
The thing I like most about the Total Recall remake 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nvPR62fP8hk> is the – I have to presume ironic 
– name of its production company. The first words that appear on screen are 
"Original Film". After 20 minutes of this well-designed and passably kinetic, 
albeit utterly humourless and derivative retread, I began to feel those two 
words like some kind of goading, pulsing taunt, as if they'd been implanted in 
my brain like the bespoke memories you can buy in the movie.

This may be because I loved the first Total Recall of 1990 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VvvZxL4RN5o>, even with its wilful crassness 
and ultra-violence, and its mixture of big ideas and graphic B-movie space 
operatics on a hefty studio budget. I saw it three times in its opening week – 
I was a fan. So I wasn't too taken with hearing the reboot's director, Len 
Wiseman, in media interviews recently putting down Paul Verhoeven's original 
film. I saw this as the necessary pre-emptive self-defence tactic of a man 
remaking a pretty decent movie – some people think a sci-fi classic – long 
before remake time has come due (has the lesson of the two Hulk movies been 
lost on everyone in Hollywood?) – but, come on, Len,really?

Wiseman's version isn't just a remake of Total Recall, it pecks vulture-like 
at the iconography of so many sci-fi classics that we pass beyond the realm of 
the mere homage into a zone in which movies are assembled collage-style from 
other movies. In his production design, Wiseman ransacks a trunkful of stale 
old futures to build his own. Thus, we get the basic Blade Runner cityscape: 
monsoonal rain and humidity, perma-dusk and millions of Asian people with 
parasols. The cops look like Imperial Stormtroopers, while their synthetic 
replacements – echoes of RoboCop – look exactly like leftover assembly-line 
cyborgs from I, Robot. The enormously detailed and, I'll concede, rather 
impressive set design owes a lot to the multi-tiered modernist Babel of Lang's 
Metropolis, which is just a classier kind of pilfery.

What is lacking is the vivid tabloid energy of Verhoeven's film, that capacity 
to lay high ideas in among the kind of low-brow violence and sex that hits the 
audience in its collective sweet spot, right when they least expect it – and 
most enjoy it. The remake runs on rails from A to Z, and what Wiseman gains in 
his grimy, ill-lit visuals he loses in the acting: everyone here is a name 
actor who bores me (Colin Farrell, Jessica Biel,Kate Beckinsale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kate-beckinsale> – AKA Mrs Wiseman), or an 
actor I love (Bryan Cranston, Bill Nighy) being underused or miscast.

Ironically titled production companies aside, the other thing I like about 
Total Recall 2.0 is that it means we won't be seeing another of Wiseman's 
Underworld movies this year. As someone who considers that franchise a 
Eurotrash Twilight with bloodbags – and no worth as horror or film – I'll take 
that as compensation.
 