
Fifty years ago this month at a radio exhibition in Berlin, a 
three-inch-by-four-inch product was unveiled. Half a century on, it doesn't 
look like much. But it was cheap, portable, easy to copy, and these simple, 
functional qualities held magic within them. They also helped the cassette 
revolutionise music for the masses, and shaped how music is used socially, 
creatively and psychologically.

CDs and downloads may have long superseded the humble C90, and its 
obsolescence seemed assured when Sonystopped manufacturing the Walkman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2010/oct/25/rip-walkman-30-years> 
in 2010. But against the odds, the cassette has whirred into fabulous life 
again, and on 7 September, an international event will celebrate its 
resurgence. At 25 venues in the UK and 50 others worldwide,Cassette Store Day 
<http://cassettestoreday.com/> will showcase the growing trend for 
cassette-only releases, with big labels such as Polydor and Domino getting in 
on the act, alongside little DIY startups.

For a format that was last the industry leader 22 years ago, it's not an 
inconsiderable achievement. There is still something in those spools that 
captures the imagination, a tangible, human connection around tape that makes 
us want to press play…

1 The compact cassette is unveiled – and revolutionises the album market
 Eartha Kitt's Love for Sale, one of the first albums to be released on 
cassette. 
Tape for audio storage was first showcased at the Berlin Radio Show in 1935, 
on the reel-to-reelMagnetophon <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetophon> 
machine, but it would take another three decades for the stereo compact 
cassette to arrive. Dutch manufacturer Philips got there first in 1963, 
alongside the first battery-powered lightweight cassette player.

Albums on cassette arrived in the US in 1966, with Nina Simone, Eartha Kitt 
and Johnny Mathis among the first artists on tape; the UK followed suit in 
1967. Intriguingly, cassettes also made the album a more significant format. As 
it was harder to select tracks on cassette than on record, listening to an 
album serially, without skipping, became ingrained in music culture. Cassettes 
also allowed more time for the album than vinyl. The standard LP length was 45 
minutes in total; compact cassettes allowed up to 45 minutes per side.

2 Portable music arrives – and starts changing our brains
 Philips was marketing its portable cassette players long before the arrival 
of the Sony Walkman. 
The Walkman is usually credited as the product that made people carry their 
music around with them. However, Philips was marketing the portable nature of 
its EL3301T cassette decks as early as 1966. They also had speakers, long 
before boomboxes and mobile phones pushed sounds out in public.

The arrival of the in-car cassette deck in the early 1970s is also often 
forgotten, turning every car journey into a sound-and-vision movie. In-car 
decks were also the first machines to have an "auto-reverse" function, allowing 
listeners to enjoy music on a loop without taking their eyes off the road. (The 
last car to have a cassette deck was manufactured relatively recently – the 
2010 Lexus SC430 convertible.)

Raymond Macdonald 
<http://www.ed.ac.uk/schools-departments/edinburgh-college-art/music/news-events/new-appointments/raymond-macdonald>
, Professor of Music Psychology at Edinburgh University, believes that portable 
cassettes changed the very way we thought about ourselves. "Before going out 
and travelling with our music, we could now make psychological choices. How do 
I feel right now? How do I want to feel in five minutes? What kind of music is 
going to help me reach these goals? And if I'm on the train, who will overhear 
what I'm playing?"

This was a new psychological phenomenon, which became even more important with 
the advent of the compilation tape. "The cassette suddenly became a 
representation of your whole personality, a tool to make someone else feel the 
emotions that you feel. It also helped people create new narratives out of the 
music they liked, and by extension, of their lives. The cassette taught people 
a new kind of self-medicated therapy."

3 The underground tape market takes off (and makes some musicians money)
 Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five. In the late 70s, Flash would charge a 
dollar a minute for customised ‘party tapes’. Photograph: Echoes/Redferns 
As blank tapes got cheaper to buy, musicians could record themselves more 
easily, without the need of a label to help them. This helped DIY genres such 
as post-punk, which had an active mail-order culture, and it also flourished in 
hip-hop, where it proved lucrative for some.

In the late 70s, Grandmaster Flash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jul/26/grand-master-flash-favourite-tracks>
 would charge a dollar a minute for customised "party tapes" for richer fans. 
He would shout out the buyer's name as part of his raps, and also give mixtapes 
to cab drivers who did "hold calls" – driving high-end clients around New York, 
without a destination, just to listen to music. In 2007, Flash told MTV that he 
used to make "a couple thousand dollars a month, easy, just doing this" – 
$6,000 in today's money.

Major labels in the UK also capitalised on the cool cachet of the cassette. In 
1980, Bow Wow Wow were signed to EMI, and had a minor hit with the first ever 
cassette single,C30 C60 C90 Go <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WiWrC5dymcg>. It 
featured the lines: "So I don't buy records in your shop/ Now I tape them all." 
In 1981, Island launched its short-lived One Plus One range, featuring a 
complete album on side one, and the same album again on side two – but 
crucially without copy protection, allowing fans to tape over the music. Albums 
in the range included John Martyn'sSolid Air and U2's Boy, and the inserts 
read: "One side what you like. One side whatever you like."

The Dead Kennedys also adopted this idea on their late-1981 EP, In God We 
Trust, Inc. Printed on the blank B-side was the message: "Home taping is 
killing record industry profits! We left this side blank so you can help."

4 Music magazines find new life, on cassette
 SFX Cassette magazine's Paul McCartney scoop. 
In November 1981, SFX Cassette <http://doctechnical.com/sfx/> became the first 
music magazine to exist not on paper, but tape. Young advertising executive 
Hugh Salmon set it up withNME journalist Max Bell, and it broke the mould in 
several ways. For instance, Salmon begged the Performing Rights Society to allow
SFX to feature 20- to 30-second extracts of pop songs in every issue – 
predating the iTunes song-extract model by a few decades. "I remember 
convincing them that a clip would tempt someone into buying it, but wouldn't be 
satisfying enough to satisfy them totally," says Salmon. "Back then, it seemed 
like a radical argument."

SFX Cassette also grabbed incredible scoops, including one from Paul 
McCartney, Salmon says. "I remember one of McCartney's people just ringing Max, 
and Max going white, starting to shake." A fan of the magazine, McCartney 
wanted to speak toSFX about his reaction to the death of John Lennon – the very 
first time he had done so. The enterprising Salmon ran the interview over two 
issues.

The tape magazine closed in 1982 because of production costs, but cassettes 
thrived instead as give-aways on magazine covers. Compilations curated by 
journalists attracted extra readers for magazines such asMelody Maker and Select
. In 1986,NME's C86 compilation featuring new bands on British indie labels 
also had a particularly long shelf life, propelling the rise of indie in the 
late 1980s, and featuring anopening track by Primal Scream 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OJU0JZTtDLQ>.

5 Cassettes help music spread in the eastern bloc
 Chumbawamba: supportive of anti-censorship. Photograph: Paul Postle 
Music was heavily censored in iron curtain countries in the 1980s, but an 
underground cassette culture in Poland helped music to travel. In Poland, rock 
music wasn't banned as it was in other communist countries, but record releases 
were extremely rare. "Only a few bands were able to release things," remembers 
Wojtek Kozielski, who ran the RED tapes label in Wrocław in south-west Poland 
in the late 1980s. "And obviously, lyrics had to be approved by censors. Also, 
angrier, younger groups were never allowed to record in studios, and could only 
occasionally play festivals and small student clubs."

But when they did, the audience members brought their cassette recorders with 
them. A tape-swapping culture grew, on plain tapes, without artwork or track 
lists. Often, these recordings were taped over albums officially sanctioned by 
the government – mostly pop hits by Polish middle-of-the-road artists such as 
Krzysztof Krawczyk or Jerzy Połomski. Music fans used to tape over language 
lessons on cassettes as well – a practical necessity when blank tapes were hard 
to buy, but also a pointed act of resistance.

Soon, bands from the USSR, East Germany and Czechoslovakia were also being 
heard in Poland. Labels like Kozielski's also started releasing recordings by 
supportive artists from other countries, such as Holland's the Ex, and the UK's 
Chumbawamba. "There was even a plan to release a compilation tape of songs 
rejected by censors," Kozielski recalls. "But this never saw the light of day 
because of one very happy reason: the election in 1989, the first independent 
government since the war, and the end of censorship."

6 Alan Sugar helps end the 'Home Taping Is Killing Music' campaign
 Alan Sugar: a big player in the 1980s cassette market. 
He may be better known now for firing corporate wannabes on his BBC TV show, 
but Alan Sugar was a big player in the 1980s cassette market. Having seen 
Sharp's twin-cassette deck – which allowed one cassette to be copied directly 
on to another – Sugar decided to develop one for the mass market. At this time, 
theBPI <http://www.bpi.co.uk/default.aspx> was running its famous Home Taping 
Is Killing Music campaign, following concerns that cassettes would aid the 
infringement of copyright and a decline in album sales. Sugar's twin-deck 
launch in 1987 was accompanied by an advert that said that copying was illegal, 
but CBS Songs nevertheless took his company, Amstrad, to court. They lost. The 
House of Lords ruled that "the defendant conferred the power to copy but did 
not grant the right to copy, therefore did not authorise the infringement" – ie 
manufacturers were not liable for the actions of their customers.

7 The live bootleg boom
 A Motörhead live bootleg tape. Photograph: Alamy 
London's Camden Lock Market <http://www.camdenlockmarket.com/> was once full 
of stalls selling bootleg cassette recordings of gigs, a scene replicated, on a 
smaller scale, up and down the country. Some had inlays featuring band photos 
photocopied on to brightly coloured card, and many were made by a notorious 
bootlegger called Big Al.

A former colleague, Ian Macdonald, remembers him on Smiths fansite 
Smithstorrents.co.uk 
<http://www.smithstorrents.co.uk/forum/viewtopic.php?p=22789&sid=6ee2e765621492893ba0f55764a83adb>
. "He was into bootlegging in a big way. He had farms of tape dubbing 
equipment, expensive industrial strength machines." Big Al had standards in 
other ways too. "If a Springsteen show finished at 11pm on Friday, Al could and 
would have 100 copies of it on sale the next morning in Camden and on 
Portobello Road."

The bootlegger would go up the front of the gigs with a WM-D6C machine – a 
1980s Sony recording Walkman model, with Dolby C noise reduction – and put his 
head in the stacks, Macdonald recalls. However, Big Al disappeared from the 
business after a BPI raid on Camden Lock in 1987, in which "4,605 tapes with an 
estimated street value of more than £20,000" were seized, according toMusic Week
 reports at the time. The live bootleg trade, however, carried on, albeit 
murkily, for the next decade.

8 The cassingle has its last hurrah
 Elastica's Waking Up cassette single. 
Between 1985 and 1992, cassette was the most popular format in the UK, before 
a small silver disc started ruining the party. The Britpop boom provided a last 
hurrah for the humble cassingle, a format dying in popularity as CD sales grew. 
Brian Cannon of the design companyMicrodot <http://www.microdotcreative.co.uk/> 
made one notable cassingle curio: the cassette version of Oasis'sCigarettes and 
Alcohol <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SaeLKhRnkhQ>, made up to look, and 
open, like a packet of 20 cigarettes.

"It was an idea from the Creation marketing department, I think," says Cannon 
now, "although I'm sure Noel [Gallagher] would say it was his! There was so 
much money in the industry at the time, we could try anything with design." 
Cannon was given a template, and the rest was up to him – although the final 
product courted controversy at the time. "We were told we were glamorising 
smoking," Cannon remembers. "As if a 16-year-old boy would start buying 
cigarettes off the back of a single in a cardboard box!"

Another notable Britpop item was the cassingle version of Elastica's Waking 
Up, designed by Jon Anonymous: made up like a packet of cards, with a spade cut 
out of the front, it had a band member trading card inside.

9 The cult of the cassette returns, in fuzzy sound
 Chillwave artist Washed Out, an early advocate of the tape revival. 
Photograph: Dan Wilton 
In 2010, the same year that Sony stopped producing the Walkman, the Wall 
Street Journal published a piece about a new genre, chillwave. Chillwave was 
essentially fuzzily-recorded, 80s-inspired pop; music that sounded like it was 
recorded on to, and meant to be played on, tape.

Ernest Greene of Washed Out was one of its earliest practitioners, releasing 
his first EP, 2009'sHigh Times <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=30ibJLBtP6Q>, on 
to customised cassette. He told theWall Street Journal how this act was a 
reaction towards anonymised culture. "The cool thing about cassettes is that 
they are made by hand and each one sounds slightly different, so it makes for a 
more personal experience," he said.

These feelings persist among other young musicians. Hardcore punk revivalists 
Loom are releasing alimited-edition album 
<http://www.contactmusic.com/press/loom-announce-limited-edition-covers-cassette>
 on cassette this month, featuring covers of 80s bands such as Jesus Lizard and 
Bad Brains. "The quality of cassettes lends them to the music we make," says 
singer Tarik Badwan (brother of singer Faris from the Horrors). "But you've got 
to look after cassettes too. It takes more care to make a cassette, do the 
artwork, store it and keep it. You don't forget about it like music on your 
computer."

He thinks younger music fans are craving a deeper relationship with the way 
music sounds too. "People are fed up with things being shiny and polished, or 
fake-raw – through-the-effects-desk-raw. People want to hear things that are 
rough and more real."

10 The rise of the cassette labels – and Cassette Store Day
 The Flaming Lips, who are releasing their latest album on tape as part of 
Cassette Store Day. 
Cassette Store Day <http://cassettestoreday.com/> co-founder DJ Jen Long 
expected the event to be a one-off celebration at London'sRough Trade East 
<http://www.roughtrade.com/events/2013/9/200> shop – not an international 
operation running in shops in the UK, the US, Scandinavia and Argentina, 
involving more than 30 major and independent labels. "We're in shock," she 
says. She began her own cassette label,Kissability <http://kissability.net/>, 
in 2011, but says she knows why cassettes still appeal over other formats. "CDs 
feel like a thing you buy at a show to get your songs on to your computer. 
They're a middle man. MP3s don't feel as exciting to me as putting out a 
physical product either – you're not waiting for them to arrive at your door, 
or giving them to a band for the first time, putting them in your tape deck, 
hearing it play." The sound also has a certain appeal - Bobby Gillespie is 
quoted on the Cassette Store Day website praising tapes' 'warm and fat' 
quality, and their 'unique bottom end'.

Tapes are also much cheaper to put out than vinyl, adds Long, and in a tough 
economic climate, this means that cassette labels can take more risks. (With 
vinyl production, labels also have to make at least 250 copies; with tapes, 
release volumes can be small, and more exclusive.)

Long's not the only one doing this either. While sales figures are still 
miniscule, hundreds of new cassette labels have begun over the past few years; 
her favourites includeSuplex <http://suplexcassettes.bigcartel.com/>, Reeks of 
Effort <http://reeksofeffort.bandcamp.com/> and Sexbeat 
<http://sexbeatlondon.com/>, which is releasing a Cassette Store Day exclusive 
by Polaris music prize winnersFucked Up <http://fuckedup.cc/home/>. 
Limited-editioncassette releases by bigger artists <http:> are on sale too. The 
Flaming Lips <http://www.flaminglips.com/?frontpage=true> are releasing their 
recent album on tape for the occasion, whileHaim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/haim> are rereleasing their debut EP, Forever
.

There is nostalgia in the mix too, Long admits, although she's quick to quash 
any criticism of the revival being a hipster fad. "We're putting out bands that 
we love. We're celebrating music that we love! It's about doing something that 
makes economic sense, that makes us all happy. Tapes involve effort, you know? 
They always have."

Cassette Store Day <http://cassettestoreday.com/> is on Saturday 7 September
 