
Hugo Lloris has said Tottenham Hotspur need a “miracle” to qualify for the 
Champions League knockout rounds, after the disaster that was the1-0 defeat 
against Bayer Leverkusen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/02/tottenham-bayer-leverkusen-champions-league-match-report>
 at Wembley on Wednesday night, and he accepted they would enter the north 
London derby against Arsenal on Sunday at a low ebb.

The club captain was unusually vocal in his criticism of the team’s collective 
efforts, which he said were the antithesis of those that had got them into 
Europe’s elite competition in the first place. Lloris even suggested that the 
players had not fully grasped the importance of the occasion against Bayer.

The defeat left Tottenham with four points in Group E, two behind Leverkusen 
and four short of the leaders, Monaco. They continue to control their destiny 
and they will advance if they win their remaining ties – away against Monaco 
and at home against CSKA Moscow.

Mauricio Pochettino ‘embarrassed’ by Tottenham Hotspur’s Wembley form
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/03/tottenham-manager-mauricio-pochettino-wembley-defeat>
However, anything less and they would have to rely on other results going 
their way and it is an illustration of the precarious nature of their situation 
that, if they did no more than draw in Monaco, they would be out if Leverkusen 
were to win at CSKA.

“We cannot be in a worse situation,” Lloris said. “After a game like 
Leverkusen, we need to question ourselves. We need to learn about the Champions 
League. We worked a lot last season to get into the Champions League and we 
cannot waste everything. We need to be ready for the next two games and try to 
get the miracle.

“The Leverkusen game was very important and I did not feel we were aware of 
that. Leverkusen did not play a great game. They were just well organised and 
had some chances, because we made too many mistakes. We need to learn quickly.

“I don’t want to think that we have already slipped out of this competition. 
We need to believe. It’s true that we cannot be in a worse situation but that’s 
football and, sometimes, you need to create a miracle. Before we think about 
the last game against CSKA, we need to think about Monaco, because it’s maybe 
our last chance to believe in the qualification. It’s very clear and very easy. 
We have two more games and we have to win the next game.”

The spectre of the derby at the Emirates Stadium looms large and Lloris did 
not hide from the fact that Tottenham had “lost a bit of confidence”. Since 
their excellent2-0 home win against Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/02/tottenham-hotspur-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 on 2 October, they have failed to win in six matches, drawing four and losing 
two. They have scored only three goals during the sequence. Lloris stressed the 
need to refocus and pick up.

“It is difficult to accept that kind of performance from us,” Lloris said. “It 
was difficult to recognise the team. We are very aggressive and very calm under 
pressure, but against Leverkusen it was completely the opposite. We need to 
learn quickly because there is a big game on Sunday.

“We will be back in a Premier League game in a great stadium, with a good 
pitch. We need to enjoy that kind of moment and stay united. I hope we are 
aware that the kind of game against Arsenal is a big opportunity for everyone 
to enjoy football, share a great moment of football with the fans and try to 
make them proud of us.

“In football, you can win; you can lose. The most important thing is the 
feeling and the attitude that you show on the pitch. To be honest, the feeling 
was very bad [against Leverkusen]. It’s difficult to accept that performance 
and it was the same case against Monaco [in the 2-1 defeat at Wembley in 
September].

“The team used to be consistent in terms of performance and we’re not used to 
losing. Hopefully, that will help us to bounce back.”
 