
Confusion reigns over where Semi Radradra will be playing next season after 
his agent cast doubt over him leaving theNRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> to join French rugby club Toulon.

After months of speculation over his future, Toulon announced on its website 
the Parramatta winger will join the Top 14 club next year for their new season 
starting in August.

NRL star Semi Radradra facing arrest warrant after court no-show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/28/nrl-star-semi-radradra-facing-arrest-warrant-after-court-no-show>
However, Radradra’s manager George Christodoulou was quick to deny a deal with 
the 24-year-old had been done, saying Toulon had “jumped the gun” in declaring 
the signature.

“A pre-contract, let alone a final contract, hasn’t even been issued to us,” 
Christodoulou told News Corp Australia. “Nothing has been signed. Yes, the 
offer on the table is a good one, which is for 2018, but nothing has been 
signed.”

Toulon’s multi-million euro squad also boasts Wallabies Drew Mitchell, Matt 
Giteau, James O’Connor and Liam Gill on its books.

Barnstorming winger Radradra, who has represented Fiji and Australia in rugby 
league, is contracted with the Eels until the end of 2017. Radrada also faces 
possibility of being issued an arrest warrant over his non-appearance in a 
Sydney court on domestic violence charges on Monday.

“Ideally we were hoping to have his court hearing finalised today [Monday] 
which would have subsequently enabled us to proceed with negotiating and 
finalising his playing future,” Christodoulou told Fox Sports.

Toulon owner Mourad Boudjellal is on the record as saying Radradra’s move was 
on after he signed signed a one-year contract with an optional extra year. 
Radradra left for his native Fiji late last week with the Eels’ permission to 
visit his father, who is ill with pulmonary tuberculosis.

He was due in Parramatta Local Court on Monday to answer three charges of 
domestic violence brought by his former partner Perina Ting, but the magistrate 
was not satisfied with Radradra’s absence, citing the nature of his father’s 
illness as ongoing.

Radradra’s arrest warrant will be held over until Thursday, offering the 
Kangaroos winger the opportunity to explain his non-appearance.
 