
Here come the Pat Pack
Irish actor Brendan Gleeson was full of pre-St Patrick's Day cheer when I met 
him in London last week. The star ofIn Bruges, Harry Potter and The General is 
about to start work on his directing debut, an adaptation of Flann O'Brien's 
novelAt Swim-Two-Birds, for which he has also written the screenplay. The film 
will star Gleeson himself, Cillian Murphy and Gabriel Byrne, all of whom also 
appear in Irish crime caperPerrier's Bounty, released later this week. They'll 
be joined by Colin Farrell among many others, including Gleeson's son Domhnall. 
In Dublin, they're proudly dubbing it "the Pat Pack". Gleeson has been working 
on O'Brien's 1939 story for years, a tale of a young drunk playwright who 
thinks he sees his characters coming to life. "The nerve of me," says Brendan. 
"It's one of the classics, a mad, mayhem book and I've been trying to get it 
done for six years. It's going to be a big one. There's massive pressure but 
it's where I live and I love what's at the heart of it, so I can't wait to get 
on with it." I wonder, of the many directors he's worked with, who he thinks he 
might direct like? "Ha," he says: "Like nobody on earth, that's for sure." 
Filming is due to begin in Ireland in September. As Cillian Murphy told me: 
"It's a real tribute to Brendan – he'll be a fantastic director and he's got so 
much goodwill behind him that all these people want to drop everything to work 
with him on such challenging material. It's chaotic stuff, but Brendan will 
bring it to life."
Cuban heels
Director Andrew Lang took a novel route to film success. He went to film 
school in Havana. The result is his debut documentary,Sons of Cuba (starring 
Cristian Martinez, right), made over three years. "The school has a proud 
tradition," he told me. "They have very few international slots and I somehow 
got one and it was the most fascinating time of my life." The film is out this 
week.
This is television
Shane Meadows has begun work on a four-part TV update of his masterpiece film 
This Is England. Writer Jack Thorne, from Skins and this week's The Scouting 
Book for Boys, wouldn't reveal much about the Channel 4 project, but he did 
tell me the action picks up four years after the end of the film. Thomas 
Turgoose is back, as are Andrew Shim, the girls (yes, including Smelly) and Joe 
Gilgun as charming, nice skinhead Woody. There's a possible return for Stephen 
Graham's Combo, too. Meadows is directing parts three and four himself, handing 
over duties on the first two instalments toThe Scouting Book's director, Tom 
Harper. Thorne, meanwhile, is working on a movie version ofSkins that will 
unite all the casts of the groundbreaking TV show, including – whisper it – 
Nicholas Hoult. 