
Bumbling, somnambulant editor Hugh Person is – if not exactly the hero of this 
novella published in 1972 – the protagonist; a protagonist accompanied by a 
dogged shadow, a postmodern omniscient narrator who impishly, maestro-ishly 
digresses throughout Hugh's ill-fated trip to Switzerland.

The journey is not only geographical but also one of memories. Hugh has been 
to Switzerland before: once, in childhood, when his father fell down dead on a 
shopping trip; on another occasion to visit an author, R, through whom he 
connects with the woman who will be his wife. Later still, his final trip sheds 
light – and reckoning – on the murder and madness at the heart of this 
dazzlingly elegant, clever novella that is designed to be reread.

Throughout the story, as Hugh goes about his privileged life in the clumsy 
haze of a "sullen slave", the imp metaphysically breaks the "thin veneer of 
immediate reality… [the] tension film" of the present to wander through the 
personal history of a pencil, or examine a former inhabitant of a hotel room (a 
19th-century Russian poet), much as a ghost might. Have patience, because all 
is part of the tight slipknot of the plot; and Nabokov's small sparks of 
brilliant prose unite to form a complex whole.

If only – if only? – it weren't for Nabokov's obsession with "nymphets", who 
play an unnaturally large part in this story. A paragraph in which Hugh gazes 
at photographs of 10-year-old Armande in her bath makes for very uncomfortable 
reading, and the first time round appears appallingly gratuitous (Lolita 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780241951644/lolita>, 
exploring those themes more head-on, can be excused) – it's the slip of an old 
paedo, turning the author into a figure of tragicomic lechery. But then so too 
is the Nabokov-like central figure of R…

It is not surprising that on publication, Transparent Things received 
Marmite-esque reviews. Nabokov wrote in his diary that they "oscillate between 
hopeless adoration and helpless hatred. Very amusing". But on reaching the end, 
a reader should look more closely at the dodgy passage and note "the flame of 
his interest": and see its importance, its indication that the judgment of the 
divine, the wrath of the creator, the possibility of design in the universe 
cannot be avoided.

Read this book, and reread it. And never forget that in these pages there is a 
master at work.
 