
Guaranteed rises in the state pension should be scrapped according to a 
damning report by an all-party committee of MPs, which claims the British 
economy has become “heavily skewed” towards well-off baby boomers.

A millennial and a baby boomer trade places: ‘I can’t help but feel a stab of 
envy’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/12/millennial-baby-boomer-trade-places-stab-envy>
Following an inquiry into intergenerational fairness, the Commons work and 
pensions committee, chaired by influential welfare reformer Frank Field, said
the “triple lock” guarantee on the state pension should be axed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/20/pensions-state-scrap-triple-lock-protect-paul-johnson-ifs>
 as it is “unfair and unsustainable”.


Under the triple lock, pensions have risen every year since 2010 by – 
whichever is the higher figure – the rate of inflation, average earnings or a 
minimum of 2.5%. This has lifted many pensioners out of poverty but the 
committee said it has resulted in the over-65s taking an “ever greater share of 
national income”.

After housing costs, average pensioner household incomes now exceed those of 
working-age people, said the report. “The millennial generation, born between 
1981 and 2000, faces being the first in modern times to be financially worse 
off than its predecessors,” it added.

The committee also calls for a review of the winter fuel payment, worth at 
least £100 and up to £300 to pensioner households. It costs the Treasury £2bn a 
year and the MPs said it should “not be off limits” when the government seeks 
budget savings.


But ministers immediately rejected any suggestion that the triple lock, hugely 
popular among older voters, should be abandoned. In a statement, the Department 
for Work andPensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> said: “We 
want to ensure economic security for people at every stage of their life, 
including retirement. We are committed to the triple lock, which is protecting 
the incomes of millions of pensioners.”

The report comes amid an intensifying debate over intergenerational fairness. 
Research from the Institute for Fiscal Studies suggests pensioners are less 
likely to be poor than younger age groups and that they have higher average 
incomes than working-age households.

Frank Field <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/frank-field> MP, chair of 
the committee, said: “The welfare state is underpinned by an implicit 
intergenerational contract. Each generation is supported in retirement by their 
in-work successors. But a combination of factors has sent the balance out of 
kilter. It is now the working young and their children who face the daunting 
challenge of getting on in an economy skewed against them.

“Homeownership, taken as a given by many in my generation, is out of reach for 
too many aspiring young people today. At the same time as tightening their 
belts, they are being asked to support a group that has fared relatively well 
in recent years.”

Field added that no party has been immune to chasing the pensioner vote but 
added: “Politicians of all stripes must accept some responsibility for these 
trends, and we must act together now to address them ... It is time for the 
triple lock to be shelved.”

The committee proposes a new formula for future increases in the state 
pension, which it suggests should be a benchmark proportion of average earnings 
below which it could not fall. It added that all parties must seek “political 
consensus on a new earnings link for the state pension” before the next general 
election.

But pension experts warned that pensioner incomes will start falling within 
the next decade, even with the triple lock. David Sinclair of the International 
Longevity Centre, said “While it is right to debate cuts to pensioner benefits, 
we must take care not to throw the baby out with the bathwater. This debate 
cannot be about young versus old.”

Tom McPhail, of advisers Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “Politicians are 
chronically compromised when making any policy decisions [that] might be 
detrimental to older citizens. You only have to look at the turnout in general 
elections to understand why: 78% of the over-65s voted, compared to just 43% of 
the eligible under-25s.

“The triple lock has served an important function in bringing pensioner 
incomes back into line with the rest of the population. It is also important to 
recognise that pensioner incomes will change again in the future, we are about 
to hit ‘peak DB’ after which successive pensioners will be increasingly reliant 
on the state pension and on defined contribution arrangements. Any measure to 
curb either of these in the next few years could rapidly push more pensioners 
back into poverty.”

 