
Britain's economy is poised for recovery, with three main indicators - house 
prices, manufacturing output and retail spending - pointing to a pick-up in 
growth in the second half of the year.

City analysts said the upbeat data suggested that aggressive interest rate 
reductions by the Bank of England's monetary policy committee were beginning to 
give impetus to the economy after six months drifting in the doldrums.

"The economy has clearly 
 turned the corner and growth is likely to pick up from now on," said David 
Walton of US investment bank Goldman Sachs.

The upturn in activity is being led by consumers. According to yesterday's 
Confederation of British Industry distributive trades survey, 22% more 
retailers reported rising sales in June than those experiencing a fall, up from 
11% in May. Retail sales volumes are now rising at the fastest rate for a year.

Alastair Eperon, chairman of the CBI's distributive trades survey panel, said: 
"The string of interest rate cuts may have
 given consumers the encouragement that was needed to get them back to the 
shops, although clearly the impact has not trickled through to all areas of 
retailing."

Cheaper borrowing costs are also boosting the housing market, where prices 
rose last month by 1.8%, taking the annual rate of increase to 6.6% from 5.8% 
in May, according to today's Halifax house price index.

The bank says average price rises are being driven by strong gains in the 
south, especially London, where a shortage of
 high-quality properties has created localised hot spots.

However, it adds that price growth in the rest of the UK remained subdued.

"Whilst we expect that the current favourable affordability position will 
continue to underpin a healthy housing market over the remainder of 1999, we 
see no evidence to suggest that the market is returning to a 1980s-style boom," 
the bank said.

Separate data published by the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply 
pointed to a more broadly based recovery,
 with manufacturing industry expanding for the first time in 15 months, 
suggesting it is learning to live with the strong pound.

The institute's survey showed manufacturers' domestic and export orders were 
rising but performance across the sector was patchy, with strong growth in the 
consumer and intermediate goods industries compensating for the decline in 
production of investment goods.

Factory employment declined for the 16th successive month, albeit at a slower 
rate.

Economists said the run of 
 positive data did not necessarily mean the MPC's repo rate, currently 5%, had 
troughed. Michael Saunders, of Salomon Smith Barney Citibank, pointed out that, 
although manufacturing activity was increasing, prices were still falling. He 
added that wage deals remained subdued despite low overall unemployment.

"The result will be to assuage the MPC's worries about the medium-term 
inflation risks and, as long as the pound stays high, keep them biased to ease 
[rate]," he said.
 