
"Tron, what have you become?" - Kevin Flynn

There's some weird scheduling on BBC2 this weekend. At 5:30pm, it's showing 
Tron; the still-startling, immediately identifiable 1982 movie that captivated 
me – and millions of children like me – back in the 1980s. A little later, it's 
showing the terrestrial premiere ofTron: Legacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tron-legacy>, the film's enormously 
anticipated 2010 follow-up.

These films aren't being broadcast back-to-back, though. As soon as Tron 
finishes, there's an hour-long programme about Nelson Mandela to get through 
before Tron: Legacy begins. This gap might have been necessitated by current 
events, or it might just simply be a quirk of scheduling. However, you can't 
help feeling that the 60-minute buffer was put there to lower expectations. 
Tron was such an important film, so idiosyncratic and iconic, that Tron: Legacy 
couldn't possibly hope to match up to it. But is Tron: Legacy really that bad?

"Your old man's about to knock on the sky and listen to the sound" - Kevin 
Flynn

The thing that struck me most about Tron as a kid – apart from all the 
motorbikes playing proto-Snake in a giant arena – was how it sounded. The film, 
at least the section of the film that anyone remembers, had a sort of constant 
ambient thrum to it; a whirring that made everything onscreen seem distant and 
staged. It was one of those rare occurrences – a film about another world that 
felt as well as looked otherworldly. Add in the blocky effects and glowing 
outfits and Tron stands as a perfectly-realised moment in time. It's The Wizard 
of Oz for boys who grew up playing Atari. It's Star Wars for people born a year 
or two too late.

The same, unfortunately, cannot be said for Tron: Legacy. Like the modern-day 
revival of Doctor Who, the revamp is so scared of losing our attention that 
music constantly swells and crashes regardless of the action onscreen. Where 
there was once a machine-like hum, now there is the sort of relentlessly urgent 
soundbed that everyone starting ripping off The Dark Knight came out. It's also 
sad to see characters interacting with physical sets, or at least to have the 
obvious artifice of the virtual sets scaled back. There's no pitch-black void 
surrounding anyone any more, just endless neon glassiness. You don't feel 
nearly as cold or alone watching Tron: Legacy as you did watching Tron. And 
surely that was always the point.

"In there is a new world! In there is our future! In there is our destiny!" - 
Kevin Flynn

The problem, I think, about Tron: Legacy is that everyone involved seemed to 
assume that it'd be a hit. Watching the original Tron back, you get a sense 
that it was a punt for everyone involved; a cheeky hat-toss to make some money 
from the Star Wars fad. I'm convinced that everyone involved presumed that Tron 
would go the same way as Battle Beyond the Stars or The Black Hole. But by 2010 
its reputation had built to the point where the producers made the mistake of 
treating it with a bit too much respect.
 Hot wheels ... Tron: Legacy. Photograph: Disney Enterprises 
It looks gorgeous, obviously. It's beautifully designed and meticulously 
realised, but the simplicity of the original has given way to an unsettling 
bloat. Jeff Bridges – real lifeJeff Bridges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jeff-bridges>, not the waxy computer version 
who doubles as the film's antagonist – has become an annoyingly zen 
spiritualist who may or may not be Jesus. The Grid isn't just a computer 
programme in the new film; it's the key to uniting the religions and unlocking 
the secrets of the universe. It believes its own hype to an absurd degree. It's 
as if nobody learned anything from the Matrix sequels.

But, despite all this, there are still plenty of bright spots. Michael Sheen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/michael-sheen>, whose performance I 
initially wrote off as stagey and unconvincing, provides a very necessary chink 
of light. Weirdly, for an eyebrowless computer program who apparently runs a 
bar inside a computer, he's the most human element of the entire film. If this 
film had been about him cackling and dancing during fight scenes like a 1960s 
Batman villain, there's a good chance that this would be one of my favourite 
films of all time.

Observations

• Apparently an earlier draft of the Tron: Legacy script was binned for being 
too Matrixy. Given the Matrixiness of the end result, I can only assume that it 
was a word-for-word copy.

• It's sad to see that Virtual Jeff Bridges hasn't had any roles since this 
film came out. One day, though, I'm sure there'll be another film that needs a 
horribly unconvincing dead-eyed avatar that looks like it belongs in waxworks 
museum for celebrities with mumps.

• The Grid has clouds in it now. I can't work out if this is a sly comment 
about the wave of server-based computing, or it's just because they really 
wanted to ruin Tron for me.

• "Biodigital jazz, man". Eight-year-old me would not have liked this film. 
Not one bit.
 