 In a dramatic early-morning display of force, French special forces abseiled 
from helicopters yesterday and stormed a Corsican ferry that had been hijacked 
by sailors protesting against plans to privatise the island's shipping line.
Five Puma helicopters carrying about 50 officers raided the Pascal Paoli, a 
combined cargo and passenger ferry run by the ailing, state-owned SNCM ferry 
company, which was lying off the Corsican port ofBastia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bastia> after being commandeered by 
unionists in Marseille on Tuesday.

A 10-strong team from the GIGN, an elite rapid intervention force, overcame 
the 30 unarmed sailors, a naval spokesman said. The interior ministry hailed 
the joint army and navy operation as "fast, efficient and non-violent".

The mutineers were handcuffed, locked in the ship's cabins or forced to kneel 
on deck, and arrested for hijacking, a crime that carries a maximum sentence of 
20 years in jail. But the show of force did little to quell the violence 
between police and protesters in Marseille and Bastia. For Corsican 
nationalists the long and increasingly brutal conflict is about far more than 
the government's plan to sell a majority stake in the heavily loss-making SNCM 
to a French investment company, Butler Capital Partners (BCP).

Some 200 riot police were deployed in the island's northern port of Bastia 
yesterday after four hours of violent clashes on Tuesday night in which 1,000 
trade unionists and nationalists fought running battles with the police.

A strike call by the powerful CGT union also paralysed France's largest port, 
Marseille. Shipping workers voted to extend a crippling 24-hour strike, leaving 
28 large carriers stranded and blockading access to a major petrochemicals 
complex and the key oil port of Fos-sur-Mer.

BCP has said it will reorganise the shipping line, which carries 1.25 million 
passengers a year between Marseille and Corsica, and could sack up to 400 of 
its 2,400-strong workforce. Despite receiving €70m (£48m) from the state each 
year as an "agent of territorial continuity" (keeping Corsica part of France), 
the line loses around €20m annually.

But for the radical CGT union and its partner, the STC, which has close links 
to Corsica's small nationalist movement, the struggle for control of SNCM has 
come to symbolise the island's broader struggle for independence from the 
mainland.

Corsica has been plagued by bombings, shootings and other mainly symbolic 
attacks by a small but determined separatist movement since 1975. The cause 
enjoys little support among islanders but has proved a significant thorn in the 
side of successive governments in Paris.

The regional prefect in Provence-Alpes-Cote d'Azur, Christian Frémont, urged 
the militants to go back to the table. He told French radio: "This ferry 
company is extremely fragile. The spectre of bankruptcy looms. Now it is up to 
everyone to sit down and talk again. It is the only way to resolve this crisis."

But Jean Brignole of the STC union said Corsicans had "long understood what 
the stakes are here ... The fate of the SNCM is not the fate of a company and 
of its employees, but that of all Corsica and of its maritime transport system".
 