

The increase in the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is not making 
trees in tropical forests grow faster, say scientists who have analysed over 
1,100 individual trees from forests in Bolivia, Thailand and Cameroon.

Researchers had expected higher CO2 levels to act as a tree fertiliser so 
boosting growth. The finding could indicate that such forests are not helping 
mitigate the effects of climate change by removing excess CO2 from the 
atmosphere.

The results contradict previous studies that made inventories of the total 
number of trees in particular regions of tropical forests and found the numbers 
increasing. So it may be that tropical forests are becoming more dense rather 
than individual trees growing faster.

CO2 is essential to trees. It is absorbed from the air and turned into sugar 
using energy from light during photosynthesis. The sugar is then transported 
around the tree allowing it to grow. Each year, a tree lays down a new tree 
ring. Its width indicates how fast the tree has put on weight during that 
growing season.


Over the past 150 years, the concentration of carbon dioxide in our atmosphere 
has increased by 30% to 35%. This should drive more photosynthesis meaning more 
growth and fatter tree rings.

However, Peter van der Sleen at Wageningen University, The Netherlands and his 
colleagues found no such increase in the 1109 trees from 12 species they 
studied. “It was very surprising. The results call into question whether 
tropical forests are carbon sinks,” said van der Sleen.


The tropical forests contain a quarter of all the carbon found in living 
things on Earth. They have been suggested as a major carbon sink, removing 
carbon dioxide from the air. If left in the atmosphere, that carbon dioxide 
would help retain more heat in the atmosphere and have more of an impact on 
climate change.

But the new findings, published in Nature Geoscience 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/ngeo2313>, run contrary to older 
experimental conclusions. A network of 50-metre-high towers in some tropical 
forests measure the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere above the canopy of 
trees. These towers show that CO2 does appear to be pulled from the air by the 
forests. So where is it going?

Studies known as forest inventories may have the answer. In these studies, 
forest plots are singled out and inventoried at regular intervals. Over the 
past several decades, these have shown that the density of trees is increasing 
as more carbon is used up.

This would increase the biomass of the forest by adding more trees rather than 
accelerating the growth of older ones. Either way, it would scrub carbon out of 
the atmosphere as a result. But it does not explain why the established trees 
do not grow faster.

“The experiments that predicted accelerated tree growth with increases in 
carbon dioxide are elegant and convincing,” said van der Sleen. “Why tree 
density would be enhanced but not existing tree growth is very difficult to 
answer.”

New experiments in Brazil will investigate. Called free-air CO2 enrichment 
(Face), the experiments will bathe patches of the tropical forest in high 
levels of CO2 and measure what happens to the growth rate of established trees 
versus saplings.

 