 The billionaire property and casino tycoon Donald Trump yesterday confirmed 
that he will run for the presidency of the United States in 2000.
Mr Trump formed an "exploratory committee" to examine a possible White House 
bid last month. But when asked by a television interviewer yesterday whether he 
was definite about his bid, Mr Trump said: "I am indeed."

The playboy tycoon is bidding to become the candidate of the Reform party, 
founded by the Texas oil billionaire Ross Perot as the vehicle for his own 
third party presidential bids in 1992 and 1996.

"I would not run under any circumstances unless I thought I was going to win," 
Mr Trump said.

Mr Trump's public declaration sets up the prospect of a colourful contest with 
the rightwing activist Pat Buchanan, who announced last month that he was 
abandoning the Republican party in order to seek the Reform nomination.

Mr Buchanan is generally thought to be Mr Perot's personal choice for the 2000 
bid, although the Reform party founder has refused to be drawn into giving a 
public endorsement.

Most opinion polls show Mr Buchanan leading Mr Trump among Reform supporters. 
They also show Mr Buchanan would win more support in a general election - a 
possibility which worries campaign strategists for the Republican frontrunner, 
Governor George W Bush.

Mr Trump brushed such thinking aside in a characteristically ambitious 
interview on the CNBC cable television channel. "Pat can run and Pat can get 3 
or 4% of the vote, but he's not going to win," he said. "And what's the point 
of running if he's not going to win?"

Mr Trump has the high profile backing of the Reform governor of Minnesota, 
Jesse Ventura, who is expected to seek the party's nomination in the 2004 
election. Mr Ventura has so far resisted attempts to draft him for 2000, saying 
that he pledged the voters of Minnesota that he would serve the full term to 
which he was elected in 1998.

The Trump bid is certain to be a headline grabbing affair if the candidate 
continues to campaign with his supermodel girlfriend, Melania Knauss, as he did 
in Florida earlier this week.

The Trump campaign is being masterminded by his longtime associate Roger 
Stone, a man who enjoys being known as the Prince of Darkness, and who started 
his political career as "an entry-level dirty-trickster for Richard Nixon", the 
New York Times reported yesterday.

Mr Stone is described as an exuberantly negative campaigner who worked as a 
volunteer for the legendary Committee to Re-Elect the President (Creep) in 1972.
 