
It is only once every two years we become truly European, prepared to forgive 
our neighbours for trying to ban our cheese and onion crisps (allegedly), and 
saying our chocolate had to contain chocolate rather than vegetable fat, 
dubbin, the remains of small rodents and all that other stuff we like to put in 
it; happy to overlook outrages like Europop, lederhosen and Maurice Chevalier. 
The most unreconstructed Eurosceptic, I suspect, will have been transfixed by 
our continent's Ryder Cup performance yesterday.

Which led me to thinking about what it means to be a European. I think the 
chief difference between us and the Americans is that, on seeingDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, we are more likely to look 
beyond the billions and focus on the hair; which is the hair of a man who has 
gone to his stylist with a picture of Melvyn Bragg cut out of the newspaper, 
and said, "That's what I want but more ginger."

Trump was one of the star turns at the Ryder Cup opening ceremony, at which 
there were frequent references to the "worldwide audience of millions" but 
little allowance made for viewers born outside the United States.

Co-presenter with Trump, of whom we might at least have been expected to have 
heard, although without any precise knowledge of how he became so rich and 
famous - was "model and actress" Angie Everhart. Who she? Well, I can tell you, 
with all the authority of someone with a broadband connection, she has been in 
a number of films, none of which are in immediate danger of troubling the 
compilers of Sight and Sound's films of the decade list, and was once squired 
by Sylvester Stallone - if squired is the word I am looking for.

Angie and Don read alternate lines off a teleprompter, in the style of what 
the Americans like to call co-anchors. It was typically cornball stuff, with 
the Trumpster drawing comparisons between the worlds of golf and business: "I'm 
a competitive kinda guy," he declaimed. "When you compete in my world, it's all 
about striking quickly and making the deal. In the world of championship golf 
it's about striking accurately and closing the deal."

Cheers and whoops greeted these platitudes, as they did Angie's opening salvo: 
"Like many luminaries that will share the stage with us today, Donald and I 
love being part of this glorious event. Golf is in our heart."

With these words she adopted her most sincere look and placed her right hand 
across her small but perfectly formed chest, bringing to mind the crack 
prompted by a bare-chested Victor Mature in one of those biblical epics, which 
Groucho Marx or someone described as the first film to feature a leading man 
with bigger breasts than the leading lady.

The ceremony was replete with anchors, the next of whom was Larry Moody, 
president of something called "Search Ministries" who, said Angie, would "lead 
us into the invocation".

Larry was one of those expensively suited, silver-haired, khaki-skinned 
smooth-talking preachers, much in evidence in America, whom one would not wish 
to deny a stage like the Ryder Cup on which to put their message across, as 
Christians in the United States currently have only 30 or 40 slots on the TV 
dial.

He said we should be grateful for golf professionals everywhere and come to 
the Ryder Cup with "an attitude of graciousness to all participants, an 
attitude of gratitude," was how he summed it up before handing over to Kathy 
Ireland, another "model and actress" whose name I suspect will have been less 
than familiar to the viewing public in Stavanger and Chipping Norton.

According to the MC Dan Hicks, Ms Ireland was "a best friend to working 
mothers and a true lifestyle designer", a reputation acquired through her work 
as design expert on the Oprah Winfrey Show, which means she may at least have 
been glimpsed by the odd European viewer, checking out satellite channels at 
two in the afternoon. Which is more than can be said for the coaches of the 
Detroit Pistons (basketball) and the Detroit Wings (ice hockey), also on the 
roster of star guests.

Kathy's task was to welcome to the stage "the loved ones" of captains and 
players, without whom blah, blah, blah, the description "loved ones" being a 
neat portmanteau term and a useful substitute for "wife" or "girlfriend" which 
might embarrass those players going through costly divorces and those who have 
one or more of each.

The American team's loved ones, however, made few concessions to the messiness 
of modern relationships, dressing in identical neat tailored red jackets, in 
obvious homage to the remake of The Stepford Wives.

None of this is to say that the Americans did not put on an impressive opening 
show, as you might expect from the nation that more or less invented 
showbusiness.

I wonder, though, if the touch of arrogance the opening ceremony betrayed - it 
was as if Britain were to choose as our representatives on the world stage 
Trinny and Susannah, Steve McClaren and Danny Baker - may have contributed to 
America's poor start.

 martin_kelner@yahoo.co.uk <mailto: martin_kelner@yahoo.co.uk>
 