
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has issued a 
video outlining his policy plans for his first 100 days in office and vowing to 
issue a note of intent to withdraw from the Trans-Pacific Partnership “from day 
one”.
What is the TPP? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=2defe271-4431-49af-9a3b-c83fa2db6e82>
In the brief clip <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7xX_KaStFT8> posted to 
YouTube on Monday, the president-elect said that “our transition team is 
working very smoothly, efficiently, and effectively”, contradicting a wealth of 
media reports telling ofchaos in Trump Tower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/15/donald-trump-transition-team-disarray-adviser-purge>
 as Trump struggles to build a team.

He said that he was going to issue a note of intent to withdraw from the 
Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal, calling it “a potential disaster for our 
country”. Instead he said he would “negotiate fair bilateral trade deals that 
bring jobs and industry back”.

Hours before Trump’s announcement, Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, warned 
that the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) would be “meaningless” without US 
participation.

Speaking to reporters in Buenos Aires on Monday, Abe conceded that other TPP 
countries had not discussed how to rescue the agreement if Trump carried out 
his promise to withdraw.

Trump cabinet contender accidentally unveils hardline anti-refugee proposals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/donald-trump-kris-kobach-documents-syria-muslims>
Abe, a vocal supporter of the 12-nation agreement, appears to have failed in 
his recent attempts to coax Trump out of his “America first” protectionism.

The TPP, which excludes China, is thought to have been high on Abe’s agenda 
when he became the first foreign leader to meet the president-elect in New York 
last week.

While details of their 90-minute meeting have not been released, Abe would 
have used the time to try to persuade Trump to go back on his campaign threat 
to pull the US out of TPP on day one of his presidency.

“The TPP would be meaningless without the United States,” Abe said, after 
Japan and other TPP countries had discussed the agreement on the sidelines of 
the Apec summit in Lima at the weekend.

He added that the pact could not be renegotiated. “This would disturb the 
fundamental balance of benefits,” he said.

Trump’s determination to rip up the agreement will have horrified Abe, 
particularly after the property billionaire appeared to have softened his 
stance on other campaign threats, such as downgrading Washington’s security 
commitment to allies Japan and South Korea.

Abe invested considerable political capital in pushing for TPP, which was 
signed in 2015 but has yet to be ratified, including overcoming strong 
opposition from Japan’s influential farming lobby.

Abe, though, suggested he was already bracing himself for US withdrawal from 
the TPP, whose 12 participating countries cover 40% of the global economy. Last 
week he told a parliamentary committee that Trump’s threat, if carried out, 
could bolster moves towards a new regional trade pact that includes China.

“There’s no doubt that there would be a pivot to the Regional Comprehensive 
Economic Partnership (RCEP) if the TPP doesn’t go forward,” Abe told an upper 
house committee, according to Kyodo news agency.

“The RCEP doesn’t include the United States, leaving China the economy with 
the largest gross domestic product,” he added.

The RCEP comprises Japan, China and 12 other Asian countries, plus Australia 
and New Zealand, and has been under negotiation since 2013.


While China declined to join the TPP, feeling it was designed to isolate it 
politically and economically, the wider implications of the US going back on a 
trade deal that took seven years to negotiate is likely to harm China in the 
long term.

“The US leaving TPP is a problem of America rejecting globalisation,” said Da 
Wei, an expert on the US at the China Institute of Contemporary International 
Relations. “China is a beneficiary of globalisation and China is not willing to 
see the tide of globalisation ebb.”

While some Chinese may be happy at what they see as a political failure for 
the US, ultimately “China disapproves of this, China is anxious about the 
retreat of globalization”, Da said.

Trump’s wider trade rhetoric could damage US-China relations, with his 
promotion of “economic nationalism” at the centre of his frequent attacks on 
the world’s second largest economy, Da added.

Last week an editorial in the Communist party-controlled Global Times warned: 
“Making things difficult for China politically will do him no good,” referring 
to Trump.

Meanwhile, the Australian government seemed reluctant to give up on the TPP 
deal entirely. Australia’s prime minister, who has just returned from a 
25,000km round-trip to Peru to reinforce support for the Trans-Pacific 
Partnership, stressed the importance of the agreement as a “strategic 
commitment”.

Malcolm Turnbull said it was up to Trump and his new Congress to make 
decisions about what they believed was in their nation’s interest.

“It is very clear that from Australia’s point of view, getting greater access 
for Australian exports ... to those big markets is manifestly in our interest,” 
he said.

Steve Ciobo, the trade minister, said the TPP was “a good deal” and Australia 
wanted to move forward with it. Speaking to the media in Canberra, he said 
there was still time for the US administration to reconsider its position 
before the TPP needs to be ratified.

“We need to let the incoming Trump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> have some time, 
let’s have some patience,” he said.


 