
World’s Strongest Man 2016 
7pm, Channel 5

The Giants Live qualifier kicks off in Norrköping, Sweden, with contestants 
from around the world battling it out for a place in the annual strongman 
contest. Will challenges including the keg toss and the Atlas Stones defeat the 
likes of Game of Thrones beefcake Hafthór “Thor” Björnsson and perennially 
straining Swede Johannes Arsjö? Representing GB are the slightly less 
fearsome-looking duo of Mark Felix and Adam Bishop.Hannah J Davies

Hilda Ogden’s Last Ta-Ra: A Tribute to Jean Alexander
8pm, ITV

With her famous rollers and slightly wonky ducks on the wall, Hilda Ogden 
became one of the most beloved characters in a street not short on them. This 
affectionate tribute to actor Jean Alexander – who died in October, aged 90 – 
brings together Corrie veterans and some famous faces (including Paul O’Grady) 
to look back at some of her funniest and most heart-wrenching moments on the 
cobbles. Graeme Virtue 

MasterChef: The Professionals
8pm, BBC2

The final week of the current series begins. The remaining four 
dinner-slingers are invited to cook for about as discerning/terrifying a dining 
table as might be imagined, including several Michelin-starred chefs and 
previousMasterChef <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/masterchef> 
finalists. They take responsibility for one course each, under the usual – 
somewhat theatrical – pressures applied by Gregg, Monica and Marcus. Concludes 
tomorrow and Thursday.Andrew Mueller

This Is Us 
9pm, Channel 4

If you’re in the mood for a sniffle or two, this week’s episode of the US 
dramedy starring ex-popster Mandy Moore certainly delivers. When Rebecca turns 
up at adopted son Randall’s home, she meets his real father. Meanwhile, Kate’s 
still living under the shadow of “The Manny” star Kevin, so Toby plans a day 
that’s all about her. Back in the past, there’s a flashback to Jack and 
Rebecca’s early days as parents and their difficulty adjusting to life with 
triplets.Hannah Verdier

Darcey Bussell: Looking For Margot 
10.45pm, BBC1

Margot Fonteyn is still lauded by many as the ultimate ballerina: she played 
her first principal role in Swan Lake at 16, and performed into her 60s. But 
early on in her career she fell for the son of the president of Panama and 
later became involved in an attempted coup, before she eventually died in that 
country alone and in poverty. Bussell is a natural guide to Fonteyn’s famously 
beautiful technique and her fascinating life story.Grace Rahman

Film choice


Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind
(Michel Gondry, 2004) 11.30pm, Syfy

Former music video director Gondry and screenwriter Charlie Kaufman make an 
inventive sci-fi-ish tragi-comedy out of the theme that true love always finds 
a way. Jim Carrey is shy Joel, who by chance bumps into enigmatic Clementine 
(Kate Winslet) on a train: love blossoms, and wilts, but after visits to Dr 
Mierzwiak’s memory-changing emporium to ease the pain, matters grow convoluted 
and gripping. A sweetly touching romance, run through a Philip K Dick-like 
altered-consciousness mill.Paul Howlett

Sport


Cricket: Big Bash League 8.30am, BT Sport 2 Sydney Thunder and Sydney Sixers 
open the 2016/7 season.

World Darts <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/darts> Championship 7pm, Sky 
Sports 1 Coverage of day six, featuring one contest in the preliminary round 
and three first-round clashes.

FA Cup Football: Peterborough United v Notts County 7.30pm, BT Sport 1 
Second-round replay at the Abax Stadium.
 