
Wigan overcame the dismissal of Ben Flower for a reckless challenge to snatch 
a dramatic 35-28 win over Warrington and ensure the battle for the League 
Leaders’ Shield will go down to the final weekend of the Super League season. 
The Wolves looked to have wrapped up the trophy, which was made ready for 
presentation at the Halliwell Jones Stadium, when Flower was sent off – for the 
first time sincehis dismissal in the opening stages of the 2014 Grand Final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/13/ben-flower-lance-hohaia-wigan-st-helens-grand-final-super-league-sent-off-punch-ban-regret>
 – after a late tackle on Warrington’s half-back Dec Patton on 56 minutes. 
Warrington were holding a 28-14 lead but the 12-man Warriors battled back with 
three tries in 14 minutes through the wingers Josh Charnley and Lewis Tierney 
to tie the scores. Matty Smith then edged his side in front with five minutes 
to go and, as the home side pushed for victory, the centre Anthony Gelling 
settled a pulsating affair with an interception try. Warrington still lead by a 
point and will finish top if they beat second-placed Hull next Friday, while 
Wigan look to have earned themselves a home semi-final with a second successive 
late fightback following their heroics against Hull a week earlier.

Beaten twice in the regular season by their hosts, Wigan made the perfect 
start with Tierney taking George Williams’ cut-out pass to cross for the first 
try after 90 seconds.

Warrington <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warrington> could not get their 
hands on the ball in the first 10 minutes and, when they did, their captain, 
Chris Hill, committed an uncharacteristic knock-on on his own 20-metre line to 
put his side under enormous pressure.

Smith extended Wigan’s lead with a penalty, making up for a failed conversion, 
and after the Wolves had gone close through Joe Westerman and Rhys Evans he 
added a second midway through the first half to take the score to 8-0.

Wigan also had a try by the hooker, Sam Powell, disallowed and, to rub salt in 
their wound, he was forced off with concussion, leaving the substitute Jake 
Shorrocks to take on the dummy-half role for the next 74 minutes.

The home side gradually grew into the game and pulled a try back on 24 minutes 
when the prop Ashton Sims was the first to reach Kurt Gidley’s high kick and 
knocked the ball back for Patton to fire out a long pass for the wing Matty 
Russell to touch down at the corner.

Warrington looked to be harshly treated when Stefan Ratchford was shown a 
yellow card for what the referee, Robert Hicks, ruled to be a cynical late 
tackle on Tierney but they responded in a manner which will have delighted 
their coach, Tony Smith.

The centre Toby King made the running for Gidley’s try on 32 minutes and older 
brother George got Hill charging through a wrong-footed Wigan defence for his 
side’s third touchdown three minutes later.

Two conversions from Patton made it 16-8 but the Warriors struck on the stroke 
of half-time when full-back Sam Tomkins, leading Wigan superbly in the absence 
of Sean O’Loughlin, burrowed his way over from dummy half for only his sixth 
try inSuper League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> this year.

Smith’s third goal cut the deficit to just two points but Wigan paid a big 
price for conceding six penalties in a row and, restored to their full 
complement, Warrington were quickly back on the attack at the start of the 
second half.

It took them only five minutes to increase their lead, the influential Gidley 
putting Westerman through a hole in the Warriors defence, and four minutes 
later he repeated the feat to get second rower Ben Currie over.

Patton added both conversions to make it 28-14 and, although Tierney had a 
second try disallowed for a forward pass, there seemed no way back for Wigan 
when they were permanently reduced to 12 men with the dismissal of Flower.

Just as their opponents played their best football while down to 12 men, Wigan 
responded magnificently with two tries in five minutes from former England 
winger Charnley.

When Tomkins’ long pass got Tierney over for his second try, awarded by video 
referee Ben Thaler after a series of slow-motion replays, the scores were level 
but Wigan had all the momentum in the closing stages and it paid off with a 
memorable victory.
 