
“People don’t understand how much I have to kill myself in the gym to get the 
weight down,” saysTyson Fury <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tyson-fury>, 
wincing at the fresh reminder of three hard sessions a day, most days, since 
mid-April. “The worst is when you are totally shattered after 12 three-minute 
rounds, yet you have an hour on the cross-trainer. Sometimes you feel like 
you’ve been on it for ages, yet the timer only says seven minutes. It’s 
horrible – the most boring thing in the world.”

Yet so dramatic is the transformation in Fury’s body he could probably reveal 
all in an infomercial and retire off the profits. He has lost three stone in 
seven weeks, is noticeably more muscular around the back and shoulders and 
claims to be far fitter too. And there is another x-factor he believes is 
helping his preparations for hisrematch with Wladimir Klitschko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/tyson-fury-wladimir-klitschko-rematch-insults-boxing>
: giving up meat.

Tyson Fury tries to apologise his way out of a jungle of prejudice | Kevin 
Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/16/tyson-fury-apology-prejudice-antisemitism>
With Fury such claims come with a handle-with-care warning. However, he 
sounded sincere when he talked about having wanted to give up meat for a while 
and how he felt far less sluggish as a result. “It’s got to the point where, if 
the man next to me at the restaurant is eating a big juicy steak, I’m like: 
‘Urgh, that’s disgusting,’” he explained. “It can’t be good for you eating a 
big piece of bloody meat like a steak because, unless you are rearing your own 
animals, it is very contaminated.”

Instead for the first five weeks of his camp – situated in the unlikely 
confines of an industrial estate in Steenbergen, a Dutch town near the Belgium 
border – Fury’s diet consisted of mostly salad and fish, although he has 
recently started adding potatoes. Yet don’t expect him to embrace veganism any 
time soon. “I don’t like vegetables,” he admits. “I have to force feed myself 
them because of my job. The only ones I like are sweetcorn and mushy peas and 
potatoes.”

Fury insists that gluttony can sometimes be good. “I put on three stone after 
winning the title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/28/tyson-fury-shocks-wladimir-klitschko-world-heavyweight-title-champion>
 but I enjoyed every second of it,” he said, that familiar glint in his eye. 
“It cost me a fortune too. There were a lot of lobsters and fillet steaks went 
into this belly. A lot of champagne, a lot of vodka, a lot of beer.

“But I’m a big believer in that you have to get unfit to get fit again. Every 
time I’ve stayed in shape in the gym I’ve got stale or got injuries. But when I 
balloon up and have three or four stone to lose my muscles are allowed to 
recover to be ready to go banging again.”

Klitschko, of course, has a very different approach. “He stays in the gym 365 
days a year, I stay in the gym in 12-week periods,” says Fury. “But I can go 
from an obese fat pig to a ripped Adonis in 12 weeks. It’s unnecessary to keep 
in shape all year round. It only helps you if you want longevity.”

At their earlier press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/tyson-fury-wladimir-klitschko-rematch-insults-boxing>
 to announce their rematch Fury took his top off and showed a belly which 
sagged below his belt – before taunting Klitschko that he could not even beat a 
fat man. It prompted a few raised eyebrows but Fury insists he was deliberately 
toying with his opponent. “I am the king of the mind games,” he says. “I know 
what I have to do to get into these guys’ heads, especially someone like 
Wladimir, who is a control freak. The best thing you can do to someone like 
that is be unpredictable. And that is what I have. The skeleton key.”

However, Fury is not taking anything for granted against a fighter he believes 
remains the second best heavyweight in the world. “A wounded animal is always 
at his most dangerous,” he says. “The only man on my radar at the moment is a 
6ft 6in Ukrainian, a former super champion. I’m expecting him to do the same 
kind of thing, jab, jab, jab, try to get close enough and hope I sit on the 
ropes or in a corner so that he can detonate a bomb. That’s not going to 
happen.”

He knows he has to be careful. “He did catch me with one right hand, around 
round seven, right on the jaw. But I looked at him and said: ‘Come on.’ It 
didn’t even hurt. I looked to Peter [Fury, his trainer] and told him I could 
walk through his punches. He said to me: ‘Don’t get hit by him.’ When you walk 
on to shots, they’re more powerful. When you’re slipping, sliding and riding 
the shots, you don’t feel anything. Ali was a master at it, wasn’t he? You 
don’t take forceful shots. He caught me with a left hook and I felt that for 
about two weeks afterwards.”

That is one reason why Fury intends to come in a few pounds heavier than the 
18st 6lb he weighed in his first fight, because he believes it will help 
strengthen his punch resistance. He feels he is stronger in body too, given he 
is now leg-pressing half a tonne and bench-pressing 170kg. Meanwhile the 
intensive sessions spent flipping tractor tyres across his gym are rapidly 
improving his core and conditioning.

“It’s just train, eat, sleep, repeat,” he says, before dispensing a final 
warning for Klitschko. “I will beat him in every department.”

Tyson Fury v Wladimir Klitschko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wladimir-klitschko> is live on BoxNation on 
Saturday 9 July. Subscribe via boxnation.com
 