
After being confronted by Tyson Fury as Batman and then a fat man on previous 
visits to Britain,Wladimir Klitschko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wladimir-klitschko> found himself facing 
what he called “the invisible man” on Monday as his controversial heavyweight 
rival failed to show for a press conference to announce their rematch next 
month.

Fury’s promoter Mick Hennessy insisted that the WBA and WBO world heavyweight 
champion had been travelling down from Morecambe with a mate when his car had 
got stuck in traffic and then broken down – news he was able to relay just as 
his mobile phone battery also died.

“This is the very first press conference Tyson has ever missed. He is normally 
very early and very entertaining at press conferences. So this is not the norm 
and we are not making it up,” said Hennessy.

Nicola Adams: ‘I wish I’d told Muhammad Ali he was the reason I wanted to win 
gold'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/12/nicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview>
Klitschko just rolled his eyes in response. Still, it was probably a step up 
from the last time the pair met in Britain, when Fury pulled off his top and 
revealed several stone of excess fat before snarling “You lost to a fat man”.

Yet with the fight having already been postponed once after Fury bruised an 
ankle in the summer, and with a UK Anti-Doping investigation hanging over the 
British fighter after a sample tested positive for the anabolic steroid 
nandrolone, there were inevitably questions about whether the fight in 
Manchester on 29 October would go ahead.

However the fight’s promoter, Frank Warren, promised that because both men had 
signed a contract and a judge had ruled the Ukad hearing into Fury would be 
delayed until after the contest “there was no danger” of it not taking place.

“There is no way this fight does not happen unless, god forbid, one of them 
gets an injury,” he said. “If Tyson’s car breaks down again on the way to the 
arena, I’ll pick him up on my motorbike.”

Fury’s trainer, Peter Fury, admitted there had been “chaos” around the 
rematch, but insisted his fighter was not guilty of any drugs charges.

“He’s been declared guilty before he has even been tried,” he added.

He also confirmed that Fury was training twice a day and would be in top shape 
for the rematch – although he said that he expected him to weigh around 18st 
10lb, more than a stone heavier than when he won the belts from Klitschko last 
November.

Klitschko, meanwhile, said he would not be distracted by the initial 
postponement of the rematch – or Fury’s no show yesterday – but didn’t appear 
entirely convinced the fight would go ahead in October.

“I’m not surprised any more because in the past there have been so many 
ridiculous moves from the Fury camp,” he said. “This press conference was to 
show to the public that we’re serious about it and we’re going to fight.

Gennady Golovkin revives memories of great Randolph Turpin | Sean Ingle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/12/randolph-turpin-memories-gennady-golovkin-kell-brook>
Maybe it will have a downside and people will think whether it will really 
happen or not.

“I have an attitude of ‘yes’ it will because I’m preparing for the fight.On 
the other hand, if it’s not, no problem. I will remain in great shape and wait 
until it’s going to happen.”

Klitschko also claimed that he was revelling in being the challenger, adding 
that while some people were writing him off given he is now 40, he was ready to 
gain revenge. “I’ve some unfinished business,” he warned. “I’m not comfortable 
with being a challenger, but I’m enjoying it. Suddenly, I need to buckle up, 
stay focused on my goal – get obsessed with that, fall in love with that – it’s 
something that makes me better. What doesn’t kill you makes you stronger.”

Meanwhile Klitschko’s manager, Bernd Bente, revealed his camp had made it a 
contractual stipulation that both fighters must be subject to strict random 
drugs testing by the Voluntary Anti-Doping Association. “For Wladimir’s safety 
we wanted to secure Vada random testing,” he added. “We had the other side sign 
that off. They do the random testing when they want. We wanted testing already 
in August, the Fury camp wanted not before 10 September.”
 