
Tyson Fury has pulled out of his rematch with Wladimir Klitschko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wladimir-klitschko> next month after 
spraining an ankle in training but the world heavyweight champion insists the 
fight will still take place in Manchester later this year.

Fury had been due to make the first defence of his WBA Super, WBO and IBO 
world heavyweight titles against Klitschko on 9 July before he injured his left 
ankle while training last week. “About 10 days ago I was running up in the Lake 
District and I went over on my ankle and sprained it,” he said. “I’ve been to 
the hospital and had X-rays and MRI scans and all that. They say it is not 
broken but it is badly sprained and to keep off it for six or seven weeks.

“I tried to train on it and had a second opinion a week later and I’ve had the 
same advice. So the fight will be postponed – I’m sorry to all my fans to let 
you all down but injuries do happen and the fight will be on as soon as 
possible. As soon as my ankle gets better we will reschedule.”

Wladimir Klitschko brands Tyson Fury an ‘imbecile who sounds like Hitler’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/23/wladimir-klitschko-tyson-fury-imbecile-sounds-like-hitler>
His uncle and trainer, Peter, responded to suggestions Fury had faked the 
injury by posting a picture of a very bruised and swollen left ankle on social 
media. Fury’s promoter, Mick Hennessy, insisted he would look to reschedule the 
fight as soon as possible. “It’s very unfortunate at this crucial stage of 
Tyson’s preparations that this injury has occurred with just a couple of weeks 
to go,” he said. “There was no way Tyson could go into the fight against 
Wladimir less than 100% fit.

“It’s essential now that Tyson gets the correct medical professional treatment 
for the injury and then we can look to announce the new date. We will put all 
our efforts into making sure Tyson fully recovers and then get the rematch back 
on.

“I feel for the fans who have purchased tickets and for the BoxNation viewers 
who were looking forward to this summer blockbuster, but we will put all our 
efforts into making sure Tyson fully recovers and then get the rematch back on.”

Klitschko said he was “totally disappointed” with the cancellation. “But one 
thing is also clear: then I’ll get my belt a few weeks later.”Fury took the 
titles off the Ukrainian last November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/28/tyson-fury-shocks-wladimir-klitschko-world-heavyweight-title-champion>
 with a unanimous points decision.

The ill-will between the two men resurfaced on Friday when Fury vigorously 
responded to jibes from his opponent that he was like Hitler.

“Wladimir obviously has no education on the matter and he doesn’t realise that 
Hitler killed hundreds of thousands of gypsies,” said Fury.

“A lot of my ancestors were killed and brutally mass-murdered by Hitler, and 
for you to call me that is a very bad. Let’s not forget that your people, the 
Ukrainians, were the guards of the death camp when my people were slaughtered.”
 