
Tyson Fury’s trainer believes the world heavyweight champion’s cocaine use 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/04/tyson-fury-cocaine-live-anymore-boxing>
 was a result of depression.

Fury became the WBA and WBO champion after impressively defeating Wladimir 
Klitschko 11 months ago but a rematch has twice been postponed and he tested 
positive for cocaine last month.

Ricky Burns defeats Kiryl Relikh to defend title and eyes Adrien Broner fight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/ricky-burns-kiryl-relikh-wba-super-lightweight-adrien-broner>
Specialist medical support is being given to Fury, who is the subject of a 
British Boxing Board of Controlhearing on Wednesday  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/05/tyson-fury-licence-discussion-british-boxing-board-control>
where it will discuss withdrawing his licence.

Peter Fury, the 28-year-old’s trainer and uncle, told BBC Radio 5 Live’s 
Sportsweek: “Personally I don’t believe he’s had drug issues going back over 
six months. If he’s done something it’s been recent. I don’t think he’s got a 
drug addiction at all. Whatever he’s taken will be a result of the depression. 
The way he’s been received since he won the world title, to him, in his mind, 
he wasn’t recognised in anywhere near the way he should have been. It’s a 
combination of all of this that put him into depression. He just wants some 
space totally away from boxing, which is understandable.”

Fury said he and the promoter Mick Hennessy asked the boxer about his positive 
test for cocaine and thatTyson Fury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tyson-fury> denied using the recreational 
drug.

Then Tyson Fury spoke to Rolling Stone magazine at length about his troubles 
and his cocaine use. But Peter Fury is uncertain what to believe, as he is 
convinced some of the interview was untrue.

“There were things in the interview which were not correct,” Peter Fury said. 
“He said in his interview he hadn’t been training at all, he hadn’t done any 
training for five months, well that’s totally untrue.”

Tyson Fury had been training at his boxing gym in Bolton and at a local 
members’ sports club, as well as with a strength and conditioning coach, Peter 
Fury said. “Just how much is the truth? Your guess is as good as mine,” he 
added. Peter Fury had questioned Tyson Fury’s attitude in training and said it 
was causing friction. “It’s almost like he was an empty shell in the gym,” said 
Peter Fury, who believes his nephew will return to the ring next year.

The WBA president, Gilberto Mendoza, has sympathy for the fighter’s situation 
but said a hearing is required over his anti-doping infringement. Although 
cocaine use is not banned out of competition, Tyson Fury’s agreement to undergo 
anti-doping testing in the leadup to the Klitschko fights means he could still 
be stripped of his titles.

Mendoza told BBC Radio 5 Live Sportsweek: “It’s very difficult to see a boxer 
have so much trouble around his personal life. I think he should take his time 
to recompose himself, to try in some way to structure his personal life and 
then come back to boxing. But the substance, the cocaine, is on the prohibited 
list. We will have a hearing. That’s a big trouble for us.

“He signed a contract to participate in this voluntary testing programme. We 
say ‘out of competition’ was in the middle of competition, because he was in 
the middle of training for a fight.”

Peter Fury hopes Tyson Fury’s state of mind is taken into account. He said 
they would not contest the boxing authorities if they were to redistribute the 
world championship belts, so long as Tyson Fury has the opportunity to fight 
for them once he is fit and well.

“We’re boxing people and we want to see fights and world champions,” Peter 
Fury said. “We’re happy for the belts to be free, providing they can put him in 
champion in recess. As soon as Tyson is ready and able he can step back into it 
and fight whoever has got the belts and reclaim his title back. I think he will 
be back. I see him back in the gym March, April and I think he’ll resume his 
career.”
 