
Tyson Fury is receiving professional help for issues that have arisen as a 
result of a “witch-hunt” against the boxer, according to his uncle. The WBA and 
WBO heavyweight champion was due to defend his belts against Wladimir Klitschko 
next month but last week he wasdeclared medically unfit to fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/tyson-fury-wladimir-klitschko-rematch-called-off>
, meaning the rematch has been postponed for a second time after an ankle 
injury put paid to the original date in July.

Peter Fury, who is also his trainer, said the boxer’s condition has arisen 
from what he perceives to be a flood of negativity that is driving him away 
from the sport. “He is seeking help and there will be a statement issued, 
probably on Tuesday,” Peter Fury said in an interview with iFL TV.

“When he won the world title he said to me: ‘I came back, I picked up the 
paper, I expected to be celebrated.’ Straight away, he said, the hate campaign 
started. He was complaining about it a lot but said: ‘OK, we’ve got to accept 
it. I’ve won the world title and this is how I’m treated. On many occasions 
he’s asked: ‘What’s it for? Because if I’m not being credited for the work I’ve 
done and what I’ve achieved, why am I bothering?’

“When we were abroad in Holland we had various issues with him – he was 
snapping a lot, and although he was coming to the gym his mind was elsewhere 
some days. I think that, because of the witch-hunt against him and recent 
allegations, it’s put him over the edge. He said: ‘If this is what boxing’s 
doing, I don’t want it.’”

The allegations in question involve a provisional suspension – since lifted – 
from action by UK Anti-Doping for allegedly producing a urine sample that 
contained nandrolone. Peter Fury says a combination of that situation and the 
negative attention he receives have conspired to damage his health. “There’s a 
lot to be answered for,” he said. “It’s very disappointing for me because we’ve 
got a super talent here and he’s been driven underground with it, almost to the 
point that he’s at breaking point.

“He’s at an all-time low. I think he’s always been a little up and down in the 
past, a bit volatile, always has been, but never like this. He just sees it as 
a complete witch hunt, and why bother? Everyone needs to look at what they’re 
doing, they’re doing a lot of damage to him. He’s a nice human being, Tyson, no 
matter what people say. He’s a gentleman to everyone and this is how he gets 
treated.”

Fury’s longer-term career is not thought to be in doubt. Peter expects Tyson 
to return to the ring when his treatment has finished, saying that “100%” he 
will be back. “I don’t think it is anything severe in terms of long-term 
effects but he needs some medical assistance and I think he’ll be OK.”

Jorge Linares goes distance to claim Anthony Crolla’s WBA lightweight title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/24/anthony-crolla-jorge-linares-wba-lightweight-report> 