
Uber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> treats its drivers as 
Victorian-style “sweated labour”, with some taking home less than the minimum 
wage, according to a report into its working conditions based on the testimony 
of dozens of drivers.

Drivers at the taxi-hailing app company reported feeling forced to work 
extremely long hours, sometimes more than 70 a week, just to make a basic 
living, saidFrank Field <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/frank-field>, the 
Labour MP and chair of the work and pensions committee.

The Uber driver trying to support his family: 'We are not earning enough'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/09/uber-driver-trying-to-support-family-not-earning-enough>
Field received testimony from 83 drivers who said they often took home 
significantly less than the “national living wage” after paying their running 
costs. The report says they described conditions that matched the Victorian 
definition of sweated labour: “when earnings were barely sufficient to sustain 
existence, hours of labour were such as to make lives of workers periods of 
ceaseless toil; and conditions were injurious to the health of workers and 
dangerous to the public”.

Although Uber classifies its drivers as self-employed, which puts them outside 
minimum wage legislation, Field said that in reality they had almost no 
independence – Uber dictates their working patterns once they have logged on, 
has raised its commission while cutting the rates they can charge, and imposes 
lockouts from its system if drivers turn down too many jobs. This, combined 
with the cost of the vehicles needed to meet Uber’s requirements, is creating 
“chronically low pay” and insecurity, the report says.

Field said he had produced the report, Sweated Labour, Uber and the “Gig” 
Economy, because he was concerned that the bottom was falling out of the labour 
market. It follows his highly criticalexamination 
<http://www.frankfield.co.uk/upload/docs/Wild%20West%20Workplace.pdf> of 
working practices at thecourier company Hermes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/20/delivery-giant-hermes-faces-hmrc-inquiry-into-low-pay-allegations>
.

He said ordinary taxpayers were suffering because companies in the gig 
economy, where people do predominantly short-term, casual work, were failing to 
carry a fair share of the risks of business. “This is what has blown a hole in 
the government’s projections for tax revenue. The more workers are pushed into 
low-paid, insecure self-employment, the less will be the tax take for the rest 
of the country. The Uber report shows that this form of self-employment is not 
confined to Hermes, but is a driving force in the wider gig economy.”

Uber said it did not believe the cases in Field’s report were representative. 
It said recent polling had shown that nine in 10 of its drivers were satisfied 
with the money they made and enjoyed being able to balance work and family life.

“We’re proud of the economic opportunities we have created for people who can 
choose to drive when and where they want. Drivers using our app made average 
payments of more than £16 an hour after Uber’s service fee this September,” the 
company said in a statement.

It said most of its drivers worked less than 40 hours a week on its platform, 
with only about 25% logged in for more than that. It urged any driver who was 
making “below average payments to get in touch so that it could advise on 
better car and insurance deals and best times and places to drive”.

 The report, written with Field’s parliamentary researcher Andrew Forsey, says 
Uber has flooded the market with new drivers, increasing competition for 
passengers so drivers are forced to work longer and longer just to maintain 
their low earnings.

Those who have taken on debt to finance their vehicles feel trapped and have 
little choice but to work unsafe hours to service their loans and feed their 
families, it says. The number of private hire drivers licensed by Transport for 
London (TfL) has almost doubled in six years, from 59,000 in 2010 to more than 
116,000 by December this year. Uber says around 40,000 drivers work for its 
platform in the UK, with about 30,000 of those in the capital.
Uber drivers chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-08T15:24:15/embed.html>
One driver told Field: “Yesterday my hourly net income fell to £2 an hour. I 
made £40 cash, then had to put in £30 in petrol.” Another described his work as 
being so low paid he received working tax credits from the state despite 
working very long hours. “The fares are too low and the commission too high. 
Drivers work six and a half days and 16 hours a day – dangerous for the driver, 
passenger and the public. Often you will earn less than the minimum wage, so 
you work more hours.”

Field is calling for TfL and the Department for Transport to require Uber to 
banish “sweated labour” from its working practices before renewing its licence 
to operate when it ends in 2017. He also wants the government to reform 
employment law so that companies in the gig economy are required to give 
workers basic protections, including the national living wage.

 Uber was founded in 2009 in San Francisco and has expanded rapidly across the 
world since. Consumers love its low fares and convenience but it has attracted 
controversy in many of the cities where it operates, being banned in some, and 
provoking protests and legalchallenges 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-judge-rejects-ubers-proposed-100-million-settlement-with-drivers-1471560362>
 in others.

 In London, a group of 19 Uber drivers took the company to an employment 
tribunal earlier this year with the help of the GMB union, arguing that they 
were not genuinely self-employed and were entitled to workers’ rights, 
including the national living wage. Thecourt ruled in favour of the drivers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status>
 in October but Uber said it would appeal against the decision. Employment law 
currently requires individual workers to bring their own cases rather than the 
ruling being automatically applied to other drivers.

Yaseen Aslam, the founder of United Private Hire Drivers, said the report’s 
findings echoed members’ experiences with Uber. “Minicab drivers throughout the 
UK have been exploited by operators for years but Uber’s entry to the market 
has accelerated a race to the bottom.”

 TfL has argued for a cap on driver licensing under both the mayor of London, 
Sadiq Khan, and his predecessor, Boris Johnson, but says it would require the 
government to legislate, which it has not been willing to do.

A government spokesman said: “Taxis and private hire vehicles provide a vital 
service for many people and businesses across the country. We are committed to 
supporting the industry, with safety a priority.

“We are keen to ensure our employment rules keep up to date to reflect new 
ways of working, and that’s why we have asked the Royal Society for the Arts 
chief executive, Matthew Taylor, to conduct an independent review into modern 
working practices.”

 