
Uber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> is facing the likelihood of 
several hundred more legal claims from taxi drivers who believe they have been 
wrongly classed as self-employed and are owed backdated holiday pay and missing 
wages.


Uber loses right to classify UK drivers as self-employed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status>
Lawyers for two former drivers who last week won an employment tribunal 
judgment that they were in fact employed as workers and should therefore 
benefit from the minimum wage, holiday pay and sick pay, said they were 
preparing to lodge multiple new cases with the same court.

The US taxi app giant has pledged to appeal against last Friday’s verdict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status>
, which was sharply critical of Uber’s treatment of its drivers as 
self-employed. Nineteen drivers lodged claims and two, Yasseen Aslam and James 
Farrar, were selected to test the issues in front of the tribunal. Uber is 
expected to issue proceedings at the court of appeal this month or next.

If successful the new cases could significantly increase Uber’s costs in 
holiday pay and compensation for underpayment of the minimum wage where it can 
be proved.

“We have received hundreds of inquiries from Uber drivers who are unhappy with 
their working conditions and are interested in bringing a claim for back pay of 
holiday pay and back pay of the national minimum wage,” said Annie Powell, 
employment lawyer at Leigh Day solicitors.

“We will lodge further employment tribunal claims with the support of the GMB 
union. It will be exactly the same claim as for the first 19 drivers and we 
will argue they should be workers rather than self-employed and so should be 
entitled to workers’ rights.”

Powell said there was no limit to the number of cases it could run. The firm 
had pursued class actions with over a thousand claimants in other matters. Uber 
has 40,000 drivers in the UK, but the company insists that according to its own 
survey, three-quarters of its drivers feel that “being self-employed and being 
able to choose their own hours is preferable to having things like holiday pay 
which come with being employed”. Uber argues it does not employ the drivers and 
that while it charges commission on each fare, the contract is between the 
driver and passenger.

However, in last Friday’s ruling 
<https://www.judiciary.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/aslam-and-farrar-v-uber-reasons-20161028.pdf>
 the tribunal judges dismissed as “faintly ridiculous” Uber’s claim that its 
London operation was essentially made up of thousands of small businesses 
linked by a technology platform. Uber resorted to “fictions, twisted language 
and even brand new terminology” to portray their drivers as self-employed, they 
said, and ruled that it was “unreal to deny that Uber is in business as a 
supplier of transportation services”.

“Simple common sense argues to the contrary,” the tribunal ruled.

Uber is resisting the ruling and has told its drivers: “There will be no 
change to your partnership with Uber in light of this decision and we will 
continue to support the overwhelming majority of drivers who tell us that they 
use the Uber app to be their own boss and choose when and where to drive.”

Jo Bertram, Uber’s regional general manager in the UK said in a statement: 
“Tens of thousands of people in London drive with Uber precisely because they 
want to be self-employed and their own boss. The overwhelming majority of 
drivers who use the Uber app want to keep the freedom and flexibility of being 
able to drive when and where they want.”

Steve Garelick, secretary of the professional drivers branch of the GMB union, 
said the new claims were evidence that “drivers have finally realised they have 
a voice”. He said the GMB has received hundreds of calls from Uber drivers 
seeking advice or support in making a claim.

“I spoke to a driver this week who was so emotional over the fact that finally 
someone is listening to their plight,” he said. “People have not been able to 
articulate it before on a larger platform like the tribunal.”

Uber declined to comment on the potential new employment tribunal claims.
 