
Celtic are to face proceedings from Uefa's control and disciplinary panel, 
which is investigating claims of offensive chanting during Rennes'sEuropa League
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> defeat at Parkhead 
on 3 November.

The police match commander at that game informed Uefa's match delegate of 
singing from a section of the Celtic support. The delegate's report has, in 
turn, triggered intervention from the control and disciplinary body.Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> are said to be surprised by that 
move. Uefa says it will examine an allegation of "an incident of an unsporting 
nature, namely illicit chanting" on December 8.

Strathclyde police said on Monday morning that the alleged songs in question 
relate to support for the IRA. The police also say a criminal inquiry has been 
launched.

Any possibility of heavy sanctions for Celtic may be offset by the fact they 
have not been punished byUefa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa> for 
similar offences before. Neil Lennon, the manager, and Peter Lawwell, the chief 
executive, have made separate pleas to supporters this year in a bid to end the 
pro-IRA chants which are most audible at Celtic's away domestic fixtures.

A Celtic statement said: "We have been made aware of this hearing in a letter 
from Uefa. We have not been given any detail on the nature of the alleged 
incidents and have not received any information on this matter directly from 
the police.

"Celtic supporters have a magnificent record of positive support for their 
team, something recognised by both Uefa and Fifa in recent years and we are 
extremely proud of this reputation. Therefore, the club will co-operate fully 
with any Uefa investigation."

Rangers have taken the former Aberdeen and Birmingham City winger Sone Aluko 
on trial. The 22-year-old, who has been without a club since leaving Pittodrie 
at the end of last season, will spend a week training with Ally McCoist's squad.

The Rangers manager's desire to add attacking impetus to his team has been 
heightened by the knee injury which has ruled Steven Naismith out for the 
remainder of the Scottish Premier League champions' season.
 