
Four billion dollars. Regardless of the kind of life you live, that’s an 
eye-catching figure.

Conor McGregor gains boxing licence but Mayweather fight remains unlikely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/01/conor-mcgregor-boxing-licence-floyd-mayweather>
If you’re among the 500 mixed martial artists contracted to the UFC, that 
figure may as well pulsate across the Las Vegas skyline in neon green lights. 
Since the Hollywood talent agency WME/IMGpurchased the UFC for a reported 
$4.2bn over the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/11/ufc-sale-4bn-dana-white-wme-img> 
– the richest in sport history – the chorus of fighters expressing frustration 
with the UFC has only grown stronger.

On Wednesday, five distinguished veterans spoke in a similar tone about their 
financial concerns and how they might be remedied. This made the introduction 
of the Mixed Martial Arts Athlete Association unique from other attempts at 
organizing fighters affiliated with theUFC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc>. For the first time, a prominent group 
of the UFC’s big attractions declared their intention to support themselves and 
their compatriots.

“The association’s sole concentration is to fight for the rights of MMA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mma> fighters and force UFC’s ownership to 
dramatically alter the company’s decade-plus outrageous treatment of its 
athletes,” the group said in a statement.

“UFC without fighters is only three letters of the alphabet,” said former 
welterweight champion Georges St-Pierre. “It’s time for us to make our voice 
heard and make change happen for the best of the UFC and fighters.”

Georges St-Pierre will find UFC is the most brutal opponent of his career
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/20/georges-st-pierre-ufc-contract-dispute>
“We’re all afraid, but it’s time to join up,” added the 35-year-old, one of 
the most lucrative draws in the history of the UFC. “It’s a fight for what is 
right and what is wrong. We should never be afraid to stand up for our virtues.”

St-Pierre joined Cain Velasquez, TJ Dillashaw, Tim Kennedy and Donald Cerrone 
in becoming the first headline-worthy fighters to advocate for more money, 
improved healthcare and other financial protections.

Without significant backing, fighters have primarily been forced to fend for 
themselves. “I know a lot of fighters want to remain anonymous,” St-Pierre 
said, “but I’m telling you guys, come see us. It’s time to stand together.”

Since a union was first mooted a few years ago, the idea has been met with 
apathy from the public and the fighters at large. A contingent of UFC veterans, 
most of whom had moved on from the company, aligned foran antitrust lawsuit 
against the UFC <http://www.si.com/mma/2014/12/16/ufc-antitrust-lawsuit-cung-le>
 that was filed in 2014. Though the case continues to make its way through the 
courts, it apparently wasn’t convincing enough to rouse fighters into making 
headway towards meaningful labor representation.

These were past-their-prime fighters derided as bitter and unimportant. This 
is a cut-throat business, and organizing MMA fighters in the UFC has always 
been a long shot for that reason alone. Never mind that for the past 15 years 
the UFC has been helmed by casino owners who shrugged their shoulders at 
sanctions from the National Labor Relations Board.

But when the sale went down and the Fertitta family handed control of the UFC 
to WME/IMG this summer, the baked-in sense of the way the MMA world worked was 
quickly challenged.

Conor McGregor struts on stage to show UFC needs him more than ever
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/08/ufc-conor-mcgregor-las-vegas-dana-white>
In 2015, the year preceding the sale, the UFC generated over $600m in revenue, 
three-quarters of which was from fights, according to documents. This was the 
most successful revenue year in the history of the UFC, and it prompted a cadre 
of fighters –from MMA’s biggest star, Conor McGregor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/08/ufc-conor-mcgregor-las-vegas-dana-white>
, to Cole Miller, a mid-tier veteran approaching 20 consecutive Octagon-housed 
contests – to voice discontent about not getting what they felt they deserved.

The media attempted to discover just how much of UFC’s revenue was going to 
the fighters. As a private entity, the UFC never needed to answer directly. 
When its executives were seriously pushed, they said the split was in the 
ballpark of major American sports like baseball, football and basketball. 
Around half, Lorenzo Fertitta protested to ESPN in 2012, following a report 
that indicated the number was likely around 15%.

Throughout Wednesday’s two-hour call, when the MMAAA was introduced, the 
fighters were joined by former Bellator president Bjorn Rebney.“What the 
association is going to achieve for the athletes is a settlement to address the 
past wrongs, driving up [the revenue split] to 50% up from 8%, and a benefits 
package that provides a safety net,” Rebney said.

Ironically, Rebney earned a reputation at Bellator for pursuing long-term 
contracts thought to be more restrictive than those UFC offered.

“Bjorn created the most egregious working conditions ever to exist in combat 
sports,” said manager Jason Genet. “He forced fighters to sign with managers 
that would not question those contracts and punished those that did. He may be 
the most qualified to rid the sport of injustices that people like him ushered 
in or he will be the reason this fails. I will wait and see. None of my 
athletes will be involved.”

Former two-division UFC champion Randy Couture, who attempted to fight for his 
freedom from the UFC 
<http://mmajunkie.com/2016/10/randy-couture-spent-500k-fighting-ufc-in-court-expects-tough-road-for-georges-st-pierre>
 in a court battle in 2007 before acquiescing and returning to the Octagon, 
says Rebney’s motives are worth exploring.

“I suspect that Bjorn is interested in creating an organization and being a 
promoter again and doing it with fighters, owned by fighters, sort of like what 
the Professional Bull Riders is,” Couture told BloodyElbow.com. “That’s my take 
on why Bjorn is involved here. It’s certainly more than just an advisor to 
fighters.”

Couture is involved with the Mixed Martial Arts Fighters Association, a 
separate body that seeks to organize all fighters in the sport, not just the 
UFC, in a trade association. The MMAFA has spearheaded the antitrust lawsuit 
against the UFC, and Rebney noted this is reason enough for his group, the 
MMAAA, not to align with Couture’s. The main reason being that he sees no point 
in signing over a third of the potential settlement over to lawyers.

Four of the five fighters on Wednesday’s call are associated with Creative 
Artists Agency, an entertainment powerhouse rivaling WME/IMG. Rebney denied the 
formation of the new group would lead to a new rival to UFC, and noted that 
while Creative Artists supports the group because of the fighters involved, no 
explicit relationship exists between it and the association. That relationship 
is closer than Rebney let on, sources said, though he called any suggestion 
otherwise a “conspiracy theory.”

The structure and backing of the MMAAA remains a mystery outside of its 501c6 
status. Rebney would not yet name its investors, and said the association will 
be headquartered in Anaheim Hills, California. Over the coming months those 
involved, particularly the fighters, will seek to expand its roster, relying on 
board members like Velasquez, Cerrone, Kennedy, St-Pierre and Dillashaw to 
recruit in the major MMA gyms across the US.

One of the goals of the association is a formal collective bargaining 
agreement, presumably before the UFC’s media rights are up for renewal 
following the completion of its deal with Fox in 2018 that pays $115m annually.

WME is pushing for a $4.5bn deal over 10 years, according to the Sports 
Business Journal.

Could fighters strike to compel UFC to negotiate?

James Quinn, an attorney who in October advised St-Pierre that he should 
consider himself a free agent after claiming a breach of his UFC contract, made 
strong statements at the time regarding the need to challenge the UFC’s 
contracts. Quinn has taken up the role of counsel for the MMAAA.

“It is a great organization and I will help in every way I can,” he said. 
“This is about these terrific athletes standing tall together.”

But Lucas Middlebrook, a labor lawyer, raised two concerns about the formation 
of the MMAAA.

“If you’re not certified or voluntarily recognized [by the National Labor 
Relations Board] the UFC has no legal obligation to sit down at the bargaining 
table with you,” Middlebrook said. “They can tell you to pound sand, and 
there’s no legal repercussion you can bring on them. If you’re the union or you 
were voluntarily recognized or certified, not only do they have to sit down 
with you they have to bargain in good faith.”

Rebney rejected the idea that a union would be the best route, claiming it 
would be “the worst possible option” because it delays movement towards a new 
relationship between the UFC and its talent for four to five years.

Asked how serious they were about the prospect of a holdout, fighters on the 
call described a strike as an option of last resort and said their hope would 
be to resolve any issues face to face with the UFC.

Rebney said he was waiting on the UFC’s call.

If that doesn’t work, Kennedy, a middleweight contender in the UFC and an Army 
Ranger with tours of duty in Afghanistan, made his intentions clear.

“We’re here to never leave somebody behind,” Kennedy said. “We’re here to make 
sure every step that no UFC fighter gets left behind.”
 