
Cheaper cars and ferocious competition in the high street have given Britain 
the lowest inflation rate in the European Union, according to official figures 
released yesterday.

After decades of Britain being one of Europe's worst inflation performers, the 
cost of living rose just 0.8% in the year to January, down from 1.2% the 
previous month.

Plunging prices for food, clothes, cars and tobacco helped to drag down 
inflation so that Britain's rate was the lowest in the EU - only the second 
time this has occurred since entry into the European Economic Community in 1973.

Using the same yardstick for all EU countries, the harmonised index of 
consumer prices, Britain's inflation rate was less than half the average of 
1.7% for both the 15-nation EU and for the 11-country single-currency zone. 
Sweden had the next lowest inflation rate to Britain at 1.2%, while booming 
Ireland had the highest inflation rate at 3.9%.

Other measures of inflation released by the government yesterday showed a more 
mixed picture.Inflation <https://www.theguardian.com/business/inflation> as 
measured by the all-items retail prices index rose from 1.8% to 2% as a result 
of the dearer mortgages triggered by the Bank of England's successive increases 
in base rates since the autumn. However, the rate excluding home loans fell 
from 2.2% to 2.1%, the 10th successive month in which it has been below the 
government's 2.5% target.

A breakdown of the data from the office of national statistics showed a marked 
difference between the downward pressure on the prices of goods, which are no 
higher now than they were in January last year, and the upward drift in the 
cost of those services sheltered from global competition, where prices were up 
4.4%.

The supermarket price war left food prices 2% lower than a year ago, while the 
category "other goods" - which includes clothes, household goods, personal 
articles and leisure goods - is showing a record 3% annual fall. The extent of 
the bargains on offer in the winter sales was highlighted by a 6.8% drop in 
clothing and footwear prices and the 4.8% decline in household prices last 
month, both of which were the largest since records began in 1948.

Within services, the sector showing the heftiest increase in prices was 
"non-shop services" - insurance, rent, fees and subscriptions, vehicle tax, 
travel costs and holidays - where the increase of 7.1% in the 12 months to 
January was the highest since May 1993.

Jonathan Loynes at HSBC said that although the price pressure was concentrated 
in a few sectors the monetary policy committee would continue to worry about 
the prospect of rising inflation in the event of a sharply lower pound. 
"Overall, while the fall in underlying inflation is encouraging, it is unlikely 
to prevent interest rates from rising a little further over the next few 
months. But with UK inflation the lowest in Europe and our interest rates 
double those in the euroland area, the peak is not far away."
 