
A brutal year for the UK’s public libraries has been topped off with the 
revelation that the sector took a £25m hit to its budgets in the year to March, 
as calculated in official figures released on Wednesday. The number of public 
libraries still open reached a 10-year low, while visitor numbers slid by 15 
million. Book budgets were also severely hit, taking an 8.4% fall over the 
period. Critics claimed the cuts endanger the long-term survival of the sector.

The Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy (Cipfa) released the 
figures as part of its annual survey of library authorities in the UK. They 
revealed that total expenditure for the sector fell from £944m to £919m over 
the year, a 2.6% fall that reflects swingeing cuts by local authorities seeking 
to shore up frontline services by raiding library budgets. Over the same 
period, visitor numbers fell to 250 million as 121 libraries closed, taking the 
total number still open down to 3,850.

Libraries receive £4m fund as part of strategy to help secure their future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/01/libraries-receive-4m-fund-as-part-of-strategy-to-secure-their-future>
The figures arrived a week after a government-appointed taskforce published a 
report outlining anational strategy 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/libraries-deliver-ambition-for-public-libraries-in-england-2016-to-2021/libraries-deliver-ambition-for-public-libraries-in-england-2016-to-2021>
 to turn around a long-term decline in libraries in England. A £4m innovation 
fund for projects to help disadvantaged communities was among the schemes 
outlined in the Libraries Deliver report.

Writer and president of the Society of Authors, Philip Pullman described the 
latest news as like “witnessing the slow death of civic decency”.

“Libraries are a great and much-loved treasure, and to see them being 
gradually starved of funds is like seeing a member of the family dying a slow 
death from some awful disease, for the want of a remedy that’s efficacious and 
infallible and easy to administer, but which someone is holding deliberately 
and malevolently just out of reach,” Pullman said. “Every MP, every government 
minister, every local councillor should be forced to wear a badge of shame if 
they let libraries die—and no, I’m wrong: I know local government officers who 
passionately want to preserve the library system, but who can’t because of the 
merciless cuts in funding. The rot starts at the head in this case. We must 
preserve our library system, and not just preserve it, but allow it to develop 
and expand and flourish.”

The annual survey echoes a five-year trend. Libraries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/libraries> suffered a 14% reduction in total 
net expenditure, from £979m in the year to March 2012 to £842m in the latest 
year. Meanwhile, there have also been 16.4% fewer visitors in five years, from 
299 million in 2011/12 to 250 million in 2015/16.
drop in visitors 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1RSeekv4XOuw-Ij-hGXPSNQih64mc_RyBL40PhPo6XW0>
Announcing the figures, Cipfa’s chief executive Rob Whiteman said: “This fall 
in library funding comes at a time of unprecedented budgetary pressures for 
local councils. In this climate, really tough decisions are having to be made 
about all sorts of services, and libraries are just one of the services bearing 
the brunt.”

Under the 1964 Public Libraries <https://www.theguardian.com/books/libraries> 
and Museums Act, local councils have a statutory duty “to provide a 
comprehensive and efficient library service for all persons”. But enforcement 
of the law has been weak.

The figures have come soon after a meeting between libraries minister Rob 
Wilson and the leaders of Swindon Council, to discuss proposed closure of 10 of 
the council’s 15 libraries. A source told The Guardian: “He is concerned about 
the proposed cuts and is not ruling out referring the council to an inquiry 
under the terms of the 1964 act.”

Any hopes that libraries might escape further cuts were quashed by Ian 
Stephens, chairman of the Local Government Association’s culture, tourism and 
sport board. Pointing to a 40% reduction in core central government funding for 
local authorities over the last parliament, he told the Guardian that funding 
pressures would continue over the next few years. He added: “This means library 
services must continue to adapt and change in line with the resources 
available, and the changing expectations of their communities.”
expenditure figures 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1BmUC4sf5s7z854mMbY95yt7V7JKlvNWWUE3T9KuzYOk>
Librarians laid blame for the accelerated decline of the sector firmly at the 
feet of central government. Nick Poole, the chief executive of the Chartered 
Institute of Librarians and Information Professionals, said: “The government’s 
response to libraries being among our most used and trusted public services is 
to cut budgets and hollow out services.”

He described the autumn statement as a missed opportunity to invest in 
innovation and growth through the library network. “If HM government wants to 
create an economy that works for everyone, we need to urgently address the 
skills and literacy crisis facing this country. It is now essential that 
libraries are given support and investment through the spring budget.”

Labour shadow culture secretary Kevin Brennan added to the criticism and 
described the fall in library spending as “staggering” and a direct result of 
the government’s policy of starving local councils of the resources they need: 
“In its own Libraries Taskforce report, a five to one benefit to cost ratio is 
quoted as the return on investment in libraries. This government’s approach is 
endangering the availability of good local libraries right across the country.”

The main plank of government policy towards libraries is to shift them into 
the voluntary sector. This shift in strategy is reflected in the new Cipfa 
figures: though paid library staff fell by 5.3% from 18,028 to 17,064, 
volunteer numbers rose by 7.5% to 44,501.

A DCMS spokesperson said: “Libraries are hugely important community assets and 
we are absolutely committed to helping them flourish and prosper in the 21st 
century. That is why the Libraries Taskforce has published a strategy for the 
service in England to ensure they are more resilient and better utilised by 
local authorities.”
 