
Ministers have summoned media bosses for talks on “accuracy” in journalism 
amid growing concern over the rise of fake news. Matt Hancock, the minister of 
state for digital and culture policy, has asked UK newspaper industry 
representatives to join round-table discussions about the issue.

Earlier this week, the US president-elect, Donald Trump, attacked CNN as “fake 
news” for reporting on an unverified intelligence dossier about his links to 
Russia. BuzzFeed published it in full while acknowledging that it could not 
vouch for its veracity. Facebook also announced a project to build stronger 
ties with news organisations following allegations that it was responsible for 
propagating falsehoods during the US election.

The UK government’s decision to hold talks on the issue follows Hancock’s 
statement to the House of Commons last November that ministers were 
“considering the implications of the dissemination of fake news on social media 
sites”.

The News Media Association has previously warned ministers that Google and 
Facebook were unfairly making money out of journalism produced by its members.

“There is now an urgent need to look at the value chain of digital news, and 
the industry is ready to play a full part in working towards finding a solution 
which sees the content creators fairly rewarded for their investment in news 
production,” said Lynne Anderson, the News Media Association’s deputy chief 
executive.

“The recent debate around fake news has again highlighted the vital importance 
of the quality journalism produced by news media publishers which underpins 
democracy by holding power to account.”

Labour has also established its own inquiry into the changing ways that news 
is consumed and shared online, as well as the practical, political and ethical 
issues raised by fake news. Michael Dugher, the Labour MPleading his party’s 
inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/13/fake-news-expose-labour-party-inquiry-start>
, said: “The dominance of tech giants like Google and Facebook means they are 
often the gateway into accessing news material – something thatgives them huge 
power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/08/challenge-facebook-reach-power-overdue-mark-zuckerberg>
 over what we see.

“And with that power must come greater responsibility. It leaves the 
government facing similar policy challenges over plurality, ownership and 
potential monopolies that previous governments faced when newspapers were the 
dominant force.”

Ashley Highfield, chief executive of the NMA, met Hancock late last year to 
discuss threats to newsgathering organisations from online platforms which earn 
considerable advertising revenues from displaying journalism produced by the 
traditional news media.

Hancock told parliament: “There is a huge challenge in maintaining 
high-quality journalism when advertising revenues increasingly go to the 
platform, but the costs fall on the content provider or newspaper.”

Newspapers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> are fighting 
government proposals that would force them to pay legal costs in libel cases 
even if they win in court. It would apply to papers who do not sign up to 
state-backed regulation.

The majority of the industry – not including the Guardian and Financial Times 
– has instead signed up to a system of self-regulation under the Independent 
Press Standards Organisation, which started work in September 2014. The 
Guardian and FT have their own systems of self-regulation.
 