
England equalled their 13-year-old record of 14 consecutive Test victories as 
they scored a record number of points over Australia at Twickenham, 14 months 
after being knocked out of the World Cup at the ground by the Wallabies, but
Eddie Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eddie-jones> shot down any 
comparisons with the 2003 World Cup-winning side.

“That team was much better than we are at the moment,” said the head coach, 
whose England record since taking over from Stuart Lancaster stands at 13 wins 
in 13 Tests, including a grand slam and four victories against his native 
Australia. “They could win any number of ways and our challenge is to be at our 
best by the 2019 World Cup.

“We were a bit scatty in the first half. It reminded me of the grand slam game 
in Paris and perhaps the players were nervous, but they showed composure, 
resilience and the ability to adapt in the second half. It was a good 
performance but I am not getting carried away because we have a lot of work to 
do to become the best team in the world. We are developing a desire to get 
there and that is the first thing.

Asked how long he felt the winning run could be extended, Jones continued: “I 
am not getting too excited,” though a second Six Nations grand slam would see 
England break New Zealand’s record of 18 successive Test victories. “What we 
have to do is keep improving and what this month has shown, with a number of 
players missing, is that no one in the side is irreplaceable. They all have to 
work hard to keep the jersey.

England backs cut loose against Australia to complete their perfect year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/england-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
“We are progressing but we can’t get too ahead of ourselves. We’re only the 
No2 team in the world and we want to be No1. We’ve got a long way to go before 
we achieve that. And we’re hellbent on achieving that. We’ve got the talent 
here. It’s just whether we get the desire and cohesion right. That’s what we’re 
aiming to do.”

The flanker Tom Wood, who was recalled to the squad at the start of the series 
having been overlooked by Jones since the World Cup, said that what struck him 
immediately about the new regime was the demands put on the players by the 
coaches.

“They have a relentless mindset,” said Wood. “That is why we are playing well.

“We did not make the start we wanted: we hoped Australia would have started 
their holiday but they came out with all guns blazing. We had to get hold of 
the ball and assert ourselves and when you are winning, it breeds confidence 
and that was something I picked up immediately I came into the camp.

“The coaches have instilled belief and confidence and the team is now almost 
running itself. I have never come into a game feeling better prepared to go out 
there and play well. The detail and amount of work Eddie and the other coaches 
do is tremendous: he cracks the whip and nothing is left to chance. Even when 
we had a diabolical first 20 minutes, we still had the belief to turn things 
around and win.”

The build-up to the match was dominated by a war of words between Jones and 
his opposite number, Michael Cheika. Afterwards there was only talk of sharing 
a beer and planning for next year.

“There are a few decisions we did not agree with, but overall we could not 
work out how to break the momentum they achieved in the second half,” said 
Cheika. “We left too many points out there in the first half, but I am positive 
that this team will do well. We are building.”
 