
The unbeaten Juventus returned to the top of the Italian league with a 2-0 
victory over the strugglingNovara on Sunday.

Simone Pepe set them on the way when he scored in the fourth minute but the 
result flattered Juventus with the veteran goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon pulling 
off a string of impressive saves. Fabio Quagliarella secured the win 15 minutes 
from time, leavingJuventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> two 
points clear of Milan, who had jumped ahead of them on Saturday with a 2-0 home 
win over Siena.

Internazionale's revival gathered pace as Andrea Ranocchia helped them win 1-0 
at the strugglingCesena. Inter's fifth win in six games moves them up to fifth 
spot – 10 points behind Juventus.

Novara <https://www.theguardian.com/football/novara> are two points clear of 
the bottom-placed Lecce, who let slip a two-goal lead to draw 3-3 at Parma.

After Milan had gone top with victory on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/dec/18/serie-a-round-up> the 
pressure was on Antonio Conte's team and they got off to the perfect start when 
Paolo De Ceglie crossed for Pepe to tap home from close range.

Alessandro Del Piero had several chances to put the game beyond Novara but he 
lacked the final touch. Novara's best chance came on the stroke of half‑time 
but Marco Rigoni headed straight at Buffon.

Juventus sealed the points when Quaglierella headed in Andrea Pirlo's corner 
for his first goal in more than a year.

In a game of few chances at Cesena 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cesena> Inter made it three wins in a row 
thanks to Ranocchia's second-half goal. Ranocchia found himself unmarked in the 
area shortly after the hour and headed home Maicon's free‑kick.

Lecce could have given their survival hopes a boost as they looked to be on 
course for a 3-1 victory atParma but let the lead slip. First their opponents 
were awarded a penalty in the 19th minute when Stefano Ferrario brought down 
Jonathan Biabiany. Sergio Floccari stepped up to the spot and sent Julio Sergio 
the wrong way, slotting the ball into the bottom left corner.

Two rapid David Di Michele goals saw Lecce take the lead, first tapping in 
Davide Brivio's cross, then three minutes later scoring with a stunning bicycle 
kick from the edge of the area into the top right corner. Lecce looked to have 
won when they extended their lead eight minutes from time after Luis Muriel 
dribbled almost the length of the pitch before setting up Juan Cuadrado.

Parma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/parma> got back into the game four 
minutes from time when the Lecce substitute goalkeeper Ugo Gabrieli flapped at 
a cross and the ball fell to Graziano Pelle to score. Daniele Galloppa grabbed 
the equaliser in stoppage time with a powerful snap shot from the edge of the 
area to close the game at 3-3.

Catania beat Palermo 2-0 in what is likely to be Maxi Lopez's last home game 
for the Sicilian side. The home side took the lead shortly after the half-hour 
when Francesco Lodi lifted a 25-yard free‑kick over the wall and into the top 
left corner.

Catania were handed their second when Matias Silvestre brought down Maxi Lopez 
in the area and the Argentinian placed his penalty into the bottom left corner.

Maxi Lopez is likely to leave Catania in the winter transfer window and the 
striker left the field in tears when he was substituted midway through the 
second half.

Elsewhere Bologna are further in trouble after losing 2-1 at Genoa. Genoa took 
the lead at the end of the first half when Lucas Pratto muscled his way into 
the area and rounded the keeper before crossing for Marco Rossi to tap in.

Bologna <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bologna> levelled shortly after 
the interval when Marco Di Vaio backheeled Alessandro Diamanti's free‑kick into 
the path of Gaston Ramirez, who fired home. Pratto won the game for Genoa five 
minutes from time with his first Serie A goal, lashing the ball into the bottom 
right corner from 18 yards.
 