
The skills gap gets talked about so much it’s become a cliche. But it’s a 
cliche that is real for many students and employers.

At the height of the recession in 2009, when there was a deluge of graduate 
job seekers, our annual survey showed that a number of employers still couldn’t 
fill all their vacancies. Now in 2016 nearly half of those employers still 
can’t find enough university leavers to hire.

Why? With over 300,000 students graduating every year from UK universities 
supply should match demand, but it doesn’t. On the flipside, a significant 
number of graduates struggle to find graduate-level work. This is the skills 
gap.

Employers don’t like rejecting applicants. Saying no to people takes a lot of 
time and costs money. Employers would much rather say yes and get on with their 
business. Employers also don’t expect new hires to be work ready on day one. 
More than 80% don’t even ask for a specific degree.

But employers do recruit for potential, which means different things to 
different employers. Some businesses may want specific technical knowledge, 
others will want leadership skills. And some will be prepared to train their 
new employees in areas that others aren’t.

While each employer wants to hire graduates with a different mix of knowledge, 
skills and abilities, we can offer some insight to the skills employers are 
looking for and struggle to find, as well as the areas they’re prepared to 
offer training.

Understand the lingo

Some of the skills-language employers use can need decoding, so it pays for 
graduates to become aware of what they’re asking for.

Commercial awareness, for example, can be demonstrated through an 
understanding of what drives your potential employer’s organisation. This will 
be different for the NHS, Jaguar Land Rover or Barclays Bank, but if you are 
not motivated by the core business of your employer, you will struggle to 
persuade them to invest in you.

Employers also want evidence of teamwork. Most graduates have some experience 
of this, but a piece of group work for a module rarely highlights the potential 
you have to deal with difficult people, situations and manage conflicting 
demands. It’s better to think outside of your academic studies, such as during 
roles of responsibilities or work experience, to explain how you can deal with 
difficult situations.

Another skill employer’s ask for is being self-aware. As a graduate you need 
to prove that you can learn from mistakes and develop as a person throughout 
your professional life.

Show these core skills

Essentially, almost all employers seek those with: people skills, the 
resilience to deal with difficult situations, practical intelligence, 
self-awareness, and the drive to do the job. The final point may sound obvious, 
but many employers speak of candidates who can’t demonstrate they have a 
meaningful interest in the work that they are applying to do.

You can develop these skills in many places, and not only as an intern. It’s a 
myth that only students who have done a lengthy internship get top jobs. While 
it is true that employers are investing more in intern programmes, there are 
twice as many graduate jobs than there are internships.

Five skills every new graduate needs to get a great job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2015/jun/18/five-skills-every-new-graduate-needs-to-get-a-great-job>
Get work experience

Employers really value experience and this can be gained in many different 
environments. Your experiences, and what you have learned from them, can 
demonstrate to an employer that you have the skills or the potential to develop 
into the employee they seek.

Work experience, an internship, volunteering, a part-time job, all count as 
long as you reflect on your experiences and articulate your abilities through 
the application process.

Every graduate applicant can talk about their academic achievements and the 
problems their group had to get a piece of work done on time. However, 
volunteering shows you have the drive to get out of bed and do something other 
than study and watch TV. Likewise, running a busy restaurant shift shows you 
can deal with difficult people under pressure or looking after your football 
team’s budget shows an aptitude for finance.

You would be surprised by how many applicants say they want to work in 
business, but don’t pay any attention to the business news. Also, many 
recruiters talk of candidates who fail to translate obviously great experience 
into workplace skills.

Don’t be that candidate. Put yourselves in the shoes of the employer. They 
will only hire you if they think you are someone worth investing in, someone 
who will add value to their organisation.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice. 

 