 Alun Michael, Tony Blair's preferred candidate for Welsh leader, is set to 
beat challenger Rhodri Morgan in a showdown tomorrow, trades union sources 
confidently predicted yesterday.
It would be a blow to Mr Morgan to lose the first of a series of votes by 
unions, party members and MPs to choose the person who will effectively become 
leader of the new Welsh Assembly in the spring.

A ballot of members of the electrical and engineering union, the AEEU, in 
Swansea tomorrow is accepted by both sides as a defining moment. "It is 
Stalingrad and Dien Bien Phu rolled into one," Mr Morgan acknowledged yesterday.

The two will give short speeches and take questions before the members vote. 
The result will be announced in the afternoon.

Mr Michael is portrayed as the steady, trusty, if dull, Labour establishment 
figure - the safe pair of hands - against Mr Morgan, humourous and 
anti-establishment but unpredictable. Downing Street does not regard Mr Morgan 
as being as dangerous as Ken Livingstone might be in charge of London but sees 
him as unreliable - "not a leader of men," a source said.

The delegates face a dilemma, torn between Mr Morgan's popularity and pressure 
to help Mr Blair, given his recent spate of troubles, by supporting his 
candidate.

 The Labour Party machine, caught out by Ron Davies's resignation in the wake 
of the Clapham Common affair, got off to a shaky start in its campaign in 
November to install Mr Michael. But his camp claimed yesterday that the 
arithmetic was beginning to stack up for him.

Mr Blair, lobbying hard for Mr Michael, held a reception at Downing Street 
last night to butter up Welsh MPs, assembly candidates and union 
representatives and will hold a question and answer session today with party 
members in NorthWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>.

To emphasise the Government's commitment to Mr Michael, other Cabinet 
ministers will be flooding into Wales this weekend: John Prescott, the Deputy 
Prime Minister, Robin Cook, the Foreign Secretary, and Mo Mowlam, the Northern 
Ireland Secretary.

A Welsh Labour MP, who is in neither camp but is sympathetic to Mr Morgan and 
believes he will eventually win, described Downing Street's reaction as 
"hyper-panic". The whole of Mr Michael's campaign had been a "diary of 
disaster. If someone was to write a book of how not to run a campaign, this 
would be it. Everything they do turns to dung".

Mr Morgan's camp described the flood of ministers as an invasion, and a 
tactical mistake given that Mr Michael has an image in Wales as a Millbank 
puppet.

While Mr Michael's supporters claim that backing for their candidate is 
growing, Mr Morgan's camp claim that there was 90 per cent support for their 
man in telephone canvassing.

Neutral observers accept that the AEEU vote is crucial. "If Alun does not win, 
I am not saying he is finished, but it will be very hard," a party official 
said.

 The meeting is expected to attract up to 200 AEEU delegates. Although the 
union expects the result to be close, soundings taken over the past few days 
have led union sources to predict that Mr Michael will nudge in.

 The AEEU, the second biggest union in Wales, has 65,000 members affiliated to 
the Labour Party and accounts for 6.5 per cent of the electoral college vote 
that will decide on the candidate.

The Transport and General Workers Union, which accounts for 5 per cent, is 
expected to back Mr Michael. The public sector union Unison (5 per cent) is 
balloting its members, and the GMB general union (6.5 per cent), was meeting 
yesterday to discuss how to proceed.

The unions account for a third of the electoral college, whileMPs, Euro-MPs 
and Assembly candidates account for a third and the 25,000 Welsh Labour Party 
members for the remainder.

The result will be announced in Cardiff on February 20.

Ken Jackson, The AEEU general secretary and one of the union leaders closest 
to Mr Blair, signalled his support for Mr Michael yesterday when he said: "It 
is important that people vote for the best person for the job. It would not be 
in the long term interests of either Wales or the Labour Party to use the 
selection process as some sort of protest."

A union source said Mr Morgan had angered union members by suggesting at the 
outset of the contest that the unions might stitch it up.

 Mr Morgan refused to accept that the AEEU vote was lost: "I have not lost a 
hustings yet. I have won five out of five against Mr Michael."

Mr Davies, who has kept a low profile since the Clapham Common affair, may yet 
lose out in his quest for a place in the Welsh Assembly that he did so much to 
create.

Welsh MPs last night predicted a fierce contest between MrDavies and Alan 
Williams, who is backed by Usdaw, the shopworkers' union.

Only one of them can go forward. A Welsh MP described Mr Williams as an 
extremely good backroom organiser who would maximise his support.
 