
Universities have been accused by the Lib Dems of stifling free speech through 
the use of “gagging clauses”, after the party’s research found more than 3,500 
former staff members in higher education have signed “compromise agreements” in 
the past five years.

Freedom of information requests show that 48 universities have paid out £146m 
in severance cash to former staff members over the past five years and 3,722 
people were asked to sign compromise or settlement agreements, which usually 
contain confidentiality clauses.

Gagging clauses should have no place in British universities | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2017/jan/04/gagging-clauses-should-have-no-place-in-british-universities>
The highest number of such agreements was signed by London Metropolitan 
University <https://www.theguardian.com/education/londonmetropolitanuniversity>
, with 894 agreed since 2011/12. Others with high figures over the past five 
years include the University of Exeter with 346, Cambridge University with 237, 
and the University of East London with 184, out of the 48 universities that 
replied to the Lib Dem requests under transparency laws.

Compromise agreements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/compromise-agreement-workplace-disputes>
 tend to be struck when a staff member accepts a severance payment in return 
for waiving the right to sue an organisation and they usually include a promise 
of confidentiality, often known as a “gagging clause”.

Responding to the figures, Tim Farron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tim-farron>, the Lib Dem leader, said the 
use of confidentiality clauses in compromise agreements by universities was not 
appropriate.

 “Universities are supposed to be bastions of free speech and forthright 
opinions, yet our research has shown that confidentiality clauses may have been 
used not only to avoid dirty laundry being aired in public but now are just 
common practice in higher education,” he said.


“This is simply outrageous. These gagging orders have a deterrent effect, 
employers seem to think that employees will just sign away the right to 
whistleblow.

“The cold wind of gagging staff and stifled debate, much in the public 
interest, is going through the halls of our bastions of enlightenment and 
tolerance. This must end, these practices must be stopped.”

Their use was defended by a number of the universities. A spokesman for London 
Metropolitan University said it was “common practice in higher education, and 
other sectors, to include compromise agreements in any voluntary redundancy 
settlements made”.


“Compromise agreements are recognised by statute, and the standard form of 
severance agreement from Acas includes an optional non-disclosure and 
confidentiality clause,” he said. “It is important to point out that such 
clauses do not prevent the individual from making a protected disclosure under 
whistleblowing legislation.

“A confidentiality and non-disclosure agreement is a standard element of 
voluntary severance agreements principally because almost all university staff 
will have had access to personal and private student data which universities 
have an obligation to protect from disclosure.

“Universities often have to make redundancies for a range of reasons, from the 
need to adjust to changing student numbers to the closure of courses with low 
demand or which do not meet the high standards of quality we expect.”

A University of Exeter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofexeter> spokesman said: 
“During the past five years the University of Exeter’s professional – non 
academic – services have been restructured to make sure they meet our future 
needs.

“Settlement agreements were used in these cases when staff left on a voluntary 
basis with enhanced terms. This is standard practice as part of employment law 
and protects personal information.

“The University of Exeter is a friendly and supportive workplace, where 
openness is actively encouraged. There are many mechanisms for staff to raise 
concerns confidentially.”

A spokeswoman for Cambridge University said: “The University of Cambridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/cambridgeuniversity> takes pride in its 
ability to recruit, retain and support its staff. Like any large employer, our 
people leave the university for a variety of reasons and we are committed to 
fair and proper processes that respect those individuals.”

Dusty Amroliwala, deputy vice-chancellor at the University of East London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofeastlondon>, said some staff 
had been offered voluntary severance as part of restructuring programmes.

“Such voluntary programmes represent good employment practice and are often 
agreed in advance with the trade union side,” he said. “Compromise agreements 
provide a legally safe means of bringing to a formal end the relationship 
between a member of staff and the employer. They protect the interests of both 
parties to the agreement and are entered into on a voluntary basis.

“Compromise agreements are not drafted to prevent discussion about general 
failings that might impact on students. Such failings, were they to exist, 
would normally be in the public domain before the departure of any particular 
member.

“The university does not adopt clauses in such agreements to prevent the 
discovery of any specific failing. Rather, it does so to avoid any ad hominem 
comment. The university is a strong supporter of the practice of free speech. 
It also recognises the importance of ensuring that appropriate safeguards are 
in place to protect both parties to a confidential agreement.”

The use of compromise agreements in the higher education sector appears to be 
much higher than in the NHS. The Lib Dems also collected figures for compromise 
agreements in the health service, which showed they have been used 439 times 
over the past five years by 44 trusts which paid out £73m in severance payments.

The highest users out of the trusts surveyed showed around 10 per year being 
agreed with former staff members.

The Department for Education said it was a matter for the employment practices 
of universities as businesses, while the Department for Health said it has 
written to all trusts to remind them of their legal obligations.

“We want the NHS to be the safest and most transparent healthcare system in 
the world,” a Department of Health spokesman said. “A departing employee should 
never be prevented from speaking out in the public interest where they have 
genuine concerns – but it’s wrong to say settlement agreements undermine that. 
We have written to all trusts to remind them of their legal obligations.”
 