
The award-winning novelist Kerry Hudson is set to make a bold call for change 
in UK publishing, which she believes is failing “to reflect the extraordinary 
spectrum of communities in this country”.

Hudson, author of the prize-winning debut novel Tony Hogan Bought Me An 
Ice-Cream Float Before He Stole My Ma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/28/hogan-ice-cream-hudson-review>, 
will call on Thursday evening for the publishing industry in the UK to ban 
unpaid internships and commit to a living wage for entry-level publishing 
positions, in order to “create a workforce which is able to relate to, and 
champion, more diverse voices, thus making them more visible”.

Speaking at the Untold Stories, Unheard Voices event on diversity 
<http://pages.bloomsbury.com/bloomsburyinstitute/nationalconversation> in 
London, part of a series of debates around the country led by Writers’ Centre 
Norwich, Hudson will lay out a “provocation” on why she believes change is 
needed.

Report finds UK books world has marginalised and pigeonholed ethnic minorities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/15/report-books-world-ethnic-minorities-london-book-fair>
Identifying herself as working class and queer, she will point to the 
statistic from Spread the Word’s recent Writing the Future report, which found 
that only 11% of publishing house respondents had recruitment ties with 
non-Oxbridge universities; she will highlight the lack of audits for diversity 
in publishing, and the industry’s predilection for unpaid internships, which 
exclude those unable to afford working for free.

“We are losing stories in the UK. We are narrowing our literary culture. We 
have a publishing industry which continues to perpetuate its failure to reflect 
the extraordinary spectrum of communities in this country and so we are losing 
that potential vitality, social exploration and innovation in the books we 
publish,” she will say.

“Unless we tackle this lack of inclusivity, the mountains marginalised writers 
must climb in order to get and stay published, we may never reach our true 
potential as an industry.”

Thursday’s event follows the publication earlier this year of Writing the 
Future <http://www.spreadtheword.org.uk/resources/view/writing-the-future>, a 
major piece of research into diversity in publishing which found that “an old 
mono-culture still prevails” in the industry. Also speaking will be Bloomsbury 
editor-in-chief Alexandra Pringle, the writer Nikesh Shukla, and the editor and 
Booker judge Ellah Wakatama Allfrey. Danuta Kean, author of Writing the Future, 
will also be present.

Meatspace author Shukla, writing about his experiences  
<http://www.writerscentrenorwich.org.uk/nationalconversationfourexamplesofdiversityinpublishingbynikeshshukla.aspx>
before the event, spoke of how, prior to his debut Coconut Unlimited being 
picked up by Quartet Books, he sent it to every agent and publisher he could 
find.

“They all rejected me, because, they said, the story of three hip-hop obsessed 
Asian boys was too niche. One agent, white, told me that she didn’t feel the 
characters were ‘authentically Asian enough’. I asked what she meant. My 
characters were drawn from my own authentically Asian observations and 
experiences. I was baffled. She said that none of them acted in a way that 
readers would identify as Asian,” he wrote in a piece for Writers’ Centre 
Norwich.

Shukla, who recently made a call for “white people … to write about non-white 
people” 
<http://isabelcostelloliterarysofa.com/2015/06/18/guest-post-true-diversity-in-fiction-a-provocation-from-nikesh-shukla/>
, added that a reviewer once wrote of one of his short stories that “he was 
glad to see Indians going through the universal experience”.

“The characters weren’t Indian; one was Bengali, one was Pakistani, one was 
from Watford. That wasn’t even the issue for me,” wrote Shukla. “The thing I 
found most problematic about this comment was that it was even a question – 
that an entire subcontinent might miss out on ‘the universal experience’. It’s 
‘universal’. That means it applies to everyone.”

Chris Gribble, chief executive of Writers’ Centre Norwich, said that “you 
don’t get change unless you initiate change, and unless we start to hear these 
voices and stories, we don’t know what we’re missing out on and become 
impoverished as readers”.

“We need publishers to back us in that effort, and understand that diversity 
brings creative and commercial advantages – that it is in everyone’s 
interests,” he said.

Eva Lewin at Spread the Word <http://www.spreadtheword.org.uk/> revealed that 
since the publication of Writing the Future in April, “we’ve had emails of 
support from writers including Philip Pullman and meetings with both 
HarperCollins and Penguin Random House to discuss the report’s findings”.

“We intend to repeat this research in three years’ time to see what has 
changed, and in the meantime to work with the publishing industry and the 
literature sector to promote the fantastic range of BAME authors already 
published – but who just don’t get the attention they are due – and to support 
the emerging BAME writers through information, training and networking 
opportunities,” she said. “It’s about keeping the heat up and demonstrating 
that the writers and the readers are out there – we all deserve a literature 
that truly reflects the diversity of the culture we live in.”

Kean added that she was “impressed with the seriousness with which some 
publishers have responded” to the report, but said “we want more in order to 
see lasting change. There are still conversations and commitments needed from 
other publishers – conglomerate and independent. It’s only when we have that 
commitment and a rigorous desire to get away from tackling diversity only at 
entry level that we will see lasting change.”

Hudson, this evening, is due to echo her words. “Without making change and 
making change now we risk turning our proud literary legacy into a factory 
producing monocultural, ‘safe-ish bets’ based on the success of previously 
published books on similar models,” she will say. “This is our society and from 
the top down (more diversity in our boardrooms, an investigation into the glass 
ceiling existing for senior management) and grassroots up, each of us must take 
an individual responsibility to ask ‘what can I do?’”
 