
US Quevilly have been upstarts since birth. The amateur team who will compete 
in the French Cup final on Saturday against aristocraticLyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> were created in 1902 by Amable 
Lozai and Jules Manneville as a breakaway from Cercle Pédestre Quevillais, 
whose management refused to grant the players' request to buy a ball to help 
them train.

The new club, Union Sportive Quevillaise, grew quickly and continued being a 
pain to the powers that be, never more so than in 1927, when Gaston Doumergue 
became the first French president to attend a cup final and spent most of the 
match being jostled in the VIP box by the excitable Lozai who, by then, was the 
chairman of Quevilly and could not contain himself as his team were beaten 3-0 
byMarseille <https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille>.

That final marked the beginning of an extraordinary relationship between 
Quevilly and the cup, even if Saturday is the first time that the amateurs have 
been back to the final since then.

They have knocked 10 top-flight teams out of the competition over the years – 
including Marseille andRennes <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rennes> 
this season to reach the showpiece at the Stade de France. That surpassed their 
feat of two years ago, when they made it to the semi-final before being 
eliminated 1-0 by Paris St-Germain.

Some of their best players were headhunted after that but most remained and 
were augmented by newcomers such as Pierrick Cappelle, who arrived with the 
seemingly naive expectation of embarking on similar adventures. "He signed last 
summer because he saw us on TV," the full-back Cédric Vanoukia told France 
Football magazine after the victory over Rennes. "New guys have been coming for 
the last two years to have another cup run. They were like kids; they didn't 
realise that there was only a one in a million chance of that happening again."

Quevilly are currently struggling in the lower half of France's third tier, 
their cup results at odds with so-so league form. But getting that high in the 
pyramid has also been an enormous achievement.

When their Normandy neighbours Le Havre and Rouen opted to turn professional 
in the 1930s, Quevilly stayed defiantly amateur until 1970, when the French 
authorities introduced a scheme to help the country's top amateur clubs to join 
the national league and move towards professionalism. Quevilly muddled around 
the third and fourth tiers for a few years before the burden became too big and 
with no money left, the club folded in 1978. They re-emerged the following year 
at the lowest level of the Normandy district league. And began working their 
way back up.

Now Quevilly's amateur status is something of a misnomer as 17 of their squad 
are paid, albeit piffling sums in football terms and in several cases through 
contracts that entail doing more than just play. The captain, Grégory 
Beaugrard, for instance, gets a salary for being theUnder-19 coach.

"I don't have the hatred that some [semi-professionals] have for pros," said 
the 31-year-old. "They have a great life but I'm not complaining about mine, 
although I would obviously be stupid to say I prefer living off €2,000 a month 
than €100,000."

Beaugrard is one of the few members of the team who has never been on the 
books of a professional club – most of the others having been in academies as 
teenagers before being told they were not good enough. The success of those 
academies is one of the reasons that the gulf in quality between top clubs and 
lower league is not as big as the gulf in wages and helps explain why many 
lower-league clubs have done well in the French Cup in recent times, most 
notably when Calais, from the fourth tier, were runners-up in 2000.

The side Lyon beat in this year's semi-finals were GFCO Ajaccio, who are in 
the same league as Quevilly. "The difference between the guys who get a 
professional contract at the end of their stint in the academies and the guys 
who don't is not as big as people believe,"said the former France manager 
Michel Hidalgo 
<http://www.la-croix.com/Actualite/S-informer/Sport/Comment-expliquer-la-victoire-de-Quevilly-en-Coupe-de-France-de-football-_EG_-2012-04-12-793741>
, whose twin brother, Serge, played for Quevilly in the early 1950s.

Zanké Diarra is one of the Quevilly players who did not get a professional 
contract after his time in an academy and he too has a famous brother: the 
France international Alou Diarra. The pair came up against each other in the 
quarter-final, when Alou's Marseille lost 3-2 in extra time. What was striking 
about that match, and the semi-final, when Queviullycame from behind to beat 
Rennes 2-1 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zbfjf-TyuF4>, was that the underdogs 
deserved to win as they were physically, technically and tactically better.

"Marseille tried to make the fitness of professionals pay off by getting stuck 
in hard from the start but we overcame that," the Quevilly chairman, Michel 
Mallet, told France 3 news. "Then Rennes tried a different approach, thinking 
they would wear us down by passing the ball around and keeping possession. But 
we overcame that, too."

The only remaining question is can they overcome Lyon, second only to the 
Qatar-backed PSG as the richest club in France and with an annual budget of 
€139m, almost 80 times more than Quevilly's. "This is exceptional," said Zanké 
Diarra after the semi-final. "I live quite close to the Stade de France and 
every time I've passed there over the years I've run a little movie in my head 
with my playing there – now I'm going to play there in real life."

But will Quevilly finally get their Hollywood ending?
 