
When a local councillor knocked on the door of Amanda Craig’s Devon bolthole, 
the novelist learned something that helped her realise, 10 years later, that 
the vote for Brexit would be a certainty and not a vain hope among Little 
Englanders.

“He came round begging for us to give work to someone he knew,” she recalled. 
When asked why he was so desperate, the councillor replied: “People don’t 
realise, but in this part of the country we are poorer than Romania.”

The writer, who is now based in north London, was astounded: “A lot of things 
have shocked me since about rural life, but that shocked me the most.”

The experience inspired Craig to write her forthcoming novel, The Lie of the 
Land <http://www.amandacraig.com/books/the-lie-of-the-land/>. A satirical take 
on the disparity between town and country, which highlights the emotional 
levers that led to the Brexit vote, The Lie of the Land is focused on a 
metropolitan couple forced to downsize to Devon because they cannot afford to 
divorce.

The book moves between privileged middle classes and migrant workers on 
zero-hours contracts in a pie factory. Set to be published on the one-year 
anniversary of the EU referendum in June, Craig’s book is in a vanguard of 2017 
novels set to tackle the state of the nation in the run-up to and after Brexit.

June will also see Douglas Board’s political thriller Time of Lies. Set 
against the 2020 general election, a monstrous rightwing demagogue with a 
hardcore following of violent young thugs stages an anti-elite coup to win. 
Likened to Jonathan Franzen and Dave Eggers, Board tackles the response of 
liberals and the establishment to a populist power grab.

Publishers predict that this trickle of fictional responses to Brexit will 
turn into a flood by the end of 2017. “I suspect we will see a lot more Brexit 
or Trump-America books once we have all lived through whatever changes these 
may bring [this year],” said Kirsty Dunseath, fiction publisher at Wiedenfeld 
and Nicolson.

Though not written specifically about Brexit, Heinz Helle’s novel Euphoria, 
published by Serpent’s Tale in February, takes as its starting point a 
post-apocalyptic future in whichEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> has crumbled and a handful of 
men are trying to survive in the Austrian Alps. Helle’s publisher described it 
as “Lord of the Flies meets The Road”, grappling as it does the anxieties of 
post-millennial European men.

Crime writers have been fast to pick the referendum as a background for their 
next works. June sees the publication of Mark Billingham’s next Tom Thorne 
novel Love Like Blood, which uses the post-Brexit vote rise in hate crime as 
its theme. Billingham said: “It’s not the issue at the very heart of the book, 
but it’s bubbling under throughout the story.”

Fellow crime writer Martyn Waites is working on novel The Old Religion – due 
in 2018 – that has the aftermath of the vote in a small Cornish community as 
its setting. Waites said crime writers were usually first to tackle social 
change because, among readers, crime fiction had replaced the social novel once 
produced by the likes of Alan Sillitoe or Stan Barstow.

“As a crime writer you’re dealing with life and death – usually murder, 
because tax fraud is boring – so you’re looking into the society that created 
the circumstances for that to happen,” he said.

Craig it was important for her that The Lie of the Land tackled the assumption 
that all leave voters were “stupid, racist and jingoistic … They are not. I 
don’t agree with how they voted, but I respect them and I think it is really 
important.”

She thinks it is imperative for contemporary novelists to tackle the 
disparities in society that led to June’s result. “Since my previous book A 
Vicious Circle, I have been writing more and more about the gulf between the 
haves and have-nots, which anyone with half a brain should be worried about 
now,” she said.

'Inspiration in dark times': books to make sense of Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/16/inspiration-in-dark-times-books-to-make-sense-of-brexit>
That two of the books published this year about post-Brexit Britain will be 
dystopian fantasies did not surprise Jasper Sutcliffe, head of buying at 
Foyles. He said: “We expect to see lots of new-world politics titles in 2017 to 
help people try to understand the new political reality, as well as more 
utopian fiction for those who wish to escape from it.”

Not all contemporary novelists are rushing to tackle Brexit. Lionel Shriver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/lionel-shriver> said her next novel will be 
set in the US because “the UK-EU situation is in flux, and the outcome is 
likely to remain unclear for some time”.

“Because a novel takes most of us a couple of years [to write] and another 
year to arrive in print, it’s dangerous for novelists to point a plot at a 
moving target. We can easily get overtaken by events,” she said.

“To successfully address Brexit in a fruitful and lasting manner would require 
a novelist to parse: what is this conflictreally about? Deep down? I think 
that’s anything but obvious.”
 