
Castellón airport has never seen anything like this, which might not come as a 
huge surprise when for four long years it had never even seen a plane. Over the 
past two days the place has been busy for the first time, thanks to the first 
people to fly from there. In January 2015 theVillarreal team boarded flight 
YW2003 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jan/19/villarreal-airport-la-liga-sid-lowe-roundup>
 bound for San Sebastián; on Wednesday they caught a charter heading for 
Liverpool John Lennon, where ametal Yellow Submarine awaited them 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/sidlowe/status/727853366009810944>. History awaits 
them too, and more than 2,000 supporters followed from Vila Real, population 
51,367.

Three charter flights left Castellón on Wednesday and six are scheduled for 
Thursday, more than normally take off there in a week. Others flew from 
Valencia, Barcelona and Madrid: fans, friends and family. Denis Suárez’s 
mother, a hairdresser, and his father, a car mechanic, came in from Galicia, 
north-west Spain. There are no direct flights but they were not going to miss 
seeing him in a European semi-final at Anfield. Nor was Suárez’s sister, Zulay, 
but at least she did not have to travel so far. She came by car.

For a Spaniard, saying no to Barcelona is very difficult – even if you’re at 
City.
Denis Suárez 
Suárez signed for Manchester City in 2011, aged 17. He left Celta Vigo, who he 
supports and had joined at 11, because they were in administration and needed 
the money. Barcelona wanted him too but, he admits with striking honesty, there 
were two fundamental reasons to choose England: one was financial, the other 
family.

“Celta had to sell and City paid them an important amount [€1.5m up front, 
€1.5m more upon his debut], while the contract sorted out my parents’ lives,” 
he explains. “And, above all, City let me take my family with me.”

After two years in Manchester he returned to Spain and so did his parents. 
They went back to Salceda de Caselas, the town of 8,835 people where he grew 
up; Suárez went to Barcelona, then Sevilla, then Villarreal. Zulay, though, 
stayed in Manchester where she runs a company called Forever Fit and where, 
Suárez says with a smile, “she’d got herself an English boyfriend”. A City fan, 
he and Zulay planned to watch Wednesday’s Champions League semi‑final with 
Denis in the Villarreal team’s hotel and Thursday’sEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> semi‑final in the 
Villarreal end.

Had things turned out differently, they might have watched him weekly at the 
Etihad Stadium. He could be forgiven for thinking that, given the chance, he 
would be in City’s first team now. “Yes, maybe. But I don’t regret any of the 
decisions I’ve made.”

He has made a lot of them, while others have been made for him, leaving him 
seemingly forever moving on. “Maybe in different circumstances I’d be playing 
for City or Barcelona, or if Celta hadn’t had financial problems I’d still be 
there,” Suárez says. “But you have to keep progressing, and every experience 
makes you stronger.”

Suárez speaks in a soft voice, his words considered and thoughtful, but the 
ambition is inescapable, the character too – visible, too, in how much he’s 
experienced so young, in his refusal to allow progress to slow, the search for 
opportunity. At 22 he has had five clubs and more lies ahead. A call-up to 
Spain’s preliminary pre-Euro squad is likely and with Barcelona intending to 
exercise their right to buy him back, so is another move.

Liverpool’s Daniel Sturridge made to wait by Jürgen Klopp on semi-final role
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/04/daniel-sturridge-liverpool-jurgen-klopp>
It has been quite a journey and it started with a goal. “It was against Los 
Angeles Galaxy in pre-season,” Suárez recalls. “I came on late and it went to 
penalties. I hadn’t got the ball, so my first ever touch as a City player was a 
penalty ... which I scored.”

If Suárez remembers the penalty – “across my body, the keeper going the wrong 
way” – most remember that game for Roberto Mancini furiously hauling off Mario 
Balotelli after an attempted backheel. Suárez was behind him on the bench at 
the time.

“Mario heard a whistle from the stands,” Suárez explains. “But Mancini hadn’t 
heard it and substituted him because he thought he was messing about. If 
Balotelli had been focused, if his head had been right, he’d have been a great 
player, I’m certain. I saw him do things in training that were la leche [the 
business]. But there was no maliciousness in him, nothing bad at all: it was 
just the way he is. He was like a kid, everything was funny, but he was a good 
guy.”

Suárez says they all were. And Balotelli, who spoke Spanish, was among those 
who helped most in the first difficult weeks, along with Pablo Zabaleta and 
Mancini’s sons Felippo and Andrea. Suárez had his family around him, built a 
relationship with team-mates and learnt English. He admits it was harder for 
his parents, for whom life in England was “nothing like” Spain even though City 
“did all they could”, but he insists: “I liked it there; going was the right 
decision and I don’t regret it.”

Nor, though, did he regret leaving. On the pitch, opportunities were few at 
the Etihad Stadium. Given his age, that was always likely, but Suárez hoped for 
more and departed without having played a Premier League game. “To start with 
Mancini showed a lot of trust and faith in me, he gave me confidence and my 
debut [in the League Cup against Wolves], but the team was competing for 
titles, so it’s hard to put in young players. In the second year an injury 
slowed me down. At the end of it [Manuel] Pellegrini arrived. I had a year left 
but I got the offer from Barça: a year with the B team, then the first team.”

What did Pellegrini say? “To stay,” Suárez replies. “I always knew it would be 
difficult to get games, but...” he says, looking for the right words. “For 
example, I see Arsenal play youth-teamers, or United with [Marcus] Rashford. I 
see teams give them opportunities, four or five games to see how they respond. 
At City that doesn’t happen. Except now with [Kelechi] Iheanacho, they don’t 
really back young players. I know it’s difficult: City have a huge number of 
top-level players. They invest a lot of money in youth, look after them, give 
them everything they need to succeed, but at the hour of truth it’s hard to 
take that next step.”

I’d always want James Milner in my team and I’m sure coaches think the same.
Denis Suárez 
Will that change with Pep Guardiola? “Maybe,” Suárez says. “Because his 
philosophy is that if he sees a young player who is good enough, he backs him.” 
Suárez thinks English football would benefit from youth teams playing in the 
professional league, rather than a Reserves League, helping young players 
prepare for that step up. But, he adds: “I also believe that to find out if 
someone is good enough, you have to try them. Arsenal do it, and it works. 
United do it.Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> have 
had [Raheem] Sterling, Suso, [Jordan] Ibe ... they’ve been given 
opportunities.” Suárez saw his best opportunity lying elsewhere and in 2013 
returned to Spain. “For a Spaniard, saying no to Barcelona is very difficult – 
even if you’re at City,” he says. Again, though, he found himself wanting more. 
He’d sat through the final-year collapse of Mancini; now he arrived at 
Barcelona for that unsuccessful 2013-14 season under Tata Martino, a year that 
felt transitory even at the time. He starred for Barcelona’s B team, finishing 
third in the Second Division, but got no first-team minutes. He did not expect 
to the following season, either, even when Luis Enrique arrived. Next stop: 
Sevilla on a two-year loan.

Suárez considered 46 games in his first top-flight season a success. But at 
the end of it, with Barcelona’s Fifa ban making a recall impossible, he pushed 
for the chance to join Villarreal instead pleading with the Sevilla coach Unai 
Emery to let him go. Eventually,Villarreal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal> paid Sevilla €3m and 
Barcelona €4m to buy him. The Catalans kept a buy-back clause, believed to be 
around €7m.

“He’s a good lad, but he said he’d have more chance somewhere else,” Emery 
admitted. He was right. Suárez has played 31 league games, plus 12 times in the 
Europa League this season. When he rolled the ball across for Adrián López to 
score thelast‑minute winner against Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/28/villarreal-liverpool-europa-league-match-report>
, it left him on the verge of a record for assists in this competition, with 
seven.

It also left Villarreal on the verge of history. Suárez has heard people say 
they celebrated too much, too soon, but he does not agree. And far from 
disrespecting Liverpool, he insists the opposite is true. “Liverpool are a huge 
club,un grande. Imagine it: you beat a big, historic club in the Europa League 
semi-final, and in the last minute ... that doesn’t happen every day.”

“People know Atlético, Madrid, and Barça, and no one else exists. The game 
against Liverpool was our way of opening Villarreal up to the world, showcasing 
our identity and style, which you can see in the goal: a sharp, clean 
counterattack, a really good one,” he says. As for Liverpool’s style, he admits 
he was surprised to see them play without a striker but believes that what most 
effected them was losing Philippe Coutinho. Suárez talks highly of Jürgen 
Klopp’s tactical work and personality; talks highly, too, of two players who 
were team-mates at City.

Explained: why five English clubs could play in next season’s Champions League
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/five-premier-league-clubs-champions-league>
“Kolo [Touré] is a great guy, always positive,” he says, but it is James 
Milner of whom he speaks most warmly and whose shirt he covets. Milner, it 
turns out, even speaks a bit of Spanish. “I don’t know if he’s underrated in 
England; what I do know is that I saw him every day and he ran more and trained 
better than anyone else,” Suárez says. “I’d always want him in my team and I’m 
sure coaches think the same. He always competes. Maybe he is rarely a 10 out 10 
but he’s always anotable [7 or 8].

“The Europa League’s taken a leap forward: you can see how teams like Dortmund 
and Liverpool have treated it, teams used to the Champions League,” Suárez 
says. And not because it is a gateway, a means of returning to that 
competition, which Villarreal have already done in anyway, but because of the 
glory, the moment, the memory. “If it then gives you access to the Champions 
League, great, but it’s a title, a trophy,” he insists.

That matters. As he explains: “Liverpool have loads of titles [already], sure, 
but Sevilla have become big through the Europa League”. Villarreal aspire to 
the same and so does he.

For Suárez, this would be his second trophy in two years, having won the 
competition with Sevilla last season; for Villarreal, defeated in three 
European semi-finals, it would be a first in 93 years. No wonder there were 
queues in Castellón. “We’re living a historic season,” he says. “Fourth in La 
Liga, semi‑finals against Liverpool, winning 1-0, last minute. It’s not that we 
celebrated as if we’d already won; it’s that maybe people don’t realise how big 
this is for us. And it’s Liverpool – come on. Any player would love the chance 
to reach a European final; imagine having that chance at Anfield.

“For Villarreal, it doesn’t get bigger. If we get through, this would be the 
most important season in the club’s history.”
 