
1) Liverpool can keep belief despite late blow

This was never going to be an occasion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/28/villarreal-liverpool-europa-league-match-report>
 whose pitch matched theremarkable win over Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/14/liverpool-borussia-dortmund-europa-league-report>
, despite the bigger prize at stake. If that sounds illogical, it probably did 
Liverpool a favour – emotion can take one only some of the way and an element 
of restraint was required to stay in control at El Madrigal. It was an 
intelligent performance from Jürgen Klopp’s team, more in the manner of that 
draw in Dortmund than the chaos that followed at Anfield and suggested they are 
developing a valuable ability to ramp things up or down when necessary. That is 
all the more impressive in their current depleted state and they were dealt 
another blow by the half‑time withdrawal of Philippe Coutinho because of 
illness. A patched-up side came so close to keeping Villarreal at bay and, 
despite Adrián López’s late winner, will be confident of another famous 
turnaround at Anfield.

Liverpool dealt sucker-punch at the last by Villarreal’s Adrían López
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/28/villarreal-liverpool-europa-league-match-report>
2) Villarreal and Soriano demonstrate their class

There were one or two expressions of satisfaction – albeit not within the 
Liverpool camp – when the draw pitted them againstVillarreal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal> rather than serial champions 
Sevilla but this was always going to be as fiendish a test as they come. La 
Liga’s fourth‑placed side are a stylish, fluent outfit with an edge and their 
captain, the deep midfielder Bruno Soriano, would walk into most major teams. 
It was his piece of vision in the 11th minute, chipping a quickly taken 
free-kick for Roberto Soldado to volley wide, that carved Liverpool open for 
the first time and it was a partnership that caused problems – Soldado dropping 
deep to receive slide-rule passes and giving Liverpool’s centre‑backs decisions 
to make. The former Tottenham striker chipped wide from a similar combination 
shortly before half-time and Bruno’s promptings caused problems throughout. 
Keeping him away from areas of influence will be a priority at Anfield next 
week.

3) Allen looks a good fit for big European nights

Joe Allen had not started a Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> knockout game this 
season but injuries to Emre Can and Jordan Henderson meant he was always going 
to get his chance and he almost took it five minutes in, arriving late to shoot 
straight at Sergio Asenjo when one expected the net to ripple. He appeared a 
natural fit for Liverpool’s purposes here, the emphasis being on keeping 
possession against a side so quick in the transition; and one had only to 
stretch the mind back three weeks to remember the composure he added in 
Dortmund when replacing Henderson at half-time. That evening he helped 
Liverpool get another 10 yards up the pitch and after a lively start by 
Villarreal he had a similar impact here, playing with his head up and showing 
an appetite to drive beyond the ball, too. Allen does not have the physical 
gifts of his stricken team-mates and that probably accounts for his place in 
the pecking order but he seems cut out for these European nights.

4) Sturridge must fear for his place in Klopp’s schema

A penny for Daniel Sturridge’s thoughts? The forward has been in good form 
during April, scoring four goals in five appearances, and a return of 11 in 22 
over the season is more than respectable. He might have expected to start in 
Divock Origi’s absence here but instead Roberto Firmino took the central role, 
Klopp’s pre-match rationale being for “a little more stability” in the 
4-3-3/4-5-1 hybrid he deployed against Dortmund and in the convincing victories 
at Chelsea and Manchester City. Firmino’s ability to press from the front works 
to his advantage under Klopp and he demonstrated it after 15 minutes when he 
dispossessed the usually impeccable Bruno and set Liverpool temporarily on the 
front foot. The downside was thatLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> lacked a presence in the box, 
although Firmino did rap a shot against the post with 25 minutes left. Even if 
Klopp’s decision made sense, Sturridge must be concerned that he does not fit 
into the schema for these occasions.

5) Mignolet will take heart from a steady night

Simon Mignolet’s form had been thrust under the spotlight again last Saturday 
when he flapped under a Vurnon Anita cross and all of a sudden Liverpool, in 
total control against Newcastle, were on the ropes. Yet he has been solid in 
Europe and did well here, getting down to his left in the first half to parry a 
firmly struck sidefooter from Tomás Pina. He saved his best until just before 
the end, superbly tipping away Cédric Bakambu’s first clear shot of the night. 
He handled well when required but was protected diligently by Dejan Lovren and 
the outstanding Kolo Touré. The Belgian is one of the players Liverpool are 
thought likely to replace – or at least enlist competition for – as they look 
to improve during the summer but Klopp has shown an ability to get the most out 
of previously under-par players and his showings during a Europa League 
campaign in which he has played every minute have done him little harm. 
 