
Vincent Kompany’s career at Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> is in serious doubt after 
he sustained knee ligament damage, the 35th injury of his eight years at the 
club and one which should rule him out until after Christmas.

The captain hurt his right knee in a collision with Claudio Bravo during 
Saturday’s win at Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/crystal-palace-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 and flies to Barcelona on Wednesday to be treated by Doctor Ramon Cugat, the 
specialist favoured by Pep Guardiola. Kompany is set to miss a minimum of four 
weeks and though there remains a firm desire from the player and Guardiola to 
try to re-establish him on a permanent basis, the prospect becomes more remote 
with each fresh blow.

The central defender has missed 35 weeks of 2016 so if he is out for another 
four will have been fit for 13 weeks. Guardiola decided in the summer to allow 
the captain one more season to prove he can be regularly available. Yet the 
latest setback means that Kompany will have made only five appearances with 
half the season gone, and given the Belgian’s serial injuries faces a fight to 
stay fit for the second half of the campaign.

Luis Enrique gives Lionel Messi to Manchester City rumours short shrift
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/luis-enrique-lionel-messi-manchester-city-barcelona-celtic>
Guardiola will also have to decide whether to drop him from the Champions 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> squad for the 
knockout stage if City qualify and whether he should recruit a new centre-back 
in the winter window. Beyond John Stones, the City manager is unsure regarding 
Nicolás Otamendi while his only other senior centre-back is Aleksandar Kolarov, 
who as a career left-back is a makeshift in the position.

Guardiola, whose side will progress to the knockout stage if Borussia 
Mönchenglandbach are beaten on Wednesday night, said: “For the next weeks he’s 
injured, yes. He had a little bit of a problem – fortunately it’s not too bad 
in the head [after initially suffering concussion], because that is the most 
difficult thing. But in that action he had a little problem with the knee, and 
the next weeks he will be out.”

The ligament damage was discovered following a scan after Kompany complained 
of pain in the knee. “He’s sad and upset. But it’s long time, a long time he 
doesn’t play,” Guardiola said. “He is in the best hands, so he’s travelling 
there – Cugat is part of our team, our staff, and he will be controlled there 
and make the best treatment possible to make his recuperation as soon as 
possible. It’s a ligament, it’s not more than that. The doctor told me weeks 
but didn’t explain exactly how many. A serious ligament would be six months 
[but]it will be shorter. It’s weeks, I don’t know, three or four.”

Asked if he may drop Kompany from the Champions League squad, Guardiola said: 
“I think now is not the moment because first we have to qualify for the next 
round, and after that we are going to decide in the right moment. When I 
decided in July and August about the squad for that period until November, 
December I decide and we are going to decide in that moment what is the 
situation. What we are looking for, what we are expecting, is that Vincent can 
finally stay regularly in the team because one day it’s a muscle problem, the 
last game it was you know – this situation. We have to help him to take this 
regularity to training week after week and be able to play more often. And 
after that, at the end right now, it’s not the most important thing [whether to 
drop him].”

Despite City’s fine 3-1 win over Barcelona  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/manchester-city-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
in the previous Group C game Guardiola still believes it will take time to 
establish the club in the continental elite, maybe as long as a decade.

Pep Guardiola was always going to win but Yaya Touré may not have lost
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/20/pep-guardiola-yaya-toure-manchester-city>
“I say 10 years but hopefully it will be shorter,” said Guardiola. “My opinion 
about that is because a team like Manchester City was 35, 40 years not playing 
in Europe, you need time to be involved in that level. It’s simple like that. 
They were not there for a long time. When you are talking about Barcelona, 
Madrid, Juventus, Milan, Bayern Munich, Borussia Dortmund or this kind of big 
team – Porto, Benfica, Inter Milan – almost every club has been there for 50 
years, and that is the difference between one club and another one.

“We are fighting since the Abu Dhabi chairman bought the club to try to make 
this step forward, and try to arrive there. We invest money, like all other big 
clubs in the world. Not just Manchester City spend money but all the other big 
clubs around the world do that, to try to do the best thing as soon as possible 
to reduce that distance to the other ones, but the history is the history and 
the history speaks for itself.

“They were a long time not in Europe, that counts a lot for the respect for 
the opponent. We are looking to do it as quick as possible, in the next 10 
years, or three, four, six, seven years. Then the people consider: ‘Wow, in the 
last 10 years this club are always there’.

“Last season it was the semi-final, this year we are going to try to get to 
the last 16, we are going to arrive in the last 16 and try to arrive in the 
quarter-finals and to be there in the elite.”
 