
A professional violinist has been jailed for conning more than £300,000 out of 
well-wishers by pretending that she had cancer. Bethan Doci, 38, claimed she 
needed the money for her treatment, but was fit and well and instead funded a 
lavish lifestyle including holidays abroad, luxury cars and expensive handbags.

 Doci, who has performed with the Royal Shakespeare Company and with 
orchestras around the world, cheated one man out of his life savings, Swansea 
crown court was told.

 Jailing Doci for 32 months, the judge, Keith Thomas, said: “You committed 
these offences in a callous and heartless manner, saying you were suffering 
from cancer and needed treatment which you couldn’t afford. You took the money 
but used it on a lavish lifestyle.”

Thomas said her treatment of a retired chartered accountant, Liam Donnelly, 
64, whose wife had died from cancer and who handed over £170,000 to help Doci, 
was especially harsh. “Your victims were devastated, especially Mr Donnelly, 
who you treated particularly cruelly by taking all his life savings,” the judge 
said.

The court heard that Doci had no assets left, having spent all the money, and 
she was ordered to repay a nominal £1 in compensation. Doci, who used the 
professional name Bethan Morgan, wept as she was led away.

As well as Donnelly, Doci duped retired businessman Bruce Pilley, 58, out of 
£168,000, and former Royal Navy officer Neil McKelvie, 56, out £30,000 after 
advertising her fake illness on the Craigslist website. Doci, who lived in a 
riverside apartment in Swansea, admitted 11 counts of fraud from 2010-13.

Catherine Richards, prosecuting, said Doci provided those who expressed a 
desire to help with false doctor’s notes. Richards said: “Her lies and 
deception became more and more elaborate.”

Paul Spreadborough, defending, said: “She was gaining a professional 
reputation as a violinist and was a dedicated performer. But she was caught in 
a classic spiral of lies, debt and deceit. She fell into a pattern and fell 
deeper and deeper.”

After the case, Supt Kath Pritchard described the investigation as “complex 
and protracted”. She said: “Thanks to the overwhelming evidence against Bethan 
Morgan, she pleaded guilty, which is testament to the tenacity and 
professionalism of our detectives. Bethan Doci/Morgan had a total disregard for 
her victims, who all trusted her. I hope her victims find some comfort in 
today’s outcome, which also sends out a clear message to criminals intent on 
committing fraudulent offences.”

A spokesman for the Crown Prosecution Service said: “She exploited the trust, 
emotional vulnerabilities and generosity of … persons whom she met on the 
internet. Her conduct amounted to a calculated protracted web of deceit to fund 
her lavish lifestyle and foreign travel. A thorough and lengthy investigation 
revealed the breadth of her crime and a number of victims.

“We hope her conviction and sentence provide some solace to those who were 
betrayed and suffered as a result of her crime, and we hope it deters others 
from committing like offences.”
 