
Time to announce our own unique, much-loved columnar award: Newspaper 
Proprietor of the Year (aka the Lord Copper Memorial Trophy). A difficult call, 
as always. Does it go, yet again, to Rupert, 85, for stopping tweeting, backing 
Trump, and getting married again (so that some call him the media’s answer to 
Mick Jagger)? To Richard Desmond, the would-be spirit of Brexit, or the 
brothers Barclay, whose total lack of interest in journalistic life becomes 
more manifest day by day? Is Tsuneo Kita, Japanese publisher of the Nikkei, in 
with an early FT shout?

No: the clear winner in this elite-loathing, privilege-hating, populism-riven 
island is surely the quiet billionaire: Jonathan Harold Esmond Vere Harmsworth, 
4thViscount Rothermere <https://www.theguardian.com/media/viscount-rothermere>, 
who emerges ever more obviously as the very antithesis of Lord C.

He runs a successful, increasingly diversified business empire. The wider Mail 
group is a hold or buy on most analysts’ reckoning. He owns Britain’s second- 
and third-biggest daily papers (theMail and the Metro) and its second-placed 
Sunday. (No 2s, moreover, may soon becomes No 1s, if theSuns go on setting at 
their present rate.) His Mail Online is a global online champion wherever 
C-list celebrities flaunt their curves on distant beaches.

Yet he swaggers not, nor does he make many public appearances. On the 
contrary, he prefers to sit in the shadows and let his editors get on with it. 
He doesn’t dictate a line. On Brexit, for instance, his daily was a ferocious 
Leaver while his Sunday voted Remain.

He rather admired David Cameron: but that didn’t stop his print attack dogs 
from tearing the ex-PM limb from limb. Does he see any great advantage in 
savaging the supreme court in similar fashion? Probably not: self-effacing 
prudence is more his style. You might, in other hands, have expected a rampant
Mail campaign when the Treasury did away with the non-dom tax status that has 
served the fourth and third viscounts so well. But no, not a squeak.

Here’s a press baron who doesn’t interfere; who maintains a careful distance; 
who doesn’t want tea in Downing Street; who goes outside the UK and outside the 
media when he has to make crucial appointments: a steadying hand on a tiller 
far away.

We’re supposed, in legend, to want newspaper owners cut down to size. Giants 
only fit for burning, along with their beanstalks. But register briefly that 
Harmsworth doesn’t fit that mould. Although one or two hallowed members of the 
judiciary might disreputably wish that he did.
 