
The All Blacks aren’t invincible. Only Superman is invincible. And Usain Bolt. 
And there is little difference between them. But the rugby team of New Zealand 
can be beaten. It’s just that a lot has to go your way. You need a lot of 
little wins to make off with the big one.

You need to win those hyper-physical little contests. You have to win over the 
referee. You have to win the crowd, or beat them. You have to win the lion’s – 
or at even just a wallaby’s – share of possession, territory, lineouts and 
scrums. And even then they’ll probably still find a way to win.

Bledisloe Cup: All Blacks hammer Wallabies in Rugby Championship opener
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/bledisloe-cup-all-blacks-hammer-wallabies-in-rugby-championship-opener>
The Wallabies won none of these things on Saturday night and were summarily 
flogged like bad pirates. They trailed in every facet, every statistic, every 
pertinent match marker. They were beaten everywhere. They were fairly 
emasculated.

When asked in the post-match press conference if his team could draw any 
positives from the Test match, Michael Cheika was succinct. “Not really. It 
would be a lie if I tried to find one.”

He did praise Will Genia in his first Test in a while and said that David 
Pocock was “outstanding”. But positives? “No, I don’t think so. We’ve got to 
look forward now. That’s the only chance’ve we got.”

Ah yes, the old “looking forward” mantra, the one trotted out by coaches to 
keep a lid on expectations or move focus from the previous 80 minutes. You’d 
think there hadn’t been a game ever played these days, so forward-looking is 
everyone in the immediate minutes of the game just gone.

To be fair to Cheika he’s far from a cliché peddler. He’s an interesting, 
super-smart, crazy owl of a footy coach. He’s a hard critter, a fine manager of 
men. And his press conference was honest and heartfelt.

But if he truly believes the Wallabies have a chance of winning the 2016 
Bledisloe Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bledisloe-cup>, he may as well 
start disputing the moon landing.

Because – and you can just about take it to the bank via your local bookmaker 
– there is no chance of the Wallabies winning the 2016 Bledisloe Cup. None. 
There just isn’t. The side trotted out Saturday, on paper, looking at them, 
it’s about the best Australian rugby can muster from here and afar. Unless 
there’s another couple of Scott Fardys playing anonymously in Japan, this is 
the best there is.

Fardy? He’d be about the only selection you could have a gripe with. He’s the 
best No6 in the land and thus you start him, and that’s just it. Ben McCalman, 
the Western Force “enforcer” was physical in patches. He’s a big body and he 
throws it about. But Fardy gives you fearless brute strength and guile over the 
ball. Fardy is the glue of the Wallabies’ ruck work and wins penalties at the 
breakdown. Pocock can’t be at every ruck and maul.

Of course Fardy may not have made a butterfly’s lick of difference, such was 
the 80 minutes of ineptitude trotted out by his team-mates. The All Blacks were 
hot and looked superb. When they’re given ball in space going forward, and you 
don’t tackle them, they’ll thunder down field like an angry 15-headed phalanx 
of warriors and angry circus performers.

And that’s what the Wallabies did – gifted them ball in space going forward, 
and didn’t tackle. It was an 80-minute litany of errors. If it wasn’t one 
thing, it was six or eight or 15 others. Knock-ons, penalties, missed tackles, 
turnovers. They kicked the ball to Israel Dagg. They threw lineout ball 
perfectly to Kieran Read. They toe-poked their own scrum ball into the All 
Black back-row. And they did it all game. The All Blacks could have scored 70.

Who to bring in? Hell, I dunno. This Wallabies side was pretty close to that 
which Cheika trotted out in the World Cup final on 31 October last year. These 
very same people got within four points of ripping off an improbable win 
against Richie McCaw, Dan Carter and half a dozen other super people.

And didn’t the Wallabies win this corresponding Test last year? With roughly 
same squad. And it seems rather a long time ago, like somewhere in the Jurassic 
period, say, or 2001 which is the last time the Wallabies won a Test match in 
New Zealand.

What to do? Look for positives? Fardy will surely start in Wellington. Ryan 
Crotty has a hamstring injury. The All Blacks’ two best hookers are carrying 
injuries, though Dane Coles’ rib cartilage problem didn’t stop him having a 
storming 78 minutes. What a player, like a fast little bull.

And what a player Beauden Barrett is. Running off a dominant pack, fast little 
feet, a five-eighth who can test a line with pace and a pass and a deft little 
bunt. He’s a ripper, Beauden Barrett. And Bernard Foley opposite him looked 
like a clubbie. Foley was nearly anonymous – and a conductor can’t be anonymous.

Matt Giteau's Wallabies future in doubt after suffering broken ankle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/21/matt-giteaus-wallabies-future-in-doubt-after-suffering-broken-ankle>
Granted, a serious-looking injury to Rob Horne who replaced Matt Toomua who 
replaced Matt Giteau didn’t help. There are those who wouldn’t want Nick Phipps 
giving directions on the team bus let alone running about on the wing.

But it wasn’t those things that lost Australia this Test match. It was the 80 
minutes of horror. It was falling off tackle after tackle. It was the penalties 
and lost lineouts and knock-ons and giving away a scrum against the head.

Yes, the All Blacks are brilliant. Watching them thunder downfield, exchanging 
hot potato passes in traffic, the pace and power of these players, the 
enterprise and skill at speed, it’s how rugby should be played, how it should 
be taught in schools. Which in New Zealand, the world’s greatest rugby nation, 
it is.

But they can be beaten. Just not by these Wallabies, at least any time soon.
 