
These days, a trip to Warrington or Wigan yields plenty of evidence as to 
their status as glamorous and wealthy Super League clubs – but on Saturday, 
when they meet at Old Trafford for the right to be crownedSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> champions, there is an 
admirable subplot beneath the glitz and glamour to confirm why they are two of 
British rugby league’s dominant forces.

Eleven miles separate the towns and the final Super League table split them by 
a point at the top but in terms of the work they do to produce the stars of 
today and tomorrow, the two are more alike than they probably care to 
acknowledge.

Eleven of Wigan’s 19-man squad are products of the club’s academy with more 
than a third of Warrington’s contingent homegrown – and a sprinkling of 
Wiganers in there for good measure as well.

It is easy to say injuries, particularly at Wigan, have forced the clubs to 
blood more youth than they might have planned. Yet the big names absent for 
both clubs are not overseas, they are players such as Sam Tomkins and Ben 
Currie. However, Wigan were given a significant boost on Friday when they added 
their captain, Sean O’Loughlin, to a revised 19-man squad. O’Loughlin has 
history of this type of recovery, playing in Wigan’s Challenge Cup and Grand 
Final appearances of 2013 without appearing in between. He has not played since 
5 August, meaning another remarkable recovery if he is passed fit after being 
included at the expense of Jack Wells, who was in Shaun Wane’s original squad.

The new England coach, Wayne Bennett, has decided to watch the Grand Final 
12,000 miles away in Australia – that is another argument – but when he does, 
he will see two teams at the forefront of the international production line for 
this year’s Four Nations. Some players have established themselves as 
first-team regulars over a number of years – others have done so in a matter of 
weeks. A season-ending injury to the hooker Michael McIlorum – another former 
Wigan academy player – gave Jake Shorrocks a chance to impress in the latter 
stages of the season and he has not disappointed.

This will be his 13th professional appearance, although he does have previous 
with Old Trafford. “I’ve been to every single Grand Final Wigan have been in – 
either as a fan or, in the case of last year, as a player,” he says. “I know 
the place well but this will be a completely different kettle of fish.

“In 2010, I was a ballboy for the game. I was stood in the tunnel and Sam 
Tomkins walked past me and knocked the ball out of my hand. I thought I was 
going to get into trouble – I was starstruck.”

Warrington have plenty of Old Trafford debutants: 12 of their expected 17 will 
play in a Grand Final for the first time, with one in particular holding some 
strong heritage when it comes to the opposition. “It’s a bit strange, being 
against my hometown club and the team who I made my debut for,” said the winger 
Matty Russell, now a vital part of Tony Smith’sWarrington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warrington>.

“My family and friends are all from Wigan, they all support Wigan and will be 
tuning in wanting them to win. I was suited up watching Wigan in 2010, being on 
the fringes of the first-team squad, so I know what it’s like to be here, but 
to play will be incredible.”

Defeat for Wigan would be a third straight loss in the showpiece while 
Warrington are aiming to be crowned Super League champions for the first time, 
having lost their two previous Grand Finals –including one against Wigan in 2013
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/oct/05/warrington-wigan-super-league-grand-final>
.

“There’s nothing much lower in sport, to get all that way to the final and sit 
on the grass and watch the opposition run around you lifting the trophy,” says 
Matty Smith, who will lead Wigan if O’Loughlin does not play. “It’s not just 
after the game either. You have to see it on repeat for months on end and it 
stays with you until you kick off the following season. It’s a long off‑season, 
it’s all you think about and that’s motivation enough for me to get it done on 
Saturday night.”

“We won’t speak about the losses,” says the Warrington captain, Chris Hill, 
another Wiganer by birth. “There were only a couple of us involved. I’m sure 
messages will get passed on but it’s irrelevant. They beat us in 2013 but that 
was three years ago. It would be unbelievable to help captain this side to 
history. Losing at Wembley will help us, I promise you that.”

“Look at Cronulla Sharks,” Russell says. “They won the NRL for the first time 
last weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/cronulla-sharks-beat-melbourne-to-break-50-year-nrl-premiership-drought>
,Hull won at Wembley for the first time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/27/hull-warrington-challenge-cup-final-match-report>
: maybe it’s a year of firsts in rugby league.”

Their three meetings this season have been of the highest quality and there is 
little to suggest their fourth will be any different. History awaits the winner 
and whether it is primrose and blue or cherry and white ribbons on the trophy, 
it is to be hoped Old Trafford will witness another classic.
 