
Tony Smith praised his side’s character and insisted Warrington have handed 
themselves a glorious opportunity to win theSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> Grand Final after victory 
against St Helens in a thrilling yet controversial play-off semi-final.

It is probably a measure of how laboured parts of the Super Eights had become 
that nobody quite knew what to expect from the opening play-off semi-final of 
2016. Yet both sides put on a fine display, withWarrington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warrington> emerging victorious after 
overturning a half-time deficit to reach Old Trafford for the first time in 
three years.

Wigan focus on Hull once again and eye fourth consecutive Grand Final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/29/wigan-hull-fc-grand-final-shaun-wane>
Warrington had won only twice against St Helens at home in 15 years before 
this and only once since the Halliwell Jones Stadium opened 12 years ago. Yet 
the Wolves’ recent form always suggested a first win in eight home games 
against the Saints was possible.

Most of the post-match attention focused on a number of controversial calls 
which went against St Helens in the second half but Smith preferred to focus on 
his side’s progression to within 80 minutes of being crowned Super League 
champions for the first time.

“When you’re coaching at a club like our club you set out at the start of the 
year to have a crack at each trophy,” he said. “We’ve given ourselves another 
chance, we’re excited and looking forward to it; character is a key ingredient 
in rugby league and my boys have got it in abundance.”

The occasion was a superb advert for the sport – away from the evening’s 
controversy. That Warrington trailed at half-time before keeping St Helens 
scoreless in the second half makes victory even more impressive.

Keiron Cunningham’s side certainly played their part in an entertaining 
play‑off, and looked on track for a 12th win in 13 games at the interval. 
Behind 8-2 in late in the half, a try from Jonny Lomax and two goals from Luke 
Walsh gave them a two-point advantage. Yet the balance swung again at the start 
of the second half as tries from Stefan Ratchford and Tom Lineham opened up an 
eight-point gap – although Lineham was suspected of knocking on in the buildup, 
which was one of several decisions which infuriated Cunningham post-match.

“They were game-changing calls and this consistently happens every single week 
when you look at video refereeing decisions,” he said. “My boys have busted 
their backsides since November to get treated in the manner that they’re 
treated and nothing happens.”

With St Helens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sthelens> chasing the game 
in the final quarter, they looked to have scored through the centre Dominique 
Peyroux – but the video referee, with the assistance of the on-field call from 
Ben Thaler, deemed there was no try.

Warrington’s failure to win the Super League title in the first 20 years of 
the competition often has opposing fans reminding them it is never their year: 
this year they may be set to silence them.

Warrington Ratchford; Lineham, Evans, Atkins, Russell; Gidley, Patton; Hill, 
Clark, Sims, Wilde, Hughes, Westerman.Interchange T King, G King, Philbin, 
Smith.

Tries Gidley, Ratchford, Lineham. Goals Patton 3.

St Helens Lomax; Owens, Peyroux, Percival, Swift; Turner, Walsh; Walmsley, 
Roby, Richards, Greenwood, McCarthy-Scarsbrook, Wilkin.Interchange Amor, Vea, 
Thompson, Knowles.

Try Lomax. Goals Walsh 3.

Referee B Thaler (RFL). Attendance 12,036.
 