
For the first time since 2011 Warrington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warrington> are in proud possession of the 
League Leader’s Shield and following a testing few weeks that began with a 
heartbreaking defeat in the Challenge Cup final this victory meant more than 
just a trophy.

The manner of defeat by Hull FC at Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/27/hull-warrington-challenge-cup-final-match-report>
, coupled with their dramatic collapse against Wigan last week, which set up 
this winner-takes-all climax to the regular season, led some to fear that 
Warrington’s season was on the ropes. This, therefore, was some way to respond.

Hull KR’s James Webster hopes to end his own reign against Huddersfield
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/hull-kr-james-webster-huddersfield-rugby-league-qualifiers>
There may not have been flair, fireworks or the anticipated razzmatazz but, 
with injury problems throughout and a sense that Warrington were turning up as 
sideshow act in Hull’s march to the treble, the Wolves were magnificent.

They finished the regular season with Super League’s best attack and defence 
and for that reason alone are perhaps deserved league leaders, earning a home 
semi-final against St Helens on Thursday following a performance built on guts, 
desire and pride.

Four of the past seven sides to finish top of the league – including the last 
two – have gone on to win at Old Trafford in the play-offs. Whether Warrington 
make that a hat-trick remains to be seen over the next fortnight but they will 
be only too aware that they were one of the three anomalies in that record when 
they last finished top in 2011.

“I think some people saw our team and feared for us,” said the Warrington 
coach, Tony Smith. “I’m so pleased. What happened last week hurt us for a 
couple of days but we knew that it would do us some good.”

For Hull there will now be no treble and following a chastening, frustrating 
night for the Challenge Cup winners, their hopes of a first Grand Final in 10 
years now rely on victory at Wigan in Friday’s semi-finals.

Hull have now suffered three defeats from four games since Wembley for FC, 
hinting at more than an inclination of a Challenge Cup hangover for FC.

“For whatever reason six or seven weeks ago we looked red hot,” said the Hull 
coach, Lee Radford, “but over the last couple of weeks we haven’t looked 
crash-hot. It’s a concern. It’s been there for a couple of weeks now.”

Sixteen of Warrington’s 17 here were British, including the two main 
architects of Hull’s downfall. The young half-back, Declan Patton, was superb 
but the return of Tom Lineham was almost guaranteed to have an impact at some 
point.

The winger, who left Hull for Warrington in a six-figure deal last year, has 
found himself so far down the pecking order this year that his last competitive 
game was for Rochdale Hornets at Barrow: but having been brought back in from 
the cold by Smith owing to further injury problems, Lineham scored two crucial 
tries to help seal top spot.

His first and one for his fellow winger Kevin Penny made it 8-0, with four 
penalties from Patton either side of a Carlos Tuimavave try establishing a 16-6 
lead for the Wolves. Warrington surrendered a two-score lead at Wembley but 
there would be no repeat here. With Hull toiling and looking as fatigued as 
Radford’s post-match summation, Lineham’s second and a drop-goal from Patton 
secured victory – and who knows what could follow in the next fortnight?

Hull FC Shaul; Michaels, Fonua, Yeaman, Talanoa; Tuimavave, Sneyd; Taylor, 
Houghton, Watts, Manu, Minichiello, Ellis.Interchange Thompson, Hadley, Bowden, 
Pritchard.

Try Tuimavave, Goal Sneyd.

Warrington Russell; Lineham, Evans, Atkins, Penny; Ratchford, Patton; Hill, 
Clark, Sims, Wilde, Hughes, Westerman. Interchange G King, T King, Philbin, 
Smith.

Tries Lineham 2, Penny, Goals Patton 5, Drop goal Patton.

Referee B Thaler. Attendance 17,453.
 