
It could be goodbye, Roald Dahl <https://www.theguardian.com/books/roalddahl> 
and farewell, fairytales for children in daycare centres in the state of 
Washington, following the issue of new regulations suggesting: “Books that 
glorify violence in any way or show frightening images are not considered to be 
appropriate” for young readers.

Daycare nurseries in Washington can earn a state subsidy if they meet a series 
of requirements – one of which is to make “appropriate books … accessible to 
children”. While the guidelines,as made public by the National Coalition 
Against Censorship 
<http://ncac.org/blog/washington-state-daycare-program-prohibits-kids-access-to-frightening-books>
 (NCAC), do not provide a list of books for nurseries, they do suggest that 
children should “look closely at fables, fairytales, and nature/science books”, 
and that “books that glorify violence in any way or show frightening images are 
not considered to be appropriate”. Earlier this summer, a UK-based survey found 
thatone third of parents also steer clear of reading their children books 
containing scary characters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/25/one-third-of-parents-avoid-reading-children-scary-stories-study-finds>
.

The NCAC warned that, while the new regulations are intended to steer children 
away from “disturbing” material, they could “end up forcing daycare providers 
into self-censoring the reading materials that they provide to young children”.

“Countless pedagogically valuable books that cater to young audiences rely on 
images that toddlers might find frightening,” said the free-speech 
organisation, pointing to books including Maurice Sendak’s Where the Wild 
Things Are, fairytales such as Little Red Riding Hood and Hansel and Gretel, 
and nature books containing images of lions, bears or dinosaurs.

 “The effect of the ‘frightening images’ standard is thus that daycare 
providers may be, ironically, prevented from selecting many fairytales and 
nature/science books. Fairytales, of course, are full of scary images,” said 
the NCAC. “The standard also prohibits books that depict or describe animals or 
people eating other animals or people. This would, naturally, impact science 
books covering the more Darwinian aspects of natural history and also 
fairytales like There Was an Old Lady Who Swallowed a Fly.”

The organisation has contacted the Washington Library Association about the 
new policy, saying that while it “trusts Washington state’s intentions … [it] 
expresses concern that its overbroad wording may impact a number of 
pedagogically beneficial books. Not to mention [that] the standards ignore the 
fact children may benefit from confronting their fears in safe and controlled 
environments.”

Psychologist Emma Kenny told the Guardian in August that “fear is a natural 
response. And when you are reading a scary story to a child, or they’re reading 
to themselves, the child has got a level of control – they can put it down, or 
ask you to stop. And the story can raise a discussion, in which they can 
explore and explain the way they feel about a situation.”

According to Daniel Radosh, a writer for The Daily Show With Trevor Noah, the 
struggle over children’s reading extends well beyond early education. When his 
son brought home a slip requiring his parents to give their permission to allow 
him to read Fahrenheit 451, Ray Bradbury’s tale of a dystopian future where 
books are banned, Radosh’s ironic response to the school went viral.

“What a wonderful way to introduce students to the theme of Fahrenheit 451 
that books are so dangerous that the institutions of society – schools and 
parents – might be willing to team up against children to prevent them from 
reading one,”he wrote to his son’s teacher 
<https://twitter.com/danielradosh/status/790568116023615488>. “It’s easy enough 
to read the book and say: ‘This is crazy. It could never really happen,’ but 
pretending to present students at the start with what seems like a totally 
reasonable ‘first step’ is a really immersive way to teach them how insidious 
censorship can be.”


The Guardian has approached Washington state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/washington-state> authorities for comment.
 