


Wayne Bennett has hit back at criticism of how he handles his media duties as 
the England coach, sending a subtle message to his players before Sunday’s
must-win Four Nations match with Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/06/wayne-bennett-england-australia-four-nations>
 by saying that “talk is cheap”.

Bennett has repeatedly come under fire for the way he works with the media 
since arriving to take charge of England, with the situation escalating further 
last Saturday when he was labelled a “disgrace” by the former Salford and Wales 
coach, Iestyn Harris, for his post-match interview with the BBC following
England’s victory against Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/england-scotland-four-nations-rugby-league-match-report>
.

But the 66-year-old insisted the best way to promote rugby league in this 
country is by winning, not by being media savvy.

“I’ll tell you about promoting rugby league,” he said. “You can talk to any 
marketing department and they don’t want you to be goofing off and talking it 
up when your team’s getting beat every week. My players and my teams are my 
priority and always will be. I’m not interested in talk; talk is cheap and I’m 
not interested in thinking I can promote the game by something I say. I started 
coaching in 1977 and they were bagging me then, and nothing’s changed in 2016.”

Most of the focus leading into the game at the London Stadium has been on 
Bennett and Mal Meninga, after the Kangaroos coach said Bennett attempted to 
undermine his position and that he wanted Meninga’s job before accepting the 
offer from the RFL at the start of this year.

Bennett attempted to defuse the situation on Wednesday and put the spotlight 
back on his players. “I haven’t read anything so it doesn’t worry me,” he said. 
“I saw him yesterday and spent some time with him. I didn’t undermine him but 
if that’s what he believes, that’s his prerogative.”

England have not beaten Australia for more than 20 years and Bennett remained 
coy when asked whether his players possess the belief to get one over the world 
champions. “That’s a good question,” he said. “I don’t know, but we’re going to 
find out. There’s lots of fallacies in what we do and that’s a fallacy – how do 
you tell if someone has self-belief? They could talk tough and look tough but 
not play tough.”

Bennett also confirmed the vice-captain, James Graham, will be fit having 
missed the game against Scotland with a knee problem. “He’ll be playing,” he 
said. “He trained this morning and he’s good. It’s important to have him back: 
he brings a lot.”
 