
Here is a greatest hits package of Barack Obama’s speeches – something to 
consolidate his canon in the same way thatThe Very Best of did for the Eagles or
20 Golden Greats for the Beach Boys. It’s 26 Golden Greats, in this case – a 
thoughtfully chosen selection, going from his amiably stinging 2002 speech 
against the Iraq war as a state senator (“What I am opposed to is a dumb war”) 
to his UN valediction last September, taking in the “race speech”, the 
“red-state-blue-state speech”, the Cairo speech on Islam, both inaugurals, the 
eulogies for the murdered pastorClementa Pinckney  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/26/obama-clementa-pinckney-funeral-eulogy>
and the victims of the Sandy Hook shooting, not to mention, of course, the 
electrifying speech he gave on election night.

Related: Barack Obama's speeches: 2002 to 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/20/barack-obama-inauguration-speeches-1>

We see Obama in hope-mongering high style; we see him negotiating tricky 
questions with forensic intelligence; we see him on the attack and we see him 
in grief, at home in the black folk pulpit and on the international stage. 
Obama isn’t immune to the empty phrase – but you can see a serious mind at 
work, here, and a coherent worldview. You can also see how – as per Mario 
Cuomo’s remark that you campaign in poetry and govern in prose – the register 
comes down after the election. By the time he’s a couple of years in power and 
battling an obstructionist congress, he sounds plain pissed off: not so much 
“yes we can” as “I am here to say that they are wrong”.

That said, even Obama super-fans might hesitate to read this book through from 
one cover to the other. He’s a remix artist – as was Martin Luther King – and 
the set phrases and the showy rhetorical tricks don’t half recur. You notice he 
leans heavily on the repetition games of anaphora (repeating a word or phrase 
at the beginning of successive sentences), epistrophe (repeating one at the 
end) and symploce (doing both things at once, sandwich-style). We keep meeting
Michelle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/michelle-obama-legacy-first-lady>
 (“the love of my life”), Sasha and Malia (“I love you”) and his grandma. We 
keep encountering the “arc of history” bending; we spot yet another little 
parable in the peroration (“There’s one story in particular…”); another 
reference to what “scripture tells us”; another evocation of the golden rule; 
more boilerplate about the “American promise”; another King quote; another 
crafty use of the date or the venue in which he’s speaking to give historical 
resonance.

But it does to remember that speeches on the page are sheet music. Obama’s 
lived in his delivery – and he has an astonishing ear for cadence. Watch him, 
at his best, vamp round a phrase such as “yes, we can”, and he hits the 
stresses like a jazz drummer.
 “It was the call of workers who organised, women who reached for the ballot, 
a president who chose the moon as our new frontier, and a king who took us to 
the mountaintop and pointed the way to the promised land: Yes, we can, to 
justice and equality. Yes, we can, to opportunity and prosperity. Yes, we can 
heal this nation. Yes, we can repair this world. Yes, we can.” 
The chutzpah of the man is impressive: a few days before he flew to Norway to 
accept the Nobel peace prize, he announced plans to send 30,000 more troops to 
Afghanistan. Yet the speech he gave in Oslo took the issue head-on, making a 
case for just war in which he casts troops “not as makers of war, but as wagers 
of peace”. That’s characteristic. Faced with the scandal over his former pastor 
Jeremiah Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/mar/14/barackobama.uselections2008>, 
Obama gave a speech on race that let nobody off the hook. Speaking at the 
Catholic University of Notre Dame, he addressed abortion directly. Among 
religious leaders he offered a tough discussion of the separation of church and 
state. In Cairo, he addressed western-Muslim relations. Always conciliatory; 
always foxily co-optative; always looking for a reasonable common ground. Mind 
you, there are limits: the Sandy Hook speech doesn’t use the G-word once. And 
those promises to close Guantánamo…

It wasn’t all vaulting words and airy dreams. Obama, having come up through 
Chicago, was also a steely political operator. Ahead of the 2008 Democratic 
primaries, for instance, he gave a speech in Des Moines, Iowa to test the 
waters for a run at the nomination. The editors note: “As Obama committed his 
address to memory per dinner rules, his organising team worked to ensure that 
his partisans would dominate the audience. Ultimately, of the estimated 9,000 
people that attended, the Obama campaign claimed 3,000 as its own supporters.” 
Belt and braces: good speech and guaranteed applause. Or, as later: speak of 
hope and dreams, but keep Rahm Emanuel handy.

There’s no special reason to buy these in dead tree form – all his major 
speeches are online – but the introduction is excellent and it’s a nice thing 
to have on your shelf. Lordy, we’re going to miss him.

• We Are the Change We Seek, edited by EJ Dionne Jr and Joy-Ann Reid, is 
published byBloomsbury 
<http://www.bloomsbury.com/uk/we-are-the-change-we-seek-9781408889060/> 
(£16.99).
 