
As someone who voted for Owen Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/owen-smith>, this week’s Labour party 
conference has been tough.

The coup or non coup or whatever you want to call it was a disaster and it 
never should have happened.

I’m not a big fan of Corbyn, but even I thought he should have been given more 
time to either succeed or fail on his own terms. The timing of Margaret Hodge 
and Ann Coffey’s motion of no confidence was too rash, and triggered a 
calamitous leadership challenge which has turned out to be a self-inflicted 
wound.

I get that MPs were angry and upset about the decision to leave the EU. I get 
that many of them loathed Corbyn and his team. I get that many of them felt at 
breaking point in terms of how they had been treated. I get that many of 
thought Corbyn was hopeless – I agreed with them.

But their anger clouded their judgment, and they raced headlong into this 
challenge without a strong candidate, a strategy, or a compelling vision to 
excite our members and the country.

Become an expert in something meaningful. Craft a radical vision. Become 
relevant.

In fairness to Smith, I don’t think there was a candidate who could have taken 
onJeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> at this 
time, and that is why we should have waited.

Not every new member is a terrifying Trot or a relic from militant days – many 
are decent people who felt we had lost our way and they wanted the party to 
rediscover its radical heart. And they were right. The truth is that while a 
Labour government did good, important work right up until its final days in 
power, we did become politically timid and could have listened more to our 
members and trade unionists. We became too managerial. We should have waited 
until we saw how Brexit was shaking down, and how Corbyn was performing when it 
came to theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> response. We 
should have also seen how we fared in the local elections in May.

The moderates need to be honest about the scale of this defeat, accept it, and 
learn from it – no matter how painful and bruising that is. Corbyn won big 
again, and the prospect of unseating him in the foreseeable future has gone.

I’ve heard some talk about continued guerrilla warfare, of maybe trying to get 
a separate operation going in the chamber and begging the speaker to recognise 
someone other than Corbyn as the official leader of the opposition. That way 
lies madness and further humiliation.

It is also difficult for the parliamentary Labour party to make huge demands 
at this stage, no matter how sensible those may be – such as shadow cabinet 
elections – because the truth is, the PLP doesn’t have that much leverage. 
Corbyn can do what he likes. That’s the deal: to the victor, the spoils.

And then there is the thorny issue of whether to serve or not. I think it will 
be very difficult for any MP who has made a high-profile and highly personal 
resignation. If there are acres of coverage of you waxing lyrical about how 
dreadful Corbyn is, and how you have zero confidence in him, that will haunt 
your media appearances for a long time. It’s not exactly honest, 
straight-talking politics to say you have had a Damascene conversion, and it 
won’t pass the smell-test with the public.

If people choose to serve, then they need to do it properly, not just as a 
means of maintaining a bit of status or relevance. They have to put their 
shoulder to the wheel and do the job with energy and enthusiasm, and stick to 
the concept of collective responsibility.

Why the matter of Jewish Labour members is a vital test case | Keith Kahn 
Harris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/27/jewish-labour-members-unified-party-faiths-views>
If that’s too much for people, and they prefer to remain on the backbenches, 
there is much they can do to be supportive in a way that feels authentic. Be a 
great constituency MP. Help amplify the messages on which there are agreement, 
such as grammar schools. Use the time and space to do some of that deep 
thinking about policy and ideas that look to the future. Become an expert in 
something meaningful (select committees are going to be increasingly 
important). Craft a radical vision. Become relevant.

What you should not do is provide a bitter, angry running commentary about the 
failings of Corbyn. I suspect the wider public will start to have very little 
patience with MPs who continue to cause pointless trouble for the leadership on 
a daily basis, and will probably end up have some sympathy for Corbyn. Because 
the truth is, in the grand scheme of things, nobody really cares.

The commonsense view from the outside will be that this is a man who has 
defied political gravity – again. His opponents need to let him and his team 
have a proper run at things, as the master of his own destiny not the victim of 
an angry PLP. He needs to be able to own his victory. He has won that right. 
This amazing experiment will either be a triumph or take us to the brink of 
electoral oblivion. Only time will tell.
 