
The Guardian has a history stretching back almost 200 years of creating 
world-class journalism. In more recent times, the Guardian has also become one 
of the world’s most influential news organisations with newsrooms in the UK, 
the US and Australia.

The Guardian has reached more than 110 million unique browsers worldwide in a 
month, while our readership in the UK also continues to grow. On any given day, 
Guardian readers are using thousands of different types of devices to read, 
view, discuss and share our journalism with each other. The amount of device 
types on which you can access the Guardian will only continue to increase so we 
want to make sure that we always provide you with a consistent, fast-loading, 
familiar and pleasurable experience, whatever your screen size.

Today we are launching a new site which has been built and designed from the 
ground up by the Guardian’s in-house team of designers, journalists, 
user-experience architects, product managers, developers and software engineers.

The new Guardian site presents you with a more compact view of the news agenda 
as it changes throughout the day and night. The new design will also give you 
more visual clues about each story’s relative importance and its editorial 
tone, whether it is a breaking news story or a live blog, a piece of analysis, 
a piece of opinion, a feature or a review.

Our videos, photo galleries and interactives are now more seamlessly 
integrated into everything we publish, instead of treating them as separate 
areas of the site. Videos can now be embedded and played anywhere within our 
homepages and articles.

And where we own the necessary rights to them, you can embed Guardian videos 
into your own site or blog.
 Playable video on our Sport homepage. 

Our new photo galleries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2010/sep/21/aerial-views-of-new-york>
 allow you to either scroll through the images, swipe through them on mobile 
devices or to view them in an opulent full-screen mode while using your 
keyboard’s arrow-keys to browse through them. You can also choose to view all 
the images in one story in gallery view.
 A comment featured on the right-hand side of a Guardian article. 
Your comments in discussion threads can now also be presented in the first 
screen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/22/paris-attacks-right-to-offend>
of an article and not only below the fold.

And within each article, our editors now have many new ways of recommending 
related material to you so that you can more easily find the most pertinent 
analysis or opinion piece that refers to a news report or vice versa.
 Our editors now have new ways of displaying links to our journalism in 
article pages. 
We have also made our topic pages easier to browse by grouping content by 
date, either by day or month depending on the amount of stories we have 
published. You can see some exampleshere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/photography> and here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>.


Our new live blogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2015/jan/28/greek-government-privatisation-programme-alexis-tsiptas-live>
 make it much easier to stay up-to-date during an unfolding news or sports 
event. A bullet point list gives you the essence of the story, while a separate 
list of key events allows you to quickly scan what has happened since you have 
visited that blog last. And if you like football, you might have noticed 
already that our new match stats and league tables are now integrated into the 
live blogs.

The Guardian’s journalists are voracious readers themselves and often know 
where to find the most interesting pieces of journalism from our competitors 
each day. “Why not share these insights with our readers?”we thought, and have 
added a collection of daily recommendations to our new homepage, called “what 
we are reading <https://www.theguardian.com/uk#what-we're-reading>”. 

The new site’s navigation contains a personalised element which allows you to 
quickly visit the areas of the site you go to most often. You can access these 
personal links by clicking on the “browse all sections” button on your desktop 
computer or the “all” button on your mobile screen. Apreferences page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/preferences> allows you to edit or to deactivate 
these personalised links.

A third of all visits to the Guardian each month contain a view of the 
homepage or one of our section homepages and the more loyal a reader becomes, 
the more often she or he tends to visit the homepage, which is why we have also 
invested a good amount of time into studying how our readers are actually using 
our homepage.
 Recently visited links. 
From personally interviewing our readers around the world and from anonymised 
data analysis, we learned that there are three main motives to visit our 
homepage. We call them “update”, “extend” and “discover”.

“Update” is by far the most frequent motive and describes the journey of 
readers who visit the Guardian – often many times a day – to find out about the 
news-agenda in general, or about news from their area of interest, whether it 
is sports, culture, the economy or any other topic the Guardian covers each day.

“Extend” describes the motivation to then gain a deeper understanding of a 
specific story which usually demands more time than a quick news update.

The third motive, “discover”, is rather a whole group of motives, such as the 
wish to find inspiration and surprise, new perspectives, interesting debates 
with other readers or entertainment.

These research insights have guided us in testing and developing homepages and 
section pages that are not just reflections of a newsroom’s internal 
organisation – foreign, home, business, culture, sport and so on – but 
reflections of our readers’ typical journeys and needs.

To make sure we are getting this right, we developed the new site completely 
out in the open. Starting in early 2014, we introduced a prototype of the new 
site to 5% of our desktop readers around the world and asked them for their 
feedback. And if you are a developer and want to take a closer look at the 
site’s inner working, most of our code is ongithub <https://github.com/guardian>
, a publicly accessible code repository.

 Thousands of readers took part in this project and have provided us with more 
than 130,000 pieces of detailed feedback . In addition, we have personally 
interviewed hundreds of readers in the UK, the US and Australia and have also 
analysed how millions of our anonymous readers were using our new site each day 
while we were constantly releasing new versions of it. (If you are interested 
in a more detailed account of what we learned from your feedback and what we 
have done about it, please read thisblogpost 
<http://next.theguardian.com/blog/your-feedback-latest-updates/> by Nick Haley, 
the Guardian’s director of user experience.)

After studying what was really happening on our beta homepage each day, we 
then decided to take a new route and have developed a set of building blocks 
whichwe call “containers” 
<http://next.theguardian.com/blog/container-model-blended-content/>. 

The new homepages and each article page are made up of various such containers 
or modules. These do exactly what their slightly technical name suggests. They 
“contain” words, pictures, videos, graphics and data. Our editors can group 
them together flexibly and within minutes by topic, by story type, by tone or 
by importance.

So instead of building one big page according to a rigid template – news here, 
features there – our editors can create modular homepages and article pages to 
create a representation of what is important each and every day and then also 
embed these collections directly in other article pages so that the majority of 
readers who won’t visit the homepage can still get the most out of the Guardian.

While designing, building and testing the Guardian’s new site, our in-house 
team has also built a new set of editorial tools for our journalists to create 
and publish their stories. These new tools will give our journalists many new 
capabilities to publish with much more ease and to enrich their journalism with 
original material from the web whenever this can provide more context to a 
story.

Our team will continue to develop this new site and will keep releasing little 
changes to it every day.

We are aware of how different this new site is from what our most loyal 
readers have been used tosince our last relaunch in 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/blog/2007/may/10/newlookforgu>. The Guardian 
owes a lot to its old site and to the brilliant team that built and maintained 
it for so many years. Yet we also realised – across all departments and teams – 
that the time had come to completely renew the site so it can support the 
Guardian’s and the Observer’s mission in the years to come and serve you, 
wherever you are in the world and whichever device you are using.

We thank you all for your continued feedback and we hope you will enjoy the 
new site and come back often.
 