
We are pleased to announce the launch of our international homepage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international>, designed for our readers outside 
the UK, US and Australia.


In April this year we began a beta trial of an international edition of our 
homepage. Since the relaunch of our website 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/insideguardian/2015/jan/28/welcome-to-the-new-guardian-website>
 earlier this year, our global traffic has grown by almost 20%, with more than 
two-thirds of our audience coming from outside the UK. While we already serve 
readers in the US and Australia with their own editions, we hope the 
international homepage will help theguardian.com <http://theguardian.com/> 
become a destination for readers living elsewhere, giving them the option to 
see a more global selection of stories when they visit the site.


We began the beta trial before the UK general election in May because we knew 
our UK homepage would be dominated by election stories, not all of which would 
be of interest to an international audience. Over this period, 50% of traffic 
from outside our core markets visitingtheguardian.com <http://theguardian.com/> 
was directed to a separately edited international homepage. The beta test 
allowed us to gauge the appetite for a more international presentation of news; 
after all, 40 million unique users based outside the UK, Australia and the US 
visittheguardian.com <http://theguardian.com/> each month.


Running the beta test was important. It allowed us to look at the stats, 
collect feedback from our readers and determine how we should staff a fully 
edited international homepage. After collating and reviewing this data and 
feedback, we are now in a position to show the homepage to all our 
international visitors.


From Thursday 8 October onwards, readers based outside our core markets who 
have never tried the international homepage will automatically be directed 
there. Whether or not the reader will see the international homepage will be 
based on the user’s IP address. So, if you’re in the US you’ll automatically 
get the US edition, if you’re in Australia you’ll get the Australia edition and 
if you’re in the UK you’ll get the UK edition. If you’re anywhere else in the 
world you’ll be directed to the international edition.

 Navigating between editions on desktop. Photograph: theguardian.com 
We do, however, understand that the international homepage may not be what all 
our readers are looking for. We know that some specifically visit 
theguardian.com <http://theguardian.com/> for a UK perspective on the news. Any 
readers who tried the international edition during the beta phase and opted out 
will continue to be directed to the UK edition. Readers will also be able to 
select their edition of choice from the edition switcher in the top righthand 
side of the desktop or the “...” button on mobile.

These preferences will be stored so users will be directed to the homepage 
they have selected whenever they visit the site. Readers in the UK, US and 
Australia can select the international edition, too, if that is what they 
prefer.
 Navigating between editions on mobile. Photograph: theguardian.com 
During the beta trial we listened to feedback from readers about many things, 
including the frequency of updates on the homepage. Now it has launched fully, 
the international homepage will be edited across our London, New York and 
Sydney offices and will be updated as soon as news breaks, 24 hours a day, 
seven days a week.


The homepage will display Guardian content which we believe has international 
interest. When readers visit the homepage, they will be able to find the most 
important news stories of the moment along with other uniquely Guardian content 
from around the world, such as long reads, analysis, opinion and sports 
coverage, be that text articles, video, audio or photography. When UK stories 
have international appeal, they will of course be featured on the page, too. We 
want to keep it simple – the navigation bar for the international edition is 
similar to that on the UK homepage, so regular visitors should still be able to 
easily find their favourite sections.


One of the many benefits of having an international homepage is that our range 
of content on international stories, such as the upcoming elections in Canada, 
will not have to compete with big UK stories that are only of interest to a 
domestic audience. This certainly doesn’t mean that international stories will 
disappear from our UK homepage. We remain committed to serving our UK audience 
with globally significant stories and, as in the past, will often lead our UK 
edition with international news.


Launching the international homepage is just a beginning. We will continue to 
explore the best experience for our readers, listening to your feedback and 
looking at how we can meet your needs in the best way possible. In future, this 
might involve elements of personalisation or more localised news, alerts and 
email services, depending on the things we learn about what our readers really 
want.


As we mentioned in our blogpost about the beta test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/insideguardian/2015/apr/20/giving-our-international-readers-a-fresh-take-on-the-news>
, we are sceptical that there even is such a thing as a global news agenda. 
However, the international edition will ensure that readers all over the world 
will have an attractive alternative to the UK homepage.


If you have questions or comments about the the international homepage, please 
get in touch via email (caspar.llewellynsmith@theguardian.com) or in the 
comment thread below this article.

 