
It is difficult to say what pay equity would look like when comparing the 
men’s and women’s AFL competitions, but it was obvious immediately that the 
initialAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> offer was a long way off 
achieving this. The $5,000 first tabled to the majority of players seemed 
random, token and, perhaps most significantly, not based on any considered 
evaluation of what the player’s time was worth, let alone her skills.

Prue Gilbert from the AFL Players Association advisory said earlier this year 
that she agreed the initial offer was not commensurate with the commitment 
required from the players. Players also privately expressed concern over the 
suggested remuneration, while publicly staying silent for fear of impacting on 
their opportunity to be drafted.

Women's AFL players strike deal over increased pay for first two seasons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/10/womens-afl-players-strike-deal-over-increased-pay-for-first-two-seasons>
What the AFLPA has been clear about is that the pay agreement does not need to 
be equal to the men in the developing years of this league, but needs to 
reflect the professional nature of the sport. We all understand that the women 
will be playing a shorter season, and subsequently will have fewer training and 
media requirements, but the reality is that an eight-game season involves a 
24-week commitment, and $5,000 in anyone’s assessment would not be considered 
fair compensation in a professional sport.

Thursday’s announcement that the AFLPA has negotiated close to a 75% increase 
to the base salary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/10/womens-afl-players-strike-deal-over-increased-pay-for-first-two-seasons>
 in year one is very welcome. The lower tier players will now receive a minimum 
of $8,500 in their first year, increasing to $9,276 in year two. Tier two 
players, who were originally offered $10,000, will now receive $12,000, 
increasing to $12,846 in year two, and the $15,000 range is now $17,000 rising 
to $17,946.

The salary has been calculated based on an hourly rate, equivalent to a rookie 
player in the AFL. The AFL and the AFLPA have determined this rate to be $30 
per hour. Whilst we still have some reservations about linking women’s pay to 
rookies who, for the most part, do not take the field, the transparency of 
basing the pay on more than just a round number is welcome.

Importantly, the conditions that have been agreed upon have been substantially 
extended. Basic equipment, such as boots, will now be provided to the players. 
Income protection insurance and all out of pocket medical expenses are covered, 
allaying some of the initial concerns that by the time players had paid their 
insurance and bought their gear, the $5,000 was pretty much spent.

Unlike the men’s league, women will be paid a travel allowance for interstate 
games, and a carer’s allowance is available to women with children under the 
age of 12 months.

One of the larger gains in the new arrangement is that players are now 
eligible for unrestricted sponsorship opportunities. In the men’s league, the 
“Visy Ambassador” loophole was closed so that players could no longer receive 
payments from wealthy coteries that sat parallel to their salary-capped club 
contract. This restriction will not apply to the women’s league giving players 
genuine and lucrative opportunities to build a financially successful football 
career.

Female players have been invited to assist the AFL with input in building the 
inaugural women’s competition. While parity of pay remains the holy grail for 
women across industries from football and beyond, what this increased offer 
demonstrates is that the AFL are listening to players and supporters in matters 
of pay as well. Most importantly, the players have voted overwhelmingly in 
support of this new proposal and are now able to focus on the business of 
pre-season.
 