 The Welsh Secretary, Ron Davies, yesterday threatened disciplinary action 
against any Welsh Labour MPs or party members who campaign against the plan to 
create an assembly in September's referendum.
 But a handful of Welsh MPs, especially Llew Smith, could defy Mr Davies, 
disrupting his attempts to present a united front. This would provide the first 
test of Labour's code of discipline.

 In Scotland, where the devolution referendum will also be in September, 
Labour MP Tam Dalyell, an arch-opponent, tested the patience of the leadership 
by disparaging the referendum as a 'pig in a poke'. He said he would vote 
against a Scottish parliament.

Mr Davies's threat of draconian action came as the Referendums (Scotland and 
Wales ) Bill was published. The bill paves the way for the two referendums : 
the one in Scotland has been pencilled in for September 4 and the Welsh one for 
September 25. The cost will be pounds 5 million for Scotland and pounds 3 
million forWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> .

 The bill is to be given its second reading in the Commons on Wednesday, 
breaking the convention that there should be 10 days between publication and 
second reading. It sets out two questions for the Scottish referendum - whether 
there should be a Scottish parliament and whether it should have tax-varying 
powers - and one for Wales on whether there should be a Welsh assembly.

 If a simple majority in both countries votes yes, Scotland will have its own 
parliament in spring 1999 and Wales an assembly at the same time.

 The Scottish Secretary, Donald Dewar said the bill was 'the first milestone 
on the way to what will be a far-reaching reform and modernisation of the 
government of Scotland.'

 Although up to a third of Scottish Labour MPs are sceptical about devolution, 
only Mr Dalyell is likely to go public. Scottish Office minister Henry McLeish 
sought to avoid confrontation last night by saying matters of discipline were 
not for him.

 In Wales , Mr Davies has a harder problem, with polls showing the Welsh 
unlikely to vote for an assembly and with many of his MPs virulently opposed.

 He said the Government's position on devolution had been endorsed by the 
party membership and the conference. It had been in the manifesto and accepted 
by the people of the country. 'It is a matter of government policy and I expect 
all Labour Members of Parliament in Wales to recognise our determination to 
create a Welsh assembly and thereby improve our democracy in Wales .

 'I do not believe it is appropriate for any Labour Member of Parliament to 
take any course of action which would include, for example, associating with 
others in opposition to our campaign or indeed publicly campaigning on their 
own behalf against our proposals.'

 The Welsh office says public money will not be used to fund the campaign for 
a yes vote, but it is planning to distribute to every household in Wales a copy 
of July's white paper setting out the plan for an assembly. The Scottish Office 
has not decided what to do.
 