
Unwanted Wests Tigers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> skipper 
Robbie Farah says he’s been told he’ll be playing reserve grade next NRL season 
if he chooses to stay after being granted permission to look for another club.


Farah, who has been at the Tigers since debuting in 2003, expressed his 
disappointment in being informed by coach Jason Taylor he was free to play 
elsewhere in 2016.


But the 2005 premiership-winning hooker said he won’t leave without a fight. 
“It has to be on my terms as well,” Farah said on Wednesday.

However the 31-year-old conceded fans might have to watch him play at Henson 
Park next season should he decide to stay and serve the final two years of his 
current contract.


“Whether they mean it or not [playing reserve grade], I’m not too sure,” he 
said. “Whether it’s just trying to get me to go, I’m not too sure. But if I 
stay, I guess we’ll find out.”

Farah admitted he felt a tap on the shoulder was coming over the past few 
weeks due to the club’s well-publicised salary cap issues.


But the NSW vice-captain said he was still dismayed at Tuesday’s announcement, 
which has left him little time to find a suitor with the available room in the 
salary cap.


One possible landing spot is with defending premiers South Sydney, where 
brother Eddie works with the medical staff. “South Sydney is a great club, 
great history, they’re premiers at the moment. A massive club with a great 
roster,” Farah said.

“I won’t rule anything out at the moment, but it’s disrespectful for me to be 
talking about other clubs at the moment while I’m wearing the Wests Tigers 
colours.”


Coach Jason Taylor also fronted the media in an awkward interview, repeating 
the club’s official line on the matter a total nine times.

Wests Tigers player charged with stalking, intimidation and assault
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/21/wests-tigers-player-charged-with-stalking-intimidation-and-assault>
“What the position of the club is at this stage is that we’ve given Robbie 
permission to negotiate with other clubs,” he said. “Basically that’s all we’ve 
got to say about it. We’ll talk about it again when something develops.”

Asked whether he had told Farah he would be playing NSW Cup next year, Taylor 
said: “So the position of the club is that we’ll talk more about it once 
something develops more.”


Farah, who plays his final home game against the Warriors at Campbelltown on 
Sunday before finishing the season against St George-Illawarra at ANZ Stadium, 
said he was heartbroken to have been denied a farewell at Leichhardt.


“Actually, that’s one of the biggest things I’m disappointed about,” he said. 
“I love that place so much. Not to have one last game there and a farewell to 
the fans is a dagger in my heart. That’s what probably hurt me a lot.

“But it is what it is. I’m not the first person, I won’t be the last. I’ve 
just got to get on with it.”
 