
West Bromwich Albion’s desire to ensure the final third of their season 
amounts to something more than a grim battle against relegation was tested to 
the very limit byPeterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough> United. Jon Taylor’s low 
shot saw the League One side take a thoroughly deserved second-half lead, and 
after a well-struck equaliser from Darren Fletcher took the tie into 
extra-time, both sides created chances to win a hugely entertaining encounter 
before the Baggies came through 4-3 on penalties.

That one of Peterborough’s penalties was missed by Martin Samuelsen was harsh 
in the extreme. The 18-year-old Norwegian midfielder, on loan from West Ham, 
was outstanding throughout, but then so too were his team-mates. Such was their 
verve, energy, application and skill, at times it was difficult to say which 
was the side from the higher level.

Peterborough United 1-1 West Bromwich Albion (WBA win 4-3 on pens): FA Cup 
fourth round replay – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/feb/10/peterborough-united-v-west-bromwich-albion-fa-cup-fourth-round-replay-live>
Albion’s manager, Tony Pulis, agreed. “You have to give Peterborough all the 
credit. I love this competition and it’s special because of games like that – 
the way they played was absolutely fantastic. We had the opportunities to win 
it in open play, but I’m just happy to be in the next round.”

In one respect, of course, Peterborough could not lose, this replay realising 
the club around £350,000 in television fees, gate receipts and advertising. 
Welcome though that sum no doubt is, however, Peterborough have become 
proficient at maximising revenue over the past few years, during which they 
have sold players for upwards of £25m, meaning progress to a fifth-round tie at 
the Championship side Reading did not represent the financial lifeline it might 
once have done.

Albion’s lack of goals of late made Saido Berahino’s recall to the starting 
line-up something of a necessity, but the sometime refusenik forward was a 
spectator for much of the opening quarter hour.

Posh poured forward with pace and style, and Harry Beautyman saw one side-foot 
effort blocked and Taylor shot wide before Ben Foster had to block Beautyman’s 
fierce drive. By then Albion had lost Gareth McAuley, the centre-back pulling 
up with a hamstring injury.

The tackling was robust, on both sides, and by the half hour the Baggies had 
not improved on their record of having failed to have a single shot on target 
in three of their previous four games. Berahino, with a side-foot volley from 
outside the box, nearly did so: the Posh goalkeeper Ben Alnwick looked relieved 
to see the ball fly just past his left-hand post.

As half-time approached Albion, finally, began to carry a more consistent 
threat. James McClean’s shot was blocked, and from the corner James Chester’s 
shanked close-range shot hit Darren Fletcher and flew over the bar. The 
interval gave Peterborough fresh energy. Lee Angol, Taylor again and Shaquile 
Coulthirst all went close before Albion went behind.

Caught short at the back by a swift break, they could not prevent Angol 
pulling the ball across the field to Taylor, sprinting into space down the 
left. The midfielder’s low left-foot shot looked a little scuffed, but it was 
strong enough to brush aside Foster’s reaching hand.

Barry Fry sees bright future for Peterborough after West Brom replay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/09/barry-fry-peterborough-united-bright-future-fa-cup>
Pulis, desperately trying to regain some sort of initiative, replaced Claudio 
Yacob with Stéphane Sessègnon. Initially it made little difference: if 
anything, the margin of superiority increased in the League One side’s favour.

The visitors had their moments, though, Craig Gardner’s scissored volley from 
25 yards just wide a case in point, and on 71 minutes they equalised. Beautyman 
failed to clear McClean’s cross from the left, and Fletcher thumped a rising 
shot cleanly past Alnwick.

Still Peterborough came forward. Coulthirst, picked out by the creative 
Samuelsen, took too long to control the ball but was still given enough time to 
hit a powerful low drive a foot wide. Albion might have won it in normal time 
when Alnwick’s scuffed clearance was returned towards the empty goal by 
Berahino, only for Michael Bostwick to kick the ball clear.

Extra-time was no less absorbing, with Gabriel Zakuani’s remarkable headed 
clearance of Gardner’s goal-bound shot the nearest the deadlock came to being 
broken until Berahino, totally unmarked in the final minute of the game, 
somehow contrived to head wide from inside the six-yard box.

“They showed what quality players they are,” said Graham Westley of his 
Peterborough team. “We’ve a very young squad, but it’s packed with talent, and 
if the players keep working and improving, they won’t be League One players for 
long.

“Samuelsen is going to be a hell of a player. At times he probably overdoes 
things, but he’s a fantastic talent.”
 