
West Brom squeezed past Port Vale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portvale> on penalties as Richard Duffy’s 
spot-kick miss spared their blushes.

Saido Berahino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/25/west-brom-reject-second-bid-tottenham-saido-berahino>
 was again left out as the Baggies were pushed all the way by their League One 
visitors in the Capital One Cup second round.

Following a dire 0-0 draw after extra-time Duffy blazed his kick over to send 
Albion through 5-3 on penalties.

Rickie Lambert had a second-half header cleared off the line and Salomón 
Rondón hit the crossbar in extra-time, but defeat was harsh on battling Vale.

Berahino was omitted again as Serge Gnabry, James Chester, Brown Ideye and 
Lambert returned for the Baggies while Vale were unchanged.

Florian Thauvin sparks Newcastle to 4-1 victory over Northampton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/25/florian-thauvin-sparks-newcastle-to-4-1-victory-over-northampton>
An awful first half was only punctuated by Ideye heading Lambert’s cross 
inches wide and Jak Alnwick saving Lambert’s deflected effort a minute before 
half-time.

Vale matched the home side, with their organisation stifling Albion, but 
lacked the quality to threaten.

Two minutes into the second half, though, the Baggies carved out their best 
chance when Anthony Grant hacked Lambert’s header off the line.

A minute later and Ben Alnwick turned over Lambert’s drive as the former 
Liverpool forward’s influence grew.

The second half was a marked improvement on the first and the visitors grew in 
confidence as Albion ran out of ideas.

Louis Dodds dragged an effort across goal after a period of Vale pressure but 
Boaz Myhill remained untroubled.

Lambert’s 35-yard volley clipped the top of the bar and Rondón headed wide 
with six minutes left, but no winner came in normal time.

Rondón and Callum McManaman fired wide in extra-time before Rondón should have 
won it in the second period. Lambert found the £12m striker 10 yards out but he 
lashed wildly past a post, and a worse miss followed a minute later.

McManaman stood up a fine cross from the left and Rondón met it from close 
range but could only hit the bar. Albion had suddenly woken up and Alnwick 
saved well from James McClean and Lambert before penalties.

And Duffy was the only one to fluff his lines as Chester scored to send Albion 
through.
 