
Wests Tigers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> coach Jason 
Taylor admits he may end up with egg on his face over Robbie Farah’s axing but 
says it’s being done for the long-term success of the club.

Farah has been told he will not be at Concord next season as management 
attempt to cut costs and clean up a salary cap mess. The NSW rake was on a 
back-ended contract and has been told he is free to negotiate with rival clubs 
despite having two years left on his deal.

Wests Tigers tell Robbie Farah he can find new NRL club next season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/26/wests-tigers-tell-robbie-farah-he-can-find-new-nrl-club-next-season>
The Tigers have said it may take three years to untangle their salary cap 
issues and Taylor admits he has been forced to make some hard decisions. “My 
feelings are that we need a fresh start and Robbie needs a fresh start,” Taylor 
said.

“We’d love nothing more than to see Robbie play for an opposition club next 
year and play really, really well. There’s every chance that he can do that. 
That might put some egg on my face but I think it’d be really good for Robbie.”


While Farah has vowed to fight for his spot next year, Taylor hosed down the 
possibility and said it was better for him to move on.

Tigers fans are up in arms at the culling of one of the club’s favourite sons 
and it comes in the wake of decisions to let go of Blake Austin and Adam Blair. 
The club has been widely panned, with Austin and Blair excelling at Canberra 
and Brisbane respectively this season.

Taylor said the club wanted to keep the pair and while they would have helped 
the side this year, it was better for the future success of the team.

He said parting ways with Farah was similarly difficult and the club will look 
to future stars like Mitchell Moses, Luke Brooks and James Tedesco to step up 
in the wake of Farah’s loss next year.

NRL: what to look out for in round 25 | Nick Tedeschi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/aug/27/nrl-what-to-look-out-for-in-round-25>
“Sometimes you’ve got to go backwards before you can go forwards,” Taylor 
said. “They’re hard decisions. But they’re aimed at Wests Tigers being a top 
eight team, a top four team down the track. Not tomorrow but down the track.”

Taylor said there was no rift between Farah and the rest of the playing group 
and denied any rumoured animosity had played a part in the decision. Prop Aaron 
Woods, who is favourite to assume the Tigers captaincy next season, also shot 
down suggestions there was bad blood between Farah and the rest of the players.

“There’s no problems,” Woods said. “It comes up every time someone leaves. I 
love him to death, Robbie is one of my closest friends. All the young boys love 
him and all the senior boys love him.”
 