
When tourists think of Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, images 
of dramatic landscapes, futuristic cities and world-class sushi might spring to 
mind.


But one Tokyo district is hoping to reel in outsiders with one of the 
country’s more controversial traditions – slaughtering whales.

Ebisu, a chichi gastronomic hub close to Tokyo’s frenetic Shibuya shopping 
district, is hosting an annual food festival aimed at introducing foreigners to 
the culinary delights of whale meat.

Japan plans unilateral restart to Antarctic whaling in 2015, says official
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/20/japan-plans-unilateral-restart-to-antarctic-whaling-in-2015-says-official>
“With so many foreign tourists visiting Japan now, we would like to show how 
we really feel” about eating the animal, Takashi Furui, head of the event’s 
executive committee, said at a press conference declaring the festival open 
last week.

A record 13.4 million foreigners visited Japan in 2014, up from 10.4 million 
the previous year.

The figure has already reached 12.9 million by August this year, with many 
regions jostling for ways to stand out as the 2020 Olympics approaches.

Around 30 restaurants in Ebisu district are offering whale dishes throughout 
the festival, which closes on 18 October.

But few tourists visiting the district this week seemed willing to tuck into 
the dark meat, which fans say has a gamey quality, similar to venison.

“I don’t believe I would do that unless I was absolutely starving and there 
was nothing else to eat,” Canadian visitor Betty Lidington told AFP near the 
main Ebisu station. Her husband Bill agreed: “I don’t really want to, and I 
won’t miss it if I don’t taste a whale.”

French tourist Agathe Lavielle said she was more open to the idea. “It doesn’t 
shock me to eat different kinds of food and meat,” she said. “I could try some, 
maybe, yeah,” she added, provided that the animal did not suffer.

Japan’s culinary relationship to cetaceans is both controversial and complex.


The seafaring nation has hunted whales for hundreds of years but the industry 
only really took off after the second world war, to help feed a hungry country.

In recent decades it has used a legal loophole in the international ban on 
whale hunting that allows it to continue catching the animalsin order to gather 
scientific data 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/19/japan-asked-to-prove-whaling-for-scientific-research>
.

But it has never made a secret of the fact that the whale meat from these 
hunts often ends up on dining tables, even though consumption has fallen 
sharply in recent years.

The country’s influential Japan Whaling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/whaling> Association has given the 
festival its blessing.

Japan accused of falsifying whaling data
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/15/japan-accused-of-falsifying-whaling-data>
“If foreign visitors actually see the food being served at restaurants, I hope 
they understand and say it may be all right to use it as resources as long as 
the animals are not endangered,” chairman Kazuo Yamamura, who attended the 
festival opening, told AFP.

Festival organisers say Ebisu’s name is deeply entwined with fishing, whales 
and foreigners.

Ebisu is a fishing god and one of the Seven Deities of Good Fortune, popularly 
venerated throughout Japan as the tutelary gods of one’s occupation.

The word can also refer to a whale, in a deified form, and was once used as a 
term to describe foreigners, relating to the belief that the gods of fortune 
come from faraway places.

Seattle tourist Eric Johnson said the festival put him off the district 
entirely. “It would make me not want to come to Ebisu if I knew I was one of 
their main targets,” Johnson said.

“Based on the principle of it, I would not even want to try it, even if it 
tastes amazing and wonderful.”
 