
You never stick up for your junior members of staff. When another healthcare 
worker said recently: “I don’t see the point of pharmacists on the ward”, 
instead of defending us, you brought the complaint to us and lectured us about 
how we do our jobs. This is the role that you – a senior managing pharmacist – 
created, and recruited us for. So why don’t you defend us?

And I don’t just hear this from colleagues. Patients routinely tell me: “Oh 
you wouldn’t know what that tablet is for” and speak to me like I am an 
uneducated, inexperienced member of staff – oblivious to the fact I have a 
four-year degree. While others tell me they “don’t understand my job”.

People often assume that the pharmacist is simply there to pick the tablets 
off the shelf, count them out and hand them over. I get asked by patients’ 
relatives: “Why does it take three hours just to get the medications up?” I 
have to defend the job that I do on a daily basis, explaining that I have to 
make sure the medications are safe before I simply hand them over.

I wouldn’t expect the public to know exactly what a pharmacist does, but now 
it seems the healthcare colleagues I work with don’t understand the concept of 
my job either. I am left feeling unappreciated by everyone around me. Our 
senior pharmacists, managers and leaders do nothing to defend our positions or 
highlight the importance of our roles.

I continue to do what I do without recognition. Patients are often 
none-the-wiser about the corrections I’ve made to their prescribed medications. 
On a daily basis I find myself having to tell junior doctors how they have 
prescribed essential medicines incorrectly: Parkinson’s medications, cancer 
treatments, anti-hypertensives, anti-epileptics and anti-diabetics. The 
prescriptions quietly get changed without the patient or other healthcare 
professionals knowing.

A doctor prescribes a double dose of a toxic drug – I see the prescription and 
instantly instruct the doctor to amend it so that the patient is not given a 
potentially dangerous dose. A doctor documents a plan to start phosphate 
supplements yet accidentally prescribes potassium supplements – I tell them to 
change the prescription to avoid potential heart problems. In both instances 
the patient is unaware. When junior doctors went on strike, we were left with 
consultants who didn’t know how to use electronic prescribing systems. On whom 
did they rely? You guessed it: us. It would be nice if, instead of agreeing 
with colleagues who say they don’t understand my role, you explained to them 
the importance of what we do.

From a distance it might seem that I am doing nothing, sitting at the corner 
of the ward behind a screen staring at drug charts, prescriptions and blood 
results. But if it was not for me checking and cleaning up the mess of 
inaccurate prescribing by doctors who are too busy and tired to pay attention, 
then patients would not be treated safely. They would be given the wrong 
medication in hospitals, with potentially fatal consequences, and they would go 
home with the wrong prescriptions.

 So next time someone questions the importance of our jobs and makes a 
demeaning remark asking what is the point of us “sitting around on the wards 
all day”, it would be nice if you stood up and highlighted just how essential 
our jobs are. I do not expect understanding, praise or recognition from 
patients and the public, but I do expect appreciation and respect from the 
other healthcare professionals that I work with – and even more so from you.

 * Would you like to write an anonymous letter to your boss for this series? 
Get in touch by emailingcareers.desk@theguardian.com 
<mailto:careers.desk@theguardian.com>
 