
You harass my team constantly while we’re trying to do our job. When I am with 
a patient, non-clinical staff call me every half hour asking for updates – and 
apply pressure for the crew to move on to other 999 calls.

What you say on the phone is overheard by patients, often the elderly and 
vulnerable, which makes them feel guilty about having an ambulance – and at 
times patients refuse to go to hospital even though they should, so the 
ambulance can be available for someone else.

You want us to work quicker and quicker, yet this means reporting accidents 
and safeguarding vulnerable patients can be missed. There’s never time – as the 
shifts often over-run and the exhausted crews go home without completing the 
necessary paperwork. Ambulances are also often denied the opportunity to 
restock drugs, potentially leaving other patients without the care they need.

There are no government targets for this though, so under your leadership the 
staff, who are caring by nature, become increasingly disillusioned and 
frustrated – up to the point they need to leave the profession for their own 
sanity.

The bullying doesn’t end there. There are staff employed by the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> to pressurise crews at hospital to 
turn calls around quicker, whether they are in a position to do so or not – yet 
again chasing a government target.

You revel in having good figures and use all the tactics you can to get them. 
You chase any government or Department ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> targets, such as sickness rates 
and flu vaccination rates. You pressurise your management team to harass staff 
to have the influenza vaccination against their wishes, and instruct managers 
to sack people on long-term sick leave. This leads to dread, fear, and 
plummeting moral.

Recruitment and retention of paramedics is a constant, national problem. Pay 
is being reviewed at a national level, but it’s not just about pay: your 
management is part of the problem, which is not being addressed. The number of 
people currently leaving the profession shows this. No amount of money can 
persuade people to continue to be on the receiving end of unattainable targets 
and bullying.

There is a cumulative effect: you bully your directors, they bully the more 
junior managers, who bully the staff. So experienced paramedics leave and take 
years of practical knowledge and experience with them, to be replaced with 
inexperienced new staff on significantly less pay.

You pretend in public to focus on patient care and welfare, but then make cuts 
that leave parts of the community with a second-class service. Bigger is not 
necessarily better. When the government merged ambulance services, from county 
services to regional ones, standards went down the pan.

Money is the true deciding factor here, not best practice, so the best care 
won’t be rolled out on a regional basis. Is it any wonder so many people are 
leaving, to be replaced by less experienced but, most of all, cheaper, staff?

 * Would you like to write an anonymous letter to your boss for this series? 
Get in touch by emailingcareers.desk@theguardian.com 
<mailto:careers.desk@theguardian.com>
 