
The thing that stands out for someone working in a low-paid, dead-end job in 
the service industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/30/hotel-workers-bullied-underpaid-few-rights-uk>
 who is trying to remember a holiday is that none of them stand out. I could 
write a whole chapter for a book that was nothing but stories from the holiday 
season – but I wouldn’t be able to tell you which year anything happened in. 
When you work through your holidays, they don’t serve as a decent demarcation 
between the old year and the new.

The New Year’s Eve party when a bad fairy turned into a good friend | Deborah 
Levy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/27/new-years-eve-party-bad-fairy-good-friend-deborah-levy>
New year celebrations are for the young, the vibrant and excited – for people 
eager for fresh starts. But cheery means chatty and I hated workingNew Year’s 
Eve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/27/new-years-eve-party-bad-fairy-good-friend-deborah-levy>
 in a position where I had to talk to customers, because the one question I 
would always get asked all night was, “What are your resolutions this year?” 
The people doing the asking were always bright-eyed and full of lust for life 
and the possibility they could see from the beginning of the calendar. I never 
had an answer. I don’t believe in resolutions because resolutions are plans – 
and plans never worked out particularly well for me when I was working for a 
few dollars an hour.

My New Year’s Eve tradition for 15 years was to put on a polyester shirt and 
watch the evening progress in snapshots, at one or other of the interchangeable 
sorts of jobs where you have a name tag, as though the whole evening is played 
out in strobe tableaux before me. The perfectly turned-out older ladies and 
gents who might have a few drinks with friends before going home to see in the 
new year in their pyjamas would be followed by their perfectly turned-out 
children having a late dinner. At about 10pm, the mood of the revellers would 
begin to shift, as the alcohol started to separate the social drinkers from the 
partiers.

That’s when the night turns dangerous and amusing and infuriating by turns, 
when people aren’t sober enough to behave well or clean up after themselves – 
and it’s even odds whether they’ll leave a fat tip or become irrationally angry 
about the fact that you’ve sold out of whatever they wanted to buy.

It’s the most entertaining night of the year to work if you like watching 
people’s lives unfold

It’s a fascinating parade – the women getting slightly cheerier and forgetting 
to check their makeup quite so often; the men brimming with bravado and 
recounting increasingly improbable tales in an attempt to try to get laid; the 
people who’ll be going home alone stopping in to recount hilarious tales of 
their evening while they pick up some crisps and a bottle of water to sober up 
with. It’s the most entertaining night of the year to work if you like watching 
people’s lives unfold.

I have been to one New Year’s Eve party in my life, at the turn of the 
millennium when I was 17. I felt full of excitement and sophistication as we 
clinked champagne glasses and kissed perfect strangers (all of whom seemed very 
attractive through the rosy glow of my first bubbles) and it was the last time 
I would experience the buzz of time’s vibrant potential until I was in my 30s.

Instead of partying, I have spent the year’s major holidays trying to pay 
rent, which is certainly responsible but not what one might call “thrilling”. 
The contemplation of your next year isn’t heartening or exciting from the staff 
room of a fast food joint; it’s more a girding or acceptance.

I spent most of those year-turnings resigning myself to what must come next. 
Another year where I would do my damnedest and never accomplish anything more 
important than my own bare survival; another year to lose my youth in; another 
year in which, if I was lucky, I might make a new friend or find time to both 
plant and then water a garden.

Years of working in hamburger joints and diners, bars and gas stations makes 
you lose your sentimentality for calendar dates and your hope that even once a 
year, you might find yourself feeling lovely and fairy-lit. Until I became a 
writer I worked every Christmas and Easter. I worked on my birthday and my 
anniversary. I worked New Year’s Eve and New Years’s Day and through my 
children’s infancies.

For someone on their way to a party to ask a service worker who’s on the clock 
how much harder they vow to work, or how much more self-disciplined they plan 
to be, is crueller than you can imagine. Resolutions are meant to bond us 
because we all want to lose five pounds and finally get to start on that novel 
– only it doesn’t work when you’re talking to people who accept their weight 
will fluctuate with their employment and mostly hope to keep a roof over their 
heads this year.

A new year is a new opportunity for hope and joy and wonder for those who have 
the luxury of starting afresh on an annual basis. For the rest of us, at least 
we get to watch the party.
 