
Bologna, player, 1981-82
Tarcisio Burgnich, his first manager

"He played in midfield, a bit like [Michel] Platini towards the end. He 
dictated the rhythm of a game and had a great sense of timing when it came to 
getting forward. Despite being the youngest guy in the team he was already a 
leader, but at that time you could never have foreseen his future as a manager. 
He was a sensitive boy, not very expansive, and I think his personality 
blossomed later on. He was good at adapting his characteristics to the team. I, 
for example, needed a striker and he scored nine goals. And to think that just 
to have him I had to have a huge argument with the president, Tommaso 
Fabbretti, who had already promised him on loan to Forlì"

Sampdoria, player, 1982-97
Enrico Mantovani, Club president 

"Our relationship went into a crisis when I started to treat Mancini like an 
adult, after years of an exaggerated paternal relationship. Mancini is a 
spoiled boy who thinks the world owes him everything. He wanted to choose the 
team, he wanted the coach to be worth half a billion lire and he wanted many 
other things that I was not capable of guaranteeing to him"

Lazio, player, 1997-00, manager, 2002-04
Sven-Goran Eriksson, coach at Lazio and Sampdoria

"I didn't give him any advice about going into management because I didn't 
need to. I was sure that he would impose himself as a manager just like he did 
as a player. He understands football like few people do. He annoys me only for 
one reason: despite the fact that I've been asking him for years, he always 
addresses me in the [formal] third person, instead of using [the informal] 
'you'. His enthusiasm is contagious and today to overcome the great stress of a 
league season it's important to have fun training like he does on the pitch"

Leicester City, player, 2001 
Peter Taylor, manager

"I thought Roberto was a diamond of a man you can trust. He was a magnificent 
player who was coming to the end of his career when I signed him. But he wanted 
to have a look at the English scene. I did not have a clue at that stage that 
he would go on to manage in Italy and win the things he has as a manager. But 
what I did notice was that he knew about training and he showed an interest in 
the way we trained at Leicester. I know he is serious about what he does and if 
he does anything, he does it well. It will be difficult to start with because 
the City players are disappointed that Mark Hughes has gone, but I think he 
will win them over"

Fiorentina, manager, 2001-02
Rui Costa, played under Mancini

"As a footballer he was always No1. A champion respected by all – team-mates 
and opponents. I have to admit that I was curious to get to know Mancini the 
manager. On the pitch he was, you might say, a bit arrogant. He had achieved 
enough in his career that he felt entitled to a certain degree of attention. Or 
at least I saw things that way. But when he arrived atFiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> I discovered a simple man who 
dispensed with formalities, who created a positive atmosphere. He spoke with 
people, he listened, he asked questions. He was neither afraid nor preoccupied, 
he just had a great desire to get started"

Internazionale, manager, 2004-08 
Javier Zanetti, played under Mancini

"Roberto Mancini is a big coach with the same characteristics as José Mourinho 
and Carlo Ancelotti. Like them he demands total responsibility from his players 
and high intensity levels during training sessions. You must offer total 
commitment and obey his orders or you will not be in the squad.Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> will find he loves the 
technical side of the game but also loves to attack"
 