
If there was one thing neurologist Paul Kalanithi didn’t want to be when he 
was a boy growing up in the desert town of Kingman, Arizona, it was a doctor. 
He dreamed of being a writer, and immersed himself in Dickens and Whitman. When 
he went to college it was to study literature; and, only as an afterthought, 
neurology.

Years later, having conquered one of medicine’s most rigorous disciplines, he 
was diagnosed at the age of 36 with what was to become terminal cancer.

When Breath Becomes Air is the memoir Kalanithi had hoped to write in old age. 
In it he reflects on his personal history and experience, and on the profession 
to which he considered himself called. A child of immigrants, Kalanithi is an 
exemplar of the modern American dream: by any measure, his life before 
diagnosis is a charmed one - not without challenge, but full of privilege and 
fulfilment. His account of life as a student surgeon is equally rich: from the 
macabre humour of dissection classes to the perplexing neurological conditions 
he encounters. His clinical experiences are recounted with literary flourishes: 
the first birth he attends recalls Beckett; TS Eliot is a constant companion.

But diagnosis of his own condition wrenches to the fore questions that had 
preoccupied him from an early age: “What makes human life meaningful?”; and, as 
his illness progresses: “What makes life meaningful enough to go on living?” 
Dissatisfied with the mere science of his illness, it is to literary accounts 
of mortality that he finds himself returning.

Kalanithi’s is a life cut short while its protagonist is still engaged in the 
furious business of living: as such, it lacks the luxury of the time and 
reflection evident in, for example, Henry Marsh’s bestselling memoir,Do No Harm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/30/do-no-harm-stories-brain-surgery-review-henry-marsh>
 (which looks back on precisely the sort of long and illustrious career 
Kalanithi fully expected to have).

Towards the end of the book, Kalanithi ponders the “many moments in life where 
you must give an account of yourself, provide a ledger of what you have been, 
and done, and meant to the world”. This is, of course, his ledger: to the world 
and to the young daughter born months before his death in 2015. It is a book 
that leaves its reader full-hearted: at once wishing that it had never been 
written, and yet moved and enriched by its humanity and accomplishment.

• When Breath Becomes Air by Paul Kalanithi is published by Vintage (£8.99). 
To order a copy for £6.99 go to bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/when-breath-becomes-air-460938.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99
 