
On one level the challenge is obvious. Beat Bristol over two legs in the next 
eight days and we’ll be in thePremiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership>. After Wednesday’s first leg at 
Bristol’s ground, Ashton Gate, and next Wednesday at Sixways, a difference of 
one point will be enough and Worcester will celebrate. No doubt about that.

Being at home for the second leg helps. A lap of honour thanking fans who have 
stuck by us and then, in boardroom and bar, the only worry will be getting to 
work the next morning. Job done? Not really.

Without getting preachy, you only have to look at London Welsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-welsh> to see that for the successful 
side life for the next few months won’t be a bed of roses. The bigger challenge 
is to take a Championship side into the Premiership and then to make it better. 
Whether that is now or in another 12 months, that is the premium. Go up, spiral 
around and crash land and next time the job will be a whole lot worse.

It’s not that we don’t want to go up. Heavens no. But we (and Bristol) need to 
make it stick and, after rising through the ranks, onlyExeter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> have managed to build on promotion 
in modern times.

I’ll come to them later, but consider this. In other circumstances Worcester 
could have Dylan Hartley, Tom Wood, Matt Mullan, Matt Kvesic, Graham Kitchener, 
Miles Benjamin and Marcel Garvey on the books. All and more passed through, 
leaving for various reasons. Wood because he didn’t believe, no matter how 
strong his performances, that he could change the established order, Kvesic 
because he didn’t thinkWorcester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worcesterrugby> would make him a Test player.

By and large, guys leave clubs for two reasons: to get better or to meet their 
aspirations. Either way, there has to be a conveyor belt of young guys coming 
through or being bought in at the expense of older guys (see Tom Wood) who 
understandably are reluctant to make way or to smooth the path of the guy 
looking for their shirt with helpful advice.

Not so long ago, Worcester signed the wing Rico Gear to go alongside a couple 
of All Blacks in Greg Rawlinson and Sam Tuitupou, who were already in the side 
with the Fiji international Netani Talei and Samoa’s Loki Crichton. Memorably 
Chris Latham, arguably the best player in the world at one time, spent two 
seasons at Sixways, but the day the Australian announced he would not be taking 
up the option of a third year, Worcester were 11th in the league, a position 
uncomfortably familiar.

Under the leadership of Cecil Duckworth, Worcester had made remarkable strides 
for a city of around 100,000, but you could argue that those ambitious signings 
had not fulfilled their purpose. You spend big money to enhance a side that is 
already going places and has its own identity. Do otherwise and you’re chucking 
cash into a black hole.

Last season there were times when guys earning millions between them couldn’t 
get into the Worcester side. Effectively we were fighting relegation with a 
£1.5m side and at the end of the season players, some earning £300,000 a year, 
left. In their place is a club with a settled coaching staff – guys like Carl 
Hogg, Simon Cross and Mefin Davies, with whom I’d previously worked. There is 
Nick Johnston, the high performance director who worked alongside Philippe 
Saint-André when Sale were league champions and then was at Northampton when 
they went from theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/championship-rugby-union> to where they are 
today, and Sam Vesty, a fourth generation Leicester Tiger who chose to work 
here rather than there – and a lot of young players who will find it hard in 
the Premiership but will grow into it.

Again without getting too preachy about the merits of “organic” growth, we 
have spent a lot dotting five academies around Birmingham and the Midlands and 
the message seems to be getting through to those guys who understand that it’s 
better playing for a Championship side than being the third or fourth string at 
a Premiership outfit sitting out the action, hoping that the inevitable 
injuries mean game time.

Guys who turned us down a year ago are now asking us if they can take up the 
offer and players offered contracts elsewhere are coming for half the money. 
Hanging on to Chris Pennell, who could have had the pick of the Premiership, 
helped massively, but others see the conveyor belt is working at Worcester.

That it will be churning out Premiership/Test players I have no doubt. The 
question is how soon and here tapping into the experiences of Rob Baxter and 
Exeter, particularly regarding the development of local talents such as Jack 
Nowell, Dave Ewers, Henry Slade, Sam Hill and Luke Cowan‑Dickie, has helped

Bristol have beaten us twice this season. We led for much of those two 
matches, as we did the league for much of the season, losing to a late try at 
Ashton Gate on the opening day while conceding acouple of late yellows on the 
final day of the regular season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/25/worcester-bristol-championship-match-report>
. Tickets will be worth the money.

If we and Andy Robinson’s side have been favourites to go up all along, I 
don’t think either is yet a Premiership side. But we will be.
 