
"After witnessing this effort 
<http://www.arsenal.com/match-menu/171602/first-team/-v-arsenal?tab=report> 
with sponsors on their crotch, I got to wondering: what is the biggest number 
of sponsors a single football kit has had," muses Chris Bates.

It's hard to provide a definitive answer here, Chris, not least because we're 
finding it tricky to count exactly how many sponsors SC Columbia had on their 
kit for that match against Arsenal. Bear in mind that some of the patches on 
the shorts may be repetitions of brands that already feature on the shirts.

Firat Topal provided the best effort we could pin down, though - Swedish side 
Mjällby AIF'snew home strip 
<http://ss11i01.stream.ip-only.net/images/album/36/70/49/30124/thumbs/dc186c1989c2537f_532_399_JPEG_scale>
, on which we can pick out at least 13 different sponsors (and that's without 
seeing the back). Mark Walsh also pointed us in the direction of Puebla FC's
2009 home shirt 
<http://puebla80s.blogspot.com/2009/05/coleccion-playeras-puebla-fc.html>, 
which boasts a slightly more modest nine. The shorts have a couple more, too.

Special mention goes to South Melbourne, though, who showed up for the 2000 
World Club Championships with a shirt featuring six different sponsors. "Sadly 
that wasjust over the official Fifa limit of one," explains Phil Hawkins. 
"Melbourne had great difficulty reprinting their shirts in time, and 
embarrassingly had to use a rival shirt manufacturer."

Coventry City's strips, on the other hand, have never advertised multiple 
sponsors, but they did attempt tobase an entire shirt around the car 
manufacturer Talbot's logo in the early 1980s 
<http://www.oldfootballshirts.com/en/teams/c/coventry/old-coventry-football-shirt-s2786.html>
. Sadly the club's then chairman Jimmy Hill failed in his bid to further boost 
the club's revenues by changing the team's name to Coventry Talbot.

Do you know of any teams with more sponsors than Mjällby? Let us know at 
knowledge@theguardian.com <mailto:Knowledge@theguardian.com>

JUST FOR A FRIENDLY?

"What is the current record crowd for a friendly in Britain?" asks Kris 
Scrimgeour.

Pleasantly straightforward, this one. The record for an international friendly 
is 125,683 - achieved at Hampden Park for a game between Scotland and France, 
which the home side won 2-0, all the way back on 27 April 1949. That answer was 
provided by Sean DeLoughry, and so was the record for a friendly between two 
club sides - 104,493 for Rangers 1-2 Eintracht Frankfurt, also at Hampden Park, 
in October 1961.

An honourable mention goes to Chelsea 3-3 Dynamo Moscow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dynamomoscow> in 1945. While the official 
attendance for that match was listed as 85,000, many witnesses estimated the 
true figure at close to 100,000, and according to Damon Maddison: "The crowd 
were spilling out of the terraces and on to the dog track, while some people 
even climbed on to the roof of the stands to watch." The highestofficial gate 
for that tour was actually at Ibrox, however, where 92,000 saw Dynamo draw with 
Rangers.

WHEN PRE-SEASON FRIENDLIES GO BAD (2)

Lask week <https://www.theguardian.com/football/series/theknowledge> we 
recalled some of our favourite pre-season friendly dust-ups. Now you lot have 
recalled a few more of your own ...

"Rather excitingly, as I was a mere bairn of eight or nine, I witnessed one of 
Scottish football's better-known friendly dust-ups from only yards away," 
reminisces Graeme Ramsay. "In 1994Raith Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/raith> hosted Hearts, whose two 
centre-backs Craig Levein and Graeme Hogg got a bit worked up a few minutes in. 
A two-handed push from Hogg was answered without hesitation with a right hook 
from Levein, and a pretty handy one at that. Hogg had his nose broken and, 
having apparently been knocked out, was then red-carded on the stretcher. 
Levein didn't hang around to see his. Most importantly the Rovers won 2-0." 
Levein was later banned for 12 matches, and Hogg for 10.

Jonny Hall noted that Wisla Krakow officials were so proud of their team's 
scrap with Dynamo Moscow that theyposted footage of it on their own YouTube 
channel <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gWconnMijqs>. And then set it to O 
Fortuna from Carmina Burana, for dramatic effect. "Watch out for the kung fu 
kick at 2mins 11sec of the clip," chirrups Jonny. "Great stuff."

Another reader, identifiable only by the catchy email moniker sdfgs fgf, 
reminded us that Manchester United had "a little bit of a spat" with Boca 
Juniors back in 2002. Carlos Tevez, playing for Boca Juniors at the time, was 
sent off for throwing an elbow at Paul Scholes, who himself was lucky to stay 
on the field after a number of dubious tackles. "It did get a bit meaty," said 
Sir Alex Ferguson afterwards of a match that had been arranged to raise funds 
for Unicef.

KNOWLEDGE ARCHIVE

"I was surprised to learn that former Tottenham goal machine Clive Allen had a 
brief spell as specialist goal-kicker with theNFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> Europe outfit London Monarchs," wrote 
Mike Hopkin, back in 2007."Have any other footballers ever had any success in 
the sport. And have any American footballers ever gone the other way?"

Quite a few 'soccer' players have had a crack at gridiron actually Mike - all 
of them, unsurprisingly, as field goal kickers - but few have been as 
successful in both sports as Toni Fritsch. Nicknamed 'Wembley Toni' after 
scoring a memorable brace for Austria in a come-from-behind 3-2 win over Alf 
Ramsey's England at Wembley in 1965, diminutive forward Fritsch was spotted by 
then Dallas Cowboys coach Tom Landry on a scouting trip to Europe in 1971. 
According to Uefa, Landry offered Fritsch a contract after just one session 
kicking a 'pigskin' through the posts.

"I never saw a game before; I never saw a football," recalled Fritsch years 
later. "And I signed a contract with him a couple days later, a contract that I 
couldn't read, but it was maybe the best contract I ever signed in my life and 
my career." His American football career was certainly a successful one - 
spanning 12 seasons from 1971 to 1982, and including a Super Bowl win with 
Dallas in 1972 (he remains the only Austrian to ever win the Super Bowl) and a 
Pro Bowl (all-star game) appearance when he was with the Houston Oilers in 
1980. In all Fritsch played for four NFL clubs, spending a year with each of 
the San Diego Chargers (1976) and New Orleans Saints (1982), on top of longer 
spells with the Cowboys (1971-75) and Oilers (1977-1981), scoring 758 points in 
125 games. Afterwards he also played briefly for the Houston Gamblers in the 
USFL.

Fritsch wasn't the first European footballer to kick in the NFL, though. 
German Horst Muhlmann played for Schalke 04 from 1962-66 before resurfacing 
stateside, aged 29, with the Cincinnati Bengals in 1969. He eventually played 
nine seasons in the NFL (Bengals 1969-74, Philadelphia Eagles 1975-77), and 
remains something of a celebrity in Cincinnati, where he owns two bars in the 
Bengals' new Paul Brown Stadium. Shortly after Muhlmann had retired, two 
American soccer-playing brothers - Chris and Matt Bahr - made a similar switch, 
giving up careers in another doomed league - the North American Soccer League 
(NASL) - to kick in the NFL. Sons of NASL Hall-of-famer Walter Bahr, Chris and 
Matt quit the Philadelphia Atoms and the Colorado Caribous in 1976 and 1979 
respectively, going on to enjoy long and successful gridiron careers, both of 
which included Super Bowl wins.

Many more professional footballers have enjoyed lower-level gridiron spells - 
with former Borussia Dortmund and Werder Bremen striker Manfred Burgsmüller and 
Barcelona keeper Mariano Angoy among a number to have kicked in NFL Europe. 
Likewise, many successful NFL kickers showed promise as footballers without 
ever going professional; most notably Morten Andersen, who became the NFL's 
all-time leading scorer this season at the age of 46 with 2,445 points, after 
nearly making the Danish national side as a youngster.

Finding athletes who have gone the other way is far trickier, but diligent 
reader James Andrews managed to dig one up. "Paul McCallum travelled from 
Canada to Scotland to play professional football in the Scottish third division 
after playing gridiron for the Surrey Rams in the junior American football 
league. He returned to American football afterwards, winning the Canadian 
Football League's Grey Cup with the BC Lions and the World Bowl with the 
Scottish Claymores."

Can you help?

"DC United of Major League Soccer just played their first qualifying match 
against CD Luis Angel Firpo of El Salvador in the Concacaf Champions League 
last night," says Thomas McGovern. "They qualified for this year's tournament 
by winning the US Open Cup on 3 September 2008. The first match of the 
Champions League was played on 28 July 2009 - a total of 328 days later. Has 
any other club team ever had to endure a longer wait between qualifying for and 
actually playing in an international tournament?"

Have you got a question you want us to answer? Email knowledge@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Knowledge@theguardian.com>
 