
"West Brom parted company with Roberto Di Matteo after a 3-0 defeat to my 
club, Manchester City,"began Ian Burnett last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/feb/09/players-public-transport>. "A 
few seasons ago I remember us playing Newcastle the game before they sacked Sam 
Allardyce. My question is: which club has provided the final nail in the coffin 
for the most managers of opposition teams?"

Of the 30 managers leaving their hotseats this season, only one club can claim 
to be responsible for a pair. Chris Turner resigned as director of sport at 
Hartlepool United five days after a 2-2 draw withSwindon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/swindon> Town, while Charlton Athletic 
pulled the plug on Phil Parkinson's reign the day after a 4-2 home defeat to 
the Robins. Danny Wilson's team also beat Southampton in Dean Wilkins's final 
game as caretaker manager between the Alan Pardew and Nigel Adkins eras.

While League One's managers must start kissing their rabbit feet and covering 
themselves in lucky lavender when Swindon are in town, in the Bundesliga it is
Hannover <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hannover> that troubled coaches 
must fear. "Hannover 96 have accounted for three managers this season alone," 
writes Mel Lynam in Berlin. "Cologne (Zvonimir Soldo after losing 2-1) , VfB 
Stuttgart (Jens Keller after losing 2-1) and Wolfsburg (Steve McClaren after 
losing 1-0)."

But in recent years few can match Grimsby Town's ability to hammer the final 
nail in managerial coffins, so much so that the excellentcodalmighty.com 
<http://codalmighty.com/site/ca.php> have come up with a name for it – The 
Grimsby Reaper 
<http://www.codalmighty.com/site/ca.php?page=club/sacked-managers>. Since 1997, 
Graeme Sharp (Oldham Athletic), Steve Bruce (Huddersfield Town), Gordon 
Strachan (Coventry City), George Burley (Ipswich Town), Trevor Francis (Crystal 
Palace), Jimmy Quinn (Shrewsbury Town), Terry Butcher (Brentford) and Colin 
Todd (Darlington) have all felt the reaper's icy, if slightly fishy, blade. The 
Grimsby Reaper can also claim a (more tenuous) hand in ending the reigns of 
Ronnie Whelan at Southend United, John Ward at Bristol City and Sven-Goran 
Eriksson at Notts County.For the full list of victims click here 
<http://www.codalmighty.com/site/ca.php?page=club/sacked-managers>.

THE LATEST EVER LEAGUE MEETING

"At the time of typing, Spurs and Blackpool have still not played each other 
in the league as Blackpool's home game against Spurs was postponed due to bad 
weather,"wrote David Graniewitz last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/feb/09/players-public-transport>. 
"The game at White Hart Lane is not due to be played till 7 May and as yet I 
have not heard when the original game is being rescheduled. Which is the latest 
point in a season that two teams have played each other for the first time?"

Blackpool are scheduled to meet Spurs on 22 February, meaning they'll fall 
well short of a couple of remarkable fixture backlogs. "In the 2000-01 season 
Rochdale and Plymouth Argyle played their final two matches against each 
other," writes Tom Moore. "The game due to be played at Spotland was postponed 
on 25 November and again on 9 December. A third attempt to play in February was 
also postponed, and with a lengthy backlog of fixtures to catch up on (Plymouth 
had nine postponements over a four-month period) the game was rescheduled for 1 
May, four days before the teams were due to meet at Home Park on the final day 
of the season.

"Rochdale won 2-1 at Spotland, a victory which moved them into the play-off 
positions, but only managed a 0-0 draw at Home Park which meant that the 
eventual play-off winners Blackpool pipped them to the final play-off place. 
Happily for those Plymouth fans who may have travelled to Rochdale for the 
three postponements, they clinched promotion at Spotland the following season."

But even that is overshadowed by Luton Town and Nottingham Forest. "Back in 
1987-88 Luton enjoyed a season mirabilis, reaching both an FA Cup semi-final 
and, of course, the League Cup final not to forget a Simod Cup final and an 
appearance in the unforgettable Mercantile Credit Centenary Classic," writes 
Andy Collon. "As a result, something of a fixture backlog ensued resulting in 
the Town not playing Nottingham Forest until Friday 13 May, six days after the 
scheduled end of the season, in the days when such an event was allowed. The 
return fixture was played the following Sunday, 15 May, and, perhaps not 
surprisingly, both matches ended in 1-1 draws."

THE SINGER/FOOTBALLER STADIUM DOUBLE

"When in my student days I started attending Queen's Park games, we had a star 
winger named James Allan," wrote Matthew Reid last week. "I often wondered what 
happened to him, until he re-emerged as lead singer of Glasvegas. When they 
supported U2 at Hampden in August 2009, he notched up the rare feat of having 
performed at the same stadium both musically and footballistically. Is this a 
unique achievement or has anyone else managed it? Did Andrew Cole ever unleash 
Outstanding on Wembley?"

It seems Knowledge reader Neil Wright has beaten Cole and co to it. "I'm not 
sure about any professional players, but I have achieved playing football and 
music in the same stadium myself!" chirrups Neil. "In May 2003 I played in the 
Southend & District Junior Sunday League Cup final (Under-15s) at Southend 
United's Roots Hall. A few years later I returned to the stadium to play guitar 
in the live band during a Renewal of Promise service for the local Scout 
districts."

KNOWLEDGE ARCHIVE

"The banter took an interesting turn in the pub when one of my mates claimed 
that a player-manager at Carlisle once placed himself on the transfer list, 
then sold himself to another club. Can this possibly be true?" inquired Stephen 
Guilfoyle back in 2006.

While we would never advocate believing everything you hear down at your 
local, Stephen, on this occasion the banter is spot-on. Ivan Broadis, born in 
Poplar, east London, in 1922, is the man at the centre of this tale, although, 
as John Briggs notes, "the Football League read his signature incorrectly and 
he was registered as Ivor, by which name he has been recognised ever since." 
Ivor's early playing career took in amateur appearances for Finchley, 
Northfleet, Finchley again, Tottenham and Millwall, before he became the 
youngest player-manager ever at Carlisle United – in 1946 – at the tender age 
of 23.

"Although his time as manager of the club could be regarded as being average, 
Broadis laid the foundations for the future, and when he left in January 1949 
(replaced by one Bill Shankly), United were in a far healthier state than when 
he had taken over," explains an article on the official club website. "Still 
registered as a player, he sold himself to Sunderland for £18,000 claiming that 
it was in the best interests of the club that he leave, providing Carlisle with 
suitable financial reimbursement for the transfer. The fans were not convinced, 
but accepted his move out of respect for the money it produced. Ivor is 
officially the first ever manager to transfer himself to another club."

Broadis's playing career took him on to Manchester City, Newcastle United, 
back to Carlisle and finally Queen of the South, while he also accrued 14 caps 
for England and played in the 1954 World Cup finals. He hung up his boots in 
1962, choosing to take up a career in journalism, reporting for the Carlisle 
Evening News and Star, and even for the Observer. And, according to Chris 
Little, "he can still be found swearing at bad copytakers at about 5.30pm on 
most Saturday afternoons in the Brunton Park press box."

For thousands more questions and answers take a trip through the K'nowledge 
archive <https://www.theguardian.com/football/series/theknowledge>.

Can you help?

"My wedding is booked at the London Wetland Centre at the end of May (a week 
after the season finishes, naturally), and all four of the Craven Cottage 
floodlights are clearly visible from the main ornithology viewing observatory, 
which is also the room where the ceremony will take place," writes Mark Haines. 
"In fact, that was a significant reason for choosing this location. Where else, 
other than in the stadium itself, is it possible to exchange wedding vows in 
full view of a ground?"

"Pat Rice has been Arsène Wenger's assistant at Arsenal since he arrived in 
1996 meaning he is now in his 15th season in this position," writes Martin 
Whelan. "Is he the longest-serving assistant manager in football?"

"It has become the norm for players to look suitably solemn after scoring 
against their former club or clubs they support," states Lecce fan Gordon 
Blackstock. "But has anyone taken it to the levels of Fabrizio Miccoli, the 
Maradona of the south of Italy? The pint-sized poacher was so upset at scoring 
against his boyhood favourites, Lecce, while playing for Palermo last week, 
that he immediately burst into tears. This continued in to the dressing rooms 
at half-time where coach Delio Rossi had no choice but to hook the emotional
Azzuri international, claiming he was 'inconsolable'. Is this the most extreme 
reaction a player has had after scoring against their beloved?"

"I was watching the Swansea v Cardiff game at the weekend and noticed that Jay 
Emmanuel-Thomas's shirt name has been abbreviated to E-Thomas," writes Philip 
Genochio. "Ruling out laziness and a lack of letters in the club's printing 
room, I can only think his name was shortened for reasons of space. With the 
hyphen his surname stretches to 15 characters – surely a name that long's been 
printed on a shirt before? What's the longest player's name ever printed on the 
back of a shirt? Can anyone surpass Vennegoor of Hesselink?"

"I once heard a story (possibly via the Knowledge) of a prolific player who 
had never missed a penalty in a long career," begins Alan Belton. "In the 
twilight of said career he was playing a friendly abroad when his team were 
awarded a penalty. The keeper asked this mythical player if he could be the 
only man ever to save a penalty from him thus entering football folklore, the 
player agreed and said he'd stick it to the keeper's right. The player stepped 
up, the keeper dived to the pre-agreed side and the player slotted it in the 
other way. After the game the keeper asked why he didn't stick to the agreement 
and player responded: 'Why do you think I've never missed?' Is this a true 
story or utter rubbish? And can anyone shed some light on the specifics?"

Send your questions and answers to knowledge@theguardian.com 
<mailto:knowledge@theguardian.com>
 