
Every great American film-maker struggles to create their own peculiar vision, 
just as the studio men struggle to stop them doing so. Yet few visions are 
quite so peculiar as Whit Stillman's, and few have seemed so marginal to the 
industry of which they are a part. It's hard to say how much impact his films 
have had; there have been, for reasons beyond his own control, too few of them. 
He has succeeded in getting four films made: a comic trilogy set in the 1980s,
Metropolitan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/91426/metropolitan> (1990),
Barcelona (1994) and The Last Days of Disco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/34487/last-days-of-disco> (1998), and 
now the about-to-be released "campus comedy"Damsels in Distress. On one level 
it may seem a rather meagre body of work. However, for some, myself included, 
they are four of the very best American films made in the past 25 years.

The presence of many of the same actors in each of the films adds to the sense 
that we are entering a very particular world. Each film in the trilogy explores 
some central concept: ifMetropolitan is about virtue, then Barcelona is about 
beauty, andThe Last Days of Disco about social life as a kind of performance. 
It's harder to say whatDamsels in Distress is about, it being so odd and so 
various. In it, some of the characters are taking a class on "Dandy Literature" 
– Peacock, Pater, Wilde, Firbank and Waugh. Like these writers, Stillman does 
one thing and does it supremely well. He makes Whit Stillman films. It's 
impossible to imagine him making some other kind of work – a historical romance 
on the House of Saxe-Coburg for example, or an episode ofHomicide: Life on the 
Street.

For all their muted sense of doom, his films play out in a better world. 
Stillman's preference is for 30s cinema; for him the Hollywood golden age ended 
in 1942. His favourite film used to beKind Hearts and Coronets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36180/kind-hearts-and-coronets>; now 
it'sThe Gay Divorcee. You can see the influence of these films in his own work, 
a preference for the sophisticated, for the artificial Eden of Wodehousian 
musical comedy. The Astaire musicals inhabit an art deco universe, a place of 
artifice. Those directed by George Stevens may venture outside, but when they 
do so the world they find looks as charmed as a garden painted by Watteau. 
Stillman's movies have something of the same spirit, but take place on 
location, not in the studio but on the street. Yet still the films' locales 
present a world as we'd love it to be. His characters might long for plain, 
even homely partners, but in fact everyone is gorgeous. InDamsels in Distress, 
even Frank, a supposedly unattractive doofus, resembles a young Bill Clinton. 
Sevenoaks University is awash with an autumnal lustre. Leaving a pre-Christmas 
party,Metropolitan's heroine remarks how the night-time Manhattan streets 
remind her ofWar and Peace; it's a romantic city, and the subway at the close of
The Last Days of Disco itself transforms into a disco, the travellers dancing 
with each other. Stillman captures disco's vacant shimmer, its beautiful 
melancholy, but he is also alert to the music's vibrancy, even, at that movie's 
end, asthe O'Jays' "Love Train"  <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SvsAqkOhI48>
plays, attaining a kind of joy.

For some, what compromises the Whitman idyll is that nearly all his people are 
prep-school-educated Ivy Leaguers. InMetropolitan, when the hero's divorced 
father moves without warning to Santa Fe, it shocks us, not just because he has 
so sneakily removed himself, but because it is hard to picture a town like 
Santa Fe co-existing with the world of the movie. In this film, at least, 
America has only one coast. These are movies by, for and about people who are 
no longer central to cinema, or, the films themselves argue, to life itself.

It is hard, even frightening, to imagine the contemporary British equivalents 
of Stillman's movies. The films would be about boarding-school survivors, 
trustafarians, sloane rangers, a milieu ignored by most native film-makers. 
Memories of the appalling Oxbridge filmPrivileged (1982) may arise, but are 
best repressed. Was there any British film that portrayed the "yuppie" 
sympathetically? In the past 25 years, a British drama would have to balance 
the picture by bringing in other classes as parallel or counterpoint, as in 
Mike Leigh, or retreat to the past like Merchant Ivory, or both, as inDowntown 
Abbey. The tone could neither be so fond nor so contemporary as Stillman 
manages, things would be sharper, more obviously satirical. It's Dickens versus 
Henry James.

Even in their American (and Spanish) context, Stillman's films include the 
sense that no one beyond their own clique will be endeared to their 
protagonists: in Barcelona they're scapegoated, in America they come across 
graffiti blazoning "yuppie scum", disco records are burned at a baseball game, 
the word "preppy" bears its taint of mild derision.

The trilogy's tone was in part formed by the abrasive screen persona of 
Whitman's lead actor, Chris Eigeman. But that abrasiveness is not Eigeman's 
alone; Stillman's people are earnest, indeed pompous, constantly "pissed" (in 
the American sense); in the early films, his people rarely smile. (It's 
interesting that the aggressive campus-editor Rick De Wolf, the nearest that
Damsels in Distress gets to such a character, is so marginal to the plot.) The 
films present parodies of the judgmental, and yet offer a softness, a capacity 
for tenderness that is rare in contemporary cinema. The first half-hour of 
Stillman's films are sometimes taken up with the thought: will we like these 
people? WithDamsels in Distress, at first we rather look down on Violet (the 
wonderful Greta Gerwig) and her companions – their equable, careful sympathy 
just looks a bitStepford Wives; some will continue to dislike them, others are 
won over. InThe Last Days of Disco, Charlotte (Kate Beckinsale) acts as a 
skilful saboteur of her prettier friend's ego ("You know, Alice, I'm not so 
much of a bitch as I might seem"). We enjoy despising her, but then the film 
finds not just her vulnerability, but her appeal; Stillman's films may honour 
virtue, but they're alive to the fact that people are loveable with, and even 
because of, their faults. With a couple of exceptions (the pony-tailed Rick Von 
Sloneker inMetropolitan, perhaps the pony-tailed Bernie in Last Days of Disco), 
no one in these films is loathsome.

Indeed, Stillman excludes evil and all truly dark passions. In Damsels in 
Distress, hearing of a potential suicide in progress, Violet and her cronies 
amble to the scene at a decorous trot. InMetropolitan, two preppy young men 
launch a raid to retrieve Audrey, the heroine they both love, who is lost, 
perhaps desperate, at sleazy Rick Von Sloneker's beach house; anything might be 
happening to her. The good guys' feckless quest plays as a cross betweenThe 
Searchers and a chivalric romance. Too maladapted to drive, they take a yellow 
cab out to the country. When I saw the film in a cinema back in 1990, somehow 
this inept chase enchanted all the audience in a spell of danger. The heroes 
burst into a scene of decadent abandon that looks very lame indeed: one of the 
two women lays on the floor reading a magazine with her bra unclasped; the 
portlier of the two villains plods about the room wearing a pair of knee-length 
khaki shorts; the apparently compromised heroine is covered up in a pink polo 
neck jumper, readingLouis Auchincloss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/louis-auchincloss>'s earnest 
novelThe Rector of Justin. It seems that Audrey didn't need rescuing after all, 
though she's glad to have an excuse to leave the house with her two incompetent 
knights errant.

In Barcelona, there is some attempt to draw in the larger world, showing 
anti-American terrorism: bombs explode, a man is killed, another is shot in the 
eye. This intrusion of the politically serious is one reason perhaps why, for 
all its merits, this is the least satisfying of all Stillman's films; the 
collision between his characters' idle perplexities and the cold war is just 
too abrupt. The moments jar, as if characters fromThe Battle of Algiers had 
strayed intoA Room with a View. In Damsels in Distress, suicide is a constant 
presence, and the film therefore draws in a potentially unbearable despair. 
Stillman treads a fine line here, and some viewers will feel that the film 
cannot accommodate such passions without perpetually hitting the wrong note. 
And yet to me at least, the film does succeed without condescension in 
responding to thoughts of suicide with comedy, acknowledging pain and 
vulnerability but answering them with intimations of joy.

His are courteous comedies; no one is mocked in his films. In Damsels in 
Distress, when we first come upon the apparent knucklehead, Thor, who does not 
know the names of the colours, we may wonder if we're being invited to laugh at 
his stupidity. When we next hear of him, his ignorance is touchingly, and 
satirically explained: his parents were so hooked on the idea that precocity is 
a form of social triumph that they put him in school before he was ready, 
making him miss out on the last year of nursery, when his peers learned the 
colours. When Thor finally gets it, and ecstatically points out the colours in 
the rainbow, the laugh is, I think, on us. After all, when were we last 
delighted at colour itself?

Yet for all his taste for the frivolous, Stillman's worlds are not Edens – 
choices must be made, and they matter. He doesn't advocate goodness; he has 
fallen for it.Metropolitan's heroine is akin to Jane Austen's Fanny Price: 
unregarded but virtuous, but by the end of the film everyone is in love with 
her. His people are often instinctive puritans, people edging through the 
sexual revolution. InBarcelona, Ted Boynton (Taylor Nichols) reads the Bible in 
secret, sometimes while dancing to Glenn Miller. When his cousin comes back 
unexpectedly and surprises him at it ("What is this? Some strange Glenn 
Miller-based religious ceremony?"), the oddity is apparent, and yet the moment 
is a key to all Stillman's films, blending as it does spiritual engagement, 
moral consciousness, nostalgia and a cheerful embrace of human ludicrousness. 
The films celebrate modern life, the bright possibilities of parties or 
nightclubs; yet their heroes' moral lives seem to belong to some bypassed 
tradition. They would adhere to absolutes that everyone else around them 
perceives as relative.

Stillman's films favour the out-moded and antique. His characters are 
adherents of exploded idealisms, followers of forgotten heroes; one character 
is a Fourierist, another a Cathar. At least in this there's a recognition that 
the past once existed: if Austen's world looks silly to us, it's nothing to how 
silly we would look to her. In Stillman's films things teeter on the edge of 
ending.Metropolitan portrays what its participants claim will be "the last real 
deb season"; at a hotel function someone declares how they love the St Regis. 
"They'll probably knock it down soon," their companion replies. We're inside 
the self-dramatising melancholy of youth. One of his heroes has Spengler'sThe 
Decline of the West for his bedtime reading; civilisation decays, the "preppy" 
(or "Urban Haute Bourgeois") class meets its doom, and yet somehow the talk 
goes on.

Stillman's people are endlessly reflective, analysing themselves, each other, 
life, their class, their society; they have theories on everything from suicide 
to soap; relationships are conducted according to formulas; pop songs are 
looked to for romantic advice. InDamsels in Distress, Violet is something of a 
female Samuel Johnson (Stillman is known to be a fan), sharing his decided 
opinions, his moral questioning, even his neurotic compulsive habits. She 
declares her faith in clichés and hackneyed expressions, seeing these as 
repositories of the wisdom of the ages. It's a paradox that unsettles cliché 
itself, its conservatism in fact disquieting the stale response. There are many 
similar contrarian moments in the films, from the character who in watchingThe 
Graduate prefers Carl Smith, the blond make-out king jilted at the altar, to 
the seedy stalker, Dustin Hoffman, or another who finds Scottie the true loyal 
hero ofThe Lady and the Tramp, as opposed to the philandering Sinatra-figure 
that's Tramp. This inversion of expectations even extends to his characters' 
religious sympathies. At a screening ofDamsels in Distress at the Rotterdam 
Film Festival, Violet's declaration that "We're all Christians, or 
Judaeo-Christians" evoked a collective gasp of horror – the only one I heard at 
a festival that prided itself on displaying the taboo-breaking.

The characters stand in bored hostility to the 60s. In The Last Days of Disco, 
Charlotte affirms: "Before disco this country really was a dancing wasteland. 
You know the Woodstock generation of the 1960s, that were so full of themselves 
and conceited? None of those people could dance." (Having seenWoodstock, I 
think the evidence for this comment may be there.) Yet, of course, they have 
more in common with the Woodstock generation than they'd like to think. Both 
endeavour to form community, in Stillman's case the "Sally Fowler Rat Pack", 
the world of the nightclub, the life of a sub-Ivy League university. Such small 
societies are both homogeneous and yet images of human variety, a sense of 
plenitude and difference that enters into the form of the films themselves. 
What other films could take in the sexual practices of Cathars, the therapeutic 
benefits of tap-dancing, the pleasures of Ronald Firbank, the uplifting 
properties of soap, and make it all somehow, more or less, cohere? InDamsels in 
Distress, Violet and Lily – linked by their floral names – suggest two 
contrasting ways of being: bright-eyed eccentricity versus the normally cool. 
Neither is preferable to the other. Having so far watched the film twice, I 
found myself preferring Lily the first time around, and siding with Violet on 
the second viewing.

Yet in plot terms, these little worlds cannot hold. Both Metropolitan and The 
Last Days of Disco end in separation, the disintegration of a social oasis. 
Above all, friendships prove transient; a circle forms, but then dissolves. For 
all Stillman's preference for the group over the couple, it's perhaps couples 
who are shown making the most permanent connections. The mood lapses into 
melancholy, though these movies close with affirmation.

Everything in Stillman ascends to sweetness. Twice his films end with dancing. 
InMetropolitan, someone is invited to dance the "Cha-cha-cha", and retorts that 
the dance is ridiculous. "It's no more ridiculous than life itself," her suitor 
replies. Stillman is a connoisseur of bad dancing – the disco moves in his 
first three films look refreshingly amateur. Yet partly because of their 
unskilled enthusiasm, the dances at the ends of his films also present a 
closing image of communal togetherness, the affirmation of harmony. Let's hope 
we do not have to wait 14 years more for another such vision.

• Damsels in Distress opens on 27 April.
 