
Jeremy Hunt’s attempt to distract attention from the growing problems across 
the health and care system betray a poor understanding ofNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> management.


In his speech to the NHS Providers’ conference 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/nhs-providers-annual-conference-keynote-speech>
 this week, Hunt asked whether the NHS “made a historic mistake in the 1980s by 
deliberately creating a manager class who were not clinicians”.

At its worst, NHS management is a reputational meat grinder

To encourage more clinicians into management, Hunt promised to review whether 
doctors and nurses are put off by the fear of sanctions from their professional 
regulators if things go wrong, and to look at whether doctors should be able to 
choose clinical leadership as a specialism. These would be welcome changes, but 
they would do nothing to address the fundamental reasons why so few clinicians 
go into management.

At its worst, NHS management is a reputational meat grinder. A combination of 
extreme financial stress, dysfunctional local systems and a tough inspection 
regime that can come to simplistic judgments means that a doctor or nurse who 
had been secure in their clinical role and spent perhaps three decades building 
their good name can see it pulled down in a matter of months.

No ministerial warm words will overcome the impression made when senior 
clinicians see respected peers such as Mark Newbold at Heart of England 
foundation trust or Keith McNeil at Addenbrooke’s quitting as chief executives. 
Managers, like clinicians, accept accountability as integral to their role. But 
when an institution is perceived to be in difficulty, treatment of the 
leadership often amounts to public humiliation.

Moving into management almost inevitably means clinical skills and knowledge 
will atrophy. While a handful of people have managed to combine the two roles, 
the likelihood is that you quickly lose track of the latest developments in 
your specialism and your technical expertise declines. Within months, the 
benefit of years of experience and practice slip away.

NHS leadership in crisis as running hospitals becomes near-impossible | Denis 
Campbell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/07/nhs-leadership-in-crisis-as-running-hospitals-becomes-near-impossible>
Hunt said he will look at this issue, but no policy sleight of hand can change 
the fact that going into management means slipping down the pecking order of 
the profession that you love.

Clinicians are problem solvers. Applying judgment built on foundations of 
evidence and experience, the job satisfaction comes from taking an action that 
benefits the patient. That inherent reward of making a difference is enough to 
trump all the stresses and difficulties and brings staff back day after day.

Managers have the stresses and difficulties, but too often the job 
satisfaction is elusive. The sales pitch to clinicians is that you can go from 
benefiting an individual patient, ward or department to improving an entire 
organisation. But with unstable finances, growing demand and intense central 
scrutiny, management often seems characterised by a lot of responsibility and 
too little power. For many clinicians, it is difficult to see how a management 
role would provide more job satisfaction.

There is still work to do in ridding the NHS of the “us and them” attitude to 
managers of too many clinicians. Around the country there are a growing number 
of imaginative schemes to help junior clinicians and managers understand each 
other’s worlds and develop mutual respect for the contribution that each makes 
to patient care. The massive expansion of leadership training for clinicians in 
recent years is similarly important in clearing out antiquated perceptions of 
management.

In NHS management being fired means you continue working for more money
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2016/nov/14/nhs-management-fired-means-continue-working-more-money>
But nothing will encourage clinicians to take up management roles more than a 
belief that the job is doable, and that they will not be scapegoated for 
failing to solve problems over which they have little control.

The gradual shift towards managing local health services as systems rather 
than organisations is a crucial step in achieving this. If government and the 
central bodies want to see more clinicians in management, they need a 
determined effort to clear the obstacles out of the way so managers can spend 
more time leading improvement built around the needs of patients, and less time 
managing bureaucracy and crises.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 