
On Saturday night Amir Khan steps into the ring in Las Vegas to face Canelo 
Alvarez <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/canelo-alvarez> in the biggest fight 
of the year to date. A victory, dare we imagine it, would add his name to the 
annals of boxing history and crown him boxing royalty – and yet Khan still 
doesn’t get his due.

To have a gifted and remarkable champion so undervalued in Britain is a blot 
on the game. A career in the glare of a boxing community and media that 
doggedly question his abilities attack his worth as a top boxer. This is a 
Pakistani man from a working-class northern town who has twice captured world 
titles, beaten some of the best of his era and whose inability to admit defeat 
has hooked spectators for over a decade.

Amir Khan v Canelo Álvarez: in the end it all boils down to weight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/06/amir-khan-saul-canelo-alvarez-weight-preview>
In her magnum opus on boxing Joyce Carol Oates wrote about the super-human 
effort required to be a boxer: “The punishment – to the body, the brain, the 
spirit – that a man must endure … is inconceivable to the rest of us.” Amir’s 
perseverance and physical discipline at his level is exemplary.

The insults come, though, and a one that arrives like clockwork is the 
prevalence of a glass jaw. Its sting is twofold; the speed and technical skill 
that make him sharp in the ring is overlooked. And, ever unanswerable, at every 
match he has to face down his critics anew.

They did get to him. He felt he had to answer doubters after a historic win 
with Marcos Maidana, facing punches with a heart that at the end delivered two 
fractured hands and a quip: “I’ve proved tonight I’ve got a chin.”

He’s also weathered unnecessary personal comments, too. He’s apologised just 
for having fun with his success – forced to remove an innocent photograph in a 
club of him clutching fake money. He’s distanced himself from his spending on 
fast cars and watches in which he found so much pleasure. The more humble side 
of his character – the humanitarian work, investment in local kids, loyalty to 
his family – is a bit lost.

Well, Brits really bristle at showy over-confidence. You only have to look at 
how Lewis Hamilton, the three-times F1 world champion of the diamond studs and 
pop-star ex-girlfriends, is branded ‘unlikeable’ or ‘unloveable’ by the press. 
The elephant in the room is that the disparaging comments faced by both sports 
stars are skewed by issues of race.

You can wade through the negativity and racist commentary posted on boxing 
websites, forums and press. Spectators boo and direct racial abuse from stands 
beyond the ring, the boxer’s twitter feed is full of racial abuse. Why? His 
self-promotion? It reveals the febrile, charged environment that Khan has faced 
in the UK. The abuse leveled at him goes way beyond what should be reasonable 
in sports rivalry.

Amir Khan, the road to Vegas – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/may/07/amir-khan-the-road-to-vegas-in-pictures>
So when America embraces him it’s great to watch. At the tail end of his 
career he’s found more personal satisfaction here in the US, where he receives 
more respect and admiration than at home. The country has rewarded his 
unwavering search for the best fights in the world and now, finally, he’s top 
dog – his face lit up on electronic billboards across the Las Vegas Strip.

In the face of his detractors, Amir Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amirkhan> behaves like a proper Brit – with 
a shrug of the shoulders and mind to move on. He beams with pride representing 
his country. This love is sewn into his shorts, it’s encrusted in diamonds on 
his fight kit and in the energy he uses to wave the British flag.

And at the heart of what makes Amir Khan the most watchable, entertaining and 
enthralling boxers in the world today is an unbreakable spirit and courage. 
American promoters want him because they know he will stake everything. It’s 
why millions of viewers will pay to watch him on Saturday night. His ambition 
burns as brightly now, a mature boxer of 29, as it did in those youthful early 
days in Athens.

If he wins against Canelo he’ll rightly be swamped with accolades and be 
recognised as a British hero. Even if he loses, his legacy and commitment to 
British boxing is still one the country can be proud of.
 