
Why do you think there are so few women working in the tech industry? If 
you’re a man reading this column you’re likely to have a very different opinion 
than if you’re a woman.

First Round, a venture capital firm, has released its annual report 
<http://stateofstartups.firstround.com/2016/> on the state of startups in the 
US. It interviewed more than 700 founders, 83% of whom were male, and found 
that diversity is still huge problem within the technology sector. So great, in 
fact, that 61% of companies are either all male or mostly male and just 8% of 
companies are either all or mostly female. When First Round asked founders to 
explain this lack of diversity they found a very serious split between men and 
women.

Nearly 50% of men thought the main reason was too few women and minorities 
entering the tech sector. Only 23% of women agreed with them. The biggest 
reason for the lack of diversity in tech, in female founders’ eyes, was 
unconscious bias. Only 12% of male founders thought this was the main driver 
behind male and pale dominance.


Why did so few male founders think unconscious bias was to blame? There are 
probably lots of reasons but two of them have to be: a lack of understanding 
about what unconscious bias actually is; and a fear that if it really is the 
reason behind the lack of diversity in tech, then it might not be the women’s 
fault that there are so few of them – it might be the men’s.


I have yet to meet anyone who is comfortable with the idea that they might be 
unconsciously biased. We all want to believe the best of ourselves. With a few 
exceptions, I’ve yet to meet a successful tech founder who was an out-and-out 
misogynist or racist. Most of them are good people who want to hire the best 
people they possibly can to help them build their business. But none of them 
like the idea that their decision on who is the “best person for the job” might 
actually be deeply biased.


There’s also the fact that for a vast majority of people, the term 
“unconscious bias” is something they simply haven’t come across. If you’re 
young, you haven’t been through any particular management or people training, 
and you’ve never experienced it yourself, it’s entirely possibly that you might 
have no idea what influences your decision-making and why. Most founders just 
want to bring together the best people as quickly as possible. If you went to 
university with someone you think would be great for the job and they can start 
now and you know they’ll be a perfect culture fit, then how could hiring them 
be a bad decision?


But it’s exactly this sort of thought process that has led to an industry 
which now looks deeply elitist and doesn’t know how to fix the problem. What it 
really needs to do is take a deep breath, put it’s big boy trousers on, and 
accept that deep down tech founders, like the rest of us, hold their own 
unconscious biases. Unfortunately, that’s the easy part: the harder part is 
hearing what those biases are and acting to change your organisation’s culture 
so it doesn’t reflect them.


Hearing that you’re biased and the effect those biases have had on those 
around you can be hard, but it’s the most important thing a CEO can do for 
their business. So here is my tip for founders who really want to create a 
different technology industry: shut up. Stop talking and, instead, ask anyone 
who’s in a minority in your workforce what they’d like to see happen. Have an 
open attitude as you go into the conversation, don’t shut down their 
suggestions and, most importantly, listen.


Because here’s the thing that we need male founders, directors, board members 
and investors to get if we’re ever to have more diversity in the technology 
industry: this really isn’t about you. It’s not about whether you are a good 
person, a smart boss or an unbiased human, it’s about the people around you and 
how they experience the world you’ve created. It will be different to how you 
experience it. Accept that, and use it to build a business that is more 
versatile, more creative and, yes, more diverse.


Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 