
The Bank of England’s chief economist Andy Haldane has warned that the UK 
pension system is too complicated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/19/bank-of-englands-chief-economist-calls-for-more-simple-pension-system>
, admitting that even he finds it confusing.

“I consider myself moderately financially literate,” he said. “Yet I confess 
to not being able to make the remotest sense of pensions.”

At its most basic, a pension is a savings account you pay into and can only 
withdraw money from when you reach the age of 55. Which sounds simple. So why 
are pensions so confusing?

There are lots of rules about what you can and cannot do

In April 2015, the government introduced “pension freedoms” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/apr/04/pensions-revolution-avoid-tax-bombshell>
 which made the rules about what you can do when you retire a bit simpler. In 
theory, you can now access all your money as you wish, subject to tax on some 
of the withdrawals.

However, before you get that far there are rules on how much you can put in 
each year (£40,000 unless you are a high earner), how much you can invest in 
total (£1m) and what happens to your fund if you die (you can leave it to 
someone tax-free if you die before 75, but there is a tax bill after that). And 
different pension schemes have their own rules and charges.

Governments keep fiddling with them


The pensions system involves lots of money and lots of people, so successive 
governments have made changes to it. These are generally geared towards making 
the system fairer, encouraging people to save and closing unintended 
consequences of previous changes. The results though are layer upon layer of 
rules.

In 2006, the pensions industry was hoping to see an end to the confusion, with 
6 April that year supposed to bring“pensions simplification” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2006/apr/06/pensions.aday>. That day, 
eight sets of old rules were brought together and some old limits were 
scrapped. It did make some bits of the system easier – for example, anyone 
could now open a personal scheme alongside their work pension. But since then 
there have been more pensions acts, all bringing their own new rules and 
regulations. Only on Wednesday, we saw the announcement of another pensions 
bill in the Queen’s speech.

As well as complicating the rules, the fact that MPs keep changing the system 
could be putting off people from engaging with it – after all, what’s the point 
of learning how it works if it might change again next year.

There are lots of different types of pension

Roughly speaking, there are two types of pension: the state pension and those 
organised by either an individual or employer. But within both groups there 
different systems, and over your working life you could end up with several 
pensions run in different ways.

The state pension is based on your national insurance (NI) contributions. For 
anyone retiring before 6 April 2016, there are potentially two sets of payment 
– the basic state pension, currently worth up to £119.30 a week, and the second 
state pension, paid on top of the basic state one. Anyone retiring on or after 
6 April 2016 gets the new state pension – this is worth up to £155.65 a week. 
There is no additional state pension any more but, to complicate matters, 
people who have made enough NI contributions during their working life will 
qualify for an extra payment on top.

Beyond the state pension there are severaltypes of scheme. Workplace pensions 
are offered by employers, but can be run as either “defined benefit” or 
“defined contribution” schemes.Defined benefit schemes are usually final salary 
schemes, and how much you will be paid will depend on your earnings when you 
retire.Defined contribution schemes will set how much you need to pay in each 
month and your payout will depend on how the pension scheme’s investments 
perform. Your employer will contribute each month too, so a workplace pension 
is generally worth signing up to. Previously, employers could leave their 
workers to set up their own scheme, but under auto-enrolment they must all 
offer a scheme and make payments into it.

Personal pensions are set up by individuals – often freelancers or contracters 
who don’t have access to a workplace scheme. They choose their own investments 
and make payments into their account each month or year.


The government has also introduced the Lifetime Isa, which everyone insists is 
categorically not a pension but, as it offers people a way to save until 
retirement, it is likely to be considered as an alternative for some savers.

They involve tax

To encourage people to save the government offers tax relief on money put into 
pensions. If you are a basic rate taxpayer it is worth 20%, if you pay the 
higher rate it is worth 40% and at the top rate it is worth 45%. This means 
that to put £100 into your pension will only cost you £80 if you are a 
basicrate payer and £55 at the top rate.

If you are paying into a workplace pension your employer will take your 
contributions from your pay before deducting tax, but if you are paying into a 
personal scheme the provider will only reclaim 20% – if you are a higher rate 
or top rate taxpayer you need to reclaim the difference via your tax return.

If you are a non-taxpayer and paying into a pension you get 20% tax relief on 
the first £2,880 each tax year.

No one knows who to trust for advice and information

After mis-selling scandals around pensions and other financial products many 
people are sceptical about taking advice on what to do with their money. The
Pensions Advisory Service <http://www.pensionsadvisoryservice.org.uk/> has lots 
of resources and a phone line if you have questions – it doesn’t sell pensions 
so you won’t be put under pressure to sign up for anything.
 