
Ai Aoyama is a sex and relationship counsellor who works out of her narrow 
three-storey home on a Tokyo back street. Her first name means "love" in 
Japanese, and is a keepsake from her earlier days as a professional dominatrix. 
Back then, about 15 years ago, she was Queen Ai, or Queen Love, and she did 
"all the usual things" like tying people up and dripping hot wax on their 
nipples. Her work today, she says, is far more challenging. Aoyama, 52, is 
trying to cure what Japan's media callssekkusu shinai shokogun, or "celibacy 
syndrome".

Japan's under-40s appear to be losing interest in conventional relationships. 
Millions aren't even dating, and increasing numbers can't be bothered with sex. 
For their government, "celibacy syndrome" is part of a looming national 
catastrophe. Japan already has one of the world's lowest birth rates.Its 
population of 126 million 
<http://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2013/04/17/national/japans-population-falls-by-record-level/#.UleNNRY_XzY>
, which has been shrinking for the past decade, is projected to plunge afurther 
one-third by 2060 
<http://www.japantimes.co.jp/opinion/2013/04/17/editorials/japans-depopulation-time-bomb/#.Ule5mhY_XzY>
. Aoyama believes the country is experiencing "a flight from human intimacy" – 
and it's partly the government's fault.

The sign outside her building says "Clinic". She greets me in yoga pants and 
fluffy animal slippers, cradling a Pekingese dog whom she introduces as Marilyn 
Monroe. In her business pamphlet, she offers up the gloriously random 
confidence that she visited North Korea in the 1990s and squeezed the testicles 
of a top army general. It doesn't say whether she was invited there 
specifically for that purpose, but the message to her clients is clear: she 
doesn't judge.

Inside, she takes me upstairs to her "relaxation room" – a bedroom with no 
furniture except a double futon. "It will be quiet in here," she says. Aoyama's 
first task with most of her clients is encouraging them "to stop apologising 
for their own physical existence".

The number of single people has reached a record high. A survey in 2011 found 
that61% of unmarried men and 49% of women aged 18-34 
<http://www.ipss.go.jp/site-ad/index_english/Survey-e.asp> were not in any kind 
of romantic relationship, a rise of almost 10% from five years earlier.Another 
study found that a third of people under 30 
<http://www.japancrush.com/2013/stories/30-of-single-japanese-men-have-never-dated-a-woman.html>
 had never dated at all. (There are no figures for same-sex relationships.) 
Although there has long been a pragmatic separation of love and sex in Japan – 
a country mostly free of religious morals – sex fares no better. A survey 
earlier this year by theJapan Family Planning Association 
<http://www.jfpa.or.jp> (JFPA) found that 45% of women aged 16-24 "were not 
interested in or despised sexual contact". More than a quarter of men felt the 
same way.
 Learning to love: sex counsellor Ai Aoyama, with one of her clients and her 
dog Marilyn. Photograph: Eric Rechsteiner/Panos Picture 
Many people who seek her out, says Aoyama, are deeply confused. "Some want a 
partner, some prefer being single, but few relate to normal love and marriage." 
However, the pressure to conform to Japan's anachronistic family model of 
salaryman husband and stay-at-home wife remains. "People don't know where to 
turn. They're coming to me because they think that, by wanting something 
different, there's something wrong with them."

Official alarmism doesn't help. Fewer babies were born here in 2012 
<http://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2013/06/06/national/japans-fertility-rate-logs-16-year-high-hitting-1-41/#.UledIxY_Xzy>
 than any year on record. (This was also the year, as the number of elderly 
people shoots up, that adult incontinence pants outsold baby nappies in Japan 
for the first time.) Kunio Kitamura, head of the JFPA, claims the demographic 
crisis is so serious that Japan "might eventually perish into extinction".

Japan's under-40s won't go forth and multiply out of duty, as postwar 
generations did. The country is undergoing major social transition after 20 
years of economic stagnation. It is also battling against the effects on its 
already nuclear-destruction-scarred psyche of 2011's earthquake, tsunami and 
radioactive meltdown. There is no going back. "Both men and women say to me 
they don't see the point of love. They don't believe it can lead anywhere," 
says Aoyama. "Relationships have become too hard."

Marriage has become a minefield of unattractive choices. Japanese men have 
become less career-driven, and less solvent, as lifetime job security has 
waned. Japanese women have become more independent and ambitious. Yet 
conservative attitudes in the home and workplace persist. Japan's punishing 
corporate world makes it almost impossible for women to combine a career and 
family, while children are unaffordable unless both parents work. Cohabiting or 
unmarried parenthood is still unusual, dogged by bureaucratic disapproval.

Aoyama says the sexes, especially in Japan's giant cities, are "spiralling 
away from each other". Lacking long-term shared goals, many are turning to what 
she terms "Pot Noodle love" – easy or instant gratification, in the form of 
casual sex, short-term trysts and the usual technological suspects: online 
porn, virtual-reality "girlfriends", anime cartoons. Or else they're opting out 
altogether and replacing love and sex with other urban pastimes.

Some of Aoyama's clients are among the small minority who have taken social 
withdrawal to a pathological extreme. They are recoveringhikikomori ("shut-ins" 
or recluses) taking the first steps to rejoining the outside world,otaku 
(geeks), and long-termparasaito shingurus (parasite singles) who have reached 
their mid-30s without managing to move out of home. (Of the estimated 13 
million unmarried people in Japan who currently livewith their parents, around 
three million are over the age of 35 
<http://japandailypress.com/over-3-million-parasite-singles-in-japan-over-35-still-living-with-parents-031659/>
.) "A few people can't relate to the opposite sex physically or in any other 
way. They flinch if I touch them," she says. "Most are men, but I'm starting to 
see more women."
 No sex in the city: (from left) friends Emi Kuwahata, 23, and Eri Asada, 22, 
shopping in Tokyo. Photograph: Eric Rechsteiner/Panos Pictures 
Aoyama cites one man in his early 30s, a virgin, who can't get sexually 
aroused unless he watches female robots on a game similar to Power Rangers. "I 
use therapies, such as yoga and hypnosis, to relax him and help him to 
understand the way that real human bodies work." Sometimes, for an extra fee, 
she gets naked with her male clients – "strictly no intercourse" – to 
physically guide them around the female form. Keen to see her nation thrive, 
she likens her role in these cases to that of theEdo period 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edo_period> courtesans, or oiran 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oiran>, who used to initiate samurai sons into 
the art of erotic pleasure.

Aversion to marriage and intimacy in modern life is not unique to Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>. Nor is growing preoccupation with 
digital technology. But what endless Japanese committees have failed to grasp 
when they stew over the country's procreation-shy youth is that, thanks to 
official shortsightedness, the decision to stay single often makes perfect 
sense. This is true for both sexes, but it's especially true for women. 
"Marriage is a woman's grave," goes an old Japanese saying that refers to wives 
being ignored in favour of mistresses. For Japanese women today, marriage is 
the grave of their hard-won careers.

I meet Eri Tomita, 32, over Saturday morning coffee in the smart Tokyo 
district of Ebisu. Tomita has a job she loves in the human resources department 
of a French-owned bank. A fluent French speaker with two university degrees, 
she avoids romantic attachments so she can focus on work. "A boyfriend proposed 
to me three years ago. I turned him down when I realised I cared more about my 
job. After that, I lost interest in dating. It became awkward when the question 
of the future came up."

Tomita says a woman's chances of promotion in Japan stop dead as soon as she 
marries. "The bosses assume you will get pregnant." Once a woman does have a 
child, she adds, the long, inflexible hours become unmanageable. "You have to 
resign. You end up being a housewife with no independent income. It's not an 
option for women like me."

Around 70% of Japanese women <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-21880124> 
leave their jobs after their first child. TheWorld Economic Forum 
<http://www.weforum.org/> consistently ranks Japan as one of the world's worst 
nations for gender equality at work 
<http://www.weforum.org/content/closing-gender-gap-japan>. Social attitudes 
don't help. Married working women are sometimes demonised asoniyome, or "devil 
wives". In a telling Japanese ballet production of Bizet'sCarmen a few years 
ago, Carmen was portrayed as a career woman who stole company secrets to get 
ahead and then framed her lowly security-guard lover José. Her end was not 
pretty.

Prime minister Shinzo Abe recently trumpeted long-overdue plans to increase 
female 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-05-26/sexism-stands-in-way-of-abenomics-saving-japan.html>
economic participation by improving conditions and daycare, but Tomita says 
things would have to improve "dramatically" to compel her to become a working 
wife and mother. "I have a great life. I go out with my girl friends – career 
women like me – to French and Italian restaurants. I buy stylish clothes and go 
on nice holidays. I love my independence."

Tomita sometimes has one-night stands with men she meets in bars, but she says 
sex is not a priority, either. "I often get asked out by married men in the 
office who want an affair. They assume I'm desperate because I'm single." She 
grimaces, then shrugs. "Mendokusai."

Mendokusai translates loosely as "Too troublesome" or "I can't be bothered". 
It's the word I hear both sexes use most often when they talk about their 
relationship phobia. Romantic commitment seems to represent burden and 
drudgery, from the exorbitant costs of buying property in Japan to the 
uncertain expectations of a spouse and in-laws. And the centuries-old belief 
that the purpose of marriage is to produce children endures.Japan's Institute 
of Population and Social Security 
<http://www.ipss.go.jp/site-ad/index_english/Survey-e.asp> reports an 
astonishing 90% of young women believe that staying single is "preferable to 
what they imagine marriage to be like".

The sense of crushing obligation affects men just as much. Satoru Kishino, 31, 
belongs to a large tribe of men under 40 who are engaging in a kind of passive 
rebellion against traditional Japanese masculinity. Amid the recession and 
unsteady wages, men like Kishino feel that the pressure on them to be 
breadwinning economic warriors for a wife and family is unrealistic. They are 
rejecting the pursuit of both career and romantic success.

"It's too troublesome," says Kishino, when I ask why he's not interested in 
having a girlfriend. "I don't earn a huge salary to go on dates and I don't 
want the responsibility of a woman hoping it might lead to marriage." Japan's 
media, which has a name for every social kink, refers to men like Kishino as 
"herbivores" orsoshoku danshi (literally, "grass-eating men"). Kishino says he 
doesn't mind the label because it's become so commonplace. He defines it as "a 
heterosexual man for whom relationships and sex are unimportant".

The phenomenon emerged a few years ago with the airing of a Japanese 
manga-turned-TV show. The lead character inOtomen ("Girly Men") was a tall 
martial arts champion, the king of tough-guy cool. Secretly, he loved baking 
cakes, collecting "pink sparkly things" and knitting clothes for his stuffed 
animals. To the tooth-sucking horror of Japan's corporate elders, the show 
struck a powerful chord with the generation they spawned.
 ‘I find women attractive but I’ve learned to live without sex. Emotional 
entanglements are too complicated’: Satoru Kishino, 31. Photograph: Eric 
Rechsteiner/Panos Pictures 
Kishino, who works at a fashion accessories company as a designer and manager, 
doesn't knit. But he does like cooking and cycling, and platonic friendships. 
"I find some of my female friends attractive but I've learned to live without 
sex. Emotional entanglements are too complicated," he says. "I can't be 
bothered."

Romantic apathy aside, Kishino, like Tomita, says he enjoys his active single 
life. Ironically, the salaryman system that produced such segregated marital 
roles – wives inside the home, husbands at work for 20 hours a day – also 
created an ideal environment for solo living. Japan's cities are full of 
conveniences made for one, from stand-up noodle bars to capsule hotels to the 
ubiquitouskonbini (convenience stores), with their shelves of individually 
wrapped rice balls and disposable underwear. These things originally evolved 
for salarymen on the go, but there are now female-only cafés, hotel floors and 
even the odd apartment block. And Japan's cities are extraordinarily crime-free.

Some experts believe the flight from marriage is not merely a rejection of 
outdated norms and gender roles. It could be a long-term state of affairs. 
"Remaining single was once the ultimate personal failure," saysTomomi Yamaguchi 
<http://www.montana.edu/socanth/faculty.html>, a Japanese-born assistant 
professor of anthropology at Montana State University in America. "But more 
people are finding they prefer it." Being single by choice is becoming, she 
believes, "a new reality".

Is Japan providing a glimpse of all our futures? Many of the shifts there are 
occurring in other advanced nations, too. Across urban Asia, Europe and 
America, people are marrying later or not at all,birth rates are falling, 
single-occupant households are on the rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/mar/30/the-rise-of-solo-living>
and, in countries where economic recession is worst, young people are living at 
home. But demographerNicholas Eberstadt 
<http://www.aei.org/scholar/nicholas-eberstadt/> argues that a distinctive set 
of factors is accelerating these trends in Japan. These factors include the 
lack of a religious authority that ordains marriage and family, the country's 
precarious earthquake-prone ecology that engenders feelings of futility, and 
the high cost of living and raising children.

"Gradually but relentlessly, Japan is evolving into a type of society whose 
contours and workings have only been contemplated in science fiction,"Eberstadt 
 <http://www.wilsonquarterly.com/essays/japan-shrinks>wrote last year. With a 
vast army of older people and an ever-dwindling younger generation, Japan may 
become a "pioneer people" where individuals who never marry exist in 
significant numbers, he said.

Japan's 20-somethings are the age group to watch. Most are still too young to 
have concrete future plans, but projections for them are already laid out. 
According to the government's population institute, women in their early 20s 
today have a one-in-four chance of never marrying. Their chances of remaining 
childless are even higher: almost 40%.

They don't seem concerned. Emi Kuwahata, 23, and her friend, Eri Asada, 22, 
meet me in the shopping district of Shibuya. The café they choose is beneath an 
art gallery near the train station, wedged in an alley between pachinko pinball 
parlours and adult video shops. Kuwahata, a fashion graduate, is in a casual 
relationship with a man 13 years her senior. "We meet once a week to go 
clubbing," she says. "I don't have time for a regular boyfriend. I'm trying to 
become a fashion designer." Asada, who studied economics, has no interest in 
love. "I gave up dating three years ago. I don't miss boyfriends or sex. I 
don't even like holding hands."

Asada insists nothing happened to put her off physical contact. She just 
doesn't want a relationship and casual sex is not a good option, she says, 
because "girls can't have flings without being judged". Although Japan is 
sexually permissive, the current fantasy ideal for women under 25 is impossibly 
cute and virginal. Double standards abound.

In the Japan Family Planning Association's 2013 study on sex among young 
people, there was far more data on men than women. I asked the association's 
head, Kunio Kitamura, why. "Sexual drive comes from males," said the man who 
advises the government. "Females do not experience the same levels of desire."

Over iced tea served by skinny-jeaned boys with meticulously tousled hair, 
Asada and Kuwahata say they share the usual singleton passions of clothes, 
music and shopping, and have hectic social lives. But, smart phones in hand, 
they also admit they spend far more time communicating with their friends via 
online social networks than seeing them in the flesh. Asada adds she's spent 
"the past two years" obsessed with a virtual game that lets her act as 
a manager of a sweet shop.

Japanese-American author Roland Kelts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/roland-kelts>, who writes about Japan's 
youth, says it's inevitable that the future ofJapanese relationships will be 
largely technology driven <http://japanamerica.blogspot.com>. "Japan has 
developed incredibly sophisticated virtual worlds and online communication 
systems. Its smart phone apps are the world's most imaginative." Kelts says the 
need to escape into private, virtual worlds in Japan stems from the fact that 
it's an overcrowded nation with limited physical space. But he also believes 
the rest of the world is not far behind.

Getting back to basics, former dominatrix Ai Aoyama – Queen Love – is 
determined to educate her clients on the value of "skin-to-skin, 
heart-to-heart" intimacy. She accepts that technology will shape the future, 
but says society must ensure it doesn't take over. "It's not healthy that 
people are becoming so physically disconnected from each other," she says. "Sex 
with another person is a human need that produces feel-good hormones and helps 
people to function better in their daily lives."

Aoyama says she sees daily that people crave human warmth, even if they don't 
want the hassle of marriage or a long-term relationship. She berates the 
government for "making it hard for single people to live however they want" and 
for "whipping up fear about the falling birth rate". Whipping up fear in 
people, she says, doesn't help anyone. And that's from a woman who knows a bit 
about whipping.
 