
The departing threequarters Josh Charnley and Dan Sarginson kept their team on 
the Wembley trail as Wigan cruised to victory over Castleford in the last of 
the LadbrokesChallenge Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/challengecup> 
quarter-finals.

Sarginson, who is moving to the NRL next year, opened the scoring after five 
minutes while Charnley, who is switching codes with Sale at the end of the 
season, touched down twice before half-time to put the record 19-times Cup 
winners on their way to a comfortable victory.

Castleford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> never looked likely 
to repeat their 16-4 win over the Warriors in the 2014 quarter-final with the 
contest over by half-time as Wigan led 22-0, their other try coming from Sam 
Tomkins, his first in the Challenge Cup since the 2013 final at Wembley.

The Tigers, who made a late change with Greg Minikin drafted in for his first 
appearance for two months in place of the injured Jake Webster, once more had 
the prop forward Grant Millington filling in at stand-off, a ploy that paid off 
in their win over Salford in the last round but flopped this time.

Wigan, who defended resolutely throughout, never looked back after Ryan 
Sutton’s break created the position for Tomkins to put Sarginson over and Matty 
Smith kicked the first of his three goals.

The Warriors had some defending to do, with Sarginson stopping the dangerous 
Luke Dorn short of the line while Ben Crooks was held up over it, before 
Tomkins skipped past the flailing arms of Millington for his try.

Wigan survived a scare when Denny Solomona, Super League’s leading tryscorer, 
made a dive for the corner but was bundled into touch and they increased their 
lead with two tries from Charnley in the second quarter.

A midfield break from Taulima Tautai set up the first as Charnley caught the 
defenders napping at a play-the-ball while his second came courtesy of a long 
pass from George Williams.

Castleford’s last chance to get back into the game disappeared when Minikin 
broke through the Wigan line early in the second half but produced a poor final 
pass.

Wigan lost Sutton with a head knock and also appeared to lose their focus as 
the visitors took advantage of the lion’s share of possession to carve out a 
try for Luke Gale, who supported Junior Moors’ break and added the goal.

The Warriors rarely had sight of the Castleford line in the second half and 
their only score came in fortuitous fashion on 66 minutes when Dorn was 
deceived by a wicked bounce from Smith’s grubber kick and Dom Manfredi dived on 
the loose ball.

Manfredi appeared to miss the ball but the video referee, Robert Hicks, failed 
to find enough evidence to overrule Chris Campbell’s initial decision.

Castleford finished a well-beaten side but wrapped up the scoring in the final 
minute when Joel Monaghan flung the ball inside as he was being pushed into 
touch for Crooks to touch down and Gale landed the touchline conversion.
 