
The Super League play-offs have provided some dramatic matches in the 
competition’s two-decade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/29/warrington-grand-final-st-helens>
 history: but you will struggle to find a game which ranged from the sublime to 
the ridiculous quite like this one.

For 40 minutes it appeared nothing less than a formality that Wigan would 
reach the Grand Final for the fourth consecutive year – and as it turned out, 
Shaun Wane’s men eventually emerged victorious: but not before one last 
stirring response in vain from a Hull side who have truly come of age in 2016, 
even if they will not be at Old Trafford next Saturday.

Terry Campese: jobs on line in Hull KR and Salford Million Pound Game
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/terry-campese-hull-kr-salford-million-pound-game>
Trailing 14-0 at half-time, Hull fought back to take the lead courtesy of a 
remarkable passage of play when the video referee awarded a try to the FC wing 
Steve Michaels, after almost five minutes of deliberation. Michaels’ touch was 
so delicate that Wigan broke up the other end and dotted down via Oliver 
Gildart before Ben Thaler deemed Michaels had indeed scored.

But as sterling as the fightback was from Hull, it wasn’t enough to deny Wigan 
thanks to yet another first-class showing of their championship credentials. 
Battered, bruised and depleted due to injuries, better sides may have folded in 
the face of a commendable comeback from Hull: but not this Wigan side.

The reward for their never-say-die attitude is Old Trafford once again – and 
the chance to win theSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> title for the first time in 
three years. The last side they beat in the Grand Final? Next Saturday’s 
opponents, Warrington. “The players have got a will and a fight to win games 
that I’ve never known before,” said Wane. “It’s the best run of my coaching 
career that I’ve ever known.”

Two early tries for Lewis Tierney put Wigan into an 8-0 lead they thoroughly 
deserved, and when John Bateman scored a minute before half-time, it opened up 
a 14-0 lead which, on the basis of the first 40 minutes, felt like enough.

But even though Hull have shown on many occasions this year they are a 
second-half team, their response, even by their own standards, was 
extraordinary. Within six minutes they had their first try as the forward Josh 
Bowden charged over and Liam Watts followed suit four minutes later to reduce 
the gap to two.

A Matty Smith penalty appeared to calm Wigan’s nerves and make it 16-12, 
before the game’s dramatic moment. Tierney spilled when tracking back, Gildart 
collected and raced the length of the field but not before Michaels got the 
decisive touch, with Marc Sneyd’s touchline conversion putting Hull in front 
for the first time. Was the drama over? Far from it. Wigan, now in desperation 
mode as the game entered the final 10 minutes, kept the ball alive at will and 
finally got their reward when Sam Powell squeezed in under the posts, before 
Anthony Gelling secured victory in the dying moments with a fine individual 
finish.

Wigan Sarginson; Charnley, Gelling, Gildart, Tierney; Williams, Smith; Crosby, 
Powell, Nuuausala, Bateman, Farrell, Isa.Interchange Tautai, Sutton, Shorrocks, 
Bretherton.

Tries Tierney 2, Bateman, Powell, Gelling. Goals Smith 4.

Hull FC Shaul; Michaels, Fonua, Yeaman, Talanoa; Tuimavave, Sneyd; Taylor, 
Houghton, Watts, Pritchard, Minichiello, Washbrook.Interchange Green, Bowden, 
Hadley, Thompson.

Tries Bowden, Watts, Michaels. Goals Sneyd 3.

Referee R Hicks.
 