
To be a champion side requires many attributes – some of which Wigan have 
looked shorn of on occasions this year. But when it matters, you can always 
rely on Shaun Wane’s Warriors – a moniker they have lived up again. That is the 
thing about the newSuper League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> 
champions: they just do not know when they are beaten. Battered, bruised and 
injury-depleted all year – but once again they are the kings of British rugby 
league – this time against all the odds.

Warrington 6-12 Wigan: Super League Grand Final – as it happened!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/08/super-league-grand-final-warrington-wigan-live>
Even here, in a pulsating Grand Final between two of the game’s heavyweights, 
the right to be called champions looked beyond them at one stage. Wigan were 
toiling under the bright lights, errors aplenty creeping into their play as the 
hour mark and a telling moment approached.

Warrington <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warrington> looked as if they 
were finally about to punish Wigan and strike what would have been a telling 
blow when Ryan Atkins appeared to have scored, opening up a two-try lead and 
surely ending Warrington’s winless run at Old Trafford. A knock-on from Atkins, 
however, saved Wigan and within a minute they were level. Soon after they were 
ahead.

Wigan would not let a winning position slip when it mattered: just like so 
many times this season.

Conversely, it is more Grand Final heartbreak for Warrington after another 
desperate defeat on the game’s biggest stage. Of the three showpiece finals 
they have now lost here, this one will be the most frustrating. For large 
periods they appeared in control. They led at half-time on merit but could not 
find that decisive play to put Wigan away – and they were punished. The gamble 
on Chris Sandow, named on the bench for his first appearance since the 
Challenge Cup final, which Warrington also lost, backfired.

Wigan’s only points in the first half put them into an early 2-0 lead. After 
back-to-back penalties on the Warrington line, the Warriors opted for the 
measured approach via the boot of Matty Smith, but from there, it was 
Warrington who grew stronger as the half wore on.

Wigan were the brighter side in the opening 15 minutes but when they had a try 
ruled out for a forward pass that allowed Josh Charnley to touch down it 
stunted their momentum.

An error from the Warriors on their own line afforded Warrington a chance they 
would not squander. Declan Patton showed, dummied and darted over for the 
half’s only try, the Warrington-born half-back converting for a 6-2 lead.

The first 40 minutes was bruising, chaotic and, for the most part, breathless 
viewing. However, the nervous tension inside the stadium was palpable and it 
was transferring on to the pitch. Mistakes had plagued both sides on a night 
where conditions were perfect for fast, flowing play and as Wigan began to look 
increasingly sloppy they looked to have finally been put away.

Atkins appeared to touch down in the left corner – so much so that the 
referee, Robert Hicks, sent the decision upstairs to the video referee as a 
try. But the discovery of a knock-on from the centre in the act of scoring 
meant the decision was overturned and it soon became clear how crucial that was.

With 60 seconds Wigan sprung downfield and levelled. A wonderful break from 
Liam Farrell, awarded the Harry Sunderland Trophy as man of the match, pierced 
the Warrington defence and he had Oliver Gildart in support to score the 100th 
try in Grand Final history.

With Smith’s conversion going wide, it meant the game remained level at 6-6: 
but with momentum now on their side once again, it was not long before Wigan 
went ahead.

Dan Sarginson and Charnley, their two departing heroes, had experienced 
indifferent nights up until now, but when the full-back kicked through for the 
Sale-bound winger to touch down – just – in the corner, it completed a 
remarkable turnaround.

Smith would miss the conversion again, but with Warrington panicking and 
becoming increasingly desperate, he would not pass up the chance to extend the 
lead to six in the dying moments with another penalty.

Warrington had their chances late on, but they could not break down the Wigan 
defence. If ever there is a lesson on what it takes to be champions, this Wigan 
side – written off time and time again in 2016 – are the perfect example.
 