
The head of Super League is not convinced rugby league’s flagship competition 
needs someone to “do a Leicester” but is still delighted to see Widnes on top 
of the early season table. No one other than the big three of Wigan, Leeds and 
St Helens have lifted the Super League trophy since Bradford’s last heyday in 
2005, a decade during which only Warrington have broken the same clubs’ grip on 
theChallenge Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/challengecup>. So could 
2016 be the year when the engraver scribes a different name on the silver?

“The unpredictability of the season has been a great advert for Super League,” 
says Super League general managerBlake Solly <https://twitter.com/blakesolly>. 
“Everyone agrees that the results from Salford, Widnes and Hull, all starting 
the season in good form, is good for the competition. I’m not sure we need a 
Leicester but certainly the fact that Castleford and Hull KR reached the last 
two Challenge Cup finals and Warrington are resurgent is really healthy. It’s 
important the same clubs are not winning the trophies year after year. That’s 
the worst thing possible for the sport. We certainly look like we have a really 
unpredictable competition this year and that’s what we want. We need different 
finalists and ultimately 12 sustainable clubs in Super League producing elite 
talent and growing their number of people coming through the turnstiles. It’s a 
virtuous circle.”

The levelling that has seen several upsets and a host of thrillingly tight 
games in the first month of the season can be partly attributed to the salary 
cap, which the clubs, reports Solly, “show no desire to move” from the current 
figure just below £2m. That has allowed the smaller clubs to grow and “become 
sustainable” while the marquee player rule, brought in this season, should 
enable the big guns to splash out on a major star outside of the cap. So far, 
only Wigan, in re-signing Sam Tomkins, have done that, as far as we know.

Champions Leeds finally earn first Super League win while Widnes go top
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/04/leeds-huddersfield-widnes-wigan-st-helens-super-league-roundup>
“Everyone was really clear that they are not just going to rush out and get a 
marquee player for the sake of it,” says Solly, a softly spoken Australian. 
“The player needs to add value on and off the field. They say they probably 
will do it but they must believe they are not going to get value for money at 
the moment. It’s up to each club if they use it and whether they make it 
public.”

That suggests that, with contracts negotiated almost a year in advance, some 
clubs are probably in discussions about signing for 2017 the sort of major 
stars who bring thousands through the turnstiles, impress sponsors and sell 
hundreds of replica shirts. Only Salford, and Leigh in the Championship, appear 
to have had that approach so far and the Red Devils have now been charged with 
breaking the cap in 2014 and 2015. Can we expect other clubs to be accused of 
cheating the system?

“No, I think it’s a very much isolated situation,” says Solly. “It’s just a 
charge at the moment and Salford have the opportunity to respond. The clubs are 
really confident in the salary cap and are committed to it. The regime is a 
live salary cap: any signing has to be approved by the RFL’s salary cap 
manager. Then there’s the retrospective audit process. This reveals any 
allegations of breach and then players are interviewed. We’re confident in the 
system.”

Salford, who lost a staggering £5.14m in 2013, are one Super League club who 
maybe should resist signing a marquee player. MostSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> clubs seem well-managed these 
days, with a majority breaking even or making a profit. In the last round of 
published figures, for 2014, Warrington made a profit of £640,000; Castleford 
Tigers cleared nearly half a million in a season in which they reached the 
Challenge Cup final and nearly won the league; and, having lost around half a 
million each year since gaining promotion, Hull KR finally broke even. Leeds 
have made a million over the past two years; even Wakefield reported a profit 
of over £350,000 in 2013.

“Less and less are losing money,” says Solly. “The distribution from Super 
League comes to close to what the salary cap is but there are a lot of other 
costs involved in running a club. Some clubs have the benefit of owning their 
own stadium and keeping the revenue. Others don’t and rent stadiums and it 
makes it a little more difficult to break even or make a profit if you are a 
tenant. It depends on the financial model of your stadium deal.”


Wigan, who pay to use the DW Stadium, usually make a profit but lost almost 
half a million in 2014 after investing in their Central Park education centre 
and TV studio, and Orrell training ground, whileSt Helens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sthelens> were a similar amount in the red 
thanks to buying out the match-day operations at Langtree Park which should see 
them increase revenues significantly. Solly can seek solace in the fact that 
his clubs are doing rather better than his Australian counterparts, at least 
off the field if not on it. The 16 NRL franchises lost £22.5m last year with 
only three clubs making a profit.


Clubcall: Oxford University RLFC

Shaun Edwards interview: England v Wales, union v league and career v family
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/no-helmets-required/2016/mar/02/shaun-edwards-interview-england-wales-union-league-six-nations>
There’s not usually much to celebrate when someone wins 70-0, but Oxford’s 
record victory over Cambridge at the 36th Varsity Rugby League match last 
Friday was a positive experience for all but the Light Blues. Over 700 Oxbridge 
alumni, students, sponsors and VIPS – including many of the RFL hierarchy – 
descended on the Honourable Artillery Company ground in the City of London and, 
judging by the guttural roar that greeted the teams’ arrival, many had been 
enjoying themselves since lunchtime. In a scene reminiscent of the players’ 
descent from the old dressing rooms down through the packed terraces at Odsal, 
the two old foes emerged on to the pitch from between the crowded beer tents, 
gladiators entering the arena.

Cambridge gave their all but were simply outclassed by an Oxford side who 
defended patiently then sliced them to pieces. Long-legged half-back Jordan 
Ayling, a chemistry student from Essex in his first season of league, was 
outstanding, scoring four tries. He is one to watch.

Chief guest Shaun Edwards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/no-helmets-required/2016/mar/02/shaun-edwards-interview-england-wales-union-league-six-nations>
 presented the Man of the Match award and the cup to Oxford skipper James 
Clark, a final year engineer from Surrey, who scored 34 points. An hour later 
some of the Dark Blues were still in their kit, celebrating with their raucous 
mates pitchside.

Only two of Oxford coach Dan Garbutt’s side had played league before going 
“up”: teenage hooker Mark Roper, who is studying biological science, spent two 
years in Wigan Warriors’ scholarship programme before returning to Orrell St 
James, and not try-scoring winger Conor McCleary from York but try-scoring 
centre Will Henshall, from St Albans. The chemistry student played league for 
the Centurions juniors in his (and my) hometown. Roper and Henshall, though, 
were among the biggest offenders when it came to haircuts: most of the Oxford 
side sported ludicrous barnets for the occasion. A reminder that students will 
be students.

Foreign quota

Toulouse Olympique showed their intentions when they trounced Coventry Bears 
in their Championship One opener last Saturday. Widnesian half-back Danny Hulme 
was wrongly credited with an astounding eight of their nine tries – he “only” 
scored four – while Australian-Egyptian full-back Mark Kheirallah, formerly of 
Newtown Jets, topped that with two tries and nine from nine with the boot.


Over 2,000 fans crossed the river to Toulouse Olympique’s temporary home of 
Stade Ernest Argelès (their Minimes ground is being redeveloped) to see a side 
that has been together for years. Second-rower Rhys Curran from Wests Tigers 
and formerHull KR <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hullkr> youngster Tyla 
Hepi have joined the likes of Cook Islands half Johnathon Ford, the Bentley 
brothers (Kane and Andrew), and Australian centre Greg White, who, bizarrely, 
attended Epsom College in Surrey, and has played league for France, union for 
storied Scottish club Melrose and Sevens for India and England. They should 
take some beating.

Goal-line drop-out

The opening weekend of NRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> action saw 
a leap in TV ratings as more games were shown free-to-air as well as every game 
being on pay-per-view Fox Sports. Super League general manager Blake Solly 
appreciates the appetite for all things rugby league Down Under and is making 
moves to bolster Super League’s presence.

“We know from the numbers from Fox Sports that there’s a hunger for Super 
League in Australia and New Zealand,” he says. “They’ll gobble up every piece 
of content they can get. They take all our Sky and BBC games live – so on 
average three games a week – and replay them during the week, and we’re now 
looking at improving the content on our website. From 2017 Fox will have a 24/7 
rugby league channel so we’ve spoken to them about what they want so Super 
League play a bigger part in that and that will become clearer over the next 
couple of months. We want to make it as easy as possible for viewers down there 
to follow Super League.”

One aspect Aussies viewers did love during the World Club Series was Jon 
Wells’ post-match analysis from players (and coaches) on Sky. “Credit to the 
team at Sky for thinking of that, and to our clubs for putting up the players 
and coaches to do it,” says Solly. “I know Trent Robinson thought it was 
absolutely brilliant and is taking it home to the NRL competition committee to 
get them to talk to TV there about introducing it.”

Fifth and last

It may be very early days but some club’s seasons are starting to take shape 
already. Without a point in their opening four games, Huddersfield will be hard 
pushed to overtake Wigan or Warrington – both eight points ahead of the Giants 
with 100% records – and are therefore extremely unlikely to finish in the top 
four. Hull KR and Wakefield, with three points between them, are so worried 
they’ve switched coaches before the snow has stopped falling.

While most of us are enjoying seeing Widnes at the top of Super League, the 
underdogs are barking loudly in the Championship, too. The surprise leaders are 
the Bulldogs of Batley – or rather more elegantly, the Gallant Youths. John 
Kear’s side, and their very near neighbours Dewsbury, who are both part-time, 
are suggesting the four full-time outfits – bullish Bradford, emerging 
Sheffield, combustible Leigh and yet another new-look London – will not simply 
hoover up the four promotion play-off places. After a series of narrow wins, 
London trail Batley by a single point scored.

There is already a predictable look about the bottom of the Championship 
though, with Workington and Whitehaven set to battle it out with newly-promoted 
Oldham and Swinton to avoid the drop. They have two wins so far between the 
four of them. At least Swinton can finally look forward to returning home, with 
land acquired for a new ground at last. In the meantime they are going to share 
with Sale RFC. My brother-in-law’s dad will be shaking with disbelief!

Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter <http://www.twitter.com/nohelmetsreq> and
Facebook <http://www.facebook.com/nohelmetsrequiredbook>
 