
Maidstone United dropped points at home for the first time this season when 
they drew 1-1 withRyman Premier League promotion rivals 
<http://www.isthmian.co.uk/tables.php> Dulwich Hamlet on Wednesday, but the 
strengths of their Gallagher Stadium will come under even more exacting 
scrutiny on Thursday night.

That is when Stevenage <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stevenage>, of 
League Two, visit for a televised FA Cup first round replay that will be played 
on Maidstone’s 3G surface. It will be the first time that a match in the FA Cup 
proper is contested on a pitch of this description, the Football Association 
having agreed in March to allow the use of 3G at every stage of the competition.

The fixture puts into the public spotlight a debate that has gained traction 
within English football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/10/fa-football-hubs-3g-pitches-grassroots>
, and one that the Stevenage manager, Graham Westley, was happy to blow open 
after the sides’ goalless draw in the first game. “As a surface it doesn’t 
work,” he said. “When you’re playing on it players’ safety is in jeopardy. It’s 
unforgiving and puts the body and joints through a lot of grief.”

But Westley was harking back to injuries sustained as a player on QPR’s 
infamous “plastic pitch” – the hard, Astroturf surface that they, Preston, 
Oldham and Luton were notorious for using before they were banned in 1995. 
Times have changed and 3G (“third generation”) pitches are now considerably 
closer in feel to soft, orthodox turf than their predecessors. They play like a 
good-quality grass pitch, say their advocates.

Numerous leagues use 3G – examples include 11 clubs in the Scottish system and 
nine in the Swedish top flight – and not only those blighted by poor weather. 
Others include French sides Lorient and Nancy, and Cesena in Serie A. So far, 
the Football League has been resistant despite advances made in the more 
physical sport of rugby union, whose authorities allowed Saracens toconstruct a 
3G pitch last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jan/21/saracens-artificial-pitch-rugby-union?CMP=twt_gu>
.

“Comparing this to Astroturf is like comparing a modern vacuum cleaner to an 
old-fashioned Hoover,” says Oliver Ash, Maidstone’s co-owner. “It’s to do with 
English conservatism. But I am convinced it is the future for many clubs up to 
League One level.”

It is Maidstone’s present, too; they are vocal and unrelenting champions of 
the surface. When Ash and Terry Casey bought the club in 2010, it was in danger 
of going out of business. It may still have done had it not been for a 
lightbulb moment about how the club could attract its substantial Medway 
catchment to a new ground.

“The piece of land we wanted was only big enough for one pitch,” says Ash. “So 
we decided to bring the whole community – to build a 3G pitch that everybody 
could use on a 24/7 basis. And if we had not done that, we would not have a 
club today.”

The pitch gives Maidstone a constant, sustainable revenue – this year they 
announced a £250,000 profit from a £1.25m turnover – and is used by around 
1,000 local players of all ages each week, right up to the hours before a game.

“Once youngsters use the facility they bond with the club, have the thrill of 
playing inside the stadium and are potential supporters,” Ash continues. It 
appears to be working – attendances have virtually doubled, with 2,226 seeing 
Welling United beaten in theFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>
 fourth qualifying round.

Not everyone shares in the optimism despite the advances in science. Alan 
Inns, captain of Kingstonian, currently eighth in Maidstone’s division and 
beaten 4-1 at the Gallagher Stadium in September, believes it presents the home 
team with an unfair advantage.

“The roll and bounce of a ball is different to that of a grass pitch and it’s 
no coincidence that the clubs who have 3G pitches invariably do very well at 
home,” he says. “I also found that the firmness of the ground was not 
beneficial to a 31-year-old body – my limbs were in a bad way after the game.”

The arguments will continue but the tide is turning. The Conference will allow 
3G in all three of its divisions from next season, banishing any fears that 
Maidstone would be refused promotion. Earlier this month,Football League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> chairmen were tied in a 
vote to introduce the surfaces, putting any positive decision on hold. “It 
demonstrates that there is still a desire amongst clubs to find out more about 
artificial playing surfaces before taking such a significant step,” said the 
Football League’s chief executive, Shaun Harvey.

“It was disappointing as we’d heard 60% would vote for it,” says Ash. “But 
another year to debate is no bad thing, and a televised match on Thursday will 
give people something new to see and think about.”
 