
Have you ever taken on a new job and tried to show healthy competition by 
finishing your tasks faster than your colleagues? Only to find, to your horror, 
that everyone despises you because the ethos of the organisation is about 
teamwork, rather than individual accomplishment? Perhaps you've made the 
opposite mistake: offering to do a colleague's work because you've got some 
spare time, only to find that she takes all the credit while you're left 
looking incompetent?

Judging how competitive we should be in today's workplace is one of the most 
perplexing problems for job-starters, according to Sue Cartright, 
organisational psychologist at the University of Manchester Institute of 
Science and Technology (UMIST). 'We're living the legacy of the eighties, in 
which individualism and greed were rewarded,' she points out, 'yet the nineties 
encourage collaboration and cooperation.'

 In fact, says Angela Baron of the Institute of Personnel and Development 
(IPD), a surprising number of people damage their career prospects on entering 
a new office because they get it wrong. There are solutions, however. 'The 
first step is to do your homework about the environment itself,' she suggests. 
'Too often, secretarial staff forget that, while you may not be a cut-throat 
sales person yourself, the chances are that if you are working among them, it's 
a value likely to infiltrate the entire office.'

Watch how people work, she advises, because attitudes are not always 
predictable. For example, increasing numbers of organisations are attempting to 
create a non-hierarchical atmosphere. Among these is London-based ad agency St 
Luke's. 'Nobody has a desk; they can sit and work anywhere,' explains marketing 
and new business manager Juliet Soskice. 'There's a collegiate atmosphere, with 
everyone encouraged to put forward ideas.' A secretary trying to prove herself 
by any means possible would hardly be welcome.

 In academic organisations, on the other hand, where you might expect a high 
level of teamwork, 'many staff can be combatant, particularly if their workload 
is severe,' says Eileen Simmonds, who has worked as a secretary in universities 
for 18 years. 'Secretarial staff tend to pick up on this and follow suit. You 
have to be careful not to let superiors use you as a tool in their own fight to 
the top. One person might give you a full week's work, for example, leaving you 
no time to help out the other three in the department. If you're not assertive, 
that can get you into trouble.'

 Be particularly aware of the dangers in organisations in which there has been 
a recent merger, Baron warns. 'The level of competitiveness here can be harmful 
because of job insecurity.' And don't make the mistake of assuming that just 
because you're a temp, you don't need to take note. 'If you go in with the 
wrong attitude, you can make enemies and the feedback to your agency may not be 
positive.'

According to organisational psychologist Judy Rose, you're less likely to be 
competitive if you're female. In fact, new research carried out by style guru 
Peter York concludes that pushy women don't tend to make it to the top anyway. 
The study, carried out for head-hunters Saxton Bamfylde, found that in very 
competitive environments, female staff could be anxious and intense. 'It sounds 
like a stereotype but research shows women's style tends to be one of 
cooperation rather than competitiveness,' Rose explains. 'Even as young 
children, boys are brought up with a focus on competitive sports, whereas girls 
are reared to share and play in groups.' This, she believes, puts women at 
particular risk of being taken advantage of by more merciless colleagues.

 Careers adviser Susan Jeffcock disagrees. 'Another recent study, by Tuvia 
Melamid of recruitment consultancy Capita RAS, found that most successful 
female managers exhibited 'macho kick-ass' characteristics. One of the reasons 
for this apparent discrepancy is that York's research focused on Britain's most 
successful female chief executives, most of whom are over 40, while Melamid 
focused on managers who are mostly in their twenties and thirties. This shows 
how much age has to do with competitiveness - the latter group are Thatcher's 
children whereas the older women weren't raised with such relentless values.'

 Jeffcock concludes that self-analysis is as important as observing your 
environment. 'A level of competition, in the right climate, can be healthy. The 
trick is to think about how you've got where you are today. If it turns out 
you're competitive by nature, make an effort to work in an industry in which 
that is rewarded.' Rose points out that if employers have any sense, they will 
arrange social occasions so that competitiveness doesn't go too far. 'Mind 
you,' she adds, 'that can work the other way, if it means playing football or 
netball, where the intent is still to win.'
 