
Wolfsburg booked their expected place in the quarter-finals of the Champions 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> for the first 
time in their history as André Schürrle’s late goal earned them an unconvincing 
1-0 home win over Gent.

The simple finish, created by a fine surge into the area by Julian Draxler, 
sealed a 4-2 aggregate success, but this was not a performance to instil fear 
in the other sides left in the competition.

The Germans struggled to break down their hard-working opponents for long 
periods and it was not until the 74th minute that Draxler, the scorer of two 
goals in the first leg, provided the inspiration to unlock the door. The goal 
was Schürrle’s fourth in eight days after his hat-trick against Hannover.

Cristiano Ronaldo goal sets Real Madrid on course to ease past Roma
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/08/real-madrid-roma-champions-league-match-report>
Wolfsburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg> went into the game 
in the driving seat, but their task would have been far easier had they not 
thrown away a 3-0 first-leg lead by conceding two late goals to give the 
Belgians hope.

And Gent looked comfortable in the first half at the Volkswagen Arena, with 
Moses Simon causing plenty of problems down the left. The striker gave 
Christian Trásch a torrid time, but, despite seeing their visitors having more 
possession, it was Wolfsburg who enjoyed the better of the few chances.

Max Kruse swivelled in the area and fired an instant shot wide after 
Schürrle’s low ball in.

Josuha Guilavogui’s fierce long-range effort was pushed away by Matz Sels and 
Schürrle met the resulting corner from the left by Ricardo Rodríguez at the 
near post, looping his header over the angle of the far post.

In the second half the hosts began to look more like the side who had recorded 
back-to-back wins in the league, but they continued to be frustrated. Luiz 
Gustavo saw his shot saved by Sels before Schürrle failed to get a clear 
connection when well-placed in front of goal after Kruse had pulled the ball 
back to him from Trasch’s deep cross from the right.

The former Chelsea man was wasteful again when he took too long to get a shot 
away and it got blocked away for a corner.

But finally, with 16 minutes to go, he broke the deadlock. Draxler picked the 
ball up on the touchline on the right and drove into the area to the byline 
before picking out Schürrle to fire low into the net.

That left Gent needing three to go through and it was always going to be too 
tall an order.

Wolfsburg were unable to add to their lead but they had already done enough to 
seal their spot in the last eight.
 