
It has taken a mere eight months or so, but hey: Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> professionals are 
able to play with the new ball. TheTorfabrik (goal factory), as the repainted 
Jabulani is now called, was true to its name on Match Day 2: 37 goals in nine 
games were no mean feat, even by the "can't defend, won't defend" standards of 
Germanic club Fußball in the early Tennies.

An alternative view, no doubt subscribed to by the league's goalkeeper 
fraternity, is that the cursed plastic thingy is about as predictable as 
Saturday night's Spiel 77 lotto numbers but actual bloopers were thin on the 
ground amid the general madness. Seven away wins underlined the DFL's central 
brand message ("it's a level playing field, even the small clubs can win") 
beautifully. Only the most obnoxious, heartless cynic would put forward the 
slightly less favourable view that our best teams are still bad enough to lose 
comfortably against anyone.

Even a 3-0 lead at home is sometimes not enough to avoid defeat, as VfL 
Wolfsburg found out to their detriment on Saturday. Steve McClaren's team were 
unstoppable – at first.Coladose 
<http://dictionary.reverso.net/german-english/Coladose>-sized genius Diego, 
straight on to the pitch after his €15m move from Juventus, was in the mood and 
the striker Edin Dzeko was brilliant as ever. Two typically excellent goals 
from the Bosnian and one more from his new Brazilian team-mate had the crowd 
singing the duo's names to the tune of the Banana Boat Song. The totally 
outplayed visitors from Mainz 05 were not seeing the ball let alone daylight.

"I got a text message from my dad after 30 minutes," 05's sporting director, 
Christian Heidel, said. "It read:Oje (Oh dear)." Heidel replied with a sardonic 
"we probably won't batter them now" and he was right, in a way: Mainz managed a 
meagre four in the second half to register a narrow, improbable win that had 
VfL supremo Dieter Hoeneß gasping for words. "In 35 years in football, I've 
never seen anything like it," the 57-year-old said.

McClaren, too, claimed to have never witnessed "such a dramatic loss of 
quality" before (DO NOT insert England-based joke here. Time to move on). "It 
was Jekyll and Hyde stuff," he scoffed, and blamed "mental deficits and lack of 
character" for the kind of miraculous reversal that is not too uncommon in 
early Europa League qualification rounds in the Carpatian Mountains but as rare 
as a decent centre-back in the Bundesliga. The last side that managed such a 
spectacular collapse on their own ground was unlucky Fortuna Düsseldorf in 
1991. Perennial yo-yo specialists VfL Bochum were the winners at the time, 
bizarrely enough.

"3-0 can be a dangerous lead," Mainz's main man Thomas Tuchel said with a 
straight(ish) face. "Sometimes the opponents don't notice that you haven't 
actually given up." Morten Rasmussen's strike before the break was a wake-up 
call that went unheeded. "We stopped playing football," McClaren said. Mainz 
didn't: The Colombian Elkin Soto and Andre Schürrle both scored inside the hour 
to equalise before the Hungarian attacker Adam Szalai turned his marker Simon 
Kjaer with five minutes to go.

Six points from two games constitute a perfect start for Mainz and Tuchel, 
whose high-energy, 200kph pressing game is rightly winning plaudits. "There's a 
spirit within this team that's quite amazing," the 37-year-olds said.

Tuchel, who never played top-flight football and retired at 24 due to a 
chronic knee injury, is the league's unlikeliest manager. He looks like a cross 
betweenHeino <http://www.alternative3.net/heino.html> and a Graphic Design 
dropout from Berlin, and he is José Mourinho minus the ego: smart, incredibly 
hardworking, self-effacing. There are no stars in his side but collectively few 
achieve more. Tuchel has confessed to admiring little, ingenuous Chile's 
tactics at the World Cup and contrary to most commentators – this column 
included – he probably did understand them, too.

On Saturday, the natural heir to 1970s idol Günter Netzer (as far as nifty 
side-partings are concerned) made the interesting point that big players come 
with an obvious drawback. "Playing against guys like Diego should be seen as an 
opportunity," he said, "because it's obvious that they will see a lot of the 
ball. That in turn makes it possible to win the ball off them a lot." If he and 
his team manage to avoid relegation for a second season in such impressive 
fashion, being in charge of bigger, more star-studded team may well be a 
problem he'll have to deal with.

Talking points

• Kaiserslautern's spirited defeat of Bayern on the Betzenberg owed much to 
the fantastic crowd and the courageous performance of the new boys, who 
overwhelmed the champions twice in two devastating counterattacks in 66 
seconds. Ivo Ivicevic and Srdjan Lakic made it a deliciously hot night for the 
Red Devils. The visitors weren't awful but Louis van Gaal was right to bemoan
the worst sitter since Rebecca De Mornay frightened little babies 18 years ago 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0104389/>: "It has to be goal," the Dutchman 
exclaimed in view of Thomas Müller's implausible failure to dispatch the ball 
free in front of goal from 11 metres. To make matters worse, two team-mates had 
been available for a tap-in, too. President Uli Hoeneß took a forgivingly long 
view. "In 100,000 years, there will always be these kind of defeats," he said, 
before warning about arrogance. Without Arjen Robben, who's been implicitly 
ruled out for the rest of the year, Bayern won't find it easy to break down 
well-organised sides. Fortunately, there aren't too many around.

Defensively, they looked fairly shambolic again, even though Martin Demichelis 
didn't actually feature. The wantaway centre-back, accused of favouring a game 
"without running, with his tie on" by Franz Beckenbauer – the Kaiser knew of 
such things himself, of course – was not part of the squad. Sadly, from 
Bayern's point of view, there have been rather fewer inquiries for the 
Argentinian than expected. An asking price of €10m was probably only part of 
the problem there.

• Schalke, too, have more trouble at the back than the hunchback of Notre 
Dame. Ex-Dortmund player Christoph Metzelder was widely booed by his own fans 
during the 2-1 home defeat to Hannover 96. Felix Magath was not exactly quick 
to defend the indefensibly bad performance of his new signing. "I can 
understand the supporters," the Schalke manager said. "He's not in great shape 
right now." The fans' anger at Magath has somewhat subsided following a 
high-level meeting with the S04 boss Clemens Tönnies but the Royal Blues 
manager needs to bring in more quality before the end of transfer period. 
Klaas-Jan Huntelaar of Milan is reportedly close to agreeing terms.

• Dortmund were hugely impressive in their 3-1 away win to Stuttgart 
yesterday. Hamburg, meanwhile, continued their formidable start to the season 
with a 3-1 triumph in Frankfurt that bore witness to another Ruud van 
Nistelrooy goal and a "Ruud Vantastisch" headline in Bild.

• All the madcap matches were overshadowed by a nine goal fest at the 
Bay-Arena. Much-fancied Leverkusen played their usual, well-controlled passing 
game against Mönchengladbach – until Arturo Vidal lost both his head and the 
ball outside his own box. Mo Idrissou's low cross was converted by the 
19-year-old Patrick Herrmann. Leverkusen struck back three minutes later via an 
Eren Derdiyok header but kept getting outplayed at the other end. It was 4-1 to 
the Foals after 58 minutes and curtains, really, but that didn't stop the teams 
from scoring two more each before Bayer's "humiliation" (Spiegel online) was 
complete. Michael Ballack looked particularly out of sorts. "He needs more 
time," the sporting director Rudi Völler said. "But today the whole team looked 
as if they'd been injured for three weeks."

Results Kaiserslautern 2-0 Bayern Munich, St Pauli 0-1 Hoffenheim, Schalke 1-2 
Hannover, Bremen 4-2 Köln,Wolfsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg> 3-4 Mainz, Frankfurt 1-3 
Hamburg, Nürnberg 1-2 Freiburg, Leverkusen 3-6 Gladbach, Stuttgart 1-3 Dortmund.

Latest Bundesliga table <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=12>
 