
Older women are having to sell their homes, go without essentials and rely on 
their own elderly parents because of the unfair way changes to the state 
pension age have been made, according to Labour’s Frank Field.

The veteran MP says that many women born in the 1950s have been “grotesquely 
disadvantaged” by the government’s handling and communication of the changes. 
He is one of a number of high-profile figures to speak out aboutpension age 
increases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/09/state-pension-inequality-cost-women-20000-campaign>
 that some women have said will leave them as much as £40,000 out of pocket.

For decades the state pension age (SPA) for women was 60. An increase to 65, 
phased in between 2010 and 2020, was included in thePensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Act 1995, but five years ago the 
coalition government pushed through a speeding up of the process. The SPA for 
women is instead increasing to 65 between April 2016 and November 2018, then 66 
by October 2020.

Many women say they had always expected to receive their pension at 60, then 
discovered their SPA had increased by perhaps four, five or even six years. 
Amazingly, the government did not write to any woman affected by the rise in 
the pension ages for nearly 14 years after the law was passed in 1995. The 
result is that hundreds of thousands of women say they didn’t have enough time 
to make alternative plans.

Field says he has received many letters from women who have been affected. 
Here are some of their testimonies:

• “I was born in 1954... I received no prior notification from DWP... I am in 
the process of having to sell my family home to supplement the shortfall, which 
works out at about £40,000. Money, I feel, has been stolen from me. Had I 
received my state pension at 60, I would not have had to sell my family home 
where I raised my daughters.”

• “I cannot begin to tell you the deep problems I face because the government 
failed to give me any notice about my pension deferment... I will have to sell 
my home because my situation is untenable to sustain for a further 
four-and-a-half years, and as I can no longer get a mortgage. I have been ill 
and continue to suffer from periods of stress-related illnesses.”

• “I was born in December 1955, am single, and did not receive a DWP letter 
until 2013 advising me I would retire at 66. This gave me only two years’ 
notice of a six-year rise... At present I am forced to rely on my 80-year-old 
retired mum to help with the purchase of meals or clothes as I am utilising 
dwindling savings to pay bills. This is an intolerable burden placed on older 
women, and I fear I will not be able to carry on should anything happen to my 
mum.”

• “I was never informed I could not retire until I was 66 … I have nothing to 
look forward to after working all these years but poverty. I have applied for 
more than 60 jobs since being made redundant, but who wants to employ a 
61-year-old nurse who has arthritis in her knees and is unable to lift 
patients?”

• “When I was 52 I gave up full-time work with the idea of doing contract work 
for six months a year. I had worked out that I could afford to do this until I 
had my pension paid at age 60. So now I am 61, it’s four-and-a-half years until 
I get a pension, and I have sold my house with the intention of buying a 
smaller, cheaper property [in a different town] so that I have some money to 
live on, leaving my son, daughter, grandchild, elderly parents and two sisters 
[in the town where I currently live]. As from June I shall be officially 
homeless and am currently living in my partner’s campervan on a campsite.”

• “I was born in January 1954 … I have struggled for so long alone that I 
finally broke down a couple of nights ago … I’m almost losing the will to live 
when everything is such a battle. I can’t wait another three years for my 
pension.”

Campaigners from the Waspi group (Women Against State Pension Inequality 
<https://www.facebook.com/WASPI-Women-Against-State-Pension-Inequality-Campaign-877054125688402/>
) staged a demonstration outside Parliament on 29 June. Field chairs theCommons 
work and pensions select committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/work-and-pensions-committee/>
, which has been looking into this issue. He has written to work and pensions 
secretary Stephen Crabb to say the government must at the very least offer this 
group the option of taking their state pension early at a reduced rate.

In May, Crabb told MPs that it would be “impossible” to unwind changes dating 
back more than 20 years. Meanwhile in January the Department for Work and 
Pensions said those affected by faster equalisation would reach state pension 
age after the introduction of the new state pension, which would be more 
generous for many women.
 