
As a nurse, Denise Crerrar is used to being attacked at work. The worst 
occasion was in the intensive care unit of Glasgow Royal Infirmary when an 
alcoholic suffering severe withdrawal symptoms grabbed her by the throat. On 
another occasion, a psychiatric patient cornered her between two trolleys.

'I know these things are part of the job, but I was never given any advice on 
how to avoid them happening. You learn how to deal with violence as you go,' 
she said.

Unlike the case of air hostess Fiona Weir, who needed 40 stitches after a 
passenger smashed a bottle over her head last November, such attacks do not 
necessarily make headlines.

According to a new report, the threat of violence against people going about 
their daily jobs is becoming commonplace. A fifth of all employees are subject 
to physical or verbal abuse each year, with nurses most at risk.

The report, Violent Times: Preventing Violence at Work, to be released on 
Wednesday by the TUC, finds that young women are twice as likely to be attacked 
as their male counterparts. Almost a quarter of women aged 25-34 have been 
threatened with violence while at work, and 11 per cent have been attacked, 
compared with 6 per cent of men in the same age group.

The authors conclude that most employees who come into contact with the public 
are likely to face some form of harassment during their working lives.

The TUC will this week call on employers to take steps to protect their staff. 
'Employers seem to have adopted the attitude that violence is unpredictable and 
therefore cannot be prevented,' said TUC General Secretary John Monks.

 The nursing profession heads the list of dangerous jobs, with one in three 
subject to some kind of attack.

The case of Jenny Morrison, a social worker who was stabbed to death last 
November by a mentally ill patient while on a routine visit to a 
care-in-the-community hostel in London, is an extreme example of the hazards 
faced by care workers.

 More than 20 per cent of them are reported to be verbally and physically 
abused at work, while job centre staff have seen a twelvefold increase in 
attacks since 1987.

Assaults on transport workers have more than tripled since 1995, prompting 
London Underground to issue posters reminding passengers that 'our staff are 
entitled to work without fear or intimidation'.

A London Transport spokesman confirmed: 'We have seen an increase in violence 
on the Underground in the first half of last year. But the situation is no more 
serious than usual. We are constantly taking action to protect our staff at 
work.'

 Graham Pykett, senior policy adviser at the Confederation of British 
Industry, said: 'Violence in the workplace is no worse at the moment than at 
any other time. Our members are not calling for additional legislation or 
further risk management strategies.

'The best practice for employers is, however, to keep assessing the risk to 
their employees.'

Will Archer, 23, wishes his employers had assessed the risks at an Essex pub. 
'It was about 6pm on a Saturday after a Euro 96 match,' he said. 'This bloke 
had been drinking in the pub all afternoon with his wife and children watching 
the football. They went home and he was left staggering around the place, 
annoying customers.

'I refused to serve him and suddenly he was over the bar and tried to punch my 
head. He missed but got me by the throat. He grabbed me and pushed me against a 
wall, then headbutted me, which dislocated my jaw, broke my nose and split my 
lip.

'Employers should have a greater duty of care, even though it is the pub 
trade. The worst thing was the owner didn't back me at all. The man got let off 
with a caution.'

Owen Tudor, senior policy officer for the TUC, said: 'The number of workers at 
risk from violent attack has increased dramatically. Employers should assess 
the risk of violence, find out what causes it and equip their employees with 
the skills to deal with it. The TUC believes violence at work is now a common 
experience.

 'No one should expect to be assaulted at work. Managements are often 
unsympathetic and fail to provide adequate support for victims. There is no 
such thing as an occupational hazard that can't be controlled.'
 