
The AFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> has agreed to increase its pay 
offer to players featuring in the inaugural women’s league from a minimum of 
$5,000 to $8,500 for the first two seasons.

The new deal, reached after months of negotiations between the league and the 
players’ association, includes a range of benefits relating to travel, 
equipment and insurance.

GWS make Nicola Barr top pick in inaugural AFL Women's draft
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/gws-make-nicola-barr-top-pick-in-inaugural-afl-womens-draft>
Marquee players will receive a financial package totalling $27,000 for the 
2017 season, priority players $12,000 and the remaining players $8,500.

The season, which starts in March next year, comprises seven matches for each 
of the eight teams in the competition, plus a grand final.

Under the terms of the new offer, the AFL will cover costs for footwear, an 
allowance for interstate travel to games, out-of-pocket medical expenses for 52 
weeks post-contract and a carers’ allowance for players travelling interstate 
with a child under 12 months old.

Income protection insurance is also included, although players will have to 
pay for their own private health insurance.

“The players overwhelmingly voted in favour of accepting these payment terms 
and look forward to working in partnership with the AFL and clubs to make the 
AFL Women’s competition the success we all know it will be,” said AFL Players 
Association boss Paul Marsh.


AFL general manager of game and market development Simon Lethlean said the 
deal was a step towards the professionalisation of the women’s game.


“The AFL wants the NAB AFL Women’s competition to succeed, and to be 
sustainable into the future,” Lethlean said.


“The league will be a semi-professional competition initially with players 
employed on a part-time basis, but we are keen for it to evolve into being 
fully professional as soon as possible.”

Netball Australia reached a deal with its players earlier this year to 
increase the minimum wage to $27,375 for next season, while women’s cricketers 
who play in both the one-day and Twenty20 domestic competitions earn at least 
$18,000.
 