
Girls and young women with cancer in the UK are not being given enough 
information about the options for safeguarding their chances of having children 
after treatment, fertility experts have said, while describing access to such 
technologies across the UK as “haphazard”.

“Cancers in young people are largely treatable with good long-term survival 
[but] one of the most common ill effects of cancer therapy is permanent 
infertility,” said Melanie Davies, a consultant gynaecologist at University 
College London Hospitals. “If you ask people who have had cancer who are young: 
‘What is the thing that bothers you most?’, top of the list is infertility.”

While men’s fertility can be preserved through freezing sperm samples, for 
women the options are more complex, involving the freezing of eggs, embryos or 
even tissue from the ovaries – although the latter is less well established and 
brings a number of risks, including the possibility of re-implanting cancerous 
cells.

But experts have raised concerns that patients, and even oncologists, are 
often unaware of the options, adding that there are huge variations in the 
availability of the technologies, storage and funding methods around the 
country, with funding often being granted by commissioners on a case by case 
basis.

“There is a very sketchy provision – in some places it is quite well 
organised, in other places it is not,” said Richard Anderson, professor of 
clinical reproductive science at the University of Edinburgh, who with Davies 
has co-authored an editorial on the topic, published in theBritish Medical 
Journal <http://www.bmj.com/cgi/doi/10.1136/bmj.i6145>. 


“There is an urgent need to improve information for patients, education for 
oncologists, and equity of funding, to overcome the barriers to more widespread 
use of fertility preservation in the UK,” they write.

While guidelines from the National Institute for Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and Care Excellence (Nice) have 
been issued, provision of fertility preservation remains patchy, they say.


“The Nice recommendation is that women [with cancer] should be aware of this 
and should be offered oocyte or embryo preservation, including adolescent 
girls,” said Anderson. “But the issue is that that doesn’t seem to have been 
established around the country by any means as yet.”

While data on the proportion of women with cancer who undertake fertility 
preservation is lacking, Davies and Anderson say the need for action is borne 
out by a number ofsurveys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/nov/21/young-breast-cancer-patients-not-receiving-fertility-advice>
, together with feedback from both patients and clinicians up and down the 
country. “Colleagues [are] finding it difficult to get money [and] difficult to 
provide an adequate and funded service,” said Anderson. According to research 
from the UK charity Breast Cancer Care, 88% of 176 women under the age of 45 
who had breast cancer said they were not referred to a fertility specialist 
after being diagnosed.

Valerie Peddie, senior charge nurse and fertility specialist at the Aberdeen 
Centre for Reproductive Medicine, agreed with the criticism. “It is absolutely 
fair and it is 100% accurate,” she said. “[Having children] is just part of the 
natural life cycle and they may be denied having children in the future if they 
are not given the opportunity for discussion.”


It isn’t only cancer patients who need access to information and technologies 
for fertility preservation, Anderson points out, noting that certain drugs and 
procedures used to treat conditions ranging from rheumatoid arthritis to sickle 
cell disease can also affect the fertility of patients. Peddie said: “It is all 
about quality of life and being afforded the opportunity for discussion and 
being given sufficient and accurate information regarding the implications, 
long and short term consequences [on future fertility] of any medical 
treatments that they might require.”

Stuart Lavery, director of IVF Hammersmith and a consultant in gynaecology, 
reproductive medicine and surgery, was upbeat about the provision of fertility 
preservation to patients.


“Our experience is that the NHS has become a lot more responsive to this issue 
– and we have got so busy now that we have had to set up a dedicated clinic 
just to see these patients urgently and get them into the system quickly,” he 
said, adding that the NHS had also become more supportive in funding such 
procedures.

Despite the progress, Lavery admitted there was room for improvement. “I think 
what is happening is that the oncology teams are really just finding out what 
is available in their local areas, and that perhaps the relationships and the 
referral pathways, that patient pathway, in many places may not be as smooth as 
it could be.”
 