
There have been some dramatic Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/championship-rugby-union> finales but none 
to rival Worcester’s extraordinary scramble back into the Premiership on 
Wednesday night, when a try from Chris Pennell in the final minute gave Ryan 
Lamb the chance to seal promotion with a conversion. Over it went to condemn 
Bristol to yet another crushing disappointment

A stunning second-half comeback from the visitors had threatened a completely 
different outcome, withBristol <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> 
having led 30-16 with 10 minutes left and in sight of a return to the 
Premiership for the first time since 2009. Andy Robinson’s side had trailed 
16-6 at the interval but came rampaging back with three tries, seemingly enough 
to bury their demons.

The Warriors had other ideas, a penalty try and Pennell’s epic final thrust, 
with Bristol down to 13 men, proving decisive. They gave away far too many 
penalties for the comfort of Dean Ryan, their director of rugby, but he will 
not care. With the outstanding Pennell, who finished with two tries, and the 
Argentina captain Agustín Creevy to the fore, this was a night they have been 
dreaming about since their relegation last year. “I’ll be honest, I didn’t 
think we had any chance,” said Ryan, reflecting on the late drama. “Sport can 
be bloody cruel … I thought Bristol were the better side throughout.”

His counterpart, Andy Robinson, was significantly less delighted, criticising 
a late decision to send Dwayne Peel to the sin-bin for dragging down a 
close-range maul despite allowing Worcester players to remain on the field in 
the first half. “I am angry. We could easily have had two penalty tries,” said 
Robinson, whose side finished top of the table and twice beatWorcester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worcesterrugby> during the regular season. 
“I can safely say that’s the cruellest bit of sport I’ve ever been involved in.”

It was hard to disagree with the former England coach, even after a first half 
in which Bristol seemed in danger of being undone by a mixed goal-kicking 
performance from Nicky Robinson. The fly-half kicked only two from five 
first-half penalty attempts and turned down the opportunity of two more. 
Sometimes it is possible to over think things and the decision to kick twice to 
the corner seemed decidedly odd in such a delicately balanced contest.

At the third time of asking sense finally prevailed, only for a tentative 
Robinson to hit the post. It was that sort of night, with Worcester’s first try 
also involving a lucky bounce when Lamb’s grubber kick ricocheted off a Bristol 
leg to the lurking Pennell wide on the right. The full-back still had plenty to 
do but he finished superbly and Lamb’s touchline conversion merely compounded 
Bristol’s pain.

A further sign that Bristol were mentally rattled came when Lamb was lining up 
another penalty attempt right in front of the sticks, only for Jack Wallace to 
come rushing out in an illegal attempt to charge it down. Just when they had 
the game there for the taking, Worcester went tactically walkabout. Lamb was 
twice guilty of taking the riskier, wrong option, allowing Bristol a foothold 
in the contest. The 60th minute sin-binning of their Australia wing Cooper Vuna 
for desperately trying to steal the ball from an offside position gave them 
further hope and, from the subsequent lineout drive, Jack Lam crashed over to 
transform the contest.

With Worcester still a man short, the centre Jack Tovey was set free by the 
electric David Lemi and Bristolian joy was unconfined when their replacement 
full-back Matthew Morgan sidestepped over to put them 30-16 ahead in the match. 
Worcester seemed dead but the penalty try and the sin-binning of Lamb and, 
subsequently, Peel set the scene for the most dramatic finale imaginable.

It may be both these clubs will be safely among the elite in 2016-17 if the 
proposed expansion of the Premiership is approved but, after a constructive 
year of rebuilding, it is Worcester who will now be back in the Premiership 
penthouse next season. Bristol would definitely welcome a change to the 
torture-laden play-off format, although the footballing equivalent suited 
Bristol Rovers just fine two Sundays ago.

Ryan, meanwhile, will need to think about strengthening his squad in the 
coming weeks but his senses were as scrambled as everyone else’s in the 
immediate aftermath. “You almost feel like you’ve been in a car accident,” he 
said. “There’s no point jumping around. I’m 48 years old, I’d look a right 
prat.”

Worcester Pennell; Biggs, Grove, Mills, Vuna; Lamb, Bruzulier; Ruskin (Bower, 
49), Creevy (Annett, 65), Schonert, Percival, Thomas, Williams, Betty 
(Senatore, 67), Van Velze (capt).

Tries Pennell 2, penalty try. Cons Lamb 3. Pens Lamb 3.

Sin-bin Vuna 60.

Bristol Wallace (Morgan, 56); Amesbury, Tovey, Mosses, Lemi; Robinson, Peel 
(capt); Traynor, Brooker, Cortes, Glynn, Sorenson, Mama, Lam, Eadie.

Tries Lam, Tovey, Morgan. Cons Robinson 3. Pens Robinson 3.

Sin-bin Lam 75.

Referee JP Doyle
 