
Workplace lawyer Josh Bornstein was so emotionally affected by a bullying case 
handled by his firm that he lobbied the prime minister to fast-track the 
complaints process so victims could quickly put an end to their torment.


The case that spurred him to action involved a 42-year-old female road worker 
who was so widely bullied by so many people over two years she developed 
depression and post-traumatic stress disorder and is unlikely to be able to 
work again.

In January the supreme court of Victoria awarded her $1.36m in compensation 
<http://www.hcamag.com/hr-news/supreme-court-awards-1-3-million-in-employer-negligence-case-210682.aspx>
 after she endured rape threats and sexual harassment.

“This was very graphic to read and distressing. Her health is irretrievably 
damaged,” says Bornstein, a principal at Maurice Blackburn in Melbourne.

By lobbying the then prime minister, Julia Gillard, Bornstein managed to get a 
change in the law 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/workplace-bullies-and-how-to-beat-them-20130531-2nh7o.html>
 under the Fair Work Act, which allows bullying victims to fast-track their 
matters and have an order made to stop the behaviour.

“That was … wonderful. I don’t usually get to do anything like that,” says 
Bornstein of his victory two years ago.

“Because the new laws [came about] in 2013, employers have been required to 
improve their compliance and improve their internal processes to deal with 
bullying complaints.”

Employing more older workers could deliver $78bn in economic gains
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/01/employing-more-older-workers-could-deliver-78bn-in-economic-gains>
The complaints process may be improving, but bullying is not getting any 
better.

In fact, there has been a significant rise in incidents over the past five 
years, according to theAustralian Workplace Barometer project 
<http://www.safeworkaustralia.gov.au/sites/SWA/about/Publications/Documents/985/bullying-and-harassment-in-australian-workplaces-australian-workplace-barometer-results.pdf>
, which has produced the first national collection of information on bullying 
and harassment in Australian workplaces.

Nearly one in 10 workers (9.7%) say they have been bullied in the past six 
months, up from 7% in 2010. The most frequent perpetrators are supervisors who 
are most likely to yell at people and humiliate them.

Bullying <https://www.theguardian.com/society/bullying> is estimated to cost 
up to $36bn annually in Australia through its impacts on victims and 
bystanders, say the workplace barometer report’s authors, academics from the 
University of South Australia.

Rhonda Brighton-Hall, an Australian expert in human resources, has an 
interesting theory about what is behind the rise in workplace bullying.

She sees it as a backlash to managers’ loss of control in the modern 
workplace, twinned with a ramping up of pressure.

“The workforce is so mobile. People are working from home, they are moving 
around. They [managers] don’t have the control they used to have,” says 
Brighton-Hall, who is on the board of the Australian Human Resources Institute 
and has held executive HR roles at the Commonwealth Bank and Luxottica.

“They used to sit at their desk, the team sat in front of them and they had 
control. Now they don’t. So they try to put processes in place to try and 
control everybody, they put in more and more rules and expectations so that 
nobody really knows what they are.”

Brighton-Hall says that treatment makes workers feel unworthy. “That type of 
bullying is insidious and it is very damaging on the individual,” she says.

Added to that is work intensification, which is cramming more tasks and 
responsibilities into people’s working hours.

“Putting them into a pressure cooker means that people are acting out … more 
than they used to,” she says.

While Bornstein says fast-tracking means he is seeing fewer bullying cases. 
Brighton-Hall, who at HR level is further down the line of complaint, is seeing 
no improvement in behaviour.

“There’s certainly an increase in incidents – I am seeing so many more cases 
and there is also more reporting on it because there has been an increase in 
understanding what bullying is,” Brighton-Hall says.

The barometer report, which surveyed 4,200 people, puts forward three reasons 
for the bullying: a lack of managerial regard for workplace psychological 
health and safety; bullying and harassment used to get more productivity from 
workers; and personal power plays.

Bullying tends to occur in workplaces where there is not enough commitment 
from senior managers to contain stress levels and prioritise psychological 
health.

Poor task and job design leads to people being overwhelmed by demands while 
struggling with low levels of resources. This creates an environment ripe for 
bullying.

The moral challenge of military robots arises when we delegate fighting wars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/02/the-moral-challenge-of-military-robots-arises-when-we-delegate-fighting-wars>
“Many managers or supervisors feel pressured to compete for job permanency, 
and strained to complete tasks or meet targets or objectives,” according to the 
report, released in November.

“As a result they may employ bullying tactics, under these stressful 
conditions and pressures, perhaps through poor performance management 
processes, to drive greater performance.”

As one overwhelmed complainant said to Brighton-Hall: “My boss sent me four 
texts on Saturday and five on Sunday and I was away for the weekend, so I 
didn’t respond until Sunday night when I got home. And, by Monday morning, I 
had a warning letter.”

This wasn’t just one weekend either, says Brighton-Hall. “There is this 
constant upping of the pressure to make the person feel they are not doing a 
good job.”

The barometer report recommends organisations improve psychological safety by 
reducing work conditions such as high demand, high pressure, high competition 
and low control/power situations.
 