
Rémi Garde’s winless sequence as Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> manager now stretches to 10 
matches and the indignities continue to stack up for the team holding the 
Premier League’s wooden spoon. Their supporters began this match by singing 
about relegation but, by the end, the dark humour had made way for open dissent 
and the clear sense they are bordering on mutiny.

FA Cup third round, Barcelona v Granada and more: clockwatch – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jan/09/fa-cup-third-round-barcelona-granada-football-clockwatch-live>
Garde’s decision to substitute Carles Gil, Villa’s most dangerous attacker, 
certainly did not go down well with the supporters who had earlier chanted: “We 
scored a goal,” in mock surprise at taking the lead against a League Two side 
that had lost their previous home match to Morecambe. Villa’s main problem is 
they have scored twice in one game only once since September. Joe Jacobson’s 
penalty four minutes into the second half means a replay at Villa Park and the 
away supporters behind Garde’s dugout were so voluble with their criticisms 
that Micah Richards, having been substituted, left his seat to try to answer 
their complaints.

Those were tense moments, with the game still going on, and at least Villa’s 
captain was willing to face an angry crowd. Richards was clearly piqued by the 
accusation that the players were not putting in enough effort and it needed the 
intervention of a couple of stewards. At the final whistle, there were chants 
of “You’re not fit to wear the shirt”. Garde was targeted with cries of “You 
don’t know what you’re doing” and his brief spell in English football has 
already taken on the form of a full-blown crisis.

“I can understand the fans being angry with the results,” he said. “We have to 
accept the criticism because we are not winning enough games. This is what we 
deserve. When you are not winning, the manager is always making bad decisions.

“I still believe I can turn it around. The day I can’t do anything positive 
for this big club, you will know about it. I do know what I’m doing – but 
sometimes it is not working.”

It certainly did not work here and there is already talk of a protest at the 
replay when, once again, it might not be easy getting past the team 54 places 
below them in the football ladder. “Our away record is even better than our 
home record,” Gareth Ainsworth, the jubilant Wycombe manager, pointed out. It 
was an exaggeration butWycombe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wycombe> 
did reach the third round by winning ties at Halifax and Millwall and should 
not be too fazed by a trip to the Midlands. As Martin O’Neill, the former 
manager of both these sides, pointed out from the television gantry, Villa’s 
confidence is not so much low as subterranean right now.

The worst team in the Premier League, with two wins all season, certainly 
ought to have made it a more straightforward afternoon after the moment, midway 
through the first half, when Richards surged forward from right-back to sweep 
in Gil’s pass for the opening goal. Instead, the match exposed Villa for what 
they are: a side low on self-belief, conceding all sorts of goals and so devoid 
of attacking threat there were only sporadic moments when they put their 
opponents under sustained pressure.

Richards was injured in the first half but lasted until the 84th minute. He 
was their best player but, beyond their captain, there was a startling lack of 
leadership from Garde’s men. Scott Sinclair, in particular, was a substitution 
waiting to happen.

Rudy Gestede did strike the angle of crossbar and post with a deflected shot 
late on and Villa might have been spared an awkward second half if the referee, 
Michael Oliver, had seen Anthony Stewart pulling back Richards in a congested 
penalty area. Richards’s driving runs forward, having been moved across from 
his usual centre-back place, were a prominent feature in some of Villa’s better 
moments.

Wycombe Wanderers v Aston Villa: FA Cup third round - as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jan/09/wycombe-wanderers-aston-villa-fa-cup-third-round-live>
Gil also showed some decent touches but Wycombe, playing with great 
togetherness, matched their opponents for long spells. Jacobson’s set-piece 
deliveries were always a threat and Sam Wood had three reasonable chances to 
score. Ainsworth also deserves credit for recognising that Villa had a spare 
midfielder in the first half and instructing his forwards to drop back on 
Ashley Westwood. After that tactical tweak, Villa never played with the same 
freedom, not least because the Wycombe centre-backs, Aaron Pierre and Anthony 
Stewart, were outstanding.

Before the game, Villa’s fans could be heard singing “sign them up” when a 
line of flag-waving mascots walked in front of their end. The mood changed for 
the worse after Westwood’s reckless challenge on Matt Bloomfield gave away the 
penalty, clattering him with a forearm as they jumped for the same ball. Paul 
Hayes, Wycombe’s usual penalty-taker, was injured but Jacobson confidently 
struck the ball past the goalkeeper, Mark Bunn.

“To see players running through brick walls for you is such a great feeling,” 
Ainsworth said. “Pride is the word. Every time I ask my players to do something 
they never say: ‘I can’t do that.’ They always say: ‘I’ll give it my best 
shot.’”

How Garde must wish he could say the same.

Wycombe Wanderers v Aston Villa: FA Cup third round - live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jan/09/wycombe-wanderers-aston-villa-fa-cup-third-round-live> 