
First-half goals from Paul Hayes and Alfie Mawson ensured that Wycombe 
Wanderers booked their place in the League Two play-off final against Southend 
with a victory overPlymouth Argyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/plymouthargyle> that sealed a 5-3 
aggregate win.

In a repeat of the first leg, Wycombe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wycombe> dominated the opening stages and 
opened up a comfortable lead – only for Argyle to leave them sweating later in 
the contest.

In the end, the substitute Ryan Brunt’s backheel was all they had to show for 
a much improved second-half display but John Sheridan’s team are condemned to 
another season at this level.

The Wycombe manager Gareth Ainsworth, however, has the chance to complete a 
wonderful turnaround after saving his side from relegation from the Football 
League last year, when they head to Wembley on 23 May.

“You don’t get lucky in these two games, you earn what you get and after two 
tough legs I want to pay tribute to my players because I felt they handled the 
situation extremely well,” Ainsworth said. “I thought the mental side was the 
most important thing today after what happened down at Home Park, with Plymouth 
ending in the ascendency. I had to get the mental side right before the game 
because the physical side is there.

“We played really well in the first half, it was a complete performance which 
got us a lead that was a mountain to climb for Plymouth in the second half. But 
again the scare came – they scored and worked a good goal, but I thought we 
defended really well. I had players out there who weren’t 100% fit but that’s 
what I’ve got here – I’ve got characters who will play through anything for me.”

The home side went ahead on the night and doubled their aggregate lead after 
eight minutes when the Plymouth goalkeeper Luke McCormick failed to deal with 
Sam Saunders’ corner. Mawson’s header across fell to the captain Hayes, who 
hooked in from a couple of yards to replicate hisopener at Home Park on Saturday
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/09/plymouth-argyle-wycombe-wanderers-match-report>
.

The home side almost added to their advantage soon afterwards when McCormick 
redeemed himself by denying Aaron Holloway after he had been played in by 
Saunders.

The hosts were dominating the match, with Nico Yennaris heading just wide from 
Hogan Ephraim’s cross. McCormick then had to come to Argyle’s rescue again as 
he just about managed to tip Saunders’ stabbed effort wide after Ephraim had 
picked him out.

But from the resulting corner McCormick was at fault once more as Mawson beat 
him to Joe Jacobson’s delivery at the near post to nod home.

It left Wycombe 5-2 up overall after what had been a one-sided first half as 
Plymouth failed to gain a foothold in the game. That poor first-half display 
led to Sheridan gambling on a triple substitution with Jason Banton, Zak Ansah 
and Brunt all brought on.

Banton almost pulled a goal back inadvertently after an hour with a cross from 
the left that dipped over the Wycombe goalkeeper Alex Lynch and came back off 
the bar.

Plymouth were now piling on the pressure with Lynch being called into action 
by keeping out a low shot by Bobby Reid that bounced in front of him.

The visitors did pull a goal back when Ansah was played onside down the right 
and his cutback was flicked into the net by Brunt from close range. Ansah then 
had a chance to really set nerves jangling when he was found in space on the 
right, but Lynch pulled off a terrific save at his near post and when the final 
whistle went most of Adams Park was in jubilant mood.

John Sheridan, the Argyle manager, said: “I’m just really disappointed in how 
we performed in the first half given the situation we were in. I stuck with my 
team and went with the same formation – I’ve kept faith in them but the first 
half was probably the worst performance from any team I’ve managed.

“We’re in a position where we’re going into the play-offs and we know the 
importance of it and we just did not get going. That’s five goals we’ve 
conceded in two games from set-plays and we’d been good throughout the season 
dealing with them.

“In the second half we had a go at it and tried to get something, we put three 
subs on at the same time and I thought in the second half their keeper’s made 
some good saves. We’re all down at the moment – it’s hard to take the defeat 
because it’s a great chance gone missing.”
 