
Gareth Ainsworth has expressed sympathy for Rémi Garde’s position at Aston 
Villa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> but still believes 
Wycombe Wanderers can create more FA Cup history, 15 years after they reached 
the semi-finals of the competition at Villa Park.

Wycombe will take 4,000 supporters to Birmingham for the third-round replay on 
Tuesday night, having heldthe Premier League’s bottom team to a 1-1 draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/wycombe-wanderers-aston-villa-fa-cup-match-report>
 at Adams Park. The game is expected to generate more than £100,000 for the 
League Two side, who played Liverpool in the 2001 semi-finals following a 
remarkable Cup run under Lawrie Sanchez.

Garde and his players were berated by Villa supporters after the first tie, 
booed on to the team bus with Micah Richards attempting to calm the situation 
by talking to a group of fans. They have since won one and drawn one but are 
nine points from safety in the Premier League.

Ainsworth, the Wycombe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wycombe> manager, 
recalled his second season in charge when the club almost dropped out of the 
Football League. “It’s tough to be a Villa fan or manager at the moment,” he 
said. “We got beat at home to Bristol Rovers in the second last game [of 2014]. 
That put us into the bottom two and we were looking at relegation with one game 
to go.

“That day we lost to Bristol Rovers everyone thought I was the wrong man for 
the job and wanted to have a go at the players. A lot of it was channelled at 
me and lot of it channelled at the players. It’s not a nice situation. If you 
drop out of the Football League it is probably even bigger than dropping from 
the Premier League to the Championship. I’m 90% sure the club would have ceased 
to continue if we’d gone down as we were in a terrible state.

“These things happen and you get over them. But the scars will remain with me 
for the rest of my managerial career. We did a lap of the pitch to thank the 
fans. But I wasn’t getting thanked too much. I thought I’d hold my head up high 
because they had supported me, I got one or two things wrong but learned a huge 
lesson and was able to rectify that. I’ve had some tough comments to take, but 
it’s football.”

Since those testing times, Ainsworth has transformed Wycombe into promotion 
contenders. The Buckinghamshire club were beaten on penalties by Southend 
United in the play-off final last year and currently sit sixth in the division.

Ainsworth, 42, likes to work with a close-knit squad, even if it is out of 
necessity due to financial restrictions. Last season there were occasions when 
they could only name four substitutes.

He also likes to keep the players grounded. “We have development days, so once 
a month me and the chairman get together and see how can we ground the players 
off the pitch, nothing to do with football. We took the boys to the Somme to 
experience the first world war, we went to the Shrivenham military academy to 
speak with some war veterans not long ago, Falklands veterans, an Iraq veteran 
who is a triple limb amputee. I just want the boys to appreciate where they are.

“It’s not a threat, it’s just trying to open their minds to see what 
everything is. We’ve had them doing assault courses round the training ground, 
teamwork things. They worked at an ice-cream factory, they had to build a 
pallet of ice cream in the quickest time they could, realising how people do 
that every day for a living.

“Hopefully it opens them up to the rest of the world because a lot of 
footballers are in a bubble and that’s what gets them in trouble, sometimes 
they think they are untouchable and don’t know what is going on around them. 
But some of the places we went, these are some of the people who pay on a 
Saturday to come and watch us, that’s important.”

In 2000-01 Wycombe beat Wolverhampton Wanderers, Wimbledon and Leicester City 
to reach the Cup semi-finals, where they lost losing 2-1 to Liverpool, the 
eventual champions, following goals from Emile Heskey and Robbie Fowler.

Ainsworth said: “This club is proud of its history, very proud. They have 
dinners, reunion dinners with the team that got promoted out of the Conference, 
the team that won at Wembley, the team that went on the FA Cup run. I’d love my 
team to be at a reunion in 10 years. How cool would it be to have the team that 
upset Aston Villa away, 15 years after we were at Villa in theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> semi-final. It’s all fairytale 
stuff but I’ve got a game to concentrate on.”
 