
China’s Communist party has given the president, Xi Jinping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/xi-jinping>, the title of “core” leader, 
putting him on par with previous strongmen Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping, but 
signalled his power would not be absolute.

A lengthy communique released after a four-day meeting of senior officials in 
Beijing emphasised the importance of collective leadership. The system “must 
always be followed and should not be violated by any organisation or individual 
under any circumstance or for any reason”, the party said.

Obama’s failed ‘Asian pivot’ leaves China ascendant | Simon Tisdall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/25/obama-failed-asian-pivot-china-ascendant>
But all members should “closely unite around the central committee with 
comrade Xi Jinping as the core”, said the document, released through state 
media.

The core leader title marks a significant strengthening of Xi’s position 
before a key party congress next year, at which a new standing committee, the 
pinnacle of power inChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, will be 
constituted.

Since assuming office almost four years ago, Xi has rapidly consolidated 
power, including heading a group leading economic change and appointing himself 
commander-in-chief of the military, though as head of the central military 
commission he already controlled the armed forces.

While head of the party, the military and the state, Xi had not previously 
been given the title “core”.

Deng coined the phrase “core leader”, and said he, Mao Zedong and Jiang Zemin 
were core leaders, meaning they had almost absolute authority and should not be 
questioned. Xi’s immediate predecessor, Hu Jintao, was never called the “core”.

Great Helmsman or ruinous dictator? China remembers Mao, 40 years after death
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/08/great-helmsman-dictator-china-anniversary-mao-40-years-after-death>
The plenum meeting paves the way for a congress, held every five years, in 
autumn 2017, at which Xi will further consolidate his power and which could 
indicate who may replace him at the 2022 congress.

A new standing committee, which currently has seven members and is the 
pinnacle of power in China, will be announced at the congress.

Zhang Lifan, a Beijing-based political commentator, said now that Xi was the 
“core”, things should go more smoothly for him at next year’s congress. But he 
would have more on the line, given his increased responsibility to answer for 
economic and social problems facing the leadership.

“If the economy continues to go downhill and the rifts in society become more 
serious, the responsibility of the core is greater,” Zhang said. “Your relative 
power and authority are greater, everyone is deferring to you. But they will be 
watching to see if your leadership is good or bad.”


An unofficial campaign to name Xi the “core” has been under way this year, 
with about two-thirds of provincial leaders referring to him as such in 
speeches, according to figures compiled by Reuters, before the plenum formally 
accorded him the title.

Steve Tsang, professor of contemporary Chinese studies at the University of 
Nottingham, said that although Xi remained in a strong position, there was 
still a year to go before the congress. “There’s still a lot of unanswered 
questions. Will his successor be named? Will Xi get a third term?”

Judging by recent past precedent, Xi should step down at the 2022 congress 
after a decade at the top, but speculation in leadership circles has swirled 
that he may try to stay on, perhaps giving up the post as president but 
remaining as party leader, the more senior of the posts.
 