
Yaa Gyasi <https://www.facebook.com/YaaGyasiAuthor/>’s debut novel, Homegoing 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/homegoing.html>, is an astonishing epic set 
in Ghana and the United States, about the legacy of slavery through 
generations. It attracted a seven-figure advance and has been described as 
“hypnotic” and “brilliant”, and its 26-year-old author as “stirringly gifted”

Why trace your story through the generations? 
I began Homegoing in 2009 after a trip to Ghana’s Cape Coast Castle [where 
slaves were incarcerated]. The tour guide told us that British soldiers who 
lived and worked in the castle often married local women – something I didn’t 
know. I wanted to juxtapose two women – a soldier’s wife with a slave. I 
thought the novel would be traditionally structured, set in the present, with 
flashbacks to the 18th century. But the longer I worked, the more interested I 
became in being able to watch time as it moved, watch slavery and colonialism 
and their effects – I wanted to see the through-line.

How did the dungeons make you feel? 
I was devastated. I felt immense rage. The dungeons still smell after hundreds 
of years. There was grime on the walls and a tiny air hole at the top. When 
they closed the door, there was no light. Hundreds of people were kept there 
for three months at a time before being sent God knew where. The terror they 
must have felt – not knowing what was to become of them. You can imagine and 
you cannot possibly imagine.

The subject of slavery has produced outstanding work from Toni Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/tonimorrison>’s novel Beloved to Steve 
McQueen’s film12 Years a Slave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/12-years-a-slave>… 
And this year alone, in America, there has been The Underground Railroad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/09/the-underground-railroad-colson-whitehead-revie-luminous-furious-wildly-inventive>
 by Colson Whitehead andGrace by Natashia Deón. Slavery is something we have 
not gotten over, it is on people’s minds and it affects us still.

In this post-election space, as Donald Trump takes over, we are wondering what 
fresh hell may be about to be devised

Your novel raises interesting questions about identity – how has your identity 
been affected by place, circumstance and genes?
Place has influenced me hugely. I was born in Ghana, grew up in America, have 
lived in Ohio, Illinois, Tennessee, Alabama. I studied English and creative 
writing at Stanford and Iowa. So many people in the States grow up in one place 
and settle. It has been interesting, during this election, to register that 
places in America are vastly different and influence people’s ideologies. 
Getting to see that, having moved a lot myself, has been powerful.

And circumstance? 
My father is a professor of francophone African literature. My mum is a nurse. 
Had my parents not decided to emigrate to America, my life would have been 
completely different. One thing I ran up against a lot as a child was that 
saying “black” or “Afro-American” implies a certain cultural identity that was 
different from mine as an immigrant. I found it difficult to feel I was being 
black in the right way. The older I got, the more I realised there’s no right 
way, that everything I do and am is also allowed to be black. It took me a long 
time to realise that… the word “black” can seem to generalise everything.

And genes? 
We are shaped more than we know by our genes. Can trauma be imprinted on our 
DNA? I think trauma is inheritable.

Does suffering for black people change with every generation? 
Suffering changes and stays the same. In America, the worst was never over, 
just made new. That was something I was trying to trace in the novel – the 
trail of trauma reinvented. The history of America has involved figuring out 
new ways to subjugate black people since the beginning. In this post-election 
in-between space, as Donald Trump takes over, we are wondering what fresh hell 
may be about to be devised.

Are you religious? 
I wouldn’t describe myself as religious, although I was raised as an 
evangelical Pentecostal Christian in the south – a unique and fraught position. 
But my father would whisper: “Had the British not come to Ghana, who knows if 
we would be sitting here in church today.” So religion for me, growing up, was 
always tempered by colonialism.

Do you suffer survivor’s guilt? 
Ava DuVernay <http://www.avaduvernay.com/>, the African American director, 
wears a shirt on which is written: “I am my ancestors’ wildest dreams.” So 
there is that feeling as well. How many hundreds of thousands of black people 
in this country had to die so that Ava DuVernay could sit in that director’s 
chair?

Ava DuVernay: 'The black body is being used for profit and politics'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/30/ava-duvernay-selma-13th-interview-criminal-justice-system>
Are there great storytellers in your family? 
So many – starting with my parents, who told grand stories at parties – a 
general mode of communicating among west Africans who love large, proverbial 
narratives. I’m shy in person. I much prefer writing it to telling it. The 
closer I get to me and to the truth, the more uncomfortable I am.

A history teacher in your book advises listening out for the quiet voices. Is 
this what you are doing?
Homegoing is very much about amplifying voices.

When you returned to Ghana, did you feel you belonged? 
It is a dual thing – you belong and you don’t. I remember the Ghanaian 
passport official reading my name correctly and it felt like the biggest, 
warmest welcome. At the same time, I understand my native language but don’t 
speak it. So I am necessarily at this remove – the country can never be fully 
mine.

And how does that make you feel? 
When I was young, I was anxious about the idea that so many of these things 
end with me. If I have children, I probably won’t be able to teach them the 
language or teach them to cook the food. But as I have grown older, I’ve 
started to understand that I am allowed to forge this new identity that is more 
layered and more dualistic.

Where is home for you? 
It is a complicated question. Home right now is Oakland, California. But again 
I think I have known for many years that home, for me, can never really be a 
place. It is this thing that you carry inside of you, similar to these 
characters, particularly the Afro-American ones who have been ripped away from 
their original homes and yet have this connection to the land. Home is this 
little light that you carry inside you wherever you go.

After a novel as compendiously ambitious as yours, I can imagine you have 
earned a rest. Are you working on a second novel yet?
I hope to write a second novel but am completely caught up in publicity. It is 
the first time in my life I’ve had to do anything like this. I have had to 
relearn to sit still, be quiet – and answer questions.

• Homegoing by Yaa Gyasi is published by Viking (£16.99). To order a copy for 
£13.93 go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/homegoing.html> or call 0330 333 6846. Free 
UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99
 