
In years to come it will be remembered in Somerset as the day Sir Alex 
Ferguson dropped into Huish Park by helicopter, the most expensive player in 
English football cleared a header off his own line and Louis van Gaal sang 
Yeovil Town’s praises. It was that sort of afternoon as Yeovil embraced the 
romance of the FA Cup and gaveManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> a far more 
uncomfortable ride than anyone could have imagined.

In the end it took a world-class goal from Ander Herrera and the introduction 
of Ángel di María, a £59.7m signing from Real Madrid, to liberate United. That 
is as much an indictment of another unconvincing United performance as it is a 
compliment to Yeovil, who belied their status at the foot of League One with a 
courageous display. Joe Edwards, the Yeovil captain, summed it up perfectly at 
the final whistle. “Mass disappointment but extremely proud of each other,” 
said Edwards, whose header was nodded off the line by Di María.

United had played Yeovil twice before, each time in the FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>, winning 3-0 in 1938 and 8-0, in 
front of 81,565, in 1949 when Sir Matt Busby was building his first great side. 
Yeovil were the part-timers who had just pulled off one of the greatest 
giantkillings by knocking out Sunderland – known as the “Bank of England” club 
at the time – at the old Huish Park where the pitch sloped 6ft from one side to 
the other.

A few Yeovil supporters could have been forgiven for fearing a repeat of that 
1949 United hiding given the way their season is unravelling. Instead they 
departed wondering what might have been had Kieffer Moore snapped up a 
gilt-edged chance to put Yeovil ahead early in the second half and trying to 
get their head round the unfathomable nature of football. “How can we play like 
that and lose 2-0 against Manchester United yet get beat 3-0 at home by Leyton 
Orient a few days earlier?” asked one home supporter of another drifting out of 
the ground.

Football, and in particular the FA Cup, has long had the capacity to inspire 
players. “A game of a lifetime” was how Gary Johnson described the tie 
beforehand.

The Yeovil manager, who had high-fived his wife at home when the third-round 
draw was made, said he would not tolerate any behaviour from his players that 
would take their minds away from the game – “I don’t want the lads having 
selfies with Wayne Rooney” – but for everyone else associated with the west 
country club this was an occasion to savour in every sense.

There were chaotic scenes as the United team coach pulled up outside Huish 
Park and another frenzy when Ferguson, after arriving in style, signed a few 
autographs outside.

During the warm-up home supporters lined the pitchside wall, holding aloft 
cameras and mobile phones to take pictures of players who, in the case of Wayne 
Rooney and Radamel Falcao, earn more in a month than the entire Yeovil squad 
pick up in a year.

Perhaps the biggest surprise was that there was nothing to dampen the spirits 
of those fans – including a Yeovil supporter who flew in from Australia 
especially for the game – when the tie got under way.

Full of energy, Yeovil played as if affronted by the suggestion that the 
result was a foregone conclusion while United gave the Football League club 
enough encouragement in the opening 45 minutes to believe that an upset could 
happen.

There was, however, to be no repeat of that cup humiliation at Milton Keynes 
Dons earlier in the season when United were hammered 4-0. Tellingly, of the 
United XI that night David de Gea and Jonny Evans are the only two players to 
have started under Van Gaal since. Yeovil have won only once at home in the 
league this season but Van Gaal’s team selection here provided a measure of how 
seriously he views the FA Cup and, perhaps, reveals that lessons have been 
learned from the MK Dons experience.

For Yeovil life will now return to the rather humdrum normality of League One 
and a game on Saturday at Barnsley. The memories of the day United came to 
town, however, will live long in the memory even if Johnson and his players did 
not quite get the result they wanted.

“We wanted to make sure we gave them a fright and I thought we did that,” the 
Yeovil manager said.
 