
Bristol Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolrovers> went 
beyond the call of duty at York. Darrell Clarke, their manager, warned them 
against underestimating City, whose relegation from League Two was confirmed 
the previous week. The fear was of dead men walking free from anxiety. By the 
end York were staggering. Rovers showed neither complacency nor compassion in a 
4-1 victory Clarke called “outstanding”.

Little good it did them immediately except to keep up the pressure on 
Accrington and Oxford in the second and third automatic promotion places, who 
both also won away. But it carries the tension and hope of avoiding the 
play-offs into the last game on Saturday. They have to win but, if they do, so 
must the others to stop them displacing one or other. Theirs is at home to 
Dagenham & Redbridge, the other relegated side.

Two years ago Clarke, newly in post, failed to get the draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/03/league-two-bristol-rovers-wycombe-northampton>
 on the last day that would have kept Rovers in the league. A year ago, having 
finished second in the Conference,they came up again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/17/bristol-rovers-grimsby-town-vanarama-play-off-final-match-report>
. No one will want them in the play-offs, if it comes to that rather than the 
short cut. “We’re the chasing team. The others will be nervous,” Clarke said of 
Saturday. “It will be a real special day.” Their fans so easily filled the 
2,000 allocation of tickets for Bootham Crescent that a live beam-back to the 
Memorial Stadium was allowed, with tickets for that sold out in 24 hours.

League Two club Bristol Rovers taken over by Jordanian Al-Qadi family
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/19/bristol-rovers-al-qadi-league-two-takeover>
Clarke, though, was entitled to sound a warning about York, unbeaten in five 
games at home and whose one win in 14 games was over Portsmouth, and he was 
delighted with his side’s confident display, with Tom Lockyer commanding in 
defence and Chris Lines rampaging in midfield. “We played on the front foot,” 
he said. They have been on it for a couple of months. This was their 10th win 
in 13 games, with only one defeat.

Billy Bodin, wide on the right, beat Scott Flinders at the near post inside 20 
minutes before Matty Taylor, the division’s leading scorer with 27, 
surprisingly shot wide when Dave Winfield, whose player-of-the-season trophy 
may have gone to his head, let him through one on one. Bodin reminded him how 
to do it from a similar mishap after 70 minutes.

When Taylor, having stretched for a cross and redemption, was taken off 
holding his leg, his replacement, Jermaine Easter, scored in a minute after 
neat play by another substitute, Jake Gosling. Rovers have strength in depth. 
Kenny McEvoy’s instant response to that was less consolation than a wave from 
the grave and Lee Mansell capped it with Rovers’ fourth. Understandably the 
ground has no scoreboard.

York, honest but hapless, looked beaten long before the end, if not before the 
start. None of them got a cheer as the team were read out. As home supporters 
shuffled away to the National League, as it now is, one muttered: “We saved the 
worst to last. Abysmal.” That is how the fifth tier is seen: the abyss. Some 
blamed the owner, some the manager, some the players. “Well, it gives us 
something to argue about,” said his companion.

York City appoint Jackie McNamara as manager after Russ Wilcox exit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/04/york-city-appoint-jackie-mcnamara>
Everyone from chairman to chaplain had a say in the programme which, with only 
one home cup game, had to complete its alphabet with X, Y and Z in one issue. 
Its final item was Y for Stéphane Zubar. It somehow foreshadowed their play. 
Jason McGill, the chairman, took “full responsibility for making the key 
decisions” but felt let down by “many of the players’ lack of character when 
the going became tough” and recently those whose “behaviour became public on 
social media”, confirming that social media is an irresistible temptation for 
idiots to expose their idiocy.

The manager, Jackie McNamara, who came in November, said recruitment was 
already under way for “players with the right attitude mixed in with ability 
and a mindset that will fight to the end”. He, like Clarke, looks set to stay 
for an instant return. The Rev Paul Deo (by God) urged fans to back the club’s 
committed staff with “Keep the faith” and there are grounds for it in Rovers’ 
example, as in Cheltenham’s with Gary Johnson. Besides, they have been here 
before, spending eight years down before returning for four and reaching the
League Two <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> play-offs 
in 2014.

Meanwhile Rovers’ final opponents have scored six goals in winning their last 
two games and climbing above York. Clarke’s Pirates face dead men flying.
 