
Yossi Benayoun was plotting the perfect goodbye to Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> on Tuesday as speculation 
mounted they were about to welcome the France international Yann M'Vila.

Benayoun has revealed he wants to end his loan move from Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> by helping Arsenal to finish 
third in the Premier League, with automatic Champions League qualification set 
to provide a boost for their summer recruitment drive.

Reports on Tuesday suggested that they were on the brink of completing what 
would be a club‑record £17.7m signing of theRennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rennes> midfielder M'Vila, who has long 
been linked with a move to the Emirates Stadium.

Arsenal appear to be succeeding in conducting their summer transfer business 
early this year, having been accused of panic signings at the end of the August 
window after selling Cesc Fábregas and Samir Nasri.

Benayoun was one of the new arrivals but has proven a useful addition to the 
squad in recent months as they have fought back from a horrendous start to the 
season to move to the brink of qualifying for the Champions League once more.

The final game of Benayoun's loan spell comes at West Bromwich Albion on 
Sunday, where Arsenal need to win to be certain of finishing third. That could 
also help to deny Benayoun's parent club, Chelsea, a top-four spot but the 
32-year-old Israel captain could not care less.

"Since I came to Arsenal, I have always been committed to one club until the 
last game of the season," he said. "The only thing I want is for Arsenal to 
finish in third place – I don't care about anybody else.

"When I finish I will have to decide about my future. I am supposed to go back 
to Chelsea first and then we will see what the future holds.

"I finish here in a good way. In the last few months, I have been more 
involved. I think I have played a big part in the last few games. You always 
remember the end and I am happy with my performances in the last few months."

Arsène Wenger must now decide whether to try to make Benayoun's move permanent 
but his attention is said to be currently focused on fending off reported 
interest from Internazionale for his No1 target M'Vila. Should he succeed, 
M'Vila would be his second summer signing following the arrival of Lukas 
Podolski.

It would also be another statement of Arsenal's ambitions ahead of contract 
negotiations with Robin van Persie, who will sit down with them this summer to 
discuss extending his deal which expires a year later. Theo Walcott also has 
only a year left on his contract and he and Van Persie may wait to see who the 
club bring in before deciding whether to commit their long-term futures.

M'Vila's arrival would provide much-needed strength in central midfield, where 
Arsenal have suffered crippling injuries this season. He is also more 
defensive-minded than many of his prospective team-mates and would help to 
protect a back four that has been left horribly exposed at times.

Reports suggest he would cost £17.7m to prise from Rennes, who have lost their 
last two Ligue 1 games to end any hope they had of qualifying for next season's 
Champions League. Arsenal's current transfer record is the £15m they spent on 
Andrey Arshavin in 2009.
 