 Hussein is it anyway? 
 During one of his visits to his north-London chiropodist, Saddam Hussein is 
arrested and charged with genocide. He wins the support of an outraged Tory 
press, and further condemnation of the arrest comes when it is revealed that 
the Iraqi leader was also finalising a weapons contract that would have 
guaranteed thousands of British jobs. An attempt to extradite him to Kuwait 
fails when a Law Lord admits to non-executive membership of the human race, and 
resigns. Saddam is allowed to fly back to face Iraqi justice.

 Take it lying down 

 The 1999 Academy Award for Best Actress inevitably goes to Helena Bonham 
Carter for her portrayal of a woman dying of Lou Gehrig's disease. A smart 
career move, mirroring the success in sick or disabled roles of Jane Wyman 
(deaf-mute in Johnny Belinda), Daniel Day-Lewis, Marlee Matlin, Dustin Hoffman, 
Tom Hanks and Geoffrey Rush. Helena's research was thorough: her father 
suffered a stroke 20 years ago and, as she explained, 'I practised with his 
wheelchair.' Moves are afoot to remodel the Oscar statuette, which looks far 
too healthy. Something recumbent, perhaps, or on wheels?

 Privates on parade 

 Plans to teach pupils 'as young as five explicit names for human sexual 
organs' provokes a backlash. A private member's bill is introduced by Anne 
Widdecombe. Called the Private Member's Bill, it bans the use of scientific 
names for what the Daily Mail calls 'external parts of the body'. A generation 
hence, and only nursery terms are remembered. Road rage consists of winding 
down your window and bellowing 'silly front bottom'.

 Nuts in May 

 After helping Eric Clapton, Michael Barrymore, Caroline Aherne, Paul 
Gascoigne, Paula Yates, Sinead O'Connor, Kate Moss and Ruby Wax resume their 
careers, the Priory Clinic decides to relaunch itself as Priory One, Britain's 
leading talent agency.

 Bill's last gasp 

 In a last-ditch move, Bill Clinton calls on OJ Simpson's star lawyer, Johnny 
Cochran, for his defence. Monica Lewinsky is forced to try on 'that dress' in 
front of the Senate. She fails to get it over her hips. 'If it don't fit, you 
must acquit,' says Cochran. A triumphant Clinton poses for Hello! in a 
windowless room in the White House. But he then finds it hard to get a golf 
partner, let alone a Gulf partner . . .

 Give 'em a big hand 

 Need a guest speaker for that special event? Here are some names and their 
specialities, taken from Who's Who In Professional Speaking, 1998. Frank 
Aguirre: Speaking, training and consulting in the septic industry. Sandra 
McFall Angelo: Growing up blonde in Africa. George Robert Bell: Born a farm 
boy, now an educated farm boy. John F Poppe: Born without arms, John delivers 
high-impact messages on attitude, self-esteem and change. Franklin T McGee: 
Funeral director. Humorist. 'To laugh is to live.'

 Getaway 

 Jack Straw introduces swingeing legislation against recidivist burglars, 
muggers and car thieves. They now stand to lose their driving licences. One 
official says this 'could really hit criminals where it hurts'. A fine grasp of 
the criminal mind. They wouldn't dream of driving a stolen car without a 
licence. That would be breaking the law.
 