
Winning tip: Tobogganing in Zurich

The best way to see Zurich is from the top of its own mini mountain, 
Uetliberg, from where you get a view of the whole city, the lake and the 
countryside with mountains in the distance. It’s particularly magical in winter 
when everything is dusted with snow and the toboggan run is open – two miles of 
downhill fun from Uetliberg to Triemli! You can hop on a direct train from 
Zurich main station to the mountaintop, which takes just 20 minutes and costs 
CHF8.60 (around £7) one way. Take in the views and then hire a sledge for the 
journey down the Schlittelweg. Night sledding with flashlights is also on offer 
for those who want to take it up a notch. Finish off a day of outdoor fun on 
the mountain over a cheese fondue or with a glass of mulled wine or hot 
chocolate at one of the many Christmas markets around the city.
Nicenumber

Food, wine and fairytales in Tallin
 Photograph: Alamy 
Estonia’s capital is a fairytale town, small enough to not feel overwhelming 
on a two- or three-day break. The food is fantastic – reindeer or fish with 
fruit and sweet, sharp sauces. Breakfasts are cured meat and fish with dark 
tasty bread. Coffee shops with huge comfy sofas welcome you in for a warming 
hot chocolate and brandy after a gentle morning walking through the beautiful 
old town. And they let you stay all afternoon, moving on to wine and then more 
amazing food. Get stuck in Fat Margaret’s Tower, pretend to be a spy meeting in 
the park, and go to the charming little cathedral. It’s an extraordinary city.
ptarmigan11 

Tübingen’s chocolate festival, Germany
 The Tübingen chocolate festival. Photograph: Paula Gibson 
Less than 30 miles from Stuttgart lies the town of Tübingen, a university city 
that combines a stunning medieval backdrop of colourful buildings with the 
atmosphere of a cosmopolitan student hangout. For six days in late November and 
early December, the old town hosts the popularChocolART festival 
<http://www.chocolart.de/english-info/>, where chocolatiers from all over 
Europe come to display, discuss and sell their delicious creations. It’s an 
ideal occasion to soak up the winter atmosphere of this beautiful Swabian town, 
as you wander through the stalls with a warming cup of hot chocolate in hand, 
watching the demonstrations and sampling chocolates as you go.
Paula Gibson


Festive markets in Aachen, Germany
 Photograph: Alamy 
So easy to get to on Eurostar Plus trains, four hours from London. I was 
overwhelmed by the choice of drinks at the markets: every drink I had one day 
was alcoholic, drunk in cosy outside bars. Restaurants were busy at night but 
we found one or two with space in the evening. We had a great time atAachener 
Brauhaus <http://www.aachener-brauhaus.de/en/> after the markets closed, 
staying there until 3am on Saturday night.
asjg

An oasis of calm in Munich

 Photograph: Alamy 
Bored with interminable dark “old masters” interspersed with famous paintings 
you can’t see for crowds? Try the Alte Pinakothek in Munich. Because it’s 
undergoing renovation, it is currently quiet and costs only €4. Being half shut 
protects you from overdoing it, but there are still plenty of fabulous works, 
with time and space to enjoy those that catch your eye. In the selfie era it is 
fitting to see Albrecht Durer’s stunning depiction of himself in 1500, which 
invented the genre. Two other selfies not to miss are a very young Rembrandt, 
and Rubens with his newly-wed wife. The restrained, touching nature of the 
latter is a vivid contrast to the surrounding plethora of massive, all action 
technicolour Rubens, with their magnificently un-photoshopped expanses of 
flesh. The Neue and Moderne Pinakotheks are just as good. But under no 
circumstances buy a day ticket for all three. These are places to dawdle, then 
go for a beautiful Bavarian beer.
johnmarian

Foodie delights in Ghent, Belgium
 De Superette, Ghent. Photograph: Piet De Kersgieter 
Ghent is the perfect place to enjoy a snug city break. It’s easy to get to by 
train, being only a half hour from Brussels. The city’s Design Museum in the 
elegant old Hotel de Coninck is the perfect place to hide away during the icy 
winter days. But Ghent is also a real foodie city, offering more than just 
waffles and frites.De Superette <http://www.indewulf.be/desuperette/?lang=en> 
is fantastic restaurant/bakery housed in an old supermarket in a residential 
street near the station, serving stone baked pizzas and local, seasonal dishes 
which diners can see being prepared in the open plan kitchen. With seats only a 
few feet away from the blazing oven, the restaurant is ideal for defrosting 
after a chilly day spent exploring. Just a few steps outside the picturesque 
centre isRustpunt <http://www.rustpunt.net/>, a monastery that also offers cosy 
B&B rooms. The ancient setting is incredible, with huge gardens offering a real 
oasis within the city.
Hester Underhill

Views and more, Oslo
 Karl Johans Gate on a winter’s night. Photograph: Alamy 
Not everyone thinks of heading north in the colder months, but Oslo offers 
light and warmth in the darker season. Norwegians are big into having things 
warm and cosy and make extensive use of candles and open fires. A stroll down 
Karl Johans gate, the main street, will put you in the mood. There are outdoor 
ice rinks around the city, with skates for rent. For a stunning view by night, 
take the T-Banen (metro) up to Holmenkollen and get out and walk to the world 
famous ski jump. Take the metro further up and walk to historicFrognerseteren 
<http://www.frognerseteren.no/index_e.aspx> cafe, which also offers a 
breathtaking view over the city. Stay at nearby, heritage-richLysebu 
<http://www.lysebu.no/en/> hotel, which specialises in gourmet food and wine 
and can arrange cross-country ski rentals, which you can start using right 
outside the door.
DianaTorrens

 A trio of restaurants, Vienna
 Wiener schnitzels hang over the plate edge at Restaurant Figlmueller. 
Photograph: Alamy 
When winter temperatures in Vienna drop, here’s where to go. Warm up at 
Gulaschmuseum <http://gulaschmuseum.at/>, feasting on bowls of comforting, 
hearty pork and beef goulashes withknődel (dumplings) and boiled potatoes. Go 
traditional with Vienna’s most famous dish, wiener schnitzel, atFiglmüller 
<https://www.figlmueller.at/en/>, where queues are long and tender veal cutlets 
in crisp, golden breadcrumbs hang over the plate edges. It’s served simply with 
potato salad, washed down with jugs of wine. Indulge atGriechenbeisl 
<http://griechenbeisl.at/page.asp/lang%3Den/24.htm> , one of the oldest 
restaurants, with a maze of cosy, candlelit, intimate dining rooms.
RoyMessenger

Christmas markets of Krakow, Poland
 Nativity scene on display in Krakow. Photograph: Alamy 
As a Brit abroad, there is something oddly beautiful about inhaling the frozen 
air of Poland in the depths of winter. Your nose hairs freeze, but you still 
feel fresh. Krakow is one of the most underrated winter holiday destinations. 
The food is excellent. Travel is affordable. History is at your fingertips. The 
locals are wonderful. On top of that, all of the unique Christmas gifts you 
could possibly find are available in the main square.
KSmythe


Make a splash in the cold: Bergen, Norway

 Photograph: Getty Images 
Bergen, even when the fjords are too wet and dreary to visit, is still a 
relaxing destination for a winter break in Norway. The city offers plenty of 
distractions, many costing nothing once you’ve invested in a Bergen Card. This 
timed card allows free travel on public transport, rides on the funicular 
railway up to Floyen mountain, and entry to many of the art galleries and 
museums. I bought the 72-hour card for £38, which is a bargain when entry to 
the aquarium alone is £20. Then after an afternoon exploring, you can retreat 
to one of the cosy cafes and admire the Christmas lights reflecting on the deep 
waters of the harbour, like centuries of visitors before you.
Keen123
 