
These 10 beaches have had consistently excellent water quality for almost 20 
years, according to the Marine Conservation Society. The MCS assesses the 
cleanliness of more than 600 UK beaches by rigorously testing the water during 
the bathing season. All are featured in the MCS’s Good Beach Guide (
goodbeachguide.co.uk <http://www.goodbeachguide.co.uk/>).

Flamborough South Landing, East Riding, Yorkshire 


The site of a fishing port since the middle ages, this is the perfect beach 
experience – crystal-clear water, sandy expanses, rock pools, interesting 
wildlife and stunning views from the nature reserve cliffs. The free Living 
Seas Centre does coastal safari workshops for children, as well as other 
activities.

Sheringham, Norfolk


A traditional seaside town, where the pebble and groyned beach is beautiful, 
revealing rockpools and giant boulders at low tide. There are proper beach huts 
and plenty of cafes. If the weather is poor, you can explore the Mo Sheringham 
Museum, the Fisherman’s Heritage Centre, or take a trip on the North Norfolk 
steam railway.

Joss Bay, Kent 


Kent’s answer to Hawaii – the breaks on the beach make this is a great place 
to learn to surf and it has a surf school offering courses. Named after 
a notorious smuggler, Joss Snelling, the sandy beach sits below cliffs. There 
is a cafe and a shop selling beach gear.

Christchurch Bay, Hampshire


This stretch of coast is dotted with amazing beaches, but perhaps the 
highlights are the undeveloped beaches towards Hengistbury Head, a site of 
special scientific interest and a nature reserve packed with important coastal 
species. As most of the area is eroding, it is a good place to learn about 
coastal management and protection. Spotting the paragliders who launch from the 
cliffs is also fun for children.

Trevone Bay, Cornwall


This sandy bay near Padstow is good for surfers, bucket-and-spaders, wildlife 
buffs and walkers. At low tide, a sandbar creates a warm lagoon for children. 
The cliffs give great views to the Camel estuary, and there’s a spectacular 
blowhole, too.

Southerndown, Vale of Glamorgan


If you are into geology and fossil hunting, head to this huge and beautiful 
rural beach, which is much quieter than its neighbour, Ogmore. Although the 
cliffs are its main feature, it is sandy with large rocks emerging at low-tide 
– perfect for climbing. It is also a good spot for surfing, swimming and 
rock-pooling, and you can walk to the ruined Dunraven castle.

Formby, Lifeboat Road, Merseyside


Named after Britain’s first lifeboat station, built in 1776, this is a vast 
sandy beach, backed by dunes and pine forest – reportedly full of red squirrels 
– which is part of a National Trust site. Prehistoric footprints found in the 
mud layers are plain to see as you walk up the beach and the dunes are home to 
the rare natterjack toad.

Ganavan, Argyll and Bute 


This beautiful sandy bay with clear water is within walking distance from 
Oban, the ferry port for the Inner and Outer Hebrides, and has great views to 
Mull and Skye. When you have explored, walk round the headland to dramatic 
Dunstaffnage Castle or head into Oban for fish and chips.

Gullane, East Lothian 


Popular with families because of the sheer amount of space, the beautiful sand 
and extensive dunes, it is a great place to fly a kite, canoe or windsurf. 
Gullane is also part of the world-famousJohn Muir Way <http://johnmuirway.org/> 
conservation trail

Fraserburgh, Aberdeenshire


Another enormous beach on which to walk, swim, sandcart, fly a kite and 
explore the dunes. There is aseashore centre 
<http://www.snh.gov.uk/enjoying-the-outdoors/simple-pleasures/get-out-and-about/location-detail/?id=11048>
 run by Aberdeenshire Council Ranger Service, and up on the nearby Kinnaird 
headland, near theMuseum of Scottish Lighthouses 
<http://lighthousemuseum.org.uk/>, is a great place to spot whales, dolphins 
and seabirds. In Fraserburgh, a port where fish is landed daily, there is also 
theHeritage Centre <http://www.fraserburghheritage.com/> for rainy days.
 