
Time Out Mercado da Ribeira, Cais do Sodré

Within weeks of its opening in May 2014, the new food court at Mercado da 
Ribeira – Lisbon's biggest fresh food market – has become a firm favourite 
among Lisboans. The first permanent foodie venture for Time Out, the market 
hosts a total of 35 kiosks – all branded in the same smart black and white 
signage and selling regional specialities, including Azeitão sheep's cheese, 
plates of ham from the Alentejo, and custard tarts from award-winning cafe 
Aloma. Tins of sardines in beautiful retro packaging at the Conserveira de 
Lisboa, wines from Garrafeira Nacional or chocolates from Arcádia make great 
presents to take home. In addition, five top chefs have restaurants here, 
offering clever dishes playing with Portuguese flavours from €5 (marinated 
mackerel with gazpacho at Alexandre Silva). Settle yourself at one of the high 
wooden benches and it would be very easy to while away a few hours eating your 
way around Portugal's culinary highlights. The original fish, fruit and 
vegetable stalls on the other side of the huge 19th century building still sell 
their wares every day, except Sunday, until lunchtime.
• Avenida 24 de Julho, open from 10am to midnight (Sunday to Wednesday), 10am 
to 2am (Thursday to Saturday)

Cervejaria Ramiro, Intendente
 Cervejaria Ramiro, Intendente, Lisbon Photograph: Isabel Choat 
Nicknamed the seafood temple, Ramiro is a historic Lisbon institution, well 
discovered by tourists but still loved by locals. This is the place to come to 
indulge in the country's fantastic seafood – glass cabinets display fabulous 
tiger prawns, huge red scarlet shrimp, spikey shellfish (known as spiny 
dye-murex), crab, lobster, oysters, and of course, the classics in every 
Portuguese restaurant: clams andpercebes (barnacles). Originally opened in 
1956, Ramiro's is a well-oiled machine with slick, speedy service from waiters 
who zip about holding giant platters of seafood aloft, but still have time for 
a joke with regulars, or to indulge children – my son was given paper and 
pencils and lots of hair ruffles. Piles of toasted bread dripping in garlic 
butter are brought to your table while you wait – and replenished when you 
inevitably polish them off. If you can, leave room for a prego, a steak 
sandwich which is usually served after the seafood. Get there early to avoid 
queuing, although the staff do their best to keep hungry punters happy, 
offering drinks to those standing in line.
• Avenida Almirante Reis 1, +351 21 885 1024, cervejariaramiro.pt 
<http://www.cervejariaramiro.pt/>

Decadente, Bairro Alto
 Decadente, Bairro Alto, Lisbon 
The Independente Hostel & Suites is one of the city's impressive crop of 
stylish hostels and the Decadente is its in-house restaurant, an atmospheric, 
funky space that appeals as much, if not more, to locals and non-guests as it 
does to the budget-conscious residents. Big shuttered windows, artfully 
arranged vintage kitchen finds and low-hanging table lamps create a stylish 
backdrop for a modern Portuguese menu, including seafood rice (described on the 
menu as Portugal on a plate), Iberian pork belly and cod with honey and 
almonds. Tables spill out into a pleasant cobbled courtyard.
• Rua de São Pedro de Alcantara 81, +351 21 346 13 81, theindependente.pt 
<http://www.theindependente.pt/explore-us/decadent/?lang=en>

Cantinho do Avillez, Chiado
 Cantinho do Alvillez, Lisbon 
José Avillez is one of Portugal's most famous chefs, a trailblazer in the same 
mould as Ferran Adrià and Heston Blumenthal, and owner of Michelin-starred 
Belcanto and the new Mini Bar, a bar with gourmet, experimental canapés. 
Cantinho do Avillez, his bistro, is a small, simple room embellished with 
industrial chic features – factory lights and a concrete floor. Olives were 
brought to our table with a delicious tomato and olive oil dip and 
filigree-thin toast. The menu cherry-picks from international cuisines with the 
likes of lamb tagine, steak tartar with New York potatoes and suckling pig with 
Asian flavours. My tuna main course was the most tender piece of the fish I've 
ever eaten, and prawns were sweet and fresh. Go at lunchtime and order the 
steak sandwich (€8.75) or dish of the day (€10.50) to keep the bill down. Even 
at night, the prices (starters from €4.50, mains from €17.25 and deserts from 
€5) are a lot less than you would pay for a similar meal and service in many 
other European cities. Worth splashing out for.
• Rua dos Duques de Bragança 7, + 351 21 199 2369, cantinhodoaville.pt 
<http://www.joseavillez.pt/en/cantinho-do-avillez>

Tágide Wine and Tapas Bar, Chiado
 Tagide Wine and Tapas Bar, Lisbon 
This fabulous tapas bar is in upmarket Chiado, below the famous restaurant of 
the same name. There are two lunch options: one course for €8.50 or three for 
€12.50, both including a glass of wine and coffee. Or order separate small 
plates of Ibérico ham (€9) or the Portuguese classicamêijoas à bulhão pato 
(clams in white wine and garlic). If you haven't already gorged on custard 
tarts, the €12.50 menu is worth it for Tágide's version, served warm with 
cinnamon ice-cream. Set in an elegant room of glossy dark wood and shelves 
lined with Portuguese wines, overlooking the town hall, it's a place to linger.
• Largo da Academia Nacional de Belas Artes 18 and 20, Chiado, +351 213 404 
010, restaurantetagide.com <http://www.restaurantetagide.com/wine.html>

Kiosks and churrascarias, city-wide
 Kiosks and churrascarias, Lisbon Photograph: Isabel Choat 
In Lisbon kiosks aren't the desperate last resort of late-night commuters, but 
civilised rest spots on some of the city's famous hills or in shady parks, and 
offering decent snacks, reasonably priced fresh juices, good coffee, beer, even 
cocktails. Many have been in the same spot for decades, their original wrought 
iron restored; newer ones are replicas but are painted the same classy racing 
green as the originals. As an example, the kiosk opposite the Independente 
hostel in Bairro Alto sells draft Sagres for €2, coffee for €1.20, sandwiches 
from €3.80 and soup of the day for €3. Come at happy hour (6-9pm) when a 
(150ml) beer costs €1.50 and a caipirinha €6, and nab one of the deckchairs 
offering views across the terracotta rooftops.

Every neighbourhood has at least one churrascaria – or grill. The Churrasco da 
Graça in the villagey neighbourhood of the same name is a classic example ... 
white paper tablecloths, TV on in the corner, tables full of locals. Grilled 
sardines cost €8, as does half a chicken (a great takeaway option if you're 
staying nearby).
• Largo da Graca 43

Atira-te ao Rio, Cacilhas
 Atira-Te Ao Rio, Lisbon 
Lisbon is a city of spectacular views. Numerous miradors, rooftop terraces and 
historic towers provide panoramas. But if you want to see the whole city 
stretched out along the river bank you need to cross the Tagus to the south 
bank. Ferries run from Cais do Sodré to Cacilhas four times an hour until 
1.20am. A short walk alongside abandoned riverside warehouses brings you to 
this little restaurant where a few tables and chairs lit by torches are set 
along the water's edge. There are tables inside (and fishing nets on the 
ceiling) but the point here is the view: you come here to see the sun setting 
behind the 25 de Abril suspension bridge and, as darkness falls, the twinkling 
orange lights of the city. The food's pretty good too. Nibble on tuna pâté, 
olives, bread and olive butter as you choose between confit cod, fish stew or 
Portuguese steak. Our dinner for two with beer, a glass of wine and two 
puddings came to €44.
• Cais do Gingal 69/70, +351 21 275 1380, atirateaorio.pt 
<http://www.atirateaorio.pt/> 

SeaMe, Chiado
 SeaMe, Bairro Alto, Lisbon 
A modern take on the seafood restaurant, SeaMe has solid wooden tables, 
waiting staff in grey Mao-style jackets, waitresses sporting I'm a Fish addict 
T-shirts, and a menu sprinkled with slogans ... 'Good things come to those who 
wait', and so on. Naff wording aside, SeaMe offers an Asian-inspired menu that 
makes an interesting change from the classics seen in most other restaurants. 
Alongside sushi and sashimi there's pan fried Azores parrot fish; seared tuna 
comes with wasabi ice-cream; and other fish listed include John Dory, grouper, 
turbot, cod, red mullet and Dover sole.
• Rua do Loreto 21, +351 21 346 1564, peixariamoderna.com 
<http://www.peixariamoderna.com>

'The Nuns' Canteen' (Associação Católica Internacional ao Serviço da Juventude 
Feminina – ACISJF)
 The Nun's Canteen, Lisbon Photograph: Isabel Choat 
Tucked away on an unmarked side street, with a discreet sign on the door, this 
is a place few Lisboans know about, let alone tourists. Run by a Catholic 
association (hence the nickname), it's a favourite among students and local 
office workers who come here to eke out their euros – €6.50 buys you a main 
course and either soup or a dessert – served from a hatch by women in nylon 
aprons and hairnets. At that price you can't expect gourmet food but it's 
freshly cooked and comes with a gorgeous view from the roof terrace – tucked 
between the lush gardens of expensive apartments – of the rooftops and the 
suspension bridge. A bargain lunch with a spectacular view.
• Travessa do Ferragial 1, +351 213 240 910

À Margem
 A Margem, Lisbon Photograph: Isabel Choat 
Belém is one of the most touristy parts of Lisbon. They come by the coachload 
to see Belém tower, the spectacularJerónimos Monastery, 
<http://www.mosteirojeronimos.pt/pt/index.php> and of course, the Pastéis de 
Belém <http://www.pasteisdebelem.pt/>, the cafe that invented the famous 
custard tart, and still sells up to 20,000 of them a day. Despite their 
popularity the family owners have admirably refused to open other outlets, 
which means long queues for takeaways but it's easy to nab a seat in the 
labyrinthine interior. A tart of crispy, flaky pastry filled with meltingly 
creamy custard and sprinkled with cinnamon sugar costs a modest €1.05. They are 
dangerously moreish so avoid if you want an appetite for À Margem, a 10-minute 
walk along the waterfront. Housed in a gleaming white former shipping container 
with views of the river from its open side, À Margem is a cool, trendy spot 
that attracts well-heeled locals and some tourists. There's a selection of 
sandwiches (from €6.50), salads (from €9.80) or fill up on custard tarts before 
you arrive and just take in the view over a glass of €5.20 wine as sailing 
boats glide past. Not cheap, but a good option in a part of the city big on 
American chains and low on decent places to eat.
• Doca do Bom Sucesso, Santa Maria de Belém, +351 91 782 4149,  amargem.com 
<http://www.amargem.com/>

• Additional reporting by Celia Pedroso 

• Flights were provided by easyJet <http://www.easyjet.com/en/>. Flights to 
Lisbon from five UK airports start at £34.99 one way. Accommodation at Vila 
Berta, a one-bedroom apartment in Graça, was provided byYour Apartment in Lisbon
 <http://www.micasaenlisboa.com/apt/>
 