
1. Skydive

 There are a few logistical reasons why skydiving hasn’t traditionally been a 
cruise ship experience: the need to have a plane on board, and the importance 
of a very accurate landing, for example. But all that has changed with the 
advent of RipCord by iFly. Don your jumpsuit and goggles, step into the 
2.5-metre diameter chamber and float in a wind tunnel in an experience that’s 
just like a skydive freefall. It’s available on Royal Caribbean’s Quantum Class 
cruise ships, including the state-of-the-art Ovation of the Seas, which makes 
its debut in Australia this month.

2. Float in a capsule over the sea

 If you like the idea of flying but are more interested in enjoying a 
bird’s-eye view than a skydiving adrenaline rush, try a ride in Royal 
Caribbean’s North Star. It’s a jewel-shaped glass capsule in which you gently 
rise 90 metres above sea level, from where you can enjoy 360-degree views of 
the surrounding ocean, land and ports. It promises to be a spectacular 
experience, without the need for wearing goggles or messing up your hair. 
 Photograph: Roy Riley / sbw-photo/Supplied by Royal Caribbean 
3. Catch a wave or climb a rock 

 Modern superliners have embraced the need for a wide variety of activities to 
suit all types of traveller, which is why on Royal Caribbean ships you’ll find 
action activities such as rock climbing (on a 12-metre wall, suitable for all 
levels), FlowRider (in which you grab a board and catch some waves on a 
12-metre-long surf simulator) and Splashaway Bay (a waterpark for kids with 
water cannons, drench buckets and winding slides). Then there’s the yoga, 
pilates, cycling, ice skating, basketball... If an action packed holiday is 
what you are looking for, you’ve certainly found it.

4. Watch a robotic barman mix you a cocktail

 Never worry about the barman getting your order wrong again. The robotic 
bartenders in the Ovation of the Seas’ Bionic Bar are meticulous in their 
measurements, meaning you’ll always get exactly what you asked for. In fact, 
you can even customise your order right down to how much ice is used. The 
robotic barmen can also move to the music, and as a finishing trick will 
perform a synchronized dance as a final flourish. Of course, the human 
bartenders are pretty cool too…

5. Go on the bumper cars

 Enough of the new-fangled – let’s get back to some good, old-fashioned family 
fun. There’s nothing quite like thumping into your siblings, parents, aunts, 
uncles and great grandmas from behind the wheel of a bumper car, and Royal 
Caribbean has achieved yet another nautical first by bringing bumper cars onto 
cruise ships for the first time. You’ll find them in SeaPlex, the largest 
indoor active space at sea, alongside other totally awesome activities such as 
roller skating and flying trapeze.

6. Have your wishes granted

When you book into a Star Class Suite on Ovation of the Seas, you get a Royal 
Genie: an incredibly helpful person who turns your entire cruise into a VIP 
experience. From organising personalised shore excursions and private shopping 
expeditions to making sure your favourite wine is chilled and waiting for you 
after a hard day’s fun, they will cater for your every whim. Of course, when 
you’re staying in a two-storey loft suite there’s every chance you may never 
want to leave, but just in case you do, your Genie will be able to organise 
everything.

7. Find a room with a view of more than just the sea

 Royal Caribbean’s Two70 is a room named for its 270-degree panoramic views, 
courtesy of vast floor-to-ceiling windows spanning almost three decks at the 
ship’s stern, making it a pretty cool place to hang out during the day and 
connect with the great big blue outside. Then, at night, Two70 takes on a new 
persona. In a stunning transformation, the windows become giant video walls, 
while robotic video arms integrate with spectacular live entertainers such as 
aerialists to create a mind-boggling multidimensional experience. From a lounge 
to a hi-tech performance space, it’s a room with a view, and more.
 Jamie’s Antipasti Plates Photograph: Matt Russell/Supplied by Royal Caribbean 
8. Dine at a celebrity chef’s restaurant

 There is no need to reserve your table six months ahead of time to dine at a 
world-renowned chef’s restaurant. Lovable Londoner Jamie Oliver (OK, he was 
born in Essex, but near enough) has his own restaurant, Jamie’s Italian, aboard 
Royal Caribbean’s Ovation of the Seas. It’s one of 15 dining experiences on 
board that ship alone, with other highlights including Michael’s Genuine Pub, 
the first American gastropub at sea, courtesy of the James Beard Award-winning 
chef, Michael Schwartz.

9. Meet the kids’ favourite DreamWorks characters 

 There is no end of kids’ activities on cruises, and select Royal Caribbean 
ships really bring the magic to life for the younger traveller. The cast of 
DreamWorks movies such asShrek, Kung Fu Panda and Madagascar are all on hand to 
share the fun - from turning up for meals to performing in character parades 
and posing for pictures, the DreamWorks Experience characters are going to make 
life on dry land look pretty dull after this.

10. See an outdoor movie

 One of the best things about summer are outdoor cinema sessions, and now you 
can also enjoy them at sea. Royal Caribbean cruise ships offer 20-square-metre 
screens providing sport and movies for all the family while you’re lounging 
around by the pool or soaking in a spa. Many of their ships also have 3-D 
cinemas, the only downside of which is that the kids will insist on going on a 
cruise holiday every year.

 