
1. The soil 
Just as wine has its “terroir”, so coffee takes its distinct flavour from the 
soil – with a bit of help from the sun, the rain, and the farmer.

2. The flower
The white flower of the coffee tree has a delicate jasmine scent, and loses 
its petals a few days after it has been fertilised.

3. The environment
The flowering of the coffee trees depends on the altitude, climate and the 
region in which they are grown.

4. The cherry 
After a few months, the plant produces a red fruit, called the cherry. It 
usually contains two beans, although in a tiny percentage it will yield a 
single, intense nugget called a “peaberry”, named for its pea-like shape.

5. The pulp
Beans lie facing one another, surrounded by a parchment-like skin, a sticky 
fruit called “mucilage” and the red cherry skin, often referred to as the pulp. 
These layers are removed to reveal the green coffee bean.

6. Drupes 
Cherries are also known as drupes. They are green at first, but turn orangey 
red as the fruits mature (except for the yellow bourbon variety.)

7. The tropics 
Coffee is best grown in tropical regions because it needs warm temperatures 
and abundant rain. Nespresso travels the world searching for the top 1-2 % of 
the highest-quality coffee beans from small producers.

8. Arabica 
The fruity tasting arabica variety is grown at high altitudes. The best 
arabicas are produced close to the equator, at an altitude of between 1,000 
metres and 2,000 metres, where sunlight and cool nights slow down maturation. 
The fruit forms six to eight months after flowering.

9. Robusta 
The more rustic robusta grows on plains at an altitude of between 100 metres 
and 800 metres in hot and humid climates. The fruit forms 9-11 months after 
flowering.

10. Flavour 
Arabica coffee has the potential for more elegance and acidity, with a 
flowery, fruity character, while robusta retains a degree of bitterness and has 
more body.

11. The blends 
Nespresso uses both high quality arabica and robusta in its Grands Crus. The 
alchemy between the two types of bean, selected from different regions, reveals 
a wealth of flavours.
 