Analysis of Google data in 2016 revealed which country to be the most desirable 
destination in the world?  Cuba  Croatia  Greece  Italy Which country is the 
happiest in the world, according to UN’s Sustainable Development Solutions 
Network?  Bhutan  Iceland  Brazil  Denmark This year marked the centenary of 
the US National Park Service. Which was the first park?  Yellowstone  Mackinac  
Yosemite  The Grand Canyon Which country banned tourists completely from one of 
its most fragile islands this year?  Indonesia  Thailand  Solomon Islands  
Greece Which city this year marked the 100th anniversary of an armed 
insurrection?  Poznan  Dublin  Helsinki  Mexico city Skyscanner, the travel 
website sold to China’s Ctrip in a £1.4bn deal last month, is based in which UK 
city?  Manchester  Cardiff  Bath  Edinburgh The Rolling Stones played a 
historic gig to 500,000 people in which city?  Rio de Janeiro  Havana  Mexico 
City  Pyongyang Mamma Mia! The Party, described as “Dinner entertainment in 
several acts” opened in which city this year?  Sydney  London  Athens  Stockholm
Disney remade its classic Jungle Book film this year, with the voices of Bill 
Murray, Scarlett Johansson and Idris Elba. In which Indian state were Rudyard 
Kipling’s original Mowgli stories set?  Himachal Pradesh  Madhya Pradesh  Uttar 
Pradesh  Kerala The film A United Kingdom co-starred David Oyelowo as Prince of 
Bechuanaland, a UK protectorate in Africa that is today known as what?  Kenya  
Gambia  Botswana  Zimbabwe Which of these countries was not used as a location 
for Oscar-winning The Revenant, starring Leonardo DiCaprio?  Argentina  Chile  
Canada  USA Rogue One: A Star Wars Story was partly shot in which idyllic 
island nation?  Maldives  Seychelles  Mauritius  Madagascar This is a new 
extension to which famous London building?  Hayward Gallery  Tate Modern  V&A  
Tower of London Which iconic railway line was, surprisingly given everything 
that was happening at the time, opened 100 years ago this year?  Hershey 
Electric Railway, Cuba  The Blue Train, South Africa  The Orient Express, Europe
 Trans-Siberian, Russia The striking City of Wine museum opened in which city 
in June?  Beaune  Lyon  Bordeaux  Paris Which country opened a spate of glass 
walkways, including this one strictly not for vertigo sufferers?  Thailand  
Chile  China  New Zealand Which area of the UK voted most overwhelmingly to 
remain in the EU?  Scotland  Northern Ireland  Cornwall  Gibraltar Brexit 
dominated the news this year, but what was the first – and until now, only – 
country to leave the EU, or EEC as it was then called?  Norway  Greenland  
Saint Martin  Switzerland Which country is the newest member of the EU?  Croatia
 Slovenia  Albania  Serbia Which country is the smallest EU member, in both 
population and area?  Luxembourg  Malta  Estonia  Cyprus  You got…  Challenge 
your friends Submit answers  