Bill Shorten began the year with an awkward moment on his supermarket tour to 
oppose a rise in the GST, when he asked a customer in Queanbeyan Woolies about 
their favourite type of a certain fruit or veg. Which one?  Mango  Lettuce  
Avocado  Apple In November George Brandis was caught on an open microphone 
giving a candid description of his state colleagues in the Queensland LNP. What 
did he call them?  Mediocre  Very mediocre  Very, very mediocre  Doing the best 
job possible under the circumstances After Wyatt Roy lost his seat of Longman 
at the federal election, he said he was looking forward to “just being 26 :)”. 
How did this manifest itself?  He travelled to the Malaysian grand prix and 
stripped down to his budgie smugglers  He travelled to Bali and got 
embarrassingly drunk  He travelled across the US on an “epic” road trip  He 
travelled to Iraq and was caught up in fighting against Islamic State"It was 
very stupid, and I’m disappointed in Wyatt," said Malcolm Turnbull in his best 
father's voice. “He’s a deep thinker. You wouldn’t think it, but he actually 
is.” Who was the Nationals senator Bridget McKenzie talking about during 
September's marathon four-hour Senate filibuster?  National party leader 
Barnaby Joyce  National party Senate leader Nigel Scullion  Outspoken LNP MP 
George Christensen  Her cattle dog, Blue Nikki Savva’s book on the relationship 
between Peta Credlin and Tony Abbott came out in March. Which of these 
activities was not mentioned as something Credlin would allegedly do for Abbott?
 Bake him biscuits  Clip his fingernails  Let him sip wine out of her glass  
Feed him food off her plate Who said they “trembled” at the thought of Donald 
Trump becoming US president?  John Howard  Sarah Hanson-Young  Christopher Pyne 
 Penny Wong In March Greens leader Richard Di Natale posed for a controversial 
photoshoot for GQ magazine. What was he wearing?  Socks and sandals  A Richmond 
Tigers guernsey  A black skivvy Di Natale's fashion sense led him to be 
unkindly compared with Daniel Craig, Steve Jobs and Sinéad O’Connor, among 
others.  Very little In February, which organisation promised to “fight for a 
cause which could determine the future of western civilisation, freedom, 
liberty and humankind”?  The Institute for Public Affairs  The Ramsay Centre 
for Western Civilisation, where Tony Abbott became a director  GetUp  George 
Christensen’s anti-Islamist website One Nation (and now former One Nation) 
senators have backed a colourful range of policies since their election in 
July. Which of these is not among them?  Australia to leave the United Nations  
The creation of a publicly funded Patriotic Broadcasting Channel  Reverting to 
the UK pound as Australia’s currency  The recall of judges for ‘proven 
misbehaviour’ Which Labor figure declared they were “not a shy person” and had 
“never been afraid of the spotlight”?  Paul Keating on launching Troy 
Bramston’s biography  Linda Burney on becoming the first Indigenous woman 
elected to the lower house  Sam Dastyari on stepping down from the frontbench 
over a donation from a Chinese businessmanThe former frontbencher resigned as 
he feared becoming "a distraction".  Anne Aly on attacks from Julie Bishop 
tying her to radical Islam On election night in July, which commentator did the 
Queensland LNP senator James McGrath accuse of being “the king of the 
bedwetters”?  Alan Jones  Chris Kenny  Paul Murray  Andrew Bolt David 
Leyonhjelm quoted the demographer Bernard Salt in urging the ABC to break free 
from what?  The smashed avocado wall  The chai latte blinkers  The goat’s 
cheese curtainThe smashed avocado curtain is the one concealing opponents of 
the shooting lobby, it later transpired.  The quinoa-proof fence On the eve of 
the federal election, Malcolm Turnbull appeared on Kitchen Cabinet. How did he 
describe his job as prime minister?  The best fun I have ever had in my life  
Not quite as much fun as I expected  More fun than being opposition leader  
Long periods of relentless humiliation punctuated by moments of fun "Would you 
like to be pompous for the whole day, or only for this question?" Who did Penny 
Wong have in her sights at estimates in October?  George Brandis Brandis had 
taken her to task for her alleged misuse of the phrase "square away", telling 
the Labor senator: "You mean reconcile."  Christopher Pyne  Sussan Ley  Peter 
Dutton In November, which publication ran the headline: “AHRC head Gillian 
Triggs ‘failing older white men’”  The Shovel  The Australian  The Betoota 
Advocate  The Retiree In December, who said: “We won’t deal with the problems 
of this country until we say this guy [the emperor] does or doesn’t have 
clothes on.”  Julie Bishop  Pauline Hanson Perhaps not even then.  Tanya 
Plibersek  Jacqui Lambie In October, which international celebrity called on 
Barnaby Joyce to end the live export trade?  Chrissie Hynde  Johnny Depp  
MorrisseyJoyce responded on Twitter, saying: "Sorry I don’t cut it at Splendour 
in the Grass."  Brigitte Bardot Who gave Malcolm Turnbull Donald Trump’s number?
 Gina Rinehart  Joe Hockey  Greg Norman "He is a great advocate for 
strengthening the Australian-American alliance," Turnbull said.  Shane Warne 
Which minister reacted angrily after an unflattering photo of him was posted on 
Twitter with the single-word caption "Eek"?  Christopher Pyne  Josh Frydenberg  
Scott Morrison  Peter Dutton The immigration minister asked Fairfax journalist 
Stephanie Peatling to remove her tweet, but not before others had shared it 
widely. The losing candidate in the last seat to be decided at the federal 
election signed off with a tweet saying: "Thank you linesmen. Thank you ball 
boys. My wife still loves me. Not so sure about my children." Who was it?  Luke 
Simpkins in Cowan  Ewen Jones in Herbert  Peter Hendy in Eden-Monaro  Tony 
Windsor in New England  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  