
I didn’t want to be a directeur sportif. I know the stereotype: beer belly, 
cigar in the mouth, saying: “Do this, do that, shut up, I’m right.” I’m quite a 
social animal, I like talking about things. In my first year at Sky I didn’t 
really talk English but during the Vuelta a España Dave Brailsford came to me 
and said he wanted me to become part of the management team. I thought he was 
joking, that it was just a bit of English humour. He said he was serious, that 
he’d asked the riders and staff and it was curious: I was the only one who 
didn’t speak English but I understood everyone and everyone understood me so 
maybe I had a gift of communicating with people; that in turn meant perhaps I 
could be a manager.

As a directeur sportif you use the feelings you had when you were a rider; you 
can feel how much they are suffering. You have to take decisions for them but 
it’s important to have a dialogue with them, to take account of everyone’s 
opinion. On the bike, with the way it hurts, the kilometres you cover, it’s 
hard to cast your mind forwards. When a rider is under the cosh, with 
everything that is going on, it’s unfortunately impossible to take in more than 
four or five important bits of information. My job is to think ahead on their 
behalf.

Anyone can give a clear opinion, that’s easy. All you have to do is bang on 
the table with your fist. The most important thing with being a directeur 
sportif is to understand the physical and mental state of your riders; working 
from that you have to take the best decision when you give your opinion. You 
have to spend time with the riders, talk things over with them, not just sit in 
the car and say: “You are doing what I want you to do. That’s my call. I’m 
the boss.”

You need clear decision-making but you need to talk everything through. Many 
directeurs sportifs make decisions but don’t explain why. That is the worst 
thing you can do because the riders feel frustrated and don’t understand why a 
particular call has been made. Suddenly the team doesn’t work better.

If the riders are frustrated it’s impossible to move forward as a group if the 
directeur sportif makes a mistake or the riders get something wrong.

You need to have a really good interaction between both parties. It’s not 
necessarily a matter of explaining before, but afterwards putting things on the 
table and saying: “OK, I made this decision and it was the right one for this 
reason or that reason; or, that was a rubbish call and now I understand why.”

I like things to be clear, well defined. I do the morning meeting with the 
stage profile in front of me and I put little bubbles on it – boom, Ian 
[Stannard] and Luke [Rowe], you go from there to there – so that it’s visual, 
especially for the Spanish riders who don’t talk too much. Two arrows – from 
there to there. That’s the plan if all goes well. The idea is that everyone 
comes out of the bus with the same idea in their minds.

The Montpellier stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/13/tour-de-france-2016-stage-11-live>
, with all the wind, was simple to manage. The riders had only to stay in 
position near the front, first or second team in the line, and, if another team 
went to the front and began to single file it out in the gutter, they had to 
stay together so that, even if they weren’t in the front of the echelon, they 
would be able to keep within reach. The crucial thing is not to be spread all 
over the place. You have to keep in a position where you are on top of things.

For the mountains we work out the riders’ order on the morning of the stage. 
The evening before I’ve seen all the riders I get an idea of how they feel and 
have a theoretical order; I prepare for the meeting the next morning, and say: 
“OK guys, that’s how I see things, does it have any sense for you?” Generally 
they say yes but there are mornings when someone will say, “I don’t feel at my 
best; let me change with someone else.” Afterwards, when the race is on, we 
talk about it again. We can change the order again if someone’s crashed or 
feels off-colour.

In the third week of the Tour you can’t expect the riders to be 100%, so the 
idea is to get them to give 100% of what they have. If I get 70% of the 40% 
strength they may have on a given day, that’s disappointing; what I want is 
100% of that 40%. If you can get that, it’s fantastic.

Nicolas Portal is a directeur sportif for Team Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> at the Tour de France
 