
What kind of sex education did you receive in the classroom? Was it an awkward 
slideshow containing more euphemisms than you could possibly comprehend? Or was 
it a series of lessons covering not only the relevant biology, but also 
sexuality, gender and reproductive health?

According to the UN, the latter is still quite rare 
<http://www.unfpa.org/comprehensive-sexuality-education>, which means the 
majority of young people lack the knowledge they need to make informed 
decisions.


In our recent podcast on the importance of sex education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/jun/15/lets-talk-about-sex-why-do-we-need-good-sex-education-podcast>
, we heard that young people who received good quality sex and relationship 
education were less likely to start having sex at a young age, and less likely 
to become teenage parents.

What was your experience of sex education? We asked readers what kind of 
lessons they received on the subject. Here’s a selection of responses.

Let's talk about sex: why do we need good sex education? – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/jun/15/lets-talk-about-sex-why-do-we-need-good-sex-education-podcast>
Sex was largely ignored

“I received none. It was just a discussion with my roommates at boarding 
school. In biology classes we were taught reproduction, but there is a clear 
difference between that and sex education. One chemistry teacher digressed 
during a chemistry class and told us about how some girl got pregnant from 
sitting on the toilet seat in a public toilet.”Ona, 34, Nigeria


“Sex education was mystic during my younger years. In our place the best word 
for sex waskufanya tabia mbaya – Swahili words meaning bad manners – and it was 
rarely spoken about. In school the most sex education I got was in my science 
and biology class, where we learned about the reproductive system and STIs. The 
rest you got to learn on your own. The sex education was rather wanting and 
more should be done to create awareness.”Anonymous, 22, Kenya

“Sex education at my Catholic school was rather limited. Once a pupil asked a 
question and our teacher said, ‘I am a miss, not a mrs, and therefore I am in 
no position to answer that question!’ And that was that.”Rose, 30, Scotland

“I think it would be fair to say that no one in that classroom understood what 
we were being told. There were lots of stories about virtue and chastity, but I 
think the teacher was afraid to say anything about sex itself, in case we got 
so excited we’d all start doing it that night.”Joyce, 28, Nigeria

The demonstrations were confusing

“My RE teacher came into the room holding a large knife and two apples. She 
sat at her desk and, after a brief period of silence, started to cut up one of 
the apples in her hand. She started to talk: ‘Every girl is an apple. Some 
apples hang high in the tree, and get all the good sunlight and nutrients. 
These are virtuous apples. Some apples, however, hang low in the tree, where 
men can easily walk by and pluck an apple off the tree and take a bite of their 
juicy flesh. But after a man takes a bite of an apple, he doesn’t keep it. 
Instead, he throws it to the ground, where it will wither and die.’ She went on 
like this for the rest of the hour, continuing to chop up the apple in her 
hand, basically telling us, ‘Don’t be a slutty apple’.”Sophie, 21, UK

“It began with a demonstration. A piece of Sellotape was wrapped around one 
person’s wrist, then another’s, then another’s: ‘Sex is like Sellotape; if you 
use it with too many people, you lose your stick’.”Anonymous, 22, UK

We had to fill in the gaps ourselves

“The girls learned about periods and how a baby developed. We were told sex 
led to STIs and that eye contact could lead to sex … I have heard it is more 
descriptive and they teach about condoms now. I appreciate this. Students need 
to know. I learned how to put my partner’s condom on from YouTube.”Anonymous, 
21, US

“Sex education was a part of the formal programme, but the classes were 
completely useless. They were held by a biology teacher, who kept telling us to 
be abstinent until we are married. Try convincing 16-year-olds to do that. 
There was no talk about birth control, or abortion, which is illegal in Poland. 
I received a proper sex education thanks to my parents.”Anonymous, Poland, 26

“I didn’t really get much sex education but it was partly covered in health 
education. The programme lacked all the important information about sex, I 
learned more about sex from peers. In schools now they are delivering sex 
education through a life orientation subject. But the teachers still shy away 
from talking sex with learners – they still put their own beliefs and values 
forward.”Yethu, South Africa, 34

“It was the fifth grade, and I was about 10 or 11. They took all the boys and 
girls from that year, and put us into separate rooms (one for the boys and one 
for the girls). They then had the school nurse and principal come in and show 
the boys a slideshow that had medical illustrations of the penis. They 
mentioned that we would soon be getting hair down there. They then gave us a 
small stick of deodorant and sent us on our way. That was literally all of the 
sex education I received from the public education system.”Anonymous, 23, US

They told me everything I needed to know

“Sex education lessons in school when I was 12 or 13 were informative and we 
mostly learned the anatomical differences between boys and girls, since we all 
knew what happens during and after sex. We also learned about various ways to 
prevent pregnancy as well as diseases. The way our teacher told us these things 
was factual. She gave us the feeling that there’s nothing to be ashamed of.”
Sabrina, 19, Germany

“I learned a lot about sex and the reproductive system from year seven onward. 
The teachers were engaged, supportive and more mature in their approach in 
comparison to the way I was taught in primary school. I guess this had a lot to 
do with going to a single-sex school for girls.”Anonymous, UK, 23

 