
This photograph was taken when I was about seven years old. I did a bit of 
modelling for a few years back then. My parents were fairly skint: we were two 
adults and five children living on a sailing barge in Kent. My father sold 
office equipment and my mum homeschooled us. They had some friends who were 
photographers and they suggested we could make some extra money by modelling. 
Some of my siblings tried it, but I was the most amenable.

This advert for Scott’s Porage Oats was shot in a studio in Chelsea, west 
London. There wasn’t actually porridge in the bowl. The photos took so long to 
get right and they needed to keep the steam going, so they used some kind of 
cigarette. It has become family legend that it was a joint: I remember my 
mother saying that there was a wacky smell and that the photographer was quite 
leftfield, but she disputes that now. I definitely have a hypnotic, spaced-out 
look that I don’t have in other pictures of me as a kid.

I have no idea what look the advertisers were going for. I was too young to 
know about the real cold war. It’s quite a serious pose, with the spoon 
clutched in my hand, and very 60s in its styling. They definitely didn’t want 
the jolly, happy-little-kid-bouncing-about look. They didn’t do much to me: 
that was how I had my hair at the time – very thick and wavy. Today, it’s thin 
and white – although it is still curly.

I was paid by the hour, £3 or £4, so it always helped if it took a long time, 
which this did. I’d be sitting under hot lights while they tried to get 
everything right; I must have been baking in that polo neck. The money all 
added up to a useful amount: we bought a couple of ponies that we had on the 
land, and we’ve still got a wooden kitchen table from Heal’s.

‘The army was guarding the runway’: the 1948 British evacuation of Palestine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/28/british-evacuation-palestine-1948-photograph>
I was also in some commercials, but we didn’t have a television so I never saw 
myself. My grandmother was very proud. But it was more boring than glamorous. 
It basically involved an awful lot of sitting around and doing nothing, 
repeatedly – like taking one bite out of 50 biscuits. Then there was all the 
driving to and from London, which took hours. Around the age of nine or 10 my 
patience ran out – I went on strike and refused to do it any more. Modelling 
wasn’t my passion; back then, I was set on going to sea. I’ve more or less 
ended up there, too, because I’m now a doctor of nannofossils (plankton-like 
fossils) at University College London, and often go on research cruises.

Some time back in the 1990s, my mother dug out all the old magazines with the 
ads; I think this one was in a newspaper colour supplement. I photocopied it 
and have had it up ever since. It’s on the dining room wall at the moment. Even 
without me in it, I think it’s a great image. It used to confuse my son when he 
was around the same age, because he thought it was a picture of him.

Funnily enough, I was never a big oat eater. I didn’t particularly like the 
stuff, and I still don’t. I much preferred cornflakes.

• Are you in a notable photograph? Email thatsme@theguardian.com <>
 