
Ken Wyatt gave his inaugural speech to parliament in 2010 wrapped in a 
kangaroo skin coat that was given to him by elders of the Noongar people, the 
traditional occupants of south-westWestern Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/western-australia>.

The coat, Wyatt explained 
<http://www.abc.net.au/local/stories/2010/09/30/3026030.htm>, was presented to 
him as a symbol of his heritage, and a reminder to take his culture and 
experiences with him in his new endeavour.

Wyatt made history in 2010 as the first Indigenous person elected to the House 
of Representatives. On Wednesday, he broke new ground again, becoming the first 
person with Indigenous heritage to be sworn in as a minister.

He will take on the assistant health portfolio, a role his 15-year career in 
public health has prepared him well for.

Seven things the cabinet reshuffle tells us about Malcolm Turnbull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/20/seven-things-the-cabinet-reshuffle-tell-us-about-malcolm-turnbull>
Heeding the advice of the Noongar elders, Wyatt has kept his culture close 
during this parliamentary career, fighting for the rights of Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait islander people, and for non-discrimination of all Australians.

But when it comes to public process on eradicating racism, Wyatt is pragmatic. 

The Racial Discrimination act “hasn’t changed people’s attitudes towards who 
they discriminate against”, he said.

Despite public outcry over the watering down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/18/racial-discrimination-groups-unite-against-morally-repugnant-law-changes>
 of the act, and the level ofsupport AFL player Adam Goodes received 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/31/support-for-adam-goodes-as-richmond-stun-hawthorn-at-the-mcg>
 after being booed by fans, there simply is not the appetite for adding racial 
non-discrimination clauses to the constitution, he argued.

“Australia’s not ready for that,” Wyatt told Guardian Australia.

Proposals to reform the constitution to recognise Australia’s first peoples 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/25/bipartisan-report-recognition-indigenous-australians-constitution>
 kick-started the debate on whether the nation’s founding document should 
include broader non-discrimination clauses.

Those clauses are “highly unlikely to be supported”, said Wyatt, who headed a 
parliamentary committee into constitutional recognition. “That’s one that a 
tough decision has to be made.”

He said that adding anti-discrimination clauses to the constitution would act 
as a de facto bill of rights, and that the public had still not come to grips 
with that concept.

The symbolism of being on the frontbench is a tremendous one
Ken Wyatt 
“If there was a common accord, say at the end of a decade, where we could put 
together a set of words that would be enshrined in a constitution, that would 
safeguard every person based on a non-discriminatory factor, then I don’t have 
an issue with that. But at the moment, we’ve not had the mature debate that’s 
needed,” the new assistant minister said.

Wyatt rejected the suggestion that momentum for constitutional reform has died 
down, and admitted that he had formulated a question that he thought was 
suitable to be taken to the people for a referendum on the issue, flagged for 
2017.


The question was taken to the former prime minister, Tony Abbott, and attorney 
general, George Brandis. He was tight-lipped on the content, saying that he was 
still to have a conversation with new prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, on its 
content.

Wyatt acknowledged the symbolic significance of his elevation to the ministry.

Indigenous Australians want treaty, not constitutional recognition, says elder
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/12/indigenous-australians-want-treaty-not-constitutional-recognition-says-elder>
“It’s surreal, it’s a privilege,” Wyatt said. “Any Indigenous Australian has 
the capacity and capability of achieving their aspirations. There are a whole 
lot of barriers that impact on each of us individually, but you work to rise 
above those. And so the symbolism of being on the frontbench is a tremendous 
one.”

Wyatt was born in Bunbury, south of Perth, in 1952, one of ten children born 
to parents Don and Mona. Together, his parents have Yamatji, Wongi and Noongar 
ancestry, and his mother was a member of the stolen generations.

Her experiences weighed heavily on the member for Hasluck, and he used his 
first speech in the House of Representatives to thank Kevin Rudd for issuing 
the apology to the stolen generations.

“When the former prime minister delivered the apology on 13 February 2008 in 
this chamber I shed tears for my mother and her siblings. My mother and her 
siblings, along with many others, did not live to hear the words delivered in 
the apology, which would have meant a great deal to them individually,” Wyatt 
said in 2010. “I felt a sense of relief that the pain of the past had been 
acknowledged and that the healing could begin.”

“At that point, the standing orders prevented an Indigenous response. On 
behalf of my mother, her siblings and allIndigenous Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians>, I, as an 
Aboriginal voice in this chamber, say thank you for the apology delivered in 
the federal parliament,” he said.

Ken Wyatt breaks ranks with Tony Abbott by calling for early referendum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/16/ken-wyatt-breaks-ranks-tony-abbott-calling-for-early-referendum>
Growing up, Wyatt used to wake before dawn to check the rabbit traps he had 
set the night before, before riding his bike to school. The animals he caught 
were his family’s primary food source.


“I came out of a lifestyle of poverty, where there was 10 of us and you 
struggle,” he told Guardian Australia. “Along the way you run into roadblocks, 
you run into hurdles, but you don’t let them push you aside from what you hope 
to aspire to.”

 He did not always aspire to be a politician. He initially aspired to a career 
in medicine but an offhand comment from his year 8 teacher changed that.

“She said, some of us are meant to teach, and I ended up teaching. Her words 
of advice I think tempered my thinking, and I ended up taking the teaching 
pathway,” Wyatt said.

He had been particularly lucky to have teachers in his life who not only 
inspired him, but who supported him throughout his career.

I think one of the challenges is, in Aboriginal affairs, that we listen to 
only a handful of leaders
Ken Wyatt 
“I am here before you today in this chamber because of the influence of 
education and my year one teacher, Miss Abernethy,” Wyatt said during his 
inaugural speech. “Her unfailing faith in my ability to succeed and serve 
Australian society resonated on the day of the election when she turned up to 
hand out how-to-vote cards for me in Maddington. This ongoing support 50 years 
after I was in her class has been particularly humbling.”

After 16 years as a teacher and public servant in the WA Department of 
Education, Wyatt moved closer to his childhood dream by taking on a role in the 
WA, and then New South Wales, departments of health.


His work in Aboriginal health won him an Order of Australia in 1996.

“I always believe that the system has a responsibility to address the health 
needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait islander people, not just specific 
programs,” Wyatt said.

He acknowledged the “uncomfortably high” suicide rate among Indigenous people 
in his electorate, but rejected the idea that the government should set a new 
Close the Gap target for mental health.

“Of all the areas that I think we would never achieve a target, [one] would be 
mental health, because there are so many variables,” he said. “What we should 
be doing though is creating a target for the number of services and types of 
services that will reach people that we know are vulnerable.”

Sorry Day protesters voice anger at 'continuing stolen generations'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/26/sorry-day-protesters-voice-anger-at-continuing-stolen-generations>
He wants all parliamentarians to meet with Indigenous members of their 
electorates in order to identify the “gaps” that exist for them.

“I think one of the challenges is, in Aboriginal affairs, that we listen to 
only a handful of leaders. We never talk to the community leadership at the 
community level, and until we start doing that we’re not going to see the 
changes,” Wyatt said.

Wyatt hopes that he will make changes as the assistant health minister, 
describing ministers as “pathfinders” in their portfolios. He joins several 
other new ministers and assistant ministers in Turnbull’s new-look front bench.

There was, however, one notable thing missing from photos of a smiling Wyatt 
after Wednesday’s swearing-in ceremony.


The kangaroo coat that he wore with pride, bearing the hallmarks of history, 
is his no more. He donated it to the art department of Parliament House, so it 
can go on display for the benefit of any budding politicians – Indigenous or 
not – who visit the capital.
 