
In a leafy, quiet district less than an hour’s drive from Rwanda’s capital, 
the calmness of the community of Mbyo belies the dark and traumatic past of its 
inhabitants.

Related: My journey back to Rwanda: confronting the ghosts of the genocide 21 
years later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/15/my-journey-back-to-rwanda-confronting-the-ghosts-of-the-genocide-21-years-later>

Here, Laurencia Niyogira and her nextdoor neighbour, Tasian Nkundiye, have 
become firm friends. But 22 years ago, at the height of the Rwandan genocide, 
Nkundiye murdered nearly all of Niyogira’s family, and left her and her 
siblings for dead.

“I am very grateful to her,” says Nkundiye. “Ever since I wrote to her from 
prison, confessing to my crimes and asking her for forgiveness, she has never 
once called me a killer. Now, I often leave my children with her when I have to 
be away from the village. She has set me free.”


The two villagers form part of a pioneering community of 54 families living in 
the reconciliation village of Mbyo, one of six set up in Rwanda’s rural regions 
by a non-profit Christian organisation to promote healing after the brutality 
of the 1990s.

The project was launched by a local NGO called Prison Fellowship Rwanda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda> (PFR), which identifies people and 
families in need of housing, regardless of their actions during the genocide.

PFR seeks to bring together survivors and perpetrators who were directly 
connected by the genocide. In Niyogira’s case, her family moved into the 
village first, and Nkundiye joined them after he was released from prison.

Now, almost 3,000 victims and perpetrators live in the six reconciliation 
villages, a success PFR attributes to its emphasis on forgiveness.

 Laurencia Niyogira and her nextdoor neighbour, Tasian Nkundiye. Photograph: 
Amandas Ong 
Aside from attending group discussions on conflict resolution, villagers also 
look after livestock together, grow maize and cassava in a co-operative, and 
share a common bank account to pay for their health insurance.

It was a tragedy for everyone, whether you were Hutu or Tutsi
Alexandre Guma 
“We are motivated by the fact that we run this whole place ourselves,” says 
Niyogira. “No soldiers, no governmental presence.”

Over the course of 100 days after the assassination of Rwanda’s then 
president, Juvénal Habyarimana, a Hutu, in 1994, more than 800,000 ethnic 
Tutsis were systematically murdered, along with Hutus who refused to 
participate in the killings.


In the years after the genocide, many Rwandans found themselves struggling to 
cope not just with the immense trauma but also with practical issues, such as 
where they should live.

“It was a tragedy for everyone, whether you were Hutu or Tutsi,” says 
Alexandre Guma, communications director at PFR. “If you had killed people and 
had gone to jail, you often returned to find that your home had been destroyed 
or taken away. And if you were a survivor of the genocide, your entire family 
had died and you had nowhere else to go.”

Guma believes that the villages are distinct from any other initiative aimed 
at national reconstruction because they are ongoing and sustainable.
 Rwandan children at the genocide memorial cemetery in Nyanza, north of 
Kigali. Photograph: Jean-Marc Bouju/AP 
Rwanda’s gacaca court system, consisting of citizen-run tribunals first 
implemented in 2001, helped in part to facilitate communication between alleged 
perpetrators and survivors as the first step in transitional justice. But Guma 
thinks that reconciliation is a long, tricky process that requires far more 
effort.

“To apologise and to forgive are one thing, but people can still go out of 
their way to avoid each other when they move back to their old neighbourhoods. 
If Rwanda is to heal, people have to confront their innermost feelings every 
day so suffering and anger doesn’t come to the surface again.”

The reconciliation villages have also helped to ease some of the strain on 
Rwanda’s severely over-crowded prisons in the aftermath of the genocide.

Related: Rwanda genocide: Catholic church sorry for role of priests and nuns 
in killings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/rwanda-genocide-catholic-church-sorry-for-role-of-priests-and-nuns-in-killings>

In the early 2000s, new laws put in place by President Paul Kagame’s 
government meant many so-calledgénocidaires could be released from prison if 
they contacted surviving victims and expressed repentance. Nkundiye was one of 
those prisoners, choosing to move to a reconciliation village after his 
confession.

At Mbyo, residents don’t shy away from acknowledging their status as 
“perpetrator” or “survivor”.

Silas Uwesegumuremyi, whose father was killed by another resident at Mbyo, 
says this honesty is vital to the project. “Genocide is something impossible 
for anyone to mentally accommodate unless they have gone through it themselves. 
We must remember the specific roles we all played in 1994, but remembering 
doesn’t bring anger any more. It strengthens us,” he says.

Last year, the National Unity and Reconciliation Commission published a survey 
showing that up to 92.5% of Rwandans feel reconciliation has been achieved. 
Rwanda has attained several other impressive milestones, including the highest 
percentage of female representation in parliament.
 Mbyo village. Photograph: Amandas Ong 
However, many are convinced more needs to be done. “I think we’re doing well, 
but there are still residual problems that will get worse if we allow them to 
fester,” says Reuben Kanyesigye, a social worker. “The children of prisoners 
are often vulnerable because their parents are under long sentence. They often 
become resentful, fail to understand their parents’ mistakes, and turn to 
crime. More needs to be done to protect and educate them.”

Florence Batoni, co-ordinator of the peace-building programme at a local NGO, 
Never Again Rwanda, is inclined to agree that projects targeted at young people 
are important. “If someone has had his whole family killed by his neighbours, 
it’s only natural that there are trust issues that are hard to get rid of. 
Until today, there are still genocide deniers who live amongst us,” she says. 
“It’s difficult to estimate how many there are, and almost impossible to reach 
out to them to change their minds if we cannot identify them.”

I lived in sorrow for a long time. But I found that I couldn’t live like that 
forever
Laurencia Niyogira 
Batoni thinks seminars and informal debates for young people both in Rwanda 
and the surrounding countries of Burundi, Uganda and the Democratic Republic of 
the Congo will help to guard them against a return of genocidal ideology.

Critics of Kagame’s regime have also argued that post-genocidal recovery has 
been a largely ersatz process due to the government’s strict regulation of 
reconciliation policy, which has come in the form of participation programmes 
such asumuganda, a designated public cleaning event that takes place on the 
last Saturday of each month.

Initiated to bring the entire country together regardless of ethnic divisions, 
there are those who wonder, however, how these compulsory programmes help to 
solve more pressing problems among communities, such as the post-traumatic 
stress disorder faced by survivors.

But Mbyo’s residents argue otherwise. “It was bad governance that sowed the 
seeds of discord in 1994, but it has also been good governance that turned 
things around,” says Aloyse Mutiribambe. “At the end of the day, political will 
helps to make things happen, but it is us – the people – who were most deeply 
affected by the genocide, so it must also be us who change things for the 
better.”

Little wonder that the row of benches beneath the trees at Mbyo are a popular 
spot for mingling, and are an enduring, literal manifestation of thegacaca 
(which translates to mean “justice among the grass” in Kinyarwanda).

When asked if she still holds occasional anger towards Nkundiye, Niyogira 
shrugs. “I have been through many hard times. I’ve drunk from pools of water by 
the road while fleeing to Burundi, I’ve lost my family, I’ve lived in fear that 
the people who did this to me would come back for revenge after being released 
from jail. I lived in sorrow for a long time, and could not look any Hutu in 
the eye. But I found that I couldn’t live like that forever.”

 * This article was amended on the 12 January 2016 to correct a mix up in the 
names of main interviewees in the piece
 