 On Friday the 6th an old, grey-headed Irishman, habited in a long topcoat 
which appeared to have served its owner for many years, went to the parish 
church of Bury, and after making a very deliberate survey of the edifice, 
walked in at the southern entrance, and marked the inner doors with the sign of 
the cross.
He then proceeded to the chancel door and having subjected the interior to a 
similar survey, came out, closed the door with considerable violence, locked 
it, and walked off with the key.

His proceedings, however, had been watched by the sexton, who stopped him and 
demanded the key; but the old man refused to give it. The Irishman flourished a 
stout walking stick, and seemed perfectly inclined to abide the result of a 
struggle. His strength proved not equal to his determination, and a third 
person interfering in aid of the sexton, he lost possession; and what was 
worse, soon found himself in the custody of a constable.

He was taken before the magistrates the same day, and, from the incoherent 
expressions he let fall, his idea seemed to be that the churches had been 
originally taken from the catholics, and having signed the doors with what he 
calls "the sign of the Lord," he had taken this straightforward method of 
reclaiming one of them.

But the magistrates, not recognising the right, committed the reclaimant for a 
short time to the New Bailey, to consider the subject more at leisure.

The Relief of Joseph Lancaster

In our advertising columns will be found an appeal to the public on behalf of 
Joseph Lancaster, the able and energetic founder of that widely diffused system 
of education which bears his name.

This highly meritorious, though, in a worldly sense by no means prudent, 
individual, it appears, is now at upwards of sixty years of age, residing in 
Canada, earning for himself, his wife and children, a hard and scanty 
subsistence as a common labourer! We hope the bare announcement of this painful 
fact will be sufficient to raise a sum of money sufficient to purchase an 
annuity as may secure a humble but certain competency for the remainder of his 
days to him who wrought for tens of thousands unspeakable benefits.

[Lancaster devised the "monitorial" system of mass education in which more 
proficient children were used to teach other children under the direction of an 
adult. In the early 19th century it was widely used to provide the rudiments of 
education for poor children in Europe and North America.]
 