 The sixty-third annual meeting of the Lancashire and Cheshire Branch of the 
British Medical Association was held at the Bolton Town Hall yesterday.
In a paper on cigarette smoking and carbonic oxide poisoning, Dr. J. Hilton 
Thompson advanced a new theory. By some, the paper on cigarettes had been 
condemned as injurious, while others looked with suspicion upon the metals used 
in the lettering, and suggested copper poisoning. None of the explanations 
advanced appeared to him to be satisfactory. In considering this question it 
was necessary to remember there were two kinds of smoking - by simply drawing 
the smoke into the mouth and then expelling it, and smoking in which the smoke 
was inhaled into the lungs and then expelled as a thin diffused cloud.

The first mode was the usual one adopted by pipe and cigar smokers, and when 
they considered the enormous number of people in all ranks of life who indulged 
in these luxuries without apparent detriment, they felt that a moderate 
indulgence in this kind of smoking was not to be looked upon as being injurious 
to health. The inhalation of smoke was entirely confined to cigarette smoking, 
and it was amongst this class that one found the deleterious consequences.

Dr. Thompson gave the results of extensive experiments in burning tobacco by 
pipe, cigar, and cigarette, and showed the presence of carbonic oxide in 
tobacco smoke. As the blood had an affinity for carbonic oxide 300 times 
greater than it had for oxygen there was sufficient in cigarette smoke to do an 
immense amount of injury if inhaled in sufficient quantities.

The Doctor, continuing, turned his attention to cigarette smokers, and spoke 
of the habitual inhalers as being slaves to the habit, as having a peculiar 
anaemic, earthy complexion, in some cases laryngitis being produced. They had a 
disinclination to work, and appeared not to have much mental or physical vigour.

After referring to the consequences of inhaling carbonic oxide poison, the 
speaker showed how an indulgence in cigarette smoking during a student's 
college career might alter the whole course from a success to a failure.

Those of mature age indulging in cigarette smoking, probably beyond making 
themselves less fit and less inclined for work, would not be affected to any 
great extent. The strong opinion held by the public concerning the injurious 
effects of this habit was justified, and the American people who enacted laws 
to remedy the evils to the young smokers had a good deal more wisdom than many 
gave them credit for at the time.
 