 Mr. [William Charles] Macready gave his last performance before another 
overflowing audience. He chose "Hamlet" for his farewell; and he never played 
the part with more care and fervour. Those who have done us the honour to read 
our lucubrations from time to time may recollect that we have ventured to 
differ from Mr. Macready as to his embodiment of Hamlet, and we, having some 
time ago given our reasons for such dissenting opinions, remain unchanged.
But we feel too much [for] Mr. Macready - too much regret at his retirement 
from the stage - to select his last performance as an occasion for criticism. 
At the close of the play Mr. Macready came forward to bid farewell and was 
received with enthusiastic applause from all in the house. A more expert pen 
than ours has furnished us with a verbatim report, as follows:

"Ladies and gentlemen, I have appeared before you in an assumed character for 
the last time, and having now had my hour upon the stage, must henceforth be 
heard no more. This is to me a serious, and a melancholy reflection. An actor's 
intrusion of his feelings upon an audience are and indeed should be rare 
occurrences.

"I should hesitate to trespass upon you now but for the apprehension that in 
taking a silent leave, I might appear insensitive of your kind estimation of my 
exertions. So far from that, your appreciation of my endeavours to illustrate 
our Shakespeare's divine [works] has made it invariably a pleasure for me to 
appear before you. (Applause.)

"Even from my boyish days, the enthusiastic yet discriminating character of 
your audiences met my observation, and draw forth my frequent remark; without 
flattery, I may assure you I have always placed faith in your judgment, and 
therefore have felt honoured in your applause. (Applause.) Its cheering sound 
will reach my ears no more, but its stimulating influence will not be forgotten 
by me; and, gratefully remembering many professional visits here, I shall think 
of the connection which I still partially have with this community.

"My words are but weak interpreters of my thoughts and feelings. Let me merely 
say, that the most earnest good hopes for the prosperity of Manchester I embody 
in that word 'Farewell'; and, uttering it with fervent emphasis of truth, I 
most respectfully and regretfully take my leave."

This address was delivered with a quiet earnestness; and, at its conclusion, 
the greatest actor of the present day retired and was no more seen among us.
 