 There is probably a great deal more smoking among the undistinguished mass of 
women than careless observers think, [Mr. E. Oliver Duerr told the Manchester 
Physical Health Culture Society last night].
In Montrose, smoking among the women is only less general than among the men. 
There you see them, in the evening and after their day's labours, sitting on 
the upturned boats which they have helped to beach or on their own doorsteps 
pulling at their short clay pipes with contentment written upon their brows.

Mr. Duerr would tell them that there is enough nicotine in their tobacco to 
poison the whole of them if they would take the trouble to extract it and 
swallow it as nicotine. The same thing has been said of carrots except that it 
is arsenic in that vegetable; and yet everybody eats carrots.

Napoleon did not smoke, says Mr. Duerr, and neither does Lord Roberts. There 
are 50 diseases which spring from or are aggravated by smoking. The tobacco 
habit damages the eyes, it reduces the temperature, it affects nutrition on 
both sides of the skull, for while it impairs the brain it also causes the hair 
to fall out, it makes otherwise honourable and human men selfish in the society 
of non-smoking ladies and children, and it keeps the working classes from 
attending public worship.

In short, it was set down that all tobacco should be reduced to a solution 
which would be found useless for killing snakes - once you have caught them - 
and for washing sheep. If smokers will not give it to the snakes or wash sheep 
with it, but will obstinately smoke it, they are requested by Mr. Duerr and one 
of his quoted authorities to inhale the smoke into their lungs and there retain 
it to be absorbed.

If they will deprive the snakes of a most effectual poison and the sheep of a 
superior wash, let them at least consume their own smoke and not pollute the 
atmosphere in defiance of the rights of non-smoking man. If they would give the 
snakes and the sheep their due but feel unable to make the sacrifice let them, 
Mr. Duerr advised, give up breakfast and supper, let them give up tea and 
coffee, and soon they will give up all their bad habits naturally and without 
conscious effort.

To frighten these young smokers Mr. Duerr exhibited a book called "The 
Cigarette Smoker," which has on its cover the picture of a skull and crossbones 
constructed of cigarettes, and he gave a number of awful examples which only an 
American doctor with a book in his mind could discover.
 