
It is not without a certain stern satisfaction that English people will learn 
that the Sultan of Zanzibar has set his face against in the matter of the slave 
trade, and that his last communication to Sir Bartle Frere was of such a nature 
as to make further friendly advances on our part "not only useless but 
derogatory."

By this act the Sultan, in the emphatic language of a correspondent, 
apparently semi-official, of the Times, has "placed himself in direct 
antagonism to civilisation, and by announcing himself the champion of slavery 
has thrown down the gauntlet, not only to Great Britain, but to all those other 
nations who have promised Her Majesty's Government their support and sympathy." 
By a clause in an old treaty, England agreed to permit the "domestic" slave 
trade - the transport, that is, of slaves from one part of Zanzibar to any 
other.

This licensed trade has been made the cover for a trade of a very different 
kind. Every year 20,000 slaves are brought from the interior to the coast, and 
more than nine-tenths of them shipped to foreign parts. For every slave brought 
alive to the coast half a dozen die on the way. It is impossible to exaggerate 
the horrors of this trade. First the kidnapping, with its inevitable 
accompaniments of murder and outrage: then the cruel forced march; worse than 
all, the horrible voyage in the pestilential hold of an Arab dhow.

Sir Bartle Frere was instructed to negotiate the abrogation of the clause in 
the treaty under shelter of which the abuse had arisen: and to take practical 
measures to ensure the abuses were not continued. By his refusal Seyd Bargash 
has put himself forward as champion of all the infamies involved in the slave 
trade. From the foreign trade his profits chiefly arise, and in [it] the swarm 
of rich Banians [Hindu traders] who guide him are alone interested.

We quote from the letter of the Times correspondent: "The news will spread 
rapidly. It is most absolutely necessary that the policy to be now pursued for 
abolition should speedily demonstrate that slavery will not be prolonged by one 
hour by the Sultan's refusal."

One thing seems clear - if slaving is to be suppressed on the East Coast, it 
can only be by the same hands which have suppressed it on the West Coast.

The Sultan has been assured by his advisers that Sir Bartle Frere's mission is 
merely a concession made by the British Government to satisfy a passing fit of 
popular enthusiasm. He has yet to learn that slavery is a practice as to which 
we have somewhat decided opinions and that our constancy has stood the test of 
efforts and of sacrifices sustained through a whole generation.
 