
[This is an extract from the Guardian's daily guides to the Art Treasures 
Exibition at Manchester.]

We now pass from Turner-the representative, as he may be called, of the 
many-sided power-to the one who was his opposite, alike in technical practice 
and in the narrow range of his sympathies and subjects, John Constable. Born in 
1766, at East Bergholt, in the fertile valley of the Stour, which divides 
Suffolk from Essex, his earliest impressions were of the gentle hills, the 
fertile meadows, and fat pastures, the luxuriant woods, the locks and the 
mills, which make the neighbourhood of his native village one of the 
pleasantest parts of pastoral England. Constable's heart was in East Bergholt 
all his life; and a circle of a few hundred yards around Flatford, near his 
native village, comprised the scenes from which his best pictures were 
painted-the lock, of which two pictures may be seen in our Exhibition, and the 
landscape called "The White Horse," among the number.

All his pictures here exhibited illustrate this intense sympathy with the 
nature in the midst of which his eye was educated and his mind was formed. Of 
all aspects of nature he most felt the beauty of clouded skies and sudden 
gleams. It is such "greatcoat" weather, as Fuseli christened it, in all his 
pictures here. In all of them we stand, as the painter loved to stand, by the 
margin of the brimming river, with its luxuriant growth of burdock, and 
plantain, and sedges, its fringe of sallows, and its eyots with their thick 
growth of aged willows.

We seem, as we look, to see the pulses of the stream as, stirred with languid 
strokes of the oar, it waves all its lazy lilies, or to hear the cheerful dash 
of the scull race, or to mark the rise and fall of the water in the lock, among 
the piles and sluices, and weed-grown fissures of the dank brickwork. And 
always the low cloud, grey with its weight of rain, or leaden with its freight 
of thunder, hangs over our heads, and all the light comes in fleeting bursts, 
or falls in pencils from a shrouded sun. Always the same earth-the same sky-the 
same spire-the same mill-the same meadows-the same river. Constable was a true 
snail. He carried his home upon his back.

The "Salisbury Cathedral" was another of Constable's favourite pictures. It is 
contributed by our townsman, Mr. Samuel Ashton. He may congratulate himself on 
the possession of a genuine, plashy, willowy, weedy, rain-clouded Constable, 
with more than is agreeable to us of his peculiar blackness and dirtiness of 
colour.
 