
The church door had been forced open during the night. The church warden 
arrived early on Tuesday morning to unlock the place, only to discover the side 
door already swinging open. Her heart sank. We do have occasional robberies, 
althoughsince the candlesticks were taken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2015/mar/20/not-feeling-terribly-les-mis-my-nicked-candlesticks>
 we have little of value left to pinch. And besides the thieving, there is 
always the threat of vandalism. Windows are often being smashed, and our church 
hall was deliberately burned down a few years ago – by bored kids, I suspect, 
although the police have never arrested anyone. So the warden was right to be 
cautious as she stepped inside.

The first thing she noticed was that all the candles had been lit. And by all, 
I mean all. The main altar candles, the side altar candles, about 20 or so on 
the votive candle stand, the one in front of Our Lady, and so on. For a high 
church establishment such as ours, lighting all the candles is quite an 
undertaking. The placelooked like a John Woo film set 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dtuWGO6JD38>. And there, sitting a few pews up 
from the front, a solitary man sat still. He hadn’t broken in to rob or damage, 
he had broken in to pray. And judging by the amount of candle wax he burned, he 
had been there half the night.

They chatted. He apologised for the door. And then left. Later that evening, 
as the weekly congregation gathered at our properly designated evening prayer 
time – what some call “organised religion” – we agreed that there was much to 
admire in a man who had gone to such remarkable lengths simply to get into a 
church to pray. Call the police? Certainly not – would that more people were so 
keen to come to church.

“Was he, erm, OK… if you follow?” asked a friend on Twitter. That could have 
meant anything, of course. But I took her to be asking if he was a bit 
unstable, unhinged maybe. “Are any of us OK, if you follow?” I replied, 
deflecting the question. I’m certainly not “OK, if you follow”, and never have 
been. And maybe that’s why I also need to sit alone in church and pray.

Years ago, when I had the keys to St Paul’s Cathedral, I would frequently sit 
in there on my own at night. And I do the same now in my bombed-out 1960s 
community church. Of course you can do it elsewhere, but these are places 
set aside for it. Here the silence creeps into me, a bit like the cold. Not the 
silence of empty nothingness but the silence of sitting comfortably with a 
friend. And into that silence I bring all that is not OK with me.

The chemistry of prayer is the meeting of these two elements: that little surd 
of hidden desperation that some (most, all?) of us carry around with us, often 
without owning up to it, and that vast expanse of purposeful silence, the 
shorthand for which is God. In my experience, these two elements are drawn to 
each other. And the slow reaction between them is worth breaking into any 
church to find.

There are various accelerants to this chemical reaction – the repetition of 
liturgical formulas, even lighting candles. Like all organised religion, 
this is easy enough to sneer at. But key to the reaction is silence and time. 
For both of these eat away at our excuses, our false hopes, our lack of 
reality. Self-serving bullshit doesn’t easily survive the rigours of time and 
silence. And in this fantasy-busting environment I am lent the courage to open 
the most defended bits of me to the infinite love of God.

Sorry, this is probably far too religious a thing to say in a secular 
newspaper. And in a wider culture that has got so used to defending itself with 
irony and sarcasm. To say what one believes straight up is to break the omertà 
of collective insincerity – the punishment for which is a rather predictable 
ridicule.

But for those of us who are “not OK”, we have little choice but to 
accept this as a consequence. The need for God can be just too strong, 
overwhelming. And I totally get why someone might break into a church to find 
it. So, good on him. I hope he found what he was looking for.
 