 The weekly meeting of the Board was held yesterday, at the Poor-law Offices, 
New Bridge-street; Mr. C. H. Rickards in the chair. Mr. Harrop, the clerk, read 
the following letter:-
"Fund for the Relief of Distress in the Manufacturing Districts, Manchester,

Dear sir - Will you kindly intimate to your Board that there is a feeling 
gaining ground that many poor people feel themselves better off under the 
Guardians and relief committees than by accepting such work as the mills now 
offer.

We, as a Committee, have various cases under investigation of refusal to 
accept work, and we shall feel bound to expose such persons; and that, having a 
letter stating the fact of such refusal, we beg to enclose a copy.

We shall be glad if you will make the matter known amongst your recipients of 
relief, and assist us in putting an end to this state of things (if it exists). 
- Yours truly, Thos. Clegg

(Copy of letter received.) "Brownsfield Mill, Ancoats, December 30, 1862. 
Gentlemen - We are now in want of forty weavers. Several have been, and refused 
to work. We shall continue to want weavers until the looms are filled. -Jno. 
Miller."

Mr. Lings said he had several cases in which the applicants for relief said 
they could not earn eight-pence a day if they went to work. He recommended them 
to go to work, and if they did not earn enough to keep them, to represent the 
matter to the relieving officers. The Chairman said the Guardians had nothing 
to do with the amount of wages. If they could obtain work they were bound to 
take it. Mr. Seyer asked what was to be done if a large family could not earn 
as much per week as the Guardians allowed them?

The Chairman said he would have inquiries made respecting the facts, and would 
request to see the wage book, to ascertain if any of the workpeople in exactly 
similar circumstances to those applying for relief could earn enough to keep 
them. If the operatives could not get a maintenance by their work, the 
Guardians had the power to give them some little assistance.

Mr. Sever said he had no doubt that many operatives made the difficulty of 
manipulating the material an excuse for disinclination to work, while some 
employers took advantage of the present state of things to offer what was not 
sufficient wages.

It was resolved that Mr. Clegg's letter should be acknowledged with an 
intimation that the Guardians would glad to be furnished with any similar 
information that might come into Mr. Clegg's possession.
 