
The fatty torik – the Turkish name for a large, mature Atlantic bonito, 
similar to the little tunny or tuna – courses the straits of the Bosphorus and 
the Dardanelles for just a short period each year in November and December. Yet 
the people of Istanbul eat it year-round by preserving the fish in a light 
brine, something it seems they have been doing for millennia – the Byzantines 
even minted coins with an image of the fish. Makinglakerda is more than a means 
to preserve bonito for the rest of the year, however; it's part of the city's 
culinary instinct.

Around 5am one recent morning in Yenikapı, yellow rubber boots were piled high 
in front of the one serene spot on the sprawling grounds of the municipal fish 
auction. Inside the "Fisherman's Mosque," 70 or 80 men were saying their 
prayers after a long stint on the Bosphorus. These fishermen had brought in the 
winter's first haul of torik – the season's most valuable catch. As they sat 
whispering their prayers, the ecosystem of middlemen was churning with 
negotiations that would ensure the passage of these fish from the long hangar 
at the seafront into local fish markets and restaurants throughout the city. 
Outside the mosque, vans marked with the city's top restaurants filed into the 
damp dark car park, which was littered with polystyrene fish coolers, and the 
place began to smell less like fish and more like money.

The fisherman, auctioneers, commission-men, wholesalers, restaurant owners, 
trolley pushers and onlookers gathered here were unable to contain themselves 
as they piled around for the season's first big torik auction. As boats 
offloaded their catch and wheeled it in, stacked in crates on dollies, the 
crowd surged toward the new arrivals.

Great loads of hamsi, or Black Sea anchovies, came off a boat named Cengiz, 
the Turkish name for Genghis Khan. Then came a procession of torik packed two 
to a crate, their heads and tail fins protruding. Tea-slingers coursed through 
the piles of fish, cigarettes were passed around, telephone calls were urgently 
placed. One man popped out from behind a stack of fish crates to surprise a 
vendor with a quick backhanded shot to the crotch followed by a howl, the 
squeak of rubber boots and friendly grappling.

"The best lakerda is made from Bosphorus torik," Yusuf Bey, a lakerda-maker in 
Beyoglu fish market, told us later. The shop where he works, Resat Balık, is a 
third-generation family business that has supplied traditionalmeyhanes around 
town with lakerda since the 1940s.

Yusuf cut the head and tail off, sliced the fish into thick medallions and ran 
a thin spike through the centre, draining the blood before tossing it into a 
bucket of seawater. After cleaning it several times he would seal it in jars of 
salt for 10 days or so before distributing it to clients around the city.

Following a suggestion from Yusuf, we next found ourselves at Refik (Sofyalı 
Sokak 7-12, Asmalımescit/Beyoglu, +90 212 243 2834), a traditionalmeyhane in 
Asmalımescit that serves Yusuf's own preparations. Served over slices of raw 
red onions, the lakerda medallions were a deep rose in colour, soft and 
fragrant of the sea. We felt honoured by the presence of this true Istanbul 
native alongside our small plates ofsoslu patlıcan (eggplant smothered in that 
New World import, the tomato),arnavut cigeri ("Albanian" liver, which probably 
arrived here with refugees of the Balkan Wars), and a spicyacılı ezme that 
tasted of southeast Turkey.

We often fear that tastes change too quickly and that much in this city is 
lost to the latest trend. But then we find ourselves involved in something 
ancient and very much alive, like drinking water from a sacred spring or eating 
lakerda, and we are reassured that the soul of Istanbul is healthy and well, if 
a little salty and often hiding in unexpected places.

• Su Ürünleri Hali, the municipal fish auction, is at Kennedy Caddesi, 
Yenikapı. Reşat Balık market is at Sahne Sokak 8, Balık Pazarı, Beyoğlu

This is an article from our Guardian Travel Network. To find out more about it,
click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/blog/2012/feb/29/guardian-travel-network-city-bloggers>
 