
Important Lancashire Invention

The great number of shuttle-changing devices recently brought under the notice 
of Lancashire cotton manufacturers is a proof of a general desire for 
labour-saving improvements in weaving mechanisms.

The possibilities of automatic looms are admitted to be great, but there is an 
equally general disposition amongst manufacturers to await developments before 
plunging into capital expenditure upon new machinery. Readers of the 
"Manchester Guardian" will not fail to recognise the great interest of the 
latest invention which, if its claim to effect a 10 per cent increase in 
production, a 10 per cent economy of expense, and at least a 10 per cent 
advance in the weaver's wages be established, may approach in importance the 
invention of the fly-shuttle itself.

What are the qualifications - apart from original genius and brains - most 
likely to be of service to the inventor of a successful automatic loom? In the 
first place, he must have been a weaver. Even the mechanically trained 
loom-making expert is not so well qualified to judge as [if] he had he been an 
intelligent, practised and alert weaver. Next, he must have been a tackler. The 
weaver may run the loom to perfection, but when it comes to setting the crank, 
adjusting the pick, judgment of the right cover, [correcting] fixing of tappets 
and economical use of leather fittings the skill of the experienced tackler is 
necessary.

In addition to the qualifications of the weaver and the tackler, the ideal 
loom-inventor must have the commercial instinct of the employer.

He must provide such attachments as will involve the minimum of alteration in, 
and be easily affixed to, existing looms. The close riddle of this test will 
sift the wheat from the chaff.

The loom attachments now under notice are the devices and property of a man 
who has successively, and successfully, occupied the three positions named. As 
weaver, tackler, and employer, the inventor of the Cowburn patent 
shelf-shuttling motion has had special training and experience.

"Putting two shuttles in" the loom is an experience dreaded by every weaver. 
The "trap" caused thereby is temper-trying and waste-making.

This need be no longer possible [thanks to] Mr. Cowburn's cunning little 
"shuttle stop motion". The employer need no more be vexed by the sight of looms 
stopped during the repair of a smash caused by the putting in of two shuttles.

The device is astonishingly simple. If it fails it will, I think, be for some 
other reason than undue complexity.
 