Poems By Wilfred Owen. 
London: Chatto and Windus. 6s. 
Lieutenant Wilfred Owen, M.C., an officer of the Manchester Regiment, was 
killed in action on the Sambre Canal a week before the Armistice, aged 25.

The twenty-three poems of this collection are the fruit of not quite two 
years' active service, less than half of it in the field. But they are enough 
to rank him among the very few war poets whose work has more than a passing 
value.

Others have shown the disenchantment of war, have unlegended the roselight and 
romance of it, but none with such compassion for the disenchanted or such 
sternly just and justly stern judgment on the idyllisers. To him the sight and 
sound of a man gassed suffice to give the lie to "dulce et decorum" and the 
rest of it.

The atrophy that he damns is not that of the men who fought - "having seen all 
things red,/ The eyes are rid/ Of the hurt of the colour of blood for ever"; it 
is the atrophy of those who "by choice... made themselves immune" from 
"Whatever shares/ The eternal reciprocity of tears".

If he glorifies the soldiers - and he does, gloriously - it is as victim, not 
as victor; not as the hero achieving.

His verse, as he says in his preface, is all of the pity of war, and "except 
in the pity" there is no poetry. But it is a heroic exception, for the pity 
gets itself into poetry in phrases which are not the elegant chasing of 
ineffectual silver, but the poetry of pain, searing and piercing to pity.

He has revealed the soul of the soldier as no one else has revealed it, not 
because his vision of the externals was less vivid and cleaving, but because to 
that vision he added an imagination of the heart that made him sure of his 
values:

"...except you share/ With them in hell the sorrowful dark of hell,/ Whose 
world is but the trembling of a flare,/ And heaven but as the highway for a 
shell,/ You shall not hear their mirth:/ You shall not come to think them well 
content/ By any jest of mine. These men are worth/ Your tears: you are not 
worth their merriment."

Irony his poetry has, and grim humour; but the Spirit of the Pities always 
breathes through the humour and the irony and keeps their bitterness sweet. 
Sometimes, as in "Mental Cases", the pain is too poignant even for pity, and 
moves only to the anger of despair; but more often the anger gives place to a 
beneficent impulse, as in "Strange Meeting", the first and one of the finest of 
his poems:

"Then, when much blood had clogged their chariot wheels/ I would go up and 
wash them from sweet wells,/ Even with truths that lie too deep for taint."

This poem happens also to be a good example of a technical innovation that is 
rather puzzling. Enough has been quoted to show that Owen uses traditional 
metres and rhymes, but, as here, he also uses, and uses throughout the poem, a 
device which is neither rhyme nor assonance. It is not assonance because the 
vowels are different, and in any case it could not be rhyme, because the 
initial consonants are alike: "spoiled - spilled," "laughed - left," "grained - 
ground".

His work will not easily die.
CP

· This review was unusually early in recognising Owen's stature and in quoting 
some of the lines by which his name lives
 