
A joint action group for industry in the North-west has been set up by 
Government departments, firms and unions. The proposals for a regional 
industrial strategy have been sent to the Prime Minister.


The emphasis is on prompting and helping individual firms to improve their 
output and exports and on joint action to clear snags. The proposals also make 
some tentative suggestions for special action in the development areas, 
particularly Merseyside. These include higher levels of financial aid, more 
selectively applied; company mergers and joint ventures between private 
industry and the National Enterprise Board; and a recasting of the Job Creation 
programme.


The North-west is the first region to respond to the Government’s new 
initiative on industry. In a covering letter to Mr Callaghan Councillor Bill 
Sefton, chairman of the Economic Planning Council and leader of Merseyside 
Metropolitan Council says: “It may be too much to hope to resolve some of the 
older industries that are now in disarray but we might find the wit to 
anticipate what will be the extra demand on our technological society and to 
develop this before our competitors do.


“Our aim, we hope, is a practical one – we see it as action to stimulate 
development by industry; not just another institution and more paper.” When Mr 
Callaghan visited the North-west in early September he was clearly disappointed 
to hear the planning council ignoring industrial problems to attack the 
devolution proposals and to demand a fairer share of national resources for the 
region.


Mr Sefton explains in his letter that it was “our very anxiety to play our 
full part in the renewing of the wealth-creating capacity of the UK that made 
us stress the need for a removal of the outworn legacy of the past to fit the 
region to attract new industry and to take full advantage of the new 
opportunities.”


The strategy paper, built on work already started in the regional office of 
the Department of Industry, is the council’s attempt to correct the balance, Mr 
Sefton has asked Mr Callaghan to ensure that the action group’s efforts and 
ideas “are received in Government circles with the same sense of urgency and 
importance as I assure you will be attached to our deliberations.”


Continue reading <https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/11/18/plan.jpeg> 
 <https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/11/18/plan.jpeg>

 