
Pulp the souvenir first editions! Re-cork the Prosecco. Reassume the sober 
Southgate-era frown. Welcome instead to the almost-dawning of the age of 
Gareth. On a mild, oddly boisterous night England and their temp-to-perm 
manager came close to pulling off a genuinely startling result at Wembley, 
leading Spain 2-0 beforetwo late goals stilled the sense of a dawning coronation
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/england-spain-international-friendly-match-report>
, with all the giddy uncertainties such a victory here might have brought.

This was still an encouraging match in many ways, if only for the simple 
pleasure of the occasion. With an hour gone, Mexican waves rolling around this 
great concrete spaceship, and Southgate’s new assertiveEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> 2-0 up it was tempting to wonder 
what that unusual feeling was. A lightness. A sense of unencumbered mild 
positivity.

Wait, that’s it. England were fun here: bright on the ball, purposeful off it 
and apparently unencumbered by any feelings of doubt, anxiety and existential 
crisis.

Adam Lallana wants Gareth Southgate to be named full-time England manager
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/09/adam-lallana-gareth-southgate-full-time-england-manager-scotland>
Context is everything of course. England beat the world champions Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/mar/26/germany-v-england-international-friendly-live>
 and thenPortugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/02/england-portugal-international-friendly-match-report>
, who went on to be European champions, this year. Both were friendlies, both 
in the months leading up to the horribly flaccid Euros. Against that they would 
probably have held against Spain but for the substitutions that disrupted a 
flickering vision of a nicely simple, stripped down post-Rooney England playing 
at last to their basic strengths.

Adam Lallana was again England’s best player until he went off, the key 
component of an aggressive and disciplined front four. Deprived of his 
increasingly ponderous captain, Southgate did something simple, setting up his 
England team to play the way the best Premier League teams play right now, 
pressing and harrying high up the pitch, coiling behind the ball and breaking 
quickly whenSpain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain> had control. 
There was confirmation here, too, that England have a new No10 and a new, 
encouragingly workmanlike point of focus. It is a mark of his slight 
outsider-dom that Lallana had not met Southgate properly until England’s 
interim manager paid a visit to Liverpool’s training ground shortly before 
naming the squad.

Lallana did not play in the Premier League until he was 23. It took him 26 
caps to score an international goal and yet in the last year he has become, 
almost imperceptibly, England’s best attacking player, most convincing creative 
midfielder, the real grown-up in that attacking trio. Here his 
immaculately-groomed features were captured in full page Stalinist close-up on 
the cover of the match programme.

It was Lallana who produced England’s outstanding moment with nine minutes 
gone, conjuring a sublime piece of creative play from the right flank. Jesse 
Lingard won the ball by the touchline and fed Lallana. His turn was instant, 
the low curling pass around Iñigo Martínez a thing of beauty. Jamie Vardy took 
the ball around Pepe Reina and was tripped. Lallana took the penalty, burying 
it easily for his third goal in three games. Lallana was the best player on the 
pitch in those opening minutes, scarcely misplacing a touch and constantly 
dragging Spain’s midfield out of position, with that unusual ability to take 
possession on the half-turn and swivel into space.

Lallana is a rare bird in other ways, a role model for modern English players, 
who may well find themselves emerging at lower levels or taking a step back to 
go forward. Five years ago Sergio Busquets and Thiago Alcântara, Spain’s 
central midfield here,won the Champions League with Barcelona on this ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/may/28/barcelona-manchester-united-champions-league-final>
. At the same time Lallana was playing for Southampton in League One. England’s 
other scorer, Vardy, was in the Northern Premier League with FC Halifax Town.

What stands out with Lallana is his willingness to learn. In the last year he 
has become a Kloppist convert, buying in completely to the synchronised 
attacking blitz. Lallana even managed to get the lovely little passing sprite 
Thiago to foul him, which as it happened was the end of his match. Watching 
Lallana limp off the field half an hour into a meaningless friendly you feared 
slightly for Jürgen Klopp’s plasma screen.

Sorry about that Jürgen. But thanks for the pointers. For now the 
Klopp-Pochettino high energy style is a clear way forward for Southgate. Before 
this game so much of the talk had been about England’s “identity”. What a curse 
it is to have to have one! Famously the poet Philip Larkin refused to take part 
in the literary-celebrity circuit because he couldn’t face “going around 
pretending to be me”. Such has been the burden of successive England teams, 
oppressed by their own invisible shadow. Here they come again. Pretending to be 
themselves.

This, though, was all very natural while it lasted, a simple plan based around 
learned and comfortable movements.

For a while Spain were surprised to find a friendly transformed into an old 
style niggle‑fest, with England’s pacy little tyros blocking and baulking and 
leaving a foot in. With Lallana off the pitch it was Raheem Sterling who became 
England’s most concentrated threat. It was his nice little dart and pass inside 
that led to the second goal, Vardy producing a Nat Lofthouse‑style charging 
header from Jordan Henderson’s looping cross.

Spain woke up and fought back with great spirit, Isco equalising with a deft 
finish five minutes into injury time. This was a fun, frantic match, one that 
pointed in its own rather madcap way towards something new: if not quite a bold 
new frontier, then a quietly promising idea of what Southgate’s England may 
strive to become.
 