
Patrice Lumumba <https://www.theguardian.com/world/patrice-lumumba>, prime 
minister of newly independent Congo, was the second of five leaders of 
independence movements in African countries to be assassinated in the 1960s by 
their former colonial masters, or their agents.

A sixth, Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana, was ousted in a western-backed coup in 1966, 
and a seventh, Amilcar Cabral, leader of the west African liberation movement 
against Portugal of the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape 
Verde, (Partido Africano da Independência da Guiné e Cabo Verde or PAIGC) in 
Guinea Bissau and Cape Verde, was assassinated in 1973.

Lumumba's death in 1961 followed on from that of the opposition leader of 
Cameroon, Felix Moumie, poisoned in 1960. Sylvanus Olympio, leader of Togo was 
killed in 1963. Mehdi Ben Barka, leader of the Moroccan opposition movement was 
kidnapped in France in 1965 and his body never found. Eduardo Mondlane, leader 
of Mozambique's Frelimo, fighting for independence from the Portuguese, died 
from a parcel bomb in 1969.

The loss 50 years ago of this group of leaders, who all knew each other, and 
had a common political project based on national dignity, crippled each of 
their countries, and the African continent. The effects are still evident today.

Ben Barka and Cabral were revolutionary theoreticians – as significant as 
Frantz Fanon <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frantz_Fanon> and Che Guevara. Their 
influence reverberated far beyond their own continent. At the 1966 
Tricontinental Conference in Havana, organised by Ben Barka before his death, 
Cuban leader Fidel Castro's closing speech referred to "one of the most lucid 
and brilliant leaders in Africa, Comrade Amílcar Cabral, who instilled in us 
tremendous confidence in the future and the success of his struggle for 
liberation."

The Third World Movement, challenging the economic and political world 
dominance of the colonial powers, the US, and the neocolonial leaders favoured 
by the west, would have two short decades of ambition and optimism despite the 
long shadow of its great leaders' deaths.

Today, it is impossible to touch down at the (far from modernised) airport of 
Lubumbashi in the south of the Democratic Republic of Congo – in 1961 known as 
Elizabethville, in Congo (then renamed Zaire) – without a shiver of 
recollection of the haunting photograph taken of Lumumba there shortly before 
his assassination, and after beatings, torture and a long, long flight in 
custody across the vast country which had so loved him. This particular failure 
of the United Nations to protect one man and his two colleagues was every bit 
as significant as that in Srebrenica in 1995, when 8,000 men and boys were 
killed.

Lumumba's own words, written to his wife just four months after the 
exhilaration of independence day in the capital Kinshasa are a reminder of who 
he was and why he meant so much to so many people then, and still does today.

"Dead, living, free, or in prison on the orders of the colonialists, it is not 
I who counts. It is the Congo, it is our people for whom independence has been 
transformed into a cage where we are regarded from the outside… History will 
one day have its say, but it will not be the history that Brussels, Paris, 
Washington, or the United Nations will teach, but that which they will teach in 
the countries emancipated from colonialism and its puppets… a history of glory 
and dignity."

Lumumba would not have been surprised that his successor, Joseph Mobuto was 
the US strategic ally inAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> for 
30 years. Congo was too rich, too big, and too important for the west to lose 
control as they would have had Lumumba lived.

How ironic that Mobuto was succeeded by Laurent Desire Kabila, whose 10th 
anniversary of assassination, by his own guards, falls just one day before 
Lumumba's? (There are conflicting reports as to the exact date of Kabila's 
death, a good overview can be foundhere 
<http://www.irinnews.org/InDepthMain.aspx?InDepthId=57&ReportId=72398>).

Kabila came to power in 1997 as the useful figurehead of the armies of Rwanda, 
Uganda, and Angola. He trailed some historical legitimacy from his involvement 
in one of the rebellions against Mobuto, inspired by Lumumba's death. Che 
Guevara was then, in 1965, deep in his second-last catastrophic attempt to 
change the world, working then from his concept of Lumumba's Congo.

When Kabila sprang from obscurity in 1997 as leader of the Democratic Republic 
of Congo, Che's African diaries from eastern Congo had not yet been published, 
with the acid comment, "I know Kabila well enough not to have any illusions 
about him."

In Kabila's first chaotic weeks in power in 1997, the great Tanzanian leader, 
Julius Nyerere visited Kinshasa and addressed the new and unformed leadership. 
"There are no uncles any more for Congo, do not wait for them to come and help 
you – the country is yours and you must take the responsibility for it and for 
your people," he said.

As one of those present told me: "They did not like Nyerere's speech, they 
could not wait to use their new power to make allies with foreign businessmen 
and get rich themselves – just like the others." But Lumumba's ideas are still 
alive, and he himself had no illusions that the road to dignity for his people 
would be extremely long.
 