
I’m embarrassed by how unmoved I am by flowers. I mean, I don’t mind a 
bouquet, but my peak pleasure comes from carrying them home on public 
transport, feeling self-important and getting in commuters’ way. Watching them 
die in a vase is a bit of a drag. I feel distinct antipathy towards floral 
prints. Most are so insipid – and they’re a lazy shorthand for pretty-pretty 
old-school femininity. No one puts on a big blobby rose pattern before striding 
into a boardroom and closing a billion-dollar deal.

This season, though, I’m prepared to reconsider. Florals come around every 
summer in fashion along with white and lace, but this year’s crop is an 
interesting bunch. Alexander McQueen’s spring 2015 show set the tone. Artist
Marc Quinn <http://www.marcquinn.com/> created alarming triffid-like orchids to 
decorate the catwalk, and the Japanese influence was obvious in the 
collection’s kimonos and bold flower prints. What made these looks interesting 
was that the models wore lacquered headwear and high ponytails that made them 
look more like samurai warriors than geishas. Finally flowers were a bit ballsy.

Though few other designers matched Alexander McQueen’s warriors, there were 
many other flowers that broke the stereotype on the season’s catwalks. Simone 
Rocha, Chanel and Michael Kors had 3D flowers popping out of their clothes. 
Thom Browne and Marni featured properly garish blooms, definitely not suitable 
for wallflowers.

If you want to spend a lot of money on this trend, try Simone Rocha 
<http://simonerocha.com/>. She’s an amazing designer. She’s just 29, only 
started showing in 2010 and she’s already won heaps of prizes and accolades, 
including a British Fashion Award. You could consider it an investment. I’d 
also recommendAntoni & Alison <http://www.antoniandalison.co.uk/>. This London 
design duo pioneered digi-printing – putting photo-realistic images on fabric – 
before all the young guns got their hands on it, and their floral trompe-l’oeil 
frocks are just beautiful.

The high street also has good offerings for the feisty florals trend. Topshop 
has some really great blobby, strong flower prints, or you could go for the 
more abstract design shown here. I picked this because it’s a polo shirt. Polo 
shirts are another big trend this summer. Buy a flowery one, kill two birds 
with one stone.

If you’re still unconvinced by the idea of florals, dip your toe in to test 
the waters: buy some shoes. I like these Asos peep-toe platforms because 
they’re weird and clumpy and the antithesis of the styles associated with 
chintzy prints. And they’re only £25. If you decide you don’t like them, no 
biggie.

I’m never going to be a big fan of florals, but this season’s prints have made 
me reconsider this style cliché. I still think no woman’s going to close a 
business deal in a rose pattern, but now I’d love to see someone seal the deal 
in one of McQueen’s lacquered headdresses. That would be quite something.


Follow Alice on Instagram @aliceefisher <https://instagram.com/aliceefisher/>
 