
In my favourite Simpsons episode, Bart wins Stampy, a full-grown African 
elephant, in a radio phone-in. Stampy goes on the rampage and heads to the 
local peanut factory in search of his favourite snack. When he sees the 
elephant approaching, the foreman turns to his staff and says: “This is the 
moment, people! Now I know many of you thought it would never happen, yet I 
insisted that we spend half an hour every morning training for it. Some of you 
thought I was mad, others requested transfer to another peanut factory. But now 
is the time…” At that point Stampy thunders in and tramples him.

I really empathise with that foreman. Give me any situation and I’ll 
overprepare for it. This tendency makes me love the British winter and its 
downpours, gales and cold snaps; leaves on train lines, frozen pipes and 
leaking roofs. It permits me to stockpile thermals and tights (try Marks & 
Spencer’s Warm Toes Tights – the merino wool soles are unbelievable) and slide 
my pac-a-mac into my handbag, style be damned.

This year, though, all is different. Many of you thought it would never 
happen, some of you thought I was mad, but this winter the fashion world agrees 
with me. The chic consensus is that raincoats and down jackets are vital; that 
warm boots with thick soles are the thing.

There were all-weather macs at Fendi and padded coats at Donna Karan; Miu Miu 
did wellies. There were chunky, utilitarian military-style overcoats at Preen 
and Acne. There were blankets at Burberry and stompy boots at Coach and Tommy 
Hilfiger. Even Hunter, beloved brand of posh welly wearers, was reborn as a 
fashion label under new creative directorAlasdhair Willis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/feb/15/stella-mccartney-husband-hunter-boots-london-fashion-week>
 (aka Mr Stella McCartney). Hunter Original, as it’s now known, has amazing 
boots in a rainbow of colours and styles, and even made rain capes look sexy. 
No mean feat.

There were also beautiful down jackets, but do try website 
mountainwarehouse.com <http://www.mountainwarehouse.com> if you want one of 
these. No, it isn’t glamorous, but it’s really, really cheap.

If you want more sophistication, try Ilse Jacobsen. Like many Scandinavian 
designers, Jacobsen excels at simple, functional clothes in vivid colours and 
interesting patterns. Her durable rainwear products will keep you looking smart 
and dry for years.

If rainwear feels too precise, then invest in a really warm coat. You can get 
a smart wool overcoat with a sheepskin collar at Topshop for under £200 or an 
Asos parka for under £100. Make sure you top it off with a bright woolly hat. 
This red beauty from Federica Moretti is nice, but if you want patterned 
scarves or gloves, tryJo Gordon knitwear <http://www.jogordon.com/>. Her 
geometric knits are standout.

Whatever route you go down, please do invest in something warm. Next year the 
designers will probably send sleeveless coats and silk bomber jackets down the 
autumn/winter catwalk, and the all-weather look will once again only be seen on 
hikers, toddlers – and me. I’m never giving it up.


Follow Alice on Instagram @aliceefisher <http://instagram.com/aliceefisher/>
 