
Have a look out the window. Rubbish, isn’t it? Spring’s bleak this year. It’s 
felt more like dragging a dead body up a long flight of stairs than bearing 
witness to the reboot of the glorious cycle of life.

I think it’s time to apply a little magical thinking to the situation. If the 
sun won’t shine and the temperature won’t rise, then let’s create the warmth 
ourselves. Maybe we can evoke this evasive spring if we try hard enough. One 
way to do this is wearing yellow. It was a huge colour trend on the catwalks 
and looked just great. Each time it hit the catwalk, it was like the sun came 
out.

There were egg-yolk skirts at Emilia Wickstead, citrus stripes and patterns at 
Carven. Burberry did dusky pollen coats and there were pastels from Carolina 
Herrera. Miu Miu, Michael Kors and Marni did lovely yellow florals.

These brightly hued delights stood out because yellow is not an everyday 
colour. It’s eye-catching, it can be garish. You can’t drop gravy on it without 
everyone noticing. It may say summer, but in the wrong hands it also says high 
visibility tabard or Jay from Buck’s Fizz.

The key to making it work is to use it sparingly. The first clothes I picked 
for this column were blanket yellow and looked crazy, like roadworks outside a 
Lego factory. But used as an accent, a burst of brightness, this spring’s 
yellow is lovely.

It’s an excellent flash of colour on a sandal strap, an unusual neon gingham 
on a skirt. It makes a great base colour for a patterned shirt or dress. 
Florals are going to be big this summer (aren’t they always?) and the best 
designs featured a flower print on a yellow background. This citrus shirt by 
Equipment is a nice variation on that theme. Also, the stockist is a new 
website calledveryexclusive.co.uk <http://www.veryexclusive.co.uk/>. It’s a 
different idea from Sarah Curran, a retailer who set up the sadly missed 
My-Wardrobe. Her new site lets customers pay for purchases in three instalments 
rather than one sickening massive lump. If you have to spend more than you can 
really afford on clothes, this seems a good way to do it.

Talking of expensive, I’ve included an Anya Hindmarch purse here. She’s such a 
popular accessories designer but personally I find her work gimmicky. This Yes 
purse, however, fits the yellow mood, I think.

And wearing this colour is about giving in to a feeling. It’s not practical or 
easy but it can look great. Writing this has made me think about the Coldplay 
song. Chris Martin has said its lyrics were about the mood of the band – 
brightness and hope – but he’s also admitted that he used the actual word 
yellow simply because it scanned. He looked round the room where he was writing 
and spotted theYellow Pages.

Even if you hate Coldplay, it’s something to bear in mind. Yellow is a 
beautiful colour, joyful and uplifting. And this spring it just fits.


Follow Alice on Instagram @aliceefisher <https://instagram.com/aliceefisher/>
 