
Traditional polka dots can be a bit uptight – perfectly shaped little 
monochrome spots rigidly spaced like so many tightly clenched bum cheeks. It’s 
a pattern that typically turns up on “fun” items of clothing, like bikinis or 
lingerie and prissy summer dresses. I’ve generally found that if you have to 
use a visual indication of “having fun” then you’re probably not.

So it’s a huge relief that although polka dots are back this summer, they’re a 
new and far more interesting breed. These spots are huge, they’re colourful, 
they’re wonky, they meander across bright fabrics as if a bit pissed.

The most revolutionary designs from the catwalk were at Marc by Marc Jacobs, 
Roksanda and Stella Jean. MBMJ’s current collection has made a virtue of 
messing up traditional patterns. I’ve written about blurry gingham before, but 
the wobbly polka dots are great, too. They were used on clothes that were 
knotted or tied haphazardly, or as asymmetric panels of colour. Roksanda 
Ilincic’s show was inspired by artist Julia Dault, who makes Plexiglas 
sculptures, and featured both outsized and shiny plastic spots. You’ve never 
seen cooler polka dots.

Stella Jean is a relatively new Italian-Haitian designer and among the many 
prints in her collection were lovely blue and orange polka dots in so many 
different sizes. Orla Kiely gets points for originality: her polka dots doubled 
as flowers. That’s two trends for the price of one.

The high street has been a little more conservative about the polka dot. There 
are lots of neat prints to be had at Jigsaw and Uniqlo, but if you want to go 
symmetric, then at least go big. Look to Asos, Cos and Topshop for whopping 
spots. I particularly like Topshop’s swimwear. It’s the antithesis of the 60s 
ideal of the itsy bitsy teenie weenie yellow polka dot bikini. It’s sturdy and 
bold. This bikini does not give a damn whether you are Beach Body Ready.

Ashley Williams is a young London designer who is going to be big. This season 
was her first solo show and everyone loved it. The footwear for the collection 
was made in collaboration with 90s favourite Red or Dead and is now available 
at a very reasonable price from Shuh. These single polka dot shoes could be a 
piece of history and they’re also really nice.

Perhaps one of my favourite spotty pieces is Peter Jensen’s Peanuts T-shirt. 
The Danish designer’s current collection based on Snoopy, Charlie Brown and the 
gang has been a monster hit. Jensen used the Shulz archive to create really 
imaginative prints as well as featuring classic characters, such as Lucy van 
Pelt, on sweatshirts and T-shirts. Many pieces are now sold out. But this 
graphic T-shirt showing the long eyelashes of Snoopy’s sister Belle is still 
available. Buy it now because soon it won’t be.

Whichever piece you choose, please show some imagination. This gridded 
repititive pattern is normally so boring and all these nice designers and shops 
have gone to a lot of effort to make it joyous for you. Come on, don’t let them 
down.


Follow Alice on Instagram @aliceefisher <https://instagram.com/aliceefisher/>

Follow the Observer Magazine on Twitter @ObsMagazine 
<https://twitter.com/obsmagazine>
 