
I have piffling regrets. Nothing to plague me on my deathbed, just trivial 
remorses made more annoying by the fact that I could fix them if only I weren’t 
so lazy.

I wish I’d read Wolf Hall (or at least watched the TV adaptation so I could 
pretend I had). I wish I had a showpiece karaoke song. I wish I could change a 
tyre and that I got to reveal this skill during a torrential midnight downpour 
in the middle of nowhere to a car full of people I kind of don’t like but still 
want to impress. I wish I had conversational Mandarin. But, right now, I 
really, really wish I could sew.

It’s this summer’s clothes that have done it. As you must know by now, the 70s 
are big this year and that was a decade that loved the handcrafted look. A-line 
dresses and skirts, simple garments without darts or tucks that you could 
easily make yourself. Homespun decorations, such as wooden beads, tassels, 
embroidery. My 70s childhood was full of this stuff. I was always being made to 
sew or knit or crochet, but I stubbornly refused to learn. Big mistake, because 
it’s all back this summer and it costs a fortune now.

The thing I hated most as a kid was patchwork. It’s the ultimate craft for 
uptight OCD pedants. All fiddly corners and neat stitching. But it looks so 
great when done properly – truly creative and unique.

To see what I mean, look at this season’s catwalk shows. Prada’s patchwork 
dresses in shades of brown, yellow and green are amazing. Anna Sui, Tommy 
Hilfiger and Peter Som’s collections feature patchwork as a mending tool, 
showing prettily patched clothes in leather, denim and suede. Marni and Proenza 
Schouler did modern takes on the strip-piecing technique. Marni’s had heaps of 
flowers and ruffles and sequins and looks particularly amazing.

Patchwork is available off the catwalk, too. It’s a good buy for summer not 
only because it’s a big trend, but because its busy patterns and stitched 
design are the antithesis of workwear. It’s synonymous with downtime, with 
holidays, weekends and festivals.

There are lots of denim and suede clothes to be found at Zara, Topshop and 
Asos. Although it’s expensive, I love this strip-pieced dress by MiH, a posh 
denim brand created by Chloe Lonsdale. Her father, Tony Lonsdale, founded The 
Jean Machine in the 70s and was known as the “blue jean king” back then. 
Chloe’s denim may be pricier, but the label has a lovely range of washes and 
finishes.

There are also lots of patchwork prints out there. & Other Stories has some 
cute printed dresses and shorts, and look for nice prints on shoes, bags and 
swimwear. I swear I had a swimsuit like this one by Australian label Minkpink 
when I was six.

If only I’d paid as much attention to the craft lessons as I did to my 
clothes. Still, plenty of time to learn: the patchwork trend is set to carry on 
into the autumn, too.

Follow Alice on Instagram @aliceefisher <https://instagram.com/aliceefisher/>
 