
So here’s the thing. I love clothes but, like many people, I’m slightly 
dysfunctional about them. These are my main idiosyncrasies: if I really love a 
piece of clothing I hardly ever wear it, just in case I ruin it. If possible I 
buy things a size too big on the off-chance that I might suddenly put on 
weight. I think I have massive shoulders and ugly clavicles so I never buy 
anything that exposes or even emphasises them. With these hang-ups, the only 
clothing that consistently defeats me is sportswear.

This is a problem, because sportswear is so trendy now that new, stupid words 
have been made up to describe it. The most annoying of these is athleisure: the 
vogue for wearing gym clothes – yoga pants, running tops – in everyday life. It 
also encompasses the rise of a number of new labels that make great clothing 
that sort of looks like sportswear but is really just fashion.

All the designers, including Chanel and Miu Miu, have had a go at doing 
trainers, and the spring catwalks at Alexander Wang and Topshop Unique featured 
lots of interesting little tennis dresses among other sports-inspired pieces. 
And let’s not forget the high street. Everywhere from H&M to Boden offers 
activewear ranges now, and Net-a-Porter recently diversified into Net-a-Sporter 
– a section dedicated to “performancewear”. The actual sportswear brands have 
also upped their game. Adidas Originals’ collaborations with designers have 
gone from strength to strength:the recent range with Mary Katranzou 
<https://www.marykatrantzou.com/projects/mary-katrantzou-x-adidas-originals/the-sneaker>
 is just lovely.

Sportswear. It’s everywhere. And it looks rubbish when you buy it a size too 
big. Still, if you don’t hate your shoulders and are capable of wearing clothes 
you like, I’d recommend this trend. It’s comfortable, and the clothes’ 
functional shapes, which typically comes in strong colours or interesting 
graphic patterns, look smart and snappy.

Of the newer labels that are sort of sportswear, sort of not, Laain excels in 
classic clothes in luxury fabrics. Check it out at Net-a-Sporter. It does have 
a great minimalist illusion of functionality about it, but it’s not cheap. 
SukiShufu is bright and shiny and very well cut. I particularly like the silver 
details on their long-sleeved tops.

On the high street, GapFit is good. The range is split into fitness and 
studio, and fitness clothes are actually made from technical performance 
fabrics. Friends of mine who run heartily recommend it. And well done to Boden 
for its sportswear. Performance clothes feel so at odds with Boden’s 
middle-England values, but the range is functional and really pretty.

My favourite part of the sportswear trend is the designer trainer. Yes, yes, I 
know it’s a few seasons since Chanel sent trainers down the catwalk at couture, 
but there’s still a lot of them about. I’m so tickled by these baroque follies, 
the diamonds, the sequins, the flowers and the satin. This latest version by 
Miu Miu is a hand-embroidered running shoe that costs nearly £1,000. I wish I 
could afford it. Oh. Though I like it so much I’d probably never wear it. 
Dammit. This fashion game is harder than it looks.


Follow Alice on Instagram @aliceefisher <http://instagram.com/aliceefisher>
 