
Military influence on fashion is so pervasive that we are almost blind to it. 
Peacoats and greatcoats, lace-up boots and regulation grey T-shirts: no one 
thinks of the soldiers who originally used them as they hoik them out of their 
wardrobe. Probably best.

But the influence of nautical, safari and combat is going to be hard to ignore 
this year, as there’s so damn much of it. If that makes you feel a bit sad, 
then don’t be. Why not think of it as a season of big shiny buttons, lovely 
roomy pockets and pretty camouflage patterns instead? See? Better already.

The military feel this time round is much more Private Benjamin than GI Jane. 
More Kate Bush than All Saints. It’s about turning dress uniforms into nice 
dresses and wearing them with lots and lots of gold. It’s about the chic, 
casualwear potential of cargo pants and sweatshirts rather than their 
utilitarian origins.

On the spring catwalk, Marc Jacobs’s show was the most memorable of the 
military-inspired collections, mainly because he turned his models into an 
army. They wore matching blunt-cut bob wigs and no make-up – except for the 
same burgundy shade of nail polish on their toes. Jason Wu sent some of the 
best camo prints down the catwalk and Ralph Lauren did a dress that was half 
fatigues, half ballgown. He honestly did. Take a look atthe final look of his 
spring show 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/fashion/spring-summer-2015/ready-to-wear/ralph-lauren/full-length-photos/gallery/1239057>
 online.

The high street has embraced the military look, too. Warehouse has very nice 
shirt dresses, and pretty much anything you can think of is available in khaki 
this spring. Asos already has a product section devoted to the colour because 
so many of its brands have churned out everything from jackets to culottes in 
this standard military shade.

If you do want to update your wardrobe with very little effort, khaki is the 
way to do it. My advice is to buy from the darker, muddier end of the palette. 
Save the pale, sandy desert shades for when you’ve got a tan later on. After 
the disgusting weather we’ve had recently, I’ve got my eye on this Gap utility 
jacket. Look at that funnel neck – I dream of shoving my chin down into it.

If you have more money to spend, then check out American brand NLST (it’s 
pronounced “enlist”, obvs). The designs are inspired by army surplus but 
recreated in women’s sizes and made out of cashmere and luxury fabrics sourced 
from Japan. Yeah, I know, but if you can afford a well-made, well-cut M43 
jacket or a hand-knitted camouflage jumper, then why not?

Unlike the soldiers of Desert Storm or those who fought in the Somme, 2015’s 
military look is accessorised by minimalist gold jewellery and chunky sandals. 
If you want some vaguely weapon-like jewellery, look at theStraight to the Heart
 <http://www.elkinlondon.com/product-category/straight-to-the-heart/> range by 
Elkin London. The arrowhead/dagger designs are suitably fierce.

Then it’s job done. War may be hell, but shopping for a warlike look needn’t 
be.

Follow Alice on Instagram @aliceefisher <http://instagram.com/aliceefisher>
 