
Sun, surf, and a healthy outdoor lifestyle full of the very best modern 
opportunities. This is the picture postcard view of Australia that has 
attracted so many different cultures to our shores for generations.

But the same environment that makes our country such a great place to live has 
also created the perfect conditions for a rise in allergic diseases such as hay 
fever, as a variety of local triggers interact with our changing biological 
makeup.

“We have constructed the perfect scenario for the expression of our allergic 
tendencies,” says allergy expert and National Asthma Council Australia 
spokeswoman Sheryl van Nunen.

“An allergy in general is an anti-parasite defence that has gone slightly 
wrong, so the immune system is not working for us but against us. The immune 
system is pretty gung-ho and this is just a misfire. You can be allergic but 
without the right environment you won’t express it.”

Allergies happen when the body becomes hypersensitive to substances known as 
allergens that would otherwise be harmless.

When we breathe in, our nose acts as a filter to catch dust and microscopic 
particles on the tiny hairs and mucus inside. For those with an allergic immune 
system, when these “dangerous” allergens are caught, the body releases 
chemicals such as histamine to try to get rid of them.

An illustrative step-by-step guide on what happens when our bodies react to an 
allergen. This simple explainer shows what happens when we apply treatment and 
the science behind how treatments work to stop symptoms.

Infographic: The biochemistry that sets off an allergic reaction 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/labs/2016/oct/telfast/explainer.html> 
The results for sufferers are the familiar and often debilitating symptoms 
like uncontrollable sneezing, or a runny and itchy nose and eyes.

“In general if you can be allergic that indicates a good immune system,” 
Associate Professor van Nunen says. “This is the uncomfortable price for these 
good attributes.”

Allergic conditions seem to be on the rise worldwide and cases of hay fever – 
otherwise known as seasonal allergic rhinitis – have doubled over the past 
generation in Australia to affect two in five adults, she says.

Researchers are still working on exactly why this is, but the combination of 
living in an industrialised society in a plant-rich, largely coastal 
environment provides an ideal range of the most common triggers.

Outdoors, these are seasonal grass pollens, while in the home it is the 
humidity-loving dust mite living on human skin scale in warm conditions.

Australia has a unique combination of native and imported flora that all 
contribute to the pollens in the air acting as seasonal triggers for conditions 
like hay fever.


What are the biggest culprits today in the area where you live? What is it 
like at different times of the year? Select your state to find out when you 
should be on high alert.
Infographic: Allergies in the outdoors 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/labs/2016/oct/telfast/outdoors.html> 
While genetics seem to be the main risk factor for developing allergies, the 
“hygiene hypothesis” also suggests a cleaner urban environment could also be 
part of it. We are not as exposed to dirt and animals to build an appropriate 
immune reaction as we once were.

Lower levels of vitamin D, which is largely gained through exposure to 
sunlight, may also be contributing as we “slip, slop, slap” our way into more 
allergies.

Recent studies have also indicated eating a more processed diet has affected 
the composition of gut bacteria. Consumption of healthy probiotics may have a 
part to play in a solution as well.

Overall, though, the best you can do is identify and, if possible avoid, your 
allergens. Skin prick testing is available, although sufferers are likely to be 
allergic to more than one trigger.

To minimise exposure to dust mites, clean floors in the home with a damp mop, 
regularly wash bed linen in a hot wash of 55C and use mattress protectors.

While pollens can provoke allergy attacks outside, when we shut our windows we 
may be locking ourselves in with some of our key triggers. We explore the 
hidden allergy dangers in the home. Room-by-room, giving all the facts. And 
importantly; what we can do about them.

What are some of the main ones in your home? What foods and drinks are you 
consuming that can amplify your allergies? And how can you help to minimise the 
danger?
Infographic: Allergies in the indoor space 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/labs/2016/oct/telfast/indoors.html> 
Those allergic to grass pollens can try to minimise exposure by staying inside 
on high pollen days or by wearing glasses to stop the allergen entering the 
eyes. While Australia has relatively unpolluted air, exposure to pollen is a 
major problem for sufferers and there is a lack of current accurate national 
data to help avoid it. Biomedical research scientist Janet Davies from the 
Queensland University of Technology’s Institute of Health and Biomedical 
Innovation is working to establish a standardised national pollen network, with 
the initial phase starting this spring.

Associate Professor Davies says the assumption being tested is that having an 
accurate and reliable pollen count will empower sufferers to monitor their 
symptoms and avoid triggers on heavy days.

“Grass pollen is the major source of outdoor allergen in the world and it’s 
Australia’s highest burden,” A/Prof Davies says. “But we currently don’t have a 
good handle on the levels. We are hoping to develop our capabilities using new 
technologies to get us much better reach.”

The four-year project involves eight institutes and six partner organisations 
using technology like apps to interact with the community of sufferers to 
report symptoms and tally these with pollen counts and weather data.

Investigators will examine different people’s thresholds and look at 
variations between individuals, places and seasons in the first phase of the 
four-year trial.

“It is an applied project that will tell us at the end whether having good 
quality pollen count data will help people,” A/Prof Davies says.

“It’s a substantial undertaking to meet the needs of people with pollen 
allergies, people with hay fever and people with asthma. It’s also an education 
tool – by collecting the data we can have an evidence-based approach for 
physicians and patients.”

She says global warming is likely to change the distribution of subtropical 
species like Bermuda, Bahia and Johnson grass, giving increasingly longer 
periods of pollen exposure and triggering different symptoms.

A short, sharp pollen season in somewhere like Melbourne produces something 
more like a classic spring hay fever, while longer exposure further north in 
Brisbane and Darwin brings chronic congestion and nasal blockage.

“With global warming we are likely to have extended pollen seasons,” she says. 
“We already have a high burden in Australia and it is likely to increase 
because of changes in the timing of plants going into pollination.”

A/Prof Davies says while there are currently four sites for the study in 
Melbourne, Sydney, Canberra and Brisbane, the aim is to eventually provide the 
full national picture.

She says while allergies can come on at any age, they mostly start to develop 
in the teenage years, which can have drastic results when it comes to school 
exams.

The effects of disrupted sleep, absenteeism and “presenteeism” also has a 
significant impact on productivity in the workplace.

Australia Bureau of Statistics (ABS) health data shows that 35-44 is the most 
common age group for allergies, followed by 25-34.

Allergies are more common in women across every age group except 35-44. 

Data shows allergies happen at the same frequency between city and country 
with the highest rates in the ACT and Western Australia.

Always read the label, use only as directed. If symptoms persist, please see 
your healthcare professional. CHCANZ.CFEX.16.08.0750c
 