
I’m Tom Rankin, an american architect living in Rome. I blog at 
sustainablerome.net <http://sustainablerome.net>. 


I’m an architect, one of 18,000 in Rome, and like most I earn money through 
other jobs. I teach architecture and design off-beat travel itineraries.


My first decade in Rome I lived close to Termini station in a multicultural, 
transit-oriented neighborhood with virtually no green space. When we had our 
second child we moved to Monteverde, the hill just west of the city centre, 
where my family still lives today. Not as central, but we are blessed with the 
biggest and most beautiful park in Rome, the Villa Pamphillj, and several other 
smaller green spaces as well.

I love to travel and when I do I like to draw, write and make pictures and 
videos. My favourite place to travel is my adopted home city of Rome, and my 
favourite way to get around is my beat up city bike. (And the red Vespa I keep 
dreaming about but resist buying).
 The view of Rome from Janiculum Hill. All photographs: Tom Rankin 
Per capita Rome is the greenest capital in Europe but only because the city 
limits were drawn far out in the countryside, encompassing vast agricultural 
tracts. So while technically low-density it is composed mostly of dense, 
vibrant neighbourhoods, connected by a chaotic web of transit, for the most 
part buses and a tiny underground, an old commuter rail, and a handful of 
surface trams. It is all set to become a great city for transit, pedestrians 
and cyclists as soon as Romans get over their automotive addiction. Rome is a 
world city, under everyone’s radar, which makes it a great laboratory for urban 
projects, but the Romans themselves —or those who call themselves Romans—are 
pretty jaded. Even seemingly obvious proposals (like cleaning the river) are 
met with a suspicion, as if someone is trying to profit. Can’t really blame 
them; historically, this has often been the case.

What’s the best building?
 The Pantheon, early morning 
The Pantheon, the quintessential resilient building, continuously in use since 
125 AD for various public purposes. The hole in the roof is not a defect; it 
provides light and ventilation and carries a message about cosmic perfection as 
valid today as it was at the time of Hadrian. I can’t walk by the Pantheon 
without going inside and getting shivers from seeing how great architecture can 
provide for everyone, from the homeless seeking respite from the city to the 
Kings and Queens of Italy (who still lie buried here).

The Pantheon is one of many great examples of material recycling in Rome. 
Bronze taken from the portico roof in the 17th century was reused, “up-cycled” 
we might say, in St. Peter’s in Bernini’s famousbaldacchino, marble statues 
were “down-cycled” to produce quicklime. The building itself found a second 
life as a Christian church after the fall of Rome, and still serves that such 
today.

And the worst?
 Delivery of food from across the country at Eataly 
Air-Terminal Ostiense. This is not a bad building in itself, but symptomatic 
of bigger problems. It was commissioned for the 1990 World Cup games with the 
idea of creating a specific station for trains coming from the airport 30 km 
away), although there were already two train stations on this spot, both from 
the Fascist era, plus a metro station, and there wasn’t much reason for 
passengers to want to arrive here rather than anywhere else in the city. In 
fact, the new building was redundant and underutilised and abandoned entirely 
shortly after the games. Finally in 2012 it reopened with a new purpose: Rome’s 
first Eataly food emporium.

Inside it feels like a nice upscale American mall — an odd setting to try 
Italian food when there are so many authentic alternatives. Outside it could be 
the outskirts of a bombed out eastern block city.

How clean is the city? 
 Volunteer cleanup sponsored by Tevereterno and Retake 
Rome is blessed with breezes -- many of which are named and personified and 
play a cultural role in Roman culture, like the cold Tramontana from the Alps 
or the hot Scirocco carrying Sahara sand — so the air stays clean despite high 
emissions. But the streets are usually strewn with litter and the trash 
collection system is inconsistent to say the least. Ancient Rome recycled or 
reused everything but sadly Rome today has followed American consumer models 
and produces more and more trash with nowhere to put it but the huge Malagrotta 
landfill, now saturated but with no clear replacement. The frugal culture of 
post-war Rome has been eclipsed by new generations reluctant to figure out the 
confusing waste separation rules so bags of trash just show up on the street 
where they stay for days on end. However, civic clean-up groups like Retake are 
starting to catch on.


What’s the best way to get around?
 Recent biking action on Via del Corso 
There are more cars per capita in Rome than in any other European capital but 
they are definitely not the best way to get around. I bike or ride a scooter 
(which is harder to park, a bit slower in getting through traffic, and keeps 
getting stolen anyway!).


The city has a very limited metro system, built late and with outdated 
criteria and slowed by poor planning in relation to archaeological finds. But 
it has a potentially fantastic bus network, crippled by traffic and poor 
management.

Many Romans use a car to get everywhere, even short distances, knowing they 
can just leave it in a tow-away zone, double-parked, or on the pavement with 
little risk of punishment. The vicious circle of congestion slowing transit and 
discouraging its use has reached a dead end, and a new generation is turning to 
bicycles and other smart transit choices.

What does your city sound like? 

Honk. Honk. Siren. Until, that is, you go into a church (chanting), a cloister 
(chirping) or a sports bar (swearing in dialect accompanied by expressive but 
silent hand gestures)

The most pervasive sound in rome is without question automotive. But at times 
when cars are absent, the occasional traffic ban, the lull during football 
matches when everyone is glued to their tellies, or places where cars can’t go 
because of emergency closings or civic actions, the subtle sounds emerge. 
Seagulls, swallows, pigeons, parrots. Cats and dogs. Children. Work sounds like 
artisans hammering. Kitchen sounds. Church bells. And the Italian language 
which just sounds good, even (especially?) if you don’t understand it.




Where is the best place for a conversation?
 Conversing in Rome 
The classic conversation in Rome is a walk to the coffee bar, dodging double 
parked cars and speeding scooters, then pushing through a crowds to pay for the 
little receipt which grants you the privilege of standing elbow to elbow at the 
bar trying to ask for an espresso which, when delivered, is downed in seconds. 
That’s when you say what you really need to say.

If communication is really desired though, I prefer a walk along the quiet 
Tiber banks, below the hustle and bustle of the city, or meeting half way 
across Ponte Sisto, in Italy but in view of the Vatican and the palaces of the 
emperors. It inspires thinking outside the box.

What one thing is indispensable for life in your city?

Santa Pazienza. Patience is considered “holy” here for good reason. You learn 
to shrug and smile and ignore the inane reason someone is giving you to explain 
why you can’t do the thing that you see everyone else doing (enrol in a course, 
build an addition, park your bicycle, get paid). You learn to ask again, after 
you have been told “no”, and you learn that the 5th time it usually turns to 
“yes”. Things happen slowly but they eventual happen, and in the long run it 
doesn’t matter if St Peter’s took centuries to build; it’s still here today. 
Patience and humour are essential; miracles are a useful optional.

 Rome is full of beautiful views 
Are you optimistic about your city’s future? 

People say I’m crazy but, YES. Rome has always bounced back from its low 
points and it is certainly at a low one now. But the structure is in place for 
Rome to become a model green city and it can’t be too late. More people are 
joining in the movement to transition toward sustainability. The built fabric 
is dense and (except the most recent buildings) designed to last. Rome’s 
temperate climate lends itself to passive solutions – shading and solar heating 
– and traditional architecture has made buildings comfortable with minimum 
expenditure. There is enough concentrated population to support transit and, 
once the cars get out of the way and riders demand service, there is no reason 
it can’t flow smoothly. Finally, in the innovative tradition of reuse going 
back to the middle ages interest in salvage is booming again today.
 