
Actor Angelina Jolie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/angelinajolie> pleaded 
with world powers Friday to help the millions of Syrian refugees, sharply 
criticizing the UN security council for being paralyzed by its division over 
Syria’s four-year conflict.

Jolie briefed the council as special envoy for the UN on refugee issues. 
Syria’s ambassador said simply of her presence: “She’s beautiful.”

Jolie spoke as the council prepared to hear the details of a new plan for 
peace talks set to begin early next month in Geneva, withSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> ally Iran among those invited.

Nearly 4 million Syrians have fled the conflict into neighboring countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/11/syrian-refugees-asylum-seekers-unhcr>
, which warn they are dangerously overstretched.

“We cannot look at Syria, and the evil that has arisen from the ashes of 
indecision, and think this is not the lowest point in the world’s inability to 
protect and defend the innocent,” Jolie said.

Jolie, who said she has made 11 visits to Syrian refugees in the region since 
the crisis began in 2011, called strongly for the political will to act. She 
said the council’s powers lie unused because its members cannot agree on how to 
address the conflict.

Russia, a top Syria ally and backed by China, has vetoed multiple council 
resolutions on Syria, including an effort last year to refer the situation 
there to the International Criminal Court.

Jolie said she would like to see the foreign minister of each of the 15 
council members come to the table to negotiate a political solution.

She also urged council members to visit Syrian refugees and see the crisis for 
themselves.

In addition, Jolie spoke briefly about the rising migrant crisis on the 
Mediterranean, where more than 1,300 migrants fleeing Syria and other places 
have drowned at sea over the past three weeks.

“It is sickening to see thousands of refugees drowning on the doorstep of the 
world’s wealthiest continent,” she said. “No one risks the lives of their 
children in this way except out of utter desperation.”

The council was hearing a full day of briefings on Syria, including one behind 
closed doors by the UN special envoy to the country, Staffan de Mistura.

A spokesman for de Mistura said Iran is among the parties invited to attend 
the new series of peace talks that will start in early May in Geneva. Iran has 
not responded, Michael Contet said in an email.

The talks are structured as separate meetings with each party, an effort to 
avoid the tensions that have hurt previous negotiations. Syria’s moderate 
opposition is expected to attend.

The UN’s outgoing and outspoken humanitarian coordinator, Valerie Amos, 
challenged the divided council to mandate a fact-finding mission into the 
roughly 440,000 Syrians who are besieged in Syria and risk death by starvation, 
dehydration and the lack of medical care.

“The government, armed and terrorist groups continue to kill, maim, rape, 
torture and take Syria to new lows that seemed unimaginable a few years ago,” 
she said. “People have become numb to figures that should, every day, shock our 
collective conscience.”

The council should mandate the negotiation of humanitarian pauses to allow the 
delivery of aid, Amos said, and it should enforce an arms embargo and sanctions 
for the “shocking lack of respect for the most basic rules of international 
humanitarian law,” including intentional blockage of aid.

US ambassador Samantha Power told the council that existing resolutions on the 
crisis “are currently being ridiculed by the Syrian regime”.

The council adopted a presidential statement expressing alarm and calling 
Syria’s refugee crisis “the largest humanitarian emergency crisis in the world 
today”.

The UN refugee chief, Antonio Guterres, told the council that 14 million 
people are now displaced in the “interlinked crises” in Syria and Iraq, where 
the Islamic State seized territory in the past year.

He called for “massively increased support” for Syria’s neighbors under the 
flood of refugees, pointing out that as Lebanon and Jordan are considered 
middle-income countries, the World Bank can’t give them grants for efforts to 
deal with the “severe demographic shock they have endured”.
 