
Eurostar <https://www.theguardian.com/business/eurostar> has been accused of 
treating cyclists as “third-class passengers” over a new policy that will force 
them to dismantle their bikes before using the cross-Channel rail service.


National cycling charity CTC has joined forces with its partners in France, 
Belgium, the Netherlands and Germany to condemn the regulation 
<http://e-activist.com/ea-action/action?ea.client.id=1689&ea.campaign.id=43067&ea.tracking.id=gn>
, claiming it will discourage new cyclists and those who rely on cycling from 
using the train and make bus and air travel more attractive.

City cycle commutes around the world – mapped
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2015/oct/06/city-cycle-commutes-mapped-london-nyc-strava>
Currently cyclists can take a complete bicycle and pay a £30 fee for it to be 
carried via a registered luggage system.

But from next month passengers will be forced to dismantle their bikes, put 
them into a box and reassemble them when they reach their destination. This is 
more restrictive than any train operator in the UK.

Eurostar has claimed the change is needed to accommodate other passengers who 
are travelling with more luggage.

But CTC chief executive Paul Tuohy said: “There is nothing sustainable about 
this policy, as it actively discourages the people we want to see cycling more 
from using what is otherwise a fantastic service.

“For the new cyclist or those who rely on cycling as a mobility aid, 
dismantling and reassembling a bike for transit is too difficult.

“With London, Paris and Brussels each vying to be top cycling cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2015/oct/06/city-cycle-commutes-mapped-london-nyc-strava>
, and Amsterdam, arguably Europe’s cycling capital, due to join the Eurostar 
network in 2016, now is not the time to take a step back in cycle rail policy.

“Cyclists should not be treated as third-class passengers and we urge Eurostar 
to reverse their planned policy.”

The European Cyclists’ Federation (ECF), which represents cycling bodies 
across the continent, described the new policy as “extremely inconvenient” in a 
letter to Eurostar chief executive Nicolas Petrovic.

The ECF added: “We understand that there is a limited space for baggage on the 
trains but it should be allocated on a first come, first served basis. We would 
therefore request that the current policy of allowing the carriage of complete 
bicycles is retained.”

Holiday firm Blue Marble Travel, which organises trips for cyclists using the 
Eurostar, also criticised the new bike rule.

Its logistics manager, Nicolas Clifford, said: “If Eurostar puts its plans in 
place the only realistic choice for cyclists seeking to join the type of 
itinerant trip we offer will be short-haul air, which makes a mockery of the 
company’s green mantra.

“Some will, indeed, fly or drive to the continent. Others will renounce their 
cycling holidays and choose to motor instead.”

But Eurostar said the new policy would allow it to transport more bikes per 
train and all “reasonable sized” bike boxes would be accepted.

A spokesman said: “Passengers with bikes have and continue to be important to 
us. Our new policy has been introduced so that we can use the space on our 
trains more flexibly, by carrying the same or more bikes depending on the 
demand from passengers.

“The only change is that bikes will now need to be carried in a bike box, 
which we are happy to provide. When packaging bikes in this way they take up 
less space which means that we can carry more bikes or any other type of 
luggage.”

But Rosemary Dooley, 68, from Kendal, Cumbria, who recently went to Portugal 
for a cycle holiday, said: “I have to take my own bike everywhere due to 
arthritis in my hands – hence small adaptations.

“I am also not mechanical but it seems now that I will have to learn to remove 
and replace the front wheel. I just hope it doesn’t involve strong fingers.”

CTC accused Eurostar of hypocrisy by claiming its new policy did not match its 
support for sustainable travel.

The charity is urging members of the public concerned about the planned 
changes to write to the train operator.

A study commissioned by the European parliament in 2012 found that there are 
2.3m cycle tourism trips in the EU every year.
 