
Twenty-four national anti-doping organisations, including the UK Anti-Doping 
Agency and the US Anti-Doping Agency, have written to the IOC president, Thomas 
Bach, to express their disappointment after he sidestepped a request for a 
meeting to discuss the problems in the global anti-doping system.

Bach was first contacted in mid-November by the organisations, which told him 
there was an “urgent need” for a face-to-face meeting to discuss ways the 
system could be more independent, transparent and better-funded.

Second McLaren report: five questions on the Russian doping scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/10/second-mclaren-report-questions-russian-doping>
The IOC director-general, Christophe De Kepper, responded instead – after a 
two-week delay – to suggest a meeting with him and the medical and scientific 
director, Dr Richard Budgett, in January.

The International Olympic Committee’s tepid response has left many of the 24 
perplexed and increasingly frustrated, especially given thesecond part of the 
McLaren report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/dec/09/mclaren-report-into-doping-in-sport-part-two-live>
 recently identified that more than 1,000 Russians athletes across more than 30 
sports were involved in, or benefited from, state-sponsored doping between 2011 
and 2015.

Bach has also stated publicly this week he felt “horror” and an “inner rage” 
when he read the McLaren report before asking: “So in a position of 
responsibility, you have to immediately ask yourself, how do you deal with 
this? What can be done so this will hopefully never happen again?”

Privately some fear Bach is less keen to get to grips with a global 
anti-doping system whose flaws became more apparent than ever during 2016.

In a letter to Bach they wrote: “National Anti-Doping Organisation leaders are 
disappointed Mr Bach has not accepted our invitation to meet. The release of 
Prof Richard McLaren’s landmark second report and the urgent need to adopt 
meaningful reform to the current anti-doping system only elevates the vital 
importance of leaders of Nados and the president of the IOC to have a 
face-to-face conversation and search for common ground on reforming and 
strengthening anti-doping.”

In an attempt to press their case to meet Bach, they have asked De Kepper and 
Budgett to come to Dublin early next month to discuss their plans for reform of 
all anti-doping organisations, including the World Anti-Doping Agency.

Crucially, those plans include ensuring no decision-maker within a sporting 
body is also involved in an anti-doping agency, which would prevent the obvious 
conflict of interest theWada <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wada> 
president, Sir Craig Reedie, has had being a long-serving IOC member.

The body also wants Wada to be strengthened through improved independence, 
transparency and increased investment – a policy Bach would be likely to be 
wary of imposing as it would lose the IOC control of the body.

The group’s proposals also call for increased protection and support for all 
whistleblowers, including Russia’sYuliya and Vitaly Stepanov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/yuliya-stepanova-russia-doping-olympics>
, by all relevant organisations, including the IOC and Russia.

Separately, Bach has also been criticised by the German Athletics Federation 
president, Clemens Prokop, for not banning Russia from the Rio Olympics. “If 
the values of the charter of the IOC are taken seriously, Russia would have to 
be suspended by the IOC until the solution of its doping problem, for the 
protection of all concerned athletes and fair play,” he wrote in the 
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung newspaper. Prokop added Bach’s comments since 
the summer had not brought “any signal that the fight for the recovery of the 
credibility of the sport had begun”.
 