
Few women have the effrontery to walk into the most exclusive and expensive 
“maisons” of Hanover Square or Rue Royale with the knowledge that they cannot 
afford anything more than “ideas” from the models that are being displayed. A 
mannequin parade which forms a “turn” at a variety theatre is, therefore, 
likely to be popular. One may examine the dresses with care, take note of the 
latest “line,” the newest trimming and coming colour with the comfortable 
thought that one has paid for the seat and earned the right to copy, if one 
can, anything that is being shown.

The difficulty with the 1923 fashions at the Palladium in London is that it is 
such an ambitious affair that one is left merely bewildered. It is arranged in 
“revue” form, and a story - a poor travesty of Cinderella and Faust - is woven 
round the dresses. But the dresses are enough in themselves, and the occasional 
song and dance merely interrupt one’s pleasure and interest in them.

A ten or fifteen minute show would be ideal - preferably during the interval 
so the male audience could retire if bored.

Every few years the “Apache” influence makes a bid for popularity. This year 
it might have come into its own, had not the revelations of Tutankhamen proved 
a formidable and more decorative rival. Consequently in several of the dresses 
the Apache and the Egyptian fight for supremacy. In one evening gown the two 
are so well merged that even if one cannot honestly admire the result one must 
admire the skilful mingling of styles. It was made of gold shot tissue, closely 
fitting, and suggested the long-waisted Egyptian effect, while the boat-shaped 
neck was finished with an “Apache” handkerchief collar of Batik coloured 
material. It was not a dress to be worn by the average Englishwoman, but it 
might be carried off with success by someone with straight black bobbed hair.

Over a Hundred Models.
There were several dresses in shimmering metallic fabrics draped in the rather 
hard Egyptian lines with heavy jewelled head dresses. A particularly charming 
one was of gold tissue, very straight, and clinging and softened with orange 
georgette which fell from the shoulders to the hem at the back, caught in at 
the waist in a pouch and over the shoulders in front in two bretelles. A fairly 
wide belt of mauve and blue brocade gave just the necessary ballast to the 
whole effect.

The sports outfits were quite invigorating and unstagey. Bright tan was the 
most popular colour, and knitted jumpers seemed to be strictly taboo. Instead, 
little white blouses, rather high-necked and demure, like a man’s tennis shirt, 
went with the walking and country costumes. There is a freshness about a shirt 
blouse which has a great charm.

There must have been well over a hundred models, and one began to be a little 
surfeited with the “latest thing.” A ten or at most fifteen minutes show of 
dresses - preferably during the interval so that the male members of the 
audience could retire if bored - would be the ideal arrangement. The Alhambra 
also are showing a smaller parade of some very charming gowns and the latest 
fashion in hair dressing. They are wise in refusing to introduce any plot or 
song or dialogue.
 