
If you are not listening to your customers and acting on their feedback, your 
business won’t reach its full potential. Experts say that gaining customer 
feedback is the only way to truly understand and know your customers. And the 
greater the insight, the better the ability to fulfil those customers’ needs – 
and exceed their expectations.

The most effective way to access ‘voice of customer’ is to get ongoing 
feedback, whether that be through face-to-face focus groups, online surveys or 
via call centres. Gathering customer feedback allows an organisation to 
pinpoint customer likes and dislikes and garner their opinions on all aspects 
of a business. It is also a valuable tool for continual learning and 
improvement, and in today’s competitive marketplace, it is increasingly 
important.

“Customer feedback is about gaining customer insight,” says Bill Morgan, 
managing director of Cognition Research. “This word, ‘insight’, is bandied 
about a lot but fundamentally an insight is information that gives your 
business a competitive advantage – information that can be used to positively 
impact business decisions. A true insight builds better business outcomes, 
otherwise it’s just information.

True insight builds better business outcomes."
Bill Morgan, Cognition Research 
“Ultimately, it’s about understanding what matters to people – whether it’s 
buying breakfast cereal or life insurance – and then working out what to do 
about it. That’s where the insight comes in. It’s an actionable piece of 
information that helps you leverage to a commercial outcome. Understanding 
people’s deeper needs and motivations is key.”

When customers feel they are being listened to and understood, they generally 
remain satisfied and loyal. One way of measuring that loyalty and satisfaction 
is net promoter score (NPS). NPS is a benchmark used by companies, globally, to 
gauge how willing a customer is to recommend a product or service.

ING DIRECT Australia has the highest NPS in the banking sector in Australia. 
Fiona Nicol, Head of Marketing at ING DIRECT, credits a large part of that 
achievement to the organisation’s customer-centric approach.

“ING DIRECT doesn’t just talk to the customer, we live and breathe the 
customer in terms of being a very customer-led organisation,” she says. “Our 
product development is an iterative process where we involve our customers 
every step along the way, taking in their live feedback, views and reactions to 
help shape products and propositions.

“We use customers as a real-life sounding board as we go through that process. 
We get direct feedback from customers about what they want and need, rather 
than what we think they want and

need. For example, we recently relaunched a new website and mobile platform 
and that was done in conjunction with a group of about 150 customers. We worked 
alongside them to test and develop the site. We see our customers as a 
fundamental element in anything we do. It’s key for us in any development 
process.”

Clearly, the customer-centric model is working. Nicol says that 40-50 per cent 
of ING DIRECT business comes via referrals.

“The advocacy that customer feedback and satisfaction builds in terms of 
customer referrals has been very beneficial for our business,” she says. “Word 
of mouth is extremely powerful. By treating the customer well and really 
listening to their feedback – and acting on that feedback – puts us in good 
stead, and business is generated off the back of that.”

Morgan says there are many ways of gaining customer ‘voice’ and feedback, 
including a balance of both quantitative (including surveys) and qualitative 
research (including focus groups). He says that while relatively new and 
advanced methodologies for gaining customer feedback, such as neuro-marketing, 
have huge potential, some of the traditional forms of research are just as 
effective.

“There are things that influence what we do that we are not conscious of – 
neuro-marketing and neuro-research attempt to access those things, effectively 
trying to identify activity in the brain,” Morgan explains. “Yes, this area has 
huge potential, but the reason why focus groups and in-depth interviews and 
surveys still provide a lot of value is you can get a long way to finding out 
what people want simply by asking questions.

“A lot of our research now takes place is co-creation focus groups, where you 
are no longer just trying to test an idea, but develop propositions with 
consumer involvement, whether that’s for first-home buyers in the home loan 
market, or buying a new car or breakfast cereal. More and more, focus groups 
are being used to help develop products and services rather than just test 
them.”

Carlie Lau, Head of Customer Intelligence at ING DIRECT Australia, agrees: 
“You can pore over quantitative data, which is great, but you have to have good 
personal interaction with your customers as well. Without that human 
interaction, business insights can fall flat. They lack depth.

“Focus groups welcome a range of voices and diverse opinions, which allows 
brands to validate and prioritise if experiences are shared or conflicting. You 
don’t just hold a focus group then develop a product; it’s a really iterative 
process. The best outcomes are when you have constant check-ins with the 
customer. And then once it’s launched, it’s not a matter of set and forget, but 
you constantly monitor and get customer feedback and look at how to refine.

What is human centred design?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/ing-direct-being-human-in-a-digital-world/2016/nov/21/what-is-human-centred-design>
“In any market research approach, the validity of insights is derived not just 
by listening to what customers say, but the ability to interpret findings and 
uncover the underlying insights. This is achieved by understanding truly who 
your customers are – their behaviours, psychographics, beliefs, values and 
principles.”

Social media is also proving to be a valuable tool for tapping into customer 
insight. Nicol says it offers a “completely transparent environment where there 
is no hiding”.

“Being a digital bank, having that human touch and being focused on the 
consumer is critical, and we engage a lot with our customers via our Facebook 
page,” she says. “We use that for real-time feedback and pride ourselves on 
talking and responding to customers very quickly. It is also a way for us to 
talk to them in a language that is not your typical corporate speak, but it 
represents very much the tone of voice of ING DIRECT – having a real, 
down-to-earth conversation and taking that feedback on board.

“We also use social media and feedback forums for research as well. There’s 
been a big shift in recent years – consumers today have access to a lot of 
information and are more in a position of control, calling the shots, if you 
like. What people are saying in this environment is increasingly being used to 
inform marketing campaigns and product development. And it will continue to 
have a big impact of what marketing looks like moving forward.”

Regardless of the methodologies used, keeping strong lines of communication 
open with customers to gain feedback and insight is essential to business 
success both now and into the future.

“Today we have to react to changing market trends and needs faster in this 
more competitive marketplace,” Morgan says. “So that’s put a greater emphasis 
on finding solutions that hit the mark. The cornerstone is to find out what 
really matters to people and then meet those needs.”
 