
Argos shoppers could face delays to deliveries of their Christmas presents 
after drivers at its main distribution centre in Staffordshire voted to strike 
for three days from 20 December.

It comes after Post Office workers voted to stage five days of strikes in the 
run-up to Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/post-office-workers-to-stage-five-days-of-strikes-next-week>
 in a long-running dispute over jobs and pensions.

December strikes do not signify new 'winter of discontent'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/13/december-strikes-do-not-signify-new-winter-of-discontent>
The 35 Argos drivers, who all work on big lorries taking goods from the 
catalogue shop’s central warehouse run by logistics firm Wincanton to regional 
centres from where they are sent out to stores, are protesting over holiday pay.

Unite, the union acting for the workers based at the depot near Burton upon 
Trent, said each driver was owed about £700 in holiday pay dating back at least 
two years. The dispute comes after it was ruled that overtime and additional 
shift payments should be taken into account when assessing holiday pay.

Unite said a strike would cause “havoc and mayhem” to deliveries in the 
crucial days running up to Christmas. Its regional officer, Rick Coyle, said 
the action was a last resort after years of talks.

“The drivers have patiently tried to resolve this matter for over two years. 
Now they would like the money they are owed in time for Christmas, which is not 
unreasonable.

“It is very difficult to understand why Wincanton has allowed this saga to get 
out of hand because this strike by our members will cause havoc and mayhem to 
deliveries to Argos shops in the run-up to Christmas,” he said.

“There will be a lot of very unhappy Argos customers, if they don’t receive 
the iPhones, TVs and white goods that they have ordered as presents for 
relatives this Christmas.”

Argos, which was taken over by supermarket group Sainsbury’s earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/22/sainsburys-gets-all-clear-to-buy-argos>
, said: “We would encourage both sides to keep talking with the aim of coming 
to a swift resolution. We also have contingency plans in place and can reassure 
customers we’re working hard to ensure this will not impact our deliveries this 
Christmas.”

The Burton on Trent facility handles nearly 2m items a week in the run-up to 
Christmas, with about 120 trailer loads of goods a day heading out to regional 
distribution centres and on to Argos’s 800-plus stores.

The action in Staffordshire comes as drivers working at another Argos centre 
operated by Wincanton in Basildon, Essex, vote on whether to take industrial 
action over a disciplinary system.
 