
"What in the world do you want with art in Manchester? Why can't you stick to 
your cotton spinning?" So a noble is said to have inquired when applied to for 
a contribution from his gallery to the Exhibition which will be opened to-day.

Many both in and out of our town will be inclined to ask the same question. 
Manchester is the centre of a district more populous than any other in the 
Queen's dominions. The wealth of this population is proportionate to its 
density, and its laboriousness is at once the source and the measure of its 
wealth.

There was a time when labour alone sufficed for the serious hours of 
Manchester masters and Manchester men. What leisure they had was given to 
animal enjoyments; to abundant feasts, copious potations, rough pleasures, and 
brutal sports. Thus, even in those days, the life of this population showed 
that man will not brook continuous, unrelieved labour. But such employment of 
leisure was more degrading than the most grinding toil.

The time for such misuse of the hours of rest is gone by. From the highest to 
the lowest of us this fact is apparent. The spirit is daily usurping upon the 
flesh; culture spreads among all classes. Travelling is every day easier; books 
grow daily cheaper and more accessible; we have yearly more and more public 
parks, athenaeums, and reading-rooms, popular lectures, and schools of design. 
Our children are better taught; our adults seek higher amusements; our Agnews 
and Grundys are among the most enterprising of art-traders; our manufacturers 
are the best patrons of living artists.

Looking, therefore, to the fine arts as unconnected altogether with 
manufacturing design, we need be at no loss for reasons why Manchester should 
trouble herself about pictures and statues. The craving for the beautiful has 
grown up even in this great workshop.

Were there no more than this, then - we repeat it - Manchester has good reason 
to gather together her exhibition of art treasures. But the fine arts have 
their application, also, to design. It is not easy to over estimate their 
importance, in this respect, to a district which contributes so largely to the 
textile productions of the world. [The exhibition] includes art which appeals 
purely to the sense of the beautiful and art which brings down beauty to the 
service of daily life.

We would fain hope that for very many visitors this exhibition may be a place 
of study rather than a lounge, a school instead of a playroom. We hope the 
committee will [open] the building for Saturday half-holidays at a price low 
enough [for] even our poorest fellow-citizens.
 