
At least 30 inmates were killed in a Brazilian prison riot that broke out on 
Saturday, a person with direct knowledge of the situation said, adding to chaos 
in a penitentiary system in which about 140 inmates have died in gang warfare 
since the start of the year.


Trail of slaughter in prisons shocks Brazilians as gang war explodes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/10/brazil-prisons-gang-violence-riots>
 Members of a drug gang started the clash by invading a pavilion in the 
Alcaçuz prison where rivals rested, Rio Grande do Norte state’s security 
secretariat said on Sunday. According to the person, who asked for anonymity 
because forensic work was under way, the number of deaths could “slightly rise”.

 Police surrounded the prison overnight but waited until noon to enter because 
of reports that inmates remained armed and out of their cells. More than a 
dozen inmates have been taken to hospitals near the Alcaçuz facility, the 
person said.

 As in riots across the country earlier this month, some inmates were 
decapitated and some bodies might have been partially burned, the person said. 
The police identified the six inmates who led the riot, G1 news website said, 
and they may be transferred to federal prisons.

 Behind the bloodshed in some of the nation’s prisons is an escalating feud 
between some of Brazil’s most powerful drug gangs, who ended two decades of an 
uneasy working relationship about six months ago.

 Brazil’s deadliest jail uprisings in decades have exposed growing turf wars 
between São Paulo-based gang Primeiro Comando da Capital, or PCC, and the Rio 
de Janeiro-based Comando Vermelho that risk plunging a chaotic penitentiary 
system deeper into violence.

 According to G1, the PCC was the drug faction behind the killings in Alcaçuz, 
which has about 1,150 prisoners and capacity for 620 detainees.

 Earlier on Sunday, justice minister Alexandre de Moraes vowed to extend 
financial and security support for Rio Grande do Norte to prevent further 
prison uprisings. Moraes authorized the state to use some of the 13m reais 
($4m) it wired in recent days to upgrade and acquire prison equipment.
 