
Struggling to cope with rheumatoid arthritis, reigning Australian road race 
champion and three-time Olympian Jack Bobridge has been forced to retire from 
professional cycling at the age of 27.

In January, Bobridge produced a stunning effort in Buninyong near Ballarat by 
riding solo in the lead for more than 90km in searing 33-degree heat to win the 
national championship.

Meet the cycling team out that runs on TUEs to beat diabetes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/cycling-diabetes-tue-therapeutic-use-exemptions-team-novo-nordisk>
He also claimed two silver medals from three Olympics, three track world 
championship gold medals and broke the individual pursuit world record in 2011.

Diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis in 2010, Bobridge was able to manage the 
chronic condition while still competing.

But racing and training took its toll on his body and after winning silver in 
the team pursuit at the Rio Olympics, then leaving professional team 
Trek-Segafredo in September, Bobridge conceded the time was right to step away.

“Since the [Rio] Games and backing off the training and racing load I’ve found 
my arthritis has been 100% better,” Bobridge told News Corp. “And I’ve been 
able to get off all meds [medication] as well.

“I’m still on the bike three times a week but in terms of the arthritis it’s 
been way less stressful on the joints and body.”

In September, Bobridge had his confidential medical records published by cyber 
hackers the Fancy Bears.

Bobridge was on a third list released by the hackers who stole the medical 
records from Wada’s data storage system relating to Therapeutic Use Exemptions 
(TUEs) granted to athletes.

Bobridge was prescribed with prednisolone and glucocorticoids over a five-year 
period.

“Regarding the Wada hacks and ‘leaks’ of my personal information I’d like to 
make it clear I have no problem with this info becoming public,” he said on 
Twitter at the time.

“It is widely known that I have rheumatoid arthritis that, at times has left 
me barely able to grip the handlebars. I have taken appropriate medication for 
this terrible disease according to the UCI rules with their written permission.”
 