
Predictions about the future tend to run to the extremes. Some people think 
that artificial intelligence will liberate us from work, leaving us to a life 
of leisure, self-driving cars, andWi-Fi-enabled kettles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/12/english-man-spends-11-hours-trying-to-make-cup-of-tea-with-wi-fi-kettle>
. Others think robots will steal our jobs, ushering in dystopian levels of 
unemployment. Like all things, the reality is likely to be something in 
between. It’s also likely to be strangely familiar.

Technology tends not to wipe away the differences and inequalities in a 
society. Karl Marx, for instance, was famously wrong in his prediction that the 
introduction of railways would overcome the caste system in India. Technology 
is mediated through society. It builds on the inequalities we already have, 
twisting and transforming them.

Women’s role in society has changed drastically in the last century but men 
and women still lead unequal economic lives.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> tend to work in different 
occupations, in different industries, in different ways, and for different 
(read: smaller) incomes. That economic difference means that technology will 
affect women in ways that are sometimes better, sometimes worse, but definitely 
different from the effects on men.

By some estimates, as many as 40% of jobs in Australia today will be done by 
algorithms or machines within a decade or two 
<http://www.ceda.com.au/research-and-policy/policy-priorities/workforce>. It’s 
not the case that white-collar jobs will stay and blue-collar will go. Instead, 
the key question iswhether a job’s tasks are routine or not 
<http://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2016/sp-so-2016-09-21.html>. Reviewing 
thousands of documents to prepare for a court case? Probably best done by a 
machine. Talking someone through a difficult health diagnosis? Probably still a 
job for a person.

It's up to organised people to ensure the new economy serves the greater good
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/07/its-up-to-organised-people-to-ensure-the-new-economy-serves-the-greater-good>
Australia’s workforce is highly gender-segregated. Women tend to be 
concentrated in particular industries or occupations. This doesn’t mean women 
will either bear the brunt or be exempt from job losses. The breadth of change 
promised by automation means that both genders face job losses over the coming 
decades. Some female-dominated roles such as administrative staff or personal 
secretary may disappear, but then so too may heavily male roles such as 
machinery operator and some kinds of labourers.

What we can see, though, is that on current trends automation is likely to 
embed the inequality that comes from having a gender-segregated workforce.

Australia’s gender pay gap 
<https://www.wgea.gov.au/sites/default/files/Gender_Pay_Gap_Factsheet_final.pdf>
 in May of this year is a little over 16% (which by the way is basically the 
same that it was back in May 1995). We know that a large part of this gap comes 
from female professions being paid less than male equivalents. Automation won’t 
change that. In this new, digitised world, human skills such as empathy, 
creativity, or even complicated manual manipulation have special value.

But the risks and opportunities in the new economy may well be distributed 
between men and women in old, gendered patterns. We are likely to see growing 
demand for people in the care sector. These jobs, such as nurses or aged care 
workers, are now largely performed by women and are largely underpaid. At the 
same time we will also likely see growth in high-paid roles in engineering, 
science and technology – areas where women are traditionally underrepresented.

Technology isn’t going to erase that gap. If current trends continue we won’t 
have a pipeline of young women ready and able to take advantage of Stem 
opportunities. We can hope that automation may force us to rethink the value of 
caring roles and pay our teachers, nurses and childcare workers more. To 
achieve that we don’t just need to advance our tech – we need to advance our 
thinking.

It’s not just about how we work. As machines take over work, a greater share 
of profits will flow to those who own things rather than those who do things. 
Take Uber, for example. At the moment the value produced by Uber is split 
between the company that owns the app and the drivers who do the work. If 
self-driving cars take over, the value created goes in its entirety those who 
own the vehicles.

Men are positioned to capture a greater share of those profits because men own 
more than women. As a consequence of the gender pay gap, men have more savings, 
more investments and more superannuation. Twentieth-century feminism has 
emphasised the importance of economic independence for women and in the postwar 
period women have entered the workforce in ever greater numbers to achieve 
this. In a digitised world, will this continue to be a viable strategy for 
economic equality?

There are very real questions about what our relationships and families will 
look like if we cement the role of men and women as economic unequals. We have 
had decades of (admittedly slow and faltering) progress towards more equal and 
respectful home lives. Can we expect that to continue if the opportunities for 
women outside the home are fewer, and less well paid?

Why teaching graduates to be flexible is more important than worrying about 
jobs that don't yet exist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/14/why-teaching-graduates-to-be-flexible-is-more-important-than-worrying-about-jobs-that-dont-yet-exist>
On the other side of the ledger, there is little evidence that the explosion 
of household technology does much to change the burden or division of household 
labour. Just as one task is made easier by a gadget, another new expectation or 
demand seems to emerge.

So what are we to do? First we need to abandon techtopian hopes that 
inequality will melt in the face of scientific advances. This is true not just 
of gender, but of race, class, or any other driver of inequality. We will erase 
inequality in the future in the same way we did in the past – through the hard 
work of concerted action to remove structural barriers.

For women, this means continuing with the program we already have – valuing 
feminised labour, removing the barriers to women fully participating in work, 
and ensuring government levers such as superannuation and taxation reduce 
rather than intensify the wealth gap. It also means that government needs to 
consider the ways in which new threats and opportunities impact men and women 
differently. We need to be alive to the role of gender.

That’s not a task for the future – it’s a task that starts now. Take the gig 
economy, for example. Digitisation has made it easier and cheaper to find 
people to do tasks. What we do with that tech is up to us. Some companies have 
used it to develop business models in which workers are paid less, have few 
workplace protections, and no guaranteed hours. (It’s worth noting that women 
are concentrated in the low-paid jobs which are particularly vulnerable to this 
business model.) We don’t have to accept this. There are other ways to deploy 
this same technology. We can encourage models that don’t leave all the risk and 
uncertainty with the worker.

When I say ‘we’, I mean our government, but I also mean each of us as voters, 
citizens and consumers. We can all question the ways in which people seek to 
use technology and ask whether they are making us a more or less fair society. 
After all, technology doesn’t make the future – we do.
 