
Fallout 4, the popular action role-playing title, has won the award for best 
game at this year’s Bafta game awards.


Although the blockbuster adventure took the night’s main prize, it was one of 
the only big budget success stories of the evening. Instead, the night was 
ruled by three independent titles, the UK-developed Her Story and Everybody’s 
Gone to the Rapture, and sci-fi sports sim, Rocket League, by San Diego studio 
Psyonix. Each won three awards a piece.

It was Everybody’s Gone to the Rapture by Brighton team The Chinese Room that 
got the awards started. The apocalyptic exploration game, set in a Shropshire 
village as the world ends, won Best Music, thanks to a haunting score from 
Jessica Curry.

In one of the most memorable acceptance speeches of the evening Curry stated, 
“I am a left wing feminist with a degenerative disease who tried to bring down 
a major publisher. It’s a miracle I’m here.”

The studio also took Audio Achievement, while actor Merle Dandridge won Best 
Performance for her role as Kate in the game.

Another British title, Her Story, won in three categories: Debut Game, Mobile 
and Handheld Game and Game Innovation. Created almost entirely by one developer 
Sam Barlow, the game is a tense detective drama, where the player watches 
videos of a murder suspect being interviewed by the police to ascertain her 
guilt. Created on a micro budget, the game quickly sold over 100,000 units onPC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pc>, tablet and smartphone.

The other big winner was Rocket League, a multiplayer online sports title that 
combines football with motor racing. The game took Family, Multiplayer and Best 
Sports Game, beating mainstream rivals like Fifa 16, Destiny and Lego 
Dimensions. Developer Psyonix created a version of the game several years ago 
naming it Supersonic Acrobatic Rocket-Powered Battle-Cars – that version 
disappeared without a trace, but the company kept itself going with contract 
work while creating Rocket League on the side. The game has now sold over four 
million units.

But it was major release Fallout 4 that took the climactic Best Game trophy. 
Created by Bethesda studios it is the latest title in the post-apocalyptic 
role-playing series, set in a devastated America. Meanwhile, Best British Game 
went to Batman: Arkham Knight, Bloodborne was awarded Best Design, and cult 
titles Life is Strange and Until Dawn won in the Story and Original Property 
categories.

This year’s Bafta Games <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> 
Fellowship went to programmer John Carmack, co-founder of Id Software, and now 
CTO at virtual reality headset company Oculus.

He helped pioneer the use of 3D graphics in video games and was the lead 
programmer for the original Doom and Wolfenstein 3D, some of the earliest games 
in the first-person shooter genre which is now one of the industry’s biggest.

He told attendees: “I don’t like to romanticise the past. I’m more excited 
about the opportunities available now than anything there’s ever been before. 
Thanks for this award, but I’m just getting started.”

The awards in full:

Music
Everybody’s Gone to the Rapture

Best British Game
Batman: Arkham Knight

Artistic Achievement
Ori and the Blind Forest

Audio Achievement
Everybody’s Gone to the Rapture

Debut Game
Her Story

Family
Rocket League

Game Innovation
Her Story

Ones to Watch
Sundown

Original Property
Until Dawn

Game Design
Bloodborne

eSports Audience award
Smite

Mobile and Handheld
Her Story

Multiplayer
Rocket League

Story
Life is Strange

Persistant Game
Prison Architect

Best Sports Game
Rocket League

Best performer
Merle Dandridge (Everybody’s Gone to the Rapture)

Best Game
Fallout 4

Bafta Fellowship award 
John Carmack
 