
Bargain-hunters flocked back into the shops last month as retailers cut prices 
aggressively in an attempt to make up for poor Christmas sales, retailers said 
today. Business in the high street rose in January for the first time in four 
months following heavy discounting by shops and stores desperate to offload 
large quantities of unsold goods.

 In contrast to last week's Confederation of British Industry Distributive 
Trades Survey, today's snapshot from the British Retail Consortium suggested 
that the easing of policy by the Bank of England since autumn may be filtering 
down to spending decisions.

 However, the BRC warned that the main impetus for the pick-up was not the 
cuts in interest rates since October but widespread price-cutting, with growth 
in sales bought at the price of lower profit margins.

 Government figures for retail sales in January, due out later this month, 
will now be eagerly awaited by the markets for any evidence of a recovery from 
December's sharp fall.

 Bridget Rosewell, the BRC's chief economic adviser, said that the 2.5 per 
cent annual increase in sales in January should not be seen as the start of a 
trend. 'It is not surprising January has seen a rebound in sales since 
consumers delayed Christmas shopping until the last minute and put off major 
purchases until the sales,' she said.

 Ms Rosewell added that the trend was little changed, pointing out that sales 
in the three months to January were only 0.6 per cent higher than in the same 
period a year earlier. 'For retail sales growth to start expanding again on any 
significant basis will require consumers to be more confident than these 
results suggest'.

 The BRC said that many sectors saw the briskest business in the first and 
last weeks of January, as shoppers rushed to the start of the sales and were 
then tempted back by extra discounts offered in the last week. The middle weeks 
of the month were less buoyant, it said.

 According to the BRC's sector-by-sector breakdown of the high street, the 
picture last month was patchy, with those outlets offering designer goods, 
items in short supply and hefty reductions doing best. Discounting was 
particularly deep in ladieswear, with shops reporting that the sales had been 
more prolonged this year to cope with a dearth of consumers.

 Designer-label clothes and shoes for children were among the best performers, 
but the BRC said that women's party shoes suffered as a result of a shift 
towards practical styles that could be worn more often.

 Price reductions fuelled strong sales of computers, and for products in short 
supply before Christmas - pre-pay mobile phones, Sony PlayStations and Dyson 
vacuum cleaners - the arrival of new stocks in January generated extra business.

 Andrew Higginson, chairman of the BRC Economic Affairs Committee, said: 'The 
trend of customers withholding spend until the sale period is now well 
established. January's growth comes on top of a strong growth in January sales 
last year.

 'This is good news for the inflationary picture.' 
 