
Winning tip: Froggyland, Split


I know it sounds dumb but after you’ve spent days soaking in the amazing 
historic sites, Froggyland is a fun diversion - several hundred artfully 
taxidermied frogs arranged in amusing settings. Definitely worth a visit and 
there’s a craft ale bar round the corner!
• Entry around €5, froggyland.net <http://www.froggyland.net/>
Wendy Moore


Great value eco resort

Pine Beach in Pakostane (south of Zadar) is an all-inclusive eco resort where 
guests stay in environment-friendly Polynesian-style reed bungalows, which have 
no electricity or sanitation. The bungalows are dotted around the pine forest, 
just steps from the sandy and rocky beaches. Shower blocks are clean and 
plentiful, and the bungalows benefit from cooling sea breezes. It’s a great way 
to holiday on a budget with all-inclusive pricing (which includes water sports, 
food, local drinks and children’s activities) but without the big, corporate 
feel of a large, glitzy resort.
• Hut from £5pppn, full board, inc watersports, pinebeach.hr/en 
<http://www.pinebeach.hr/en/>
bowbank

Yellow Cat’s guest house, Šipan

 Suđurađ on Šipan island. Photograph: Loop Images/UIG via Getty Images 
This island has a raw beauty to it. It hasn’t been polished for tourists and 
has a humble, rugged, wild feel. Arriving at Guest House Šimunović, in Suđurađ, 
we were warmly welcomed by the owner and his wife with coffee and a tour of the 
outside kitchen and private jetty. They owned a few cats and as we were 
chatting we asked the owner his name. He replied: “Yellow Cat”. We cooked our 
meals outside and helped ourselves to homemade wine and fresh lemons from 
Yellow Cat’s organic farm. We hiked up to the highest point on the island, 
where there is a disused church. From there, you get a spectacular panoramic 
view of the island and can see as far as the mainland and the mountains where 
the border to Bosnia and Herzegovina is. We spent hours jumping off the jetty 
into the water. On one occasion we were startled by a wetsuit-clad, 
spear-wielding Yellow Cat emerging from the sea laden with octopuses which we 
later grilled over hot coals and smothered in olive oil. Wonderful.
• Doubles from about £25 room only, +385 98 984 1801, no website
Susube

Dining in Rabac


This small coastal resort in Istria has a complete lack of British tourists 
and a faraway feel. Crystal clear water, secluded pebbly coves, pine woods, 
cicadas, butterflies, dolphins and stunning views make for a slow-paced break. 
Food is varied and delicious; dine at Gostionica Primorje (two courses from £20 
for two, just off Obala Maršal Tita, no website), sitting harbourside under 
olive trees. It has charming service, Istrian specialities, seafood, delicious 
local wine and complimentary rakia.
hotbreezydoll

Salt pans at Ston

 Salt pools at Ston. Photograph: Westend61/Getty Images/Westend61 
In Croatia’s far south is Ston. Its medieval outer walls, which have a 
circumference of 5km (making them among the longest in Europe), were built to 
protect salt production at a time when salt, it is often claimed, was more 
valuable than gold. The production of salt from evaporating sea water in 
shallow pools remained unchanged for thousands of years. Walking round the 
walls involved some steep inclines and effort but rewarded us with spectacular 
views over the unspoilt town and salt pans. Coming down into similarly medieval 
Mali (Little) Ston, where numerous oyster farms crisscross the bay, we sampled 
the region’s delicious seafood and tasted excellent local wines.
eurohike

Plitvice lakes

 Photograph: Russ Bishop/Getty Images/age fotostock RM 
It’s well known but still an absolutely stunning national park, with lakes, 
forests, waterfalls and caves, and many hiking trails. The vibrant colours due 
to the limestone, water, trees and sunlight are amazing. You can end the day 
with a relaxing ride across lake Kozjak in an electric boat which is included 
in the price of the park’s entry fee.
• High season entry fee £21pp (low season £6), np-plitvicka-jezera.hr/en 
<http://www.np-plitvicka-jezera.hr/en/plan-your-visit/operating-hours-and-prices/>
giddyk

Croatia’s craggy side

 Photograph: Getty Images/EyeEm 
In spring, Croatia is the perfect destination for sport climbing, with plenty 
of sunshine, accessible crags and routes to suit all abilities. Marjan hill, 
right next to Split, offers breathtaking views out to sea and back over the 
city. The climbing is interesting, well-bolted and surprisingly quiet – the 
place feels a world away from the bustle of tourists in the city. Another 
excellent climbing spot isStraćine 
<http://www.hvarclimbing.com/cragstopos/stracine-crag/> on the island of Hvar, 
which can be reached by taxi from Stari Grad ferry port. The 15-minute walk up 
from the road through fragrant rosemary bushes is worth it for the stunning 
view and sense of tranquillity alone.
Immie282

Sandy beach at Nin


Most of the Croatian coastline is pebbly but we were lucky enough to have a 
local friend take us to a little-known beach at Nin, just north of Zadar, where 
soft sand greeted us. Not only that but there was therapeutic mud to wallow in, 
leaving the skin feeling soft and smooth all over.
Phil Moore




Sea kayaking near Dubrovnik

 Photograph: Sabine Lubenow/Getty Images/AWL Images RM 
The sea kayaking trip I booked as a surprise for my best friend on her hen do 
was the absolute highlight of our trip. The tour took us to the beautiful 
Elaphiti islands near Dubrovnik, where we stopped off for cave swimming in the 
luminous Green Cave and cliff jumping from the rocky outcrops. The coastline 
and Dubrovnik looked so beautiful from the water. I booked the Arches, Caves, 
and Islands Kayak Day Tour with Outdoor Croatia, who were really friendly and 
helpful. It rained heavily on the day I had booked, which the guides advised 
would not have been safe for us. They happily moved our booking to the next day 
and even adapted the trip so we could finish early and catch our flight home in 
the afternoon.
• Arches tour from £38 inc all gear, outdoorcroatia.com 
<http://outdoorcroatia.com/>
roflcopter123

Hvar apartments

 Villa Nina, Hvar 
Stay at Villa Nina, run by a cute male duo, a 15-minute walk from town - its 
self-catering apartments are reasonable and homely. The owners pick you up from 
the harbour, leave you out beautiful fruit each day, and sometimes invite you 
up to their house for a BBQ and homemade wine. A picture perfect beach is a 
short walk away for glorious sunsets and reasonable fish suppers. In town, 
marvel at the super yachts while sipping a cocktail overlooking the harbour at 
the Adriana hotel’s sky bar – best fish restaurant has to beGariful  
<http://hvar-gariful.hr/>right on the harbour. Afterwards, mosey down side 
streets with sumptuous cocktails and live music that floats through the streets 
on the warm air.
• Apartment from £40pn, on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/Villa-Nina-595035640551747/about/?entry_point=page_nav_about_item&tab=overview>
Jessica Rogers
 