
The Department for International Development’s approach to managing aid in 
conflict zones is often weakened by a desire to protect its own reputation, 
with staff reporting confusion over how to implement DfID’s key policies,a 
report has found 
<http://icai.independent.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/ICAI-Performance-Review-DFIDs-approach-to-managing-fiduciary-risk-in-conflict-affected-environments.pdf>
 (pdf).

According to the Independent Commission for Aid Impact (Icai), which 
investigates taxpayer-funded UK aid, DfID staff in conflict-affected areas are 
satisfactorily assessing and mitigating the risk of aid misuse. However, the 
report found that weaknesses in the approach to risk transfer, as well as staff 
confusion over “zero tolerance” and “high-risk appetite 
<https://www.theirm.org/knowledge-and-resources/thought-leadership/risk-appetite-and-tolerance/>
” policies, require urgent attention in order to protect UK aid funds and make 
maximum impact.

Aid watchdog urges DfID to consolidate gains on water, sanitation and hygiene
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/24/aid-watchdog-urges-dfid-to-consolidate-gains-on-water-sanitation-and-hygiene>
DfID has committed to spending half of its budget in fragile states and regions
 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/department-for-international-developments-settlement-at-the-spending-review-2015>
 – a sum worth £5.5bn this year – where government access is limited, and the 
risk of fraud, looting, aid diversion and informal taxation is high. As a 
result, it is crucial that DfID has central systems in place for staff to 
classify, rate, escalate and monitor these risks with confidence, said Dr 
Alison Evans, Icai’s chief commissioner and the report’s author.

“You’ve got so many different ways that food aid, for example, can end up in 
the wrong hands,” said Evans. “You have to have more than one strategy for 
working out where that asset ends up.”

Unlike most other donors, DfID decentralises its fiduciary risk management to 
country offices, where the staff responsible for programmes are known as 
“senior responsible owners”. Evans said this focuses attention on the changing 
risk environment, encouraging personnel to implement management systems 
autonomously and work with local partners to control fiduciary risk more 
effectively.

But there is a downside. Because DfID lacks a clear, overarching 
risk-management system, and country offices categorise and rate risks 
themselves, there is a huge variation in how risks are defined and assessed 
across the department’s work in conflict areas. This, in turn, can affect 
multilateral or corporate partners.


Icai’s report, published on Tuesday, assessed performance in five 
conflict-affected countries – the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), 
Somalia, South Sudan, Syria and Yemen – using interviews with DfID staff and 
implementing partners, and country strategy reviews. DfID was given a 
“green-amber” rating, indicating that its fiduciary risk management in 
conflict-affected states, though mostly satisfactory, required urgent attention 
in some areas.


A number of senior staff expressed concern about the frequency with which 
decision-making was driven by “reputational considerations” rather than 
fiduciary risk itself, said Evans.

“How do you manage that political tension? We found that to be a very live 
discussion, particularly in environments where DfID is trying to work with 
local partners, or where DfID is working in unfamiliar territory, of which 
Syria is a good example,” she said. Staff can be torn between working with a 
smaller, local partner (which can mean a higher fiduciary risk) or a larger 
(potentially lower risk) private sector partner. Fearful of the “reputational 
risk of a possible loss or diversion of aid funds”, the larger partner is often 
chosen, despite a2013 report by the Overseas Development Institute showing that 
local aid frequently delivers equal, or greater, development returns 
<https://www.odi.org/projects/2696-localising-aid-budget-support-southern-actors>
.

“There is not a long track record for this,” added Evans. “How far DfID goes 
in working with these organisations, and how quickly, is a matter of balancing 
both fiduciary and reputational risk … [But] there is a certain concern that 
DfID is putting a lot of its eggs in particular baskets with certain 
contractors.” This narrowed the pool of potential suppliers and possibly 
reduced value for money, said Evans.

DfID’s dependence on taxpayers’ money meant it was up to staff to protect and 
spend that money as effectively as possible, said a DfID spokesman, making the 
department likely to “err on the side of caution” in assessing risks. He added: 
“There are of course challenges to providing life-saving aid in some of the 
most difficult and dangerous places in the world, including disasters and war 
zones, which is precisely why we have such a rigorous system of checks and 
measures in place.”

The report found DfID to be at its most effective when using technological 
innovations to manage fiduciary risk, particularly in countries where access is 
limited. In Somalia, where the department has only a limited presence in the 
capital, Mogadishu, and is instead required to work primarily out of the 
Nairobi office, using third parties to deliver assets, tracking technology has 
been deployed to follow money and assets in real time. A similar programme, 
tracking pharmaceuticals, was used in DRC.

“That seemed to show to us how [DfID’s] decentralised system really plays up 
to its strengths,” said Evans. “We feel DfID could do a better job spreading 
this experience across its portfolio and learning how it might be applied in 
other contexts.”
 