
Tributes have been pouring in for the former US first lady Betty Ford – 
perhaps best known around the world for her work treating addiction – who has 
died aged 93.

Her husband, President Gerald Ford, died five years ago and his widow had 
lived in California in her later years. InUS politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-politics>, she was remembered as an 
outspoken woman who brought style and laughter to an often stuffy 1970s White 
House.

President Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> led 
the national tributes. "Today, we take comfort in the knowledge that Betty and 
her husband, former president Gerald Ford, are together once more," he said in 
a White House statement.

Former presidents praised her outspokenness on women's rights and health, 
especially cancer and drug and alcohol problems. "As a staunch advocate for 
women's and equal rights, Betty paved the way for generations of women to 
follow. Her courage, compassion and commitment to helping our nation deal with 
drug and alcohol abuse and addiction helped thousands of people to a successful 
recovery, and in the process she helped to save countless families," said 
former president Bill Clinton.

"She was a wonderful wife and mother, a great friend and a courageous first 
lady. No one confronted life's struggles with more fortitude or honesty, and as 
a result, we all learned from the challenges she faced," added former president 
George HW Bush.

Those challenges came first in 1974, when Ford, who was then first lady, was 
diagnosed with breast cancer. In a move that shocked the nation, she revealed 
the diagnosis and openly discussed her mastectomy. That decision inspired women 
across the US and prompted a surge in those going for check-ups. She once said 
that she believed her cancer had served a "special purpose" in allowing her to 
advocate for early detection and treatment. She was pronounced clear of the 
disease in 1976 after chemotherapy.

Ford's open style hit the headlines again, after her husband had left office, 
when in 1982 she founded the Betty Ford Centre in Palm Springs, California, as 
a clinic for people with drug and alcohol problems. At least half the clinic's 
places are reserved for women and it has become world renowned for both the 
treatment it provides and for research into addiction.

Ford revealed she had struggled herself with both pills and alcohol. She had 
developed a problem with painkillers after a neck injury in 1964 had resulted 
in a pinched nerve. Her drinking increased as she missed her husband while he 
was on his lengthy business and political trips, and as a way of overcoming her 
social anxiety. Her family and friends eventually persuaded her – after a tough 
battle – to seek treatment in 1978. Her victory in that battle led directly to 
her desire to found her own clinic and go public with her struggles. The Betty 
Ford Centre rapidly became a byword for addiction treatment and attracted 
celebrities such as Elizabeth Taylor and Liza Minnelli. Ford worked tirelessly 
to strip away the social stigma surrounding addiction, just as she had for 
cancer.

Although she died with her name known around the globe, Ford came into the 
world in modest circumstances. Chicago-born in 1918, Elizabeth Ann Bloomer was 
the daughter of a travelling salesman. She was a model and dancer who married 
her first husband, insurance salesman William Warren, in 1942. However, the 
marriage ended in divorce in 1947. A year later, she met Gerald Ford, a war 
veteran standing for Congress. The pair quickly wed and their marriage lasted 
58 years.

When Ford replaced the disgraced Richard Nixon, his wife was seen as a breath 
of fresh air. Whereas the Nixons had demanded that White House staff had little 
to do with them socially, Ford insisted on a more friendly atmosphere. It was a 
success, and when Ford returned from her mastectomy, staff held up signs 
reading: "We love you, Betty."

She was also a renowned hostess, performing the traditional duties of a 
presidential spouse. She became known – some would say infamous – for dancing 
in the White House's halls and corridors and the parties that she held were 
famed for going on past midnight. On her husband's last full day in office, she 
danced on the cabinet room table, a moment captured by a photographer.

But aside from the open gaiety, Ford also created headlines for her forthright 
views on women, sex and equal rights for women. She privately urged her husband 
to make more female appointments. But she was far from a liberal on other 
matters, including the Vietnam war.

Her public speeches divided reaction: some loved her and some wished she would 
stay quiet. In 1975, she joked on a TV show that she would not be surprised if 
her daughter had an extramarital affair. Her husband later turned the joke back 
on her, quipping that the comment might have cost him millions of votes in the 
1976 election that he lost.

But, as the battles of the 1970s disappeared and Ford became known for her 
clinic more than her political statements, she became among the best-loved 
first ladies of recent history. "We know that organisations such as the Betty 
Ford Centre will honour her legacy by giving countless Americans a new lease on 
life," Obama said.
 