
Betty Ford, who has died at the age of 93, was perhaps the only politically 
involved person to emerge with a vastly enhanced reputation from the tangled 
American political scandal known as Watergate. Not that she played any part in 
the main drama; she was unwittingly thrust into the script when an embattled
Richard Nixon <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/richard-nixon> selected her 
husband, congressman Gerald Ford, to replace Spiro Agnew, disgraced for 
corruption, as vice-president.

The move was as great a shock to her as to the rest of the country, and even 
more so when Nixon's resignation in August 1974 brought her into the White 
House as first lady. The reality of her new situation was brought home with a 
thud. Within 24 hours she found herself as hostess at a state banquet for King 
Hussein of Jordan. Always a strong individual, she set about her new role in 
characteristic fashion. "I was an ordinary woman who was called on stage at an 
extraordinary time," she said later. "I was no different once I became first 
lady than I had been before. But, through an accident of history, I had become 
interesting to people."

She pulled no punches in her early encounters with the press and other media, 
offering opinions on subjects ranging from women's right to choose abortion, 
the need to appoint women to the supreme court, the urgency of supporting the 
constitutional amendment on equal rights (then under debate in 50 state 
legislatures), and the possibility of her daughter becoming involved in 
pre-marital sex. It was that determination and honesty that eventually led to 
the addiction treatment centre that bore her name and became her legacy.

The contrast with the buttoned-up, apolitical stance of her predecessor, Pat 
Nixon, brought the inevitable national furore, and various presidential 
advisers suggested that Gerald Ford should rein in his wife as soon as 
possible. He declined, commenting she was fully entitled to her own views. 
Within weeks, in fact, public opinion swung through 180 degrees when Betty 
revealed that doctors had discovered a lump in her right breast and that she 
faced a mastectomy. Such candour was unprecedented and more than 55,000 
messages of support poured into the White House. Betty's progress through 
surgery and recuperation was closely followed, and her frank accounts were held 
responsible for a surge in screenings and early remedial treatments.

Her independent nature had been evident from her earliest years. Born 
Elizabeth Bloomer in Chicago, and brought up in Grand Rapids, Michigan, she 
displayed an early talent for dance and began to study seriously at 14. Her 
progress was such that, by the age of 20, she was offered tuition by the 
choreographer Martha Graham in New York, joined her teacher's auxiliary company 
for performances at Carnegie Hall and worked as a fashion model to earn extra 
cash. It was not a life that appealed to her mother and there were running 
family rows before Betty reluctantly returned home. Within a year she had 
married an old school sweetheart and left home, though the marriage was soon 
ended by mutual consent. In 1948, she marriedGerald Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/dec/27/guardianobituaries.usa>, a 
lawyer fresh out of the wartime navy and just embarking on his political career.

She settled into the classic role of a Washington wife, eventually involved 
with three sons and a daughter, the parent-teacher association, the local 
church and all the chores of American politics. She also had lonely periods 
when her husband was away nursing his congressional district in far-off 
Michigan. At the age of 46, she suffered a pinched nerve which left her 
bedridden for several weeks. Then she developed arthritis and was prescribed 
powerful analgesics to help her cope with the two conditions. She became 
addicted to the pills and, under the strain of life in the White House, also 
took to the bottle.

She refused to acknowledge her problem, which her daughter graphically 
described years later. "Going shopping could turn into a day-long wait while 
she got ready, and after a cocktail before dinner, Mother would doze off before 
the meal was even over." Eventually, when Gerald Ford was defeated in the 1976 
election, her family convinced her that she must seek medical help. In April 
1978 she went into the Long Beach naval hospital to be treated for her 
addictions and, in November that year, told the whole story in her 
autobiography, The Times of My Life.

When her well-documented recovery was completed in 1982, she founded the Betty 
Ford Centre <http://www.bettyfordcenter.org/index.php> in Rancho Mirage, 
California, dedicated to the treatment of alcohol and chemical dependency. The 
industrialist Leonard Firestone organised much of the funding for the 
not-for-profit organisation, and Betty became chair of its board, working 
tirelessly till the age of 87 to raise money and convince the American public 
of the need for its services. The centre's philosophy was based on peer 
relationships, and many celebrities, including Elizabeth Taylor, Liza Minnelli 
and Mary Tyler Moore, checked in. This endeavour – the organisation has now 
treated more than 90,000 people – and her long record of campaigning for 
women's rights brought numerous academic and national awards. Her husband died 
in 2006 and she is survived by her children.

• Elizabeth Anne Ford, US first lady and addiction treatment centre founder, 
born 18 April 1918; died 8 July 2011
 