
Jewish community centers in several states have been targeted with bomb 
threats, but authorities said it was not immediately clear whether the threats 
were linked.

A Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives spokeswoman, Amanda 
Hils, said in an email that the agency was aware of the threats and its field 
divisions were ready to assist state and local law enforcement.

The Maitland Jewish community campus was evacuated on Monday for the second 
time in a week because of a bomb threat. The complex includes a school, 
community center, a Holocaust museum and the offices of the Jewish Federation 
of Greater Orlando.

Police said no explosives were found after bomb threats were received at the 
Miami Beach Jewish community center and the Jewish Community Alliance of 
Jacksonville.

A Miami-Dade police bomb squad was dispatched to the Alper Jewish community 
center, where staff evacuated hundreds of children “as an abundance of caution” 
after a bomb threat was called in, said Alvaro Zabaleta, a Miami-Dade police 
detective.

“As a community, we must always be vigilant when it comes to security,” the 
Greater Miami Jewish Federation’s director of community security, Brenda 
Moxley, said in an email.

In Nashville, Tennessee <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/tennessee>, 
police responded to the Gordon Jewish community center after a security guard 
received a bomb threat over the phone.

No explosives were found, but 225 people in the building and an adjacent 
school were evacuated, said Mark Freedman, executive director of the Jewish 
Federation of Nashville and Middle Tennessee.

In Delaware <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/delaware>, the Siegel Jewish 
community center in Wilmington was evacuated after a bomb threat was called in.

Buildings were evacuated and authorities investigated similar threats in 
Tenafly, New Jersey, and Columbia,South Carolina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/south-carolina>. In Maryland, threats were 
also called into Jewish community centers in Baltimore and Rockville.

Last week, bomb threats also targeted two Jewish preschools in Tampa and an 
Orange County Jewish community center.
 