
'I'm still the same person the Guardian used to eulogise when I was a young 
MP," says Robert Kilroy-Silk. "On all the liberal issues I am the Guardian man. 
I believe in a woman's right to choose, I'm opposed to the death penalty, I'm 
anti any form of discrimination against women, I believe in higher rates of tax 
for the rich. I don't feel I've drifted to the right at all."

This is a surprise. The 69-year-old former Labour MP turned disgraced 
multi-millionaire TV presenter has been called many things – racist, xenophobe, 
Europhobe, Islamophobe, Arab-hating Little Englander and orange (thanks to his 
alleged sun tan) – but not until now an upholder of liberal Guardian values.

Most of these labels are false, he argues. He isn't even orange: "I'm not 
tanned at all. Look at me." And he isn't. Kilroy-Silk and his wife Jan have 
just returned to their Buckinghamshire estate from a summer spent at their 
11-bedroom Spanish villa between Gibraltar and Marbella. Jan, who will later 
kindly drive me back to the station in their Daimler, has a nice tan, but her 
husband of 48 years surely looks as pasty as he did when he was raised in 
Birmingham's backstreets during Britain's postwar austerity years.

That's because he has spent his summer in the shade, filling reams and reams 
of paper in his new career as writer of eye-poppingly unsavoury novels that 
nobody will publish. "If the politics were taken out, they'd be eminently 
commercial," he says.

But back to the non-existent tan. When someone chucked a sack of manure 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/manchester/4213693.stm> over him before his 
appearance on Radio 4's Any Questions in Manchester in 2004, the Have I Got 
News for You wags joked that "the shit hits the tan". Unfair: yes, there was 
shit (and a court made the defendant pay Kilroy-Silk £200 costs for throwing 
it), but then, as now, no tan.

The manure incident followed Kilroy-Silk's sacking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2004/jun/08/otherparties.television> from 
the BBC for a column in the Sunday Express headlined "We owe Arabs nothing" in 
which he wrote: "We're told that the Arabs loathe us … What do they think we 
feel about them? That we adore them for the way they murdered more than 3,000 
civilians on 11 September 2001 and then danced in the hot, dusty streets to 
celebrate the murders? … That we admire them for being suicide bombers, 
limb-amputators, women repressors?"

What made him write that? "There was a big thing in the Independent about how 
Arabs think we're decadent. I thought, what do we think of them? This was in 
the context of the Iraq war, when Britons and Americans were laying down their 
lives … I'm not stupid. I didn't intend to say every Muslim or Arab is like 
that." Then perhaps he should have substituted "Muslim extremists" for "Arabs" 
throughout. "I wish I had. That's what I believe."

Does he regret the article? After all, it cost him his lucrative TV career. 
(Younger readers may not remember, but 10 years ago Kilroy, daytime precursor 
of the Jeremy Kyle show, was watched daily by 6 million viewers). "I don't 
regret it. I regret the fact that the BBC allowed itself to be bullied by a few 
people. Most of the complaints came from one Muslim website. You could tell 
because the complaints all spelled my name wrongly in the same way."

The Sunday Express editors clearly liked his article, since they ran it twice, 
in April 2003 and January 2004. The second time it appeared the Muslim Council 
of Britain and the Commission for Racial Equality condemned it: "I was vilified 
in every single newspaper." Guardian columnist Faisal Bodi argued that 
Kilroy-Silk should be prosecuted for inciting race hatred. Bodi contended that 
Kilroy-Silk had previous in slurring Muslims, when defending Salman Rushdie 
during The Satanic Verses affair in 1989. "But I was right about Rushdie!" he 
snaps. "We shouldn't allow books to be burned. I'm in favour of a multi-ethnic 
Britain, but not a multicultural one. You can't tolerate practices that are 
morally wrong on the grounds of cultural difference. You can't accept that one 
part of the population discriminates against women, imposes forced marriages or 
allows female circumcision … I was called a racist for saying these things. But 
now Cameron, Sarkozy, Merkel are saying them. My daughter says I've been 
outflanked by the right."

We're drinking tea in the opulent living room of his vast house, formerly 
owned by suave actor Dirk Bogarde and heavy-metal bawler Ozzy Osbourne. It was 
in this very room, Kilroy-Silk tells me, that Alan Jay Lerner and Rex Harrison 
were brought together by Bogarde. Harrison soon afterwards starred as Henry 
Higgins in Lerner and Loewe's My Fair Lady.

Beyond the French windows is a rolling garden, and beyond that deer and goats 
roam in acres of parkland. It's only an hour down the M40 from Birmingham, but 
Kilroy-Silk has come a long way materially, from the terrace house in Summer 
Lane where he was born to this eight-bedroom Georgian mansion. Like Osbourne, 
Kilroy-Silk is a working-class Brummie done good. "I'm from Hockley, he's from 
Aston, which is posher."

His dad, William Silk, was a Royal Navy stoker lost at sea during the war when 
Robert was 18 months old. His mother, Rose Rooke, later married William's best 
friend, car worker John Kilroy – hence the double-barrelled surname. The 
grammar school boy studied politics and economics at the London School of 
Economics before becoming a politics lecturer at Liverpool University. Later he 
served as Labour MP for Ormskirk (1974-1983) and Knowsley North (1983-86).

"The two things I was most proud of in my life were going to the LSE and being 
an MP. Trollope said M and P were the most prestigious letters a man could have 
after his name. When I was elected as a 31-year-old MP I was respected. Now if 
you say you're an MP you're treated with contempt. Understandably. How could 
the prime minister think it right to claim having his wisteria pruned as 
a parliamentary expense? Now those other letters in my life, LSE, have been 
besmirched." He means because of the revelations earlier this year that the 
LSE received donations from the Gaddafi regime.

He became disillusioned with parliamentary politics decades before the 
expenses scandal. "I got shafted by Militant. The were trying to deselect me 
and by 1986, I'd had enough. Fortunately I got offered a TV job 
simultaneously." I suppress a giggle. Not because being subverted by Trotskyist 
entryists is funny, but because he said "shafted". In 2001 Kilroy-Silk hosted a 
daytime ITV game show called Shafted, once crowned the worst TV progamme ever. 
At the end of each episode, he would ask the two remaining contestants if they 
would share the prize money or risk getting more money by shafting their 
opponent. He would make an unwittingly hilariousfisting gesture <> to 
demonstrate the latter option, for which he was weekly mocked on Have I Got 
News For You.

Kilroy-Silk's career could be told as one of being repeatedly shafted – by 
Militant in 1986, by the BBC in 2004, and by the UK Independence party when he 
failed to become its leader later that year. He was shafted by his new party 
Veritas when he was ousted as its leader in 2005, and by voters who failed to 
elect him at the general election in the same year. He was shafted by I'm a
Celebrity <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/celebrity> viewers when he 
was the first to be voted off the 2008 show.

Could he have risen higher in politics? "I'm too much of a troublemaker. My 
contemporaries, Jack Straw, John Prescott, Margaret Beckett, all became cabinet 
ministers. Possibly I could have done too, but I'm too much of a maverick."

No one can shaft this troublemaking maverick any more. Perhaps more's the 
pity. Enriched by the millions he earned from the BBC in his TV glory days, 
Kilroy-Silk is beholden to no one as he writes novels that he self-publishes on 
Amazon's Kindle. He's published three since the spring and each seethes with 
rage at political correctness in modern British society – with their unsavoury 
racism, glum sexist stereotypes, borderline homophobic jibes and digs against 
Islam, they reek of an outsider judging a world he doesn't want to understand.

The first novel, Betrayal, is about consensual adult incest. In it an 
18-year-old daughter meets her 40-year-old father for the first time and they 
are immediately sexually attracted to each other. What made him write that 
story? He says he originally approached his agent with a political saga of a 
novel. "They thought it was wonderful but that publishers wouldn't be 
interested in a political novel. They said you can clearly write and we'd like 
something from you. Then I found a story about a daughter and father who have 
an affair when they first meet and the mother shops them to the police.

"I thought it raised all sorts of moral issues I could explore. It also made 
me angry. Consensual adult incest is illegal in this country, but it shouldn't 
be." Why not exactly? "There is surely nothing wrong with incest between 
consenting adults, at least when, as in my book, one party is a parent and the 
other is a child, and they haven't seen each other for decades. I know it's 
shocking, but there are circumstances such as those when it isn't wrong." 
Really? "I'm proud of the way I tackled a difficult subject and I thought I did 
a reasonable job empathising with the characters, but when it went out to 
publishers they weren't prepared to push the boundaries. Adult incest is taboo."

It's not the incest theme that put me off Betrayal, just the clunky expository 
writing and endless digressions. It begins: "Michael Steven's 18-year-old 
daughter, Katherina, who he had not seen since she was less than a year old, 
had arrived at his front door a little over an hour ago, on this Friday 
afternoon in early June, looking spectacular in the bright sunlight." It cries 
out for an editor. Kilroy-Silk, to his credit, concedes the point.

The second novel, Closure, anatomises the disintegration of a British family. 
He hopes it will be adapted as a TV series. His third, Abduction, is better 
written than the others, but even more likely to require publishers who read it 
to be brought round with smelling salts. It deals with two parents framed as 
violent by a pair of hetero-hating lesbian social workers and have their 
children forcibly adopted as a result. "It's based on fact," says Kilroy-Silk. 
"Read Christopher Booker in the Sunday Telegraph, Lib Dem MP John Hemming or 
the Forced Adoption website." It ends (spoiler alert!) with the wretched 
stereotype of an obese lesbian social worker being murdered by a vengeful 
father who leaves her strangled corpse tied up amid dildos to make it look like 
a perverted autoerotic asphyxiation. After, of course, having arranged that the 
children have been kidnapped from their adoptive parents and whisked away to 
Cyprus. It's a Daily Mail revenge fantasy on PC Britain gone nuts.

Nonetheless, I submit, Abduction is the sort of drama Hollywood might like, 
ideally with Mel Gibson as an un-PC little guy avenging himself on power-crazed 
social workers, moronic coppers and other jumped-up state functionaries. "Oh do 
write that!" says Kilroy-Silk. Only one problem: your inveterate homophobia 
would need to be excised. "Homophobic? That's not me." But there does seem to 
be a theme: not only do the absurd lesbian social workers gleefully install one 
of the forcibly adopted children on a gay Islington couple who toast their 
adoption triumph in Taittinger and offer a glass to their six-year-old charge 
(monsters!), but two other characters moan about gay men fellating each other 
in public in Brompton cemetery. "But that's based on fact!" says Kilroy-Silk. 
"I'm in favour of equal rights and the legalisation of homosexuality, but not 
of anyone having sex in public. And the lesbian social worker story is based on 
fact."

Kilroy-Silk is now writing a thriller: "I'm trying to write in a more 
disciplined way, without the politics." Perhaps, then, his new book might get 
published. "Who knows? Jan thinks I should write my autobiography. Maybe I 
will. Or I might get disillusioned and spend my time feeding the goats and 
deer."

It's a lovely autumn afternoon at the Kilroy-Silk estate as I leave him, so I 
can understand that impulse. But surely it would be premature: Kilroy-Silk is 
clearly still overflowing with energy and political passion. The only 
question is whether anybody wants them any more.
 