
The kit on his back changes but Bradley Wiggins marches on and he may keep 
marching on until Rio. With the yellow jersey swapped for Stella McCartney's 
blue and red creation, the human machine inside remained the same, dominating 
the Olympic time trial as he had done both the longcontre la montre stages at 
the Tour de France to continue hisannus mirabilis. The 32-year-old is now 
Britain's most prolific Olympian, his gold medal taking his personal tally to 
seven, one ahead of Sir Steve Redgrave.

"To be mentioned in the same breath as Sir Steve Redgrave or Sir Chris Hoy is 
an honour as it is," said Wiggins. "It's all about the gold medals. There's 
only one colour really. It's No4 for me, not No7. So I have got to carry on to 
Rio now and make it five." To date, this is his fourth gold, to go with a brace 
in the individual pursuit, from Athens and Beijing, and the Beijing team 
pursuit. To that he adds a pair of bronzes, the team pursuit in Sydney – at the 
tender age of 20 – and the madison in Athens, where he also won the silver 
medal in the team pursuit.

As for what comes next, the Tour de France winner is undecided. He mentioned a 
vodka and tonic or two in celebration, a brief stay in London to watch his old 
team-mates in the team pursuit and Hoy going for gold in the keirin. After 
that, he has talked of riding the Tour of Britain, the world championship team 
time trial, but in reality he has yet to decide. His season began on 1 November 
last year, when he launched into full training for the Tour, and most likely he 
needs a break to take in the enormity of his achievements this year and to 
reflect on what might come next.

Continuing his unbeaten run in full-distance time trials this season – as 
opposed to briefer stage-race prologues – Wiggins finished 42sec ahead of the 
world champion Tony Martin of Germany, a healthy margin of almost a second per 
kilometre for the 44km distance, with the Tour de France runner-upChris Froome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-froome> giving Great Britain a second 
medal by taking bronze. As at the Tour, where he won one stage to Wiggins's 
two, and finished second to his Sky team-mate, the Kenyan-born Briton again 
performed above expectations but went under the radar. Between them they took 
the home cyclists' tally to three medals in four events and in terms of 
momentum that can only bode well for the track races which start on Thursday.

Fabian Cancellara, the defending champion, whose participation had been in 
doubt following a heavy crash in the road race which had left him with a 
heavily bruised shoulder, was far from his usual imperious self. So often 
Wiggins's nemesis in the past, the Swiss was out of the picture before half of 
the 44km had been covered. His deficit on Wiggins at the 18km mark was 31sec, 
which sounds minimal but represents a mountain in these circumstances. At the 
finish he had slumped to seventh, and he collapsed briefly afterwards clutching 
his shoulder.

"Spartacus" had been made to look very human, but he has been Wiggins's target 
for years; of late it has been Martin in the sights of the Londoner and his 
coaching team. Vitally, last September Wiggins took Cancellara's scalp at the 
world championships; this February, it was Martin's hanging from his belt, by 
an infinitesimal margin – less than a second – at the Tour of Algarve. Since 
then, he has not looked back. Now, as he pointed out afterwards, he will be the 
one to aim at.

After winning the Tour de France, Wiggins showed a healthy disregard for 
protocol by addressing the British fans; here, he did something similar 
afterwards by freewheeling from the finish area for a mini lap of honour among 
the crowds, who were unable to enter the Hampton Court palace precinct where 
the medals were handed out. "The great thing about cycling is its 
accessibility, we all know about Olympic ticketing. All the real fans are out 
there, in here it's a bit of a prawn sandwich fest."

"Wiggo, spin to win", proclaimed the banner close to the start, along with the 
mod roundel which has become synonymous with the first British winner of the 
Tour de France, and the sideburned national hero's legs spun smoothly enough, 
his back barely moving in spite of the effort, in contrast to Froome's "busier" 
style and the fourth-placed Taylor Phinney's imitation of a nodding dog. He lay 
only second to Martin at the first checkpoint but pulled ahead by the second, 
18.4km into the race. The rest resembled his Tour de France: a seamless road to 
victory, with the difference that here he was cheered on by a vast crowd of 
mainly British support. The men's course was based on the same loop through 
Cobham and Esher as the women, but to make up the greater distance, two 
additional circuits were added: one at the start, westwards towards Walton on 
Thames, turning at the Queen Elizabeth II reservoir, and a second at the end 
north through Teddington and Strawberry Hill. The picture was the same as for 
the women's event earlier in the afternoon: massive crowds thronging town 
centres and leafy lanes alike.

The crowds around the start and finish area, and across Hampton Court bridge, 
were gathered three and four deep on the barriers, union jacks of all kinds 
waving in the breeze, cycling club jerseys proclaiming that they had travelled 
from all corners of the UK: Clitheroe, West Wales, south London. The passage of 
each rider, no matter their nationality, was greeted with a deafening drumming 
on the advertising hoardings. It was electrifying to watch, and clearly 
thrilling to ride through. Both Wiggins and Froome said they will never forget 
the noise.

The metronomic progress of most of the participants belies the tension in time 
trialling. It looks smooth on the surface, but plenty can go wrong. Luis-León 
Sánchez, a stage winner in the Tour de France, had his progress halted within 
metres of descending the start ramp when his chain snapped, and then followed 
that up with a puncture; the New Zealander Jack Bauer misjudged a bend and came 
close to crashing. In a discipline where medals can be decided by seconds, such 
incidents can be catastrophic.

The initial running was made by Martin, who had broken a bone in his wrist 
during the Tour de France, and pulled out early in Saturday's road race to save 
his strength for this race. After just under 8km he led Wiggins and Cancellara 
by six seconds, with Phinney at 9sec and Froome a further 1sec behind. The 
battle for medals looked tight initially, but the gaps opened inexorably as the 
duel between Wiggins and Martin gained in intensity. Ten kilometres later, the 
picture had become clearer: Wiggins led, 11sec ahead of Martin, the gold medal 
battle clearly between the world champion and the Tour winner. The final time 
check, in Esher High Street, with 15km to run, reflected the Tour champion's 
dominance. Martin had slipped away again, 23sec back; Froome was now at 42sec 
and clearly heading for bronze.

Shortly after passing through the town, belting down Portsmouth Road, Wiggins 
overtook Sanchez, who had started four and a half minutes ahead, and 
disappeared into the distance, a Ferrari to a horse and cart. That was an image 
to place alongside the punch in the air as he crossed the finish line in the 
Tour time trial at Chartres, and it summed up the day: Wiggins dominant in a 
final triumphant lap of honour at the end of the greatest summer of his 
sporting life.
 