
Several years ago I had to explain to a leading professional cyclist precisely 
why it was that the media and hardcore cycling fans were so determined to 
remain sceptical, in some cases in a very vocal way, about performances that 
stood out and about explanations that did not quite fit. The analogy I used was 
that of someone who had suspected for years that their partner was being 
unfaithful but had continually given him or her the benefit of the doubt, 
before eventually being presented with conclusive proof.

Bradley Wiggins opens up with full story on asthma, allergies and TUEs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/bradley-wiggins-full-story-asthma-allergies-tues>
With that experience in recent memory, you would be pretty damn careful about 
putting your faith in anyone else; when you spotted anything bordering on the 
suspicious your antennae would be sensitive, your emotions raw, your fear of 
being caught out again intense. My interlocutor got the point, although the 
fact that the explanation needed to be made says much about the distance in 
thought process between top sportspeople and those who follow them.

Since the Fancy Bears hacking team released details of Sir Bradley Wiggins’s 
therapeutic use exemption certificates for triamcinolone, I have had to look 
for a different analogy. The vexed question of just where the moral boundaries 
are drawn between being prudent, evading tax and avoiding tax seems uncannily 
similar to the question of what TUEs are acceptable and what aren’t, and in 
what circumstances.

The facts of the case presented by Wiggins to the Guardian this week – details 
of his allergies and asthma, the timelines of specialists visits, TUE 
applications and so on – backed up by speaking to some of those close to him, 
make it clear that the strict letter of the anti-doping rules was followed, 
hence his use of the corticosteroid triamcinolone was within the rules at the 
time.

The objective in visiting Wiggins this week was not to be judge, jury and 
executioner. I wanted to get what facts I could and build a complete idea of 
what had taken place and when, to get much clarity as possible. Hence the 
decision – with the cyclist’s agreement – to run the interview in full on this 
newspaper’s website.

The picture painted tallies with what has become clear over the years: while 
even the best cycling teams look perfectly run on the surface, and like that 
impression to persist, in reality they are often scrabbling around holding it 
all together; in that context it makes sense that Wiggins didn’t see his doctor 
for weeks at a key time in the season, visited a specialist at the last moment, 
and the first TUE was put together overnight.

The use of Kenalog by injection to treat hay fever is a vexed one but the two 
GPs I spoke to – one from within the world of cycling, one from without – had 
few qualms about it. Until the NHS changed their guidelines a few years ago, 
you might give it to a student suffering from allergies before exams, and if 
you did, you might well do so shortly before the first paper.

On the other hand, I cannot recall that any overt trace of Wiggins’s 
allergy/asthma problem broke the surface in the eight years when I spoke quite 
frequently to him, often at some length. Had it done so, I would have ensured 
we discussed it when collaborating on his account of the years 2010-12 in the 
book My Time. I would have expected at least a passing mention followed perhaps 
by an immediate caveat that this should not be discussed right now, but the 
best I can manage is a vague recollection of something that may or may not have 
been said in 2009 about one rainy Tour stage through the Vosges mountains.

This is by no means because one expects to be privy to every secret but 
because Wiggins was not always a guarded character when it came to things 
cycling-related. However, there were areas of his life we never discussed, 
primarily those away from bike races, so an absence of evidence may be 
noticeable but it is not incriminating in itself. Given that his doctors are 
bound by confidentiality, only a comprehensive trawl of those who had close 
contact with him over the last 12 years would show how visible his problems 
were to outsiders.

The time line is consistent, although there are mistakes that imply a 
looseness with detail among those dealing with the paperwork: the rider himself 
cannot be blamed for those. Here Lady Bracknell’s law applies: one mistake you 
might expect, more than that is a concern, not in this specific case, but more 
generally given how important and sensitive the process is.

Wiggins: ‘I was paranoid about making excuses. It wasn’t something I was going 
to shout from the rooftops’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/bradley-wiggins-interview-tues> 
The question of Dr Geert Leinders intrigues, as it has done since the end of 
2012, hence my decision to press Wiggins over the nature of the contact he had 
had with the controversial doctor and what Leinders might have known. This was 
not the first time I had questioned him about the Belgian and the line remains 
consistent to the point of being unbreakable.

The key question about Leinders’ involvement is whether his hiring represented 
a major switch in Sky’s marginal gains philosophy, well beyond the team’s 
decision to ditch its founding philosophy on zero tolerance. While 
acknowledging that there have never been any allegations of improper practice 
relating to Leinders’s spell at Sky, the Wiggins imbroglio prompts the obvious 
question: was this event an outlier or was it part of a pattern?

For most individuals, gut feeling is the ultimate decider on your personal 
position on moral spectra such as these; to return to the tax analogy, you 
either believe it is acceptable to have a flat in Monaco to use as a tax 
address, or it’s fine for an MP to “flip” a residence, or you don’t. In cycling 
terms, the question I ask myself is this: if one of the young cyclists I advise 
was in the position Wiggins describes, and was to ask my view on whether he 
should do the same thing, which side of the line would I fall?

I would advise against, for all it might be within the rules and a GP might 
justify it, simply because of the broader issues involved. The substance has 
too much resonance for me as a cyclist. Beyond my personal view, higher up the 
sporting food chain, reputational issues come into play as well; remaining 
within the letter of the law is one thing but with a certain stature comes a 
responsibility to remain within its spirit, too. You cannot travel into the 
grey area where Wiggins and Sky ventured in 2011-13 and expect your moral 
credibility to remain unscarred.
 