
For all the intrigue over whether Sir Bradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins> would suffer the indignity 
of having to grit his teeth and block out the boos, the truth is that it was 
never likely that his supporters were ever going to transform the start of his 
journey towards retirement into anything other than a celebration of his golden 
achievements. Wiggins might be avoiding the media during the London Six Day 
ride this week, wary of getting drawn into another discussion about those 
Therapeutic Use Exemptions, but it soon became apparent that he was on safe 
ground on the track.

On an evening of razzamatazz and colour in east London, the cheerful mood 
outside the Olympic Velodrome in the hour before the gates opened hardly 
suggested that Wiggins would later have to stomach criticism from supporters 
who once worshipped him, that his grand farewell would turn sour. It simply was 
not that kind of crowd. People turned up from work excited to settle down for 
an evening of cycling. Parents brought young children along, some of them 
cycling fanatics, others getting to grips with the sport for the first time.

Shane Sutton says British Cycling and Team Sky will be cleared
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/shane-sutton-british-cycling-team-sky-bradley-wiggins-cleared>
They relished watching Wiggins race the 40km Madison with another star of 
British cycling,Mark Cavendish <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/markcavendish>
, although the atmosphere did fall flat when they finished third after a 
frantic surge at the death from the victorious Dutch pair of Yoeri Havik and 
Wim Stroetinga.

In an unsurprising development, it proved difficult to eavesdrop on any 
earnest conversations about TUEs. The fallout from revelations last month 
concerning Wiggins is yet to cool down.Team Sky and Wiggins have been under 
pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/18/brian-cookson-team-sky-pushed-rules-to-limit-british-cycling-tues>
 after his TUEs became public knowledge, leaving the firstBritish winner of the 
Tour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/22/bradley-wiggins-tour-de-france-cavendish>
 open to accusations he had behaved unethically by injecting the powerful 
corticosteroid, triamcinolone, in 2011, 2012 and 2013, before his most 
important race of those seasons. They have denied any wrongdoing.

Here, however, punters regarded the first night of competition as a chance to 
enjoy one of Great Britain’s most successful Olympians racing on home soil. 
This is his UK swansong, his career set to wind down with one final event in 
Ghent next month. Wiggins is teaming up with Cavendish in multiple events over 
the six days of competition . The pair won theMadison world title here in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/06/sir-bradley-wiggins-mark-cavendish-world-madison-championships>
 and have had a love-hate relationship at times.

Derek Sewell had travelled from north Wales with his two sons, all of them 
eager to see Cavendish and Wiggins in action. “They won’t be booing anyone,” he 
said.

The first mention of Wiggins over the public address system drew an 
appreciative cheer from the crowd as the venue began to fill up. There was more 
support from fans interviewed on the big screen, especially from the younger 
ones.

Last to make their entrance as the elite riders rolled out, Wiggins and 
Cavendish were given a huge ovation when they appeared on the stage in the 
middle. The odd couple engaged in matey banter on stage for a while, playing 
their roles perfectly.

Bradley Wiggins gets back in the saddle – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/oct/26/bradley-wiggins-gets-back-in-the-saddle-in-pictures>
Briefly, Wiggins turned serious as the microphone was thrust in his face. 
“It’s just good to get back on my bike,” he said. “I love riding, I was born to 
ride the Madison. It’s one of the best memories I had as a kid.”

Wiggins and Cavendish were undoubtedly the headline act and the roars were 
deafening as they set an early pace in the Madison.

If any jeers were directed at Wiggins, it was impossible to hear them over the 
pop music pumped out by the speakers. As far as those inside the Velodrome were 
concerned, he is innocent until proven guilty. A hero until proven guilty.

Chris Dabbs was part of a small group of big cycling fans. They had recently 
cycled 500km to raise money for Bloodwise, a cancer charity. “We’re really 
looking forward to seeing Bradley Wiggins and all the guys, especially Bradley 
for the last time,” he said. “My own view is maybe it’s sailing a little close 
to the wind. But the general cycling public think if those are the rules, those 
are the rules. Who hasn’t done it, probably? Nothing’s tainted as yet. It’s 
interesting you say for now – I don’t think we’re talking about Lance 
Armstrong. I think what we’re talking about is just using the rules and playing 
the game.”

Madison Sports Group, the event’s organiser, is trying to drum up interest in 
six‑day racing in this country again. As a form of entertainment, it has its 
origins in Britain in the late 19th century but the London Six last year was 
the first time it has been hosted in this country since 1980. There were a few 
empty seats on Tuesday night but the final four nights are sold out.

It is cycling as showbiz, a deafening beat reverberating off the walls and the 
low roof, flashing red and blue lights giving the track the look of a 
nightclub, a DJ playing the tunes on a stage in the middle. With its brilliant 
acoustics, the Velodrome is the perfect setting for it.

“We need to turn this into a party this evening,” the DJ shouted. The sound of 
Rihanna filled the Velodrome. The crowd roared. No one was talking about 
triamcinolone.
 