
Bradley Wiggins capped his remarkable sporting year by winning the 2012 BBC 
Sports Personality of the Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bbc-sports-personality-of-the-year> award on 
Sunday night. As Wiggins received his latest trophy from the Duchess of 
Cambridge, he did so not only as the Tour de France champion and Olympic time 
trial gold medallist, but also as a symbol of Britain's sporting annus 
mirabilis.

In Britain's greatest year, Wiggins won support of the public with his 
self-effacing charisma as well as his phenomenal achievements.

Described at various stages throughout 2012 as le gentleman, the modfather and 
the banana with sideburns, the epithets he received were bestowed upon an 
idiosyncratic yet very ordinary man who has achieved extraordinary things.

"It's something to remember for the rest of my life," he said. "To receive it 
from David Beckham and the Royal Highness is quite something really. It's never 
going to get any better, let's face it."

"Winning this, winning gold in the London Olympics, it's about as good as it's 
ever going to get. I'll just cherish this moment forever. I can die happily 
now."

Wiggins revealed that the sports personality trophy would eventually find a 
home at his local pub in Eccleston, Lancashire. He was anointed as the 59th 
winner of the award ahead of the runner-up, heptathlete Jessica Ennis, and 
tennis star Andy Murray, who took third place.

Wiggins became the first Briton to win the Tour following three-and-a-half 
gruelling weeks in France. Just days after riding to victory up the 
Champs-Elysées, he was pedalling through London to claim gold for Great Britain 
on the road.

The 32-year-old received 30.25% of the votes, 492,064 in total, while Ennis 
earned 22.92% and Murray 14.17%. Athlete Mo Farah was fourth with 8.07%, 
followed by Paralympians David Weir and Ellie Simmonds. A total of 1,626,718 
votes were cast.

Wiggins is the first English winner of the award for six years and follows Tom 
Simpson, Sir Chris Hoy and Mark Cavendish as cyclists to have secured the 
accolade. It was fitting that Wiggins won the award the year after Mark 
Cavendish, who worked so selflessly during the summer to ensure his team-mate 
and close friend came away with the yellow jersey in Paris.

Such was Britain's embarrassment of riches that Farah did not even make the 
podium despite his stunning performances in the Olympic 10,000m and 5,000m in a 
memorable summer.

In any other year, Ennis could have taken first prize. Under extraordinary 
pressure to win the heptathlon in the face of severe competition from her rival 
Tatyana Chernova, Britain's poster girl delivered in breathtaking style with 
personal bests in the 100m hurdles and javelin before a stunning 800m victory.

In 1997, Greg Rusedski won Sports Personality after reaching the US Open 
final. Murray won that competition on top of his Olympic singles gold this year 
yet third place was his reward.

Lord Coe was presented with a lifetime achievement award for his role in 
bringing the Olympics and Paralympics to London, his part in the successful 
staging of London 2012 and for his career as a middle-distance runner.

He said: "It has been a privilege to have been part of this journey. I don't 
think we'll ever say goodbye to 2012. I don't think we'll ever forget this – 
that spirit will never disappear. I do think that Olympic sport now has a much 
firmer handhold on public consciousness and political support than it has ever 
had. It's a great legacy to build on. Now the hard work begins – this is the 
most exciting part of the story going forward."

The ceremony was dominated by the endeavours of the Olympians and Paralympians 
who contributed to Britain's most successful Games.

The presenters – Gary Lineker, Sue Barker and Clare Balding – gave out eight 
awards on a night when memories of the 65 Olympic and 120 Paralympic medals 
were emotionally remembered inside the ExCel centre, one of the London 2012 
venues.

Team GB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-gb> and Paralympics GB won the 
accolade of team of the year in a surprise move by the 12-person judging panel, 
which decided to overrule the BBC's terms stating the award would be "for the 
team in an individual sport or sporting discipline that has achieved the most 
notable performance". However, the BBC's guidelines did stipulate that the 
criteria could be amended "should there be unanimous agreement amongst panel 
members". There was, and their decision meant Europe's remarkable golfing 
comeback at Medinah Country Club in the Ryder Cup was beaten.

Dave Brailsford, the performance director of British Cycling and the Team Sky 
principal, was named coach of the year after Team GB's 12 Olympic cycling 
medals and Britain's most successful Tour de France. "My job is to look after 
other people but we are only ever going to be as good as our riders. It is 
about the athletes, it is about the riders," Brailsford said.

The young sports personality of the year went to the Paralympic swimmer Josef 
Craig and the overseas personality prize was awarded to the Olympic sprint 
champion Usain Bolt.

Footballer Fabrice Muamba, who suffered a cardiac arrest while playing for 
Bolton Wanderers against Tottenham Hotspur in the FA Cup, presented the unsung 
hero award to husband and wife team Sue and Jim Houghton for their work at a 
community sport centre in Desford, Leicestershire.

The Paralympic sitting volleyballer Martine Wright took the Helen Rollason 
award for outstanding achievement in the face of adversity after losing her 
legs in the London 7/7 bombings.

How Britain voted

Bradley Wiggins: 492,064

Jessica Ennis: 372,765

Andy Murray: 230,444

Mo Farah: 131,327

David Weir: 114,633

Ellie Simmonds: 102,894

Chris Hoy: 42,961

Nicola Adams: 35,560

Ben Ainslie: 35,373

Rory McIlroy: 29,729

Katherine Grainger: 28,626

Sarah Storey: 10,343

Total votes: 1,626,718
 