
The Team Sky principal, Dave Brailsford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dave-brailsford>, believes Bradley Wiggins 
is still capable of improvement, despite winning an historic Tour de France at 
the weekend.

Wiggins realised his lifelong ambition after becoming the first Briton to top 
the Tour podium after 13 days in the yellow jersey, negotiating 3,497 km to 
Paris.

A monk-like existence in Majorca and at altitude in Tenerife has also helped 
Wiggins to an unprecedented series of wins in 2012 – in the Paris-Nice, Tour de 
Romandie stage races and a defence of his Dauphiné crown.

But while the three-times Olympic champion has rightfully received glowing 
tributes from all quarters since his triumph on the Champs-Elysées on Monday, 
Brailsford still believes there is more to come.

After achieving Team Sky's stated aim of winning the Tour within five years 
two years ahead of schedule, Brailsford – in his role as BritishCycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> performance director, as well as at 
Team Sky – is eager for further success.

He said: "When guys win first gold medals there always tends to be a dip [in 
performance]. He can still get better. It's down to Bradley's desire and 
commitment which will be within.

"If he stays intrinsically driven towards doing the Tour there is no reason 
why not because physically he can do it again. It's more about his desire. I 
will put money on it that he will stay as focused and driven as he is."

Wiggins's appetite for victory remains and he will aim to help Mark Cavendish 
win the London 2012 Olympic road race on Saturday's opening day before seeking 
personal success in the Hampton Court time-trial on day five of the Games.

He said: "I'm loving what I'm doing at the moment. I'm in my element on days 
like this. I love that whole process of going out, warming up, getting in the 
zone, out there flying along the road.

"That's what I love doing. It's how I've ridden all year. I could have 
switched off after Paris-Nice [in March]. But you forget about it, move on to 
the next thing."
 