
Finally, 75 years after a man named Charlie Holland led a three-man team on an 
exploratory venture that ended when his pump broke and he was unable to reflate 
a punctured tyre, Britain has its first winner of theTour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance>. Bradley Wiggins, already a 
triple Olympic gold medal winner, stood on the top step of the podium halfway 
up a sunlit Champs Elysées on Sunday to accept his victory in the world's 
greatest bike race and, to some eyes, the greatest free show the world has to 
offer.

There he was, at the very summit of every bike racer's ambition, with the eyes 
not just of a vast crowd in Paris and the sport's worldwide audience on him but 
those of his own nation, watching on television. Then he was handed the 
microphone.

"Right," he said. "We're just going to draw the raffle numbers."

The French, for whom the Tour has represented an important expression of 
national identity virtually since its inception in 1903, have spent the past 
three weeks finding out about the 32-year-old Wiggins. They have been told 
about his collection of Gibson and Fender guitars and Lambretta and Vespa 
scooters, and about the roundel on his helmet – originally the RAF insignia, 
appropriated in 1964 as a pop art device on a T-shirt worn by Keith Moon, 
drummer with the Who, and then adopted as a symbol of the Mod revival. They 
have listened to his nakedly emotional press conferences and they have 
discovered his mischievous and very English sense of humour.

"Colonel Wiggo", they christened him, and sometimes "Le Gentleman", in 
recognition of his gesture – which showed his respect for cycling's cherished 
traditions – in slowing the peloton to wait for Cadel Evans, the defending 
champion, after the Australian rider had suffered three punctures from carpet 
tacks strewn on the narrow road at the top of the Mur de Péguère.

They were equally impressed when, while wearing the race leader's hallowed 
yellow jersey, he started to appear in the line of riders pacing his Team Sky 
colleagueMark Cavendish <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/markcavendish> for a 
bunch sprint. Normally the leader hides himself inside a protective posse of 
team-mates, keeping clear of possible accidents. Yet here was Wiggins, putting 
himself at risk in order to give Cavendish the chance of glory.

It worked again on Sunday, when Wiggins shot out of the tunnel under the 
Tuileries, with the golden statue of Jeanne d'Arc in his sights. Turning left 
into the Rue de Rivoli, in front of pavements packed with British fans, he 
accelerated to the front, once again making the pace, a beam of light at the 
head of the pounding pack. And again Cavendish responded, racing on to seal an 
extraordinary triumph.

In return, thanks to Wiggins, the British have finally learnt to adore the 
Tour, and to appreciate its unique qualities. In cricket terms, you might say 
that the 3,497km (2,172 miles) race, with its 20 teams and 198 riders, its 21 
stages, its ever-changing backdrop of mountains and sunflower fields and 
delectable small towns, its four jerseys – yellow, green, white and polka-dot – 
and its tears of joy and pain, resembles a five-day Test, a 50-over match and a 
Twenty20 contest all going on at the same time, stretched over three weeks. 
Only more complicated than that, in its blend of individual and collective 
endeavour and reward.

No wonder it took a Briton so long to master its complexities, following in 
the wheeltracks of 21 Frenchmen, nine Belgians, six Italians and six Spaniards, 
four Luxemburgers, two Dutch, two Swiss, two Americans and single riders from 
Ireland, Germany, Denmark and Australia. But now Britain has the winner, as 
well as the world champion, Cavendish, and a good chance of repeating the 
successes of Beijing when the Olympic Games start with Saturday's road race.

In recent days Wiggins's victory – described by Sir Chris Hoy as "the greatest 
individual achievement in the history of British sport" – has been compared to 
Fred Perry's hat-trick of Wimbledon singles titles, Roger Bannister's 
four-minute mile, Denis Compton's 3,816 runs in the summer of 1947, Geoff 
Hurst's World Cup final hat-trick, the British Lions' defeat of the All Blacks 
in New Zealand in 1971, Steve Redgrave's gold medals in five consecutive 
Olympic Games, Lennox Lewis's victories over Evander Holyfield and Mike Tyson, 
and Paula Radcliffe's marathon world record.

None of these comparisons quite fits. The one that does is the success of Mike 
Hawthorn in becoming Britain's first Formula One world champion in 1958, after 
decades of dominance by French, Italian, German and South American drivers. 
Hawthorn's success prefaced a flood of British grand prix success, from Jim 
Clark to Jenson Button. It may be that Wiggins's success will have a similar 
effect.

Behind Sunday's celebrations lies the structure of British Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling>, which has evolved over the past 20 
years into an all-conquering machine. Dave Brailsford, its 48-year-old 
mastermind, guided the squad to an unprecedented haul of gold medals in Beijing 
and then supervised Cavendish's successful bid for the world championship. 
Having attracted sponsorship worth around £25m a year from Sky – a deal 
brokered when James Murdoch, a cycling fan, was still running his father's 
business – he exposed himself to ridicule within the international cycling 
community with a pledge made when he launched his Tour de France project.

"We made it clear that our ambition was to win this race in five years with a 
clean British rider," he said this week, as the hour of vindication approached, 
"and that's what we've done. It may be a surprise to everybody else but it's 
not a surprise to us."

Wiggins, a reformed party animal who stopped drinking and adopted a strict 
diet in order to lose around 10% of his body weight when he got serious about 
winning the Tour, had his own closing message to the world from the top step of 
the podium. "Have a safe journey home," he told the exultant Brits among the 
multitude, "and don't get too drunk."
 