
Sexist behaviour has been exposed at the top of British cycling after the 
sport’s governing body upheld complaints made byJess Varnish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jess-varnish> against the former technical 
director Shane Sutton of “inappropriate and discriminatory language”.

Varnish had claimed that Sutton had told her to “go and have a baby” and 
called the 25-year-old “too old” to compete after she failed to qualify for the 
Rio Olympic Games this year. Sutton was later suspended after another set of 
allegations: that he had described Paralympic athletes as “wobblies” and 
“gimps”. He resigned from his role, the most senior inBritish Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling>, 100 days before the 
Olympics started in August. Sara Symington is now in the running to be 
appointed as the new performance director.

An internal investigation into Varnish’s claims reported back on Friday. 
British Cycling said in a statement: “Following an internal investigation the 
British Cycling board has upheld an allegation made by Jess Varnish that former 
technical directorShane Sutton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/shane-sutton> 
had used inappropriate and discriminatory language. The board wishes to put on 
record its sincere regret that this happened.”

An acrimonious and public dispute began after Varnish failed to qualify for 
Rio and had her contract on the Olympic podium programme cancelled. She claimed 
to have learned of her absence from the team only after Sutton gave an 
interview about the selection to the Daily Telegraph.

Varnish, who has won medals at the Commonwealth Games and European and world 
championships, then made her allegations in another interview, this time with 
the Daily Mail. She alleged that in a conversation following the cancellation 
of her contract Sutton told her to “just move on and go and have a baby”. She 
also claimed that this was not the first time Sutton had made such remarks. 
“After 2012 I was told that ‘with an ass like mine I couldn’t change position 
within the team sprint’,” Varnish also told the Mail. “It basically implies the 
stronger woman has to go in ‘man one’ position because I’m quite glute 
dominant, shall we say.” At the time Sutton strongly denied making the comments.

Cyclist Jess Varnish says Shane Sutton told her to ‘go and have a baby’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/23/jess-varnish-british-cyling-shane-sutton-go-and-have-a-baby>
Varnish was supported in her claims by the former Olympic and world road-race 
champion Nicole Cooke and the double Olympic champion Victoria Pendleton. She 
said that others who might vindicate her claims were afraid to speak out. “I am 
aware that some people at BritishCycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> are afraid to come forward due to 
the culture of fear that exists, as they don’t want to lose their jobs,” 
Varnish said in a statement on her website.

Varnish’s claims were later joined by those of the Paralympian Darren Kenny, 
who also alleged insulting language on the part of Sutton. “The term used to 
refer to us was generally ‘gimps’ with another word in front of that,” Kenny 
told the Daily Mail. Another source told the paper: “They were referred to as 
wobblies. It was an in‑joke used to describe para-cyclists.”

After the verdict Varnish released a statement on her website. It read: “I 
spoke out because I wanted to shine a light on the culture at British Cycling, 
a culture that in my mind was incorrect. I’m relieved that the British Cycling 
board have acknowledged that the language used towards me was inappropriate and 
discriminatory and I would like to thank those involved and those that 
contributed to the investigation for their time and effort.

“I’ve always believed in standing upfor yourself, especially when you know 
things are wrong. It wasn’t easy for me to talk about this experience and I 
could’ve quite easily said and done nothing, but that isn’t me. I’ve always 
given 100% to my sport and am still in love with cycling, so I hope that 
British Cycling can use this investigation as a way to improve and create a 
better environment for the Great Britain team.”

Sutton has yet to comment on the decision, though his wife Abbie tweeted: “Two 
words spring to mind when the word liar is used #jessvarnish #neverhappened 
#watchthisspace.”

This is a turbulent time for British Cycling, which as well as having to 
replace its head coach – Sara Symington is widely expected to take over from 
Sutton – is also losing its long-standing chief executive Ian Drake in April 
after he announced his resignation from the post this month. It was also 
announced on Friday that the governing body will be asked to explain the use of 
therapeutic use exemptions at a parliamentary hearing, which is expected to 
take place in December.

“The findings of the investigation will help the development of the 
organisation alongside the independent review into the culture of the World 
Class Programme, jointly commissioned by British Cycling and UK Sport, and led 
by Annamarie Phelps,” the British Cycling statement said.
 