
British Cycling’s lead physiotherapist, Phil Burt, has confirmed that he is 
cooperating with the UK Anti-Doping investigation into allegations of possible 
wrongdoing within cycling, although it is not clear whether he has spoken to 
the two investigators from Ukad who visited the Olympic team base on Friday.

The inquiry, which has now been linked to three BC staff members, started when 
questions were raised about a package containing a “medical substance” which 
was delivered to the then Team Sky doctor Richard Freeman at the end of the 
Critérium du Dauphiné stage race in June 2011. The team vigorously deny any 
wrongdoing.

In a statement issued on Wednesday to the cyclingnews.com website through the 
British Cycling press office, Burt said: “I am happily and fully cooperating 
with the Ukad investigation and look forward to their report. To respect the 
integrity of their investigation I will not be commenting further.” Burt did 
not respond when contacted by the Guardian, andBritish Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> would not comment.

Burt’s statement followed an interview in which Simon Cope, the former British 
Cycling women’s coach, said the physio might have been the person who gave him 
the package which Cope then delivered to Freeman, who was working for Team Sky 
at the Dauphiné. Asked by cyclingnews where the package had come from, Cope 
said: “It came from BritishCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling>. 
Phil Burt. Either he gave it to me or someone from the office did. I can’t 
really remember. I also took them [Team Sky] some spare clothes.”

Cope, who is directeur sportif at Sir Bradley Wiggins’s eponymous team, 
confirmed in the interview he will also cooperate with the investigation. “I’ll 
tell them what the truth is. I know what the truth is. There’s nothing untoward 
going on.”

Burt, who attended the Rio and London Olympic Games with the GB squad and was 
one of the brains behind the team’s campaign to eliminate saddle soreness among 
its cyclists, would neither confirm nor deny that he gave the package to Cope. 
The burly physio has been a British Cycling fixture for several years, working 
across both the Olympic team and Team Sky.

Wiggins will not start next week’s Abu Dhabi Tour in which his team is racing, 
because, according to his spokesman, the race was not on his schedule although 
he was involved in its publicity material. The multiple Olympic medallist is to 
concentrate instead on Six Day track races in London and Gent.

Wiggins – who is not understood to be a subject of the Ukad inquiry – has been 
caught up in controversy recently after computer hackers revealed that he had 
had three injections of the corticosteroid triamcinolone. The cyclist and Team 
Sky have strenuously denied wrongdoing, insisting that the injections were to 
treat his pollen allergies. The International Cycling Union has stated that the 
rider and the team were acting within the rules.
 