
In the run-up to last summer’s Rio Olympics, British Fencing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/fencing> announced a new “brand identity” – 
a redesigned logo, in other words. Rendered in slanted sans-serif capitals in 
red and blue against a white background, the governing body’s title was now 
marked by three dramatic oblique slashes, as if inflicted by a duellist’s 
sabre. Unfortunately, however, these wounds have proved to be neither merely 
symbolic nor superficial.

UK Sport funding axe ‘catastrophic’ for badminton, says chief executive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/uk-sport-funding-badminton-catastrophe->
Last week the organisation was informed by UK Sport that its Olympic funding 
had been withdrawn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/uk-sport-funding-badminton-catastrophe->
. Over the next four-year cycle, leading up to the Tokyo Games, it will receive 
not a penny to match the £3.1m it received from the national lottery, via UK 
Sport, to prepare its campaign for Rio last summer.

It had been caught with its guard down, and it was not alone. Where some 
sports had their funding raised and others saw it reduced by a relatively small 
percentage, fencing shared its bad news of zero funding with archery, 
badminton, weightlifting and wheelchair rugby.

Zero funding amounts to official confirmation that your sport has no chance of 
producing a medal from the 2020 Games, or even in 2024. UK Sport’s policy is to 
look at each discipline from an eight-year perspective, assessing the division 
of about half a billion pounds on the basis, as it put it, “of the medals won, 
the number of medallists developed, and the quality of the systems and 
processes in place to find and support the nation’s most promising future 
champions”. Its support generally equates to between £20,000 and £60,000 per 
athlete per annum. For this, results are not just expected but demanded.

Fencing demonstrably failed in Rio – but only narrowly. Richard Kruse, 
Britain’s best exponent of the foil (which has a flexible rectangular-section 
blade, with points scored by hits to the opponent’s torso), finished fourth in 
the men’s individual event,losing to a Russian in the bronze medal match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/07/richard-kruse-fencing-rio-2016-olympics>
. He was also a member of the British quartet who finished sixth in the men’s 
foil team event, losing in the quarter-final to the gold medal-winning Russians.

But the really painful statistic is that Britain have taken only one gold 
medal in the Olympic fencing since the very first modern Games in 1896. That 
went to Gillian Sheen, a 28-year-old dental surgeon from London, in the foil in 
Melbourne in 1956. And there has been no British fencing medal of any colour in 
52 years, sinceBill Hoskyns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/19/bill-hoskyns> took the 
individual silver in the men’s épée (rigid triangular-section blade, hits 
scored on any part of the body) in Tokyo in 1964.

Hoskyns now seems like a caricature of a British fencer. Brought up on an 
estate in Somerset, followed by Eton, where he took up the sport, and Oxford, 
from which he graduated with a fourth-class degree in agriculture, he took part 
in five summer Games. He competed with all three weapons – foil, épée and sabre 
(flexible triangular-section blade, hits on torso and mask) – displaying a 
left-handed style described as “nonchalantly elegant”. He even died with a 
blade in his hand – a pair of secateurs, in fact, while tending his orchard at 
the age of 82.

His female counterpart would probably be Dame Mary Glen Haig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/02/dame-mary-glen-haig>, whose 
father had fenced at the 1908 Games and who competed in the first of her own 
four Games in London in 1948, where she finished eighth in the foil. Later she 
became a sports administrator, serving on the International Olympic Committee 
and the International Fencing Federation as well as supervising the first 
Women’s Islamic Games in Tehran in 1993.

The worst stain on Britain’s Olympic fencing record is probably the 
participation of the landowner and baronet Cosmo Duff-Gordon in the silver 
medal-winning men’s épée team at the 1906 Intercalated Games. Six years later 
he and 11 others – his wife, her secretary, two other first-class passengers 
and seven crew members – left the sinking Titanic in a lifeboat designed to 
hold 40, and were safely picked up three hours later. Duff-Gordon was said to 
have rewarded the crew by sending each of them a cheque for £5. The scandal led 
to an inquiry, which ruled that suggestions of bribery were “unfounded”.

In terms of honourable behaviour, the finest moment was undoubtedly 
contributed in 1932 by the 21-year-old Judy Guinness, a member of the Irish 
brewing family. Adjudged to have won the foil final in Los Angeles by a single 
point, she told the judges that they had failed to spot two hits by her 
opponent, Ellen Preis of Austria, and thus relinquished the gold medal.

For that noble gesture alone, you might think, Britain’s fencers deserve 
support for whatever Olympic ambitions they may possess. Almost 10,000 of them 
are members of British Fencing and about 25,000 more take part recreationally. 
There are about 400 fencing clubs in the UK and the governing body has a 
high-performance centre in Hendon, used by the athletes of the world-class 
programme – the men’s foil and sabre teams.

At the elite level, fencing in Britain has been struggling to make a belated 
transition from a sport run by enthusiastic amateurs to one capable of 
operating professionally. When the last chairman, David Teasdale, stood down 
this year, he described his four-year tenure as “a period of unrest”. He had 
taken over with a warning fromUK Sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/uk-sport> that there could be no public 
funding without an improvement in British Fencing’s governance.

Many changes were forced through as a result, including the arrival of 
independent directors, and Peter King, one of the principal architects of 
British Cycling’s Olympic programme, lent a hand. Optimism was aroused in the 
buildup to Rio by bronze medals for the men’s foils teams at the world junior 
championships in April and the European senior championships in June.

None of it proved to be enough. Now the funding runs out on 1 April and 
Georgina Usher, British Fencing’s chief executive since 2014 (and a 10-times 
British champion), told me that it has until 11 January to lodge an appeal 
against a decision she described as “devastating” in the light of the 
modernisation efforts.

It will be said that Britain did not come second in the Rio medal table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/21/great-britain-team-gb-second-rio-2016-olympic-medal-table>
 – with 67 medals from 19 sports – by backing losers and that UK Sport’s 
no-compromise policy recognises the need to justify the spending of public 
money. But it should be remembered that British Cycling, currently riding a 
boom with 130,000 members, had barely 20,000 less than a decade ago. And 
whoever dreamed that British gymnasts would one day be winning Olympic medals? 
Our fencers, who thought they had parried the worst, must now launch a swift 
and decisive riposte.
 