
Thousands of buy-to-let landlords will share a multimillion-pound payout after 
winning a “David and Goliath” legal battle against one of Britain’s biggest 
building societies.

Court of appeal judges have ruled that the West Bromwich was not legally 
entitled to vary the landlords’ mortgage interest rates in the absence of a 
change in the Bank of England base rate, which their home loans track until the 
end of the term.


West Bromwich building society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/west-bromwich-building-society> has been 
left with a £27.5m bill after being defeated in the court of appeal – but it 
said this “will not put the society in financial difficulty,” adding: “Our 
financial position remains very strong.”


The case involves a controversial 2013 decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/sep/23/west-bromwich-interest-rates-buy-to-let-mortgage>
 by the West Brom to hike the monthly costs of more than 6,000 customers with 
buy-to-let mortgages that tracked the Bank of England base rate.


The action group that fought and won the case said the ruling “sends a clear 
message” to other mortgage lenders that might have considered following suit. 
It added there were around 1m buy-to-let tracker mortgages that could have been 
affected if the decision “had gone the wrong way”.


Borrowers reacted with fury when the the West Bromwich Mortgage Company, a 
division of the building society , said it would be increasing their interest 
rates by two percentage points. This was despite the fact that the base rate 
had been at 0.5% since 2009.

Some of those affected – for example, those paying a rate of 1.49% – saw their 
mortgage rate more than double at a stroke.


House prices compared with earnings 'close to pre-financial crisis levels'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/27/house-prices-compared-to-earnings-close-to-pre-financial-crisis-levels>
Scores of borrowers formed the Property118 Action Group 
<http://www.property118.com/property118-action-group-win-at-the-court-of-appeal/87296/>
, initially raising more than £400,000 to fight the decision. They took their 
case to the high court, where they were defeated, but they have now won their 
case at the court of appeal.

The West Brom said that while it was “disappointed”, it accepted the court’s 
decision and so would be contacting all 6,415 affected borrowers, most of whom 
were not part of the court action, to advise them of the outcome. The society 
said the borrowers would receive a refund of any additional interest charged.


It is not clear how or when this money will be distributed, but some borrowers 
look set to receive thousands of pounds. The total cost to the business is 
£27.5m, which, if it was all distributed to the borrowers would mean an average 
payout of £4,286 each.


The West Brom said: “Although this will result in the society recording a loss 
for the year to March 2017, underlying profitability is expected to be 
maintained, and the capital position of the society remains strong, and is 
significantly in excess of regulatory requirements.”


It is understood the affected customers took out their deals between 2006 and 
2008, and are on a variety of different interest rates. All, according to the 
society, were described as “landlords of multiple property portfolios”.


The society had argued that the small print of the mortgages contained a 
clause that, under certain circumstances, enabled the lender to change the 
interest rate “to something more in line with the current market norm”. It 
suggested it had acted in part because of the plight of savers, who make up the 
vast majority of its 446,000 members and had suffered dramatic falls in income 
due to plummeting interest rates.


Mark Alexander, from the action group, said it had been a “David and Goliath 
legal battle”, and that justice had prevailed. He added that buy-to-let 
landlords often lacked the experience and finances to defend their legal 
rights, and Property118 Action Group Limited “will offer them a unique and 
powerful umbrella at a very reasonable price”.


Jonathan Westhoff, the society’s chief executive, said: “Naturally we are 
disappointed by today’s decision from the court of appeal. At all times, we 
acted to ensure we were treating customers fairly and that our approach was in 
the best interests of the society and its members as a whole.


“We will now contact all affected borrowers and ensure we process promptly any 
reimbursement they are due. In line with our prudent approach to managing the 
society, we had already allocated capital to cover this unexpected outcome, and 
so the society remains in a strong financial position.”

 