
Not much that was good emerged out of the 80s. We may look back on neon 
make-up and shoulder pads with nostalgia for a misspent youth/early career, but 
with no great degree of pride or fondness. You Know Who was in charge 
throughout. Even the Wispa was a rare misfire in Cadbury's otherwise unmatched 
history of successful chocolatiering. But re-runs that have just started on FX 
prove that the decade was not entirely wasted. One word saves it from 
choco-socio-cultural ruin, and that word isCheers

It must be noted that Cheers nearly didn't make it. During its first season, 
in 1982, it ranked 77th out of 77 shows and was almost cancelled. Looking back, 
it is impossible to see why. Whichever order you take them in, each character 
propping up, or serving at, the famous Boston bar is better than the last. 
Sweetly dim Coach, charming womaniser Sam Malone, 
extraordinary-in-the-most-boring-manner-possible Cliff Clavin: each of them 
stupid (and here was the really clever thing) in a totally different way. 
Excruciatingly cultured Diane Chambers, forever struggling to reconcile her 
cherished intellectual pretensions with her animal attraction to Sam, that 
fizzing ball of fury Carla Tortelli, stilling herself only to spit out 
one-liners drier than a roasted peanut, and the mighty Norm ("Norm!") were all 
there from the beginning, along with the alchemical process that allows some 
actors to find their rhythm with each other and make every good line a great 
one, and every great one comic genius.

Coach was replaced (after Nicholas Colasanto's death) by Woody, Frasier and 
Lilith joined the regulars, and Diane made way for Rebecca Howe. Viewers held 
their breath and exhaled with relief as the show made them its own, the comedy 
stream uninterrupted. Apart, possibly, from those surreal months with Roger 
Rees as Rebecca's boyfriend Robin Colcord, but at this distance I honestly 
can't be sure they actually happened. If they did, it was a small price to pay 
for redeeming an otherwise worthless decade.
 