
Australian sprinter Caleb Ewan won Tuesday’s opening stage of the Tour Down 
Under, with baking 40-degree conditions prompting organisers to shorten the 
course.

The in-form Orica-Scott rider posted his fourth win of the year, beating Sky 
rider Danny van Poppel and Bora-Hansgrohe’s Sam Bennett.

Related: Caleb Ewan underlines Tour Down Under sprint credentials with opening 
win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/15/caleb-ewan-underlines-tour-down-under-sprint-credentials-with-opening-win>

Two-time world champion Peter Sagan led out Bennett at the Lyndoch finish, but 
Ewan tore through on the outside for a tight win. It is a repeat of Ewan’s 
stage-one win a year ago at the same Barossa town.

The stage win also gave the 22-year-old the overall lead, which was also the 
cast at the start of last year’s Tour.

As the race started to run behind schedule, the decision was taken mid-stage 
to cut the finishing loops at Lyndoch in the Barossa from three to two. It 
shortened the stage that started in suburban Unley from 145km to 118km.

“The safety and welfare of the riders, spectators and everyone involved with 
the race is always our primary concern,” race director Mike Turtur said in a 
statement.

“We consulted with rider representative Adam Hansen (Lotto Soudal) and with 
our chief commissaire Alexander Donike, and both agreed it would be sensible to 
shorten the stage distance.”

Belgian rider Laurens De Vreese (Astana) attacked at the start of the stage 
and the peloton was happy to let him go before predictably catching him inside 
the last 20km.

Belgian Jan Bakelants (Ag2r) then attacked, his jersey coated in salt as he 
gained about 30 seconds but he too was caught before 1km was remaining as the 
sprinters’ teams drove the pace.

Orica-Scott team director Matt White said on Tuesday morning that the 
Australian team had drilled into their riders the need to stay hydrated 
properly during Tuesday’s stage.

Conditions are expected to be milder for Wednesday’s decisive stage through 
the Adelaide Hills.

“It’s going to hurt the Europeans today – it’s going to hurt a lot of guys,” 
White said of the oven-like conditions. “All the guys have had pretty mild 
conditions since they’ve been in Adelaide and this is going to be a long day in 
the office.

“We’ve stressed with our guys that if you make a mistake with hydration and 
you cook yourself today, you’ll be paying for it for days – and tomorrow is a 
crucial day.”
 