
Q I do not have a partner. I want to purchase a property and hold it as 
tenants in common with my son to avoid my home being included in means-testing 
should I need to go into care in the future. As this arrangement seemingly 
works for married people will it work in my circumstances? And would my son 
have to live in the property?


If this arrangement would not work for single people then does that mean we 
are not being given the same rights and opportunities to pass on what we have 
worked for to our children as those living with a partner?GD

A If it turns out that you do need to go into long-term care and you ask your 
local authority to arrange it for you, you will have to hope that they don’t 
trace the question you have emailed me. If your local authority did find it, 
they might reach the conclusion that you deliberately deprived yourself of an 
asset – by making your son joint owner of your property – to avoid having the 
value of your home included in the financial means test.


In 2016-17, if you have capital of more than £23,250, you are expected to meet 
the full cost of any long-term placement in a care home. Even if your local 
authority didn’t decide that you had taken avoidance action, it would still 
include the value of your half of the property. But rather than using the 
market value of the property divided by two, your local authority must base its 
value on the sale value of what’s called your “beneficial interest to a willing 
buyer”, which could make the valuation lower because finding a buyer willing to 
go into joint ownership with your son may be hard.

Even so, the value of your beneficial interest could exceed the £23,250 limit 
so owning your home jointly with your son still wouldn’t help.


Whether you owned it jointly or not, the value of your property would not be 
included in the means test if then moving into a care home you had a partner 
and the property was their home as well as yours. The value of your property 
would also be disregarded if it was the main home of a relative – including 
sons and daughters – over 60, whose permanent home it was.


Although you may find it unfair to single people, the disregard is intended to 
ensure that a home jointly resided in does not have to be sold if one of the 
residents has to go into care. So if the property was genuinely your son’s home 
and you lived together, and he was over 60 at the time you were means-tested, 
the value of the property would be disregarded. And provided that your other 
assets – including cash savings – did not come to more than £23,250 – you would 
be eligible for help with care home fees.
 