
We were about 10km along Romania's route 7C southbound, 270km northwest of 
Bucharest, when we hit the first hairpin. As my wife pulled out of the tight 
curve and the road started sloping up, a sign told us to expect 16km more of 
the same. Welcome to the road Nicolae Ceausescu built.

Constructed at the communist dictator's orders in the early 1970s and reputed 
to be the highest byway in Europe, 7C, aka the Transfagarasan Highway, charges 
up and over Transylvania's Fagaras range, past spiky peaks and jagged 
waterfalls as it climbs to a ridge between the country's highest mountains, the 
2,543m Moldoveanu and 2,535m Negoiu.

This is no pass through a gap but a frontal assault, a stark and spectacular 
reminder of unchecked power stamping itself on an obstreperous landscape. I've 
driven more altitudinous roads, but never one that felt quite so removed from 
the territory down below.

At the Cabana Balea Cascada hotel, midway up, we stopped to admire the silver 
slash of a waterfall against a barren mountainside above; everything below was 
blotted out by thick cloud, like the view from an airplane at cruising altitude.

From there, the road clings to the side of a ledge. The clouds streamed in and 
rolled out, sometimes obscuring the way for all but a few metres, then parting 
to reveal a splendid alpine vista or a harrowing plunge where a guardrail 
should be. At several points, the road seemed to simply disappear into the 
ether.

Fortunately, on an out-of-season afternoon there wasn't much traffic to dodge. 
Neither the giant trucks nor the horse-drawn carts that are ubiquitous on 
Romanian roadways come up here, and the crest of the Fagaras is chilly and 
snowy most of the year. On long summer days, though, campers, hikers and bikers 
- hardy, determined and to my mind slightly insane bikers - make this a popular 
byway.

It probably wasn't to give his people access to the splendours of the upper 
Fagaras that set Ceausescu to carving a road into a rock face. It came about 
via one of the bursts of earth-moving megalomania that characterised the 
dictator's 22-year reign. On the practical side, it would also provide a way to 
get troops and tanks across the rugged mountains in a hurry.

Soldiers were conscripted to do the job: more than four years of daily 
dynamite blasts cleaved 3.8 million cubic metres of earth out of the mountains' 
north face. At least 38 workers died in the process - there was never an 
official record of the fatalities, and 15 years after Ceausescu's downfall 
there's not so much as a plaque to memorialise them.

Only when we reached the top did we fully appreciate the monumental 
achievement - or folly. About 2,000m up, a series of jutting ledges offer a 
sweeping view over the serpentine route, crazily crossing the velvety hummock 
between two soaring ridges, seemingly doubling back, behind and over itself a 
dozen times. It's as if the road were designed by a toddler with a sheet of 
paper and a black crayon.

Here, just before it enters a half-mile tunnel connecting Moldoveanu and 
Negoiu, the road crests at Balea lake. Two small hotels and a third under 
construction attest to the slow but steady growth of tourism in Romania's more 
remote quarters. We booked a room at Cabana Balea Lac, recently restored after 
a devastating fire in the 1990s. It is a comfortable wooden lodge with a good 
restaurant and a long deck over the lake.

Running east-west, the spine of the Fagaras is crisscrossed by more than 300km 
of trails that offer some of eastern Europe's most spectacular hiking. You can 
pick up several paths a few steps from the door of Cabana Balea Lac; it's about 
a 6km hike to the top of Negoiu, double that to Moldoveanu, but with perhaps an 
hour's daylight left we were not feeling ambitious. A shorter, 
blue-cross-marked trail took us in a wide arc around the lake (more of a pond, 
really) then jutted up toward one end of a semicircular ridge. At this point, 
it was less a trail, more a series of blue signs indicating the next rock to 
scramble for.

Ahead of us, to the west, the mountain gave way to azure sky and another line 
of ridges marching towards the horizon. Behind us, the glacial bowl from whence 
we'd come was rapidly disappearing as a bulbous cloud that had affixed itself 
lazily to the mountainside began spreading its cottony heft over the lake and a 
thick mist wafted theatrically down to meet it.

It was tempting to stay and watch the meteorological show - how often do you 
get to see two cloud formations in an up-close tango? But we knew better than 
to put much trust in the vagaries of visibility up here. We picked our way back 
to the trail while the picking was good.

Way to go

Getting there: British Airways <http://www.ba.com> (0870 8509850) flies 
Heathrow-Bucharest daily from £179 return inc tax. Flights, hotels, and car 
hire can be booked throughRomania Travel Centre 
<http://www.romaniatravelcentre.co.uk> (01892 516901).

Further information: Romanian Tourist Board <http://www.romaniatourism.com> 
(020-7224 3692).

Country code: 00 40.

Flight time London-Bucharest: 3hrs.

Time difference: +2hrs.

£1= 53.4 lei.
 