
Australia’s Chloe Hosking finally broke the Rabo-Liv Dutch stranglehold on La 
Course, sprinting to a brilliant victory on the Champs Élysées. With 
temperatures touching 30C, the weather was in stark contrast to last year’s 
deluge and the Wiggle High5 rider made the most of it, putting her head down 
and simply bulldozing her way to the line in a sprint finish worthy of Mark 
Cavendish.

In the absence of Britain’s Lizzie Armitstead and the world tour leader Megan 
Guarnier, it was wide open although Marianne Vos started favourite and her 
Rabo-Liv team were active throughout the 13-laps. Her French team‑mate Pauline 
Ferrand-Prevot was a fixture on the front of the peloton throughout in a race 
that was attacking and aggressive from the off.

This is the first time La Course has been part of the new UCI Women’s World 
Tour and Armitstead’s Boels Dolmans team has dominated. But Armitstead’s focus 
is already elsewhere. After crashing out of La Course in 2014 and withdrawing 
from this year’sGiro Rosa with illness <http:>, the British rider is taking no 
chances with her Olympic buildup. “Going into Rio, I want gold, I would be 
disappointed with anything else,” she said last week. So it was left to riders 
such as Hannah Barnes [Canyon-SRAM] and Dani King of Wiggle High5 to fly the 
flag, with King putting in a stinging if fruitless attack over the closing laps.

Chris Froome set to win third Tour de France in Paris – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/24/chris-froome-set-to-win-third-tour-de-france-in-paris-live>
The UK national champion Barnes showed off her jersey early on, getting into a 
break that formed after three laps and included the strong all-rounder Chantal 
Blaak (Rabo-Liv). But with a maximum lead of 18sec the move was always destined 
to fail as the peloton, riding at speeds of around 60kmh, inexorably reeled the 
breakaways back in.

The action was fast and furious, ridden in the characteristic spirit of 
women’s cycling where smaller team sizes contribute to open and attacking 
racing. But the heat and a strong headwind inhibited the formation of any 
really threatening breakaway move, with riders content to attack for the sprint 
points available at every passage over the finish line. Nina Kessler of 
Lensworld-Zannata took the green jersey with Barnes in eighth.

The 121 riders, grouped into 21 teams, streamed round the finishing circuit of 
the Tour de France on a glorious Parisian afternoon – a ribbon of colour 
illuminating such landmarks as the Arc de Triomphe, the Tuileries and the 
Champs Élysées where Chris Froome was later crowned athree-times Tour de France 
champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/24/tour-de-france-2016-predictable-race-still-brings-joy-to-a-battered-france>
. Though the course itself is hardly challenging – bar a slight drag on each 
passage of the Champs Élysées and the uneven cobbles – this is essentially a 
city centre criterium course and it is the symbolism of riding on one of the 
greatest stages in world sport that is important.

A late break looked as if it might stick, driven by the Dutch rider Lucinda 
Brand (Rabo-Liv) who jumped on to the wheel of France’s Eugénie Duval before 
powering away. She was joined by Amy Pieters (Wiggle High5) and the American 
Lauren Stephens (Team Tibco) and for a while over the closing kilometres it 
looked like a Dutchwoman would again take the win. Even when the move was 
reeled back in over the final 3km Dutch hopes were kept alive by Ellen van Dijk 
who put in a trademark last gasp attack to go clear under theflamme rouge.

But it was Hosking’s day, after her Wiggle High5 team rode a near perfect 
race. Launching her sprint 300m from the line, the Australian put her head down 
and simply rode away from Finland’s Lotta Lepisto and Marianne Vos – the 
Dutchwoman resurgent after being sidelined for the 2015 season. After her three 
stage wins at Thüringen Rundfahrt, Vos will be reassured by her performance 
here with barely two weeks to Rio.

Hosking clasped her face in disbelief before raising her arms in victory. She 
is the first Australian winner on the Champs Élysées sinceRobbie McEwen in 2002 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2002/jul/29/tourdefrance2002.tourdefrance2> 
and won in similarly dominating fashion. “Van Dijk took a flier and I was 
jumping from train to train. With 300m to go I thought, ‘This is way too 
early,’ and I was waiting for them to come, and waiting for them to come but 
they didn’t come.”

Afterwards, she was quick to thank her team, giving particular praise to 
Britain’s Amy Roberts and Audrey Cordon though the Frenchwoman’s race ended in 
one of the bruising crashes that marred the final two laps. After celebrating 
with her family, a clearly elated Hosking said: “We never gave up and my team 
protected me and put me in position. I’m so lucky.”

This is the Australian’s fourth world tour win after her overall victory in 
the Tour of Chongming Island in what has been a breakout season. It caps a 
fantastic month in which she took her first stage at the Giro Rosa. Vos used 
her Instagram account to thank La Course for a “great day” in Paris and to 
praise the winner: “Not only a fantastic sprint, but also good selfie skills.” 
She will be hoping for better than third in Rio with a repeat of her epic2012 
tussle with Armitstead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/29/lizzie-armitstead-britain-first-medal>
 very much on the cards.
 