
Will real men wear lace shirts? Christopher Bailey thinks so. The very first 
model in hisBurberry <https://www.theguardian.com/business/burberrygroup> 
catwalk show was wearing a trenchcoat – a particularly elegant number in 
lightweight navy gabardine – but barely anyone noticed, because he was also 
wearing an ivory lace shirt and a lace tie the colour of English mustard.

Of the 44 outfits on the catwalk, 33 sported lace. (The name of the 
collection: Strait-Laced. Ha ha.) A teal green double-breasted suit was worn 
with a mint lace shirt underneath; a casual cotton lace shirt, worn with 
slim-fit trousers and tasselled loafers, sported a white ruffle along the 
placket, and scallop-edged short sleeves.


The Macaronis, London’s original dandies, were wearing lace blouses back in 
the mid-18th century. And the phenomenon that is the Burberry catwalk show is 
living proof that British men, given the opportunity, are still game for 
getting dressed up. Bailey stages these shows with red-carpet swagger, this 
time in an arena-sized clear plastic marquee in Hyde Park, London, with 
champagne waiters and cashmere picnic blankets dotted around the lawns.

The invitation featured a gold peacock, and attendees dressed accordingly. 
Film-maker David Furnish and singer Tinie Tempah wore double-breasted suits: 
Furnish in beige, checked shirt and pocket square, sockless loafers, Tempah in 
white with matching shorts. The actor Chiwetel Ejiofor kept his 
Prince-of-Wales-check grey suit buttoned; Radio 1 DJ Nick Grimshaw wore a black 
giraffe-print shirt with a suit and boxfresh white trainers.


Much of London designer menswear is about amplifying or refining streetstyle, 
but the Burberry look has its roots in formal, upper-class sartorial 
traditions. Bailey is smart, therefore, about adding off-beat, soulful elements 
to keep the look interesting, and lace – which references both the traditions 
of British dandyism and the contemporary fashion cult for androgyny – was the 
crucial seasoning of this collection.

With their floppy curls and trailing scarves, the line-up looked a little like 
an impossibly good-looking Oxford college orchestra. Backstage after the show, 
Bailey said: “Some men will wear lace, and some men will not. Some pieces in 
the show are not for everybody. But I like the poetry the lace brings with it – 
and in the showroom we’ve got beautiful classic poplin shirts with a tiny lace 
placket, which are very much more wearable.”


Tailoring came in a new slim cut dubbed The Chelsea, but the suiting and 
trenchcoats were broken up by cashmere joggers, which Bailey said were 
“intended to make things a little more relaxed, because I don’t like things 
when things get too uptight”.

He added: “This is a sartorial, formal show with all this classic tailoring, 
so I wanted to knock off the edges a bit, make it feel a little bit more 
effortless.” Square tortoiseshell sunglasses and tie pins in the shape of 
caterpillars and dragonflies – think David Bellamy meets Schiaparelli – were 
employed to spice up a collection which majored in simple tones, surprisingly 
wintry for a summer catwalk, of black and charcoal, navy and pale grey.


Eleven female models joined the lineup wearing looks from the womenswear 
pre-collection, a reflection of the sharply rising profile of the 
pre-collections in the fashion calendar. For the women, the lace theme was 
developed into patchwork and macramé lace takes on Burberry’s signature 
high-waisted, slender day dresses.

“We had been working on that collection at the same time as the menswear, and 
I’m always reflecting that we don’t have a proper platform for 
[pre-collections],” said Bailey after the show. “The spirit of the two 
collections worked well together.”

 