
When the 2016 Tour de France <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance> 
route was announced in October last year, eyebrows were raised at the number of 
mountain stages that would finish at the foot of descents. The received wisdom 
was that this might not be to Chris Froome’s advantage, as his bike‑handling 
ability was regarded as questionable. Here, however, the rider once nicknamed 
Crash Froome won the stage at the foot of a 60mph descent – the first time he 
has done this in his career, he said – stealing a march on his rivals after 
corner after impeccable corner, proving he has nothing to fear when the road 
plunges downhill.

Froome took the yellow jersey after finishing 13 seconds ahead of an elite 
chase group of 13; with the 10sec time bonus for the stage win, his net gain of 
23sec was not on the scale of the minutes he gained at last year’s Pyrenean 
finish at La Pierre Saint Martin, but this was a major setback for Nairo 
Quintana and company. After attacking as the leaders went under the banner at 
the top of the final pass of the day, the Col de Peyresourde – and just as 
Quintana was grabbing a bottle from a team helper – the Kenyan-born Briton 
opened a gap of 23sec at one point on the 16km plunge to the finish.

Tour de France 2016: stage eight – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/09/tour-de-france-2016-stage-eight-live>
That in itself indicates that he was physically and mentally fresh, and that 
he is willing to seize every opportunity to gain even a handful of seconds. He 
also unveiled another marginal gain. A recent vogue is for riders to adopt an 
ultra-aerodynamic position on descents by tucking the elbows in and effectively 
sitting on the top tube rather than the saddle, in a variant of the elbows-in 
tuck pioneered by Graeme Obree in the 1990s; Froome took this one step further 
on Saturday by pedalling while in the tuck position, travelling several 
kilometres an hour quicker than Quintana and the chase group.

Doing this is efficient but immensely risky because the rider’s weight is 
projected so far forwards, meaning the slightest impact on the front wheel can 
be destabilising: “It’s not good for the health,” said SirDave Brailsford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dave-brailsford>, the Team Sky head, 
although Froome countered: “Our work is always dangerous.” His attack also 
reflects Team Sky’s desire to race differently, using attack as defence and – 
as Brailsford put it in best management speak, “to use the element of surprise 
as part of the repertoire”.

The chances are that those in the chase group here will make up the top 10 
overall in Paris. While Tejay Van Garderen, Quintana and Fabio Aru all figured, 
it did not include Alberto Contador, or Geraint Thomas, both left behind when 
Froome’s team-mate Sergio Henao attacked a couple of kilometres from the top of 
the Peyresourde. They dropped a further 1min 41sec, as did Warren Barguil of 
France. On the other hand, Bury’s Adam Yates hung on manfully and now lies 
second overall to Froome, having been yellow jersey ‘on the road’ in the second 
half of the stage after the Belgian Greg Van Avermaet cracked.

While the time gaps at the end were far from definitive, this five-hour stage 
will weigh heavily in the legs, by virtue of the intense heat – well over 30C 
during the final climbs – and the volume of climbing: the lengthy Col du 
Tourmalet with its bleak scree slopes, the narrow Hourquette d’Ancizan, with a 
descent which was more fearsome than the uphill section, the irregular little 
ramps out of the town of Azet and finally the majestic Peyresourde.

There were casualties: Michael Markov of Denmark was the first man to abandon 
after carrying the injuries from his crash at Utah Beach on day one, and having 
done well to get this far. The heat, inevitably, led to at least one rider – 
Lotto-Jumbo’s Wilco Kelderman, as it happened – taking a forward plunge on to 
the tarmac after the glue sticking a tubular tyre melted, although the Dutchman 
was able to carry on.

One issue was decided, however: Thibaut Pinot’s attempt to become the first 
Frenchman to win the Tour since Bernard Hinault in 1985 has come to an abrupt 
end. Having lost three minutes on Friday at Lac de Payolle, Pinot was visibly 
off form and opted to self-immolate in the midday sun rather than go gently. He 
valiantly led the race over the Tourmalet and the Hourquette, with Sky keeping 
tabs on him at a distance after which he was reeled in and emphatically dumped.

The after-effects of this stage could well be felt on Sunday, when the 
mountain climbing is far less forgiving as the race heads east through the 
Pyrenees to Andorra, with a summit finish at the Arcalis ski station at the end 
of a final 70km with only a couple of brief downhills to break the climbing. 
This is where Jan Ullrich took the yellow jersey in 1997, with a display of 
strength which led many to predict he would win at least five more Tours, and 
it is a first real chance for either Froome or Quintana to truly measure the 
strength of the other.

General classification after stage eight

1. Chris Froome (Britain / Team Sky) 39:13:04” 2. Adam Yates (Britain / Orica) 
+16” 3.Joaquim Rodriguez (Spain / Katusha) 4. Daniel Martin (Ireland / Etixx - 
Quick-Step) +17” 5.Alejandro Valverde (Spain / Movistar) +19” 6. Nairo Quintana 
(Colombia / Movistar) +23” 7.Fabio Aru (Italy / Astana) 8. Tejay van Garderen 
(U.S. / BMC Racing) 9.Romain Bardet (France / AG2R) 10. Bauke Mollema 
(Netherlands / Trek) 11.Sergio Henao (Colombia / Team Sky) 12. Roman Kreuziger 
(Czech Republic / Tinkoff) +34” 13.Louis Meintjes (South Africa / Lampre) 14. 
Warren Barguil (France / Giant) +1:51” 15. Pierre Rolland (France / Cannondale) 
+1:55”
 