
The packed domestic summer road cycling calendar has a new race, with Chris 
Froome <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-froome> to headline the 
Australia Day event on Melbourne’s Formula One circuit. The Towards Zero Race 
Melbourne will lead into the 28-29 January Cadel Evans Great Ocean Road race 
weekend in and around Geelong.

Froome has confirmed he will start his campaign for a fourth Tour de France 
title by racing at the Evans men’s race on 29 January and then the 1-5 February 
Herald Sun Tour.

British Cycling must come clean over Shane Sutton and Jess Varnish
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/08/british-cycling-jess-varnish-shane-sutton>
Given his status, organisers will ensure he also competes in the Albert Park 
event. Race Melbourne will feature the fields competing the following weekend 
in Geelong. Adelaide’s Tour Down Under has done the same since its 1999 
inception, holding the Down Under Classic street race outside the CBD two days 
before the Tour itself starts.

Race Melbourne will be a kermesse, a circuit road race format that is popular 
in Europe. The women’s race in the morning will be 12 laps of the 5.3km grand 
prix circuit, for a race total of 63.6km. The men will have 22 laps for a 
116.6km race.

The pancake-flat circuit will not suit Froome, who is a renowned climber, and 
the two races will most likely end with bunch sprints.


Start Orica-Scott duo Simon Gerrans and Esteban Chavez are also confirmed for 
the Cadel Evans Great Ocean Rd race and they are potential starters at Albert 
Park, along with the team’s top sprinter Caleb Ewan.


Meanwhile, Cadel Evans race organisers have confirmed the event has attracted 
13 of the 18 WorldTour teams. The event has reached top-level WorldTour status 
after just two editions but under international rules, only 10 of the teams 
have to compete at the Cadel Evans race because it is new to the WorldTour 
circuit.

BMC, Cannondale-Drapac, Quick-Step Floors and Team Sunweb are among the top 
teams to commit to the Geelong race. The Cadel Evans race field will also 
feature four pro continental teams and an Australian national team line-up of 
emerging riders.
 