
Everybody likes a good road trip and Mutua Matheka is planning one that will 
take him on a whirlwind tour of Africa in an ambitious project to explore urban 
life across southernAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>.

Eschewing the traditional safari route with which the continent has become 
synonymous, Matheka and three of his friends will travel and document the lives 
and vibes of people in 13 cities in 10 southern African countries.

His motivations are eloquently captured in the trip’s title: Unscrambling 
Africa. “It is a play on the colonial partition of African land, the scramble 
for Africa, that introduced borders which violently separated African people,” 
explains Matheka. “Although colonialism is now long gone, those borders still 
exist, more so in our minds, where Africans rarely know about what goes on in 
neighbouring countries.

“Unscrambling Africa will aim to explore a section of Africa, tell stories of 
its people and its cities through visual documentation, and – hopefully – stir 
curiosity and a sense of togetherness among Africans who follow our journey.”

Kenya's 'panic button' app: shake of phone sends distress signal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2017/jan/04/kenyas-panic-button-app-shake-of-phone-sends-distress-signal>
The team includes Lulu Kitololo, an artist and designer, Joe Were, a 
photographer, and Josh Kisamwa, a documentary film-maker. They will leave 
Nairobi, Kenya’s capital, on 10 January and spend eight weeks on the road, 
travelling through Tanzania, Malawi, Zambia, Botswana, Namibia, South Africa, 
Lesotho, Swaziland, Mozambique and Zimbabwe.

The group will document their travels through blog posts, YouTube vlogs, 
podcasts and Instagram posts. At the end of the 15,000km journey, they will 
produce and sell a web video series, a coffee-table photo book, photographic 
prints, colouring books and postcards. If they can raise enough money, they 
also plan to exhibit their work in the cities they visit.

The decision to focus on southern Africa was influenced by the fact that, of 
the countries they plan to visit, only South Africa requires Kenyans to obtain 
a visa. In 2013 the African Union announced plans toabolish visas for all 
African travellers 
<http://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/In-pursuit-of-a-visa-free-Africa-/2558-3379426-item-0-xow4u/index.html>
, but in the meantime many states in west, central and north Africa have 
stringent visa regulations for African travellers, making journeys within the 
continent difficult and expensive.

For six years, Matheka, an architect and father of two, has been taking 
striking photos of Nairobi. He likes to scale tall buildings and capture 
bird’s-eye views that offer an alternative to the bleak portrait often depicted 
in the news, where poverty, wildlife or societal failings resulting from 
corruption are often the focal point.

Matheka’s photos convey a sense of a bustling metropolis alive with 
possibilities and interesting people with interesting stories to tell.

We will rely heavily on their local knowledge and we hope to take great 
pictures and clips
Mutua Matheka 
But photographing Nairobi isn’t easy. Photographers often fall victim to 
harassment by police and local council officers, and are sometimes arrested or 
have their equipment confiscated.

There is increased paranoia about photography on the streets and in shopping 
malls after 2013’sWestgate mall attack, which left 67 people dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/westgate-mall-attacks>.

Matheka has had his share of run-ins with the authorities, whom he says are 
often just looking for a quick way to make an extra buck by extorting money. “I 
have lost count of the number of times that I have been in confrontations with 
the police, watchmen or city council officers in the course of my work. They 
always ask to see my ‘permit’. But because I am aware of my rights under the 
law and I know that permits are only for commercial photography, I am usually 
able to talk myself out of any tight spots without acquiescing to bribery.”

Matheka hopes the cities he visits during the Unscrambling Africa project will 
be more amenable to street photography. However, just in case they aren’t, he 
has identified local artists in each city who can show him the ropes and keep 
the team out of trouble.

“A lot of Unscrambling Africa will involve collaborative efforts with local 
photographers and filmographers in the cities we visit,” he says. “We will rely 
heavily on their local knowledge and we hope to take great pictures and clips 
with them.”

The quartet has ploughed roughly £8,000 of their own money into the trip, with 
a successful Kickstarter campaign crowdsourcing a further £28,000.
 