
Chuba Akpom scored in the 87th minute to give Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> a 2-1 victory over the MLS 
All-Stars on Thursday night at Avaya Stadium.

Akpom, a second-half substitute, capitalised on the work of midfielder Chris 
Willock and Nacho Monreal to score the winning goal.

Willock worked himself into space on the left-hand side of the area and fed 
the ball to Monreal, who crossed to Akpom. The 20-year-old striker got behind 
the Chicago Fire defender Brandon Vincent and slotted in from close range. 
Akpom was later named man of the match.

MLS All-Stars 1-2 Arsenal – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jul/28/mls-all-stars-v-arsenal-live>

Earlier, Joel Campbell gave Arsenal a 1-0 lead in the 12th minute with a 
penalty. Laurent Ciman had fouled Theo Walcott, and Campbell trotted slowly up 
to the ball before hitting a low drive underneath Philadelphia Union’s Andre 
Blake.

A familiar foe for Arsenal, the former Chelsea star Didier Drogba, now playing 
for the Montreal Impact, levelled the score in first-half stoppage time. The 
New York Red Bulls’ Sacha Kljestan began the move with a ball to Giovani dos 
Santos on the left of the box. Dos Santos passed to the Ivorian, who took three 
shots before he scored: Petr Cech stopped the first, Rob Holding blocked the 
second and Drogba converted the rebound.

It often felt like a home game for Arsenal. The Gunners’ red-and-white shirts 
overwhelmed any other club’s representation in the stadium.

Arsenal’s starting line-up featured familiar names such as Walcott, Jack 
Wilshere and Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain but Arsène Wenger chose to feature younger 
players, including Willock and the 18-year-old Polish central defender Krystian 
Bielik. The All-Stars fielded a starting 11 featuring European veterans Drogba, 
Kaka, Andrea Pirlo and David Villa.


The visitors enjoyed the majority of the possession from the start. The 
All-Stars responded by attempting to strike quickly on counterattacks. In the 
seventh minute, Real Salt Lake’s Kyle Beckerman began one such attack by 
slotting a pass to Kaka, who sent a long ball to Villa on the left flank. But 
Kieran Gibbs blocked Villa’s shot before it could trouble the Arsenal goal.


A minute later, Pirlo orchestrated another counterattack by chipping the ball 
to Dos Santos but Cech used his right hand to deflect dos Santos’ 15-yard shot 
to safety.
Cech made another critical save in the 47th minute by lunging to deflect 
Sebastian Giovinco’s 16-yard fusillade that had been heading into the 
upper-left corner of the net.

Swiss midfielder Granit Xhaka made his debut for the Gunners when he entered 
the match in the 46th minute but it was Akpom who was to have the final say.
 