



The Church of England has appointed its first black bishop for 20 years in a 
move that significantly increases its handful of minority ethnic clergy in 
senior leadership positions.

Downing Street announced that Woyin Karowei Dorgu is to be the 13th bishop of 
Woolwich, and will be consecrated at Southwark Cathedral on 17 March.

Dorgu was born and brought up in Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>, and ordained in the UK. Woolwich, 
in south-east London, has a significant Nigerian population, many of whom 
worship in black-majority Pentecostal churches rather than the C of E.

At a press conference at Southwark Cathedral, Dorgu said one of his priorities 
as bishop would be to celebrate the racial diversity of the Woolwich area. He 
said he intended to “encourage BAME [black, Asian and minority ethnic] 
vocations and more participation in ministry”.

“I will celebrate the diversity in race, ability, gender, sexuality and class 
… Celebrating our differences is a gift,” he added.

The only other black bishop currently in the Church of England is John 
Sentamu, now archbishop of York – second in the church hierarchy – who was 
consecrated as bishop of Stepney 20 years ago. There are three BAME archdeacons 
and one dean.

BAME representation among clergy and senior leadership has long been a concern 
in the church. Last year, the proportion of BAME people among those embarking 
on the process of becoming a priest fell to 1.9%, compared with a share of the 
general population of about 15%. In previous years it has been 4-5%.

The church established a committee for minority ethnic Anglican concerns more 
than 30 years ago, which recently stepped up efforts to improve BAME 
representation. An initiative called Turning Up the Volume was set up in 2012 
with the aim of doubling the number of BAME clergy in senior positions within 
10 years.

Dorgu told the Guardian his appointment was “a small step in the right 
direction”, adding: “Quite a lot of Nigerian Christians [in the Woolwich area] 
are from an Anglican background. I hope my appointment will be a model. Seeing 
someone from a similar background could be a catalyst for dialogue between the 
C of E and black majority churches and Nigerians looking for a spiritual home.”

Although he and Sentamu were the only black bishops, Dorgu said: “I would not 
describe the position as lonely. There is a lot of support and friendship.”

Dorgu said he did not believe the C of E was institutionally racist, adding 
that he preferred the term “unconscious bias”. “If the church was racist, I 
wouldn’t be where I am today. The church is making an effort to be more 
inclusive.”

On the issue of sexuality, which has divided the Church of England and the 
global Anglican communion for two decades, Dorgu said he stood firmly behind 
the church’s official position. The church refuses to conduct same-sex church 
weddings on the traditional biblical grounds that marriage is between a man and 
a woman, and its insistence that gay clergy must be celibate.


Dorgu – known to some of his congregation as Brother K – trained as a medical 
doctor in Lagos before being ordained. He was brought up in a Christian family 
but said as a teenager he rebelled against the gospel and left the church.

After encountering Christian students at university, he decided to “accept 
Jesus as my personal saviour and Lord in my early 20s”. He came to the UK in 
1987 and was ordained as a priest in 1996.


He described himself as an evangelical but added: “I will fly no party colours 
… I will promote unity, respect, integrity and collaboration among different 
traditions.”

Since his ordination, he has been a minister in London parishes.
 