
Police have charged a 48-year-old man with the murder of two women taken from 
the streets of Claremont in Perth,Western Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/western-australia>, in the late 
1990s, following a 20-year investigation into the alleged serial killings.

Bradley Robert Edwards, from Kewdale, appeared in Perth magistrates court on 
Friday charged with the murders of Jane Rimmer in June 1996 and Ciara Glennon 
in March 1997.

Edwards is also accused of abducting a 17-year-old girl in February 1995 as 
she walked through Rowe Park in Claremont, and indecently assaulting an 
18-year-old woman during a break-in at a Huntingdale home in February 1988.

He was remanded in custody to appear in Stirling Gardens magistrates court on 
11 January.

Edwards was arrested at his home in Kewdale, in Perth’s eastern suburbs, on 
Thursday, after detectives searched his home.

Rimmer, then 23, was last seen after leaving a hotel in Claremont on 9 June 
1996; Glennon, then 27, was last seen leaving the same venue on 14 March 1997.

The bodies of both women were later discovered dumped in bushland.



No charges were laid in connection to the disappearance and suspected murder 
of 18-year-old Sarah Spiers, who disappeared from Claremont in the early hours 
of 27 January 1996.

The WA police commissioner, Karl O’Callaghan, said it was a “significant 
breakthrough” in the long-running case.

Claremont serial killings: unsolved rape may offer vital clues – former 
detective
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/16/claremont-serial-killings-unsolved-may-offer-vital-clues-former-detective>
Addressing the media in Perth on Friday, O’Callaghan said police would allege 
Edwards abducted both Rimmer and Glennon, before killing them and dumping their 
bodies. He is alleged to have acted alone.

O’Callaghan paid tribute to the families of Rimmer, Glennon and Spiers, and 
said the investigation into the suspected murder of Spiers was “ongoing”.

“So there is still much work to be done, but this has already been the biggest 
and most complex police investigation in WA history,” he said. “Hundreds of 
police officers have worked on this case over the 20 years.”

The investigation into the suspected serial killings, dubbed Operation Macro, 
began after Rimmer disappeared in June 1996. O’Callaghan said police had “never 
wavered” in their commitment to find the alleged killer.

“I want to pay tribute to the families of Sarah Spiers, Ciara Glennon and Jane 
Rimmer, and the victim of the 1995 attack for their patience and understanding 
during the investigation,” he said, before asking the media to respect the 
families’ privacy.

He also warned people not to speculate about the case on social media before 
saying he would not take questions, because he was concerned divulging too many 
details could jeopardise further investigations.

“These crimes shocked the West Australian public and police understand the 
high level of media and public interest,” he said. “However, now that a person 
has been charged, I want to take this opportunity to reiterate the need to 
respect the judicial process which has now commenced.”
 