 Computer games are creating a dumbed-down generation of children far more 
disposed to violence than their parents, according to a controversial new study.
The tendency to lose control is not due to children absorbing the aggression 
involved in the computer game itself, as previous researchers have suggested, 
but rather to the damage done by stunting the developing mind.

Using the most sophisticated technology available, the level of brain activity 
was measured in hundreds of teenagers playing a Nintendo game and compared to 
the brain scans of other students doing a simple, repetitive arithmetical 
exercise. To the surprise of brain-mapping expert Professor Ryuta Kawashima and 
his team at Tohoku University in Japan, it was found that the computer game 
only stimulated activity in the parts of the brain associated with vision and 
movement.

In contrast, arithmetic stimulated brain activity in both the left and right 
hemispheres of the frontal lobe - the area of the brain most associated with 
learning, memory and emotion.

Most worrying of all was that the frontal lobe, which continues to develop in 
humans until the age of about 20, also has an important role to play in keeping 
an individual's behaviour in check.

Whenever you use self-control to refrain from lashing out or doing something 
you should not, the frontal lobe is hard at work.

Children often do things they shouldn't because their frontal lobes are 
underdeveloped. The more work done to thicken the fibres connecting the neurons 
in this part of the brain, the better the child's ability will be to control 
their behaviour. The more this area is stimulated, the more these fibres will 
thicken.

The students who played computer games were halting the process of brain 
development and affecting their ability to control potentially anti-social 
elements of their behaviour.

'The importance of this discovery cannot be underestimated,' Kawashima told 
The Observer .

'There is a problem we will have with a new generation of children - who play 
computer games - that we have never seen before.

'The implications are very serious for an increasingly violent society and 
these students will be doing more and more bad things if they are playing games 
and not doing other things like reading aloud or learning arithmetic.'

Kawashima, in need of funding for his research, originally decided to 
investigate the levels of brain activity in children playing video games 
expecting to find that his research would be a boon to manufacturers.

He expected it to reassure parents that there are hidden benefits to the 
increasing number of hours their children were devoting to computer games and 
was startled by what he discovered.

He compared brain activity in children playing Nintendo games with those doing 
an exercise called the Kraepelin test, which involves adding single-digit 
numbers continuously for 30 minutes.

The students were given minute doses of a radioactive pharmaceutical through 
an intravenous drip which allowed a computer to map a complex picture of their 
brains at work. A subsequent study was conducted using magnetic resonance 
images.

Both studies confirmed the high level of brain activity involved in carrying 
out simple addition and subtraction and that this activity was particularly 
pronounced in the frontal lobe, in both the left and right hemispheres.

Though it is often thought that only the left hemisphere is active for 
mathematical work and that the right hemi sphere is stimulated by more creative 
thinking, the professor found that arithmetic produced a high level of activity 
in both hemispheres.

In subsequent studies, Kawashima established that arithmetic exercises also 
stimulate more brain activity than listening to music or listening to reading. 
Reading out loud was also found to be a very effective activity for activating 
the frontal lobe.

Kawashima, visiting the UK to speak at this weekend's annual conference of the 
private learning programme Kumon Educational UK, said the message to parents 
was clear.

'Children need to be encouraged to learn basic reading and writing, of 
course,' he said. 'But the other thing is to ask them to play outside with 
other children and interact and to communicate with others as much as possible. 
This is how they will develop, retain their creativity and become good people.'

tracy.mcveigh@observer.co.uk <mailto:tracy.mcveigh@observer.co.uk>
 