 On Monday morning the queen and Prince Albert walked in the royal gardens of 
Buckingham Palace. Her Royal Highness the Duchess of Kent visited her majesty. 
During the day his Royal Highness Prince Albert rode out on horseback. In the 
evening her Royal Highness the Duchess of Kent, attended by Lady Fanny Howard, 
lady in waiting, dined with her majesty and his Royal Highness Prince Albert at 
Buckingham Palace. Her majesty's first levee, this day (Wednesday) at St. 
James's Palace, is expected to be numerously attended, it being the first since 
the year before last, and the suite of state apartments will be thrown open for 
the first time since they have been re-embellished.
Cowes, Isle of Wight. - Osborne House, the seat of Lady Isabella Blackford, 
has been taken by her majesty with an option to purchase, if approved of. The 
royal household are expected in May, but considerable additions must be made to 
the building before it can accommodate a very large establishment. It is 
beautifully situated in a fine park with abundance of noble timber. The views 
are extensive and of varied beauty taking in Portsmouth, Spithead, &c.

The mansion has on the ground floor drawing room, dining room and library, 
with two ante-rooms and hall. First floor - Five bedrooms and two dressing 
rooms. Second floor - Nine rooms. Offices, housekeepers' rooms, servants' hall, 
laundry, kitchen with beds for maidservants; three beds for men over the 
stables.

Osborne Park and wood, with gardens &c, contains 346 acres, the whole of which 
is freehold. The farm contains 424 acres. The park runs down to the water. The 
landing and bathing are good and strictly private.

A Sunday Party. - Lord Brougham entertained at dinner on Sunday last, the 
French ambassador and the Countess de Ste. Aulaire, le Baronne de Langsdorf, 
the Marquis and Marchioness of Clanricarde.Morning Post

The Established Church in Ireland. We have not concealed our apprehensions 
that changes impend over the established church in Ireland. What these changes 
may be we are not prepared to say; not, with reference to our immediate object, 
is it much matter: provided we admit that they will tend to curtail the power, 
the dignity and the usefulness of the establishment. But that such changes will 
be attempted have we no more doubt than of the curious agenda of Sir Robert 
Peel, from which we derive the augury.Dublin Evening Mail
 