
Everyone who watches Strictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> has a 
favourite part. My extensive Twitter research suggests that Tess Daly's legs, 
Louis Smith's arms, Kimberley Walsh's bum and Pasha Kovalev's face all rate 
highly, but I have more rarefied tastes: my favourite part is judge Craig Revel 
Horwood, and every single word that comes out of his mouth.

At some point in Strictly's 10-year run, Revel Horwood has become fixed in the 
role of the show's panto villain. Maybe the proximity to Christmas and all the 
sequins confuse the audience into thinking they've snuggled themselves into a 
plush seat at the Bristol Hippodrome for a round of Robinson Crusoe, rather 
than having a floorside view of the sacred art of the paso doble.

So every week, the couples dance, and every week Brucie slowly toepokes some 
reference to how incredibly stingy Revel Horwood is with his marks. Revel 
Horwood then starts to speak, and the audience starts booing. And every week, I 
sit on my sofa and shout: "SHUT UP! SHUT UP YOU DRONING INGRATES AND LISTEN TO 
CRAIG!" Because I understand Craig. Yes, in the deep and special way that one 
can only know a person by watching them very carefully for two hours of 
primetime every week, and in a fashion that would almost certainly not be 
classified as "a bit Play Misty for Me", I know Craig. And I know that Craig
loves dance.

Of course, all the judges could claim to love dance. But, as any student of 
the Argentine tango knows, true love always brings heartache. Bruno Tonioli can 
roar and hipswivel in gleeful approval, Len Goodman may offer a patrician wink 
of satisfaction, and Darcey Bussell can purr out praise – but which of them 
apart from Revel Horwood can look as though they've been stabbed in the heart 
by a treacherous lover when a clumsy celebrity makes a flat-footed, 
stiff-hipped farrago of a Latin routine? Only Revel Horwood truly suffers, 
because only Revel Horwood truly loves.

He is a man for whom perfection matters. You can see it in his face – I mean, 
actually see it, right in the middle of his face, in the nose that he had 
artificially miniaturised and graciously fluted when he was 18. "I felt it was 
too big,"he says 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-1221563/Under-microscope-Strictlys-Craig-Revel-Horwood-lifelong-struggle-anorexia.html>
, and it looks like one of those noses designed not for pleasingly organic 
proportions, but as a living apology for committing the faux pas of having an 
unappealing snout in the first place. "Look," says the nose, "I may not have 
been naturally delightful, but I have been refined. I havemade an effort." And 
frankly, the least the rest of the world could do in the circumstances is get 
the bloody armhold right when you're doing the Viennese waltz.

Even though he's not head judge, I like to think that the rest of the panel 
take their cue from his serious-minded critiques. Do you recall the spangled 
past of week six and with Louis and Flavia'sdivisive waltz 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p010yrtx>? The other judges expressed loud 
dismay when Revel Horwood declared it pedestrian – yet by the next week the 
judges' consensus had become that young Smith really wasn't trying hard enough. 
Where Revel Horwood leads, dancing wisdom follows.

Come week nine, thanks to Revel Horwood's scrutinising eye, Louis and Flavia 
turnedin a Charleston <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p0121chg> of 
leaderboard-topping splendour. And Revel Horwood was delighted. He may even 
have let slip a heartfelt "daah-ling" of joy at the four-footed miracle before 
him. Yes, to love deeply is to know pain, but it is also to know true bliss. 
And I'd like you to think of me as a very normal person with just the merest 
hint of the stalker's glassy gaze when I say that we should all live as though 
Revel Horwood is watching us all the time. Daah-lings – it's just a matter of 
doing things the right way.
 