
If there is one thing to learn about Croatian islands, it’s that they are all 
different. Pag, for example, is all cheese and chalk, while Hvar is lavender 
and langoustines. But Cres is new to me and I want to know more about the 
joint-largest of the country’s 718 islands (only 47 of which are inhabited). On 
the map it’s a weird-looking, elongated creature, said by the ancient Greeks to 
be the body of Apsyrtus, murdered by Jason and his Argonauts. I’m on a hiking 
trail across the northern head of the island, the Tramuntana, and I’m on a 
Roman road. Not just the site of one, you understand, but the very cobbles laid 
down 2,000 years ago, although a local guide warned me that one short section 
was recently resurfaced – “by Napoleon”.

The way leads past olive trees that look like they were planted to shade 
travellers when the road was first built. I cross a modern asphalt road and the 
trail becomes an old country path: white stones smoothed by centuries of bare 
feet and donkey hooves. It is hot, but I am shaded by immense oak trees. Then I 
emerge on a meadow of short grass and enter a village.
 Cres Town’s seafront 
Trees are laden with apples and sweet chestnuts ready to roast. The well is 
full of water. I glance inside a house and see wooden chests and beds. On a 
kitchen wall, next to an oven, someone has stencilled bunches of ripe grapes. 
The only thing missing is people: they all abandoned this village, and many 
others on Cres, after the second world war. What this island has in abundance, 
I’m realising, is ghosts.

Later that day I reach Beli, a hilltop village on the coast, and the best base 
for exploring Tramuntana. My partner Sophie and daughter Maddy (13) are waiting 
for me, as arranged, in thekonoba, or taverna. Maddy is at a point in her life 
when she likes 25 hours of sleep a day and can only be roused by the whispering 
of certain key words: snorkelling, rock climbing and Coke. Sophie, however, is 
at a point in her life where those words put her to sleep. For her, “beach and 
book” usually hits the spot, though the addition of “white wine” always helps. 
We are on a family road trip through Croatia.
 Kevin walking on the Roman road near Beli 
At the Eco-Centre down the lane I meet Tomislav, an unusual young Croatian in 
that he has moved away from the city of Rijeka and reinhabited his 
grandfather’s remote village, Ivanje, in the centre of the Tramuntana. “Some of 
those old people who emigrated come back to look,” he says. “They’re very 
nostalgic. They never found peace in the city.”

The language they spoke, however, the Tramuntana dialect, will never come 
back: the last known speaker died in 2015. Cres wine and cheese are more or 
less extinct, too. Now Tomislav is working to try to save another disappearing 
part of the old scene: the griffon vulture.
 Low cloud makes for an unusual looking sunset over Valun on Cres Island 
In former times, people kept sheep, and the vultures fed on any carcasses. But 
now the shepherds and their flocks are rare and the vultures – once common all 
across Europe, even in Britain – are struggling. “They will fly to the Alps to 
find food,” says Tomislav. “And they are easily disturbed by tourist boats.”

In a large enclosure, the project is rehabilitating three young specimens that 
were rescued from the sea after falling from their nests. Since there are only 
around 50 pairs left on Cres, they are a vital part of the rescue plan. They 
look a bit shabby and clumsy in their pen. Tomislav assures us their wild 
relatives are more impressive and that viewing is possible. “Take the cliff 
path from the town beach and keep going as far as you can.” Cres griffons are 
highly unusual in their nesting on sea cliffs.
 Sheep in the ruined village of Stepici 
I whisper “swimming” in Maddy’s ear; “beach and book” in Sophie’s.

When I say Cres is relatively uninhabited, I should also point out that there 
are two seasons in Croatia: the quiet time and August. During the latter, any 
beach near a road is certain to be popular. The coast near Beli is largely 
taken over by Italians.

There are some simple country cafes, a kayak hire agency, a zipwire and a dive 
centre. But after picking our way through the sunning flesh, we find a gorgeous 
narrow path along the cliff where the wild sage grows. There is a second beach 
with about six people on it, then a third with two. Any further progress is 
blocked by a sign announcing that the next cliff is a griffon nesting site. We 
can’t see any sign of them, however.
 Sophie and Maddy canoe into a cove on Cres. 
Maddy and I swim. Sophie reads. I cannot think of anywhere that has seas 
clearer than in Croatia. I could stare in astonishment at those colours all day 
long: glassy grass-green, malachite, turquoise, or Homeric wine dark.

Hiring a boat is highly recommended. Best spots for that are Valun and 
Martinšćica on the west side of the island. Ask to be taken to the Blue Grotto 
under the village of Lubenice, but try to get there early because every motor 
boat heads there for lunch. The village on the cliff above makes a great sunset 
spot.
 Maddy enjoys a view near Lubenice 
With a canoe or kayak, places like Koromaćno near Belej are a good bet: a 
short paddle will soon reveal an empty beach. Watch out for the wind, though: 
thebura and the jugo are just two of the vicious local furies sent to torture 
mariners. If in doubt contact the excellentpansion in Beli which organises 
coastal expeditions and has copies of a useful hiking map.
 A griffon vulture soars over a cliff at Beli 
As Maddy and I get out of the water, the sun is sinking fast. I’ve decided I 
will have to come back at dawn tomorrow to catch sight of a griffon vulture. 
Then a shadow crosses the sky: a massive bird that sweeps over us imperiously, 
followed by another and another. They are so close we can see their white heads 
turning to check us out, but then they soar higher and higher before folding 
their wings into powerful swoops and disappearing over the mountain. The humans 
may have become ghosts, but on Cres the vultures remain the overlords.

Discovering Croatia: the spirit world

There is a baffling array of spirits awaiting discovery in Croatia, from the 
more well-knownslivovitz (plum brandy) to the esoteric biska, a type of grappa 
concocted from mistletoe and popular in Istria. A favourite liqueur issmokovača 
(made from dried figs) which is sweeter than the often astringenttravarica 
(various herbs), which is served as an aperitif. Then there isorahovac 
(walnuts),medica (honey), kruškovac (pears) and rogač (carob), which someone 
memorably described to me as having a bouquet like “cocoa and arse”.

• Accommodation was provided by HomeAway (020-8827 1971, homeaway.co.uk 
<https://www.homeaway.com/merch/region/croatia/1015>), which has rental 
properties throughout the island, and Pansion Tramuntana in Beli (+385 51 840 
519,beli-tramontana.com <http://www.beli-tramontana.com/en/pansion>) which 
offers B&B from €30pp and outdoor activities with guides. Also check with the 
tourist office in Cres Town. Further information:croatia.hr <http://croatia.hr/>
 andkvarner.hr <http://www.kvarner.hr/en/tourism>
 