
A tea stall under a tree on one of Khartoum’s busiest roads doesn’t look like 
much to pin your hopes on when seeking to cure a sick child. But dozens of 
anxious parents and unrelated strangers rush to places like this acrossSudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan> every day – the former to press 
prescriptions and the latter cash into the hands of volunteers managing a 
crowdfunding operation that saves children’s lives.

The operation, set up in 2012, received donations of some $220,000 (£176,000) 
for medicines in 2014, and also collected $533,000 to open children’s intensive 
care units in two hospitals in the capital.

In Sudan, communities are finally seeing the value of educating girls | Yousra 
Elbagir
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/04/in-sudan-communities-are-finally-seeing-the-value-of-educating-girls>
“If these guys weren’t here I’d start to sell things from my home, like my 
bed, chairs and cooking utensils,” says Arafa Moussa, who has come from the 
Jaffar Ibn Ouf children’s hospital across the road to get help to pay for her 
son’s medicines. Since her husband had a heart attack and lost his job last 
November, they have not managed to pay the monthly 2,000 Sudanese pounds (£248) 
to manage their eight-year-old’s rare condition of aplastic anaemia.

“If he didn’t get the medicine, he would bleed from his nose, eyes, ears and 
whole body,” says Moussa, wiping her tears as she talks about trying to sell 
the family home to pay for the bone marrow transplant he can only get abroad.


It was seeing children with cancer in pain that led around 15 young Sudanese 
volunteers to establish the crowdfunding initiative, calledSharia’ al-Hawadith 
<https://m.facebook.com/SharAlhwadth/>. It was named after a street lined with 
medical facilities, and which roughly translates as Accident Lane. It is now 
home to a small army of young volunteers who sit under a tree sipping endless 
cups of tea between racing off to get prescriptions for parents who turn up or 
call from hospital.


Decades of conflict and the resulting sanctions against the regime of 
President Omar al-Bashir have crippled investment and development. 
International NGOs have struggled to operate in a climate of government 
suspicion and restrictions, which includes limiting the medical work of 
Médecins Sans Frontières‎ and the Red Cross.

“Our government doesn’t want [NGOs] here … there were so many, but they were 
driven out,” says Hathim Ahmed, one of many pharmacists working with Sharia’ 
al-Hawadith to provide medicines that most insurance won’t cover. None of the 
volunteers are paid.

The initiative does some preliminary means-testing by speaking to parents, and 
asks them to contribute between 10% and 50% for expensive medicines or to buy 
the cheap ones themselves. For those who can’t contribute, Sharia’ al-Hawadith 
bears the total cost.

“About 25% of the people I see can’t afford to pay for treatment or 
medicines,” says junior doctor Leben Khair, who has volunteered for Sharia’ 
al-Hawadith since discovering that most insurance policies only pay for up to 
10% of medicines and that “even private insurance doesn’t cover the expensive 
ones”.


In Sudan, while NGOs have floundered, such online crowdsourcing models have 
prospered, allowing people to donate for medicines, books, blankets or food 
without going through an organisation that could be considered a political 
threat.

“We publish the daily needs in the Facebook page … and we write the medicines 
or the cheques we need to do today,” says Ibrahim Alsir Alsafi, a journalist, 
who – like most other volunteers – spends a day or an evening a week sitting at 
the tea stall the street.

Ayman Saeed, one of Sharia’ al-Hawadith founders, says not being an NGO has 
its advantages. “It gave us more room to move freely and expand as much as we 
can, and our [decentralised] management system … was a good strategy.” He says 
it gives people the chance to approach the concept in their own way.

More than 100,000 people follow the Facebook page where the prescription 
requests and the whereabouts of sick children are posted. With volunteers 
working in all of Sudan’s 18 states, and most children’s hospitals, people can 
give money personally or send it through people they know living locally. 
“Sudanese people – most of them from outside Sudan – help us by transferring 
lots of money. We don’t have a bank account but they transfer it to their 
relatives here and they come to give it to us by hand,” says Alsafi.

The initiative requires a level of trust between pharmacists and volunteers, 
who all keep accounts of what has been bought or given on credit per shift. 
Some people who donate, especially for chronic cases or for first-time donors 
and who want to see where their money’s going, meet the patients, and 
sometimes, like the volunteers, get to know their families quite well.

Riding the Nile train: could lifting US sanctions get Sudan's railway on track?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/14/nile-train-us-united-states-lifting-sanctions-sudan-railway-on-track>
Some pharmacists in Khartoum say that per shift they can give away anything 
from 200 to 2,000 Sudanese pounds’ worth of medicine, but that they trust the 
initiative and know they will be paid.

“Sometimes people go to the pharmacy and they just pay our debts for the whole 
month,” he says.


The largest donation received was from a wealthy Khartoum woman who didn’t 
have cash so turned up with her gold jewellery. When the dealer found out the 
money was going to charity, he paid double for it.


People living abroad also respond to the regular calls for drugs that are not 
available in Sudan, or are extremely expensive imports, by sending them over. 
“Antibiotics, especially injectables, are very expensive, and cancer drugs per 
injectable dose can cost 900,000 Sudanese pounds. A course of 28 tablets can 
cost 1.5m,” says Ahmed.

Since running his own pharmacy in the hospital district, Ahmed, like many 
other pharmacists, has worked with different charitable funds and given away 
drugs to needy customers for years. He now extends credit to Sharia’ 
al-Hawadith to reach increasing numbers of poor people who have been hit by 
inflation and a falling currency, which puts medicines imported from Europe or 
the US even further out of reach.


“People are really getting poorer and poorer every day; things are getting 
worse, so we are trying to help,” he says.

 