
The following correction was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and 
clarifications column, Tuesday February 5 2008

 We stated in the article below that Cyprian Ekwensi's first novel, People of 
the City, published in 1954, was the first Nigerian work to gain international 
acclaim and the first Nigerian novel to be published in Britain. In fact, Amos 
Tutuola's The Palm-Wine Drinkard was published by Faber & Faber in 1952 to 
exceptional worldwide interest.




Between stints as a teacher, forester, pharmacist, broadcaster and film-maker, 
the west African novelist Cyprian Ekwensi, who has died aged 86, published more 
than 40 books as well as radio and television scripts. His first novel, People 
of the City (1954), appearing four years before Chinua Achebe's Things Fall 
Apart, was the first Nigerian work to gain international acclaim and the first 
Nigerian novel to be published in Britain. Jagua Nana (1961) won Ekwensi the 
1968 Dag Hammarskjöld prize in literature.

People of the City tells the story of a young crime reporter who doubles as a 
bandleader in a large west African city. As one British critic wrote, the novel 
said more about west Africa than 50 government reports. However, Ireland banned 
the novel on the grounds of indecency. Controversy was to dog Ekwensi's 
literary career.

Of Igbo extraction, he was born in Minna, in west central Nigeria. His father, 
David Anadumaka, a famed storyteller and elephant hunter, inspired him towards 
creative writing. Ekwensi was a brilliant, gregarious pupil at boarding school 
- Government college, Ibadan - and became engrossed in Yoruba culture. His 
school life and multi-ethnic upbringing were to be reflected in his work. After 
stints at various Nigerian and Ghanaian colleges, he worked as a forestry 
officer (1945-47).

In that wild and lonely environment, he began writing short adventure stories, 
some of which were published in 1947 as Ikolo the Wrestler and Other Ibo Tales. 
The same year, five of his works were published in England by Lutterworth Press 
as part of its African new writing series. Another collection of light romance 
stories came out in 1948 from an Onitsha publisher in Nigeria. In 1949, Ekwensi 
began to read his stories on the Nigerian Broadcasting Corporation while also 
writing for several Lagos newspapers.

Two years later, he won a scholarship to study pharmacy at London University. 
He said that it was while he was on the ship to England that he began to 
assemble People of the City. Working as a pharmacy assistant at Oldchurch 
hospital, Romford, Essex, he wrote plays that were broadcast by the BBC. He 
also recorded a voiceover for Man of Africa (1953), which featured at the 1954 
Venice film festival. Ekwensi's film scripts included Nigeria Greets the Queen, 
marking her first visit to Nigeria in 1956.

On his return to Nigeria that year, he worked for the broadcasting 
corporation, becoming director of information in 1961. Two children's novellas, 
The Drummer Boy and The Passport of Mallam Illia, were published in 1960 and 
the novel Jagua Nana and the equally successful collection of vignettes, 
Burning Grass, in 1961. From 1961 to 1966, Ekwensi published at least one major 
work each year. Jagua Nana, the story of a high-class Lagos prostitute, was 
vehemently attacked by the Catholic and Anglican churches for its sexually 
explicit language and was banned in several schools. An application to film the 
book was rejected by the Nigerian parliament - but then came the Dag 
Hammarskjöld prize.

When the Nigerian civil war broke out in 1966, Ekwensi became an adviser to 
secessionist leader Odumegwu Ojukwu, chairing Biafra's external publicity 
bureau. After the war, he resumed his literary and pharmaceutical career. He 
helped form the Association of Nigerian Authors in 1981, and in 2001, was made 
a member of the Order of the Federal Republic. Four years later, he was 
inducted into the Nigerian Academy of Arts.

"Five decades or more of writing have brought me world fame but not fortune," 
he said. "If I were an American living in America or Europe, I would be 
floating in a foam bath in my own private yacht off the coast of Florida." 
Lately, he had been working on his biography. He is survived by Chinwe, his 
wife, and their nine children.

· Cyprian Odiatu Duaka Ekwensi, writer and pharmacist, born September 26 1921; 
died November 4 2007
 