
New evidence has emerged in one of the most enduring mysteries of United 
Nations and African history, suggesting that the plane carrying the UN 
secretary generalDag Hammarskjöld 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/september/18/newsid_3790000/3790079.stm>
 was shot down over Northern Rhodesia (now Zambia) 50 years ago, and the murder 
was covered up by British colonial authorities.

A British-run commission of inquiry blamed the crash in 1961 on pilot error 
and a later UN investigation largely rubber-stamped its findings. They ignored 
or downplayed witness testimony of villagers near the crash site which 
suggested foul play. The Guardian has talked to surviving witnesses who were 
never questioned by the official investigations and were too scared to come 
forward.

The residents on the western outskirts of the town of Ndola described 
Hammarskjöld's DC6 being shot down by a second, smaller aircraft. They say the 
crash site was sealed off by Northern Rhodesian security forces the next 
morning, hours before the wreckage was officially declared found, and they were 
ordered to leave the area.

The key witnesses were located and interviewed over the past three years by 
Göran Björkdahl, a Swedish aid worker based inAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, who made the investigation of the 
Hammarskjöld mystery a personal quest since discovering his father had a 
fragment of the crashed DC6.

"My father was in that part of Zambia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zambia> in the 70s and asking local people 
about what happened, and a man there, seeing that he was interested, gave him a 
piece of the plane. That was what got me started," Björkdahl said. When he went 
to work in Africa himself, he went to the site and began to question the local 
people systematically on what they had seen.

The investigation led Björkdahl to previously unpublished telegrams – seen by 
the Guardian – from the days leading up to Hammarskjöld's death on 17 September 
1961, which illustrate US and British anger at an abortive UN military 
operation that the secretary general ordered on behalf of the Congolese 
government against a rebellion backed by western mining companies and 
mercenaries in the mineral-rich Katanga region.

Hammarskjöld was flying to Ndola for peace talks with the Katanga leadership 
at a meeting that the British helped arrange. The fiercely independent Swedish 
diplomat had, by then, enraged almost all the major powers on the security 
council with his support for decolonisation, but support from developing 
countries meant his re-election as secretary general would have been virtually 
guaranteed at the general assembly vote due the following year.

Björkdahl works for the Swedish international development agency, Sida, but 
his investigation was carried out in his own time and his report does not 
represent the official views of his government. However, his report echoes the 
scepticism about the official verdict voiced by Swedish members of the 
commissions of inquiry.

Björkdahl concludes that:

• Hammarskjöld's plane was almost certainly shot down by an unidentified 
second plane.

• The actions of the British and Northern Rhodesian officials at the scene 
delayed the search for the missing plane.

• The wreckage was found and sealed off by Northern Rhodesian troops and 
police long before its discovery was officially announced.

• The one survivor of the crash could have been saved but was allowed to die 
in a poorly equipped local hospital.

• At the time of his death Hammarskjöld suspected British diplomats secretly 
supported the Katanga rebellion and had obstructed a bid to arrange a truce.

• Days before his death, Hammarskjöld authorised a UN offensive on Katanga – 
codenamed Operation Morthor – despite reservations of the UN legal adviser, to 
the fury of the US and Britain.

The most compelling new evidence comes from witnesses who had not previously 
been interviewed, mostly charcoal-makers from the forest around Ndola, now in 
their 70s and 80s.

Dickson Mbewe, now 84, was sitting outside his house in Chifubu compound west 
of Ndola with a group of friends on the night of the crash.

"We saw a plane fly over Chifubu but did not pay any attention to it the first 
time," he told the Guardian. "When we saw it a second and third time, we 
thought that this plane was denied landing permission at the airport. Suddenly, 
we saw another aircraft approach the bigger aircraft at greater speed and 
release fire which appeared as a bright light.

"The plane on the top turned and went in another direction. We sensed the 
change in sound of the bigger plane. It went down and disappeared."

At about 5am, Mbewe went to his charcoal kiln close to the crash site, where 
he found soldiers and policemen already dispersing people. According to the 
official report the wreckage was only discovered at 3pm that afternoon.

"There was a group of white soldiers carrying a body, two in front and two 
behind," he said. "I heard people saying there was a man who was found alive 
and should be taken to hospital. Nobody was allowed to stay there."

Mbewe did not forward with that information earlier because he was never asked 
to, he said. "The atmosphere was not peaceful, we were chased away. I was 
afraid to go to the police because they might put me in prison."

Another witness, Custon Chipoya, a 75-year-old charcoal maker, also claims to 
have seen a second plane in the sky that night. "I saw a plane turning, it had 
clear lights and I could hear the roaring sound of the engine," he said. "It 
wasn't very high. In my opinion, it was at the height that planes are when they 
are going to land.

"It came back a second time, which made us look and the third time, when it 
was turning towards the airport, I saw a smaller plane approaching behind the 
bigger one. The lighter aircraft, a smaller jet type of plane, was trailing 
behind and had a flash light. Then it released some fire on to the bigger plane 
below and went in the opposite direction.

"The bigger aircraft caught fire and started exploding, crashing towards us. 
We thought it was following us as it chopped off branches and tree trunks. We 
thought it was war, so we ran away."

Chipoya said he returned to the site the next morning at about 6am and found 
the area cordoned off by police and army officers. He didn't mention what he 
had seen because: "It was impossible to talk to a police officer then. We just 
understood that we had to go away," he said.

Safeli Mulenga, 83, also in Chifubu on the night of the crash, did not see a 
second plane but witnessed an explosion.

"I saw the plane circle twice," he said. "The third time fire came from 
somewhere above the plane, it glowed so bright. It couldn't have been the plane 
exploding because the fire was coming on to it," he said.

There was no announcement for people to come forward with information 
following the crash, and the federal government did not want people to talk 
about it, he said. "There were some who witnessed the crash and they were taken 
away and imprisoned."

John Ngongo, now 75, out in the bush with a friend to learn how to make 
charcoal on the night of the crash, did not see another plane but he definitely 
heard one, he said.

"Suddenly, we saw a plane with fire on one side coming towards us. It was on 
fire before it hit the trees. The plane was not alone. I heard another plane at 
high speed disappearing into the distance but I didn't see it," he said.

The only survivor among the 15 people on board the DC6 was Harold Julian, an 
American sergeant on Hammarskjöld's security detail. The official report said 
he died of his injuries, but Mark Lowenthal, a doctor who helped treat Julian 
in Ndola, told Björkdahl he could have been saved.

"I look upon the episode as having been one of my most egregious professional 
failures in what has become a long career," Lowenthal wrote in an email. "I 
must first ask why did the US authorities not at once set out to help/rescue 
one of their own? Why did I not think of this at the time? Why did I not try to 
contact US authorities to say, 'Send urgently an aircraft to evacuate a US 
citizen on secondment to UN who is dying of kidney failure?'"

Julian was left in Ndola for five days. Before he died, he told police he had 
seen sparks in the sky and an explosion before the crash.

Björkdahl also raises questions about why the DC6 was made to circle outside 
Ndola. The official report claims there was no tape recorder in the air traffic 
control tower, despite the fact that its equipment was new. The air traffic 
control report of the crash was not filed until 33 hours afterwards.

According to records of the events of the night, the British high commissioner 
to the Rhodesian and Nyasaland Federation, Cuthbert Alport, who was at the 
airport that evening, "suddenly said that he had heard that Hammarskjöld had 
changed his mind and intended to fly somewhere else. The airport manager 
therefore didn't send out any emergency alert and everyone simply went to bed."

The witness accounts of another plane are consistent with other insider 
accounts of Hammarskjold's death. Two of his top aides, Conor Cruise O'Brien 
and George Ivan Smith, both became convinced that the secretary general had 
been shot down by mercenaries working for European industrialists in Katanga. 
They also believed that the British helped cover up the shooting. In 1992, the 
two published aletter in the Guardian 
<http://archive.theguardian.com/Repository/ml.asp?Ref=R1VBLzE5OTIvMDkvMTEjQXIwMTgwMA==&Mode=Gif&Locale=english-skin-custom>
 spelling out their theory. Suspicion of British intentions is a recurring 
theme of the correspondence Björkdahl has examined from the days before 
Hammarskjöld's death.

Formally, the UK backed the UN mission, but, privately, the secretary general 
and his aides believed British officials were obstructing peace moves, possibly 
as a result of mining interests and sympathies with the white colonists on the 
Katanga side.

On the morning of 13 September the separatist leader Moise Tshombe 
<http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/COLDtshombe.htm> signalled that he was 
ready for a truce, but changed his mind after a one-hour meeting with the UK 
consul in Katanga, Denzil Dunnett.

There is no doubt that at the time of his death Hammarskjöld‚ who had already 
alienated the Soviets, French and Belgians, had also angered the Americans and 
the British with his decision to launch Operation Morthor against the rebel 
leaders and mercenaries in Katanga.

The US secretary of state, Dean Rusk, told one of the secretary general's 
aides that President Kennedy was "extremely upset" and was threatening to 
withdraw support from the UN. The UK , Rusk said, was "equally upset".

At the end of his investigation Björkdahl is still not sure who killed 
Hammarskjöld, but he is fairly certain why he was killed: "It's clear there 
were a lot of circumstances pointing to possible involvement by western powers. 
The motive was there – the threat to the west's interests in Congo's huge 
mineral deposits. And this was the time of black African liberation, and you 
had whites who were desperate to cling on.

"Dag Hammarskjöld was trying to stick to the UN charter and the rules of 
international law. I have the impression from his telegrams and his private 
letters that he was disgusted by the behaviour of the big powers."

Historians at the Foreign Office said they could not comment. British 
officials believe that, at this late date, no amount of research would 
conclusively prove or disprove what they see as conspiracy theories that have 
always surrounded Hammarskjöld's death.
 