
Most parents of small children will know that holidays with the kids aren't 
really holidays; they are just childcare with a better view. Squashing three, 
four or five people into one hotel room, where each snore or cry wakes everyone 
else, can make going away more exhausting than being at home.

And, until recently, if you wanted an affordable spot that was as comfortable 
as home, or had an ounce of style, you could forget about it. But times are 
changing, with the arrival of outfits such as Baby-Friendly Boltholes, with its 
mix of well-equipped rental cottages, farm stays and villas, and a collection 
of family-friendly hotels from romantic-getaway specialist Mr & Mrs Smith.

Another recent arrival offers a more novel approach – short stays in real 
family homes. Kid & Coe is the brainchild of Zoie Kingsbery Coe, wife of a 
hard-travelling DJ, who set it up last year when she realised standard hotel 
accommodation was ill-suited for family life, and couldn't find a holiday 
rental that had all the baby kit her family needed. The result is a collection 
of 300 homes in 68 destinations, from Cornwall to the Galapagos, with minimum 
stays of between one and seven nights, depending on location.

And these are not just any old homes: these allow you to live like a rather 
affluent native, with designer furniture, kitchens equipped with mini cutlery, 
and bedrooms/playrooms filled with toys. Listings on the company's website 
include information on everything from high chairs to laundry, but if you want 
more details before booking, you can contact the host via the site's messaging 
service.
 Living room, with swing, in the Wouwermanstraat house. Photograph: Binti Home 
Each booking then unlocks Kid & Coe's own travel guide, City Scout, with 
recommendations of where to shop, play and eat. Compiled by local families and 
owners, it's a personal black book of suggestions and advice.

Being keen on cycling, art and on a location reachable by train, we chose 
Amsterdam, and stayed in a beautiful wooden-floored property on 
Wouwermanstraat, a few minutes' walk, even at toddler pace, from the 
Rijksmuseum and leafy Vondelpark. That said, the array of toys in the basement 
playroom – and there are no toys better than the toys of another child – meant 
it was sometimes hard to drag our two out. The five-year-old was glued to the 
indoor swing, a design extravagence made all the more indulgent by the lengthy 
diversions it allowed for us to relax in the stylish living room.

The owners had left not only a couple of city guides, but a hand-drawn map of 
the cafe-rich local area, Amsterdam-Zuid, picking out their own favourite 
things to do and eat: apple pie and playgrounds featured heavily. They'd also 
left a note on the well-stocked fridge telling us to help ourselves. Given that 
the property has two king-size beds, two cots and a child's bed, two families 
could easily stay here easily and split the (admittedly hefty) cost. Along with 
their iBook, the owners also provided details of trustworthy babysitters, and 
responded instantly to a query about vegetarian restaurants nearby.
 Children's bedroom in Wouwermanstraat 
They also left us the use of their cargo bike. Cyclists, of course, rule in 
Amsterdam, and a new cycle lane runs through the middle of the Rijksmuseum. 
Rembrandt's The Night Watch had a helpfully soporific effect on the toddler, 
and the other galleries there – particularly the 17th-century dolls' houses – 
held our five-year-old's interest for a while, as did the Stedelijk modern art 
museum.

Amsterdam also provides the perfect diet for a growing child. Perfect, that 
is, if your ideal meal consists solely of carbohydrates: the Pancake Bakery has 
a menu whose size (79 varieties!) is only matched by that of the pancakes 
themselves. And as for that apple cake – our hosts directed us to Winkels, near 
the Central Station. The mere memory of it has me drooling now.
 Kate Carter's children in the Stedelijk museum Photograph: Kate Carter 
As always with family holidays, there was a certain amount of nostalgia for 
past activities: lingering in art galleries rather than sprinting through them, 
an afternoon drink, a browse of the tempting-looking independent fashion shops. 
We probably also left the five-year-old with some very confused ideas about the 
herbs sold by those funny-smelling shops and cafes. But looking back on five 
years' of holidays since two became three, then four, this was an infinitely 
more relaxing experience than any previous trips.

• Accommodation was provided by Kid and Coe (+ 1 212 905 6065, kidandcoe.com 
<https://www.kidandcoe.com/destinations/amsterdam>). The Wouwermanstraat house 
costs from €330 a night, plus a €50 cleaning fee (two-night minimum stay), but 
properties in Amsterdam start from €198 a night for a home sleeping five adults 
and two children, and homes elsewhere in Europe from €72 a night. Train travel 
was provided by Eurostar and Thalys (08432 186 186,eurostar.com 
<http://www.eurostar.com/uk-en?gclid=CMvJ7YS5ir4CFesSwwodPHYAIQ>), which has 
fares from London to Amsterdam via Brussels from £99 return. More information 
fromholland.com <http://www.holland.com/uk/tourism.htm>
 