
Britain’s biggest buy-to-let landlord, Fergus Wilson, says future investors 
will never be able to match the financial success he has enjoyed – and that 
landlords’ days in this country are numbered.

Fergus and his wife Judith bought nearly 1,000 homes in Ashford and Maidstone 
in Kent, but are now in the process of selling up. He reckons the much tougher 
lending criteria, with larger deposits and higher rental income requirements, 
will kill off the market for future buyers.

“It will be impossible to achieve in the future what Judith and I achieved. 
The constraints put on [buy to let] by the government will ensure that. It is 
keen to ensure there is never a repeat of 2008… it is being cautious, some will 
argue over-cautious. The days of the small buy-to-let landlord are numbered. 
Very many landlords are exiting because of restrictive tax conditions due to 
hit them.”

The number of houses bought with buy-to-let mortgages is already slumping, 
according to the Council of Mortgage Lenders. Its economist, Bob Pannell, 
predicts a “fairly substantial” fall in buy-to-let lending in 2017, suggesting 
that 2015 may turn out to have been “peak buy to let” year.

“We are already at or past the peak for buy-to-let lending,” he says. “We are 
currently running at around 6,000 new purchases a month using buy-to-let 
mortgages, compared with 10,000-11,000 in the corresponding period last year. 
The combination of a tightening in lending criteria and changes to tax relief 
are the key drivers.”

Theresa May has picked up George Osborne’s baton and is proceeding to bash 
landlords with renewed vigour
Paul Smith, chief executive of haart 
Paul Smith, chief executive of the haart chain of estate agents, says the 
number of buy-to-let transactions has tumbled 63% this year, amid what he calls 
a “war on landlords”.

“The scale of decline in buy to let in just 12 months is deeply worrying – 
landlords have clearly pulled out of the market and are unlikely to return any 
time soon. This is entirely the result of government policy, with Theresa May 
picking up George Osborne’s baton and proceeding to bash landlords with renewed 
vigour. The effect has been to more than halve the number of buy-to-let sales 
in England and Wales, and the inevitable consequence will be fewer properties 
available to renters next year, and higher rents.”

Buy-to-let lending will fall 20% next year, says Stuart Law, whose company 
Assetz has been among the biggest proponents of property investing. “Buy-to-let 
lending will be much lower in 2017 than 2016, perhaps 20% lower. The mortgage 
interest tax will lead to reduced borrowing in low-yield locations like London, 
and also lower mortgage loan-to-value levels generally. For landlords in 
London, selling up is already the reality.Property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/property> yields in the city are so low that 
some find themselves already subsidising their tenants even before all the tax 
changes come in. Beyond the M25, however, it’s another world.”

But at the CML, Pannell points out that only between 30%-40% of rented 
properties in the UK have a buy-to-let mortgage attached to them, and therefore 
won’t be affected by changes to tax relief.

Even landlords who are facing steep tax hikes may decide to carry on, because 
the alternatives are worse. Simon Rubinsohn, economist for the Royal 
Institution of Chartered Surveyors (Rics), says: “Yields have been compressed 
and returns aren’t as attractive as they were. But when you look at the 
alternatives, landlords do not find any greater comfort from the idea of 
putting their money in the banks or on the stock market.”

Research by Rics in August found that most landlords said the tax changes 
would make no difference to their plans, but the proportion saying they would 
decrease their property portfolios over five years was 40%.

At the Intermediary Mortgage Lending Association, director Peter Williams 
shares the view that landlords will stay in the market. “While the changes are 
significant, residential property remains an attractive investment – rents tend 
to rise at least in line with inflation. Though a minority of landlords may 
sell up as a result of the changes, this is unlikely to be as widespread as 
many believe.”

The good news for tenants is that the tax changes could dampen property 
speculation and create a fairer market, according to Dan Wilson Craw of 
campaign groupGeneration Rent <http://www.generationrent.org/>. “The government 
has recognised that the appeal of buy-to-let investment is not only making it 
harder for people to buy their first home, but is drawing capital away from 
productive parts of the economy, such as job-creating businesses and building 
new homes.

“Both the stamp duty surcharge and withdrawal of tax relief will reduce the 
incentives for borrowing heavily to speculate on house prices, and help create 
a fairer housing market.”

But he says much more needs to be done to protect existing tenants. “While 
first-time buyers will enjoy a more favourable market, the tax changes won’t 
make the slightest difference to the chronic instability of the private rented 
sector. The government now has to help those who are stuck renting for years to 
come, with protections from unfair evictions and much greater investment in 
social housing.”

The big unknown is how rents will behave. At estate agency Jackson-Stops and 
Staff, Nick Leeming is not sure that landlords will be able to push up rents 
much. “Supply and demand is a crucial factor in setting the level of rent, and 
this will be the overriding consideration in landlord decisions to increase 
rent or otherwise. We are actually finding that, in general, tenants are 
increasingly savvy, willing to look around and unwilling to pay over the odds 
on rent. The burden passed on to tenants will therefore need to be limited for 
landlords’ properties to be competitive.”

But the Residential Landlords Association reckons that rent rises are 
inevitable. Policy director David Smith says: “These changes will simply place 
an upward pressure on rents which in the end will only cause difficulties for 
tenants.”

Stuart Law puts it more bluntly. “It is unquestionable that landlords will 
pass these new tax costs on to tenants. In my view it isn’t even a matter for 
debate. In buy-to-let circles this retrospective mortgage interest tax is at 
best unethical, or at worst taking people’s hard earned retirement income – and 
it’s not known as the ‘tenant tax’ for nothing. If they have to pay more it is 
crystal clear that this cost will end up hitting tenants, not landlords.”

 * On Saturday: How the tax landlords pay could double or even triple 
 