
Michael Sharp, the chief executive of Debenhams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/debenhams>, is to quit the department 
store group after pressure from institutional investors.

Sharp, who first joined in 1997 and became chief executive in 2011, has been 
under fire followinga string of poor results and profits warnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/13/debenhams-share-fall-disappointing-sales>
 in recent years. Cenkos, the City broker, has been agitating recently for 
change at the group.

Sharp has not formally resigned and will continue in his post through the 
crucial Christmas period. He said he wanted to leave in 2016 and will stay on 
until a successor has been appointed.

News of his departure came as the group announced its first rise in annual 
pre-tax profits for four years. Profits were up 7% to £113.8m, following a21% 
dive last year to £110.3m. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/23/debenhams-profits-department-store>

Sharp said: “I hope being transparent about my intentions will stop recent 
speculation becoming a distraction, allowing me and the Debenhams team to focus 
on delivering our strategy and on the important Christmas trading period.”

Sharp said he had always intended to serve a five-year term at the retailer. 
“I’m two months into my fifth year and this has always been my plan. We have a 
strong management team and our strategy is clearly working,” he said.

He added that his departure would not mark a change in strategy and that he 
was tempted to stay but had always made clear to the board that he only planned 
to do five years. “These jobs are very demanding and that needs to be taken 
into account when you embark on a role like this,” Sharp said.

He denied that shareholders had pressed him to quit. “This is all about me 
sticking to my original plan,” he said.

The outgoing chief executive said the succession plan would involve a full and 
transparent selection process for a replacement to run the group and that he 
would stay on to settle his successor into the role. Both internal and external 
candidates will be considered.

Sharp said the group had delivered a good set of results that meant it was 
well positioned ahead of the run-up to Christmas. The company has cut out 42 
promotional days over the past 18 months, as it tries to wean its customers off 
heavy discounts. It has invested in new own-brands and put in new cafe areas.

Eight Sports Direct departments have also been installed as part of plans to 
redesign 1m sq ft of poorly performing space in Debenhams stores.

Sharp said Debenhams hoped Black Friday would be a bigger sales day this year 
as it was a payday and fell within the retailer’s annual Big Gift Event 
four-day promotion.

“Last year, we saw uplift across all categories, with beauty and gifting 
particularly strong. It kickstarted the Christmas gifting campaign and we 
expect to see a similar shape this year,” he said.
 