
The boss of Debenhams <https://www.theguardian.com/business/debenhams> has 
warned that the government’s plans for a further round of deep spending cuts 
are weighing on consumer confidence despite the apparent health of the economy.

Michael Sharp, the retailer’s chief executive, said that although customers 
are starting to feel better off they are cautious about spending because of the 
government’s gloomy tone and its decision to stick with plans for £12bn of 
welfare cuts.

Announcing the department store group’s recent trading figures, he said: “When 
I sit down and talk to customers, they recognise that energy is cheaper and 
it’s cheaper to fill the car and their weekly budget for food is going further, 
which is great bearing in mind that not long ago there was 5% inflation [for 
food].

“The government has done quite a good job of positioning itself on the need 
for further austerity. Everyone is very aware of the £12bn cuts that are talked 
about. They see the positive [economic] indicators but ... they pick up 
messages that say things are going to remain tough for a while, and that 
influences their feelings about their own financial situation.”

Some economists, including the former Bank of England rate setter David 
Blanchflower, have said the government’s insistence on sticking to its 
manifesto pledge for £12bn of cuts will damage economic confidence. 
Blanchflower has compared the effect to the slowdown that followed the 
chancellor’s warnings about the dire state of the economy early in the last 
government.


Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the TUC, said: “We can be pretty certain 
that cuts will damage consumer confidence and spending, especially the extreme 
cuts the government is planning to tax credits for working families with 
children. Similar cuts in the last parliament did so much damage that the 
economy only narrowly escaped a second recession. What the economy really needs 
is investment in skills, infrastructure and decent public services. This would 
support more of the well-paid and secure jobs that are desperately needed.”

May’s retail sales figures increased by just 0.2% despite annual wage growth 
picking up to 2.7% with inflation close to zero after a plunge in oil prices. 
Growth in the wider economy slowed to 0.3% in the first three months of the 
year.

Sharp said: “[Customers] are saying they are aware of the positive indicators 
but they are also aware of the messages coming from the government that there 
is still work to do and on that basis they remain cautious.”

Chancellor George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> 
said last week he was planning to press ahead with welfare cuts despite 
pressure from some Conservative colleagues to slow the pace and concern from 
bodies, including the OECD, about the impact on the working poor. The Labour 
leadership candidate Andy Burnham has accused the government of frightening 
people with the threat of cuts.

Debenhams, which has struggled amid fierce competition in fashion retailing, 
announced solid third-quarter trading figures. In the 15 weeks to 13 June, 
which included a period of unseasonal cold weather, sales at stores open a year 
or more were unchanged.


Sharp said the flat performace was because Debenhams brought its “new season 
spectacular” sale forward into the first half of the year. The company said it 
was on track to meet forecasts for annual profit of about £110m.

Retail analyst Nick Bubb said analysts had expected like-for-like sales to 
have fallen by 1% or 2%. “On the face of it, despite the ominous share price 
dip to about 90p [on Wednesday], they have managed things surprisingly well,” 
Bubb wrote in a note.

Sharp said Debenhams had weaned itself off a reliance on discounts that gave 
the impression that goods were almost permanently on sale. Having reduced the 
number of days when the company advertises a sale he now wants to reduce the 
number of items reduced and vary the discounts.

The company’s shares rose almost 1% to 91p in early trading.
 