
The UK’s chief taxman has referred the parcel delivery giant Hermes to HM 
Revenue and Customs compliance officers following complaints by couriers that 
they are being paid at levels equivalent to below the “national living wage”.

The move follows a Guardian investigation that revealed some self-employed 
couriers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/18/hermes-couriers-paying-staff-less-than-living-wage>
 for the company, which delivers for retailers including John Lewis and Next, 
were taking homeless than minimum wage 
<https://www.gov.uk/national-minimum-wage-rates>.


Some 78 couriers subsequently made complaints to Frank Field 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/frank-field>, the chairman of the House 
of Commons work and pensions select committee.

Life as a Hermes driver: 'They offload all the risk on to the courier'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/18/life-as-a-hermes-driver-they-offload-all-the-risk-on-to-the-courier>
They set out how their self-employment meant they received no paid holidays or 
sick pay. They also said they risked losing work if they were unable to do 
their rounds because of ill health or for other reasons. Twenty more also 
claimed they should be considered employees rather than self-employed.

Hermes said HMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> had confirmed in 
2011 it was right to class its couriers as self-employed and said it is 
“committed to ensuring that our couriers receive earnings that are equivalent 
or higher than the national living wage”.

A spokeswoman for the company said Hermes: “We are confident in the legality 
of our self-employed courier model and we will cooperate fully with any 
investigation should there be one.”

Edward Troup, HMRC’s executive chairman, on Thursday told Field that he had 
passed about 100 reports from Hermes workers to “the appropriate compliance 
teams for consideration”.

He said: “If we find that companies have misclassified individuals as 
self-employed, we will take all necessary steps to make sure they pay the 
appropriate tax, national insurance contributions, interest and penalties.”

Troup made clear that he could not comment on individual cases, but said: 
“Individuals cannot be opted out of employment rights and protections, simply 
by calling them ‘self-employed’. We are committed to tackling false 
self-employment.”

In a parallel move, Jane Ellison, the financial secretary to the Treasury, 
said HMRC was also setting up a new “employment status and intermediaries” team 
and is “transforming its compliance approach” on issues including false 
self-employment.

She said: “The government takes false self-employment very seriously and is 
committed to taking strong action where companies, to reduce their costs, force 
their staff down routes which deny them the employment rights and benefits they 
are entitled to.”
 Jane Ellison’s letter 
Field said: “Clearly the government is girding its loins for a serious 
fightback against those companies trying to wriggle out of their obligation to 
pay the minimum wage by enforcing ‘self-employment’ on their workers.

“The prime minister has set companies the task of delivering a decent minimum 
for their workers, and companies now know they will be caught out if they 
jeopardise this effort.”

One Hermes courier in Manchester, Marie, 42, who estimates she earns £3.50 per 
hour after expenses, welcomed the moves. “I feel like we are now being listened 
to,” she said. “My customers are asking me if it’s true I am earning less than 
the minimum wage and when I say ‘yes’ they are disgusted.”
 Edward Troup’s letter. 
After the Guardian ran its initial investigation, Hermes invited couriers who 
believed they were being underpaid to request a review of their parcel delivery 
rates. Marie said she wrote to her bosses six weeks ago requesting a rise on 
her 45p per parcel rate, but has heard nothing back.

“I can’t be patient,” she said. “I am working for nothing. I am at the bottom 
end of the parcel rates.”

She said she was now looking for a second job to subsidise the expenses of 
working for Hermes, which have recently risen because of increases in petrol 
prices.

Hermes said that there was a system in place that allowed couriers who are not 
satisfied with the way a field manager handles their request to escalate it.

A Hermes spokeswoman said: “Three out of four of the pay rate cases that were 
reviewed by the service complaints panel in its first month received a rate 
increase. We also have an external independent ombudsman service that is able 
to make an independent decision on matters that are referred to it, and Hermes 
has committed to always accept the decision of the ombudsman.”

To find out more about supporting the Guardian’s own journalism by becoming a 
supporter, please clickhere 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_rjbHermes_footer>
 