 It is to the credit of their sex generally that females do not indulge in the 
grosser habits of the table so much as the men. But there is a practice very 
common among both sexes - that of drinking largely of hot tea - which is 
anything but a harmless one.
The tea itself, perhaps if taken moderately, is an innocent thing. But to take 
into the stomach, morning and evening, several cups of a very hot liquid - so 
hot that the drinkers are obliged to sip it, in order to get it down without 
scalding their throats - is a practice replete with mischief.

The stomach is in consequence much relaxed, and the digestive power sadly 
weakened, to the great promotion of nervous and other never-ending complaints. 
There are indeed some ladies who seem to think that the men are rather 
interested than otherwise, on beholding their little agitations and hearing the 
soft complaints of aching heads and disturbed nights: but they grievously 
deceive themselves. None but their apothecaries can listen with any sort of 
attention to such unavailing babble, however languishingly uttered.

If they wish to increase their own comfort and augment their influence with 
the other sex, they will carefully avoid every habit that tends to deprive them 
of their natural portion of strength, without which beauty soon disappears, and 
even the heart too becomes cold and selfish.

On this point, perhaps the opinions of one who moved in what is termed "the 
higher circles" will command attention, when the advice of an anonymous writer 
would be disregarded. Mr. Parne Knight, in his Inquiry into the Principles of 
Taste, says,

"No real weaknesses of mind or body ever excite love, but always either 
commiseration or contempt, which considered in the abstract, are nearly allied, 
and on these occasions generally mixed. In the human race, indeed, nature has 
formed the female weaker than the male and consequently a comparative degree of 
weakness is a characteristic of the sex, and of course one criterion of 
individual perfection.

"For in such cases one can only judge particular perfections by their 
conformity to general characteristics.

"But ever that any individual woman appeared more amiable or more beautiful 
for appearing peculiarly weak either in mind or body is so far from being true, 
that the almost universal suffrage of the other sex will attest the direct 
contrary and proclaim activity, as well as health of body, to be one of the 
first incentives to desire: and vigour, as well as sensibility of mind, to be 
one of the first incentives to esteem and mental affection."
 