
It is completely impossible to interview Diane von Furstenberg. It is almost 
as impossible to meet her without falling just a little bit in love with her. 
The first, because it is not in her nature to follow another person's lead, 
whether in conversation or in anything else, so instead of answering your 
questions she just tells whatever tale from her fabulous life she feels 
like telling; the second, for much the same reason.

We are sitting together on a yellow velvet sofa in the penthouse suite of a 
smart Munich hotel, balcony doors open to a breeze drifting in over the red 
gothic rooftops. She puts her glasses on to get a better look at me, then leans 
back and props her feet – nude fishnets, high-heeled sandals – on the coffee 
table, and tells me about the time she told Oprah Winfrey that as a little girl 
she "didn't know what I wanted to do, but I knew the kind of woman I wanted to 
be – an independent woman, who drives her own cars and pays her own bills" – 
and how Oprah loved the story so much that Von Furstenberg has named her 
forthcoming memoirs The Woman I Wanted To Be, "because if Oprah thinks it's 
important, it's important, right?"
 A Von Furstenberg wrap dress on the new York catwalk in 1975. Photograph: 
Nick Machalaba/Cond Nast Archive/Corbis 
Then she tells me about the time she was having breakfast with Anna Wintour. 
"I was having a lousy day, and I asked Anna: 'Do you ever have a day when you 
wake up and feel like a loser?' And she said: 'Sure, all the time.' Which made 
me feel a little better ..." And then she tells me about the first time she 
posed forAndy Warhol <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/andywarhol> in 
1973, and how he wanted a white background and her apartment was all colour and 
print, so she squeezed into the only white space available, in the kitchen next 
to the refrigerator, and there wasn't room to stand straight, which is why she 
is posing with one arm twisted above her head in that picture.

It is the Warhol connection that brings us to Munich. Von Furstenberg is the 
first in a series of Designer Conversations, curated by theMyTheresa.com 
<http://www.mytheresa.com/> fashion boutique in order to give their online 
fashion consumers a look into the minds and lives of the people behind the 
brands. The evening after our afternoon on the sofa, MyTheresa's creative 
director, ex-Grazia fashion editor Paula Reed, will host a dinner in Von 
Furstenberg's honour at the city'sMuseum Brandhorst 
<http://www.museum-brandhorst.de/en.html>, home to over 100 Warhol pieces 
<http://www.museum-brandhorst.de/en/collection-brandhorst/andy-warhol.html> in 
its permanent collection – and, in honour of DVF's visit, a pop-up display of 
wrap dresses in the foyer. There, Reed will remind the assembled guests – 
German Vogue editors, minor European royals, DVF staffers – how Von Furstenberg 
"participated in every pop cultural moment of the past 40 years, built her 
business from scratch not one but three times, and all while raising two 
children."

The DVF story is fashion's favourite fairytale. The free-spirited young 
European princess who arrived in New York in the early 1970s and made her 
fortune with a dress, was on the cover of Newsweek before she was 30, then lost 
her way in business, moved to Paris, divorced and remarried, staged a comeback 
in her 50s and now helms a business more successful than ever, with 85 stores 
worldwide. The year 2014 is yet another significant date, in a life with more 
than its share of landmarks. The 40th anniversary of the wrap dress has been 
celebrated with an exhibition in Los Angeles, and November sees the publication 
of her memoirs.

"The wonderful thing about ageing," she says, "is that you have a past. In 
fact the only thing I don't like about ageing is the way I look. I don't wear a 
wrap dress any more, because I don't have the waist, and I don't like that." 
Actually, she looks great. She has fabulous legs, and the kind of face that 
hollows with age rather than sags, so that her fine bone structure is even more 
striking than when she was young; she softens the effect with a halo of coppery 
hair and lots of glinting gold jewellery, all of which enhance her deeply 
tanned skin. She looks amazing, and I tell her so. "No. It's not true. I don't 
look amazing. But I haven't touched my face." Really? Nothing? No Botox, no 
fillers? "No. Nothing. I haven't done anything at all, which is why I look how 
I look. But apart from the looks, I get better. I'm smarter, I'm more aware, 
I'm kinder."
 Munich’s Museum Brandhorst features a pop-up display of wrap dresses in 
honour of Von Furstenberg's visit. Photograph: Gisela Schober/Getty Images for 
mytheresa.com 
The wrap has stayed alive and relevant for four decades because what it stands 
for – a woman dressing for freedom and movement and self-determination – is as 
compelling now as it ever was. In the early days, Von Furstenberg airily 
extolled the joys of a zipless dress which you could slip on quietly when you 
wanted to make a swift exit without disturbing a sleeping man. That boldness 
still feels ahead of its time in 2014, when the "walk of shame" is the butt of 
many a joke. "That's what my brand does," she says. "We sell confidence." 
Confidence comes from comfort, as much as from glamour. She notes that it is 
female designers – "Coco Chanel, Donna Karan, me" – who dress women in jersey, 
"because we know it feels great and lets you get on with your day, and we care 
about that." She is a unique combination of being ultra-feminine with a 
distinct feline slink to her walk, but comfortable being in charge and entirely 
without coquetry. In the introduction to her book, she tells how, as a girl 
revising for exams, she would pretend she had students, and imagine herself 
teaching them. Passivity bores her; what's more, she says, "idleness breeds 
insecurity. It's so important for women to have children but it is equally 
important for women to have an identity outside the home. You have to be 
engaged, you have to be part of the world. … It doesn't have to be a job. It 
can be that you bake [sic] the best jam in the world and everyone wants a piece 
of your jam. What matters is doing something."

For most of the wrap's 40 years, Von Furstenberg "took that dress for granted, 
even though it paid my bills, paid for my children's education, my apartment on 
Fifth Avenue and my house in the country. To be honest, sometimes I even 
resented it. But now, finally, I see: this dress is actually bigger than me. I 
am just a conduit for the dress. … It is so much the essence of my brand. I 
became who I am, because of that dress, because the dress is everything my 
brand stands for." I want to ask her about her own memories of the dress, but 
she starts to uncross and recross her legs, an impatient gesture I have 
identified as a "tell" for not-interested-let's-move-on, and then she starts 
firing questions at me instead; how old am I? Do I have children? How old are 
they? What does my editor think about the (recently announced, just minutes 
before our interview) acquittal of Rebekah Brooks?

She has recently appointed Michael Herz, a British designer initially hired to 
curate the wrap dress exhibition, as artistic director of her label. "I am 
working on adding great talent and professionalism in all areas of the company. 
I thought I would retire by 30, and I'm 67 and I'm working harder than ever. 
But that's because this is the last stage of my work. I have built something 
big, and now I need to carve the DNA really deeply into it, because I am 
planning for a time after me." Is she talking about retiring? A change at DVF – 
whether a stock-market flotation or outside investment – is rumoured to be on 
the cards, but fashion designers are sensitive on the subject of retirement. 
(Giorgio Armani, 80 next week, refuses to discuss the notion.) She demurs. 
"Well ... it's not about retirement, right now the company needs me, but I am 
planning for a time after me. I am very involved in my women's causes (for six 
years she has been active on the board ofVital Voices 
<http://www.vitalvoices.org/>, a global organisation to support female leaders) 
and that will never stop. That, I will be doing until I die."
 The 40th anniversary of the wrap dress has been celebrated with an exhibition 
in Los Angeles entitled 'Journey of a Dress'. Photograph: Michael Buckner/Getty 
Images for Diane Von Furst 
Last year, she wrote an article for the New York Times celebrating the digital 
revolution <http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/28/opinion/fashions-latest-muse.html>
. "Sometimes people my age still say: 'I don't do email, my assistant handles 
it,' and I tell them: 'You can't say that. It ages you.'" She has an iPad with 
a DVF chain-link cover (she proudly shows me the Guardian on her Newsstand) and 
an iPhone case with inbuilt knuckle-duster, with which she snaps photos of my 
blouse – a vintage DVF twig-print in apple green – and emails them to her team 
in New York. "I am so lucky," she says. "Old enough to have danced at Studio 
54, young enough to be involved in the first design collaboration with Google, 
when we did Google Glass." Working on the 40th anniversary 'Warhol' editions of 
the wrap dress made her think about "how Andy Warhol was a visionary. The world 
of branding, the iconography of the modern age. He was so, so far ahead of his 
time. He was making reality shows, decades before anyone else knew what they 
were. Can you imagine what he would have done with Instagram? Those were 
extraordinary times, the 70s. As exciting as right now. Not more exciting, 
though. Now is great."
 