
For nearly a decade I was a Labor MP in the NSW parliament. One of the very 
first things I learned was that we were never, ever, ever permitted to leave 
the parliament without the whip’s approval. It didn’t matter if you were 
attending your mother’s funeral or popping out for dinner, if the whip hadn’t 
signed you out, you weren’t going anywhere.

For a year or so after retiring from politics, I would still get the urge to 
call the whip’s office and ask if it was OK to duck out for a coffee or a 
sandwich.

For the life of me, I can’t understand how the Turnbull government, with just 
a one-seat majority, seemed to have no process in place to ensure that it could 
always win a vote on the floor of the parliament. And boo-hoo to thoseCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> MPs who are calling 
Labor’s parliamentary tactics, like moving a motion just before parliament 
finishes, a “stunt”. If parliament is sitting, it is sitting. Stay there and do 
your damn jobs.

Sam Dastyari denies different stance on South China Sea amid donations row
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/05/sam-dastyari-donation-row-coalition-steps-up-attack-on-bill-shorten>
By the way, don’t you love the irony that the people who want to cut penalty 
rates, which primarily benefit low-income workers, also think it’s just fine to 
nick off out of their $200,000-a-year jobs early on a Thursday afternoon?

You bet they do. You bet I am.

Speaking of Tony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott>, sources close to the 
former PM told my Sky News colleague Peter van Onselen – via a text message 
sent while we were live on air, no less – that, as prime minister, if he had to 
be away from parliament, Mr Abbott always had a pair. (And by that, I mean a 
registered and excused absence, reciprocated by the opposition).

Mr Abbott didn’t miss a vote on Thursday afternoon either. Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> did miss a vote. 
Turnbull missed the 4.15 division, which the government won by one vote. 
Subsequent inquiries confirmed two things: one, that Turnbull was giving a 
speech at the time, and two, that Turnbull didn’t have a pair.

Makes you think. 

You know what else Abbott and his treasurer Joe Hockey could do that their 
successors Turnbull and Morrison can’t? Maths.

Yep, say what you will about the 2014 budget of horrors, but one thing you 
can’t say is that it didn’t add up. The measures were woeful and unfair and now 
destined to exist as zombies, not allowed to live, but not able to be killed 
off by their creators.

But the maths was correct.

Not so for Messrs Turnbull and Morrison. What a pair these two are. Their 
omnibus savings bill – their big idea, their big stab at budget savings, their 
big stick to whack at the opposition – didn’t add up. It was off by $107m! And 
this wasn’t some buried detail on page 362. This was in a summary table on page 
five. Page five!

Let’s consider how many eyes in the Turnbull government supposedly reviewed 
this bill: treasurer Morrison and his staff; the prime minister and his staff; 
the cabinet, who would have approved it; the Coalition party room, who would 
have approved it.

Apparently none of these people own calculators. Or read beyond page four.

It took the opposition’s economic team, led by Jim Chalmers and Chris Bowen, 
less than a day to find the $107m error. In fact, the opposition noticed it the 
night before in a draft of the legislation they were provided by the 
government, and just assumed it was a typo that would be fixed in the final 
legislation.

It was that unfathomable to the opposition that the government, with all those 
eyes looking at its legislation, had actually made a “computational error”. But 
that’s exactly what Morrison called it the next day after he was forced to 
admit the mistake – a computational error. This may makeScott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison> the first treasurer 
in Australian history to openly acknowledge that maths is not his strong suit.

On political donations, Canberra is sleepwalking into its own integrity crisis 
| Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/01/on-political-donations-canberra-is-sleepwalking-into-its-own-integrity-crisis>
One person who can add up fairly accurately is Labor senator Sam Dastyari. We 
already know his facility with numbers, given the success of Labor leadership 
challenges mark I (Gillard) and mark II (Rudd). Senator Dasher is devastatingly 
accurate when it comes to paying his bills, securing a Chinese-Australian 
company to pay his very specific electorate overspend allowance of $1670.82 
(which he did declare).

Imagine if we could channel that kind of diligent precision to the budget 
deficit.

Why did the senator get a Chinese-linked company to pay his bills? I’d rather 
try to explain something simpler, like how there are three persons in one in 
the Holy Trinity, or how it is that Saint Mother Teresa cured a woman of her 
cancer.

Really, I would rather that Senator Dastyari explain this, in more detail, 
than he has to date. And really, really, I would prefer that Australian 
parliamentarians decided to ban foreign political donations altogether.

Maybe one day they will.

But for next sitting week, let’s set some realistic goals for our federal MPs. 
Let’s try to stay at work until parliament finishes, and get our numbers to add 
up correctly. And don’t forget that all members, including prime ministers, 
still need a pair.
 