
The French luxury group LVMH has agreed to sell Donna Karan International, the 
parent company of the New York labelDKNY 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/dkny>, to the US clothing firm G-III 
Apparel Group.

 The sale, which values the lossmaking fashion brand at $650m (£496m), comes 
just over a year after the introduction of a new design team, showing how 
little patience LVMH has for underperforming businesses in the current tough 
trading environment.

 Analysts estimate DKNY’s annual sales at $450m–$500m, meaning G-III will pay 
1-1.5 times annual revenue, less than the 1.9 times LVMH paid when it bought 
the brand in 2001.

 “Selling DKNY is a way to get rid of a problem at a time when the market is 
tough and luxury companies would be right to show less leniency with 
underperforming businesses,” said Luca Solca, an analyst at Exane BNP Paribas.

Donna Karan's greatest fashion achievements
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jul/01/donna-karans-greatest-fashion-achievements>
 Founded in 1984 by Donna Karan, the label came to define the professional 
working woman’s wardrobe with its sleek and sophisticated mix-and-match pieces. 
The designer expanded the Donna Karan New York brand by creating a less 
expensive clothing line for younger women called DKNY.

 Over time, the Donna Karan brand lost touch with its customers as its 
brightly patterned African-inspired designs confused an identity based on 
jersey dresses, bodysuits and wrap skirts, fashion editors said.

 And sister label DKNY struggled to compete with so-called accessible luxury 
brands Michael Kors and Tory Burch and edgier New York newcomers such as 
Alexander Wang.

 LVMH publishes its first-half figures on Tuesday, which analysts expect will 
show further evidence of the slowdown affecting the global luxury goods 
industry, caused in part by lower tourist spending in Europe after a series of 
terrorist attacks.

The luxury conglomerate also faces pressure to turn around Marc Jacobs, which 
has seen its sales dive in the past two years. Analysts estimate Marc Jacobs 
makes even bigger losses than DKNY.


 However, the two companies’ losses have not been so material to make it a 
priority for the group, which owns 70 brands and generates €4bn in annual net 
profit.

 G-III owns brands such as Vilebrequin and Andrew Marc and makes clothing for 
Calvin Klein, Tommy Hilfiger and Karl Lagerfeld among others. It will fund the 
deal through new debt and $75m of G-III common stock to be issued to LVMH.
 