
A "restrained, sparely written" debut novel by a Dutch author and part-time 
gardener has beaten Marilynne Robinson's Orange prize-winning Home and Joseph 
O'Neill's Booker-longlisted Netherland to win the world's richest prize for a 
single literary work, the InternationalImpac Dublin literary award 
<http://www.impacdublinaward.ie/>.

Gerbrand Bakker's The Twin (Boven is het stil), in which protagonist Helmer is 
forced to return to his family's small farm in the bleak Dutch countryside 
after his twin brother dies in a car accident, was named winner of the €100,000 
Impac prize in Dublin this evening. The award is unique in that public 
libraries around the world nominate titles they think should win – The Twin was 
proposed by libraries in Amsterdam, The Hague, Utrecht and Eindhoven – after 
which an international judging panel select the winner, this year from a 
shortlist of eight.

In Dublin to receive his prize, Bakker said he "had to lie down for a while" 
after hearing that he'd won the award. "It's wonderful," he said. "But for me 
it was also wonderful to read the book in English – I said to David [Colmer] 
the translator: 'Who wrote this book?' I didn't recognise it, I thought it was 
very good. It made me realise it really is a book, and I am a writer." The 
€100,000 (£83,000) award money will be divided between Bakker and Colmer, with 
Colmer receiving €25,000.

Acclaimed English author Anne Fine sat on this year's judging panel, which 
said The Twin "convinces from first page to last". "Though rich in detail, it's 
a sparely written story, with the narrator's odd small cruelties, laconic 
humour and surprising tendernesses emerging through a steady, well-paced, 
unaffected style," said the judges. "With quiet mastery the story draws in the 
reader. The writing is wonderful: restrained and clear, and studded with detail 
of farm rhythms in the cold, damp Dutch countryside."

The Twin is the third debut novel in a row to win the Impac, following Michael 
Thomas's Man Gone Down last year, and Rawi Hage's De Niro's Game in 2008. The 
idea for the book came to Bakker on a holiday in Corsica in 2002. Hiking 
through the mountains, he had the idea of a son "who was going to do something 
terrible to his father".

"It stayed in my mind for months and I got so frustrated – nothing was 
happening with the idea. Then I just sat down and got writing. I didn't know 
where I was going, I just started – for me that's a good way to write," he said.

Bakker became a licensed gardener in 2006 and also works during the winter as 
a skating instructor, but says that these days he makes enough money to be a 
full-time writer. "I became a gardener in 2006 when I thought I had to learn 
something so I can always make money, and I still do as much work as I can," he 
said. "The two things work well together. In the autumn when I rake the dead 
leaves I can do it for hours – once I even disturbed a pile I'd made so I could 
go on raking. The sound is so wonderful: it lets you think in a subconscious 
way, in the back of your mind."

As for the huge cheque he'll be taking away this evening, Bakker thinks he 
might buy a horse. "Not a race horse, but a cart horse, a work horse. In 
Holland we've got these huge grey horses which are very sweet and I would like 
to own one," he said. "I'm not a rider but I just love these big beasts. 
They're so kind. You can lie on top of them every day for 10 minutes, not ride 
them – and then feed them a carrot or 10."

The International Impac Dublin literary award is organised by Dublin city 
libraries, and is open to novels written in any language, provided they have 
been published in English. This year 156 titles from 43 countries were put 
forward by 163 public libraries.
 