
A Dutch investigating magistrate has given police two weeks to question a drug 
dealer who may have caused the deaths of three British tourists in Amsterdam by 
selling them white heroin while passing it off as cocaine.

A court spokesman said on Tuesday that there were enough “serious 
reservations” about the unnamed 42-year-old man, who handed himself in to a 
central Amsterdam police station early on Saturday morning, to warrant his 
detention.

The suspect’s lawyer, Gerald Roethof, told De Telegraaf  
<http://www.telegraaf.nl/binnenland/23894120/__Cokekiller_blijft_nog_vast__.html>
that his client did not know what drug he was selling. He had “the shock of his 
life”, Roethof said, when he saw CCTV footage of himself in the media and 
learned he was wanted in connection with street sales of the drug, which have 
left 20 other foreign tourists needing emergency medical treatment over the 
past year.

“He immediately tried to trace his supplier, but was unsuccessful,” the lawyer 
told the paper. “That’s why he decided to give himself up.”

The images, broadcast last month on Dutch television, were recorded on a 
city-centre street in February on the day that three Danish tourists bought the 
drug, fell seriously ill, and had to be taken to hospital.

White heroin, which is historically produced in the “Golden Triangle” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/jun/27/burma.afghanistan> of south-east 
Asia, is typically both purer and more expensive than brown. It can prove fatal 
when inhaled, according to a spokeswoman for theJellinek addiction clinic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/16/dutch-scheme-reintegrate-alcoholics-beer-amsterdam>
: “Heroin is a depressant and cocaine a stimulant,” she told Dutch media.

“If people don’t know they are using heroin and lay out a line thinking it’s 
cocaine, there is a very high chance of overdosing. Their heartbeat and 
breathing can slow right down. They may fall into a semi-conscious state; they 
may end up inhaling their vomit; eventually, they may stop breathing and die of 
respiratory failure. Snorting white heroin can be fatal.”

The bodies of Britons Shaun Brotherston, 20, and Bradley Price, 21, were found 
in a hotel room in south Amsterdam last November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/28/british-tourists-died-white-heroin-amsterdam-cocaine-shaun-brotherston-bradley-price>
, less than a month after a third 22-year-old British tourist died in similar 
circumstances. The pair were lying next to a white powder, later identified as 
white heroin, which a police spokesman, Rob van der Veen, said they had “almost 
certainly” bought in the belief it was cocaine.

The deaths and hospitalisations – many patients needed resuscitation – 
prompted the city to launch a public awareness campaign. Posters in popular 
tourist areas, such as the Leidseplein, and English-language flyers in hotels 
and youth hostels warned young holidaymakers that people were suffering “severe 
health problems after using cocaine bought on the street”.

Electronic billboards carried stark messages such as “Extremely dangerous 
white heroin sold to tourists as cocaine”, while the justice ministry offered a 
€15,000 (£11,000) reward for information leading to the arrest of the dealer.

Defending the campaign, Amsterdam municipal council said the city saw “the 
safety of Amsterdammers, and the many thousands of tourists who visit our city, 
as our most important responsibility. In this situation, avoiding more victims 
takes precedence … over any negative impact on the city’s reputation.”

Although hard drugs are illegal in the Netherlands, many tourists, 
particularly young visitors, are drawn to Amsterdam’s famous coffee shops, 
where the sale of cannabis is tolerated.

The city’s mayor, Eberhard van der Laan, also defended a decision in December 
to allow teams of street workers and “smart shops” to start selling €2 heroin 
testing kits designed to quickly and clearly show the presence of heroin in 
drugs. “Not to do anything – that would be bad for the city,” he said.
 