
Ubisoft may well have just announced the end of the open-world action 
adventure as we know it. Ghost Recon: Wildlands, the latest title in the French 
publisher’s strategy-shooter series, is the first to take place in a freely 
explorable landscape. But instead of adopting the usual approach of providing a 
main through-line of story missions, backed up with side quests (as in games 
like Far Cry and Grand Theft Auto), Wildlands has no fixed narrative at all.

Instead, players – taking part alone or with three friends – will be able to 
travel the world’s nine different environments, taking on missions in any order 
they want. There are no cinematic sequences to drive the plot. A range of land, 
sea and air vehicles including helicopters, trucks, motorbikes and speedboats 
are available for navigation, and the landscape – based around Bolivia – is 
scattered with towns and villages to discover.

In a pre-E3 briefing, creative director Eric Couzian emphasised the sense of 
player freedom and environmental realism, claiming that every non-player 
character in the landscape will have their own motivations and agendas. “We 
want you to feel the thrill of exploration,” he said. “It’s a consistent world, 
and we wanted it to be as real as possible. We sent the team to Bolivia for two 
weeks to recreate it fully. We have worked with many experts, including 
military consultants and botanists. The world is alive: the enemies and 
civilians have their own lives, dictated by their jobs, the time of day and 
their faction. There is no script at all. We know that every player will have a 
different experience.”

Similarly to Far Cry 2, it seems players will be able to meet different 
military and political factions in the game, influencing their allegiances and 
behaviours along the way. “The choices you make will have an impact on the 
world in the medium- and long-term,” said Couzian. “You can manipulate the 
balance between the factions.”

It appears the game is taking a loose approach to co-op play. Participants can 
roam the world freely of each other, taking on different tasks, or meet up to 
collaborate on specific missions. Players can select their own weapons and 
vehicles, and then take on jobs at the locations and time they choose. “It’s 
new for the industry, a unique open world, military co-op shooter,” insisted 
Couzian.

In a behind-closed-doors demo, we see Ghost Recon soldiers battling through a 
series of environments from jungles to deserts and bare scrublands. Weather and 
ecosystems add to the authenticity. “The core of the game is the idea of 
getting rid of the script,” says senior producer Nouredine Abboud. “The thing 
is, this makes it very difficult to create demos. Even as the game’s producer, 
and having spent three years working on the game, I’ve rarely seen the same 
situation twice. In general, I think games are going to go more toward 
[systemic design]. We’d have liked to do this years ago but it wasn’t possible. 
Now for the first time we have machines that are capable.

“Does this mean we’ll see the end of scripted games? I can’t say that. But at 
the core of what we’re doing with Ghost Recon is the idea of putting the player 
back in control and avoiding a linear path.”

Speaking at the beginning of the presentation, Ubisoft Montreal’s chief 
executive, Yannis Mallat, spoke about the growing dominance of open-world 
games, and especially games that combine systems, such as intelligent enemies, 
ecosystems, day/night cycles and seamless co-op to produce emergent play. “Five 
out of the 10 best-sellers last year were open-world games,” he said. 
“Established brands like Witcher and Metal Gear Solid have gone open-world. 
We’re going to see bigger and more complex systemic worlds.

“We think the best games are built on solid systemic foundations. They will 
offer players an almost infinite combination of experiences.”

In development at Ubisoft’s Paris office, Ghost Recon: Wildlands currently has 
no release date.
 