
At the beginning of the new millennium, the international community made a 
commitment to achieve universal primary education for all boys and girls. 
Today, 15 years later, we find huge gaps between these commitments and reality.

What is the millennium development goal on education all about?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/23/millennium-development-goal-education-explainer>
Across the world, 58 million children still don’t have access to schools, 
particularly in sub-Saharan Africa and south Asia. Millions more fail to 
graduate, or fail to learn what they need toparticipate in society meaningfully.

Capitalising on the inability of governments to cope with rising demands on 
public learning, private education providers are mushrooming. I see this not as 
progress, but as an indictment of governments that have failed to meet their 
obligation to provide universal, free and high-quality education for all.

Education is not a privilege of the rich and well-to-do; it is the inalienable 
right of every child. The state must discharge its responsibility as guarantor 
and regulator of education as a fundamental human entitlement and as a public 
cause. The provision of basic education, free of cost, is not only a core 
obligation of states but also a moral imperative.

Privatisation cripples the notion of education as a universal human right and 
– by aggravating marginalisation and exclusion – runs counter to the 
fundamental principles of human rights law. It creates social inequity.

Education is not a privilege of the rich and well-to-do; it is the inalienable 
right of every child

The admission policy in private schools is based on the ability to pay, and on 
the socio-economic background of parents. As a result, private schools lack the 
diversified system of learning and cultural plurality that is so necessary 
today. They promote market economy values rather than the humanist mission of 
education.

Disturbingly, some in the international community are pushing for greater 
privatisation in education. The World Bank, a longstanding supporter of the 
approach, has recently been joined by other international bodies. At the end of 
2014, the African Development Bank, the UN Economic Commission for Africa, the 
African Union commission, and the UN Development Programme releaseda report 
<http://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Publications/MDG_Report_2014_11_2014.pdf>
 promoting increased private sector involvement in education. The study 
concluded that “Africa must build a vibrant private sector that supports the 
development of a dynamic primary education system”. This call has been echoed 
by some government officials in Africa and elsewhere.

In the 1980s and 90s, when developing countries first made significant cuts to 
their public health and education spending understructural adjustment 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Structural_adjustment>, international financial 
institutions, along with the largest donors, promoted user fees and increased 
private sector service delivery. The World Bank’s current policy of encouraging 
and supporting profit-seeking multinationals that provide education is a matter 
of serious concern, given the devastating impact this strategy has on the right 
to education.

As a recent Oxfam briefing paper has suggested, governments should not allow 
low-fee private schools, and should restore education as an essential public 
service. As private education becomes big business, learning must be protected 
from the forces of privatisation.

According to a study on private education 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/307032/Private-schools-2014.pdf>
 by the UK’s Department for International Development (DfID), a potentially 
very large number of low-fee private schools, which target poorer families in 
developing countries, are unregistered. These schools save costs by hiring 
ill-trained teachers and running large classes in substandard school buildings. 
Such “edu-businesses”, as they have come to be known, are an unsatisfactory 
replacement for the good public education governments should be providing.

Huge commercial publicity often tempts parents to opt for private schools in 
the expectation that their children will receive a better education. They 
believe that private schools are more efficient, and that competition improves 
outcomes.

However, such beliefs are rarely supported by evidence. The DfID study, for 
instance, suggests private schools do no better than state ones.

Uganda’s success in universal primary education falling apart | Alon Mwesigwa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/23/uganda-success-universal-primary-education-falling-apart-upe>
The cost of privatising education lies not just with school fees but also with 
the damage done to the public good. Fees, however small, hit the poorest and 
most vulnerable hardest. Sometimes, this means the oldest son receives an 
education while daughters stay at home. Inequalities in society grow when the 
poorest are excluded.

In the worst cases, corruption undermines the system. Headteachers may require 
special payments to accept students, and teachers may charge for private 
tutelage. We must constantly remind states of their obligation under human 
rights law to establish conditions and standards for private education 
providers, and of the need to maintain a transparent and effective system to 
monitor these standards, with sanctions for abusive practices.

Parents, community, teachersand students must be encouraged to speak out 
against the commercialisation of education, acting as vigilant observers and 
reporters of abusive practices. Governments must empower human rights 
institutions, watchdogs and other mechanisms to investigate alleged violations 
of the right to education.

 I’m not saying traditional public schools are the only solution. Community 
schools, locally organised and run with state support, can meaningfully 
complement government efforts to provide education and are an alternative to 
privatisation.

Ambitious goal of universal education needs $22bn annually | Mark Anderson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2015/mar/11/universal-education-shortfall-22bn-annually-unesco>
Governments must face the education challenge head on. Investment in education 
must be prioritised, using at least 4% of GDP, and reform priorities should be 
established with assistance from civil society and international donors, 
development banks and the UN.

Leaving these challenges to the private sector may seem easier. But when we 
ask what kind of world we want, we do not say one for those who have, and 
another for those who don’t. Let’s not create education systems that promote 
inequality – there is enough of that already. The international development 
agenda must aim to eliminate private schools, not champion them.



 * Kishore Singh is the UN special rapporteur on the right to education  