
Emma Pooley says it was “at best silly and careless” of Team Sky’s principal, 
SirDave Brailsford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dave-brailsford>, to 
guess at her whereabouts when questioned over a medical package.

Bradley Wiggins doctor will not travel to Road World Championships in Doha
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/cycling-team-sky-bradley-wiggins>
The Daily Mail reported on Thursday that UK Anti-Doping was investigating Team 
Sky and Sir Bradley Wiggins over the contents of a package allegedly delivered 
by British Cycling’s women’s team manager, Simon Cope, to Team Sky at the 
conclusion of the Critérium du Dauphiné stage race in France on 12 June 2011.

Ukad has said merely that it is investigating “allegations of wrongdoing 
within cycling” and two of its investigators met BritishCycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> staff at the Manchester Velodrome 
on Friday.

Brailsford had reportedly been asked by the Daily Mail to explain why Cope was 
in France on 12 June 2011 and the newspaper reported that Brailsford said Cope 
was there to see Pooley. But she was actually racing in the Basque country in 
Spain on that date, finishing fourth in the Iurreta-Emakumeen Bira stage race.

Pooley told cyclingnews.com: “The only thing I know is where I was on June 12 
[2011]and I absolutely was not meeting anyone from British Cycling, anywhere. 
Certainly not Simon Cope at La Toussuire.

“When you’re being questioned about something as important as this you 
shouldn’t just come out with guesses and, if it is an honest mistake, then he 
[Brailsford] should be checking his facts. It doesn’t matter to me. It just 
looks bad for them. It’s at best silly and careless.”

Team Sky welcomed the investigation by Ukad and is “confident there has been 
no wrongdoing” while it is understood that Wiggins and his representatives have 
received no notification from Ukad and believe the 36-year-old is not a subject 
of the investigation. Both Team Sky and British Cycling say they are 
co-operating with the investigation.

It is also understood that Team Sky and Brailsford have tried to ascertain the 
events of June 2011, gathering written statements from staff present at the 
time and documentation to piece together the events.

The evidence was for British Cycling and Ukad, which is investigating more 
than one allegation of “wrongdoing”; on Thursday there was one solitary claim. 
UKAD did not go into any detail about the allegations and mentioned no names.

The logistics surrounding a cycling team are complex and packages are 
regularly transported. Determining the contents of the specific package will be 
central to the investigation, which could take some time. The whereabouts of 
individuals will be important, too.

Lizzie Deignan wins women’s team time trial at Road World Championships
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/lizzie-deignan-wins-womens-team-time-trial-road-world-championships>
Pooley added: “Maybe it was an honest mistake. It’s clearly quite a serious 
issue because it’s about the perception of cycling and anti-doping. I’m the 
kind of person who keeps records of everything. I was at a stage race in Spain 
losing the yellow jersey on a descent in the rain. I can distinctly remember it 
because it was a bit of a disaster. I looked up my old training diary to see if 
I’d forgotten or anything and I’ve still got the flight numbers from how I got 
home.”

UkaD would not comment on what was discussed when its investigators met 
British Cycling representatives on Friday in order to “protect the integrity of 
the investigation” and would not disclose whether the meeting was pre-arranged 
or the result of an unannounced visitPA
 