 Who made the following statement while addressing a Make Poverty History rally 
in London in 2005? "Like slavery and apartheid, poverty is not natural. It is 
manmade and can be overcome and eradicated by the actions of human beings.”  
Bono  Nelson Mandela  Chris Martin  Hillary Clinton When was the target to 
halve extreme poverty achieved?  2001  2007  2010  It hasn’t been Which region 
is closest to achieving the targets on reducing poverty and hunger?  Latin 
America and the Caribbean  Oceania  South-east Asia  North Africa Which was the 
first sub-Saharan African country to achieve the goal of halving extreme 
poverty?  Nigeria  Ethiopia  Chad  Ghana In 2008 the World Bank revised the 
extreme poverty rate from $1 a day to what?  $0.75 a day  $1.25 a day  $1.50 a 
day  $2 a day Since 2000, aid from high-income countries has …  Fallen  Risen  
Stayed the same  Been withdrawn After India, which country has the greatest 
share of people living in extreme poverty?  Nigeria  Brazil  Bangladesh  China 
The UN general assembly agreed that high-income countries should provide what 
percentage of their gross national income as official aid?  0.1%  0.7%  1%  1.7%
Where do the majority of the world’s hungry people live?  Sub-Saharan Africa  
Asia  Latin America  Europe Which US president declared: “As the wealthiest 
nation on Earth, I believe the United States has a moral obligation to lead the 
fight against hunger and malnutrition, and to partner with others.”  Lyndon B 
Johnson  Jimmy Carter  Bill Clinton  Barack Obama  You got…  Take off that 
anorak and pour yourself a celebratory drink, you've just recorded a perfect 
score! Clearly you are an expert on the fight to end poverty  When it comes to 
battling poverty, you're just the kind of foot soldier the world needs. Great 
work! You really know your stuff  When it comes to battling poverty, you're 
just the kind of foot soldier the world needs. Great work! You really know your 
stuff  A noble effort. With a bit more work, your knowledge of global poverty 
will be up there with the best!  A noble effort. With a bit more work, your 
knowledge of global poverty will be up there with the best!  Bad news: you're 
really not impressing anyone with that score. Still, cheer up – you've got a 
whole 15 years to get to grips with the next set of global development goals. 
See you back here in 2030!  Bad news: you're really not impressing anyone with 
that score. Still, cheer up – you've got a whole 15 years to get to grips with 
the next set of global development goals. See you back here in 2030!  Bad news: 
you're really not impressing anyone with that score. Still, cheer up – you've 
got a whole 15 years to get to grips with the next set of global development 
goals. See you back here in 2030!  Seriously? You haven't really been paying 
attention for the past 15 years, have you? Luckily, we have the perfect 
solution: www.theguardian.com/global-development  Seriously? You haven't really 
been paying attention for the past 15 years, have you? Luckily, we have the 
perfect solution: www.theguardian.com/global-development  Seriously? You 
haven't really been paying attention for the past 15 years, have you? Luckily, 
we have the perfect solution: www.theguardian.com/global-development  Challenge 
your friends Submit answers  