
Since 23 June, we’ve heard a lot about how Brexit was won by disaffected 
voters in parts of the country that have lost out as the economy has changed 
over the last few decades: people who feel “left behind”, economically and 
socially. But so far we have heard little from the government on what it plans 
to do to about it.

Later this month, the autumn statement will provide the first outline of what 
Theresa May’s ambition to build a country that works for everyone means in 
practical terms. But there is another key moment to come before the end of 
November – the publication of Michael Heseltine’s estate regeneration strategy. 
Part of David Cameron’s legacy, estate regeneration was a cornerstone of his 
(now postponed) plans for a “life chances” strategy, Lord Heseltine has been 
working with a panel of experts to work out how best to spend £140m on 100 
estates around the country.

The aim to boost life chances is the right one – on some estates, such as 
Grange Park in Blackpool, the unemployment rate is double the local average. In 
Milton Keynes, life expectancy varies by up to 12 years between estates and the 
surrounding area. At the same time, many estates in London are relatively low 
density, so regeneration offers opportunities to build much needed new homes.

Our society has lost control of housing – here's how to get it back
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/oct/26/social-housing-crisis-local-control-economics>
The problem is that Heseltine’s panel has, on average, just £1.4m for each 
initiative it supports. To put that into context, the first phase of 
regeneration of Sheffield’s Park Hill estate required £39m of public funding 
and redevelopment of the Castle Vale estate in Birmingham was made possible by 
£198m of government support.

The current onus on commercial viability is likely to mean densifying estates 
and using new home sales to fund wider redevelopment. There is a real danger 
that this will entrench the north-south divide, leaving behind those places 
outside London and the south-east where redevelopment of this kind is not 
commercially viable, or where bricks and mortar regeneration is not the answer 
to concentrations of multiple disadvantage.

As we find in our report, Great Estates, 
<http://www.respublica.org.uk/our-work/publications/great-estates-putting-communities-heart-regeneration/>
 fresh thinking on housing estates could make a significant impact on millions 
of people around the country. A range of initiatives, from refurbishing homes, 
improving the public realm, and providing new community facilities, to 
delivering new forms of employment support, can significantly improve outcomes 
across the board.

In our study, we looked at 122 estates across England, from inner London and 
Dudley to Blackpool and Portsmouth. The common theme we identified is that by 
focusing on commercial viability, the government’s approach to regeneration 
will not help poorer communities outside London and the south-east.

The potential if we get it right is clear: we find that on 12 well-known 
estates alone where unemployment exceeds local levels, initiatives that bring 
unemployment in line with the local average would raise £140m for the Treasury 
to 2030 through extra income tax and national insurance revenue and jobseeker’s 
allowance savings – the same amount currently available in total for schemes on 
100 estates.

The role of social housing in Northern Ireland's divided communities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/oct/12/social-housing-northern-ireland-divided-communities-brexit>
This does not mean that the answer is simply more public funding. In Ladywood 
in inner Birmingham, for example, the council is working with a social 
enterprise to improve public sector delivery on its estates; and in Milton 
Keynes, the public and private sectors have come together to develop an 
innovative, community-led form of regeneration on seven of its most deprived 
estates. What these examples show is that the government has a role to play in 
unlocking other sources of funding such as social investment, and supporting 
collaboration between public and private sectors.

Estate regeneration when done well can transform places and raise life chances 
– and crucially start to heal the divides that the Brexit vote revealed. In the 
autumn statement we will see how strong the prime minister’s commitment to 
reconnecting left-behind communities across the north and the Midlands really 
is.

Edward Douglas is senior policy and projects officer at ResPublica

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 