
An NGO that uses music and radio to spread awareness about girls’ rights in 
Ethiopia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ethiopia> has lost its UK aid 
funding after a negative press campaign.

Girl Effect, which created a five-piece girl group, Yegna, described by the 
Daily Mail and the Telegraph as Ethiopia’s Spice Girls, said its aims had been 
“wilfully misrepresented”.

It says Yegna is a multi-platform brand, not merely a girl group, that 
addresses issues such as early forced marriage, violence and barriers to 
education through a radio drama, music, talkshows, and a YouTube channel.

Priti Patel gives UK aid suppliers 30 days to provide details of spending
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/19/priti-patel-gives-uk-aid-suppliers-30-days-to-provide-details-of-spending-international-development>
The shadow international development secretary, Kate Osamor, said headlines 
describing the group as simply a pop band were “sensationalist” and the money 
supplied to the group was part of a much wider campaign that was ignored in the 
reports.

“Sensationalist, headline-grabbing stories of waste and corruption have become 
an ever increasing staple of British newspapers over recent months,” Osamor 
said. “No policy, project or programme designed to improve the lives of 
destitute and marginalised people around the world seems exempt from rightwing 
media criticism.”

She said aid should not be “one size fits all according to what we in the west 
think is what is needed”.

The Department for International Development (DfID) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/department-for-international-development-dfid>
 said it had taken the decision to end its partnership with Girl Effect after a 
review of the programme, and had not been influenced by any newspaper campaign.

A spokesperson said: “Empowering women and girls around the world remains a 
priority, but we judge there are more effective ways to invest UK aid and to 
deliver even better results for the world’s poorest and value for taxpayers’ 
money.”

The loss of funding will be a big blow to the project, which has consistently 
been praised by DfID for its impact. It was initially created in 2011 by DfID 
in partnership with the Nike Foundation, which said Yegna aimed to “change the 
culture of Ethiopia in a good way, to explain the problems in the society”.

A spokesperson for the project said: “Partners like DfID broke new ground with 
us by investing in this cutting-edge work. DfID has consistently recognised 
Yegna’s impact, achieving an A grade in DfID’s annual evaluation for the last 
three consecutive years.”

Girl Effect says Yegna reach 8.5 million people, or 50% of the population in 
Addis Ababa and the Amhara region of Ethiopia, and help change the lives of 
some of the hardest-to-reach and most disadvantaged girls in the world.

Three-quarters of girls who listen to Yegna say the band have inspired them to 
continue their education and 95% of young male listeners say they would speak 
out against a girl being forced to marry, according to its evaluations.

The Daily Mail hailed the decision to stop funding on its front page on 
Saturday.

Leyla Hussein, a girl’s rights campaigner and founder of Dahlia’s Project, a 
therapy service for survivors of female genital mutilation, accused the paper 
of stoking a lynch mob mentality.

She said: “It’s really sad that the Daily Mail has reduced them to the 
Ethiopian Spice Girls, which is not what they are about, and it feels like a 
lynch mob, with the paper playing on people’s fears and spreading messages of 
hate.”

Hussein said she did not expect the money would be redirected to help address 
social problems in the UK, which is what many critics of the international aid 
budget often call for. “DfID is about international aid, not domestic, so 
you’re asking it to do the impossible. My hope is that they will redirect the 
money to a grassroots project with similar aims in empowering girls.”

The decision was also criticised by the British Ethiopian poet and broadcaster 
Lemn Sissay. Yegna have previously performed at events with him, he chose one 
of their tracks, Taitu, when he appeared on Desert Island Discs.

“The message of the song is about the empowerment of girls. If you watch the 
video, you’ll see the song is just as relevant to girls in Wigan as it is girls 
in the villages and cities of Ethiopia. This is not how they are being 
portrayed,” Sissay said.

“It’s really sad when this kind of thing happens. It’s like what happened to 
Camilla Batmanghelidjh. Suddenly everybody has an opinion and everyone thinks 
their opinion is right against what the money was being used for. And everybody 
suddenly becomes an expert on foreign aid. It seems like a really black and 
white issue but the relationship between the UK and Ethiopia goes back a long 
way.

“It’s wrong to let Yegna to hang out and dry. They were the babies of the 
British Council, the former British ambassador to Ethiopia and the Nike 
Foundation. They all brokered this deal for the betterment of Ethiopia.”

He hoped the attention would end up being positive for Yegna. “I think this is 
a great opportunity to get Yegna to come and perform over here. The funding has 
done its job and now they can take over the world,” he said.

The Tory MP David Nuttall welcomed the decision to cut funding. “The project 
is no doubt well intentioned but this is not the sort is spending my 
constituents expect our aid budget to go on,” he said. “At a time when domestic 
services are been cut back to help balance the books, taxpayers cannot 
understand how we can spend money on projects like this whilst there are so 
many pressures on spending at home.”
 