
Cycling groups have called on Eurostar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/eurostar> to ditch a new policy requiring 
passengers to dismantle and box up their bikes, claiming it will deter people 
from taking bicycles on cross-Channel trains.

CTC <http://www.ctc.org.uk/>, the UK’s largest cycling charity, said more than 
2,700 people have written to Eurostar in seven hours urging it to scrap the 
change which will come into force on 1 November.

Users can currently hang their bikes by the front wheel in a specially 
designated compartment for a £30 fee as part of a registered luggage system. 
Under the new policy, bikes have to be dismantled and boxed up, and then 
reassembled at the other end.

Eurostar has already had to tweak the change 
<http://road.cc/content/news/167946-eurostar-scraps-bike-box-size-restrictions> 
after it was pointed out the initial dimensions for the bike box were too 
small. It subsequently said there would be no size limitation. But cycling 
groups are still up in arms.

CTC, which has joined forces with cycling groups in France, Belgium, the 
Netherlands and Germany, say the change is more restrictive than any train 
operator in the UK. TheEuropean Cyclists’ Federation <http://www.ecf.com/> 
(ECF), which represents cycling bodies across Europe, described the policy as 
“extremely inconvenient”.

Paul Tuohy, the CTC chief executive, said 
<http://www.ctc.org.uk/press-release/2015-10-13/cyclings-zero-stars-eurostar>: 
“It’s hypocritical that an organisation with a history of sponsoring awards 
celebrating the achievements of pioneering travel initiatives could come up 
with such a barmy policy on cycle carriage. Cyclists should not be treated as 
third-class passengers and we urge Eurostar to reverse their planned policy.”

Rosemary Dooley, 68, a CTC member from Kendal, Cumbria, who recently took her 
assembled bike on Eurostar, said: “I have to take my own bike everywhere due to 
arthritis in my hands, hence small adaptations. I am also not mechanical. But 
it seems now that I will have to learn to remove and replace the front wheel. I 
just hope it doesn’t involve strong fingers like changing an inner tube.”

Nicolas Clifford, logistics manager at cycle tour specialists Blue Marble 
Travel, said: “In 2015 alone, close to 100 of our clients have crossed the 
Channel with their cycles via Eurostar – this despite the obvious failings of a 
poorly designed system. If Eurostar puts its plans in place, the only realistic 
choice for cyclists seeking to join the type of itinerant trip we offer will be 
short-haul air, which makes a mockery of the company’s green mantra.”

Eurostar said its new policy was designed to use the space on its trains more 
flexibly, “by carrying the same or more bikes depending on the demand from 
passengers”. The company also said it had to balance the needs of cyclists with 
those of other passengers, who increasingly want to take registered luggage.

“By changing our policy slightly we can continue to meet the needs of 
cyclists, whilst also helping other passengers with their registered luggage 
requirements,” said Eurostar.

A spokesman said the company intended to press ahead with the change. Eurostar 
has written to concerned passengers, telling them that “our staff are trained 
and ready to assist with the new procedure”.

But CTC warned: “We are concerned to what degree they have been trained. Only 
someone properly trained to reassemble a bicycle should be involved, anything 
else could leave them liable to a failure of duty of care.”
 