
This week, Guardian Australia has continued to receive complaints about 
Centrelink’s newmethod of retrieving welfare debts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/23/centrelink-officer-says-only-a-fraction-of-debts-in-welfare-crackdown-are-genuine>
, which relies on an automated data matching processcriticised as crude and 
unfair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/28/call-to-suspend-centrelink-system-after-single-mother-receives-24000-debt-notice>
.

Now, a handful of the thousands of Australians caught up in the government’s 
crackdown share their experience of being unfairly targeted.

Sally, Brisbane

I am the single mum of five and three year olds. I work part time and receive 
partial parenting payment and family tax benefits. This finances our simple 
lifestyle. I was shocked and dismayed to receive a letter from Centrelink 
Compliance department with a debt of $24,215.81 (including $2,110 debt recovery 
fee) to be paid by 9 January. I was able to talk withCentrelink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink> Compliance and it 
appears the automated system “duplicated” my employer, so it appears I had a 
second undeclared job. Although this is Centrelink’s error, I need to provide 
two years of payslips and apply for a “manual reassessment” of my case. To 
stave off debt collectors, I had to start repaying my “debt” at a reduced rate.

Centrelink debt notices based on 'idiotic' faith in big data, IT expert says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/30/centrelink-debt-notices-idiotic-big-data-assumptions-expert>
Ryan, Melbourne

As a long-term full-time employed professional, tax payer and small business 
entrepreneur, I contribute to our economy in many positive and financial ways.


Centrelink have incorrectly alleged they overpaid me the government benefit 
Youth Allowance which financially assisted me to successfully complete a 
professional tertiary qualification in 2010-2011. This qualification is now 
used daily in my profession. This issue has been raised six years in 
retrospect, which appears now due to an erroneous automated computer “data 
match”.

Centrelink have repeatedly refused to provide written evidence of how the 
overpayment occurred. In addition to this, they have falsified my fortnightly 
income statement since I reported it in the 2010-2011 financial year. They have 
also requested I supply documented financial records I am not obliged to keep 
under ATO law. Centrelink has been grossly wasteful of my time and that of 
tax-funded government employed staff. My time is valuable and productive, both 
within full-time employment and small business development.

Throughout this ordeal, I’ve been subjected to personal distress, confusion 
and dismay and at a time of family grieving, my 66-year-old father passing away 
concurrently with receiving presumptive Centrelink letters of debt. The current 
data match regime appears to have a clear objective and obvious demographic: 
disrupt the disadvantaged, defenceless and vulnerable.

I now feel nothing more than inspired to stand up, fight for change and the 
protection of our basic civil liberties. We may feel small as individuals, but 
collectively we can stand tall and safeguard those around us, who deserve 
respect, dignity, equality and compassion in our free and democratic society.

James, Wollongong

A debt collector rang me on a Saturday morning and it ruined my weekend. I 
thought I was being scammed: they were asking for my personal details and 
demanding I identify myself. I had to wait until Monday to get an answer out of 
Centrelink, which was: I owed them $1,000 because their automated tax matching 
said so.

A crackdown on welfare while the richest pay no tax? It's one promise the 
Liberals kept | Van Badham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/29/a-crackdown-on-welfare-while-the-richest-pay-no-tax-its-one-promise-the-liberals-kept>
They wanted letters and payslips from employers proving I wasn’t a liar. When 
I did get the information, there has been no way to provide the Department of 
Human Services with it even after four weeks of trying. I feel as though I’ll 
have no choice but to pay when leaving for an overseas trip – extorted for the 
money I “owe” at the customs desk or miss my flight.

Dave, Sydney

I reported correctly while on youth allowance but was sent a letter from 
Centrelink demanding payment of a $2,500 “debt” based on alleged under 
reporting. The demand caused me stress and anxiety. I spent at least five hours 
contacting Centrelink and gathering my payslips to prove that I did not under 
report and that I did not owe a debt.

After phone calls and emails to and from Centrelink and a journalist from the 
ABC, Centrelink acknowledged that I did not owe any debt. There was no apology 
for the false accusation or the stress caused. I am concerned that most people 
would simply pay the “debt” on the assumption that Centrelink had a valid basis 
to their demand.


Names have been changed.

If you have more information about this story, email 
christopher.knaus@guardian.co.uk.
 