
Family planning is much more than a vital health and human rights intervention 
(Critical moment for family planning as funds come under pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/28/critical-moment-family-planning-contraception-funds-under-threat>
, 28 July). Investments in voluntary family planning are also investments in 
sustainable development, and therefore should be of as much of concern to 
ministers of finance as to ministers of health.

In the developing world, about 190 million pregnancies occur each year, of 
which 73 million (39%) are unintended. These unintended pregnancies often end 
in abortions (49% of the time, and many unsafe), unintended births (38%) or 
miscarriages (13%), with detrimental health and economic effects for many women 
and their families. Behind these statistics are untold stories of human 
suffering and lives taken off track, underscoring the urgent need for greater 
investments in family planning.

Critical moment for family planning as funds come under pressure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/28/critical-moment-family-planning-contraception-funds-under-threat>
However, only 1% of all overseas development assistance is allocated to family 
planning. Funding from local governments is typically even lower. In too many 
countries, programmes remain weak and political commitment is lacking. Family 
planning is assigned a low national priority, relegated to the health budgets 
of donors and the portfolios of health ministers, who are often battling a 
range of other health issues.

From a broader perspective, this low priority is a mistake, because family 
planning programmes have a wide array of development benefits that often are 
under-appreciated. In addition to the improved health and empowerment of women 
and girls, fewer births lead to a boost in the growth of GDP per capita; 
reduced pressure on the need to build schools, clinics and infrastructure; 
reduced environmental degradation; and greater political and social stability, 
as youth unemployment declines. A dollar invested in family planning returns 
multiple dollars in savings in other development sectors.

Family planning must therefore be reclassified as a development intervention. 
If we’re truly serious about meeting the sustainable development goals, we must 
embrace the rare investment opportunities that drive progress on many different 
development fronts – family planning chief among them.
John Bongaarts
Vice-president and distinguished scholar, Population Council

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 