
Whether it’s to fuel them as they write or paint through the night, or to 
feature in their work, coffee has been celebrated by European artists, 
musicians and writers since it arrived there in the 17th-century.

Voltaire
Voltaire, born in 1694, was an early adopter. The grand philosophe is said to 
have enjoyed a staggering 40 to 50 cups each day, mixed with chocolate. He is 
said to have credited coffee as playing an important part in the development of 
his philosophies, and rewarded staff handsomely if they supplied his favourite 
coffee beans.

Balzac
Fellow Frenchman, Honoré de Balzac, was another passionate coffee consumer. 
The novelist and playwright wrote a light-hearted essay, The Pleasure and Pains 
of Coffee, in honour of his favourite drink. “Coffee sets the blood in motion 
and stimulates the muscles,” he wrote. Although his essay doesn’t specify the 
amount of coffee he actually drank, rumour has it Balzac, like Voltaire, 
consumed a significant number of cups a day.

Beethoven
Although there is no evidence he drank a disproportionate amount of coffee, 
Ludwig van Beethoven was said to obsessively count out 60 beans, the perfect 
amount in his opinion, for every cup he drank. Beethoven’s biographer recalled 
the composer using a glass coffee maker to brew his morning tipple – and he 
didn’t start his day without it.

Bach
Another legendary German composer, Johann Sebastian Bach, wrote a cantata in 
honour of coffee.Schweigt stille, plaudert nicht (Be still, stop chattering), 
is also known as the Coffee Cantata and it poured scorn on the controversy that 
surrounded the rise of the Vienna coffee house scene. Coffee was seen as a 
dangerous vice, but Bach was a big fan and the cantata ends with a song 
celebrating the benefits of coffee drinking.

Franklin
It was while living in London that the author and political theorist Benjamin 
Franklin, a founding father of the United States, fell in love with coffee. He 
held political meetings and played chess in his favourite London coffee shop 
and even had letters delivered there. Franklin sold his own beans, and never 
travelled without his own coffee supply.

Sartre
In the 20th-century, coffee shop culture boomed and became a fertile breeding 
ground for artists and thinkers. In early 1900s-Paris, the coffee shops of 
Saint Germain-des-Pres played host to the existentialists Jean-Paul Sartre and 
Simone de Beauvoir and, by the 1960s, coffee bars were the hip British hangout 
for beat bands, pop artists and actors.

Wood
Being crazy about coffee is not a preserve of the past: coffee is the drink of 
choice for most contemporary A-list celebrities. Some love a simple latte to 
start their star-studded morning – others crave something more hardcore: Lord 
of the Rings actor Elijah Wood is said to start his days with a quadruple 
espresso over ice.

Nespresso has added a sprinkle of Tinseltown stardust to its coffee by 
enlisting George Clooney and a host of famous friends, from Matt Damon to Jean 
Dujardin, in its ad campaigns – look out for a new guest star this month.

Even characters in films have been known to love a cup o’ Joe too, from the 
coffee-obsessed President in Monsters vs. Aliens to the cast of Friends, who 
never tire of Central Perk. Even Pulp Fiction’s Winston Wolfe can’t start work 
without a coffee, “lots of cream, lots of sugar”.

It is often said that art imitates life, but coffee is the drink that fuels 
both.
 