
In the evolutionary process of the Istanbul fish restaurant, there was a 
moment in the late 1990s when the amphibious, shore-hugging boat restaurants 
crawled out of the Bosphorus and became land dwellers. Overnight, yellow 
Wellington boots became black loafers as seafaring grill men became 
restaurateurs and waiters.

Some rue the day the municipality cleared the Bosphorus of its smoking 
flotilla of fish restaurants, but we never found dining aboard them very 
pleasant. That slight roll of the sea underfoot may feel "authentic," but we've 
seen it send a can of Fanta sliding across a rickety table, drenching a freshly 
grilled fish in orange pop, then rolling around on the filthy floor of a 
cramped dining space that was always filled with fishy grill smoke. Luckily, 
the land-based versions of these fish restaurants are extremely pleasant, 
across-the-board affordable, of reliably good quality and family-friendly.

Adem Baba (Satışmeydanı Sokak 2, Arnavutköy, +90 212 263 2933, adembaba.com 
<http://www.adembaba.com/>, open noon-10.30pm), located in Arnavutköy, is our 
favourite example among the formerly seaborne fish restaurants that have 
migrated to land. But further up the Bosphorus lie another couple of boats come 
ashore that deserve attention.

At Takanik (Köybaşı Caddesi 155, Yeniköy, +90 212 299 5656, takanik.com.tr 
<http://takanik.com.tr/takanik-park.html>, open 10:30am-10.30pm) there is much 
to remind you of the venue's former glory afloat on the Bosphorus. Among all 
the fishing boat paraphernalia that decorates the dining room is a mural 
depicting the old Takanik boat-restaurant in action, as a sort of memorial. We 
find it hard to believe that food of this quality could have been served on the 
boat. Our meal started with plates of cool pickles, beets, eggplant purée and 
grilled red peppers – on the house(boat). The fried calamari we ordered was 
pillowy soft and not at all greasy.Thebalik köftesi were distinctly handmade 
patties of roughly chopped fish laced with onions and parsley, unlike the 
heavily battered croquette type ofbalik köftesi found in some other fish 
restaurants.

Our dil şiş – sole skewered with lemon, tomato and peppers – was just fine, 
although not on par with what's served over at Adem Baba. We wish we'd taken a 
cue from the table next to us, where one elderly Istanbulite spoke at length to 
the waiter about his love ofsardalya (fresh sardines), which he'd come that day 
specifically to eat. It was the first he was eating this season, he told the 
waiter, who took the order with visible pleasure. We knew the feeling; a year's 
anticipation of good, fresh sardines can make a simple meal into something 
worth carrying on about.

Fish Var Balıkçı-1 (İstinye Caddesi 26, İstinye, +90 212 277 2582, 
fishvar.com.tr <http://www.fishvar.com.tr/>, open 10am-10.30pm) is the result 
of the union of two restaurant vessels that were formerly docked across from 
the Austrian Consulate in Yeniköy, slinging fish sandwiches and simple plates 
on the waterfront. The outcome is an excellent, if predictable, family-style 
fish restaurant on the coastal road in İstinye. Among the standards – including 
seasonal fish served grilled or fried, calamari, and a coolçoban salatasi 
(shepherd's salad) with cheese – was a memorablebalik kokoreç of pan-fried 
cubes of sea bass among peppers and onions in a broth that reminded us of a 
curry. As we left, we saw a waiter running a heaping order ofbalik ekmek – the 
classic grilled fish sandwiches – across the street to an idling boat filled 
with day-trippers. For some, it seems, old habits die hard.

This is an article from our Guardian Travel Network. To find out more about it,
click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/blog/2012/feb/29/guardian-travel-network-city-bloggers>
 