
Flatpack furniture, stamp duty payments and three years of free tube travel 
are among the sweeteners being offered to buyers of luxury flats inLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> as developers scramble to revive a 
waning market.


Investors and owner-occupiers can choose from a range of incentives on 
properties across the capital, with housebuilders attempting to sell homes in a 
market knocked by changes to stamp duty anduncertainty over the upcoming EU 
referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-uk-housing-market-house-buyers-decline-inquiries>
.

Buyers of a one-bedroom apartment on the edge of London’s financial district 
in Aldgate, where prices start at £780,000, are being offered three years of 
free travel if they can move in before July. The zone 1-3 travelcard provided 
by developer Barratt London is worth £1,520 in the first year. At the 
developer’s Catford Green site in south-east London, the same offer is 
available on two-bedroom homes.

The Guardian view on housing in London: bricks and mortals | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/24/the-guardian-view-on-housing-in-london-bricks-and-mortals>
A range of incentives offered by Taylor Wimpey to potential buyers include 
free furniture packs, a year’s ground rent and service charge paid, and a 
rental guarantee – aimed at buy-to let landlords – for the first year of 
ownership, equal to 5% of the purchase price. The offer is available on several 
developments, including the Music Box in Southwark, central London, where 
prices start at £737,500.

Since December 2014, buyers paying more than £937,500 for a property have 
faced higher stamp duty bills; on 1 April 2016, those costs were increased 
again with a newthree percentage point surcharge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/25/george-osborne-unveils-his-bold-plan-to-tackle-housing-crisis>
 on second homes. At Galliard’s Marine Wharf East development in Surrey Quays, 
south-east London, where flats start at £430,000, investors are being offered a 
stamp duty payment, alongside their choice of a free furniture package or one 
year with no service charge.

On Wednesday, Berkeley Homes said it had seen a 20% decline in reservations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/15/berkeley-homes-20-per-cent-drop-reservations-new-homes>
 in the the first five months of the year and had not launched any new schemes 
in London over the same period. The upmarket developer said it was offering to 
absorb the increased stamp duty at the top end of the market.

At Nine Elms Point in Battersea, south-west London, and Enderby Wharf in 
Greenwich, south-east London, Barratt London is offering to cover stamp duty on 
some of the larger, more expensive apartments for sale. The saving on the 
two-bedroom apartments covered by the offer at Nine Elms Point starts at 
£32,149, according to the developer’s website.

About 35,000 prime properties are in the pipeline in London, according to 
consultancy firm Arcadis 
<https://www.arcadis.com/en/united-kingdom/our-perspectives/2016/june/chancellor-must-pause-top-housing-tax-or-risk-distorting-the-market/>
, and nearly 17,000 are due to be completed by the end of 2018. In a report on 
the market, Arcadis’s head of commercial development, Mark Cleverly, said the 
financial viability of prime property would be under pressure for the next two 
to three years as construction costs rise faster than sale prices.

Without a cut in stamp duty, he added, there was likely to be lower growth in 
the prime market. Cleverly said housebuilders’ offers to pay stamp duty for 
buyers would “take a serious chunk out of gross development values and 
developers’ margins”.


Jonathan Hopper, the managing director of Garrington, which finds homes for 
wealthy clients, said it had “been a few years in the making, but luxury 
property developers are now in the midst of a perfect storm”.


A series of “demand-sapping factors” had hit the market, from stamp duty rises 
to EU referendum uncertainty, he added.


“The challenges are particularly acute in the new build sector, with global 
economic turbulence curtailing demand from the overseas buyers who for years 
inflated the market in the mistaken belief that any luxury property with a 
London postcode would automatically turn to gold,” Hopper said. “With so many 
luxury developments now being built, there’s suddenly a danger of oversupply – 
and some developers fear being left with unsold stock on their hands. As a 
result, there are some incredible offers out there and the dynamic has shifted 
firmly to a buyer’s, rather than a seller’s, market.”

Hopper said buyers were increasingly holding the cards, but they should 
remember that a discount does not automatically equal a bargain. “In some 
cases, the price reduction is merely the absence of froth, rather than a 
steal,” he said.

David Galman, the sales director at Galliard, said the market in properties 
costing between £750,000 and £1.5m had “definitely gone off the boil. I think 
last year’s budget and Brexit have been factors”.


The company added a “Brexit clause” to sales of flats in Slough, Berkshire, 
launched on 9 June. “We probably didn’t need to do it actually – we had a good 
launch. All of the buyers get it, but only around 10% to 15% were keen to make 
sure it was there,” he said.

“I don’t think anyone’s going to pull out of buying a £250,000 flat in Slough 
because we’ve voted to leave the EU.”

The company has long offered free legal work for buyers: Galman said it was 
worth the cost to know that a deal was progressing. “When the stamp duty 
increase was announced, I felt that we would all have to absorb some of the 
costs as a way to keep the market going along,” he said.

Galman said investors were keen on the incentives of interest on a deposit and 
guaranteed rent in the early years. “We don’t think that is going to cost us 
very much – we think the rental market is very robust. We have an interest in 
the rental company too.” New offers brought interest from investors and 
owner-occupiers, he added.


However, Galman said “people are sitting on their hands until Brexit comes. 
But I’m not sure what will happen after that, because it’s the end of June and 
the holidays are starting – it could stay quiet until September.”


Barratt London said it regularly offered incentives at its developments. Gary 
Patrick, its regional sales director, said: “We offer incentives on selected 
apartments as it is a great way to promote the development. For example, we are 
currently offering a free TfL [Transport for London] travelcard on every 
two-bedroom apartment purchased at Catford Green, valid for three years across 
zones 1-3. On other selected developments, we sometimes offer incentives such 
as stamp duty paid, free furniture packs or paying legal fees. These all help 
to give extra value to our customers.”

Henry Pryor, a buying agent who works in London and the south-east, said 
incentives were always introduced when the market was getting harder for 
sellers, and that some were worth having.


“Transaction costs such as stamp duty usually have to be paid out of taxed 
income, and part exchange deals where the developer buys your old home can save 
time and aggravation; but never forget who ultimately pays for these 
inducements – the buyer either directly or over 25 years of your mortgage,” he 
said. “Personally, I prefer to pay less in the first place.”

Simon Wainwright, the director of JPW Real Estate, which advises companies on 
the development of sites and manages finished buildings, said sales had been 
slowing. “Some of [the developers] feel that they have got a high exposure to 
the top end of the market,” he said. “The result is that there are developers 
who have parties going out and saying that we can do you 20 units at a 10% 
discount, and if you take 30 you can have 15% off ... They are prepared to take 
a hit to de-risk these projects.”

Wainwright said sales were being made to private equity firms that would keep 
them until they could resell at a profit. “The stamp duty schemes are more for 
individuals,” he said.
 