
We've committed a lot of space on this blog to identifying the taste, smell 
and sight of a seriously good kebab, but it was not until we sat in Şeyhmus 
Kebap Evi (on a tip from chef Gencay over at Meze) that we came to know what 
delicious kebab actuallysounds like.

Had we previously known the sound of the zirh blade's rhythmic roll over large 
cuts of lamb, we could have followed our ears through the side streets, past 
the jewelers near Atik Ali Pasa Mosque to the brisk lunch in progress at this 
little kebab shop. In his open kitchen Vaha usta works the zirh, a 
scimitar-like heavy curved knife, on a thick wooden slab and it sounds like a 
steam engine chugging at full speed. Each day starts here with a pile of choice 
cuts of beef and lamb, the place closing down around five PM when the meat runs 
out. It has been that way since the mid-1970s, when Şeyhmus (pronounced 
"Shay-muhs" like the Irish poet Heaney) himself was still working the counter.

Vaha usta cuts the meat fresh for each kebab depending on the customers 
preferences – fatty or lean, spicy or not – before wetting his hands and 
working it on to long skewers. We chose theMardin kebabi (fairly lean and 
spiked with green peppers) as a nod to the southeastern Turkish hometown of the 
late Şeyhmus usta, both of which are celebrated in large framed photos and 
posters all over the dining room.

Vaha usta, working at a frantic speed, barked an order at a young waiter 
playing with his cell phone. The boy pocketed the phone and quickly came to 
Vaha usta's side with a napkin and cleaned up shreds of meat that had gone 
flying from the blade on to nearby tables. (Note to readers: select your table 
carefully or wear a raincoat.)

We enjoy swordplay at the lunch counter for the sake of entertainment, but a 
few bites of our Mardin kebab told us that this was not just a gimmick. The 
meat used at most kebab shops may be of fine quality, but it has usually been 
smooshed through a grinder once or twice leaving it a limp, pliable mound. 
Vaha's zirh-cut lamb/beef combo came off of the skewer springy, with great 
textural variation. At certain points it still seemed to have a grain. People 
speak of zirh-cut meat having a particularly fresh taste and we got that. But 
it was the texture that impressed us most. This kebab made the average 
street-side Adana look like an Oscar Meyer wiener.

So entranced were we by the properties of this Mardin kebabi, the heavy roll 
of the zirh on the chopping block, the slap of freshtirnakli ekmek (flatbread) 
coming out of the oven, the sight of meat flying through the air that we forgot 
to ask just how it was that an Irishman ended up making kebab in Mardin.

• Molla Fenari Mah, Medrese Sok No 2, Çemberlitaş, +90 212 526 1613
 