
‘What’d you buy for me?’
‘I’m gonna make you pasta con le sarde, and purpi alla carrettera for after.’
Exquisite, but deadly. Montalbano gave her a hug.

The Terracotta Dog <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Terracotta_Dog>, Andrea 
Camilleri

---

There are few characters who eat as well as Inspector Montalbano. While he is 
out solving murders, his incredible housekeeper Adelina fills his fridge with 
the most delicious sounding dishes: tender octopus, rich, nutty cakes, fish 
fresh from the sea. I am hardly surprised: I have never eaten quite so well as 
when on holiday in Italy. Each time I have been lucky enough to go - a 
life-changing visit when I was 12, a road trip with a friend 10 years later, a 
wedding a couple of years ago - it is the food I come home speaking about.

Related: Food in books: plum tart from The Light Years by Elizabeth Jane Howard
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/little-library-cafe/2016/sep/08/food-in-books-plum-tart-from-the-light-years-by-elizabeth-jane-howard>

This pasta is a Sicilian classic - one that speaks of culinary influence from 
the Middle East (the nuts, sultanas and saffron), and of the Mediterranean sea, 
never far away when in Sicily. It is the work of no more than 15 minutes, the 
sort of thing you can come home to after a long day at work, relying mostly on 
ingredients you might already have in your cupboard. If you have access to 
fresh sardines, do use them, but tinned ones work well too. They’re a favourite 
ingredient in my kitchen, great mashed onto toast, and the star in this pasta 
dish. I know it’s not particularly pretty, but it’s a dish that has filled me 
with joy on these cold January days; a nod to a place I long to visit again.

This May I’m returning to Italy with my family. We have much to celebrate: a 
couple of 30th birthdays, a 60th, my stepfather visiting Europe for the first 
time since I moved over. We’re staying in houses with kitchens, keen to take 
advantage of local markets. We’ll drive around and explore new towns, we’ll 
read books in the sun, and we’ll get far too competitive over board games. But 
most of our time there will be given over to food. It normally is, when we’re 
all together.
 Photograph: Kate Young of The Little Library Café 
Pasta con le Sarde

Serves 2

Ingredients 
40g breadcrumbs
 2tbsp olive oil
 1 brown onion, finely diced
 4 anchovy fillets 
50ml white wine 
1tbsp tomato paste 
120g sardine fillets (in spring water, or olive oil) OR 150g fresh sardine 
fillets, chopped
1 small bulb fennel, finely sliced (wild fennel is ideal, but harder to get 
your hands on outside of Italy)
Pinch saffron threads 
40g pine nuts 
20g sultanas
 250g bucatini or spaghetti

Equipment 
Large saucepan 
Knife and chopping board 
Frying pan 
Wooden spoon 
Colander

1. Fill your largest saucepan with water and put it on to boil. Tip the 
breadcrumbs into the frying pan and toast over a medium heat until golden 
brown. Set aside.

2. Warm the olive oil in the pan and fry the onion until soft. Add the 
anchovies, and cook with the onion until they melt. Add the white wine, and 
allow it to bubble away for a moment. Stir in the tomato paste, until the onion 
is coated with the anchovies, wine and tomato.

3. Stir in the sardines, fennel, saffron, pine nuts and sultanas. Cook over a 
low-medium heat for 10 minutes, ensuring that you cook the sardines through if 
they are fresh.

4. Meanwhile, cook the pasta to the packet directions, ensuring you drain it 
while it is still al dente. Reserve a mug full of the cooking water in case you 
need it to lubricate the pasta and sauce.

5. Tip the pasta into the sauce and stir it through. If it is a little dry, 
add some of the cooking water and a dribble of oil, and stir again.

6. Top each portion with the toasted breadcrumbs and serve.
 