
Joseph Williamson was an intriguing fellow. Born into poverty in 1769 he 
picked himself up by his bootstraps, set off to Liverpool to seek his fortune, 
donned a pink suit to marry a wealthy tobacconist's daughter and then, for 
reasons only known to himself, set about digging a series of tunnels the 
purpose of which remain, to this day, a total mystery.

"There are two theories," Gordon Hunter, chairman of the Friends of the 
Williamson Tunnels, tells me, "that he had them dug to keep men returning from 
the Napoleonic Wars occupied, or that his wife came under the influence of a 
lunatic preacher who told her the apocalypse was coming and she persuaded 
Joseph to prepare chambers for underground living."

Either way, it's clear that Joseph, dubbed the "Mole of Edge Hill" had a 
penchant for eccentricity.

"There was a trapdoor in his basement," Gordon says, "and it led down to 
underground rooms and tunnels. He had a large fireplace and there are vents 
everywhere."

"Why did he want to live underground?" I ask.

"No idea," says Gordon, with a shrug. I like Gordon. He's a retired engineer 
with watery blue eyes. I don't think he stops smiling once for the whole time 
I'm with him.

Williamson was, you've gathered, quite the character, with clear liking for 
the frivolous and mischievous. Despite being a millionaire he once met King 
George IV in nothing more than a pair of tatty corduroy trousers, hobnail boots 
and a patched coat. He would throw banquets where he would pretend to serve 
beans and bacon simply to see who his real friends were.

The thing I find the most remarkable is that until just over a decade ago, the 
Williamson Tunnels were regarded as something of a myth. Everybody had heard of 
them but nobody believed they existed. But a chanced-upon article, written in 
1925, lit the fire of curiosity once more. "A man called Charles Hand found the 
entrance to one of the tunnels," Gordon explains, "and he wrote that he was 
able to walk underground for over a mile. We've only scratched the surface," he 
says, gesturing down into a hole I am about to descend in Edge Hill. "We think 
there are three layers of tunnels. At least."

"It was brilliant when we were finally allowed down here," says another 
volunteer, Les Coe, passing me a hard hat. "It was like finding Tutankhamun's 
tomb. Best day of my life."

Currently there are two excavation points. There's one the public can go down, 
at the Williamson Tunnels Heritage Centre, and then there are the tunnels being 
actively cleared by the volunteers. Every Saturday and Sunday they come and 
undertake the slow, laborious task of taking out more than a hundred years' 
worth of rubble and debris poured down holes by bakers, jam makers and 
housewives. Every bucket is pored over for small treasures and they're doing 
all this purely for the love of local history and preservation.

"It's been a long fight to be able to excavate these tunnels," says Gordon 
with a rueful nod. "Ten years it's taken us to get permission. But now we have."

The good news is that the rubble, they think, will only be in the top layer of 
tunnels. As soon as they have excavated those they should, in theory, have 
unfettered access to the second and third layers.

"We know they go down at least 90 feet," says Les, his eyes bursting with 
enthusiasm.

Sadly, I can only go down to the top layer, but the brickwork is exquisite and 
the volunteers' curiosity is infectious.

"There are narrow tunnels," Les explains, "some no wider than a metre, but 
then suddenly, they open out into massive spaces. It's magical."

No doubt about that. Les and Gordon are the last of the great explorers. There 
aren't many places left on earth that are yet to be discovered but there's a 
small corner of Liverpool that still harbours a great secret.

• Guided tour of the tunnels from the heritage centre (Smithdown Lane, 
0151-709 6868,williamsontunnels.co.uk <http://www.williamsontunnels.co.uk>, 
adults £4.50, children £3, family ticket £14). Thefriends of the tunnels 
<http://www.williamsontunnels.com/getinv.htm> are always looking for volunteers

Follow Emma on Twitter @EmmaK67 <https://twitter.com/EmmaK67>
 