
Q When my mother passed away in 2012, she left her property to me and my three 
brothers – the deeds have been changed accordingly.

One of my brothers has lived in the property for around 25 years. We all had a 
verbal agreement with my mother that he could live there as long as he needed 
to.

 We understand that one of my other brothers is now seeking to sell the house. 
Can he sell his share or borrow against it, and can he force the sale of the 
property? What rights would the brother living in there have?JW

A As one of the joint owners of the property, the brother who is living in the 
house has the right to occupy it, as do you and your other brothers. He can’t 
be made to leave the home without an exclusion order from the courts, which 
your other brother would have to apply for. But simply wanting to sell a 
property isn’t seen as a good reason for granting such an order as it is 
usually used to remove someone who is physically abusive to another occupant of 
a jointly owned home.

 The brother who wants to sell, on the other hand, does not have the right to 
sell the whole property without everyone’s agreement. If you each own a 
distinct share in the property – and so are tenants in common rather than joint 
tenants – in theory, the brother who wants to sell could try to sell his share 
without your permission. But unless you and your other brothers would be happy 
and able to buy him out, it’s unlikely he would find a willing buyer.

 He can’t force you all to sell the property, but he can ask a court to order 
a sale. This can happen only after he has formally written to all of you – or 
gets a solicitor to write – setting out his case for selling the property and 
giving you the chance to reply with the reasons why you don’t want to do so.

If he did go to court, it would consider a number of factors including the 
intention of your mother from whom you inherited and the purpose for which the 
property is owned. If your brother were to go to the expense of going to court, 
it would be wise to use a solicitor yourselves who would be able to advise on 
how to formalise the verbal agreement you had with your mother about her wishes 
for your other brother to use the property as his home after her death.
 