
France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, the world’s top tourism 
draw, has announced a scheme to lure even more tourists with a fund intended to 
boost everything from hotels to wine heritage, and its foreign minister has 
urged the French to be more welcoming.


 With the attractions of the capital, Paris, its Loire valley chateaux, Alpine 
ski resorts, riviera beaches and gastronomic pleasures, France has been the 
world’s most visited country since the 1980s, welcoming 84 million tourists in 
2014.

 It hopes to boost that to 100 million by 2020, banking on a sector that 
already employs two million to contribute more to growth in the eurozone’s 
second-largest economy, still struggling to shake off a downturn.

 “Tourism is a national treasure that needs to be protected, nurtured and 
developed – that’s the aim of all these measures,” the foreign minister, 
Laurent Fabius, said of the launch in coming months of a tourism investment 
fund.

 In a reference to the sometimes gruff welcome offered to tourists, Fabius 
said a humorous publicity campaign would be launched, encouraging the French to 
improve service levels and help tourists when they could.

 “To put it diplomatically, we have room for improvement here ... When we come 
up against a foreign tourist, we are all ambassadors for France,” Fabius said.

 Consumption by tourists in France, including by the French themselves, 
accounts for 7% of national output. But France’s visitors spend less than they 
do elsewhere, a fact that even prompted a government inquiry in 2013.

The €47.1bn of revenues it extracted from visitors in 2013 lagged well behind 
those of the US, which managed to squeeze $130.4bn from 70 million visitors.

 Campaigns to boost security for tourists and translate signs at airports into 
other languages have helped increase the average length of stay, now at about 
seven days.

 A move to process visa applications for Chinese visitors in less than 48 
hours led to a 61% surge in visas granted to them in 2014, a fact witnessed by 
the busloads of Chinese shoppers each day outside Paris’s luxury stores.

 But Fabius said the aim was to go further, calling on those French TV 
channels broadcast abroad to promote French regions with feature documentaries 
while asking for foreign channels broadcasting the Tour de France cycle race to 
publicise links to tourism websites.

 The new tourist fund would have as its flagship shareholder the CDC state 
investment vehicle and would seek other investors in projects to renovate hotel 
infrastructure and develop wine, river and sea tourism.

 “We come to Paris for the spirit, for the energy, the culture, the shops and 
for the magic of the city,” Bayan Al Barak, 48, a visitor from Bahrain said of 
annual family visits for which she budgets €1,200 (US$1,350) per person per day.

 “French people have changed a lot in the past five to eight years. They have 
become sweeter and more welcoming,” she said as she wandered along Avenue 
Montaigne with its high-end stores.

 Xiao Liu from Beijing, who is on honeymoon, put the daily budget for herself 
and her husband at €430 (3,000 Chinese yuan), twice the monthly minimum wage in 
Beijing.

She described Paris as “a compulsory step” on a tour of Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> but complained: “There are no 
road signs in English. Everything is in French. It’s really not practical.”
 