
Berlin, April 1
All Allied rail traffic between Berlin and West Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> is now at a standstill. By this 
morning there were four Allied trains standing either at Helmstedt, just inside 
the British zone, or at Marienborn, five miles on the Russian side of the 
frontier. These included the American trains from Frankfurt and Bremerhaven, 
which were both stopped at Helmstedt, and the British up and down trains 
between Berlin and the British zone, which were held by the Russians at 
Marienborn. The Allied officers refused to allow Russian guards to search the 
trains or to check travellers’ documents, and for that reason the Russian 
authorities would not let the trains proceed.

A train from the British zone to Berlin has returned, according to an official 
communique, “for administrative reason.” Last night’s train from Berlin 
remained at Marienborn until to-night and during the day a restaurant car was 
allowed to leave the British zone to feed passengers. Press correspondents who 
wished to travel with this car were, it is reported, prevented from doing so by 
British “security.”


According to the same communique, General Brownjohn, the British Deputy 
Military Governor and Chief of Staff, has protested in the strongest terms to 
the Soviet Military Government against its obstruction of transport to and from 
Berlin.


Dakotas to take over
The British authorities have already cancelled the through train from Berlin 
to the British zone to-night and it is possible that other trains may also have 
to be cancelled. To-morrow three British buses will run from Berlin to 
Helmstedt and an emergency air service is being put into operation by which 
flights of R.A.F Dakotas will take passengers who have urgent business in the 
British zone. This service will start to-morrow unless there are more 
satisfactory developments in the situation.

American trains are still halted at Helmstedt and an American announcement was 
published early this morning which read, “We have advised the Russians that we 
are prepared for our train commanders to give proper documentation, but that we 
cannot permit entry into our trains as a news procedure.” In spite of this the 
Russians are reported to have boarded one American train. A later American 
order has cancelled all military trains to and from Berlin and an air service 
is being introduced instead. The Americans have pointed out that their trains 
which have been stopped were purely for passengers, with the exception of one 
milk car from Bremerhaven.


On the roads between Berlin and the West the situation is even more confused. 
Yesterday all vehicles were stopped at the zonal frontier which were not 
carrying Russian translation of their travel documents. This morning an 
American communique said that only people in military uniform were allowed to 
pass the border and all civilian employees of the Military Government were 
turned back. At Berlin, on the other hand, all vehicles carrying Russian 
translations were allowed to continue westward. These differences alone suggest 
that the Russian move is not expressly designed to cut off Berlin from Western 
Germany, although individual Russian interpretations of their orders have given 
this impression.


Road block and arc-lamps
A visit to the new Russian control post a few miles outside the perimeter of 
Berlin was rewarding. It is situated opposite the village of Nowawes on the 
autobahn and it is a scene of intense activity. My car was stopped by a group 
of five Russian officers, with a colonel in charge. On the road there are 
double barriers, and arc-lamps are being installed ten feet above. Two sentry 
boxes have been built so far and German workmen were busy on fresh 
constructions. In five minutes I counted eight Russian officers and about 
thirty Russian soldiers at and around the control post.

An English-speaking Russian officer there is examining all vehicles. He stated 
that Allied civilians and military could continue on their way if they carried 
Russian translations of their official documents. Allied cars might carry 
“personal luggage,” but the carriage of all freight must be authorised by the 
British authorities and countersigned by the Russian commandant in Berlin. A 
Russian colonel maintained that no new regulations were being put into force 
but that the agreement for the control of the international highway dated from 
the end of 1945.


At the British checkpoint I found one British Military Government lorry which 
the Russians had refused to allow to pass. It was carrying spare parts for a 
volkswagen works at Wolfsbuttel in the British zone and the Russians sent it 
back without explanation in spite of the protests of the British officer in 
charge.


At Nowawes, inside the Russian zone, I heard that more than a dozen German 
houses situated near the autobahn had had to be evacuated by their owners. The 
Russians told them to find other accommodation in the village of Babelsberg 
near by and gave them half an hour to leave. Their houses are to be used by 
Russian troops stationed on a new control post whose numbers may be around 
sixty with a dozen officers. British officers arriving from the British zone 
stated that a secondary Russian checkpoint is in use between 25 and 30 miles 
outside Berlin. This too is on the autobahn and is manned by Russian troops, 
although the checking this morning was carried out by German police.
 