
At ten a.m. Mme. Macrioniti, the wife of an Armenian merchant, came to be our 
interpretess, at the harem of Mehemet Ali, and we made our way up the 
Bosphorus, to little beyond the palace of the Sultan's mother, on the Asiatic 
side, and were received at the door, (which opens with one or two steps into 
the sea, like the Venetian houses) by several servants, and by Achmet Bey, a 
large heavy-looking man, a younger brother of Mehemet.

He took us upstairs to a large handsome room, very cool, though the day was 
hot, with large windows to the sea, which was the apartment for the men, where 
the ladies never come; and soon afterwards he led us by some passages to 
another room, on the same floor, and exactly similar to it, furnished in the 
same way, that is, very meagrely. Placed on the cushions by the window appeared 
a large bundle dressed in white calico, with a blue cotton handkerchief on its 
head, which proved to be Mehemet Ali's mother. On nearer inspection, she had, 
though in bad health, evidently the remains of beauty, with fine eyes, and a 
gentle amiable countenance, very like the pasha.

Near her stood a small ugly effigy of twelve years old, her daughter; and 
beyond her another lady, the pasha's principal wife, of whom he has three. The 
wife and sister were in shape very like the ladies on Chinese paper; they were 
dressed nearly alike; one description may, therefore, do for both. An enormous 
pair of trousers, so wide as to be like two petticoats, completely hid the 
feet; the wife's were of stiff black silk, the sister's of yellow satin, both 
thickly embroidered in gold; a spencer, or vest, with long sleeves of green 
velvet, thickly embroidered with gold, made tight to the body, over which was a 
long very narrow, and tight open gown, made of the thin Broussa silk - black 
and embroidered in gold, and divided into three very long and narrow flaps, 
which trail all around on the floor. The wife had, moreover, round her throat a 
black silk handkerchief, fastened with diamonds; and both she and the young one 
had red fez caps on their heads, larger and broader than those of the men, with 
the long blue silk tassel falling like a shower all about.

The hair of the younger lady was mingled with curls and ringlets of spun silk; 
the other had her hair cut short before like a man's; what became of it behind, 
I know not; her eyebrows were painted, and she had a small sprig of black 
sticking plaster in the middle of her forehead. The caps of both were strewed 
over with diamond stars, crescents and sprigs, all in disorder, and without any 
kind of taste. But it is beyond all power of description to express how 
surpassingly hideous and absurd was the effect of these dresses when the 
wearers attempted to walk; the long straight backs gave them the appearance of 
a woman dressed in a man's coat, with the flaps trailing on the ground, the 
long trousers prevented their getting beyond an embarrassed waddle; and the 
stiff silk causing a loud rustling, made it really difficult to avoid laughing. 
This wife is promoted to the dignity of the superior one, by being the mother 
of the pasha's only child, a very handsome boy of six years old, who was 
brought in, dressed in a little military frock-coat, stiff with gold, and 
hooked and eyed very tight at his throat.

After some time, when our subjects of conversation, which were few, were 
drawing to a close, I suggested our taking a walk; and as the little sister 
said the boy would go with us to their garden and vineyard, we went with him, 
and a man they called his banker, who seemed a sort of superintendent of the 
family, and who spoke Italian.

At parting, he gave us each a beautiful bouquet, and when I asked if we should 
say adieu to the ladies, he said he would do so for us; the fact was, I 
believe, they had all relapsed into their cotton garments, and were smoking 
their pipes; an amusement which, with eating, bathing, dressing, and an 
occasional drive in the arabas to the Sweet Waters, or a little way into the 
country, forms the whole history of the existence of Turkish women. -from 
Countess Grosvenor's Narrative of a Yacht Voyage in the Mediterranean.
 