
CARPENTRAS, JULY 13
Tommy Simpson, the British cyclist, died early this evening after collapsing 
during a mountain stage of theTour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance> in intense heat this 
afternoon, on the ascent of Mont Ventoux, a barren mountain rising over 6,000 
ft near Carpentras. A doctor tried to give him artificial respiration and he 
was flown at once by ambulance helicopter to Avignon hospital. But soon after 
6.30 pm the press at Carpentras were told that Simpson, 29, had died.

The collapse came two miles before the summit of Mont Ventoux on the 
thirteenth stage of the race from Marseilles to Carpentras. Simpson had been 
riding well through the day; all that struck one of his team mates was that he 
was taking drinks more often than usual. At the bottom of the Col he had been 
dropped by one of the leading groups, but towards the top of the climb he was 
still well up in the broken field and trying to regain contact with Aimar's 
small pursuing group 200 yards ahead.

Then, as the few eye witnesses described it, he faltered in his riding and 
fell over to the side of the road. The British team car was right behind him. 
Harry Hall, the team's chief mechanic, helped Simpson remount his cycle, but 
Simpson fell once more.

Dr Pierre Dumas, the doctor who travelled with the tour, examined him and 
immediately ordered his transfer by police helicopter to the nearest hospital. 
Simpson's was the first known death in the Tour's history. He was lying seventh 
in the overall race after the twelfth lap and was the only Briton ever to have 
worn the yellow jersey of overall leader in the race – in 1962. Tour officials 
announced that a ceremony to mark his death would be held tomorrow morning at 
the start of the fourteenth lap. "It is just like autoracing. The race goes 
on," said one. The doctor who attended Simpson at the hospital refused to sign 
a burial certificate, which means that in all probability there will be a 
post-mortem examination.

As a rider Simpson was only just short of the very highest class. He was a 
good climber, a brave descender, an efficient all rounder and highly 
professional. Only one season did he fail to win at least one of the classic 
races, and in 1965 he became world champion, and was voted sportsman of the 
year. He rode in five Tours de France before this one, but in the last two he 
was put out of the race through injury. He had badly wanted to do well this 
year to prove himself a reliable team man.

For more archive extracts on the Tour see The Tour de France … to the bitter 
end 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780852653364>
 (Guardian books)
 