
The Gambia’s army chief pledged his loyalty on Wednesday to President Yahya 
Jammeh, who has refused to accept defeat in last month’s election and faces the 
possibility of regional military intervention to enforce the result of the vote.


 Jammeh initially accepted his loss in the Dec. 1 election but a week later 
reversed his position, vowing to hang onto power despite a wave of regional and 
international condemnation.

 West African regional bloc ECOWAS has placed standby forces on alert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/forces-on-standby-to-oust-gambian-president-yahya-jammeh>
 in case Jammeh attempts to stay in power after his mandate ends on Jan. 19. 
Jammeh has called the bloc’s stance “a declaration of war“.

 “May I please seize this opportunity to renew to your Excellency the 
assurance of the unflinching loyalty and support of the Gambia Armed Forces,” 
General Ousman Badjie wrote in a letter to Jammeh published in a pro-government 
newspaper.

 Many Gambians, who have lived through 22 years of Jammeh’s increasingly 
authoritarian rule, were stunned when the elections commission declared 
opposition figure Adama Barrow the winner of last month’s election. Jammeh’s 
initial acceptance of the result sparked nationwide celebrations.

 Badjie declared his allegiance to Barrow soon after the poll results were 
announced, according to a spokesman for the president-elect. However his 
position remained unclear followingJammeh’s dramatic about-face. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/gambia-president-yahya-jammeh-will-not-step-down>

 Also on Wednesday, Jammeh’s ruling party, the APRC, filed a second petition 
at the Supreme Court asking it to nullify the election results because of 
alleged voting irregularities.

 The court, which has not heard cases for years, is scheduled to consider an 
earlier challenge by Jammeh’s camp on 10 January, nine days before Barrow is 
due to be inaugurated in a ceremony West African leaders say they will attend.

In another illustration of the growing pressure on Gambian officials as the 19 
January deadline looms, Alieu Momarr Njai, the head of the elections 
commission, fledThe Gambia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gambia> on Friday 
due to fears for his security, family members said.

 Last month Gambian security forces seized control of the commission’s 
headquarters, which holds the original poll records and told staff, including 
Njai, to leave.

 Over the weekend Gambian security agents closed three private radio stations, 
making it harder for the incoming government to communicate with its supporters.

 “It is a sign of weakness for any side of the political spectrum to resort to 
media closures rather than engagement to put one’s position across,” Barrow’s 
office said on Wednesday in a statement.
 