
I haven’t always been the kind of man who plays videogames. I used to be the 
kind of boy who played videogames. We’re inseparable, games and I. If you cut 
me, I’d bleed pixels. Or blood. Probably blood, come to think of it.

Games get a bad press compared with, say, opera – even though they’re 
obviously better, because no opera has ever compelled an audience member to 
collect a giant mushroom and jump across some clouds. Nobody writes articles in 
which opera-lovers are mocked as adult babies who never grew out of 
make-believe and sing-song; obsessive misfits who flock to weird “opening 
nights” wearing elaborate “tuxedo”cosplay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/may/13/cosplay-sci-fi-weekender-dressing-up-fantasy-characters>
 outfits.

On no account go to the opera yourself: you’ll probably run into a mafia boss. 
According to at least one film I think I saw once, mafia bosses love opera, 
because there’s loads of death and killing in it. Yet politicians don’t table 
motions solemnly condemning opera’s dangerous level of violence.

Opera – a three-hour unskippable cutscene and all-round cultural blight whose 
primary function in modern society is to be used as a backing music to 
slow-motion montages of sporting folk – gets an easy ride partly because it’s 
called “opera”, instead of “singy-sing-sing time”. This is gaming’s biggest 
image problem: that infantile word, “gaming”. Or rather, that was gaming’s 
biggest problem, until the arrival of “gamergate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/16/gamergate-abuse-feminist-new-york-times-anita-sarkeesian>
”.

If you don’t know what gamergate is, I’d suggest you Google it, because I’ve 
tried and failed to explain its roots in person to people I consider patient 
grownups, each of whom pulled a face like I was describing the plot of a 
terrible high-school teen drama. It began with a blogpost written by the 
disgruntled ex-boyfriend of a female games developer, and somehow ballooned 
into a bitter online culture war bristling with gruesome personal threats. Both 
sides of the argument have flaws and strengths, nothing that couldn’t normally 
be hammered out in a few hours of civil debate. But there’s something in the 
water: gamergate has dragged on for weeks, growing increasingly toxic. And now, 
in 2014, women have been forced into hiding – for voicing an opinion about 
videogames. That’s a sentence that should only ever appear in the opening 
chapter of an implausible dystopian sci-fi novel, moments before you toss it in 
the bin.

There seems to be a small yet vocal core of maniacs bafflingly resistant to 
the notion that women should have any say in the games industry at all. Even 
recent statistics indicating that female players now outnumber men can’t sway 
them, thanks to a lazy assumption that most of those women are playing Candy 
Crush or other, equally non-taxing “casual games” apparently un worthy of being 
called “games” at all. I don’t think that’s true, and even if it were, 
I wouldn’t blame women for voluntarily choosing to play something soothing and 
non-threatening in their free time, since they spend so much of the rest of 
their time being forced to play a terrifying survival horror MMORPG 
colloquially known as “The Internet”. Women are the hardest hardcore gamers 
there are, by miles.

You know those games where you get to choose your character class at the 
start, weighing up the pros and cons of picking a Warrior over an Archmage, or 
what have you? Never, ever choose “woman” on your first playthrough of The
Internet <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet>, because you’ll face 
an immediate difficulty spike. Suddenly it’s a stealth game with nowhere to 
hide, one with hundreds of respawning enemies waiting to attack you the moment 
you make a noise or stand out in any way whatsoever. The enemy AI is 
sophisticated and unpredictable; it studies your weaknesses and moves to 
exploit them. Instead of shitting fireballs at you, your foes bombard you with 
unrelenting abuse. Reach the higher difficulty stages without dying (by your 
own hand) and this could graduate to blood-curdling death threats.

Sadly, there’s no easy way for male players to experience the hardcore 
“female” difficulty setting to the full – perhaps if The Internet was available 
in the form of an old-school text adventure, in which you play a woman on an 
epic quest to just go about her business, it’d be fun to try it out for a while.

I can picture it now. Black screen, white text. DOS style.

“You are a woman,” it reads. “You are standing in an open field west of a 
white house, with a boarded front door. There is a small mailbox here.”

There’s a prompt, blinking. You take your first step into this brave new world 
by typing OPEN MAILBOX, and hitting return.

DIE U FUCKN WHORE, replies the game.

Not one to be dissuaded, you try again. OPEN MAILBOX.

I SAID DIE U FUCKN WHORE says the game, accompanied by an animated gif of your 
head on a porn star’s body.

You decide to see what you’re carrying, by typing INVENTORY.

YOU HAVE: A LAMP, A ROPE, A FAT ASS AND SAGGY TITS, chuckles the game.

You try something else. You type GO NORTH.

The game thinks for a while, then distributes your home address and phone 
number and threatens to murder you and your entire family.

OK. That’s enough. QUIT GAME, you type, fingers shaking: QUIT GAME.

But it won’t quit. And you can’t be sure it ever will.
 