
Golden present and rosy future met in the track centre here on Friday night, 
at least as far as British women’s team pursuiting went.

The Rio gold medallist Joanna Rowsell-Shand watched a youthful British quartet 
of Emily Kay, Emily Nelson, Eleanor Dickinson and Manon Lloyd ride to a 
composed victory in the 4,000m, along with the “fifth woman” in the Rio squad, 
Ciara Horne, while another Rio gold winner Katie Archibald has been mentoring 
the team this weekend.

Shane Sutton considering Australia cycling performance director job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/04/shane-sutton-australia-cycling-performance-director-job>
On this showing there is every chance that one or more of the youngsters will 
be pressing their seniors hard in the run-in to Tokyo.

Together with the former sprinter Dani Khan, who rode Thursday’s qualifying 
round before giving way to Kay, they exude promise and enthusiasm. Nelson and 
Lloyd are about to celebrate their 20th birthdays – on Saturday for Lloyd, next 
weekend for Nelson – while Kay is relatively senior at 21, and Dickinson is 18, 
fresh from riding the European Championships a few weeks ago as a junior, and 
such a new inclusion in the squad she has barely trained with her team mates.

The quintet timed their run perfectly for this World Cup. They qualified 
second fastest on Thursday, then disposed of the Poland quartet in the second 
round before taking on the Italians – the fastest qualifiers and the European 
champions – in the final.

For all their youth they have a wealth of junior and under-23 gold medals at 
world and European level behind them – Kay and Nelson won the junior world team 
pursuit championship here in 2013 – and they needed that experience in the 
final, where the Italians were constantly ahead but never by more than around 
half a second.

Lloyd, who had put in a massive lap and three-quarter starting effort to get 
the team up to speed, paid the price and pulled up with four laps to go. At the 
same time Italy’s Simone Frapporti swung up for one last time, leaving both 
teams with the minimum three counters in the final kilometre.

It then came down to who had most strength left and when Maria-Giulia 
Confalioneri slipped off the back of the Italian string with two laps 
remaining, the crowd sensed a gold medal was imminent if the three British 
women could keep close to each other’s wheels. By the gun Confalioneri was half 
a dozen lengths adrift of her team-mates, while the young Britons hung 
together, inspired by the crowd, according to Kay.

“When you go into a ride like that and know it’s going to be close, you try to 
keep to your ride,” she said. “You can hear the crowd. In a weird way they gave 
you that extra bit of energy. Down that back straight going into the last lap I 
had to fight to stay together until the end and I think that made the 
difference.”

Similarly, the Great Britain men’s endurance squad have more than a whiff of 
the future about them, including a 19-year-old Matt Bostock, a 20-year-old 
Oliver Wood and a 21-year-old Mark Stewart, who comes from Dundee and the 
former kilometre rider Kian Emadi-Coffin, who is making the transition from 
sprinting, plus the seasoned Andy Tennant.

Tennant, Wood, Emadi-Coffin and Stewart had to endure a false start in the 
final against France, who included the Tour de France veteran Sylvain Chavanel 
along with the promising Corentin Ermenault, who has been linked with Sir 
Bradley Wiggins’s eponymous team for next season.

British Cycling seeks a new head committed to ‘equality and diversity’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/02/british-cycling-performance-director-job-advertisement>
The British went out fastest and while the French fought back in the second 
kilometre and ran the home team close throughout the Britons ran out relatively 
comfortable gold medallists by 1.339sec, but again breaking the 4min barrier to 
do so.

Continuing the theme of youthful promise, the sprinter Ryan Owens, who 
travelled to Rio as a reserve, qualified second fastest in a promising 
9.890sec, and ended up fourth after being taken to three rounds in the 
quarter-final by his team-mate Joe Truman. At 20 and 19 respectively they have 
plenty of time ahead and that is something most of the Great Britain team here 
have in common.
 