
The elegant, perceptive journalism of Georgina Howell, who has died aged 73, 
entertained and informed readers of British and American magazines for 40 
years, until she retired to Brittany in 2000 to write Daughter of the Desert, a 
biography of Gertrude Bell, the explorer, linguist and archaeologist who was 
the British government’s oriental secretary in Iraq in the 1920s.

Bell, whose life has since been made into a film, directed by Werner Herzog 
and starring Nicole Kidman, was Georgina’s heroine: an early feminist, the 
first woman to gain a first in modern history at Oxford, the first to achieve 
senior rank in British military intelligence and the first to win respect and 
to be treated as an equal by the establishment in Britain and rulers in the 
Middle East. The biography,published in 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/sep/03/biography.features> and later 
retitled Queen of the Desert, was shortlisted for the Samuel Johnson prize. 
Georgina also edited Bell’s writings in A Woman in Arabia (2015), for Penguin 
Classics.

Georgina began her career in journalism at 18 in 1960 by winning Vogue’s 
annual talent contest – the route to success for many aspiring young writers. 
She left behind the shorthand and typing classes at the London School of 
Secretaries and began work in Vogue’s Condé Nast offices “watering the plants 
and taking messages” for the garden editor of House and Garden, who, Georgina 
said, “had a very demanding social round that permitted few visits to the 
office”.

She was soon transferred to Vogue, where she wrote copy for fashion spreads, 
won £5 in a staff competition by coming up with the slogan “Buy nothing until 
you buy Vogue” and assisted in styling the studio shoots of David Bailey,Duffy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/jun/06/brian-duffy-obituary>, 
Snowdon andTerence Donovan 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/obituaries/obituary-terence-donovan-1354218.html>
.

Beatrix Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/25/beatrix-miller> 
(always “Miss Miller” to Georgina) became editor of Vogue in 1964, recognised 
the young writer’s talent and gave her features to do. Within a few years, 
Miller promoted her to features editor and she later commissioned her to write 
a history of Vogue UK, published in 1975 as In Vogue: Six Decades of Fashion. 
Georgina updated it in 1991 with the title In Vogue: 75 Years of Style, to 
coincide with the magazine’s 75th anniversary.

An only child, she was born in Kimberley, South Africa, where her father, 
Bill, a career RAF officer, was training British fighter pilots for combat in 
the second world war. Her mother, Gwen (nee Darrington), wrote and presented 
short stories for the BBC’s Woman’s Hour. When Bill was posted to RAF bases in 
the far east and Britain, Georgina was sent to a succession of substandard 
convent schools where, as a Protestant, she felt discriminated against. Her 
treatment by nuns gave her a deep loathing of organised religion, though she 
did once try Buddhism and believed that everyone had a soul and there would be 
a hereafter.

Georgina had the most impeccable manners. In the tumultuous world of magazine 
and newspaper journalism, she was a calm, cool, modest presence and never 
raised her voice in the executive positions she held after leaving Vogue – 
fashion editor of the Observer and deputy editor of Tatler.

But beneath it all there was steely determination, which became evident to 
David Robson, deputy editor of the Sunday Times Magazine, who commissioned 
features from her when she was a freelance writer in the 1980s. He remembers 
her tenacity in trying to find a famous woman who might have preserved the 
fashionable clothes she wore in the past. After negotiations by telephone with 
Bianca Jagger in Nicaragua, Georgina tracked down her frocks and accessories to 
a self-storage unit in Croydon.

“Bianca was twitchy about everything – photographer, hairdresser and makeup 
artist – and even insisted on having a mirror to reflect the camera viewfinder 
to check on how she looked,” said Robson. “But Georgina wouldn’t give up and 
she got the feature we wanted.”

Georgina infused her writing with worldly intelligence. In the book of her 
collected journalism, Sultans of Style (1990), she describes the work of 
Vivienne Westwood thus: “She created confrontational, nose-thumbing costume for 
people with a terror of passing unremarked … As fashion they’re schlock. As 
style they’re 100% effective.”

Her feature writing in the 1990s for American Vogue, the Sunday Times and 
Vanity Fair broadened to include interviews with rock and film stars, 
politicians and royalty: her subjects included Clint Eastwood, Axl Rose, Lord 
(Chris) Patten, Robert Redford, Ronald and Nancy Reagan,Princess Diana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1997/sep/01/guardianobituaries.monarchy>, 
Princess Anne andElizabeth Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/mar/23/elizabeth-taylor-obituary>.

In 1990 she married Christopher Bailey, whom she met while researching the 
misbehaviour of Hooray Henrys at the Royal Agricultural College (now 
University), where he was the registrar. Her first marriage, to the painter and 
art teacher Michael Buhler, with whom she had a son, Tom, had broken down in 
the late 60s.

Living with Christopher, in a 1,000-year-old, courtyarded manor house they 
restored in Brittany, became a new and blissful rural life for Georgina. 
Christopher devotedly cared for her after she was diagnosed with cancer four 
years ago. He and Tom survive her.

• Georgina Howell, journalist and author, born 8 May 1942; died 21 January 2016
 