
Fifteen years after revolutionising the glossy women’s magazine market, 
Glamour is to scrap its “handbag” size, opting for a bigger format that 
recognises that in a digital age print magazines are now “luxurious and 
indulgent”.

Glamour became an instant success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2001/mar/22/condenast.pressandpublishing> 
when it hit newsstands in 2001 – despite the publisher of its arch-rival 
Cosmopolitan labelling it a “pygmy” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/mar/08/mondaymediasection2> – and 
rapidly became the top-selling women’s glossy magazine in the UK.


Its publisher, Condé Nast, said the move to scrap the handbag size was a 
recognition that in a digital age women are no longer “snacking” on a print 
product they can take with them as they did when the title was launched.


The rise of Glamour magazine
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/mar/08/mondaymediasection2>
From January, Glamour will be published in a larger format, the same size as 
stablemates Vanity Fair and Wired, “recognising that the print experience is 
now regarded as more luxurious and indulgent”.


“Glamour was a brilliant innovation, a star was born, and as the frontrunner 
in the market we gave women the editorial they craved how and when they wanted 
it,” said Jo Elvin, who has edited the title since it launched in the UK. 
“Embracing digital from day one … now is the moment to recalibrate in response 
to our readers’ changing lifestyle and needs.”


As part of the relaunch Glamour, which will remain priced at £2, will be 
printed using a higher quality paper stock to “amplify” the print product for 
readers.


In line with many other magazines, Glamour is relaunching its website later 
this month with a focus on “mobile first”, as 70% of its online readership 
comes from mobile devices.


The new-look Glamour.com will also include the launch of a Glamour Video 
channel showing archive footage as well as “a number of new creative franchises 
aimed squarely at our video-obsessed millennial audience”.

Glamour has a monthly print circulation of 300,000 while Cosmopolitan sells 
407,000 copies, according to the latest Audit Bureau of Circulations figures.

Jamie Jouning, publishing director at Condé Nast, said the title would be less 
like its direct rival Cosmopolitan and “closer to Marie Claire and Elle”.

Cosmopolitan has taken a completely opposite strategy, opting last October to 
slash its cover price from
£3.80 to £1.

The move, which made it half the cost of Glamour, helped it drive total 
circulation up to more than 400,000, taking the top spot in the women’s 
glossies market from its rival.

Cosmopolitan also significantly upped the number of copies given away for free 
– to places such as gyms and shopping centres – to more than 100,000.

On Thursday, Cosmopolitan’s publisher, Hearst UK, which owns titles including 
All About Soap, Esquire, Harpers Bazaar and Good Housekeeping, internally 
announced a cost-cutting strategy putting more than 60 roles at risk, the 
Guardian has learned.

The restructure includes a radical rethink of digital strategy that includes 
scrapping the youth website Sugarscape and the Reveal.co.uk website, leaving 
the monthly magazine a print-only product.

Digital Spy, once the company’s big digital-only media, tech and showbusiness 
star, which positioned itself against the likes of Mashable, is understood to 
be making dramatic cuts of potentially half its staff.

The website, which will refocus on a narrower range of content, is thought to 
employ as many as 50 full-time and part-time staff.

A spokeswoman said the cuts were part of a plan to “reshape” its business and 
focus on the digital future. She added that it was hoped that many of the staff 
at risk would be redeployed within the business.

There also expected to be cuts at the company’s extensive magazine portfolio.
 