
Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> is being sued over its 
internal confidentiality policies which bar employees from putting in writing 
concerns over “illegal” activity, posting opinions about the company, and even 
writing novels “about someone working at a tech company in Silicon Valley” 
without first giving their employer sign-off on the final draft.


The lawsuit, revealed by industry news site The Information 
<https://www.theinformation.com/employee-lawsuit-accuses-google-of-spying-program>
, accuses Google of breaching California labour laws through its 
confidentiality provisions, by preventing employees from exercising their legal 
rights to discuss workplace conditions, wages, and potential violations inside 
the company.

It has been brought by an individual employee under a Californian act that 
allows employees to sue on behalf of co-workers; if the employee wins, the 
state gets 75% of the penalty, while the remaining payout would be split among 
Google’s employees. The maximum fine in Google’s case is almost $4bn.

The lawsuit opens with a strong claim 
<http://www.bakerlp.com/Google-Blackout-Case/2016-12-19-PAGA-Complaint-Against-Google.pdf>
: “Google’s motto is ‘don’t be evil.’ Google’s illegal confidentiality 
agreements and policies fail this test,” it says.


The core of the complaint is that Google’s confidentiality policies prevent 
employees from exercising speech rights which are protected, both 
constitutionally and in federal and state law.

In a statement given to the Guardian, Google described the suit as “baseless”.

“We’re very committed to an open internal culture, which means we frequently 
share with employees details of product launches and confidential business 
information”, the company added. “Transparency is a huge part of our culture. 
Our employee confidentiality requirements are designed to protect proprietary 
business information, while not preventing employees from disclosing 
information about terms and conditions of employment, or workplace concerns.”

The policies, the lawsuit claims, restrict Googlers from effectively seeking 
new work, because they cannot use all the skills they gain at the company in 
future jobs; they unlawfully limit what employees can do out of work, by 
preventing employees from speaking to the press “or otherwise exercising their 
speech rights”; and they prevent employees from disclosing information to 
government or regulators, even if the employee believes that Google is breaking 
the law.

One such policy, cited in the lawsuit, instructs Googlers to “avoid 
communications that conclude, or appear to conclude, that Google or Googlers 
are acting ‘illegally’ or ‘negligently,’ have ‘violated the law,’ should or 
would be ‘liable’ for anything, or otherwise convey legal meaning.”

Another training program warns them: “Don’t send an email that says ‘I think 
we broke the law’ or ‘I think we violated this contract.’” The filing also 
claims “the training program also advises employees that they should not be 
candid when speaking with Google’s attorneys about dangerous products or 
violations of the law.”

The suit says that Google’s confidentiality policies go so far that they also 
“prohibit employees from writing creative fiction. Among other things, Google’s 
Employee Communication Policy prohibits employees from writing ‘a novel about 
someone working at a tech company in Silicon Valley’ unless Google gives prior 
approval to both the book idea and the final draft.”


While confidentiality policies are common in Silicon Valley, the suit argues 
that Google has a responsibility to include in its employee training the fact 
that staffers are allowed to speak about Google with non-Googlers, even press 
and regulators, in certain circumstances.
 