
A camel, a biplane and a monster truck convene in the Californian desert. A 
trio of dalmatians flank Naomi Campbell in a white convertible. Nine models 
lounge in haute couture in an enchanted forest. A handsome spaceman washes up 
in his capsule on a hazy beach.

Related: Q&A: Grace Coddington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/26/grace-coddington-interview>

Often described as the most influential fashion editor of the past 30 years, 
US Vogue creative director Grace Coddington has produced some of fashion’s most 
memorable imagery. Her pictures might be jolly and decadent or moody and 
mysterious, but they always tell a story – and a sweeping, vivid yarn at that.

On Wednesday, Coddington announced that she was stepping down from her role. 
It sounded, at first, like a subtle shift – the 74-year-old would become 
creative director-at-large, working on several shoots a year – but the 
industry’s reaction was seismic. New York Times fashion criticVanessa Friedman 
described her decision as “the tectonic plates shifting” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/21/fashion/grace-coddington-vogue.html>, 
arguing that the old guard of fashion might finally be making way for a new, 
more digitally aware culture.
 Naomi Campbell in a shoot by Peter Lindbergh. Photograph: Lindbergh/Phaidon 
As Friedman also pointed out, Coddington’s move was particularly poignant 
given her status as the living embodiment of the good old days of fashion. 
Highly recognisable – a shock of orange hair against porcelain skin, the kind 
of visual branding Elizabeth I would have appreciated – she sketches pictures 
from the front row while those around her take snaps on their iPhones. She has 
been central to the industry since the 1960s, first as a model, then as an 
editor on British and later US Vogue. But what really sets her apart is her 
determination to create beautiful imagery against all odds, even if it involves 
batting off commercial concerns or risking the wrath of governments – as in 
1976, when she had Jerry Hall pose in a red swimsuit atop a Soviet monument in 
the USSR, and had to smuggle out the film. In 2009, she became the unlikely 
star of the Vogue documentary The September Issue, in which she came across as 
the guardian of artistry in the face of Anna Wintour’s pragmatic commercialism.

Historically, sweeping Coddington-style editorials have always been about more 
than clothes, according to Susanna Brown, photography curator at the Victoria 
and Albert Museum. Since the first fashion magazine photography, in the 1880s, 
they have sold a lifestyle and helped shape contemporary culture. During the 
second world war, says Brown, “the British and American editions of Vogue 
raised morale with optimistic articles and photographs of practical wartime 
fashions. Cecil Beaton used the bomb-damaged Inner Temple as the backdrop for 
an image of a suited model in a defiant pose.”
 A Mario Testino shoot for Coddington featuring an 18-year-old Gisele 
Bündchen, far left, taken in Italy in 1998. Photograph: Phaidon 
But constructing dreams the Coddington way comes at a price. Hours of manpower 
are poured into the organisation of such photo shoots; thousands must be spent 
on flights and accommodation. Even Coddington is not immune to such concerns, 
says Iain R Webb, former Blitz, Harpers & Queen and Elle fashion editor. 
“Things were already changing during my time at Elle in the late 1990s,” he 
says. “Airlines stopped handing out free travel for credits and hotels became 
less accommodating. Carting a team off to exotic locations was no longer cost 
effective. Combined with the demand on output – less time, more images – and a 
growing pressure to please advertisers, the process started to become less 
creative and more prescriptive. Grace summed it up when she told me, ‘You’d go 
on a Vogue trip to Africa for two weeks. Now it’s two days and it’s not even 
Africa - it’s Miami, and you’re trying to make it look like Africa!’”

The influence of these grand gestures is hard to quantify, but it is dwarfed 
by the reach of social media. As recently as the 1990s, such images were the 
only way many fashion fans would get to see the work of their favourite 
designers. Now, they’re one of many channels. One cameraphone snap by Cara 
Delevingne reaches 25.7 million Instagram users at the touch of a “share” 
button, whileUS Vogue’s circulation has remained more or less constant at 
around 1.2m since Wintour took over in 1988 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1988/06/30/arts/anna-wintour-transferred-to-head-vogue-magazine.html>
.
 US Vogue editor Anna Wintour, left, with Coddington during Paris Fashion Week 
in 2010. Photograph: Antonio de Moraes Barros Filho/WireImage 
That said, it is certainly possible for a glossy magazine to reach millions 
through its photography. In 2014, Kim Kardashian’s Paper magazine cover shoot – 
in which the reality TV star balanced a champagne glass on her bottom –caused 
such a furore that it was widely described as “breaking the internet” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/dec/17/kim-kardashian-butt-break-the-internet-paper-magazine>
. Hundreds of millions of people saw the pictures – Kardashian alone has more 
than 50 million Instagram followers – despite the fact that the magazine’s 
circulation is just 155,000.

Related: Grace Coddington to step down as creative director of American Vogue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/20/grace-coddington-american-vogue-anna-wintour>

US Vogue’s glossy, 20-page fashion editorials, on the other hand, do not 
really live on the internet. Though a few may be available online, their main 
home is within the physical pages of the magazine. They offer a mark of 
difference from the blurry images casually consumed for free on the internet; 
they help to make fashion magazines escapist paradises suitable for securing 
high-end advertising. They are designed to be pored over slowly by invested 
readers, perhaps while sipping red wine in the bath. Only time will tell if 
such an experience will one day appeal to iPhone-addicted millennials.

Among the old guard in the industry, glossy fashion photo shoots remain 
gravely important. Editors and buyers still discuss them reverentially at 
fashion shows; photographers and stylists use the cachet of shooting for Vogue 
to secure commercial jobs. They are a measure of power, creativity and cultural 
clout; a connection to the rarefied worlds of art and photography.

Whether or not Coddington’s move will have a tectonic effect remains to be 
seen, but it shines a light on the deepening divide between the industry’s 
priorities and readers’ increasingly digital lives. Publishers should use this 
moment to work out how to maintain their gravitas while producing content that 
feels – as Vogue might say of this season’s most fashionable shoe – suitably 
modern and relevant.

Coddington’s legacy: the experts’ view

Lucinda Chambers
Fashion director at British Vogue and former assistant to Grace Coddington

Most stylists are interested in one specific look, but Grace has extraordinary 
range. She can do anything from grunge to couture, she understands the point of 
view of an incredible variety of photographers, and she does simplicity well, 
but can also go completely over the top. She does everything to an 
extraordinary level. She has an astounding imagination and a childlike view of 
fashion, as though she is seeing everything for the first time. She has also 
broken much new ground because of her longevity. She was the first person to 
put a model wearing no makeup on the cover of Vogue in the late 1970s – I was 
her assistant at the time and we received hundreds of letters, “shocked and 
outraged from Reading”. I don’t think she is afraid of anything – and the same 
can’t be said of many fashion editors and stylists today.

Susanna Brown
Curator of photographs for the V&A’s Word and Image department

During both her career as a model and her long tenure as Vogue’s creative 
director, Grace has been respected for her individualism and her understanding 
of fashion as an expressive medium. She has collaborated with several 
generations of photographers, modelling for the likes of Frank Horvat, Norman 
Parkinson and Jeanloup Sieff in the 1960s. Her past experience as a model 
brought insight to her work on the other side of the camera, for instance with 
Guy Bourdin, Barry Lategan and Helmut Newton at British Vogue between 1968 and 
87. Since the late 80s at American Vogue she has championed the fantasy of 
fashion, and collaborated with photographers such as Annie Leibovitz, Steven 
Klein, Craig McDean, Steven Meisel, Mert & Marcus, David Sims, Bruce Weber – to 
name just a few. It seems that she has never been driven by an interest in 
consumerism or fleeting trends. In the transient world of fashion, she’s 
remained true to her unadulterated creative vision.
 Talisa Soto photographed in 1982 by Bruce Weber for Coddington. Photograph: 
Weber/Phaidon 
Robin Muir
Contributing editor and former picture editor at British Vogue, and curator of 
Vogue 100: A Century of Style at the National Portrait Gallery

When you talk to some younger creatives, you sense a slight embarrassment 
about doing fashion – as though it’s a bit cheap and commercial – but for 50 
years, in front of and behind the camera, Grace has delighted in fashion 
photography for fashion photography’s sake. She has worked brilliantly with 
photographers – having been a model, she had longstanding relationships with 
the likes of Bourdin and Newton, who would not have dreamed of working for 
British Vogue had it not been for Grace. She also put Weber on the map. The 
1982 shoot they collaborated on (see picture above) was a seminal moment. A 
tribute to the artist Edward Weston, using non-models, many of whom were shot 
from behind, it felt like such a departure from the bright colours of so much 
photography in the 1980s. You just wanted to run through that cornfield, 
wearing that coat.
 