
One Olympic cycle can make a massive difference. In late autumn 2012, the 
World Cup at the Chris Hoy velodrome in Glasgow bookended a summer of golden 
glory for British cyclists in which Sir Bradley Wiggins had won the Tour de 
France for the first time, Mark Cavendish had worn the rainbow jersey to great 
effect, and the track events at the London Olympics had been dominated to the 
extent that the opposition were reduced to muttering darkly about “special 
wheels”.

Four years on, Great Britain are again in Glasgow, where racing started on 
Thursday night with a team pursuit qualifying session for men and women but in 
a different context. The team are headless.

The post of performance director was advertised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/02/british-cycling-performance-director-job-advertisement>
 this week, six months after Shane Sutton stepped down as the coach over 
allegations of “inappropriate and discriminatory language”upheld a week ago by 
an inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/british-cycling-upholds-complaint-shane-sutton-jessica-varnish>
.

An inquiry into the background to the Sutton saga is under way, and on 
Thursday night he indicated his intention to appeal. At the Rouleur Classic 
exhibition in London, he told the Press Association: “I can categorically state 
I never made those comments I was originally alleged to have made. I’m pretty 
sure people will be sitting back going ‘well, he’s going to appeal’ – which is 
going to happen now. I will take it from there. I will produce the evidence. 
Everything comes out in the dirty washing. I am quite sure the evidence this 
time will prevail and I will win.”

The other architect of the 2012 triumphs, Sir Dave Brailsford – who left 
British Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> in 2014 – 
is in a precarious position at Team Sky as UK Anti-Doping investigates the 
delivery of a package containing an undisclosed “medical product” to the team.

It is also likely the culture, media and sport parliamentary select committee 
will question BritishCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> in 
December over therapeutic use exemptions after the revelation that Wiggins had 
an injection of the corticosteroid triamcinolone immediately before his 2012 
Tour victory and on two other occasions close to major target events; the 
substance was taken within anti-doping rules after a TUE and no offence was 
committed, but criticism has been widespread.

Finally, along with a new team head, the governing body is looking for a chief 
executive after Ian Drake announced he would leave in April next year.

British Cycling seeks a new head committed to ‘equality and diversity’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/02/british-cycling-performance-director-job-advertisement>
This looks like turmoil but there is one key constant: domination of the 
Olympic medal table. With 12 medals including six golds won in Rio by GB 
cyclists, Glasgow in 2016 is a case ofplus ca change, plus c’est la même chose 
and the riders travelled north from Manchester this week knowing as in 2008, as 
in 2012, the results are very much on their side whatever else is going on.

This explains why, for example, the team pursuit gold medallist Katie 
Archibald, the only member of the Olympic squad racing in Glasgow this weekend, 
feels insulated from recent events. “We are all on a high,” she said. “Every 
British track cyclist at Rio won a medal. It’s a big wave we can coast on for a 
while. The political dramas seem bizarre. As a rider you talk to your coach for 
the day‑to-day things and so you don’t feel any effect. You end up reading 
about it in the press, reading the stories and so you see it as external. 
That’s credit to the atmosphere at British Cycling – the riders aren’t 
concerned by politics, they are concerned by training. Needing a new 
performance director doesn’t bother me.”

This is home turf for Archibald, who comes from Milngavie on Glasgow’s 
north-west outskirts. She concedes readily she is “flying” after winning the 
women’s omnium and the individual pursuit at the European Championships in 
Paris and dominating the women’s events at the recentLondon Six‑Day. “I’ve done 
every superstitious dance I can to hold that form for this weekend. After this 
I have to accept that [team pursuit] training will kick in again.”

The local crowd will get to see Archibald racing the scratch on Sunday night 
and the Madison on Saturday, a significant moment as the two-rider relay is a 
new if belated addition to the women’s schedule and this is the first time a 
fully international field will contest the event. The weekend will also see the 
first running of an omnium at World Cup level under the new format, in which it 
is cut to one day and four endurance races, with a new discipline, the tempo 
race, appearing alongside the scratch, points and elimination.

Even though her strongest event, the individual pursuit, has gone, Archibald 
has her sights on the omnium in the long term, in spite of her team-mate Laura 
Trott’s dominance in the past five years: “Since I’ve been on my bike I’ve 
wanted to be the best. [Saying] that is something people shy away from because 
journalists say they want to knock so-and-so off their throne, but it’s 
something I will train for, that and the individual pursuit.”

Together with the team pursuiter Andy Tennant, the 22-year-old Archibald is, 
in terms of race experience, effectively the senior member of a youthful Great 
Britain team made up mainly of members of the under-23 academies. They have 
travelled without any up-and-coming women sprinters. Filling that gap will, no 
doubt, be on the to-do list of the next performance director but for the next 
three days racing should take precedence over politics.
 