
Hannah Mills and Saskia Clark are all but certain to win gold for Great 
Britain in the women’s 470. Mills and Clark, who won silver at London 2012, 
produced a series of fine performances on the ninth day of the regatta when 
they finished third in the eighth race, second in the ninth, and third in the 
10th.

Combined with their three wins earlier in the competition this meant Mills and 
Clark have a 20-point lead over the New Zealanders who beat them four years 
ago, Jo Aleh and Polly Powrie. So long as Clark and Mills finish the medal race 
on Wednesday they will win gold.

“It’s completely surreal,” said Mills. “I’m absolutely shocked, stunned and so 
relieved.” The pair had been leading the fleet after seven races but had an 
uneasy wait after racing was postponed on Monday because of the weather 
conditions.

“We have sailed out of our skin in a marathon event,” said Mills. “We have 
been sailing for what feels like forever to win a gold medal this week and I 
can’t believe it.”

Using what may or may not be a technical term, Mills explained that “we just 
bashed in three solid faces, and that’s what we tried to do all week”.

Along with everyone else at the regatta they had been triple-checking the 
points’ calculations to make sure they were correct. “I didn’t trust our coach 
that he got the points right,” Mills said, “and until we’ve got the medal I’m 
not sure it will sink in.” First they need to finish the final race without 
being disqualified.

Even if they come last the two points they earn would be enough to win the 
gold.

It should be easy enough although the fact that Aleh and Powrie have been 
disqualified twice since the regatta started is a reminder Mills and Clark 
cannot take anything for granted.

“We just need not to mess up,” Clark said, “be solid and get around the 
course.”

Mills, 28, and Clark, 36, first teamed up 18 months before the London 
Olympics. Clark finished sixth in the 470 class in Beijing but struggled to 
find a new partner for London 2012 before pairing up with Mills.

Despite the short amount of time they had been working together they were 
devastated to be beaten to the gold medal in 2012 by Aleh and Powrie.

Going into the medal race at those Olympics the two boats were tied in the 
standings, so whichever one finished ahead of the other on the day would win 
the gold. This time things will be a lot more comfortable for the British pair.

It will be Great Britain’s second gold medal in as many days after Giles 
Scott’s victory in the men’s Finn, and their third overall with Nick Dempsey’s 
silver in the RS:X windsurfing.

Scott also had such a sizeable lead that he had effectively won the event 
before the medal race had started. Great Britain’s other medal contenders, 
however, did not get on so well on Tuesday.

Nick Thompson finished sixth in the Laser, and Alison Young eighth in the 
Laser Radial.

Thompson and Young are the world champions in their events.
 