
In 1916, the novelist Thomas Mann wrote to his friend Ernst Bertram that he 
believed the tragedy of Germany was "symbolised and personified by my brother 
and myself". He may have been correct. The story of the strained relationship 
between Thomas and Heinrich Mann – characterised by a lifelong hate-envy – is a 
familiar part of German literary history. According to the German critic Marcel 
Reich-Ranicki, in his bookThomas Mann and his Family 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/s/ref=nb_sb_noss?url=search-alias%3Daps&field-keywords=Thomas+Mann+and+his+Family&x=0&y=0>
 (1989), Thomas Mann "was as sensitive as a prima donna and as vain as a 
tenor". Reich-Ranicki hits exactly the right note: the Mann family story is the 
stuff of German opera.

Thomas and Heinrich were from Lübeck in northern Germany. Heinrich was the 
elder by four years. He dropped out of school, gave up work, and became a 
writer. His little brother Thomas wanted to be just like him. With the 
publication of his very first novel, Buddenbrooks (1901) – a fictional account 
of the Mann family – he succeeded. The book became a sensation. Thomas became 
rich and famous. "I was swept up in a whirl of success," he wrote. In 1912 he 
wrote Death in Venice and in 1929, he won the Nobel prize for literature. 
Meanwhile, Heinrich disappeared in his brother's wake.

Among his many works, Heinrich wrote only one novel that is now remembered, 
Professor Unrat (1905), and that only because in 1930 it was made into a film -
The Blue Angel <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0020697/> – starring Marlene 
Dietrich. Heinrich's books were not merely bad, wrote Thomas, but "bad in such 
an extraordinary way as to provoke passionate antagonism". "My 
brother-problem", he wrote in a letter in 1917, "is the real, in any case the 
most difficult, problem of my life ... At every step kinship and affront." 
Kinship and affront: not only Thomas Mann's themes as a writer, but the story 
of his life.

In 1905, Thomas married Katia Pringsheim and they had six children, despite 
the fact that Mann was gay, or rather, in Colm Toíbín's nice phrase, "gay most 
of the time". One biographer, Andrea Weiss, has argued that Mann did not care 
at all for Katia, only for her "cultured background, her family's position in 
Munich society, and no doubt the prospect of regaining the privileges of wealth 
which had eluded him since the death of his father".

His relations with his children were similarly complex. "When a man has six 
children, he can't love them all equally," Mann claimed. He loved the eldest, 
Erika, the most. She was an actor, and eventually became his assistant. Only 
one of his children, Klaus, became a novelist and he faced the same problem as 
Heinrich: how to compete with Thomas? He couldn't, and on 21 May 1949, in 
Cannes, he killed himself with an overdose of sleeping pills. Mann interpreted 
his son's death as a consequence of exile from Germany. But Klaus had faced 
other, more obvious challenges: he was a drug addict, he was gay and he was the 
son ofThomas Mann <https://www.theguardian.com/books/thomasmann>.

Another son, Michael, also killed himself (as did Mann's two sisters, and 
Heinrich's second wife). A third son, Golo, became an eminent historian, 
without a good word to say about his father. Only the two younger daughters, 
Monika and Elisabeth, seemed to have escaped their father's long, dark shadow.

On close inspection, great artistic dynasties often seem to be made out of 
other people's agony. Katia supported her husband, and raised their children at 
great personal cost. Late in life, she remarked: "I just wanted to say, I have 
never in my life been able to do what I would have liked to do."
 