
It’s autumn! What coat should I get?

Alissa, by email

Indeed it is! A change is upon us and I mean that in both the seasonal and 
sartorial sense. We are now in September so dressing the same now as you did in 
August? Madness. Everyone knows what the signs of Judgment Day are, right? The 
dead rising from the grave! Cats and dogs living together! Wearing the same 
skirt length this year as you did last month!

But things have shifted in the coat fashion market. Whereas in times of yore 
(ie, 10 years ago) there really were distinct coat trends – a military coat one 
year, a 60s car coat another – now all bets are off. The reason for that is 
brands realised that because coats generally cost a lot more than your average 
piece of clothing, people are less willing to fork out three or even four 
figures every year just on the whim of a trend. Coats are one part of even the 
biggest fashion fan’s wardrobe that are generally guided by strange concepts 
like personal taste and practicality, as opposed to what a.n.other fashion 
magazine has told them to wear.

But this does not mean coats are immune to fashion snobbery. Oh good heavens 
no! No, when it comes to coat trends what matters is not what you wear but how 
you wear it. For a long time, the trend was to not wear one at all, and this 
was because celebrities doing the red carpet tend not to wear coats. However, 
at some point someone noticed not wearing a coat in January made most women 
look less likeCate Blanchett <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cate-blanchett> 
at the Oscars and more like a boozed up student in the middle of freshers’ 
week. Personally, I think the latter is far more fun than the former, but I 
accept it might lack the crucial aspirational factor that all fashion trends 
need. So coats were allowed in from the cold but they needed to be worn a 
certain way. There have been trends about how coat belts must be tied and 
trends about how coat sleeves must be rolled. The longest lasting trend was 
so-calledshoulder robing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/nov/09/how-to-dress-shoulder-robing>, 
which involved draping your coat over your shoulders, as though it were a cape 
and you had broken both your arms and so were unable to make use of the 
sleeves. This achieves a similar effect to the no coat at all trend in that the 
suggestion is you don’t really need a coat, because you have a car and driver 
on hand to protect you from the elements. Shoulder robing became so popular 
that the front rows of fashion shows looked like the audition queue for 
Quasimodo in a regional production of The Hunchback of Notre Dame, with dozens 
of fashion editors all hunching forward, trying to keep their coats balanced on 
their shoulders.

But we’ve entered a new coat-wearing age – feel the excitement, people! Now, 
to wear your coat properly you have to do the opposite of shoulder robing and 
zip up your parka only halfway and then peel the top half off your shoulders 
but somehow hold them in place, perhaps by slightly holding your arms outwards. 
If you think this sounds stupid then you are thinking correctly, because this 
trend has emerged from Demna Gvasalia, the designer behind Vetements, the label 
we all apparently have to care about now even though it looks like the 
brainchild ofDerek Zoolander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/90417/zoolander>. The trend for 
shoulder disrobing (as I herewith name it) got its biggest showcasing at the 
a/w Balenciaga show, for which Gvasalia also designs, and this month Vogue has 
decreed it the only acceptable way to wear one’s parka.

So what can we make of this? On the one hand, this trend is free, so yay. On 
the other, you will probably lose your coat within a day, so boo. Thus, you 
don’t need to spend any money to look a darn fool in fashion. Which is some 
form of democracy, I guess.

Are interviews with models the lowest form of journalism?

Craig, by email

No, that accolade goes to the open letter, which is the plague of modern 
journalism. But model interviews are not far off, because they are, by and 
large, extremely boring. I’ve read half a dozen interviews withCara Delevingne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/cara-delevingne> in the past month and, 
bless her, even she sounds bored in them, never mind the reader.

This is not because Delevingne or models in general are boring: heck, they’re 
people and most people have something of interest to say, and if they’reNaomi 
Campbell <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/naomi-campbell> they have A LOT 
of interesting things to say. But they are being interviewed because they are 
models, which is not an interesting profession. The only profession that is 
harder to talk about interestingly without sounding pretentious is acting, and 
that really is saying something. I feel for models about this, I really do. 
They’re told in their jobs just to look nice, and suddenly we turn around and 
expect them to be the voice of their generation. It feels odd to say this about 
people who are paid huge amounts of money just to look good, but maybe we 
should stop expecting quite so much from them?
 