
When people ask Hamilton Morris <http://hamiltonmorris.blogspot.co.uk/> what 
he does, he tells them he works in science. "I don't have any desire to explain 
myself," he says. Which is a shame, because if he did, they'd get a much more 
outlandish answer. Morris is a 24-year-old psychonaut – that is to say, an 
explorer in the realm of psychoactive substances. Another way of putting this 
is that he takes drugs for a living.

Resembling an even-more-attenuated member of the Horrors and talking in a 
distinctive, deep bass voice with long, drawled vowels that themselves sound 
narcotised, Morris travels the world in search of new highs. These adventures, 
which he undertakes with a mix of gonzo abandon and scholarly rigour, are 
chronicled in thevice.com <http://www.vice.com/en_uk> video series Hamilton's 
Pharmacopeia <http://www.vice.com/hamiltons-pharmacopeia>.

The highlight is a six-part film called Nzambi, in which Morris travels to 
Haiti in search of the preparation purported to induce zombification and ends 
up having hypnagogic hallucinations about Jean-Claude Van Damme.

For Morris, the drugs themselves seem secondary to what his hero, 
ethnobotanist Wade Davis, terms "the cultural matrix": in other words, his 
desire to get off his face and out of his head is bound up with the noble 
spirit of anthropological enquiry. "Oh yeah," he agrees. "Absolutely. And that 
applies to everywhere and every single drug. I could guess you could call it 
ethno-chemistry."

We're drinking water out of jam jars and talking amid the spectacular chaos of 
his Williamsburg apartment – an exploded Wunderkammer of cultural matrices that 
would also support anthropological investigation. Books and journals are 
amassed in strata so deep that they look like the floor's naturally occurring 
geological eructations. Curios include a taxidermy anteater, a shrine of tiny 
coffins, and – lying open and empty on the floor – a suitcase so small and 
quaintly battered that it looks like a toy or a prop. But it's neither, having 
accompanied Morris on missions to the Amazon (in search of the psychedelic sapo 
frog), the Netherlands ("magic" truffles) and, more recently, Shanghai (to 
investigate its grey market drug factories, best known for producing 
mephedrone).

But for all the global adventuring, Morris claims that "the internet is the 
new unexplored jungle. This is the best time ever in the history of mankind to 
be interested in drugs because you have virtually every botanical psychedelic 
that's ever been discovered available from different ethno-botanical vendors on 
the internet. And on the one hand, sure, it's bad that people inevitably die, 
but it's also amazing in terms of everything that's being learned about 
toxicology as a result."

I must look a bit shocked because he concedes that last statement is more of a 
"detached view of things. It's tragic that people are dying but it's also 
amazing what's learned as a result of – things that would never be learned if 
everyone acted responsibly."

'My parents had a pretty rational position, which is that drugs are not bad, 
it's only bad to waste your time with drugs. Which I agree with'
 Hamilton with his dad Errol Morris. Photograph: J Vespa/WireImage 
I ask him what kind of a kid he was. Introspective? Nerdy? "Probably I was a 
nerdy kid, yeah. I certainly wasn't athletic." He thinks and then offers, "I 
was a pyromaniac," with a languid wrist gesture that says "weren't we all." 
"There was no serious damage to anything," he insists. "But I would spend hours 
stripping the phosphorous off the heads of matches and making different 
explosives."

Morris is the only child of Errol Morris 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/oct/28/errol-morris-tabloid-joyce-mckinney>
, the documentary film-maker, and Julia Sheehan, an art historian. "My dad is a 
weird guy and always had a lot of 'characters' around – Holocaust deniers and 
robotics experts." His folks sound pretty lenient. "I think they had a pretty 
rational position, which is that drugs are not bad, it's only bad to waste your 
time with drugs. Which I agree with. I feel very lucky, very genetically 
privileged, that I have pretty solid control over my use of things. Drugs are 
too interesting, too much fun to use irresponsibly. I very rarely drink or 
smoke pot. But with something new, it's never recreational, and I try to mostly 
do new things."

Morris's first meaningful drugs experience came at age 13, "in my friend's 
Volvo, smoking salvia and crying tears of joy". He felt, he recalls, "just 
astonishment that those states are even possible, that anyone can reach them so 
effortlessly." And like a fastidious gourmand bemoaning the rubes who dunk 
ketchup on their souffles, he has little patience for "those people not having 
good experiences". Generally, he says, "it's because they're not doing it 
right". and he stresses the word with exasperation. "I don't even understand 
what is going on with these people, that are doing, you know, twenty grammes of 
mephedrone in a single night, because it's only going to result in misery. It 
does ruin it for everyone, a little bit."

He's never been hospitalised himself, but evenly recounts his best friend at 
university going "permanently insane" while they were tripping together. "He 
had such a severe psychotic break he did not recover. As in he is now 
schizophrenic as a result. So, I mean, I've worried about going insane. But I 
think a lot of people in their early twenties worry about going insane. I think 
that's just a general human worry, not necessarily a psychonautical worry.

"I would encourage people to not reactively think that these things are bad or 
to always point out 'Oh it could be dangerous'. Everything could be dangerous. 
There shouldn't be this weird attitude of being afraid to experiment with 
anything. The states can be so dramatic and can feel so terrifying or so 
unpleasant at a certain point that you wonder how could you ever recover from 
something so awful. Then you do recover, usually in the same day or the same 
hour. The resilience of the human mind is amazing."

I wrap things up by asking Morris if he thinks drugs have made him a better 
person. He doesn't hesitate: "Almost certainly."

Hamilton Morris's Doctor Coca premieres in June on vice.com  
<http://www.vice.com/en_uk>
 