
I never thought I'd drink a cabbage. But here I am, sitting in a sun-cooked 
garden on the Algarve with a green moustache and an empty pint glass. When I 
flew to Portugal for this seven-day raw juice camp (run by British company
Explore Raw) <http://exploreraw.com/> I was overweight and newly single. I felt 
rather like the eponymous chronometer of the nursery rhyme My Grandfather's 
Clock: too large for the shelf. But I had heard impressive stories about the 
benefits of juicing, and if the alternative was "90 years on the floor", it had 
to be worth a try.

If the tabloids are to be believed, raw juicing is the method du jour for 
celebrity weight loss, with acolytes including Beyoncé, Woody Harrelson and 
Jennifer Aniston. The science is simple: raw foods contain more vitamins and 
minerals than their cooked counterparts, and juicing them (skin and all: that's 
where a lot of the good stuff hides) is the fastest, most efficient way to 
inject those benefits straight into your system. If you shove the correct 
ingredients into your juicer, you'll have all the nourishment you need and more 
– within seconds.

When it comes to retreats, juicing is already a crowded bandwagon, with 
laughably expensive tickets – particularly given that you're not paying for 
"food" in the traditional sense of the word. But Explore Raw is dedicated to 
changing that. Founder Stephanie Jeffs, a 43-year-old former City worker who 
says she shed nine stone and cured her polycystic ovary syndrome after 
discovering juicing – offers weekly breaks at a villa in Vale de Lobo near Faro 
from as little as £500.

For that price you have to camp, but that's no great hardship in the 
property's beautiful gardens, with a state-of-the-art solar-powered shower, 
inflatable beds and an option for ready-pitched tents. (For juicers with more 
liquid assets rooms are available in the house itself.) After three days of 
just juice (enough to cleanse away baddies such as sugar and caffeine), small 
meals of raw food are added to your newly cleansed system. These, like the 
juices, are 100% vegan and served at room temperature. Then there's the 
"compulsory" exercise. We have three training sessions a day, guided by affable 
former soldier Damien, who likes sweat – a lot. ("It's fat crying on its way 
out of your body, mate.")
 The pool at Explore Raw's villa 
The first three days on just juice are hard. By day two, conversation within 
our 10-strong group (80% female; 80% British; 80% aged 25-45), has turned 
almost exclusively to food: roast lamb; pizza; stilton cheese. When we're not 
exercising, we're fantasising about food. On the third day we drive to a farm 
to pick oranges for our juices and, when Stephanie's back is turned, I grab a 
handful of parsley from the herb garden and chew it, stalks protruding from my 
mouth, like a famished goat.

The juices themselves are as full of flavour as they are of vitamins, with 
ingredients as diverse as lemon, kale, cacao nibs, spinach, cauliflower and 
avocado. Iknow I'm getting enough nutrients but my body – or rather, my mind – 
really misses the act of eating. When we're finally given a tiny portion of 
food (a simple carrot and seed concoction), I wolf it down like an Alsatian 
eating a bowl of chicken.

The villa is 15 minutes' drive from Faro airport in an area popular with 
golfers and, recently, England's football team in training. But it's also an 
easy jog to picturesque Trafal beach, where we run every morning.

The sense of calm and relaxation is reinforced by scheduled midday naps, 
ever-present sunshine and group film screenings every evening. By the end of 
the week, I've lost 11cm off my waist, 8cm off my hips and my shorts (once, 
when diving into the pool). But it's what I've gained that's more significant. 
My skin is glowing, my eyes seem whiter, and I have a ridiculous overabundance 
of energy. I feel like a superhero (Cabbage Man? Avocado Boy? ). It sounds 
strange, but just a week of ingesting nothing but raw fruit and vegetables has 
made me feel capable ofanything as I head home. And that's the raw truth.

• Accommodation was provided by Explore Raw (07914 399 109, exploreraw.com 
<http://exploreraw.com/events/retreats/>), which runs week-long boot camps from 
£500, not including flights. The next camps in the Algarve will run 27 
September-4 October and 4-11 October. Easyjet (easyjet.com <http://easyjet.com>
) flies to Faro from seven British airports from about £60 return
 