
Since yesterday morning the enemy has continued his violent thrusts against 
our line westwards from Bapaume and Peronne, and at the time I write his massed 
troops, mostly Brandenburgers and picked troops, are endeavouring to advance in 
the direction of Roye from Nesle, where French troops are heavily engaged. At 
the same time he is pushing on over the old Somme battlefields down from 
Delville Wood, High Wood, and Maurepas towards the old lines we held before the 
beginning of the Somme battles in 1916.

The enemy has only paused since he began the great offensive on Thursday last 
to bring up new divisions and pass them through and beyond the divisions 
exhausted by attack or shattered under our fire, while the latter re-form and 
rest and then come on again or are relieved by reserves continually crowding 
over the captured ground. By this means, and owing to the enormous forces at 
the disposal of the German Command, they are able to pursue any advantage 
gained with fresh troops against our hard-pressed men, who have been fighting 
without respite since the beginning of the battle, six days ago, except where 
on the right some of them have now been replaced in the front line by French 
battalions.

Amazing Odds

In spite of the gravity of these hours and the progress made by the enemy, 
there has never been a more glorious spirit shown by British troops throughout 
our history, and when one day, but not now, all details of this battle may be 
written, it will be an epic of heroism more wonderful than the world now 
realises.

For our men and their officers have withstood the onslaught of forces which 
have never been less than two to one, and in most parts of the line have been 
four to one, and six to one, and eight to one - nine divisions against three 
round Croisilles, eight divisions against two from the Cambrai sector 
westwards, in many places one division against one battalion. Such odds have 
been unknown before. Yet the enemy dare not let these odds stand, but 
continually increase and renew the fighting line with fresh troops against 
those of ours who go on fighting.

Our men have gone on fighting by night and day from one day to another, 
falling back most of the time, but holding the enemy all the time by 
machine-gun and rifle fire, by field batteries getting into action as soon as 
they have taken up new positions, by desperate little battles in which one or 
two companies hold up waves of Germans until their own line has fallen back in 
an orderly way to new defensive positions.

Six Days' Killing

For six days they have been killing the enemy as he advances across the open 
of the old barren battlefields nakedly exposed to their fire. Our riflemen in 
some old trench of theirs or ours on these battlefields of the Somme which were 
left derelict for a year - as I saw them yesterday above Pozieres ridge, where 
they made fire trenches of these ditches full of undergrowth - shoot down 
German troops as in the old days at Le Cateau, lay their ranks out in dead and 
wounded men.

But immediately the gaps are filled up by the grey swarms behind, and our 
weakened forces come further back to a new ditch or road from which they fire 
again and kill again and fall back again, because the enemy is reckless of the 
cost of his advance, and his tide never ceases its drift.

Our men have been fighting six days and nights like this after the first storm 
of shells and gas until their beards have grown long and their faces haggard 
and worn for lack of sleep, and their clothes have become torn on wire and 
covered with dust of mud and chalk.

I saw a small party of them to-day so weary with this endless battle that they 
could hardly walk, and were holding hands like tired children and leaning 
against each other like drunken men. But for the most part they hold their 
heads up gamely and show no kind of dismay because so far luck has been against 
them.

They look grimly towards the enemy's lines, waiting for him to show himself 
across the slope so that they can deal with him once more, and while they are 
waiting they stand about in groups under the cover of ruined walls or in sunken 
roads, smoking cigarettes, with their rifles handy and their steel helmets 
thrust over their eyes, which are steady and calm.

Cool and Steady

The whole movement of our army under the necessity of withdrawal from fixed 
positions is as orderly as though on manoeuvres in England. I can say honestly 
that I have seen no officer show a sign of being flurried.

The transport lorries move away from a road only when it becomes untenable by 
the enemy's shell fire, and retire to some village further back, where they 
unpack their supplies with leisurely method, much faster than it seems. Camps 
are packed up and stores removed as the Germans are reported nearer, and 
headquarters staffs change their lodgings from one old chateau to another or 
one cottage to another, with their signallers and despatch riders, and retain 
extraordinary composure, because of the perfect discipline of character which 
is a quality of our race in bad times as well as in good times.

It is all an amazing drama, because this open warfare is a new thing to us and 
the menace of the enemy is strong and serious, and the retirement under the 
terrific pressure of the human avalanche now hurled against us is by no means 
pleasant.

But in the inevitable turmoil of this situation, in roads crowded with the 
traffic of men and guns, in villages seething with troops rushed up towards the 
battle-line, on the field of battle itself, the British army retains its 
self-control, its will-power and its supreme, inspired courage.

The Machine Well Controlled

Above all, it retains its hopefulness and its faith. These are dark days for 
us because of the sacrifice of life and the success of our enemy in gaining 
ground, but at least this is good and great - that our armies still remain 
unbroken, and the enemy has failed to divide our forces or to cut off large 
masses of men.

Our generals have control of the machine from one end of the line to the 
other. No division has been lost, however battered it may be by heroic 
fighting. The enemy has to pay dearly all the way along, and our men have never 
lost heart or courage to keep the German hordes in check long enough for 
orderly retirement. That is wonderful and magnificent, and the heart of the 
world will beat faster because of what these men have done and are still doing 
in sheer human valour. New French divisions have come to our support and have 
taken the places of some of these men of ours who fought the longest and at 
greatest sacrifice.

The Battle Between Ham and Nesle

Yesterday and on Sunday enemy pressure became strongest round Ham and 
northwards along the valley of the Somme, which he was trying to cross with a 
large army. I have already told how he made repeated efforts to get a crossing 
at St. Christ, Brie, and other places, and how his outposts were flung back by 
our counter-attacks. But on Sunday he had definitely gained a bridgehead at 
Ham, and by strong attack got as far as Verlaine, a mile on the other side of 
the river.

On Sunday morning the enemy was in Esmery Hallon, and made an attack on a big 
scale with newly arrived Brandenburgers on the village of Voyennes, his object 
being to enlarge the district round the bridgehead of Ham. Our gallant men, 
fighting step by step, had to fall back, making a separate battle in defence of 
Rouy-le-Grand, and holding that night the line of Libermont, the canal to 
Bouverchy, and up to Offoy. It was a perilous winding line, difficult to hold, 
and its weakness was tested by the enemy in great strength.

The French Pouring Up

By this time the French divisions were beginning to arrive, and as their 
splendid regiments came into the battlefields, mixing with our battalions and 
fighting in their midst, new heart was put into our men at this most welcome 
and priceless support. Gradually, as the hours passed on Sunday and Monday, the 
French held the battle line more strongly.

But the enemy saw our weakness on the left of here and Ollezy, and made new 
and stronger attacks. During the night battalions at Ollezy who had borne the 
brunt of the hard struggle fell back, and yesterday our left on this sector 
also had to withdraw.

It had now been decided to dig a defensive position on which our men could 
retire in case of need, and for this purpose all pioneer and infantry 
battalions in the neighbourhood did some heroic digging, which enabled our line 
to swing back when the time came for relief with much greater safety from a 
sudden break-through.

Yesterday the enemy still further increased his pressure towards Morchain and 
on both sides of Nesle. He did not make a frontal attack on that town, but came 
down on its flanks, and did not actually enter it till last night. An officer 
of ours walked through Nesle yesterday afternoon, and there was no German there 
at the time.

On the extreme left of our line there has been a continual struggle about the 
Arras-Bapaume road, and the enemy has been trying to force his way across the 
old Somme battlefields towards Montauban and Mametz.

I can say with absolute truth that our army is still confident that it will 
defeat the enemy's plans of a decisive victory.
 