
Winning tip: Termessos, near Antalya, Turkey

If you're in Antalya, it's well worth taking a trip to the ruined Pisidian 
city of Termessos. It's bewilderingly under-visited, possibly because of the 
steep climb to the site (1,000m above sea level), and you often feel you have 
the place to yourself. The impressive amphitheatre has views across the Taurus 
mountains. Leave Ephesus to the masses and take in this piece of history on 
your own terms.
30km north-west of Antalya, muze.gov.tr/termessos-en 
<http://muze.gov.tr/termessos-en>
rhiannonabike

Greece
 The Byzantine city of Mystra. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
Mystra, Peloponnese
The Despotate of Mystra, as it was known in the 14th century, is the most 
complete, dramatically sited and atmospheric Byzantine city in Greece. With 
magnificent views into the valley, it huddles against a steep cliff at the foot 
of the Taiyetos mountains. Narrow streets give access to medieval semi-ruined 
houses, palaces and churches, some with brilliant frescoes.
vicvomit

Epidavros amphitheatre, Peloponnese
While staying at the seaside town of Nafplio we went to the amphitheatre at 
Epidavros, extraordinarily preserved and set against a stunning backdrop. In an 
audience of thousands, we saw a performance of the Greek tragedy, Medea by 
Euripides. The acoustics and atmosphere were truly memorable.
Buses run from Nafplio
petermcgahan

Discarded Kouros statues, Naxos
The Kouros of Naxos are three statues still lying where they were being 
chiselled from the marble. Dating from sixth or seventh century BC, the male 
forms are believed to be either the god Dionysus, or local heroes, destined to 
grace temples. They lie in open countryside where skilled hands worked on the 
slabs until fatal flaws were revealed or the stone fractured, and the statues 
were discarded. These are touching reminders of the minor craftsmen behind the 
great antiquities.
herbalwalks
 Church of Agios Spyridon, Kardamyli. Photograph: Alamy 
 Kardamyli, Peloponnese
With remains of one of the seven cities mentioned in the Iliad, the home of 
writer Patrick Leigh Fermor and the chapel where Bruce Chatwin's ashes are 
buried, this is Greece ancient and modern – and for modern comforts stay at the
Anniska & Liakoto <http://www.anniska-liakoto.com/> hotel apartments in the 
village.
kardamili-greece.com <http://kardamili-greece.com/en/home.html>
saragarnham
 Palace ruins at Knossos, Crete, Greece. Photograph: Alamy 
Knossos, Crete
Everyone can enjoy this amazing site, with its legends and myths of the 
minotaur, impressive frescoes and murals, and space to explore and wander 
without rush. This is a centre of Minoan civilisation and culture. There is 
enough information for enthusiasts, a decent shop, a nice cafe and unintrusive 
staff who let you take your time to absorb the atmosphere and wonder. The 
dolphins and griffins in murals appeal to the younger visitors, and there is 
plenty of shade from the sun and heat.
ancient-greece.org/archaeology/knossos.html 
<http://ancient-greece.org/archaeology/knossos.html>
kris1

Polyrinia, near Kissamos, Crete
A 6km amble through the Sirikari gorge brings you to the ruined acropolis of 
Polyrinia, which means "rich in sheep". A powerful city-state built by the 
Achaeans, it was recolonised in Byzantine and Venetian times and there is much 
to see: fortifications, decorative arches, rock tombs and the later Church of 
the Holy Fathers. Rest in the shaded chapel courtyard and admire the 
jaw-dropping views of Kissamos Bay and the White Mountains before turning back 
for the sleepy village of Ano Paleokastro.
interkriti.org/crete/hania/polyrinia.html 
<http://www.interkriti.org/crete/hania/polyrinia.html>
baggyamy

Turkey
 Cagaloglu hammam, Istanbul. Photograph: Alamy 
Cagaloglu hammam, Istanbul
Cagaloglu hammam in Istanbul is one of the oldest Turkish baths in the world 
and has been visited by figures as diverse and illustrious as Florence 
Nightingale, King Edward VIII and Tony Curtis. This place was built by Sultan 
Mahmud I in 1741 and still has its high-domed ceilings, marble fountains and 
interior garden. The bathing experience is as it was in the Ottoman days: you 
are given a brisk body exfoliation followed by a bubble massage as you lie on a 
smooth marble plinth.
Alemdar Mh. +90 212 522 2424
bowbank

Dalyan rock tombs
Kingfishers overtake the little boats that chug past the mud baths and round a 
final bend of the Dalyan river to reveal the 2,500-year-old rock tombs carved 
by the Lycians high up on sheer cliff walls. Our guide explained this was so 
the souls of the ancient kings of nearby Caunus could be wafted away by winged 
sirens. There are restaurants opposite, good to enjoy at night while the 
striking and extremely photogenic site is floodlit.
dalyanguide.co.uk/DalyanRock.html
cornishjay

Greek theatre at Erythrae, Ildir
Ancient pomegranate trees shade the trail up to the Greek amphitheatre of 
Erythrae. Visitors here are few, even in summer. A sun-wizened old man was 
minding a hobbit-hole, inside which, on a dusty floor, lay fragments of 
mouldings and ceramics. When we said we were from England he proudly spoke his 
two words of English: "Manchester United." Cafes on the coast road to Çesme 
have terraces with spectacular views over the Aegean.
susanmagicbus
 Sunset over the Blue Mosque. Photograph: Alamy 
Blue Mosque, Istanbul
Generally, crowds detract from an experience - more so in a beautiful, serene, 
spiritual place. Istanbul's Blue Mosque (Sultanahmet Camii) suffers due to its 
popularity - especially when cruise ships are in. To see and feel it as it 
should be seen and felt go in the evening – no crowds and a bonus of gorgeous 
lighting effects. It closes for half an hour for prayers five times a day, so 
check times online first:bluemosque.co <http://www.bluemosque.co/>
billontyne
 The ruins of Sagalassos. Photograph: Alamy 
Sagalassos, near Antalya
My favourite time to visit Sagalassos, a two-hour drive north of Antalya, is 
winter, when this ancient site is covered in snow. Climb up to the 9,000-seat 
theatre and savour the view over this remote but important Pisidian city. Then 
head down to the library, the rock-cut tombs, the agora with the decorative 
fountain, and the remains of the bathhouse. The site has ongoing excavations 
every summer, but for the rest of the year, you are likely to have it to 
yourself.
whc.unesco.org/en/tentativelists/5409
lemkenny

Aphrodisias, near Geyre, Caria
Aphrodisias is a stunning ruin of an ancient Greek city, near the modern 
village of Geyre, about 230km south-east of Izmir. It's almost on the same 
scale as Ephesus, but doesn't attract the same crowds. It is quite a trek, but 
it has a splendidly preserved theatre and stadium, and the remains of a temple 
of Aphrodite. The museum has a great collection of Roman statues, and there are 
plans to excavate and display more. The museum contains a great selection of 
marble Roman statues in very good condition and plans are in place to excavate 
and display even more, so go now before the crowds really begin to descend on 
the place.
aphrodisias.info <http://www.aphrodisias.info/>
jgnaughton
 The amphitheatre at Patara. Photograph: Fantuz Olimpio/SIME 
Patara
A small entrance fee gives you access to the extensive Lycian archaeological 
site complete with large amphitheatre. Work is still in progress and we found 
the guys working there really friendly and anxious to explain it all to us. 
When you have finished looking round the historical site, you can drive a 
little way further to the beach – 18 km of beautiful sand. There is a small 
cafe and a few recliners with umbrellas. Paradise!
patarainfo.com <http://www.patarainfo.com/>
dayzee

Tlos, near Fethiye
We visited Tlos in spring, when the snow on the mountains provided a 
magnificent backdrop to this ancient, ruined Lycian citadel subsequently 
inhabited by Romans, Byzantines and, eventually, Ottoman Turks. We wandered up 
to the citadel, passing wonderful examples of Lycian carved rock tombs, 
sarcophaguses and the remains of Turkish baths and a Roman stadium. Despite 
being surrounded by history it was the all-round view which provided the most 
lasting spectacle.
lycianturkey.com/lycian_sites/tlos.htm
annasethi
 