
Sit too close to the front at the Dorfman Theatre for Alexander Zeldin’s new 
play, Love, and you’ll find yourself in the kitchen of the temporary 
accommodation the characters live in. During the constant battles over the one 
toilet, shared between eight people, certain sounds may make you long for the 
fourth wall.

The National Theatre production follows the inhabitants of typical shared 
temporary accommodation for a few days – a situation that increasing numbers of 
people find themselves in. Statistics released recently found that in the third 
quarter of 2016, 74,630 adults lived in temporary accommodation and 117,520 
children.

Lessons from Finland: helping homeless people starts with giving them homes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/sep/14/lessons-from-finland-helping-homeless-housing-model-homes>
Temporary accommodation is both limbo and prison: the people trapped there 
know the official line that says they’ll be cooped up short-term, but the 
reality is different. Emma, three weeks from giving birth when her landlord 
evicts her, her partner and two children, accuses her immediate neighbours of 
lying when they tell her they’ve been in the same room for a year. While 
government guidelines state that families with children should not be housed in 
bed-and-breakfast style accommodation for longer than six weeks, themost recent 
statistics show this remains the reality 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/live-tables-on-homelessness>
 for hundreds of families.

There are many different reasons why the tenants in Love’s small building 
ending up in temporary accommodation, from the private landlord’s decision to 
evict the family, their neighbours being told they could have better 
accommodation if they agreed to leave the flat they were living in, to the 
newly arrived Syrian refugee who arrives with a single suitcase. But each of 
the characters is in an identical situation through no fault of their own, and 
at the mercy of a failed social housing system where demand outstrips supply. 
They butt their heads against the gatekeeping bureaucracy of the local council 
and Jobcentre, imposing sanctions and withholding bidding numbers, while people 
spend all day at the housing office waiting for a five-minute appointment that 
changes nothing.

The play shows the mundane hardships of living in such accommodation: the 
stolen crockery, the differing hygiene standards, how to cope when you want to 
eat alone with your children to cling to a semblance of normality as other 
people’s loneliness threatens to intrude. But it also shows how people find 
ways of overcoming their frustration – trying to decorate an institutional 
space for Christmas so your children don’t panic about their predicament or, in 
one particularly poignant scene, when a son, caring for his ill mother washes 
her hair in the sink as a treat.

Zeldin’s previous play, Beyond Caring, dealt with zero-hours contracts; Love 
joins a raft of plays that have dealt with housing and homelessness in the last 
few years. Much has been made of the 50th anniversary of Cathy Come Home, but 
in the arts, homelessness and the housing crisis have become mainstream topics 
to cover because so many people are affected.


It is difficult to discuss modern Britain without instantly nodding to the 
problem of housing, from street homelessness, households in temporary 
accommodation, the firesale of social housing, and the problems of private 
renting.

This is the new normal: topics chosen not because of their worthiness but 
because they’ve forced themselves into the public realm by their ubiquity and 
far-reaching consequences. A look back at the arts and culture generated in 
this period will show that the problem of housing is not even close to being 
solved.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 