
The chancellor committed almost £4bn to housing in Wednesday’s autumn 
statement, in a move he said represented a step-change in the government’s 
ambition to increase the supply of homes for sale and rent.

The money, which the Treasury said was new cash, will be spent through two 
funds: one providing money for infrastructure projects to make sites viable for 
building, the other providing money for affordable homes.

Philip Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> said the 
government had made good progress, with the number of new homes being built 
last year hitting an eight-year high, but “for too many, the goal of home 
ownership remains out of reach”. He added that the challenge of delivering 
housing was not new “but the effect of unaffordable housing on our nation’s 
productivity makes it an urgent one”, and said the government planned to more 
than double capital expenditure on housing.

Measures to tackle the housing crisis included:

 * A £2.3bn housing infrastructure fund for local authorities to help deliver 
up to 100,000 homes 
 * An extra £1.4bn for local authorities and housing associations to provide 
affordable housing to rent or buy 
 * Confirmation that the Greater London Authority will receive £3.15bn to 
deliver more than 90,000 homes starts by 2021 
 * The roll-out of right-to-buy to 3,000 more housing association tenants 
The first fund is designed to address the problem of potential sites being 
objected to because of the impact on local infrastructure. The government said 
sites for up to 100,000 homes could be unlocked by allowing local authorities 
to bid for funds to spend on roads, utilities and services such as broadband. 
Money will be targeted at areas of high demand for housing, and councils in 
London will be able to apply.


The second tranche of money will be available to housing associations and 
councils and used to fund work on 40,000 additional affordable homes by 2021. 
The cash can support homes for shared ownership, affordable rents – classed as 
up to 80% of market rate – and the new rent-to-own policy, but will not be 
available for homes offered at social rents. New homes for social rent, 
considered by some to be the only truly affordable housing, are already 
disappearing,with recent figures showing they accounted for just one in five 
affordable homes last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/17/number-of-affordable-homes-built-in-england-slumps-24-year-low>
.

Hottest year ever – but no mention of climate change by Hammond | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/24/hottest-year-ever-but-no-mention-of-climate-change-by-hammond>
The Local Government Association (LGA), which represents councils around the 
country, welcomed the additional funding for housing, but called on the 
government to include social rented homes in the package.


Lord Porter, chairman of the LGA, said: “Only an increase of all types of 
housing – including those for affordable or social rent – will increase 
affordability and make it easier for working families to save for a deposit to 
buy their first home.”

The Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) warned that despite the extra money 
for affordable homes, it expected 13,000 fewer to be built over the next five 
years. This was a result of the move away from shared ownership schemes – which 
would have brought in more money for housing associations, and the government’s 
recent decision to drop plans for rent increases for higher-earning tenants.

Anthony Lee of BNP Paribas Real Estate said the proposed sum was unlikely to 
achieve the delivery of 40,000 new homes that the government suggested. “Before 
2010, when grant funding was previously available to fund affordable housing in 
private sector-led developments it was typically provided at around £30,000 per 
bed space, or £130,000 for a three-bed unit,” he said. “However, since that 
time, house prices in many parts of London have almost doubled, so any grant 
funding has to work harder to achieve the same outcome that would have been 
possible in 2010.”

Groups representing aspiring first-time buyers welcomed the ban on letting 
agents fees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/22/philip-hammond-letting-fees-ban-autumn-statement-affordable-housing>
 which had been trailed ahead of Wednesday’s statement, and the additional 
funds for new homes.

Betsy Dillner, director of Generation Rent, said: “The government’s previous 
obsession with home ownership meant that funding wasn’t getting to the people 
most in need of affordable housing. By giving builders more flexibility over 
what tenure of homes they build, the government has made it easier to provide 
homes for people on the lowest incomes.”

However, she said that 40,000 homes over four years “won’t make a big 
difference”.

Reuben Young, policy officer at PricedOut, said that “more of the right types 
of homes will be built” under the plans, rather than money being focused on 
shared ownership. But he said that the continuation of the help-to-buy loan 
scheme, which Hammond mentioned in his speech, was unwelcome. “We hope 
government will wean itself off these inflationary demand-side subsidies as 
soon as possible so we can eventually see homeownership being affordable to 
average people,” he said.

Jan Crosby, UK head of housing at accountancy firm KPMG, said the autumn 
statement highlighted that there was “no magic fix for our housing issues”. 
Crosby said that funding for affordable homes remained at a historically low 
level, and that the forthcoming housing white paper needed to suggest 
comprehensive measures to tackle the problems in the market.

“There is a nod towards better integration of transport spending with housing 
in the detail of the autumn statement,” he said. “The white paper, however, 
will need to look more widely across infrastructure, devolution of spending 
powers, planning, taxation, public land funding, delivery models and rental 
tenures, as well as consider the impact of migration and the generational shift 
in home ownership, in order to be truly comprehensive and to move the dial on 
housing volume.”


Ahead of the statement, estate agents had called on the chancellor to make 
changes to stamp duty at the top end of the market and to look again at the new 
higher rate of tax on second homes.

Changes introduced two years ago have slowed sales of £1m-plus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/03/george-osborne-stamp-duty-overhaul-autumn-statement>
 homes,although recent figures show that the government has recorded an 
increase in receipts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/30/stamp-duty-revenue-up-london-hmrc-tax-rates>
.

Nick Leeming, chairman at estate agency Jackson-Stops & Staff, said: “A cut in 
current prohibitive stamp duty levels would get the market moving at all levels 
and give welcome relief to first-time buyers, who are having to grapple with a 
multitude of costs including saving for a deposit.

“This reform would have resulted in a chain reaction up the housing ladder, 
spurring current home owners to take their next step and freeing up housing 
suitable for first-time buyers and second steppers.”
 