
The housing crisis topped chancellor Philip Hammond’s list, in the autumn 
statement, of the long term weaknesses in the UK economy. His increases in 
capital funding for housebuilding were welcomed by the social housing sector, 
but sector leaders want to see more done for those struggling most to find 
affordable homes.

Hammond’s measures included accelerating housebuilding on public sector land 
and the widely trailed measures to increase capital for housebuilding and not 
to implement pay to stay for higher-paid council tenants.

Government decides against 'pay to stay' plan for higher-income council tenants
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/21/government-pay-to-stay-council-tenants-george-osborne>
the Treasury said: “The government has decided not to implement pay to stay, 
under which local authority tenants with taxable incomes over £31,000 (or 
£40,000 in London) would have been required to pay a market, or near market, 
rent. The government will work to deliver its commitment to ensure that social 
housing is occupied by those who need it most through other measures.”

One of the measures includes a large-scale regional pilot of the right to buy 
extension to social housing tenants. Others will be included in the housing 
white paper, to be published at a later date. In the meantime, the government 
will relax restrictions on grant funding to allow providers to deliver a mix of 
homes for affordable rent and low cost ownership, with an additional £1.4bn to 
deliver an additional 40,000 housing starts by 2020-21 and infrastructure 
investment of £23.bn to deliver 100,000 new homes “in areas of high demand”.

As part of a series of announcements on devolution of greater power to 
regional government, including infrastructure and transport investments in the 
north, the chancellor announced a package of £3.15bn for London to build 90,000 
affordable homes.

Key points:

Liam Booth-Smith, chief executive of thinktank Localis, welcomed the £1.4bn 
injection into the affordable homes programme, which would enable housing 
associations, developers and councils to bid for a larger pot of money to fund 
new affordable housing. “While the cash figure will get the headline, the 
bigger change is that the grant funding will come with fewer strings attached 
than previously,” he said. “Bidders will be able to use it to build homes for 
affordable rent, not just shared ownership and rent to buy.”

Terrie Alafat, chief executive of the Chartered Institute of Housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing>, said that given the scale of the 
UK housing crisis, the autumn statement was a “significant step in the right 
direction” and demonstrated that the government recognises housing as a key 
part of the UK’s infrastructure. She welcomed the plans for 40,000 new 
affordable homes and the greater flexibility for housing providers to build 
homes of all tenures. But Alafat said the CIH would have liked to see more to 
support people who need housing the most, with more funding diverted 
specifically to support social rents, and called for “a strategic rethink on 
welfare measures we believe make housing inaccessible to a significant number 
of individuals and families”.

Jonathan Turner, a partner at law firm Bevan Brittan, which specialises in 
housing and local government, welcomed the new £2.3bn fund to deliver up to 
100,000 new homes in areas of high demand and the £1.4bn to deliver 40,000 
additional affordable homes, but said getting access to the funds, and ensuring 
they are directed to the regions that need them most, will be critical. “The 
government needs to make sure that obtaining grant is not blocked by an 
overload of applications, which is likely,” he said.

With the death of pay to stay, is the Housing Act crumbling? | Colin Wiles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/22/death-pay-to-stay-government-housing-act-crumbling>
Ann Santry, chief executive of Sovereign, one of the largest UK housing 
associations, said the government had recognised the track record of housing 
associations, which built more than 40,000 homes last year, by giving them 
greater flexibility to provide a range of homes. The Sanctuary Group responded 
to the autumn statement by announcing it will build 30,000 new homes to be 
built in England and Scotland by 2026.

Sarah McMonagle, director of external affairs at the Federation of Master 
Builders, welcomed the chancellor’s commitment to double annual capital 
spending on housebuilding. “As council budgets have been stripped back, local 
authorities have increasingly looked to developers, including even the very 
smallest developers, to plug these funding gaps,” she said. “Key to the fund’s 
success will be to ensure that it focuses on unlocking large numbers of small 
sites and not just small numbers of large sites.”

Housing measures must be focused on increasing supply

Paul Dossett, a partner at consultancy Grant Thornton, said it was encouraging 
to see investment prioritised to support delivery of desperately needed new 
homes, particularly in those areas with the highest demand. “We await with 
interest the eligibility criteria for the infrastructure fund and the terms 
under which the fund is able to invest – these will be key to understanding the 
potential impact of the fund and its attractiveness to the homebuilding 
sector,” he said. Dossett added that the practicalities of delivering right to 
buy in the social housing sector had still not been resolved, with “real 
concerns” that it could lead to a decrease in the amount of housing stock. 
“This comes at a time when unaffordable rents are pushing more people into 
homelessness, in turn increasing costs on local government.”

Just about managing families

Campbell Robb, Shelter’s chief executive, said the  extra investment would be 
welcome news for many of the “just about managing” families crying out for 
genuinely affordable homes. He said it was promising to see restrictions on 
funding relaxed, which should help to build the homes that those struggling 
need, including affordable homes to rent.

“At Shelter we see the impact of our chronic shortage of affordable homes 
every day, with increasing numbers of people left with no choice but to fork 
out most of their hard-earned wages on expensive private rents, and wave 
goodbye to the chance of a stable home.”

The chancellor also announced a review of the public services needed by the 
country’s older people, something welcomed by Kathleen Kelly, assistant 
director of policy and research at the National Housing Federation:

One housing announcement was less lauded: £7.6m will be provided for urgent 
repairs at Wentworth Woodhouse, subject to approval of a sustainable business 
case for the Grade I listed country house. That did not meet with universal 
approval:

And what wasn’t in the chancellor’s speech

Some housing experts pointed out that for housing associations, more important 
than anything in the chancellor’s statement itself was the consultation 
launched by the government on 21 November intofunding for supported housing 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/funding-for-supported-housing>:

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 