
No bottle of hair dye could possibly hold as much history as Clairol nice ’n 
easy, No 512, a shade of dark auburn launched in 1975. The extraordinary face 
on the side of its bottle belonged to Tracey Norman, one of the first African 
American models to make it big and the second black woman, after Beverly 
Johnson, to appear on the cover of Vogue.

By the time her large eyes and sharp cheekbones became the face of No 512, 
Norman’s career was booming and her shade became a bestseller soon after its 
launch.Laverne Cox, best known for her role in the TV series Orange is the New 
Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/14/laverne-cox-orange-new-black-transgender>
, remembers Norman’s face on that bottle, as do many other millions of American 
women. As Cox toldNew York Magazine last year: “I can’t tell you how many hours 
I stared at that photo of her on that Clairol bottle and that caption, ‘Born 
Beautiful’. Yeah, we are born beautiful.”

Norman, however, was keeping an extraordinary secret. As a trans woman she was 
making history, all the while hoping that no one else would ever know. Cox, a 
trans actor, and every other woman who bought a bottle of No 512, had no idea 
that the beautiful black woman on the side of the Clairol bottle had begun life 
as a biological boy. Norman was, in short, the first black transgender model.

In recent years, rapid if overdue progress has been made in the realm of trans 
rights and trans visibility. Now trans models such as Andreja Pejić, Carmen 
Carrera, Lea T and Hari Nef walk runways and secure campaigns for major fashion 
labels. Forty years ago, however, the word “trans” barely existed and prejudice 
was such that the idea of a trans model being “out” was unthinkable, even 
horrifying, to a far less enlightened world. As such, Norman would say a prayer 
before each shoot: “Please don’t let this be the day.”

She “passed” as a cisgender female for years before that day came around in 
1980. Norman was, as she understands it, outed on a shoot and with that, her 
career was in effect terminated. Now, however, Clairol has welcomed her back 
into the spotlight and in front of the camera. Last week the brand announced 
Norman, 63, as the face of its new “Color As Real As You Are” campaign. In the 
accompanying video, Norman reminds us: “Back in the 70s it was a different 
world for transgender women … I had to hide my truth.” The clip ends: “It’s 
good to be back and it’s really good to be me.”

Clairol’s global associate brand director Heather Carruthers said: “We’re 
honoured to bring back Tracey Norman as a woman who no longer has to hide her 
truth.”

In the words of Janet Mock, a transgender advocate and the author of the 
bestselling memoirRedefining Realness 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/285683/>, Norman’s 
reunion with Clairol is “one of those full-circle narratives of affirmation and 
acceptance that further chips away at the persistent myth most trans people 
have done so much work to unlearn: that we are not enough – not good enough or 
‘real’ enough.” Mock also points out that Norman is not just African American 
and trans, but a woman in her 60s – an age, she says, “when our society tells 
women to go away and hide”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDdqbYjivr1o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDdqbYjivr1o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDdqbYjivr1o&media=>
 Tracey Norman reurns to Clairol 
Mock adds: “As a black trans woman who has to grapple with a culture that 
tells me I am not beautiful because I am trans and I am not beautiful because I 
am black, seeing this living legend shine is a beacon of affirmation that, yes, 
we are beautiful, but more importantly we are whole, deserving and worthy.”

For Norman, who knew from a very young age that her body did not match her 
gender, such affirmation was hard to come by. Born in Newark, New Jersey, she 
was the first person in her family to graduate from high school. On the same 
day in 1969 that she received her diploma, she summoned the courage to tell her 
mother the truth. Her mother, in turn, told her she had always known.

Within two years, Norman had begun taking hormones, thanks to a doctor working 
under the table for the transgender community, and was not just “passing” as 
female, but turning heads for her beauty. She became interested, albeit 
tentatively, in the idea of modelling.

One day in 1975 she spotted a group of well-known black models on the street 
and followed them into the Pierre hotel in New York, assuming they were heading 
to a fashion show. In fact they were heading to a casting. Norman, who hung 
back so as to be last in line, found herself facing a panel of three people. 
She had no idea that they were anItalian Vogue editor, the fashion designer 
Luciano Soprani and the photographer Irving Penn. To her astonishment, she 
received a phone call the next day telling her she was booked for a two-day 
photoshoot that paid $3,000 – more money than Norman had seen in her life. By 
little more than chance and chutzpah, a black girl from New Jersey in 1970s 
America had just gone from virtually nothing to the pages ofVogue. Only Norman 
knew that the whole truth was even more extraordinary.

Laverne Cox: 'Now I have the money to feminise my face I don’t want to. I’m 
happy'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/14/laverne-cox-orange-new-black-transgender>
Enthusiastically endorsed by Penn, who bragged that he had discovered the next 
Beverly Johnson, Norman signed to Zoli agency, which began, as she has put it, 
“booking me left and right”.

One of her most loyal clients was Essence, a magazine Norman had worked with 
plenty of times before it booked her for a shoot for its Christmas issue. All 
was going well until a hair assistant, a man who had always asked Norman 
probing questions about her past, entered the shoot and spoke to the magazine’s 
editor, Susan Taylor. Norman recalled that, soon after, the shoot was shut down 
and, with it, her career. She believes the hair assistant had discovered her 
secret.Taylor has since told New York Magazine 
<http://nymag.com/thecut/2015/12/tracey-africa-transgender-model-c-v-r.html> 
that she has no recollection of this: “No one could have outed her to me. I 
always suspected she was genetically male. I accepted her as she presented 
herself, as an exquisitely beautiful black woman.”

None the less, Norman maintains this is the day her career ended. As she told 
New York Magazine: “Beauty and fashion is all about illusion. So when the doors 
were opened for me, I walked right through. And then the doors slammed … Once 
the doors closed, I was no longer a woman and I no longer got the respect of a 
woman.”

About 18 months after that shoot, Norman bought a ticket to Paris where she 
got by for two years working in mostly low-profile jobs. Then, she returned to 
New York and signed with a small agency. When she was hired for an Ultra Sheen 
cosmetics ad, her third beauty contract, it seemed like a comeback. And yet 
word had spread so fast in New York that when the ad ran, everyone knew her 
foremost as “the girl who’d been a boy”.

After that she was unable to get work and she gave up her apartment and moved 
back in with her mother. In the intervening years, Norman has earned a living 
at Show Center, a burlesque peep show featuring trans women in Times Square. 
She has also become an “icon” and “legend” (these terms have specific status) 
in the ballroom community, in which different houses, which operate like 
surrogate families for LGBTQ youth of colour, compete against each other in 
drag balls. She rose to the rank of “mother” in the House of Africa, hence her 
full name, Tracey Africa Norman, and in 2001, she was inducted into the 
ballroom house of fame.

The success of her Vogue days, however, seemed distant and irretrievable. 
Then, last December,New York Magazine ran a cover story and, once again, her 
life changed. Norman, who has spent decades training herself in invisibility as 
a mode of survival, needed convincing to agree to such high-profile press. Yet, 
“I was reminded,” she said, “that I made history and I deserve to have 
it printed.”

In the wake of the profile, Norman’s career has been reborn. That is most 
evident in the Clairol contract – a personal triumph and homecoming for a woman 
shunned by her profession for decades. More important, though, it is a triumph 
for trans visibility.

As she told the Huffington Post: “I’m hoping people will take away from this 
that I am human and I was presented with this great opportunity to better my 
life. Unfortunately, because of people’s prejudices I was not able to do it.” 
Unlike so many, however, she was afforded a second chance.
 