
Lace was a big catwalk trend for the summer, especially white lace. There were 
wafty ethereal dresses at Chloé and Erdem, sexy minis at Louis Vuitton. Michael 
Kors, Oscar de la Renta and Marchesa did smart separates and perfect little 
summer frocks. Oh, but it did look pretty floating down the catwalk. But come 
on, let’s not even pretend we’re going to wear this stuff.

You can wear white lace, but you can only wear it once. White is a colour that 
is only truly loved by childless people who don’t have pets, but do have a 
driver. People who never eat beetroot or drink coffee.

Lace certainly has its place, but it’s not in normal wardrobes. Lace is for 
brides or twee vintage devotees or four-year-olds who don’t know any better; 
for the desperate for sex in their scratchy lingerie sets. Thankfully the 1970s 
trend, which shows no sign of dying, has welcomed back broderie anglaise, 
famously the only style of fabric you can convincingly poke a fag through. For 
some reason, this time round broderie anglaise is referred to as broderie. I 
don’t know if this is a provenance quibble – like the Cornish pasty or 
champagne – but it suits the no-nonsense attitude of the fabric. Broderie is 
the sensible shoes of lace. It’s practical. It’s for people with jobs. You get 
the hint of skin, but without the sugary girliness or “just spicing up my 
marriage, be right back” of lace. There’s also the knowing nod to the 70s 
without the trailing of flares in a puddle.

And if that wasn’t alluring enough, new-look broderie anglaise goes one 
better. While in the 70s the fabric was almost uniformly white, now it comes in 
a multitude of colours. On the catwalk there was a lovely burgundy at Isabel 
Marant, and Valentino sent out broderie in any colour you can think of.

On the high street, navy crops up a lot, but there are also lots of clothes in 
those lovely bright citrus colours that go so smugly with a tan. There are also 
a lot of precision laser-cut patterns that make the fabric look supermodern.

Whistles and J Crew have embraced the trend. Go to Whistles for perfect pencil 
skirts or asymmetric dresses, tops and trousers in black, navy or old-school 
white. J Crew has really gone for colour, though my personal favourite is this 
almost polka-dottish monochrome Portea pattern. It’s cute without being 
annoying.

For more traditional broderie, look to more traditional shops. Marks & Spencer 
has some really pretty frocks and tops, as do Comptoir des Cotonniers and Zara.

As usual, if you’re dubious about a trend then go small on it. For broderie 
just buy some shoes or a bag featuring a punched eyelet pattern. My tip would 
be broderie espadrilles. These shoes are back (again, of course) this summer, 
and I love these Kate Spade ones. They look like wicker, another material 
irrevocably linked to the 70s.

It’s not often that a fabric comes along that’s practical and comfortable and 
interesting. I know it’s a cliché, but broderie: what’s not to like?

Follow Alice on Instagram @aliceefisher <https://instagram.com/aliceefisher/>
 