
I watched the little blue dot on my iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> approach the yellow square 
labeled Musée d’Orsay. That blue dot – that is, I – hovered amid a dozen red 
pins marking the restaurants and cafés I knew I needed to try, because the 
internet said so.

When I reached the Musée d’Orsay, the line to buy tickets wound on forever. I 
moved to take a step toward the line, but a woman trying to get the perfect 
selfie cut me off. I offered to take a photo of her with the museum in the 
background and she looked at me curiously – why on Earth would she want that? – 
before twisting her selfie stick into position. I took another step forward, 
but my elbows were already slippery with sweat; I was uncomfortable and 
uninspired and suddenly had no desire to wait half an hour in the steamy 
weather to stare at some paintings I had already seen on Google Images.

I’m lucky to have grown up in the age of technology. Though flights are still 
a luxury item and travel remains a privilege, technology makes it lower-risk. 
Through iMessage and Skype, I can keep in constant contact with my family and 
friends. I can drop into any city and immediately know the customs and language 
thanks to apps dedicated to making me an informed traveler. There are hundreds 
of articles online telling me the top 10 cafés, so I don’t have to worry that I 
might miss the “best” parts of the city. After arriving in Paris, though, it 
became clear that having the world at my fingertips came at the expense of the 
world around me.

I heard one word over and over: flâneur. It can be loosely translated to mean 
a connoisseur of streets or one who wanders aimlessly through cities. If the 
city is a gourmet meal, theflâneur is the gastronomist. We have no direct 
translation in English, and I wonder if this is because we have no equivalent 
action in America. Aimless wandering is frowned upon in our ambitious, driven 
society.


For all that technology has given to travel, it’s taken the serendipity out. 
I’ve become so preoccupied with trying to see the city I heard about online 
that I forgot to experience the place right in front of me, passing by cozy 
cafes that breathe with the romanticism and tranquility I sought because a 
stranger online wrote on a blog that L’as du Falafel is a must. But I arrived 
to find a line full of Hawaiian-shirt and khaki-clad tourists. I may never miss 
a “must-see,” but I’ll also never stumble on a hidden gem.

That’s the sad paradox of discussing wanderlust on the internet: we talk about 
travel the way we want it to be; we talk about it as if it’s a wild adventurer 
where we meet a world we never knew existed, and in that discovery we find 
ourselves, Eat, Pray, Love-style. But when we go to these places, we don’t 
wander. We don’t explore. We’ve cut out the space to find ourselves and 
replaced it with a list of other people’s finds. We are tourists, notflâneurs. 

The day after I did not go to the Musée d’Orsay, I left my cellphone at home 
and just start walking. I found a wine bar where the owner tried to explain the 
different wines through gesture; he spoke no English and I only knew a handful 
of French. I met new artists in their galleries on alleyways that do not show 
up on the maps. I ate atarte de framboise in a park, surrounded by picnicking 
Parisians. I got lost in a maze of cobblestone streets only to find an unnamed 
cafe with a blonde cat that purred on my lap while I sipped an espresso and 
talked to a stranger about the time he visited America and saw a bear.

I did not see Van Gogh paintings. I did not eat the best falafel. But I did 
see Paris.
 