
Jonny Bairstow 27 England wicketkeeper

Christmas Day differs depending on whether England are on tour or not. Last 
year, in South Africa, we trained in the morning before the Boxing Day Test in 
Durban. It was a case of heading back to the hotel straight after nets, getting 
showered and changed, and then we all met at the restaurant for a fantastic day 
as one big family of players and relatives. My mum and my sister were there. We 
had presents and a dinner with all the trimmings. A beer was fine – it’s down 
to you as an individual to turn up the next day and perform – and we then spent 
the evening getting prepared for the match as usual.

This year we are home after a long tour of India  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/21/vic-marks-england-cricket-tour-to-india-and-bangladesh-review>
on 22 December and head back for the one-dayers on 4 January, so it will be a 
condensed Christmas to see all my family and friends. I’ll be in my village 
with my mum, sister, grandma, brother, his wife and my uncle. We go down to the 
pub on Christmas Eve to see old school-mates and on Christmas Day I’ll go for a 
run in the morning while my mum and sister take charge of the dinner – too many 
cooks spoil the broth, as they say – but we all chip in with jobs like 
preparing melon wrapped in ham or prawn cocktail. I’m not a big fan of 
Christmas pudding. I don’t do dessert to be honest, I prefer a few more pigs in 
blankets after the main meal, which is the usual turkey butterfly with all the 
bits and bobs. Plus lots of gravy. We northern lads like our gravy.

Jo Pavey 43 Athlete

Now I’m a mum, Christmas Day is very different than it used to be. In the past 
I would usually be trying to peak for a race on New Year’s Eve in Italy so I’d 
do a hard track session on Christmas Eve, which would normally be 16x400m with 
little rest, then do a long run on Christmas Day. When I was living in London 
in my 20s I’d typically get up, eat a box of chocolates as a treat for 
breakfast – after all, it’s not Christmas every day – and then run 16 miles 
before a big drive to my parents in Devon for Christmas dinner. Unlike many 
athletes I’ve never felt like I missed out on celebrating Christmas. I’ve never 
been one to obsess about what I eat, so I’ve always enjoyed a traditional 
dinner with all the trimmings and a glass of red wine. One year, though, I was 
so stuffed I felt I had to run again in the evening, so I did my favourite 
five-mile circuit around the roads near my parents’ house – fuelled by my mum’s 
strong coffee and a lot of chocolate – I did it in my best-ever time, which I 
wasn’t expecting!

These days I have two wonderful kids, Jacob, who is seven, and three-year-old 
Emily and I want Christmas to be all about them. So this year I will do my long 
run on Christmas Eve and take Christmas Day completely off. Even though I’m 43 
now, I still hope to get selected for next year’s world championships in London 
and so I am training hard. But one day of overindulgence won’t hurt. So on 
Christmas Day we’ll probably wake up nice and early to open presents – although 
Emily has already told my husband Gav and I that we have to turn our electric 
fan heater off because she doesn’t want to burn Santa’s bottom at breakfast. 
Later on we’ll all settle down for traditional dinner. I’m not sure what I’ll 
make for a starter, if anything, but it won’t be posh: prawn cocktail or soup 
probably. Then it’ll be turkey with trimmings, Christmas pudding, and some wine 
too. And on Boxing Day I’ll run it all off.

Sam Twiston-Davies 24 Jockey


As a jockey, your Christmas Day depends entirely on what weight you have to do 
for the races on Boxing Day. I’ve been very lucky the last few years, I’ve gone 
to Kempton for the good racing, where the horses are mostly carrying 11st or 
more. If you ever have to do 10st, that would be the tricky part. So I won’t be 
going too wild with the portions, I won’t go mad on the puddings or stay up too 
late but I’ll definitely get stuck into a bit of turkey and vegetables. I won’t 
drink on Christmas Day. I don’t drink if I’m riding the next day but there’s no 
racing for the two days before, so I’ll be able to have one or two then, 
starting with the Lesters [jockeys’ awards night] on the 22nd, which is always 
a great, fun party.

For Christmas, I’ll be at my mum’s place in Naunton in Gloucestershire, with a 
few of her sisters, some cousins and my brother Willy, who is also a jockey. We 
sometimes have another jockey or two because it can be hard for the Irish lads 
to get back if they’re riding in England on Boxing Day. I think this time 
Richie McLernon will stay with us. We had Aidan Coleman one year.

Racehorses still have to be exercised on Christmas Day, so we’ll be at the 
stable where my dad trains by 7am. He’s quite good about it, he only sends out 
that week’s runners, so it’s probably one or two lots up the gallops and that’s 
you done. After that, we might pop to church and then help with the festive 
activities, laying the table and so on before getting on the Xbox.

I’ve always grown up with going racing on Boxing Day, which is something else 
to look forward to. You go to bed at Christmas having had a good day and 
looking forward to either the prospect of going to a great day’s racing or 
hopefully having a few rides. I think I’ll be on The New One in the Christmas 
Hurdle. We’ll see if I can geta ride in the King George 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/thistlecrack-cue-card-kempton-king-george-colin-tizzard-confirms-horse-racing>
 as well.

James Wade 33 Darts world No6

For a darts player, the Christmas period is as normal as it can be while 
you’re working. We have the world championship at Alexandra Palace, although 
there’s a break from Christmas Eve to Boxing Day. I won’t touch my darts on 
Christmas Day. It’s not for me. There’s more important things on Christmas Day 
than a game – it’s all about family. I’d say 95% of players will practise on 
Christmas Day. They put things in different perspectives. I feel a bit sorry 
for people in any sport who can’t leave it behind for one day.

The initial thing on Christmas Day is to have a cup of coffee or tea, and then 
we start eating! Open some presents, eat some more, open some more presents. We 
have a full Christmas dinner: traditional with a twist. It’s nice to remember 
it as Christmas dinner like when you were a kid; that’s really important. Have 
you noticed that kids don’t seem to get as excited about Christmas these days? 
That’s really sad. It’s rubbish really.

My wife has a glass of champagne in the morning, and we’ll have a few drinks 
in the evening while watching the sort of terrible Christmas TV you’d never 
watch at any other time of year. We usually play some board games and little 
quizzes. Everyone’s got a soft spot for Trivial Pursuit, haven’t they? Board 
games always cause arguments at Christmas. That’s why I love them.

As told to Ali Martin, Sean Ingle, Chris Cook and Rob Smyth
 