
Most men’s feet are disgusting. Mine are no exception – a gnarly mess of dried 
skin, blisters, purple nails and fungal infections (thank you, AstroTurf 
football). However, with the weather heating up I want to start wearing some 
footwear that will expose my hooves to the world. Out of concern for other 
people’s gag reflex, I’ve been endeavouring to get them into a more respectable 
condition: painting antibacterial stuff on the nails, filing them down, 
exfoliating the crusty skin and slathering the whole lot in moisturiser. It’s a 
struggle, but slowly I’m starting to see results. I just have to face facts: I 
am never going to be a foot model.

There is a range of summery, toe-revealing options for men. The pool slider 
has come into fashion – a real surprise for me, because I associate them with 
my childhood swimming club, and it’s safe to say that none of us were flying 
high in the style-stakes poolside. Nevertheless the slider is strutting down 
the catwalk, and that’s good news, as sliders are extremely comfortable – 
almost orthopaedically so.

I wanted to get a liquid silver pair of Nike sliders, but they sold out in 
about four seconds, so I settled on a pair of all-white ones with a subtle camo 
print (tricky to say what they’re camouflaging against). My girlfriend loathes 
them. She won’t let me leave the house wearing them. She thinks they’re too 
naughty. She’s wrong. They are exactly the right amount of naughty. I do 
privately accept her point that you can’t beat the classic, the navy and white 
Adidas three-stripe, but unfortunately I’ve argued myself into a corner and 
can’t back down. If you fancy a slightly smarter slider, Hunter (yes, the welly 
guys) do a rather chic plain black pair.

The other options are leather sandals – personally I think they always make 
people look like they’re part of a historical reconstruction event. Having said 
that, it’s interesting that Birkenstocks are popping up again. They look good, 
but be warned: you have to keep them clean and well aired. I had to prematurely 
dispose of my last pair due to their eye-burningly toxic odour.

In spite of all my buffing and scrubbing and clipping and rubbing, it may be 
that I just play it safe with espadrilles. I’ve said it before and I’ll say it 
again: the espadrille is a great shoe. Light, comfy, looks good, cheap – and, 
crucially, doesn’t reveal the horrors beneath. If you fancy spending a bit 
more, you can always splash out on some Soludos or Havaianas. Both have a thin 
plastic layer on the sole that makes them last longer, and they are made of a 
more robust canvas.

Whatever you decide, please remember that flip-flops are only OK on the beach. 
Even if you’re Australian.


Follow Rick on Twitter @rickedwards1  <https://twitter.com/rickedwards1>
 