
A forthcoming book, Lost for words: how can journalism survive the decline of 
print?, contains 50 essays by editors (current and past), academics, 
commentators and newspaper executives.* In something of a sneak preview, here 
is an edited version of one chapter, “If print dies so does freedom”, by 
journalist TIM CROOK, professor atGoldsmiths, University of London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/goldsmiths>. 

The vital social habit of buying and reading a newspaper is in catastrophic 
decline, but I cannot resist.

I tried to be seen as the only lecturer prepared to carry around a newspaper 
in my journalism department in the hope of encouraging my colleagues, and the 
younger generation, to retrieve the habit.


I even invaded the corrupt and perverted space of online conversation to 
evangelise the beauty of print andmock the superficiality and superfluous 
vapidity of the digital cyber usurper 
<https://theconversation.com/lily-livered-defeatism-must-be-challenged-to-save-print-editions-of-newspapers-21716>
. This has been to no avail.

There are journalism programmes in universities now which do not teach print 
design and publication. It makes me feel like a falling man of history, unable 
to do anything to resist an unendurable destiny of social disempowerment and 
political vulnerability.

I have had nightmares about desperately trying to locate articles and features 
I had been so sure about, but no longer exist in virtual space.

I distributed sheets containing 10 statements and facts banned and censored in 
the UK over the last 50 years to 150 students in a lecture theatre. I then 
projected the same text on to a presentation screen from an externally 
published website.

I asked 10 students to do their best to destroy their sheets of paper and 
compared this inconvenience and difficulty with the speed and effortless 
deletion operation in the online software embedded on the lecture hall computer.

Two clicks, one username and password, and whoosh. In a split second the 
maxims were gone as though they were never here nor there. Meanwhile, the 
students were still tearing into the paper.

I then asked the remaining 140 students to imagine there had been an executive 
government order backed by judicial injunction ordering them to surrender their 
sheets, and making it a criminal offence to possess or distribute them.

If they wanted to keep their manifesto of subversion, resistance and liberty, 
how would they conceal it? Most realised the state was faced with myriad 
difficulties in search and retrieval.

How could it be so sure all of the students would give up their hot property? 
How could it be so sure of identifying and confirming who had received the 
paper? Was there a reliable data trail in credit and swipe card transactions? 
If free how could it have been receipted?

The paper was easy to protect and harbour. It had no digital signature. Once 
it had escaped from the originating printing source it would be well-nigh 
impossible to track and destroy.

When the 140 students with their own copies of the sheet dispersed into their 
social and physical human networks the challenge facing the authoritarian 
tendency was the same as trying to contain a contagious disease.

It quickly dawned on the students that the digital version erased before their 
eyes, had, while available online, been connected with every downloader.

The originator’s dangerous creation while ostensibly wiped was always stored 
somewhere on the computer’s hard disc, and had been mirrored by some digital 
back-up facility.

George Orwell <https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeorwell>, in Nineteen 
Eighty-Four, predicted the dangers of combining totalitarian control with 
manipulative technology in social communication.

He conjured the implication of the memory hole down which truth and the public 
record can be annihilated in a blast furnace or bonfire of human identity and 
history. What was being destroyed was also cultural dignity and independence.


When communication and information is centralised by technology on to one 
electronic platform Orwell’s vision of control is realised. This is what the 
internet has achieved. It means Winston Smith’s dystopian world of destroying 
the past is materialising into reality.

The material newspaper form of local public record was essential in 
constructing my own family identity. But the record of the 1950s that helped me 
does not exist in the early 21st century.

The local newspaper industry has neither the manpower nor media institutions 
on the ground to achieve such micro-reporting and writing of the first draft of 
history. The online equivalents are unlikely to archive in the same way.

Business failure and digital indebtedness to hosting servers could so easily 
result in the wiping of whole swathes of online journalism. This is condemning 
future generations to a rootlessness of origin and historical reference.

I have no doubt the Orwellian liquidation and alteration of information is 
carrying on without challenge or social and political discomfiture. The 
European Court of Justice ruling in 2014 on the right to be forgotten through
Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> browser data processing 
means hundreds of thousands of articles and online records are being 
disconnected to the searching process.

 This, in the old days, would have been the equivalent of a reference library 
without any catalogue or index. Courts in England and Wales regularly issue 
secret injunctions suppressing links to archives, and directly removing entire 
postings.


I have seen the Metropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> change the detail of an 
important online media release which had huge significance in determining the 
public interest debate at the centre of a major story.

I feel responsible for having let down the current younger generations who 
look at newspaper buying and reading as something quaint and bad for health – a 
bit like smoking a pipe or wearing a bowler hat to work.

We have plunged helter-skelter into blindly and thoughtlessly abandoning the 
art of quotidian reading by newspaper. The aspirant authoritarian and 
totalitarian can certainly wise up to the prospects for control, manipulation 
and disrupting the art of verification.

This will always be something that can be avoided so much more reliably by 
exploring volumes of newspapers rather than forlornly search-engine surfing 
with the prevailing moniker: “Some results may have been removed under data 
protection law in Europe.”

This is something I experienced when writing the name of a famous and global 
celebrity in the Google search-box. There were 39,200,000 results in 0.66 of a 
second.

Speed and scale were astonishingly impressive. But I could not help worrying 
about those results which “may have been removed” secretly. Print may be dying, 
but democracy and liberty may be also passing away with it.

*Lost for words: how can journalism survive the decline of print?, edited by 
John Mair, Tor Clark, Ray Snoddy and Richard Tait with Neil Fowler, is being 
published next month by Abramis. You can obtain a copy at the pre-publication 
price of £15 fromrichard@abramispublishing.co.uk 
<mailto:richard@abramispublishing.co.uk>.

NB: The Media Society is staging a launch event for the book at the Groucho 
Club on 23 January 
<http://www.themediasociety.com/8-january-2017-lost-words-print-dying/> at 
which I will discuss the book’s themes with one of its editors and 
contributors, Ray Snoddy. You canbook here 
<https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/the-media-society-last-words-is-print-dying-or-not-tickets-28721002291>
.
 