
With the Italian government strapped for cash, Rome is becoming increasingly 
creative about how it preserves its heritage. Since 2014, companies funding 
restoration projects have been offered tax breaks via the Art Bonus scheme. 
Luxury label Tod’s bankrolled the Colosseum’s current restoration, while Fendi, 
better known for fur than philanthropy, picked up the tab for the Trevi 
Fountain’s refurb. But the site of Domus Aurea, Nero’s fabled House of Gold, is 
taking a different route – crowdfunding.

So far, the donations amount to €3,685 from 75 people. Not bad... but the 
rescue project has been costed at €31 million. Hungarian archaeologist, Mihaela 
Iaslau, who works at the site, hopes that by raising awareness in this way, a 
sponsor might be found. He says: “Crowdfunding is a kind of advertising to 
attract some private investment.”

Nero’s palace has been closed since damage by flooding in 2010, but it has 
recently reopened for guided weekend visits, in groups of up to 25 people, to 
raise awareness of the problems at the site (50% of ticket sales goes into 
restoration too). Booking is currently until August, but it’s likely to 
continue beyond the summer.

Rome-based archaeologist Darius Arya emphasises the importance of allowing 
people in to see the work in progress, and adds: “It allows people to have an 
insight into what is going on.”

Built around AD64, the Domus Aurea was less a villa, and more of a city. After 
Nero’s death, his successor, Trajan, destroyed the building and it gradually 
became buried, until the part you can visit today was excavated in the 1930s.

This is a visit to an archaeological rescue-job in progress. Every time it 
rains, the parkland that today covers the 2,000-year-old roof of the palace 
becomes 30% heavier. Water and tree roots are eating away at its caverns.

A sun-dappled garden with twisted wisteria and remnants of Roman walls marks 
the entrance to the palace today.

Visitors are given hard hats, adding to the sense that this is an 
extraordinary visit. Inside, water drips through the ceiling. It’s clear the 
archaeologists are fighting a battle underground. The frescoes are glossy with 
water. Where now there are walls of rubble, once there were views onto 
flower-filled gardens and marble statues. The deepest part is 16 metres 
underground, and the chill makes it feel like a dungeon. In the Sala della 
Volta Dorata (Room of the Golden Vault) faded paintings glow, framed by stucco. 
During the Renaissance, Raphael and Pinturicchio crawled along the top of the 
rubble in this room to study the works.

The tour finishes with a model showing how the €31m will fund a lighter, 
better-draining garden to top the site. The hope is palpable: perhaps showing 
the public what is being lost will ensure Domus Aurea’s survival.


• Co Op Culture <http://www.coopculture.it/events.cfm?id=268> organises tours 
in Italian and English, tickets €12.
Donations can be made at crowdfunding.coopculture.it 
<http://crowdfunding.coopculture.it/>
 