
Q Could you please assist me with the following complicated but not uncommon 
situation. In 2001, I bought house for £167,000 with my then wife. In 2005, we 
let the house out. In 2013, we divorced and I mortgaged the house to be able to 
buy out my ex-wife.


In 2015, I remarried and gave my new wife half the property for mortgage and 
tax purposes. We are now considering selling the house for around £400,000. The 
house is still let and has been for around 136 months.


Am I right in thinking that my ex-wife was liable for capital gains tax when 
she disposed of her share by selling it to me? And would I be liable for 
capital gains tax (CGT) if I sold the house today? Would I be advised to move 
back into the house for a period of time to limit my exposure to CGT?AH


A Whether you are right in thinking that your ex-wife was liable for CGT when 
she sold you her share – not that it’s any of your business – depends on when 
the disposal took place.


If she transferred her share to you before the end of the tax year in which 
you separated, then – like transfers of assets between spouses who are not 
separated – the transfer would be treated as giving rise neither to a gain nor 
a loss, so no CGT would be payable.


If the transfer took place after the end of the tax year that you separated, 
your ex-wife may be liable for CGT but that’s between her and her tax office. 
More information is available inHelpsheet 281 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/husband-and-wife-civil-partners-divorce-dissolution-and-separation-hs281-self-assessment-helpsheet/hs281-spouses-civil-partners-divorce-dissolution-and-separation-2016>
 – “Spouses, civil partners, divorce, dissolution and separation” – from HM 
Revenue & Customs (HMRC).


You too would be liable for CGT if you sold the property, but only on your 
share of the gain and probably not on the whole of that. The fact that you say 
“move back into the house” suggests that when you first bought the property 
with your now ex-wife, it was your home until you let it out in 2005 so the 
answer to your last question is: you don’t need to move back in to minimise 
your tax bill.

The fact that you lived in the home before letting it out means that you 
qualify for partial “private residence relief”, which makes part of the gain 
tax-free. You can work this out by taking the number of months you lived in the 
house plus 18, and then dividing that figure by the number of months you owned 
the property. Multiplying this fraction by whatever the gain is (what you sold 
it for less what you paid for it, legal fees and stamp duty) gives you the 
amount of private residence relief you can subtract from the gain to reduce the 
tax you pay.


If you moved back in, the fraction would be calculated differently. Rather 
than adding 18 to the number of months you lived in your property, you would 
add the number of months out of the final 18 of ownership not covered by actual 
occupation. So, for example, if you moved back in for six months before 
selling, you would add 12 to the number of months you lived there.


Since you let the property, you may also qualify for “lettings relief”, which 
also reduces your tax bill. The amount of the gain qualifying for lettings 
relief is the smallest of: the gain attributable to the period of letting 
(calculated by multiplying the gain by the number of months the property was 
let then dividing by the number of months of ownership); the amount of private 
residence relief you’re entitled to; and the maximum lettings relief of 
£40,000. More information on calculating lettings relief is available in HMRC’s
Helpsheet 283 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/private-residence-relief-hs283-self-assessment-helpsheet/hs283-private-residence-relief-2016>
 on private residence relief.

 