
Sometimes parenting is a survival game and, like our evolutionary predecessors 
fending away wolves with burning sticks, we’ll take just about any tool at our 
disposal. For me, bleary-eyed and exhausted, my five-month-old son asleep in my 
arms at four o’clock in the morning, that tool was an exercise ball to bounce 
him back to sleep (we later graduated to a rocking chair).

It’s not perfect. I still need to be awake and somewhat attentive but it does 
the job, especially as he’s a relatively good sleeper anyway.

But recently, while trying to settle him, I stumbled across a better solution 
online:the Snoo baby crib <https://www.happiestbaby.com/pages/snoo> rocks an 
upset baby back to sleep and then slows down to keep him or her soothed and 
snoozing. It picks the ideal white noise for the situation. A combination of 
sleep deprivation and the angelic glow of my smartphone screen gave the crib a 
nearly Messianic quality. At last, a tool to give all of us some sleep.

By this stage I’d been settling for two hours. Through the delirium my mind 
started racing: it’s all well and good to be able to rock a babyback to sleep – 
what if you could put them in fully awake and have the crib do all the work? 
Could artificial intelligence work out how to feed a bottle? It’d need a 
refrigeration unit but that shouldn’t be too difficult …

In my desperate madness, I proceeded to design a machine that would 
effectively make me redundant in my son’s life for the next few months.

The logic of technological entrepreneurship is the logic of progress: once 
we’ve found a way to technologise something, we want to know how far we can 
push it. Cars can double as chauffeurs, phones as personal assistants, cribs as 
parents, the list goes on.

Amazon Go means more than just job losses, it will restructure the economy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/09/amazon-go-means-more-than-just-job-losses-it-will-restructure-the-economy>
There’s nothing intrinsically wrong with technological innovation. Engineering 
is precisely the art of providing tools to allow humans to get on with the 
business of being human without being impeded by unnecessary inconvenience.

But technology always primes social values in particular ways. It’s unlikely 
that technological disruptions of parenting will be any different. Just as 
global access to information has changed our appetite to pay for news, 
technologies that make parenting easier can prompt unexpected behaviour.

For instance, with parents able to get a good night’s sleep quickly and 
easily, there may be less pressure for secondary carers – often fathers – to 
take additional time off work to help care for their partner and child. Might 
this surreptitiously displace working parents from the home earlier than they 
otherwise might have chosen? A number of new families I’ve met have joked about 
how eager the mother was to send their partner back to work to have them “out 
of the way” – technology like this might expedite the process.

On the bright side, it might also provide much-needed relief to single parents 
and those working multiple jobs to make ends meet; providing them the 
opportunity to rest, explore other opportunities for income or take some time 
for self-care. Yet those who need to work two jobs are also those with the 
least discretionary income to spend on robotic cribs for their children. 
Although good in theory, the crib might not be available to those who need them 
most until they can be produced cheaply at scale.

There is also a question as to how this and similar technologies could alter 
our conceptions of parenting itself. When I contemplated fatherhood, part of 
what I was committing to was bleary-eyed, sleepless nights trying to wrestle a 
little one back to bed. This wasn’t a necessary evil, it was a defining aspect 
of being a parent – an exercise of self-sacrifice, presence and solidarity with 
my partner. If, as Snoo promises, “exhaustion is optional”, will manually 
settling your child move from an essential part of parenting into a fringe 
activity done by purists? If so, there might be unforeseen consequences.

Once I returned to work after my paternity leave, settling my son back to 
sleep was on some days the only time I had with him. LED–illuminated cuddles 
were the only moments I had with my boy; but I was exhausted and, if presented 
with another option, I might have been tempted – a decision I might have 
regretted knowing what I do now. For me, giving up my sleep was the only 
tangible way I could connect to my son and my new role as a father.

Could automation make life worse for women?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/08/could-automation-make-life-worse-for-women>
Perhaps our baby wouldn’t have been any worse off soothing in a crib – though 
I suspect there’d be fierce debate on that point. But I have a feeling my 
parenting might have. Until recently, sleep rituals, nappy changes and burping 
weren’t menial tasks that distracted from the real business of parenting; they 
were the defining experiences of it. In many ways, they still are.

Maida Lynn Chen, director of the Pediatric Sleep Center at Seattle children’s 
hospital,thinks similarly 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/innovations/wp/2016/10/21/this-smart-crib-will-rock-your-baby-to-sleep/>
. She told the Washington Post, “There are certain triumphs to parenting, such 
as figuring out your child’s cues and being able to soothe your baby in some 
shape or form. Really developing and growing, as a parent, your skill set to 
try to figure out [why the baby is crying], I think that’s part of the 
parenting process.”

Andy Warhol advised people to allow the things that bore them to become 
thrilling instead. I’m not sure if he had parenting in mind but he may as well 
have. Technology can make our lives easier but to pursue ease and comfort 
merely because we can might also make them emptier.

I feel a thrill when my son falls asleep in my arms. In my better moments, I 
feel a thrill when he grunts to announce he’s awake. With the wisdom of 
perspective, they aren’t thrills I’d trade for smaller bags under my eyes. And 
I’m not sure what kind of a dad I’d be if I did.
 