
Impressionism has reached a more classical stage of existence in France than 
in England. The exhibition at the Hanover Gallery, New Bond-street, London, 
deals mainly with the works of four French masters of such long standing and 
high reputation that they have well earned the right to be regarded as veterans 
presently to become classics.

At the Paris Exhibition last year the most perfect and harmonious expression 
of a really living modern school was that afforded by the gathering together of 
paintings by Monet, Sisley, Renoir and Pissarro, and the show which has been 
now brought to London, if not so perfectly representative, is actually larger, 
and is full of interest to the student.

A French critic has said that Monet "paints the atmosphere which lies between 
you and the object", whereas with many looking at a thing pictorially implies 
an attempt to get rid of the atmosphere as an obstruction to the discovery of 
true form. Monet would say - "There is no such things as form apart from light; 
learn to look at light and you will find form."

When these painters are not at their very best some portion is liable to fall 
out of focus, or at least to remain inexpressive and vague. Take Monet's "La 
Terrace de Vétheuil", which represents a female figure reclining in a simmering 
expanse of sunlight and shade.

From many points of view it looks obviously wrong; from no point of view does 
the whole of it become quite right so as to carry conviction. Yet, with all its 
shortcomings, the picture deals with a phase of light which presents peculiar 
difficulties for a perfect rendering.

The artist is more thoroughly fortunate in such pieces as "Etretat", of sea 
and grey rock, or "Chemin Creux", a high-banked lane half-cavernous in its 
reception of soft filtering atmosphere.

The art of Sisley and Pissarro is, as a rule, less audacious, more suave, more 
ruled by remnants of older conventions, more often touched here and there by a 
preconcerted sense of style, than that of Claude Monet.

Monet, in following out the old claim that truth and beauty are one, seems to 
lay the emphasis very much on truth; the others seem to come upon truth 
secondarily through a more idealising faculty.

It is interesting to see how much strong leaders of impressionism as Sisley 
and Pissarro have been able to show that naturalism and individuality are not 
incompatible qualities. Monet may be stronger in his facts, but this is not the 
final proof that he is stronger in his art.
 