
The ABS’s six-monthly compendium of gender indicators 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/4125.0Main+Features1Feb%202015?OpenDocument>
 released this week reveals an Australia quite starkly divided along gender 
line. It’s a nation where women are paid less for the work they do, do more 
unpaid work, are denied seats at the heads of the largest corporations, are 
more stressed and are greater victims of harassment.


Looking at data on gender always has me rather wanting to avert my eyes. For a 
male over 40, who has been the beneficiary of the male patriarchy probably more 
than I care to admit, it’s a tad disconcerting to be confronted with figures 
that confirm the position of privilege that is being a male in Australian 
society. As a father of two daughters it is also rather dispiriting to look at 
the slow pace with which society is changing on gender equality.

But rather than get too depressed let’s start with some positive news – women 
still live longer than men. When women get to 65, they can expect on average to 
live another 22 years; men get just 19 years:

So clearly this must be due to a life lived free of stress and care? 

Well, certainly women do less paid work than men, but that doesn’t mean they 
have their feet up. When combining paid and unpaid work together men do on 
average six hours and 25 mins a day work, while women marginally are ahead, 
with an average 7 hours and 33 minutes a week:

This division of labour isn’t too bad in the sense that a nice balance is 
achieved, but it highlights that men remain the ones who work the most for 
monetary gain – and thus intrinsically have the most independence.

This is borne out by the data on median weekly earnings across occupations:

In all occupations, the median male hourly rate is higher than it is for 
women, and this difference is magnified when applied to median weekly earnings 
– because men work more hours each week on average than women:

And the difference between what women take home each week compared to men is 
not narrowing. Among the eight different occupation groups, only in three are 
the difference between earnings of men and women less in 2012 than it was in 
2002:

And as we discussed earlier in the week with the release of the Productivity 
Commission’s report intochildcare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/feb/23/tinkering-with-childcare-funding-does-little-to-boost-womens-participation>
, the reasons why men work longer hours in paid employment is highlighted by 
why people of both genders are not looking for work (or more work).

For men, the main reason is they are attending an education institution – 
school – TAFE, university etc. For women, the main reason is because they are 
caring for children:

The reason stated by 28% of women for not working was due to caring for 
children – compared to just 3% of men. It’s also worth noting that 12% of women 
not looking for work stated the main reason was due to the ill health of 
someone else or due to “other family considerations”, compared to just 5% of 
men.

Still, I guess being at home more means women have more free time I guess?

Alas, while 34.9% of men felt “rushed or pressed for time”, 42.4% of women 
did. And once again the reason why each gender felt they were pressed for time 
was quite instructive.

While the most common reason for both genders for being stressed was because 
of the rather ubiquitous “trying to balance work and family”, the second most 
common reason for men was the “pressure of work or study”. For women, however, 
the second most common reason was “too many demands” closely followed by 
“demands of family”. For men, the “demands of family” rated only the sixth most 
common reason:

Probably not helping with the stress is the fact that women are more than 
twice as more likely to experience sexual harassment as men do.

In 2012 a fairly jaw-dropping 14.8% of women experienced sexual harassment at 
some point in the year, compared to 6.6% of men:

By far the most common form of harassment was “inappropriate comments”. Nearly 
10% of women had experienced such comments in 2012 – constituting 65% of all 
cases of sexual harassment towards women.

And while men were on the receiving end of sexual harassment as well, 
interestingly such harassment was almost as likely to be have been perpetrated 
by a man as it was a woman. For women, nearly 95% of such cases involved a male 
perpetrator.

Given such harassment also included indecent exposure, it clearly is not all 
workplace harassment, but it may not be a coincidence that women are on the end 
of more harassment when we look at the top echelons of companies executive 
structure and find them male dominated:

In 2012, 96.5% of CEOs in the top 200 companies listed on the Australian Stock 
Exchange were men. This was barely an improvement in gender equality from 2002 
when 98.7% were men.

Even at the lower level of executive managers, men still hold sway – almost 
like there is some power structure in place which ensured that the best man is 
always chosen for the job.

In 2002, 91.6% of executive managers were men, by 2012 it had fallen all the 
way to 88.5%. At this rate, by around the turn of the century we’ll get to a 
50:50 split.

It would seem on the road to equality, we still have a fair bit of driving to 
do.
 