
Six years ago I found a green, cloth-covered hardback book at my parents’ 
home. The spine read Climbing Days: Dorothy Pilley. Recognising the name, I sat 
down to read, intrigued; I’d stumbled upon the fabled mountaineering memoir of 
my great-great aunt.

Related: Climbing Days by Dan Richards – review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/26/climbing-days-dan-richards-review-dorothy-pilley>

Endpaper sketch-maps of mountain ranges led on to stories of thrilling 
ascents, love, camaraderie and derring-do on mountains around the world. It was 
vivid, packed with incident and humour, strikingly modern and egalitarian. I 
read it, then asked my father about the author, a woman who, 1935 memoir aside, 
I knew next to nothing about. The conversation that followed set me on a quest 
to discover more about Dorothy, or Dorothea as she was within the family, and 
her amazing mountaineering life and legacy.

Dorothea was born in Camberwell, south London, in 1894 to a family on the up. 
Her father, a chemist, teacher, and entrepreneur, had amassed a small fortune 
manufacturing baby food. Dorothea was sent away to the exclusive Queenwood 
school in Eastbourne to be groomed for a life of top-end housewifery, but 
promptly rebelled – a trait and spirit which endured.
 Dorothy Pilley, right, with her husband Ivor Richards. Photograph: Pilley 
Family archive 
As a young woman she kicked forcefully against the life and choices others 
thought best and seemly. Eventually, she achieved a level of autonomy through 
journalism (for, among others, the Daily Express, and periodicals including 
Lady’s Pictorial, the Englishwoman, and the Pall Mall Magazine) and by working 
as a secretary for the proto-feminist British Women’s Patriotic League. It was 
also during this period that she began to escape London to climb in the 
mountains of north Wales and Skye.

Snowdonia was central to Dorothea’s independent 20s. It was there she learned 
to climb on the nursery slopes of Tryfan

Snowdonia was central to Dorothea’s independent 20s. It was there, in 1915, 
that she learned to climb on the nursery slopes of Tryfan and the Idwal Slabs; 
there, in 1917, that she first met her future husband and climbing partner, the 
literary critic and scholar IA (Ivor) Richards; and there, in 1921, that she 
helped found thePinnacle Club <http://pinnacleclub.co.uk/> – the world’s first 
climbing club established by women for women. So it seemed apt that I began 
there too.

From the moment I decided to research and write about Dorothea, it felt 
crucial to engage with her mountaineering legacy in a physical way, to climb 
the routes and peaks she pioneered with Ivor. I travelled first to the Idwal 
Slabs – a formation the locals call Rhiwiau Caws (Slopes of Cheese). It is a 
great fist of rock, dark fingers pushing down into the wet earth. I hiked up 
the A5 from Bethesda in hard rain, then on into the bowl of Cwm Idwal to stand 
beneath the rhyolite cliffs and watch others climb the slick rocks, soaking up 
the scene and the sky.
 The north ridge of Tryfan, Snowdonia. Photograph: David Else/Getty Images 
A couple of months later I returned with members of the Pinnacle Club, a 
chastening and farcical trip: a circular several-mile walk around Ogwen in a 
deluge. We climbed nothing. Saturated and silent in a steaming car, we drove to 
their hut in the valley of Nant Gwynant. Drying out by the fire, we looked 
through their archive of letters and photographs of the club founders. Theclub 
members were kind and stoical and I was grateful for their hospitality. Several 
months later, writing up the episode, I discovered a Welsh phrase for such 
sodden days:Mae hi’n brwr hen wragedd a ffyn – “It’s raining old women and 
sticks”.

It wasn’t until I took part in a Conville Winter mountaineering course that I 
felt I’d experienced real mountaineering

In the months that followed, I learned the ropes on crags and walls around the 
UK in all weathers. However, it wasn’t until I took part in aConville Winter 
mountaineering course <http://www.jcmt.org.uk/courses/> in the Cairngorms that 
I felt I’d truly experienced real mountaineering. Run in conjunction withPlas y 
Brenin <http://www.pyb.co.uk/>, the National Mountain Sports Centre, the 
Conville courses were established by Jonathan Conville’s family in the wake of 
his death on the north face of the Matterhorn in 1979. He was 27. A trust was 
established to provide subsidy and training to young mountaineers so they might 
enjoy the mountains in greater safety.

Dorothea and Ivor have been described to me as climbing aristocracy, whose 
feats and reputations spanned generations. To properly follow them it was vital 
that I learned to climb and belay safely on snow and ice and get to grips with 
spiky kit, such as axes and crampons. So, stood with a team of fellow Alpine 
rookies below the cliffs of Coire an t-Sneachda, I was taught to navigate, dig 
snow holes and take avalanche precautions.
 Cairngorms, Scotland. Photograph: Getty Images 
“You need enough in your locker to survive and return to safety if things get 
out of hand,” explained our instructor, Sammy. This is the crux of the Conville 
course: that while risk can never be eliminated in the mountains, it can be 
managed.

“Risk was the salt,” wrote Dorothea, “but he or she would be a stupid cook who 
thought the more there is of it the better.”

Dorothea was every inch the swashbuckling heroine, a fierce trailblazer, yet 
always caring

And so, mindful not to be stupid cooks, we set about learning our place within 
the Cairngorm’s wild sphere.

There followed two trips to the fabled Dent Blanche in Switzerland: a 
beautiful, savage, massive Sphinx-like peak that forms the apex of Dorothea’s 
memoir. The first time, I travelled over with my father and we set about the 
mountain with great zest and enthusiasm but we suffered: poor fitness, altitude 
sickness, failure to reach the summit, arguments, angry hut guardians and then 
a benighting. That is a beautiful word but a horrible reality: the light broke 
down, visibility was low so we stopped for the night, sat on a freezing ledge 
above Zermatt with an intermittent grandstand view of the Matterhorn. That 
rather took the shine off the expedition.
 Two female hikers looking at the reflection of the east face, Hoernligrat, of 
the Matterhorn. Photograph: Ingolf Pompe/Getty Images 
My second attempt, made several months later with Swiss guide Jean-Noël 
Bovier, while far better organised and successful on paper, was equally 
eventful – and occasionally fractious. He got me to the summit, for which I’ll 
always be grateful, but at the cost of a thorough dragooning. The climb was a 
vertiginous boot camp of sarcasm, tough love and swearing. On the descent I 
fell through a snow cornice and nearly began to descend at a speed incompatible 
with life. It all happened in a flash but Jean-Noël’s skill and hawser strength 
saved me. We may have argued, but I love that man, won’t hear a word against 
him. I can’t thank him enough.

Would Dorothea and Ivor have approved? I hope so. They were fantastic 
climbers, but at the same time, wonderfully droll, funny people with a strong 
sense of the ridiculous. Dorothea was every inch the swashbuckling heroine, a 
fierce trailblazer, yet always caring. I hope they would have been pleased that 
I went out to meet them in their element. I grew to love and value them 
enormously along the way.

“It is the reverberation of one’s life among them,” wrote Dorothea of the 
mountains, “In each case the sense of an uncapturable significance will arise, 
and its secret – for the mountaineer as for any pilgrim passion – is almost an 
open one. Therein, reflected, is the experience of being ardently alive.’

• Climbing Days by Dan Richards is out now, published by Faber and Faber 
<https://www.faber.co.uk/9780571311927-climbing-days.html>. To order a copy for 
£12.99, including UK p&p, visitthe guardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/climbing-days.html> or call 0330 333 6846

Hang on! Six tips to inspire women climbers

By Hilary Lawrenson, president of the Pinnacle Club 
<http://pinnacleclub.co.uk/>, a club for women climbers
 Mingulay, Outer Hebrides, Scotland. Photograph: David Forman/Getty Images 
1. Getting started
If you want to start climbing outdoors, most local clubs will have 
introductory days for beginners. You could go on a “wall-to-rock” course or go 
for the full works with a weekend or week-long course at somewhere such asPlas 
y Brenin <http://www.pyb.co.uk/>, the National Mountain Centre in Snowdonia. 
The gritstone edges in the Peak District offer hundreds of easily accessible, 
short climbs for starting on, or you can scramble and do easy multi-pitch 
climbs in the mountains of Snowdonia.

2. Join a meet
The Pinnacle Club organises around 30-40 meets a year, many at our club hut in 
Snowdonia, but also in different parts of the UK and abroad. Most are for 
experienced traditional climbers, but we also have introductory meets for women 
who don’t have much climbing experience. They are a great way to meet other 
female climbers and be inspired. As well as the climbing they’re sociable and 
great fun whatever the weather.

3. My favourite UK climb
I’ve climbed in fantastic locations from Mingulay in the Outer Hebrides to 
Land’s End in Cornwall, from Fairhead in Northern Ireland to the gritstone 
edges in the Peak District. One of my favourite climbs, only 12 minutes’ drive 
from my house, is Croton Oil on Rivelin Edge, on the outskirts of Sheffield. It 
features an awkward wide crack, followed by balance-y moves standing on 
improbably sloping footholds, to finish dramatically on top of a pinnacle, 
where you can sit and admire the view.

4. The films to watch
There are great short films on BMC TV <http://tv.thebmc.co.uk/> where you can 
pick up tips about technique, gear, clubs and all aspects of climbing. I 
recommend: Pinnacle Club/BMC Women’s International Climbing Meet 2016; 
Arc’teryx Lakeland Revival: Middlefell Buttress;Mina Meets Godzilla;  
<http://tv.thebmc.co.uk/videos/mina-meets-godzilla/>and the multi-award-winning 
Operation Moffat <http://www.lightshedpictures.com/operation-moffat/>.

5. Useful resources
• British Mountaineering Council <https://www.thebmc.co.uk/>
• UKClimbing <http://www.ukclimbing.com/>
• The National Mountain Centre <http://www.pyb.co.uk/>
 Dorothy Russell tackling peaks in the Lake District 
6. And finally …
The great thing about climbing is you get to go to beautiful places in the 
pursuit of your sport. It can really challenge you physically and mentally and, 
unlike team and competitive sports, people carry on doing it well into their 
70s. In fact, there’s an active climbing scene for pensioners on the Costa 
Blanca in winter when it’s too cold to climb in the UK. You can see a short 
film of Pinnacle Club “senior” members Dorothy Russell, 76, and Judith Brown, 
58, climbing in the Lake District on Middlefell Buttress (see the films listed 
above).
 