
The annual protest against the inequalities of the income tax was made on 
Thursday by Mr. Hubbard, in the Commons, and is finding the usual echo from 
every corner of the land. The continual fruitlessness of remonstrances render 
their repetition somewhat undignified, yet it must not be supposed that they 
are entirely ineffective. The Chancellor of the Exchequer would no doubt 
rejoice to be spared the task of defending the obnoxious impost. Not only would 
he then be saved the trouble of discovering new disguises for old fallacies, he 
would also feel much more at ease concerning the duration of the tax itself.

If people once went to sleep under the burden to which Mr. Gladstone says 
their backs every year become more adapted, the income tax, with all its 
manifold inequalities, would speedily become acknowledged as a permanent 
institution. Fortunately, however, for the cause of justice, the adjustment is 
never likely to be complete enough to make men forget the weight, and every 
Chancellor of the Exchequer will be compelled to hear, and expected to answer, 
the complaints of the victims.

The member for Oxford University reminds the House of Commons that Pitt and 
the late Sir Robert Peel, both came to the conclusion that a just income tax is 
a chimera, but he ought to have added that, on this very ground, both those 
eminent finance ministers regarded it as only a temporary resource. With the 
first it was simply a war tax, and when an attempt was made to continue it at 
close of the war, the House of Commons rebelled against the Government, and 
deprived it at one swoop of the ten per cent, two shillings in the pound, at 
which the rate then stood. Sir Robert introduced the tax for great fiscal 
reforms, the benefit of which was enjoyed especially by those very classes 
which are most injuriously affected by the impost.

But no one is better aware than Mr. Gladstone that Sir Robert never meant the 
burden to be permanent. He himself has adopted the pledge for its termination; 
and we dare say that when the year 1860 passed away, and left the country still 
groaning under the load, no one felt the disappointment more keenly than he. 
But the conscience even of a Chancellor of the Exchequer is liable to be 
blunted by the continual renewal of bills. If he were allowed to carry off the 
spoil in silence, redress would soon be forgotten altogether. The only chance 
of preventing the income tax from becoming perpetual lies in forcing the 
Finance Minister periodically to defend it; and the country is indebted to Mr. 
Hubbard and his supporters for not allowing Mr. Gladstone to shirk the irksome 
duty.
 