
Friday night at Pals Bar & Brasserie in Croydon. A battle cry curdles through 
the venue. 'You doan wanna war wid whoo? War wid mweee!' MC D Double E lurches 
towards the crowd as he hits the mic. Bodies surge back towards him, smashing a 
low glass border in front of the DJ booth. Only minutes before office workers 
performed boozy slow dances around this suburban pub to chart hits. Now the 
energy in the room has turned. It's getting grime-y.

The crowd, now overwhelmingly young, black and male, is clued in and keyed up 
by the maddening noise blasting out of the PA - a mash of shuddering sub-bass, 
clattering beats and queasy synth-lines. D Double's microphone is feeding back 
like crazy. The shards of glass that have fallen inside the booth rattle in 
sympathy with the grinding percussive rhythm. This relentless assault and 
battery only serves to inflame the audience further. Hands primed like guns are 
thrust in the air to bust off imaginary shots in appreciation. Cigarette 
lighters and illuminated mobile phones are brandished like beacons. A mosh pit 
forms towards the edge of the dancefloor and several alarmed security guards 
wade in to break it up. But before they can the DJ, Danny Weed, spins back the 
track and kills the sound.

This is 'grime', a hybrid of American rap and Jamaican dancehall filtered 
through Britain's rave scene and powered by a raw punk energy all its own. 
Grime's first big star is Dizzee Rascal, whose Mercury Award-nominated album 
Boy in da Corner described a jagged, disenfranchised world alien to the 
experience of most Britons. Last month, Dizzee's mentor Wiley - the undisputed 
king of this new scene - followed him into the limelight.

But behind these two there's a large ragged army of hungry MCs spitting blood 
and fire about the grim reality of everyday life. Banded together in crews 
(with names such as Nasty, Boyz in da Hood, Roll Deep and Black Ops) they 
engage in their own brand of warfare in which reputations can be won or lost in 
16 bars. These are the bastard sons of Blair's Britain, trapped in long 
abandoned pockets of the country where violent crime is rife and the street 
economy holds sway. Music is their only way out of the grime.

Estranged from its mother culture, British rap has always suffered from 
something of an identity problem.Grime <https://www.theguardian.com/music/grime>
 draws from 15 years of dance music - from house through to jungle and the 
two-step garage sound popularised by So Solid Crew. It has its own culture, one 
that is almost entirely self-sufficient and bypasses traditional avenues of 
distribution and promotion. As well as specialist magazines such as RWD - born 
three years ago with a pounds 2,000 grant from the Prince's Trust and now the 
second largest dance music magazine in the UK - the scene also has its own 
version of MTV in cable station Channel U, which broadcasts roughly hewn 
homegrown promos for grime tracks alongside ultra-slick American rap videos. 
The pirate radio network is paramount in promoting and popularising the scene. 
In this culture, an appearance on 1Extra, Radio 1's digital urban music 
station, is about as overground it gets.

'This is an underground thing but its roots are in unadulterated capitalism,' 
says Matt Mason, editor of RWD . 'If you go to any young crew just coming up in 
the scene they'll have a whole business plan to help build up a reputation and 
product. There's more hype in garage than any other kind of music whether it's 
two MCs having a clash on a pirate or just the lyrics and the way they say 
them. It's just pure hype.'

The desire of each crew to carve out its own territory in a crowded market has 
led some of them to tag their sound with its own particular brand name. The 
generic 'grime' or 'UK garage' just won't do. Wiley and the other 10 members of 
his Roll Deep Crew describe their sound as Eski (or Eskimo). Jon E Cash's Black 
Ops have Sub Low. Others define their music in metrical terms: 8 Bar, 2 Step or 
44.

MCs have to play the same game to make themselves heard above the tinny gaggle 
of voices that crowd pirate transmissions. D Double E's idiosyncratic vocal 
style has made him one of the most recognisable and popular MCs on the scene. 
He only has to let out his call sign, a deliberate corruption of 'It's me!' 
sustained into a noise somewhere between a whoop and a grunt, for the audience 
to cotton on to his presence. 'At raves, sometimes I don't even have to MC, 
bruv,' he grins. 'I just go on stage and hear the echoes coming out the crowd. 
It's a deep signal.'

When D Double handles the mic his whole face tenses up with concentration and 
his teeth are bared to deliver lyrical threats of extreme physical violence 
designed to riddle the confidence of other MCs. But despite his merciless 
street persona, it's hard to see him as a bad sort underneath it all. The 
voicemail message on his mobile phone is a touching home recording of him 
coaching his two-year-old daughter to mimic his vocal style. He lives for the 
music and has done for 10 years, since he started out MCing at jungle raves at 
the age of 14. Up until the beginning of this year, D Double was the lead 
spitter in Nasty Crew. Now he's going solo. He spends much of his time rolling 
around his manor in a second-hand Rover, playing his own tracks on the car 
stereo over and over again as he bounces between the studio, pirate stations 
and raves. D Double's reputation in his local area is so well established that 
he can get away with referring to himself as the 'Newham General' with 
absolutely no sense irony.

Newham, Tower Hamlets and Hackney in east London - the last two rank in the 
top five most deprived boroughs in Britain - are to grime what the South Bronx 
is to hip hop. Rhythm Division records has been a fixture of Roman Road in E3 
for nearly 10 years. Owner Mark Prutton recalls many of today's names 
patronising the establishment as youngsters. 'They didn't have any money in 
those days so they'd come in, crowd around the decks and ask to listen to loads 
of records.'

Many producers bring white labels of their latest tunes fresh from the 
pressing plant and sell them exclusively at Rhythm Division before distributing 
them elsewhere. A hot tune will have been a staple on the pirates and at raves 
for months before its official release and may shift a few hundred copies in 
just a week. Wiley claims to have sold up to 50,000 last year out of the back 
of his car.

TEN MINUTES FROM HERE IS THE ESTATE where Dizzee Rascal grew up. Built in the 
Seventies and, by the looks of it, left to decay ever since, Crossways is one 
of the most impoverished council estates in London an unforgiving residential 
wasteland dominated by three 25-storey highrises known locally as 'Three 
Flats'. The long-deserted concrete playground outside has become a graveyard 
for discarded crack vials.

Pirate station Rinse FM, on which Dizzee cut his chops alongside many of the 
scene's leading figures, used to broadcast from high up in one of the blocks. 
Sitting there, it must have felt as if they were transmitting their angst 
across the whole of London.

Three Flats is also home to Wiley's new protege, Ruff Squad's Tinchy Stryder, 
so called because although small in stature he takes big strides. Dizzee calls 
him 'Tantrum', however, because that's what he sounds like: a flurry of lyrical 
menace. A charismatic child soldier who looks far younger than his 17 years, 
Stryder carries himself with a natural confidence and composure that outshines 
his Ruff Squad peers.

Unlike Dizzee and Wiley's music, there is neither hope nor humour to leaven 
Ruff Squad's sound, just an oppressive dread. 'Tings in Boots' is a stone-cold 
ghetto anthem which (in case you're wondering) has nothing at all to do with 
hotties in knee-high boots. 'It means things in car boots,' says Stryder, 
'nothing to do with girls. The lyrics relate to a few people in the underground 
scene who carry this and that. It's not meant to mean just guns, but weapons 
generally.'

The suggestion that those in the scene are not immune to violence is borne out 
by a series of events that occurred in February two months before Wiley's album 
was due to drop. Rumours started to fly around that Wiley had been rushed by an 
up-and-coming crew and stabbed several times in the melee.

The next day, he cancelled all further press interviews and proved 
increasingly difficult to nail down. A few weeks later, he was stuck again by 
the same crew while out shopping. All of this went entirely unreported in the 
media but was alluded to by several of the people interviewed for this piece. 
Even his record company, XL, seem to have been kept in the dark as to what 
happened.

Flyers for many UK garage events specifically advertise 'No Grime!'. Crews 
such as Ruff Squad are forced to perform in out-of-the-way suburban clubs in 
places such as Bedford, Croydon, Luton and Sheffield. 'Most of those things 
that happen on the scene exist without garage [music] and without the MC,' says 
Stryder. 'But sometimes people get too carried away with the vibe at the rave. 
The tempo is fast so everything is up, not really laid-back. Sometimes people 
get bottled or rushed.'

In general, however, grime works to ritualise and contain aggression between 
crews through battles and clashes in which the aim is to 'merk' rival MCs on 
the set - kill them lyrically in the most inventive way possible. To the 
outsider, even the vernacular used by the grime MC seems impenetrable. 'Every 
time you go on the radio it's like you're warring with someone,' says Stryder, 
'so everyone's trying to be on their best form.'

ONE SATURDAY AFTERNOON, WORD HAS got around that Nasty Crew are doing a set at 
Heat FM , a pirate that operates from a back room on a north London council 
estate. More than 25 people are crammed into a space barely 12 foot square. 
Only nine belong to Nasty. The others are members of up-and-coming crews 
Meridian and Venom. The atmosphere is thick with weed smoke and charged with 
anticipation. Electricity is patched in from next door to power a set of decks 
played back through a cheap boombox - the only actual equipment in the station.

Nasty's most formidable MCs - Kano, Sharkey Major, Ghetto, Hyper and Stormin - 
form a huddle around the mic and pass it back and forth between themselves to 
keep the other crews from muscling in. As he rhymes, Ghetto bucks his wiry body 
spas modically back and forth like a boxer sparring jabs. His hoodie is pulled 
down so low over his head that the only visible parts of his face are the gold 
teeth that glint in the light of the bare bulb hanging from the ceiling.

When a member of Venom finally wrestles control of the mic, the rest of his 
crew shout out a bizarre, tooled-up version of Madness's 'Our House'. The 
chorus runs: 'Arms house in the middle of the street!'

Afterwards Marcus Nasty, Nasty Crew's shaven-headed capo, is not impressed. 
'The problem is there's no class in the game,' he spits. 'Years ago you 
wouldn't find people jumping up on stage with Nasty or coming to the stations 
for our show. People knew you couldn't do that. We are the top boys.'

Nasty Crew used to operate under the patronage of top producer Jammer. But in 
November 2003 Marcus Nasty emerged from prison after a two-year stretch for 
unspecified offences to resume his position in charge of the crew he co-founded 
in 1999.

'If it wasn't for this music, I'd be in a lot of trouble,' he says. 'Grime 
keeps me on-road. It's keeping a lot of other kids out of jail, too. Rather 
than shooting each other, they all come down here and war lyrically.' When 
Marcus Nasty got a new lease on life, Jammer ducked out. Depending on to whom 
you talk, the crew's reputation was either built on Jammer's production or vice 
versa. But either way, there wasn't room for two heads in one crew. D Double E 
left soon afterwards, also citing differences with Marcus Nasty.

This kind of internecine dispute is all too common, the result of a constant 
tension between the drive for success and loyalty to the street, between 
satisfying the desires of the individual and the demands of the crew. One by 
one, the major labels are picking off the MCs whom they deem capable of holding 
the attention of a mainstream audience. Boyz in da Hood's Durrty Doogz has been 
signed to Sony for over a year. Nasty's Kano is set to ink a deal with 679 
Recordings, who also put out the Streets. In some cases, the connections 
between the underground and mainstream are even closer. Details of MC Maxwell 
D's steamy affair with R&B pop sensation Jamelia were splashed across the News 
of the World . The canny 24-year-old (who used to be part of Pay As You Go 
Cartel with Wiley) exploited the kiss-and-tell He's put together a group which 
bears the same name as his label, Musketear, to bring through the next 
generation of MCs, which he likes to call the 'black S Club 7'.

The youngest member of the Musketears, Ashman, is a 12-year-old from the 'posh 
bit of Peckham'. Ashman gives a shout-out to 'my mum, Miss Lee' on his debut 
single, 'How It Is', and proceeds to relate how his street fame brought him the 
attention - 'She didn't want to know me... now she wants to blow me.' Ashman 
represents the future of grime.

Two generations down the line, D Double E's priorities have changed since 
leaving Nasty. He says he's tired of listening to 14-year-old kids chatting 
about guns - 'That's just noise, not music' - and wants to spit about things 
that are dear to him. He wants to rhyme about his daughter.

'All that stuff just seems like for little kids to me. And I'm not a little 
kid any more. I don't want to be spitting like that. I want to be doing things 
that they can look up to. I wanna be an artist, man.'
 