
Between 2011 and 2015 the Russian state orchestrated a doping programme that 
enabled 1,000 athletes in 30 sports to take banned performance-enhancing drugs. 
The sports ministry, the secret service and the national anti-doping agency 
collaborated in the systematic corruption of the 2012 London Olympics and 
Paralympics, the 2014 Sochi Winter Olympics and Paralympics, and the 2013 World 
Athletics Championships in Moscow. At a press conference in London on Friday 
morning, Professor Richard McLaren, head of the independent body appointed to 
investigate the conspiracy, provided irrefutable proof of both the scheme and 
its cover-up. And in doing so he exposed, with surgical precision, a great 
gaping wound in the Olympic movement.

Over the course of two hours, McLaren and his chief investigator, Martin 
Dubbey, detailed the evolution of the Russian doping programme. They moved from 
the “uncontrolled chaos” of its makeshift beginnings, where “top-level 
national-team coaches” were selling performance-enhancing drugs to athletes who 
would then be protected by corrupt doping control officers, to its final 
fruition as an “institutionalised and disciplined” strategy in which 
competitors were able to dope in the run-up to and even during major 
competitions. “Well-known and elite athletes” were protected by the false 
reporting of lab results and the practice of sample-swapping, in which tainted 
urine samples were replaced with clean substitutes.

Russian state doped more than 1,000 athletes and corrupted London 2012
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/more-than-1000-russian-athletes-benefitted-from-state-sponsored-doping>
McLaren’s proofs included a huge cache of email correspondence and other 
documentation, which has been made available to the public at
www.ipevidencedisclosurepackage.net 
<https://www.ipevidencedisclosurepackage.net/>. He used forensic analysis to 
show telltale microscopic scratches on urine sample bottles, which matched 
those made in controlled experiments to determine whether it was possible to 
open the supposedly tamper-proof seals; DNA analysis to reveal many of the 
Russian samples contained mixtures of urine from more than one person; and 
chemical analysis to show that many samples had been adulterated in an attempt 
to make the clean urine match the dirty samples.

There were many remarkable details in McLaren’s presentation and, if some had 
already been revealed in the first part of his investigation last July, they 
still seemed striking second time around. Like the way in which the secret 
service had a special team known as “the magicians”, whose job it was to jemmy 
the caps off the sample bottles; that a “bank” of urine was kept so that they 
would have a ready supply of clean samples to use; and the way in which the 
clean urine would be mixed with water, salt and Nescafe granules to ensure they 
matched the appearance and consistency of those they replaced.

But the most jarring moment of McLaren’s speech was not to do with any of 
those details but came in another passage. McLaren said: “The Russian Olympic 
team corrupted the London Games on an unprecedented scale,” and: “The desire to 
win medals superseded their collective moral and ethical compass and their 
Olympic values of fair play.” McLaren himself said that it all “seems like 
fiction”. But those five words, “Olympic values of fair play”, sounded utterly 
fantastical, like some little snippet of Disney thinking adrift in the midst of 
his two-hour long prosecution of international sport.

These would be the “values” propagated by the same International Olympic 
Committee that decided not to ban Russia from the Rio Games even though the 
International Association of Athletics Federations had already suspended Russia 
from all competitions, and the International Paralympic Committee would soon 
afterwards bar the country from participating in the Paralympics. You can see 
exactly how precious those “values” are in the short statement the IOC released 
on Friday about this “fundamental attack on the integrity of the Olympic 
Games”. It contained no condemnation, no contrition, no apology, only 300 words 
of waffle about the assorted commissions it has set up to “prepare appropriate 
sanctions and measures”. The IOC’s behaviour has been most notable for its 
vacillation and procrastination.

McLaren stubbornly refused to comment on these or any other issues that he 
felt were outside his purview but he did allow himself to make one small plea. 
“Over the past few months, we have seen infighting between the many different 
factions within international federations and among the anti-doping world,” he 
said. “I find it difficult to understand why we are not all on the same team. 
We should all be working together to end doping in sports.”

The World Anti-Doping Agency and the IOC have seemed more interested in 
squabbling with each other than they have in tryingto provide leadership for 
the athletes and fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/20/wada-ioc-olympics-russia-ban-rio-2016>
. In the absence of that leadership, Russian authorities have been busily 
trying to undermine McLaren’s findings by pushing the idea that they are the 
victims here – and even before McLaren had finished addressing the press, 
Russian politicians and administrators were speaking out against him.

Igor Lebedev, an MP with the far-right Liberal Democratic party, said: “All 
this only shows that they have no facts and no evidence.” Lebedev ended with a 
bizarre appeal to Donald Trump to “put an end to this”. Vitaly Smirnov, head of 
Russia’s new independent anti‑doping commission, insisted that “there has never 
been an organised system in Russia for the falsification” of samples.

Help us with the McLaren report on Russian doping
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/we-need-your-help-reporting-on-mclaren-russian-doping-scandal>
The hacking group Fancy Bears also tried to confuse the issue by losing it in 
a fog of moral equivalence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/19/mo-farah-named-fancy-bears-leak>
. It exposed the therapeutic use exemptions used by many western athletes, as 
if to say that Russia’s offences were only one of many shades of grey.

And it is true that, as former sports minister Vitaly Mutko put it: “This is 
not a Russian problem, it is a problem of world athletics.” Doping goes on in 
the UK, in the US and elsewhere around the world. But you should not get lost 
worrying about hypocrisy when the truth is that Russia has been caught running 
a systematic, state-orchestrated sports doping programme.

McLaren hopes a “cultural change” is under way in Russia but says it will take 
“longer than a few months or even a year” to come about. Which sounds 
optimistic, even naive. He argues that many of the officials involved have been 
moved on. Which is true. Mutko himself has since been promoted to deputy prime 
minister.

But despite that, McLaren’s words do suggest that there is, at least, some 
hope. More, for sure, than anyone should feel for the prospect of the IOC 
taking similar steps to reform itself. Its failings allowed this to happen, and 
after its behaviour in the past year, its “values” and its talk of a 
“zero-tolerance” approach to doping, rings as empty and insincere as any of 
those Russian denials.
 