
He was the star Italian cyclist whose victory in the Tour de France on the eve 
of the second world war made him a favourite of fascist dictatorBenito Mussolini
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/benito-mussolini>. But he was also a devout 
Catholic who helped save hundreds of Jews from the Nazis by using his 
hero-status to courier false documents around Italy.

On Friday– 100 years after his birth in a small village bar in Florence called 
Ponte a Ema - Gino Bartali, known to some as Gino the Pious, will be remembered 
in his home region of Tuscany, where a special bike ride, a dinner, a parade 
and free museum tours will be held in his honour.

Bartali – the noted rival of Italy's other beloved cycling champion of the 
era, Fausto Coppi – died in 2000. He had won three Giri d'Italia and two Tours 
de France – a decade apart – in a stellar career which straddled the second 
world war, and, legend has it, helped saveItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> from tumbling into civil war in its 
aftermath.

As the cyclist battled through a gruelling Tour de France in July 1948, 
Communist leader Palmiro Togliatti was shot and nearly killed, taking an 
already tense country to the brink of outright conflict.

Bartali, who had been far down the leader board on the day of the shooting, 
went on to win three stages in a row, and another later on, to eventually take 
the Tour – news greeted with delight at home and which former prime minister 
Giulio Andreotti would later acknowledge "contributed to ease the tensions".

But Bartali's greatest achievements are now believed to have taken place out 
of competition, when no one was looking. In the aftermath of September 1943, 
when Italy had surrendered to Allied forces and swaths of northern and central 
Italy became Mussolini's Nazi puppet republic, he is understood to have 
transported counterfeit identity papers to Jews who were at risk of being 
deported to concentration camps. The papers were hidden in the frame of his 
bike.

Giorgio Goldenberg, the son of a Jewish survivor, said in 2010 that Bartali 
had also taken him and his family in, hiding them in his cellar until the 
liberation of Florence in 1944.

Bartali never spoke publicly of his clandestine wartime activities, which he 
is believed to have carried out at the behest of the archbishop of Florence, 
and only told parts, gradually, to his son, Andrea.

Last year, he was awarded the title Righteous Among the Nations by Yad Vashem, 
the Holocaust memorial centre in Jerusalem.

"When I asked my father why I couldn't tell anyone, he said: 'You must do 
good, but you must not talk about it. If you talk about it you're taking 
advantage of others' misfortunes for your own gain," Andrea Bartali told the 
BBC earlier this year.
 