

At his last menswear show in January, J.W.Anderson combined playful social 
media, gender-neutral dressing (silk pyjamas, Björk hair and chokers) and 
pre-web style designs (cartoon snails). As well as being a playground of ideas, 
the show demonstrated his position as the designer who best taps into the 
millennial’s mindset.

But on the third day of the menwear week in London collections men, Anderson’s 
spring/summer 2017 show was different. Fresh from a collaboration with the 
rapper A$AP Rocky that referenced the mood for all things 1970s, there was a 
sense on Sunday of a sea change for the designer.

Backstage he spoke of stripping back ideas he has played with since his debut 
menswear collection in 2008. And despite the appearance of handbags and one 
dress, this Anderson felt less about agenda setting and more about retreating 
into a place of almost pre-gendered peace, childhood.

Topman Design reinvents Britishness to launch London Collections: Men
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jun/10/topman-design-reinvents-britishness-london-collections-men>
As the crowd gathered in the the school assembly-like setting of the hall in 
Yeomanry House, the voice of David Bowie narrating Peter and the Wolf sounded 
over the PA as the models began walking. The moral of the story – you can’t 
succeed unless you take risks – was felt very much part of Anderson’s raison 
d’être.

It was an avalanche of ideas and the designs were a typically combustible mix. 
Layering was a big theme, there were tunic tops featuring designs such as a 
circle of minotaurs holding hands and Picassoesque eyes worn over quarter 
length trousers – some in warm storm colours, others in pink and purple tartans 
and monochrome polka dots. There were dress shirts which combined clay-coloured 
jigsaw patterns with freakish purple cartoon faces and a black calf-length 
jacket with the zips taking refuge on the arms rather than down the middle.

What was interesting to note too was there were more conservative outfits (a 
dark blue bomber jacket over a longer denim jacket and all-in-one navy black 
coveralls pinched at the waist) that, as his collaboration with A$AP Rocky 
again proved, Anderson could do his take on “normal” too.

With the idea of childhood looming large, the eclectic mix – of elements that 
do not typically work together but here formed something else entirely – tapped 
into the idea of wilful toddler playing in the sandbox. While some of the 
oversized garments like the two-tone polo neck in heart red and sky blue with 
sleeve that went way beyond the end of the hand, suggested a kid trying on the 
clothes of a parent.

But there were also explicit references to prepuberty; silver medallions on 
bags, orange coloured underwater goggles, models wearing crowns made of 
interconnected squares, logos of cartoon stick figures that all fit with the 
overriding theme of fragmentary preadolescence, Anderson combining all these 
disparate textures and elements to replicate the nonlinear memory moments of 
all our collective preadolescences. “How do you escape nostalgia, because 
that’s boring?” he asked rhetorically backstage after the show. With this 
collection he had answered his own question.
 