
This article is the subject of a legal complaint made on behalf of Ched Evans

Jill Saward, who died this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/05/jill-saward-campaigner-ealing-vicarage-rape-dies-at-51>
 after a stroke, campaigned against sexual violence for most of her adult life. 
It’s quite a thing, when you think about it, “campaigning against sexual 
violence”. It’s quite a thing that sexual violence is something that ever 
needed to be “campaigned against”. Yet it did – and it still does.

The Ealing vicarage rape, of which she was the victim, was perpetrated in 
1986. It wasn’t quiteGeorge Orwell’s English murder 
<http://orwell.ru/library/articles/decline/english/e_doem>, but even in the 
absence of a corpse it bore the hallmarks of what Orwell suggested was a 
perfect crime in the eyes of the media, containing as it did respectability and 
“sex”, as sexual violence was still called 30 years ago. The press splashed 
merrily on the details, as if a ship full of gold had run aground on their 
private beach.

Three masked men had subjected Saward’s father and boyfriend to a vicious 
beating. Two of them repeatedly raped the vicar’s daughter. The judge in the 
trial, considering Jill’s trauma to have been “not so great”, sentenced the two 
rapists to five years’ imprisonment and the man who had indulged himself in 
plain, unvarnished nonsexual violence to 10. The judge did later admit that he 
had been wrong, but not until he’d been told many times, very loudly and in no 
uncertain terms.

I don’t know what medical details provoked Jill Saward’s stroke at the age of 
51. But I do think it’s worth mentioning, in the context of this tragedy, that 
there is a strong link between trauma in women and stroke or heart attack. 
Research suggests thatincreased risk 
<http://newsroom.heart.org/news/ptsd-traumatic-experiences-may-raise-heart-attack-stroke-risk-in-women>
 may be as high as 60%. There’s a heightened risk for men too, though not as 
strong. That phrase from the judge, that the trauma of rape is “not so great”? 
It is a great deal more ignorant and wrong than it appeared to be even in 1986.

We know who Saward is only because she chose to waive her automatic anonymity 
– the first woman to do so – in order to campaign more effectively for changes 
in attitudes and the law. Not everyone thought this was a good thing.

When Saward wrote a book about her case in 1991, Julie Davidson in the London 
Review of Books <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v13/n02/julie-davidson/victims-voice> 
voiced reservations. “Ever since Freud pulled his finger out of the dyke of 
Victorian repression, we’ve been obliged to believe that people keep quiet 
about certain things through guilt, shame, false embarrassment or oppressive 
feelings of one kind or the other. Popular culture, at any rate, gives no 
credence to the notion that certain emotions are too delicate and certain 
thoughts too complex to be tossed randomly into the public domain, where they 
are almost certainly going to be tainted by misunderstanding and 
misinterpretation.”

Davidson’s concern was about the general state of confessional culture, which 
has certainly flourished in the 25 years since. But speaking out is not the 
same as understanding your emotions and being prepared for your own long-term 
psychological reactions. There is still a great deal of shame around rape, and 
a great deal of activity designed to keep it that way – drunk women, flirty 
women, women in revealing clothing, women who walk home alone late at night: 
these are all women viewed by many as having played some part in their own 
assault.

People listened to Saward because she was such an “innocent” victim. Even now, 
a woman whose alleged rape is more messy will be mercilessly pilloried. The 
woman in theChed Evans  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/24/rape-victims-trial-evidence-labour-women-ched-evans>
case knows that well. Saward’s thoughts weren’t “tossed randomly” into the 
public domain. She spoke because she could. She could because the assault on 
her was so clearly Not Her Fault.

Was it good for Saward, the individual, reliving her ordeal again and again as 
she campaigned, listening to the ordeals of others as she counselled? Probably 
not. But it was valiant. She deserves admiration. She deserves gratitude. She 
deserves her death to be honoured. But some thinking needs to be done about 
this case as well.

Saward laid herself on the line to get people to understand that a violent 
rape by strangers was an extremely serious crime. Yet, the idea that a “proper” 
rape has to be done by a man who jumps out of the bushes with a knife in his 
hand still persists very strongly. Women are still badgered and berated and 
guilt-tripped into sex by men who are supposed to care for them. Wives with 
headaches are still a joke. I hasten here to say, hashtag not all men.

But there’s still a widespread belief that it’s not much to ask, the provision 
of a vagina to be penetrated, and that the cost to the vagina-provider is 
small. We need more Sawards: more complicated Sawards, less virginal Sawards. 
Unfortunately the hostility that would be thrown at women that brave is the 
vile, frightening and traumatic evidence that such women are still needed so 
very, very much.

Being able to make clear the damage done by rape will not stop rapists. On the 
contrary. But it might stop the excusers of rapists – people like the judge in 
Saward’s case – from believing that sexual violence is something easily moved 
on from, because the trauma is “not so great”.
 