
An international panel of retired judges has called for a new inquiry into the 
death in 1961 of the United Nations secretary generalDag Hammarskjöld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/dag-hammarskjold>, in an air crash in Zambia.

It says that significant new evidence has emerged and that the possibility 
that Hammarskjöld's plane was shot down should be taken seriously.

The Hammarskjöld commission – chaired by a former British privy council judge, 
Sir Stephen Sedley, and including the former chief prosecutor at the Hague war 
crimes tribunal, Sir Richard Goldstone – also appealed to the US to declassify 
reported National Security Agency (NSA) radio intercepts of warplanes over the 
area, which are still categorised as top secret, 52 years after Hammarskjöld's 
death.

The commission pointed to several strands of evidence supporting a theory that 
Hammarskjöld's DC6 airplane was shot down on the night of 17 September 1961, 
while he was on a mission to Ndola, in what was then Northern Rhodesia, to try 
to negotiate a ceasefire between the Congolese government and rebels from the 
mineral-rich Katanga region, who had significant support from Belgian 
mercenaries.

The report highlighted five key pieces of evidence:

• An apparent confession by a Belgian pilot that he fired on the DC6, known as 
the Albertina, which he had picked out with twin searchlights mounted under his 
Fouga jet's fuselage.

• A police sergeant's account of seeing "sparks" in the sky prior to the crash.

• Another witness's testimony of seeing "a very bright light" in the sky at 
the same time.

• A police assistant inspector's testimony that he had seen a flash in the sky.

• The account of a local official, named Timothy Kankasa, of seeing a smaller 
plane flying above and then alongside the Albertina "shining a beam like a 
headlight on it".

The commission said it had already requested NSA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nsa> intercept records from the US 
national archives in Washington, arguing that "an acid test of the aerial 
attack hypothesis may be feasible".

"It is a near certainty not only that Ndola's radio traffic was being 
monitored routinely by the NSA from Cyprus or elsewhere, but that one or both 
of the large Usaf aircraft which had been flown in to Ndola on the crucial 
night and were parked throughout on the tarmac were there for the specific 
purpose of monitoring the local radio traffic," it added.

A covering letter by Sedley accompanying the commission's report said: "Our 
answer to the question posed to us – whether the UN would be justified in 
reopening its own inquiry in the light of the evidence now available – is a 
qualified but firm yes."

He said that a "dependable answer" to the Albertina mystery is within reach, 
but that such an answer "will probably not be comprehensive".

It is not clear whether the UN will heed the commission's advice to open a new 
inquiry. There have already been three investigations, two of which were 
inconclusive, and one that pointed to pilot error.

A Guardian investigation in August 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/17/dag-hammarskjold-un-secretary-general-crash>
 pointed to the evidence that the Albertina was shot down, and that was 
followed later in the same year by a book,Who Killed Hammarskjöld? 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Who-Killed-Hammarskjold-Supremacy-Africa/dp/184904158X>
, by British academic, Susan Williams, who argued that there was substantial 
evidence that hardline Belgian colonialists, outraged at UN support for the 
Congolese government in Kinshasa, were behind the death of the veteran Swedish 
dilpomat, which was then covered up by the British colonial authorities.
 