
By the time Shrijith Ravindran arrived, a crowd had gathered around the 
injured man. Someone had moved his body to the side of the road, and witnesses 
had started taking photos and videos. But nobody was helping Dilip Khairnar, 
who by now, had blood pouring out of his ears. Ravindran, on his way home from 
the Malaka Spice restaurant where he works, pushed through the scrum to see 
what was happening. “He was in a horrible state. I asked the people there, ‘Has 
someone called an ambulance?’ They said, ‘Yes, but he’s been here for quite a 
while and the ambulance hasn’t come yet’,” Ravindran recalls, now six months 
after the incident.

Ravindran knew time was running out. “I asked someone to help me put him in my 
car, and I drove him to the nearest hospital.”


That night at around 11pm, Khairnar became yet another statistic: one of 
140,000 people who die every year on India’s chaotic roads.According to India’s 
Law Commission <http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/reports/rep201.pdf>, 50% of 
these deaths could have been avoided if victims had received medical attention 
within the first 60 minutes after the accident occurs. But according to a 
survey by theSaveLife Foundation 
<http://www.grsproadsafety.org/sites/default/files/201307/SaveLife_FullReport.pdf>
, a road safety advocacy group, 74% of bystanders would not assist a road 
accident victim, with the majority citing legal hassles, repeated police 
questioning and long waits at hospitals as reasons for not wanting to get 
involved.

Utility vehicle hopes to reduce India's road deaths among rural population | 
Esha Chhabra
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2013/dec/28/utility-vehicle-cut-india-deaths>
Ravindran was an exception. “There is this fear,” he says. “It’s not that 
people don’t want to help, but they’re thinking, will I get stuck? What if the 
police hassle me? Or what happens if I get to the hospital and can’t track down 
his relatives? Who’s responsibility is he then? What if he dies in my car? Then 
what do I do with the body if the hospital say he’s your responsibility? There 
are no proper rules, and usually you get stuck in all this if you try to help, 
so people don’t want to get entangled.”


In March, India’s supreme court passed a landmark ruling, introducing a “good 
samaritan” law <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-36446652>, which gives legal 
protection to bystanders who help road accident victims, instructing police and 
hospitals not to hassle people providing emergency help in times of distress.


For Ravindran, however, the law came too late. He spent hours waiting in 
hospital before Khairnar’s family was found, filling out forms and police 
reports. “At one point I literally had to carry his body from the emergency 
room to the X-ray theatre, and no one would help me hold the stretcher. You can 
understand why nobody wants to help when the system itself is so bad,” he says.


He lay unattended on the road, bleeding profusely. People stopped to see but 
no one helped. His death left me devastated
Shrijith Ravindran 
Piyush Tewari, founder of SaveLife, says good samaritans are often called to 
police stations for questioning, forced to give witness statements in court, 
detained for hours in hospital and obliged to pay medical bills. “There are 
countless cases where bystanders have intervened and saved lives in incidents 
related to building collapse, bomb blasts, fire, train accidents. However, the 
same bystanders who become rescuers in other situations are reluctant to come 
forward to help road accident victims,” he says.


Tewari’s interest in road safety started after his 17-year-old cousin was 
killed in an accident. “For 45 minutes he lay unattended on the road, bleeding 
profusely. People stopped to see but no one came forward to help, and he bled 
to death. This incident left me devastated and was also a triggering point for 
me to start researching the issue of road safety and emergency care inIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>,” he says. 


Tewari took a sabbatical from work and travelled around the country meeting 
families of road accident victims, lawyers, police, doctors and road safety 
activists. His efforts led to a huge awareness campaign, including questions 
being raised in parliament, a petition signed by 100,000 people delivered to 
the health minister, and discussions of good samaritan laws on talk shows.

With little political will to tackle the issue of road deaths – a complicated 
problem that could take years to resolve – advocacy and public pressure has 
been crucial to drawing attention to cases like Ravindran’s.


Now, for the good samaritan law to be enforced, India’s federal system 
requires each of the country’s 29 states and seven union territories to follow 
the supreme court’s directive to pass their own laws.

Last month, the state cabinet of the southern state of Karnataka became the 
first in the country to approve the court’s ruling, months after a horrific 
death in the state capital, Bengaluru, of a24-year-old man who was run over by 
a lorry 
<http://bangaloremirror.indiatimes.com/bangalore/others/Youth-survives-20-minutes-after-lorry-splits-body-in-half-donates-his-eyes/articleshow/51016089.cms>
 and who died before emergency services reached him.

Karnataka’s government will now ask the state’s legislative assembly to ratify 
their bill. If ratified, it would set a precedent for other states to follow.


According to Suzanne Turner, who authored a study on good samaritan laws 
<http://www.trust.org/contentAsset/raw-data/7be34cce-ea0d-4c90-8b39-53427acf4c43/file>
 worldwide, the new law is the “first step” to reducing road deaths and 
improving emergency medical care. She says the legal reform is “unprecedented”, 
and hopes other states will follow Karnataka’s lead.


Ravindran also sees the law as a step in the right direction, but says 
reducing road deaths requires political will. “There are still so many big 
questions that are unanswered, such as who will assume the costs if the victim 
is taken to a private hospital? What happens if the victim’s family members 
can’t be found? The truth is, we don’t have the answers,” he says.
 