
Kate Moss and Kanye West have joined Instagram in the same week. A curious 
move in 2016, given that your mum joined last easter. So what does it mean? 
Judging by the first posts that communicate very little, the two have had a 
change of heart or direction – West stayed safe with an arty image (a shot from 
Total Recall), while Moss first posted a picture of her in a field in shorts 
(which she then deleted) before posting a picture from an interview with 
Business of Fashion. Moss’s post might be new but a model onInstagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram> is not and this picture is 
(perhaps) illustrative of the power social media has in fashion.

Since leaving Storm, her agency last year, the model has been stealthily 
setting up her own eponymousagency <http://www.katemossagency.com/>. In a 
recent interview, she said of models including Gigi Hadid and Kendall Jenner: 
“They’ve definitely got another side with it, like the Instagram side, and they 
know their business, I think.” We know digital media is changing the way 
fashion and its people are presented but this has always seemed like a 
chicken/egg situation. Gigi Hadid’s fame would be halved in the absence of 
social media – Moss is already famous and doesn’t need to calibrate her brand.
 Kate Moss’ first Instagram post 
Still, agencies are having to cope with a shift towards a system where models 
are hired for their social media presence, one where their personal brands are 
multi-faceted to the point of exhaustion: “Modelling is so much about … the 
constant demand for content. Models aren’t just walking the runways and 
appearing in campaigns. They are also managing a constant feed of content 
through social media and online,” says Imran Amed of Business of Fashion.

Since Kate Moss is Kate Moss <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kate-moss>, 
suggests there’s something to be learned from the move: black and white is the 
new lark, outdoors is the new indoors and trousers are still optional. West’s 
post, however – an image of the Johnny Cab’s cab from Total Recall – tells us 
nothing we don’t know about the artificial fragility of our world.
 