
The 1992 and 1993 cabinet papers released on Sunday reveal the Keating 
government juggling with the desire to reform the economy through changes to 
industrial relations, superannuation and privatisation, while also providing 
stimulus in the midst of high unemployment and a sluggish exit from a deep 
recession.

At the end of 1991, the Australian economy was floundering. The national 
accounts released in December, just two weeksbefore Paul Keating took over from 
Bob Hawke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/14/australian-party-leadership-challenges-brief-history-of-spills>
, showed the economy had shrunk for five consecutive quarters. And while these 
figures were later revised to show the economy had already begun its tepid 
recovery, with unemployment at 10.4% and the Liberal opposition led by Dr John 
Hewson proposing a massive economic package in its Fightback! program, the onus 
was on Keating to deliver something quickly.

On 7 January 1992 the cabinet agreed on a statement focusing on economic 
recovery and industry development.

The statement, which Keating’s speechwriter, Don Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/don-watson>, named One Nation, was 
designed with the intention of getting “beyond the economy and instilling in 
the country a sense of pride and common purpose independent of sporting 
conquests and foreign military endeavours”, as Watson wrote in his memoirs, 
Recollections of a Bleeding Heart.

Keating himself was no less grandiose. He told the media on its launch on 26 
February that it was “a statement which I think will lead to a turning point in 
our economic history and our social history”.

Mostly it focused on infrastructure spending and efforts to lift economic 
growth and productivity, designed to create 800,000 jobs in four years, a 
return to surplus and a drop in the unemployment rate of three percentage 
points.

On 28 January cabinet discussed 43 proposals to be included in the statement. 
On the same day ministers were informed that the budget picture was 
deteriorating sharply. The mid-year review provided to cabinet estimated the 
1991-92 budget deficit at $5.44bn – 15% larger than estimated in the previous 
year’s budget.

But such bad news was very much the norm. By May the estimate was up to 
$9.25bn and by the time the 1991-92 figures were fully tabulated, the deficit 
would be $12.63bn.

Among the measures introduced in the One Nation statement were $816m in 
infrastructure spending under the building better cities program over five 
years. Among the specific measures that were announced was construction of 
Sydney’s Glebe Island bridge – now known as the Anzac Bridge.

Keating also promised two lots of tax cuts – the first in 1994 and the second 
in 1996.

​The drive to reform the industrial relations system continued throughout 1992 
and 1993

But the large spend on infrastructure, tax cuts, the jobs programs Jobstart 
and a one-off payment to families worth $300m did nothing to allay concerns 
about the state of the budget or curb the desire to continue reforms undertaken 
during the 1980s.

Even while agreeing to large infrastructure spends, the cabinet expressed 
concern at “the potential threat to the structural integrity of the budget if 
expectations are raised of a continuing boost to infrastructure spending”.

The cabinet was careful to ensure any spending measures were matched by 
commitments from states towards reform, especially of public enterprises.

The cabinet considered offering assistance to the textiles, clothing and 
footwear industry as it was one of the sectors most heavily affected by tariff 
reductions, but in the end rejected a $160m assistance package in favour of a 
more modest $41m “restructure” package. It noted that were they to have 
approved the larger amount “we may only succeed in perpetuating the tradition 
of high levels of protection for these industries under a different guise”.

The drive to reform the industrial relations system continued throughout 1992 
and 1993. In the One Nation statement Keating argued that the government would 
move “quickly towards a bargaining system in which higher wages will come from 
increased efficiency”. In July 1992 the cabinet agreed to a submission by Peter 
Cook, the industrial relations minister, that would introduce an industrial 
relations system with the emphasis “on workplace and single enterprise 
agreements”.

That led to the introduction of the industrial relations reform bill in 
October 1993 by Laurie Brereton, which legislated the full introduction of 
enterprise bargaining and a limited “right to strike”, leading to a sharp drop 
in the level of industrial disputes.

The Keating government also focused its attention on women’s work 
participation. In September 1992 the cabinet agreed to amend the Sex 
Discrimination Act 1984 to enable complaints relating to direct discrimination 
against women in employment to be made directly to the sex discrimination 
commissioner.

In April 1993 the cabinet agreed to a childcare cash rebate scheme of up to 
$28.50 a week for one child and $61.20 a week for two or more children, to be 
“introduced from 1 July 1994” and endorsed “a commitment to meet full demand 
for work-related formal childcare by 2000-01”.

Changing the industrial relations system was also behind the introduction in 
July 1992 of the superannuation guarantee. Intriguingly, in February that year, 
the treasurer, John Dawkins, sought to delay its introduction owing to the 
increase of labour costs and a “desire to provide more time for consultation 
with industry on implementation details”. But his proposal was defeated in 
cabinet.

The government also remained committed to privatisation. In June 1992 the 
cabinet agreed to the sale of Qantas and Australian Airlines and in August to 
$1bn worth of asset sales. It also discussed the possibility of selling the 
Commonwealth Bank. The cabinet was told “there is no economic reason for the 
government to continue to own 70%, as opposed to a majority of the shares”, and 
that “sale down to just over 50% could be expected to yield about $1,000m” – in 
fact by the time the government’s share was sold down to 50% the following 
year, it yielded closer to $1.5bn.

But despite the One Nation spend, the growth projections continued to falter. 
After Labor won the March 1993 election on the back of the GST scare campaign 
the signs were not good. Dawkins informed the cabinet in his April 1993 
economic outlook that “it is very difficult not to see Australian growth 
continuing to be constrained by the international economy”. The cabinet was 
warned that the next budget would have to include “significant savings in the 
medium term”.

Dawkins then told cabinet on 29 June that owing to weaker GDP growth, weaker 
employment growth and lower inflation, “in the absence of fiscal policy 
changes, revenue to GDP is unlikely to recover as it did after the economic 
downturn in the early 1980s”.

Publicly, Keating remained his defiant self 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/21/its-time-for-paul-keating-to-zip-it>
.

Asked by a journalist on 10 July if the unemployment rate of 10.8% meant he 
had to admit his economic policies had failed, he responded: “Do you mean the 
ones that have taken Australia from an industrial museum to give it a future, 
or do you mean the cyclical ones?”

But the lack of growth meant cuts were needed, and among the biggest were the 
tax cuts promised in the One Nation statement.

In February 1993 Keating had told the National Press Club the tax cuts were 
“not a promise, they are law – L-A-W”. But on 22 July he was again at the press 
club, this time to announce that the government would bring forward the first 
half of the tax cuts but that the second part would be postponed until 
“probably in 1998”.

He again spelled it out, saying “They will be L-A-W law. And what is more, 
they are R-E-S-P-O-N-S-I-B-L-E, responsible law.”

But the postponement of the tax cuts severely damaged the government’s 
economic credibility and the 1993 budget made the wound fatal, with an increase 
in petrol excise and the wholesale sales tax, the removal of optometry from 
Medicare and the cancellation of promised childcare benefits.

Watson recalled that “old ladies jammed the office phones at night; the faxes 
clogged with hostile message from optometrists and builders and women’s groups”.

How Paul Keating became the modern day hero for left and right alike | Jason 
Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/01/how-paul-keating-became-the-modern-day-hero-for-left-and-right-alike>
Dawkins quit politics in December but one of his final acts was to have 
cabinet agree to a change in the timing of the budget. On 30 November, the 
cabinet agreed it would subsequently be brought down on the second Tuesday in 
May rather than in August.

And while the economy grew about 4% throughout 1993, unemployment remained 
high – hitting 11% in August.

As a result the government initiated a green paper released in December called 
Restoring Full Employment, which culminated in the Working Nation policy in May 
1994, by which time unemployment finally began to fall.

The One Nation program promised 800,000 jobs in four years but achieved only 
660,000. The unemployment rate fell just two percentage points, rather than the 
promised three. The budget remained in deficit, and the promised second round 
of tax cuts had been dropped.

On 2 March 1996, almost exactly four years after the release of the One Nation 
program, the Keating government was defeated in a landslide.

• Cabinet records for 1992 and 1993 held by the National Archives of Australia 
reach the open access period on 1 January 2017. Information about the cabinet 
records, copies of key cabinet documents, including selected submissions and 
decisions, are available on thearchives’ website <http://www.naa.gov.au/>
 