
My friend and colleague Ken Grieve, who has died aged 74, was a film and 
television director who worked on a range of drama series and plays including 
Dr Who, Strangers, Peak Practice, Casualty and The Bill, his career perhaps 
hitting a peak in 1988 with an adaptation of Len Deighton’s Game, Set and 
Match, starring Ian Holm.

Ken was born and brought up in Edinburgh, the son of Henry Grieve, a plant 
manager at British Aluminium, and his wife, Lesley, a seamstress. He attended 
the Edinburgh Academy, where he excelled in geography and history, and won a 
scholarship to Bryanston school in Dorset.

His first job was as a trainee studio cameraman with Granada Television. He 
became one of its elite crew, strong and skilled enough to manoeuvre the huge 
cameras on live pop shows. He later further trained as a director of dramas and 
documentaries, cutting his teeth on Coronation Street and Crown Court in the 
mid-1970s.

Actors and crew loved working with him as he was always appreciative of their 
efforts, ready to listen, approachable and courteous. He relished the magic 
actors could create – and also made them look good. I worked alongside him as a 
fellow director on The XYY Man and Strangers with Don Henderson, Mark McManus, 
Dennis Blanch and John Ronane, and as a producer on Heartbeat, The Royal and 
The Bill. In all these shows, he seized the day with the enthusiasm of a small 
child at Christmas.

Ken was a loyal, mildly eccentric and generous friend, and a highly talented 
colleague. He was politically impassioned, an instinctive socialist with an 
unshakeable sense of fair play, though wearily dismissive of politicians’ 
plausible promises of a brave new world.

He received a diagnosis of myeloma eight years ago and determined to carry on 
working until he was no longer able. When told he could drive no more, he took 
his pushbike up and down the hills of Edinburgh. When told that too was 
off-limits, he went walking every day with sticks. He even declined the care of 
a Macmillan nurse.

He is survived by his partner, Jane, his children, Simon, Ben, Charlotte and 
Dee, from his marriage to Fiona, who died in 2010, and his brother, Robin.
 