
“We believe that a universe only driven by profit maximisation can be 
poisonous, to culture especially.”

In a single sentence during his appearance at the Web Summit conference, 
Kickstarter chief executive Yancey Strickler set out the principle behind the 
crowdfunding company’s recent decision toturn itself into a public benefit 
corporation (PBC) 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/blog/kickstarter-is-now-a-benefit-corporation>.

The move took advantage of a recent change in US corporate law clearing the 
way for for-profit companies to declare their obligations to consider the 
impact of their decisions on society, rather than simply on shareholders.

Kickstarter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/kickstarter> also promised 
when becoming a PBC that it would now donate 5% of its annual post-tax profits 
to arts education and organisations tackling inequality.

“We’ve always approached Kickstarter from a very idealistic perspective. It’s 
who we are,” said Strickler. “From the very beginning we all vowed never to 
sell the company, to never try to go public. To preserve this as a public 
trust: a space that can exist, and in a strong creative economy, a place where 
new ideas can happen.”

Strickler denied that Kickstarter is hoping to “shame” other technology 
companies into following a similar path, but he suggested that a number of 
startups may willingly become PBCs themselves, after seeing his company’s 
example.

“We remember what brought us here. Every giant corporation started as a small 
company, but at some point they lost their soul. I think there are other 
entrepreneurs and people like us that want to do something more than just 
survive or get rich,” he said.

“There’s a lack of models to follow: if you look around the world of 
technology, there’s a lot of talk of valuations and growth rates and all of 
that, but there’s not as much talk about impact, about responsibility and 
things like that.”

Strickler said Kickstarter has been a profitable company for five years, which 
helped it retain its independence and ability to make the decision to become a 
PBC – although he said previous investors all supported the move.

“We just want to create another path, especially for an entrepreneur who’s 
starting something now, who feels similarly idealistic about the world. They 
shouldn’t be forced to put aside their strong beliefs just to get that cheque,” 
he said.

One risk for Kickstarter in its PBC strategy is that it may face more 
challenges when hiring new staff, if it is competing with other technology 
companies able to offer equity and the hope of an exit via IPO or acquisition 
in the future.

But Strickler rejected such concerns. “I think it makes it easier, especially 
for the sort of people that we work with. We’ve always been very open with 
people about being an option holder: an equity holder in Kickstarter is not the 
win-a-million lottery ticket that a startup may be promising you,” he said.

Instead, Kickstarter is keen to offer dividends and profit-share schemes to 
its employees: decent bonuses when the company does well, but not the kind of 
riches sought by many startups through IPO or acquisition.

“There shouldn’t be ‘everyone just gets rich and stops caring and is shopping 
for boats all day’. That is not a good moment for a company,” said Strickler. 
“Here there is upside, but it is upside on an annual basis … It turns out there 
are some exceptionally talented people who are interested in that.”

Strickler talked about Kickstarter’s efforts to ensure its values are shared 
by every employee, including its famous “fuck the monoculture” ethos, which is 
the conclusion to its booklet distributed to new staff.

“The monoculture is just the same-same of the world that gets created when 
everyone tries to optimise for money … We all need to fight for a more diverse 
culture,” he said.

“That’s a flag we fly. There are a lot of other people doing that – not as 
many companies of our scale – but it is incredibly important. That’s a fight 
worth fighting.”

Strickler said that besides music and film, technology is one of the 
categories where this fight is most important. He cited the examples of 
numerous hardware projects that have been funded by Kickstarter’s community, 
from Pebble to Oculus Rift.

“Small-scale hardware was nowhere because those are not good investments … 
It’s much more niche, it’s community-driven, and those are things that 
traditional investors are not going to find all that compelling,” he said.

“But on Kickstarter there are huge crowds that are interested in something, 
and as a result it can exist. It can flourish.”

Strickler declined to bite on a question about whether Oculus VR, which funded 
its original Rift virtual reality headset on Kickstarter before ultimately 
selling to Facebook for $2bn, represented a challenge to Kickstarter’s values.

“I think that an artist or creator’s creative freedom is incredibly important. 
I would never feel comfortable with Kickstarter where you are forbidden from 
doing what you think is right for your project,” he said.

Kickstarter pairs with UNHCR to help Syrian refugees after White House call
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/06/kickstarter-pairs-with-unhcr-to-help-syrian-refugees-after-white-house-call>
“I’m a backer of Oculus. They have a lot of pressure on them and a lot of 
expectations, and they’re thinking: ‘How can we pull this off at the biggest 
scale possible?’ I didn’t see any big moral issues with it.”

Even so, when Strickler was asked for his advice for younger tech startups, he 
was clear in his belief that their founders should have more faith in their 
long-term vision and values.

“Don’t sell out. Don’t sell out your values, don’t sell out your community, 
don’t sell out the long term for the short term. Be idealistic. Really be clear 
about the things that drive you. Remember the lessons that your parents and 
grandparents taught you about how to treat people and try to build that in,” he 
said.

“Just have patience. So much of the zeitgeist in the world of business and 
technology and startups is about ‘be more aggressive than the next guy, be 
harder, be faster, be paranoid’. All these things. It’s all wrong. Being 
patient, thoughtful, creative, trying to make the right decisions. That’s what 
matters.”
 