
Appreciate the crema

A good espresso has a good crema – that’s the tan-coloured layer that sits on 
the top, like the head on a Guinness. Take note of the colour: the darker it 
is, the more intense the coffee is likely to be. Sniff it, then stir it in: 
this will release even stronger aromas.

Slurp, don’t sip

A good wine should be decanted to aerate it; in the same way, introducing air 
to your coffee will help release the full range of flavours. Professionals hold 
a “cupping spoon” to their lips, which is a spoon with an extra-deep bowl, but 
you can use a normal spoon, or just slurp it from the cup.

The science of timing

Most of us head straight for the coffee machine as soon as we wake up. But 
recent research suggests that cortisol, which is a naturally occurring hormone 
that makes us feel alert, is produced most abundantly in the first hour after 
waking. If you normally get up at 8am, the optimum time for your first cup may 
not be until 9.30am, when cortisol levels start to dip again. You could start 
with decaffeinated, of course: Nespresso offers Vivalto Lungo, Arpeggio and 
Volluto in Decaffeinato versions that retain the same character and aroma.

Know your lungo from your latte…

If you ask for a latte in Italy, you’ll get a glass of milk and a puzzled 
expression. That’s because “latte” is Italian for “milk” – and we have 
shortened the Italian term “caffè latte” to mean an espresso with milk added.

“Lungo”, on the other hand means long in Italian, so many people think asking 
for one will get them a long black. And once again, confusion ensues. A long 
black is actually hot water with an espresso added to it (an Americano is the 
same ingredients, but in the reverse order), while a lungo is a long draw 
espresso; shorter than a long black, but with all the water brewed. Nespresso 
has six Lungo Grands Crus, specially blended to suit a longer drink.

… and latte from your flat white and cappuccino…

These three milky brews cause a lot of confusion in the coffee world, so to 
make sure you know what you’re drinking:

A cappuccino is the traditional Italian blend of 1/3 espresso, 1/3 steamed 
milk and 1/3 stiff milk froth on top. The ratios and layering mean you 
experience the foam first, then a bed of rich milky coffee.

A latte is often thought of as just a milkier cappuccino, but it’s actually 
more complex than that. A latte is constructed from a glass of textured, not 
just steamed, milk that an espresso (usually a double shot) is poured into with 
a thin layer of milk micro-foam on top. Less layered than a cappuccino, it’s a 
milky coffee with wide appeal.

The flat white, being an Australasian invention (there is huge debate over 
whether it was invented in New Zealand or Australia) is a little more open to 
interpretation. The basic ingredients are similar to the latte: espresso and 
steamed milk. However, with the flat white the milk can be either textured to 
blend then micro-foam into the milk, creating a velvety smooth cup, or just 
steamed and the foam excluded, creating a milky, slightly shorter drink.

… and your ristretto from your espresso

The opposite of a lungo is a ristretto. Meaning “limited” in Italian, this is 
espresso prepared with half the usual amount of water for a more concentrated 
taste. Nespresso offers several Grand Cru designed to be drunk as a ristretto 
as part of its Intenso range.

 On its own, or with a little extra? 

This is the most vexed question of all. The die-hard espresso purists don’t 
add milk, cream or sugar: they like to appreciate the drink as it is. But 
everyone’s palate is different, and you should take it as you like it. If you 
want to add ice cream, that’s an “affogato”; if you want to add a shot of 
liqueur, that’s a “caffè correto” (“corrected” with alcohol).

Different blends of coffee will pair well with different foods: read our guide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discover-nespresso/2015/sep/16/ditch-the-doughnuts-elegant-treats-to-pair-with-your-cup>
.
 