
An expansion of La Course, the women’s event run alongside the Tour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance>, is in the offing for 2017. A 
spokesman for the Tour organisers, Amaury SportOrganisation, would not comment 
in detail on speculation that La Course is set to grow to several days next 
year butconfirmed that “the format will be different in 2017”. ASO added that 
more details will be revealed next Tuesday, when the route for the men’s Tour 
is announced in Paris.

La Course has been run for the past three years as a criterium on the 
Champs-Élysées circuit on the final day of the men’s Tour de France, a format 
which has drawn criticism from top women racers such as Lizzie Deignan, née 
Armitstead.

Its probable expansion in 2017 was revealed by the organisers of the Thüringen 
Rundfahrt, Germany’s top women’s stage race, who stated on their website that 
they had been forced at the last minute to change their 2017 dates, because of 
a possible clash with an “expanded” women’s Tour de France.

Tony Martin storms to victory in Road World Championships men’s time trial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/tony-martin-storms-time-trial-victory-road-world-championships-cycling>
Thüringen has been brought forward two days, to the apparent annoyance of the 
organisers who pointed out on their website that they had been planning their 
30th anniversary edition for some time and were at an advanced stage. The 
German race was initially scheduled for 14-20 July but is now expected to run 
from 12-18 July, they said.

The 2017 men’s Tour de France will finish on 23 July in Paris, meaning that, 
assuming the finish of La Course were to remain the same, the way is now open 
for the French race to expand to as many as three or four days.La Course was
launched in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/25/marianne-vos-la-course-tour-de-france-women>
 as a one-day event enabling ASO to experiment with the re-introduction of a 
women’s event alongside the Tour de France following a campaign involving 
leading lights in women’s racing – including the Olympic medallist Emma Pooley 
– who called for the resurrection of the women’s Tour de France, which was run 
by the men’s Tour organisers from 1984-89.

The event was then run separately from the men’s Tour and continued outside 
the aegis of the Tour organisers in various forms and under different names 
until 2009. The Tour organisers ASO continued to run women’s events, most 
notably the Fleche Wallonne and Ladies Tour of Qatar, and after the inception 
of La Course, they introduced a similar event on the final day of the men’s 
Tour of Spain.

When La Course was launched, ASO would not be drawn on whether it would expand 
beyond a single-day format on a closed circuit, but the women’s calendar has 
developed rapidly in the last three seasons, and the inception of a women’s 
Tour de Yorkshire along an identical route on a place to place stage of the 
men’s event this spring showed that logistically it could be done.
 