
The lawyer for a Western Australian man due to be extradited to the US on 
child sex charges has called for an overhaul of Australia’s laws, saying his 
client would probably die in jail if convicted.

Christopher Lobban, 58, has been in Perth’s Hakea remand prison since 
Australian federal police raided his home in July 2011 on allegations from the 
Polk County sheriff in Florida that he encouraged a woman on a BDSM (bondage 
and discipline, dominance and submission, sadism and masochism) website to whip 
and spank two teenage girls. The woman is alleged to have filmed the acts and 
sent the video to him via the website’s chat room.

Lobban has maintained he did not know the girls were underage.He has been 
fighting extradition orders for five years, but the Australian government has 
authorised an order that would see him handed into the custody of US federal 
marshals in Sydney on 2 January.

If convicted in Florida, he faces a 25-year mandatory sentence under Polk 
County’s anti-paedophelia laws. “Given his age, it’s a death sentence,” his 
lawyer, Bernard Collaery, said.

Collaery, a Canberra-based barrister who was attorney general in the 
Australian Capital Territory’s minority alliance government from 1989-1991, 
said Lobban had already spent longer in jail than he would if he had been 
sentenced in an Australian court.

He called on the federal attorney general, George Brandis, to exercise his 
discretion and refuse the extradition order, and said Australia’s current 
extradition laws, which allow people to be extradited to certain countries 
without a requirement for the prosecuting jurisdiction to show probable cause, 
left Australians unprotected.

“We just export people on request,” Collaery told Guardian Australia. “Our 
relationship with the United States is big enough and robust enough for 
Australia to say no to Washington.” He said Lobban’s case was of “arguable 
merits” and had not been pursued by Australian authorities.

Sheriff Grady Judd has alleged Lobban was in contact with a woman in Polk 
County and urged her to conduct and film the sex acts, even instructing her in 
the construction of a so-called spanking table.

Judd told local media in 2014 
<http://www.theledger.com/news/20140320/polk-county-still-seeks-extradition-of-australian-man-for-sexual-abuse-charges>
 that they had a “rock solid case” and described the 15-year-old girls being 
beaten with a leather paddle, adding: “I just can’t explain to you how brutal 
this process was.” The woman is currently serving a 20-year jail term.

Collaery said Lobban received a video from the woman which he believed 
contained consenting adults. He also disputed suggestions the pair were in a 
relationship, saying it was just a chat room.

Neither Collaery nor any of Lobban’s previous lawyers have seen the alleged 
videos used as evidence by Polk County, because Australia’s extradition treaty 
with the US does not require them to provide evidence.

If extradited, Lobban faces charges of two counts of promoting a sexual 
performance by a child, two counts of solicitation to commit aggravated child 
abuse and two counts of solicitation to commit lewd or lascivious battery.

Collaery said regardless of the unpleasantness of the allegations, Lobban 
should not be extradited. “His alleged offence is repugnant … but that’s the 
real test,” he said. “The real test is to represent or protect the unlikeable. 
There’s a higher power at play here. We can’t allow this kind of show-trial of 
a human being.”

A spokesperson from the attorney general’s department said it would not 
comment on the extradition process “to ensure the safety of all persons 
involved and to uphold the integrity of the surrender process”.
 