
Leicester were no match for Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> in their International 
Champions Cup match at Los Angeles’ StubHubCenter, losing 4-0 to the French 
giants.

The Premier League winners beat Celtic on penalties last weekend but it was no 
surprise that the French champions were a tougher prospect on Saturday night.

PSG took the lead in the 26th minute from the penalty spot, Edinson Cavani 
sending Kasper Schmeichel the wrong way after Daniel Amartey had brought down 
Jonathan Ikone. Leicester came close to an equaliser soon after, Riyad Mahrez’s 
free-kick bringing a good save out of Alphonse Areola, before Amartey headed 
the resulting corner narrowly wide after the ball was punched towards him by 
PSG’s goalkeeper.

However, livewire Ikone doubled the lead just before half-time, the 
18-year-old holding off Wes Morgan and giving Schmeichel no chance after Thomas 
Meunier’s pass deflected into his path.

Ahmed Musa wasted a chance to get the Foxes back in the game within three 
minutes of the restart, fluffing his close-range finish after Leonardo Ulloa 
had created the opening.

Any doubts about the outcome were ended when Lucas Moura headed in Maxwell’s 
cross at the far post in the 64th minute, before Odsonne Edouard – like Ikone, 
just 18 – wrapped up the win in the final minute.

The Foxes, who start their Premier League campaign at Hull on 13 August, are 
next in action against Barcelona in Stockholm on Wednesday.

Zlatan Ibrahimovic sees ‘something big’ happening at Manchester United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/30/zlatan-ibrahimovic-integrating-well-manchester-united-team>
Meanwhile, Jamie Vardy has explained that rejecting a move to Arsenal was an 
easy decision because he has “unfinished business” with the champions.

The 29-year-old, who scored 24 league goals to help Leicester win the title 
last season, spurned the advances of Arsenal, after the north London club had 
triggered a release clause in his contract, in favour of extending his stay 
with the Foxes.

“It’s not been put out there that I have always said the boys, the close-knit 
brotherhood, is unbelievable and for me, there’s a lot of unfinished business 
here,” Vardy told Sky Sports.

“I feel that the club is only going one way and that is forward, that’s why I 
want to be a part of it. It wasn’t that big [the decision] when I think about 
it. It was quite easy and this is where I want to be.”

Leicester City’s unsettled Riyad Mahrez scores stunner against Celtic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/23/leicester-city-riyad-mahrez-celtic-claudio-ranieri-brendan-rodgers> 