
There has been much debate over the weekend about plans by government to 
introduce a“buy as you go” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/05/rising-rents-force-housing-policy-change-homes-tory>
 scheme.

According to David Orr, chief executive of the National Housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> Federation (NHF), the scheme 
would cater for a large section of the population who lack the necessary money 
to save for a deposit or commit to a mortgage.

Tory ‘buy as you go’ plan to make renters homeowners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/05/rising-rents-force-housing-policy-change-homes-tory>
In theory the proposal sounds credible. But there have been many attempts in 
the past to introduce similar schemes, including try before you buy, rent to 
own, right to aquire, social homegrant and voluntary purchase grant, to name 
but a few.

What is different about this proposal? The NHF has identified 1.4m people as 
not being served by current housing options. It claims that there are many 
tenants living in the private rented sector who want to own their own home but 
cannot get a mortgage because their income is low or work insecure. The 
proposals would be for new build housing and new tenants and the federation 
believes that this would contribute significantly to housing associations’ 
plans to build 335,000 homes over the next four years with the help of 
additional funding.

This is all very well but the proposal assumes that participants will pay 90% 
of market rents. This will surely exclude many who at the moment are finding it 
difficult to afford market rents in the private rented sector and who are 
sharing or living in overcrowded conditions in order to do so. Would 10% below 
market rents be attractive?

For those who do use the scheme, there must be a question about what would 
happen if their circumstances change during the 25-year period, when incomes 
could, of course, go down as well as up.

It’s not clear whether housing benefit would support the equity part of the 
rental payment if income falls within these levels. Confining someone to such a 
long period in one dwelling will also affect mobility. Will the equity accrued 
be portable if someone wants to move on? Who will select the lucky ones to use 
this scheme? What allocation system will be used? If government funding is 
underpinning the scheme with taxpayers’ money how should this work? We have 
seen examples of generous discounts given to sitting tenants in the past 
through the right to buy, which has seen more than 1.9m council homes in 
England sold off, many of which have ended up in the private rented sector, 
rented to people supported by housing benefit.

The private rented sector itself has grown substantially in the past ten years 
almost doubling in size. There are now 11 million private renters, including 
1.5 million families with children. There are also around 1.5 million tenants 
claiming housing benefit in the sector many who are paying an increased 
shortfall between rents charged and what diminishing housing benefit levels 
allow.

The new reduced benefit cap: how it works and who it affects
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/nov/03/reduced-benefit-cap-families-dwp>
In the past, housing policies have encouraged the private landlords to house 
people with lower income, who would previously have been housed in the social 
sector. Many councils discharge their homeless duties by using private 
landlords. using this sector. Yet tenants renting privately do not get the same 
benefits as social housing tenants, even though they may be in similar 
circumstances. They do not qualify for discounts through the right to buy 
scheme, they don’t qualify for good management and maintenance services that 
social landlords can give and they certainly have less security to remain in 
their homes for longer periods. So why are the chosen 1.5 million going to be 
treated differently?

The building of many more houses by housing associations over the next four 
years has to be welcomed but should the 1.25 million on social housing waiting 
lists not be first priority?

As it stands, this scheme looks to me like a tenure transfer from the private 
rental sector to housing associations for one group of people, while councils 
will continue to offer private rented accommodation to discharge their 
homelessness duties.

One colleague I spoke to recently called it “yet another chancers’ lottery”. I 
hope he is wrong.

Paddy Gray is professor of housing at Ulster University

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 