
Reporter and presenter:

LF Liz Ford

Interviewees:


DB Doortje Braeken

LE Lucy Emmerson

DG Dennis Glasgow

RS Remmy Shawa

AP Anne Philpott

PK Priya Kath

[CLIP FROM 1950s US ADVERT:


MALE SPEAKER ‘How to say no’ – that’s the subject under discussion. 

FEMALE SPEAKER But really … you can’t help getting into situations where 
petting is likely to start, even in your own home watching television!]

LF Welcome to the 1950s, when sex education was … well … awkward, to say the 
least.


[CLIP CONTINUES, MALE SPEAKER Hm … you know, I’d never thought of that before!]

 LF But how much progress have we made since then? 

 [Music: Let’s Talk About Sex by Salt-N-Pepa]

 DG The education I got in school about sex was pretty biological. All I knew 
was the name of the private parts and the fact that during intercourse – 
fertilisation takes place after that and then a baby comes.

PK And first kiss makes you pregnant. And having sex with a virgin will be 
like, you can just get it – HIV/AIDS – and things like that.

 AP When I used to do sex education in schools and sometimes young women 
wouldn’t know they’ve actually had sexual intercourse because young men would 
say to them that was – they’d call it flirting or kissing.

 LF Six decades later the misconceptions and taboos around sex remain. And 
questions about whether children and young people should receive sex education, 
and what form that sex education should take, are still hotly debated the world 
over. So why in 2016 do we still not like to talk about sex?

 DB It’s sad, isn’t it? My name is Doortje Braeken, I’m from the Netherlands 
and I work at the International Planned Parenthood Federation as senior adviser 
for adolescents, gender and rights.

 It’s a lot to do with wording because the moment you say sexuality education, 
people think about having sex and we’re promoting having sex to young people 
and people get very nervous about that.

 And we know that already still 66% of young girls in the world don’t know 
what menstruation is when they start their first menstruation. 40% don’t know 
anything about HIV. It’s not only that we have to talk about sex – it’s even 
the basic facts of lives young people don’t know yet.

 LF I’m Liz Ford, and in this month’s podcast, with 1.8 billion 10- to 
24-year-olds in the world today, we look at why effective sex education or 
comprehensive sexuality education, as it’s now called, has become more 
important than ever before.

 So what should young people be taught? When should sex education start? And 
what does comprehensive sexuality education actually mean?

 Lucy Emmerson is coordinator of the Sex Education Forum. 

 LE Human sexuality is relevant to us all and that would encompass 
relationships as well as the physical aspects because that is how we engage 
socially, how we relate to each other, find intimate relationships as well as 
friendships and social groups; how we think about our culture and our values. 
It also impacts on relationships and then, in turn, on our sexuality.

 And we now know that if you have good quality sex and relationship education 
taught by a trained educator, and if that starts early enough, we see young 
people being more likely to use contraception, less likely to start having sex 
at a young age, less likely to become teenage parents and less likely to be 
involved in relationships which are coercive.

 LF Doortje Braeken from the International Planned Parenthood Federation.

 DB I don’t know exactly what you learned. I learned to wait and I didn’t know 
for what. I wasn’t told what do I have to wait for. But this is much more also 
about relationships, it’s about understanding the society you live in, it’s 
about rights. There’s a very strong focus also on gender and gender inequity. 
So it’s much broader than just about the birds and the bees and where your 
ovaries are. I think knowing where your ovaries are is important but it doesn’t 
help you to have a very good relationship, I think.

 LF So at what age should sex education start? Lucy Emmerson. 

 LE Sex Education Forum believes that it’s a lifelong learning process. It 
starts really from birth, in many ways, because children can see relationships 
around them in their family as soon as they’re born. And as children develop 
they become more aware of their own body and want to name different parts of 
their body. It’s at that point that adults have to decide – am I going to 
provide straightforward factual information or am I going to start making up 
things because this aspect of human life scares me in some way?

 We’ve developed a curriculum framework which shows the kind of questions that 
children naturally want to explore and ask about at each age and stage. And so 
that would start in the kind of infant section of a primary school looking at 
things like: where do babies come from? How does my family care for me? How’s 
my family similar or different to other families? About friendships as well – 
about behaviour that is OK and what behaviour is not OK. And then those themes 
are revisited with a bit more sophistication as the years go by.

 DB We are part of the WHO Europe <http://www.euro.who.int/en/home>, who make 
guidelines and they start at zero because they say actually how you touch your 
child, how you dress your child, how you don’t avoid questions already starts 
when they’re one, two and three. But of course it’s something different than 
sex education when you’re 14 or 15. So I think for me it’s a lifelong process. 
It’s also for me, who’s already quite old, maybe I can still learn a lot.

 LF Last month I visited Denmark to attend the Women Deliver conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/17/deliver-for-good-conference-diseases-women-deliver-copenhagen-gender-equality>
, where 5,000 delegates met to discuss the reproductive health, rights and 
wellbeing of women and girls. Sex education was among the topics debated. 
During the conference at Copenhagen’s City Hall, 600 young people attended what 
was hoped to be the largest sex education class held in the country.

'We can’t keep looking at women as body parts or diseases', says Women Deliver 
CEO
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/17/deliver-for-good-conference-diseases-women-deliver-copenhagen-gender-equality>
 DG My name is Dennis Glasgow, I’m 18 years old. I’m from the Guyana 
Responsible Parenthood Association which is IPPF’s member association in 
Guyana. I generally never got much information about sex in the school setting 
and that’s how young people get involved in premature sexual encounters because 
of so many gaps they want to fill. And it’s pretty sad that teachers can’t help 
them fill it and they have to go and experiment on their own and that 
contributes negatively to their overall development.

 Sex is something that has been taboo in my society and in the Caribbean for 
quite a long time. And by talking about sex … somewhat diminishes it as a taboo 
now.

 LF For comprehensive sexuality education to be effective, taboos and 
misconceptions must be tackled. And this involves good communication and 
information from teachers and schools.

 LE Many teachers may think it’s a good idea to teach SRE but lack the skill 
and the competence to do it.

 LF And for many parents talking about sex can be a daunting task. 

 LE Globally so many adults have had poor sex and relationships education 
themselves; some have had none at all. And it makes it very hard to imagine 
what it would be like if it was any good for one’s own children. And that’s a 
huge barrier whatever country we’re looking at. But often in schools or at home 
there’s a big gap that builds up where nothing is said for many years and then 
children have already realised that it’s a taboo thing they feel they can’t ask 
questions about.

 LF Remmy Shawa helps manage sex and reproductive health at Sonke Gender 
Justice in South Africa.

 RS I remember we were at the Aids conference in 2013 in Cape Town, and we 
were talking about the importance of parents talking to their children about 
sexuality. And this older woman stands up and says, “Look, I am interested in 
talking about the choices for my children but I don’t even know what to talk 
about because I don’t understand my own sexuality.”

For a lot of cultures in our region you have aunties and uncles having the 
responsibility to talk to children, their nephews and nieces, about sexuality. 
But if themselves don’t understand more about sexuality then you have a gap 
that you’re not filling.

 [Music: Je t’aime … moi non plus by Jane Birkin and Serge Gainsbourg]

 LF One taboo that Anne Philpott is trying to tackle with regards to sex 
education is the idea of pleasure.

 AP I’m Anne Philpott and I’m based in the UK and I’m the founder of The 
Pleasure Project. I think the fact that sex can feel good is something that we 
should all be told and should be talked about in an open way. The primary 
reason most people in the world have sex is for pleasure and the public health 
world has really missed pleasure out, it’s a huge gap. So when it comes to 
telling people to use condoms, for example, it’s very much selling that on 
diseases or, you know – if you don’t use a condom, you’re a bad person.

 The Pleasure Project did a global review which we call the Global Mapping of 
Pleasure 
<http://r4d.dfid.gov.uk/PDF/Outputs/SexReproRights_RPC/GlobalMappingofPleasure_Final.pdf>
 in which we did a whole range of case studies of organisations that had a 
broader discussion and actually answered questions when young people asked 
about pleasure. For example, how to use condoms in a sexy way; how to introduce 
that in a sexy way. How to see that as part of the consensual discussion rather 
than “the condom moment”, as people said.

 We have to wake up to the fact that young people are now … have got access to 
the internet, which is a massive change from 10, 20 years ago, and I think the 
public health world has got its head in the sand and we might regret this in 10 
years. Young people can just Google words, have very easy access to a whole 
range of what is essentially bad sex education ie pornography – and are seeing 
violent or very stereotypical pornography. So I think that they need to have an 
opportunity to discuss that and know that that’s not real life. So we’re really 
about bridging between the pleasure world and the world of public health, and 
our mission is to ensure that people include pleasure in sex education 
messages; or putting the sexy into safer sex. And also putting the safe into 
erotic.

 LF Around the world signs point to improvements in sex education. Lucy 
Emmerson.

[Music: Je t’aime … je t’aime …]

 LE When countries are faced with particular health situations that’s 
sometimes been a trigger to say, “Well actually, we’ve got to do something.” 
The HIV epidemic has been an interesting example. When that’s come to the fore 
in a country there’s been a decision that has to be made at ministerial level – 
how are we going to respond? Are we going to have an information campaign? Are 
we going to do something in education? Are we going to just steer people along 
a moral line about how they should behave rather than focus on giving facts and 
information?

 In England we’ve had some developments recently. The current government talk 
about sex and relationships education as something that’s important that 
schools are expected to do, but they haven’t managed to make it a requirement 
yet.

 LF In 2013 ministers of education from 20 countries in east and south Africa 
signed a ministerial commitment on comprehensive sexuality education and sexual 
and reproductive health services for adolescents and young people. Remmy from 
Sonke again.

 RS South Africa is one of those countries that has started doing that 
already. And in addition to that there’s a relationship between the Department 
of Health and the Department of Education. So that even as children are 
learning about their sexuality in schools, they also have access to high 
quality sexual reproductive health services that are user friendly.

 LF And as awareness of the need for good sex education increases, some are 
also turning their attention to groups who may have been previously ignored or 
marginalised.

 RS The boy child or young boys and young men have been left out of the 
picture, and what that has led to is having misinformation among men and boys 
around what sexuality is. And for them then trying to tie their masculinity to 
sexual prowess, to sexual conquests, how many sexual partners one has. And that 
obviously leads to negative sexual behaviour. And what we aim for as an 
organisation obviously is to have, you know, an equal society where there is 
equity, they are healthy relationships and relationships that are happy, not 
just heterosexual relationships but even in same sex relationships.

 LF Doortje Braeken from the International Planned Parenthood Federation. 

 DB A group that is really, really neglected are young people with 
disabilities – whether it’s mental disabilities or cognitive disabilities or 
physical disabilities. We’re starting to work on them now but we still see them 
as asexual beings. Some of our member associations are really, really trying. 
So, for instance, for deaf young people you need new sign language because 
there are none for having fun at sex, or having good sexual relations. 
Sometimes they are not even signed. So we have to develop signs for that.

 LF Doortje believes that collaboration is key to good sex education. In May 
the International Planned Parenthood Federation published a report called
Everyone’s Right to Know 
<http://www.ippf.org/sites/default/files/ippf_cse_report_eng_web.pdf> (pdf).

 DB It’s important that governments, ministries and non-governments, like 
civil societies and young people, work together.

 LF Anne Philpott from The Pleasure Project again.

 AP The fact that Aids is the highest killer of adolescent girls in Africa 
still is a human rights issue. The fact that the Lancet showed in a report that
unsafe sex is the highest risk factor for death and disease for young women 
<http://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2016-05/tl-tli050516.php> and the 
second highest for young men means that many of us globally have a collective 
responsibility, and that goes all the way from the World Health Organisation to 
UNAids to national health systems and also to schools.

 LF In addition the sustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
, adopted by world leaders last year, mentioned the need for more information 
and education around sex.

 DB Goal number three, which is about health, we fit in there. Of course in 
goal number four – which is about education – and goal number five is about 
gender equality, and they all, not say directly [that] comprehensive sex 
education is important, but they all infer how important it is for young people 
to have access to information and education.

 AP Historically we have focused on diseases or in terms of women it’s kind of 
women being seen as walking potential diseases or walking pregnancies. And 
institutions such as the World Bank, for example, who are very focused on 
economic development should think beyond that; so not just thinking about 
increasing GDP or increasing incomes but thinking about, for what? I’ll die a 
happy woman when I see the World Bank actually measuring women’s pleasure or 
women’s wellbeing as an ultimate indicator of their investments rather than the 
income of populations.

 LF So is sex education about money? 

 DB It’s always about money. Of course it’s always about money. We know from 
countries like Estonia where they invested in comprehensive sex education 
together with access to services they, in a couple of years, the abortion rate, 
the HIV rate, the STI rate went down. And if you then calculate it, it becomes 
extremely cost effective. Because basically to have sex education in a 
curriculum costs something like $15-20 per child. Now, if you compare that with 
STI treatment, HIV treatment or abortion or young girls being pregnant and you 
have to do something about it, that’s not a difficult thing to then decide 
actually how cost effective it will become. But it’s a difficult thing to sell.

 LF So are we at last after decades of awkwardness finally making progress? 
Lucy Emmerson.

 LE I’ve got concerns about the countries around the world bringing in some 
policies which are discriminatory against lesbian, gay, bisexual and trans 
people; so it’s not a simple progression.

 I’m always optimistic because I’ve seen schools improve their practice and 
start providing wonderful sex and relationships education; getting everyone on 
board and then starting to teach it really well. In some countries, governments 
have made a shift and said, “Right, this is going to be compulsory, we want to 
make sure every child is going to get it.” And generally when a country moves 
in that direction they continue moving in that direction rather than making a 
swing back.

 LF According to Doortje Braeken, assessing the quality of sex education as we 
go along is also important.

 DB Together with Unesco we made a tool to really assess the quality of the 
education. It’s not, “OK, did you discuss gender? OK, tick, you did it,” but 
we’ll really go in depth. And at the end of the day you have to do it and you 
have to start talking with young people. Now how do you do that? How do you 
help educators – whether it’s teachers or whether it’s parents or whether it’s 
peer educators or other educators – how do you help them? And I think we also 
need to invest on good research about – what are the results? What will happen 
over time – kind of longitudinal research. But we should do it together with 
young people. We should define and develop the questions [on] what good 
comprehensive sex education is with them, and not do it all by ourselves 
because they know best, whether it has helped them or not.

 [Music: Let’s talk about sex for now … To the people at home or in the crowd 
… It keeps coming up anyhow … Don’t decoy, avoid or make void the topic … Cos 
that ain’t gonna stop it …]

 LF So that’s all for this month’s podcast. You can listen to all our podcasts 
ontheguardian.com/global-development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/global-development-podcast>
; or on SoundCloud, iTunes or all podcasting apps. I’m Liz Ford. The producer 
is Kary Stewart. Thank you for listening.

[Jingle: For more great downloads, go to theguardian.com/audio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/audio>]
 