
It is always a risk to read too much into friendlies but the intensity shown by
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> here suggested that, 
after a mixed pre-season, they are almost ready for the real business. Sadio 
Mané looked blisteringly sharp on the right, while there was a defensive 
resilience to a centre-half partnership of Dejan Lovren and Ragnar Klavan. But 
arguably the most promising aspect was that the first three goals came from 
pressing high up the pitch. Jürgen Klopp’s style is beginning to take hold and 
it will be fascinating to see how effective it is over the coming weeks.

A word of caution, though. Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> were some way off full 
strength, showing all the signs of a team that remain in the embryonic stage of 
their preparations. La Liga does not kick off for another week and numerous key 
figures, including Ivan Rakitic, Gérard Piqué and Andrés Iniesta, only returned 
to training in recent days. All three were introduced an hour in with the game 
already put to bed and the influence of Luis Suárez, making his first 
appearance against his former club here, and Lionel Messi was minimal.

Premier League 2016-17 season preview No9: Liverpool | Andy Hunter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/05/premier-league-2016-2017-preview-liverpool>
Despite that caveat, there is much for Klopp to be satisfied with a week out 
from Liverpool’s Premier League opener against Arsenal. They attacked with 
intent from the first minute, when Mané fed another new addition, Georginio 
Wijnaldum, within 15 seconds. The former Newcastle United player could not 
convert but it was a sign of things to come.

Adam Lallana played a pivotal role in the opener by intercepting a loose Barça 
throw-in and charging forward. He played a quick give and go with Roberto 
Firmino just inside the box before squaring to Mané who finished clinically to 
Marc-André ter Stegen’s left.

It took a little more than 20 minutes for Suárez and Messi to come alive but 
when they did it nearly resulted in a stupendous equaliser. The Uruguayan 
delivered a delicious flick into the Argentinian’s path but his strike went 
across goal and came back off the right-hand post.

Arda Turan missed a sitter eight minutes later after Simon Mignolet parried 
his initial shot, the Turkey midfielder inexplicably missing the target from 
eight yards under little pressure, but beyond that Barça scarcely threatened.

Jürgen Klopp says Liverpool’s England players have got over Euro 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/05/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-england-recovered-euro-2016>
Philippe Coutinho should have made it 2-0 in the 33rd minute when he turned 
Aleix Vidal too easily before cutting in and shooting just over. Vidal had a 
shocker here before being substituted at the interval and right-back must be 
the biggest concern for Luis Enrique.

Klopp has a similar worry at left‑back, where James Milner, captaining the 
team, started and looked relatively solid before coming off three minutes 
before the break with an injury. He was replaced by Alberto Moreno, who remains 
untrustworthy.

If that tempered Liverpool’s satisfaction, a blistering start to the second 
half left them feeling buoyed again. Mané was crucial once more, delivering a 
teasing low cross from the right towards a cluster of players hovering near the 
six-yard line after Barça were hounded to give away possession. Jordan 
Henderson, introduced at the start of the second half, was initially awarded 
the goal but replays showed that Javier Mascherano, another former Liverpool 
player, turned the ball into his own net.

Ten young Premier League players who could make 2016-17 their season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/06/premier-league-2016-17-young-players-to-watch-this-season>
Two minutes later, the other half-time substitutes combined to make it 3-0 as 
Kevin Stewart nicked the ball off Sergio Busquets near halfway and, with 
Barça’s defence spread, he fed Divock Origi. The Belgian sped forward and 
nonchalantly slotted past Claudio Bravo.

By the time the Mexican wave reared its head among the second largest crowd 
seen since the national stadium reopened, the game had lost its intensity but 
Marko Grujic made it 4-0 in added time with a looping header after a lofted 
pass from Lazar Markovic. There was even time for the dreaded thunder clap, but 
the less said about that the better.
 