
Lobster, once associated with only the swankiest restaurants, is now on the 
frontline of the supermarket price war.

Discount stores fighting to lure Christmas shoppers are importing hundreds of 
thousands of £5 crustaceans from Canada.

The discounters have taken advantage of a slump in the wholesale price of 
lobster aswarming seas, better fishing capabilities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/03/maine-lobster-and-cape-cod-under-threat-from-rapidly-warming-seas>
 and fewer natural predators (including cod) have resulted in more lobsters and 
made them easier to haul in.

The quantity of lobster caught has more than doubled in the past 10 years, 
while the pound has risen against the Canadian dollar, helping to cut prices 
further.

Lobster has joined high-end products including oysters, fine wine, whole legs 
ofjamón serrano and champagne on the shelves of bargain-driven grocers, with 
Asda and Iceland offering whole cooked frozen lobster for £5, and Lidl for 
£5.99.

Malcolm Walker, the founder and boss of Iceland, said: “It’s just like 
[competing on] milk or bread prices. But now we are squabbling over the price 
of lobster. It’s an unusual product to sell at that price and it captures 
people’s imagination. A lot of people who have never had one before can now 
pick it up and try it.”

The UK imported 2,600 tonnes of lobster from around the world last year, up 
from 1,900 tonnes in 2009. Restaurants are also joining the rush and adding it 
to their menus.

“There are lots of reasons for the bigger catches,” said Geoff Irvine, of the 
Lobster Council of Canada. “The water temperature is up. It could be to do with 
the global warming effect but I’m not a scientist.” He also pointed to bigger 
boats, which are more able to fish in bad weather.

The lobster boom is also helping to revive fishing communities in places far 
away from your local Lidl, such as Yarmouth in the Canadian province of Nova 
Scotia, where other forms of fishing have been hit by falling stocks.

Bernie Berry, a Nova Scotia fisherman, says he has increased the amount of 
lobster he lands in the winter season by as much as 30%, and spring catches 
have also risen slightly. “I’ve never seen catches as good as now. It’s a bit 
of a phenomenon that’s happening right along the American seaboard.”

Back in the UK, lobster catches are up and prices are steady, but most go to 
the continent, where the Spanish and French turn up their noses at North 
American lobster.

Johnny Murt, a fisherman from Padstow in Cornwall, said he was surprised 
British shoppers didn’t buy local lobster because they could get it fresh off 
the boat for a similar price to the frozen Canadian version: “It doesn’t seem 
such a special deal. They are small lobsters. We are not allowed to keep them 
at that size in this country.”

But Murt is hopeful that British consumers’ new taste for lobster will lead 
them to seek out local produce in future. “It would be great if we had more 
markets in this country, instead of sending them to the continent for peanuts.”

Tim Hughes, chef director of Caprice Holdings, which owns the famous fish 
restaurants J Sheekey and Scott’s, reckons Cornish and Scottish lobster is best 
for taste: “It’s a great product, the Canadian lobster, but not as good quality 
as native. Most people prefer the texture of native lobster – it’s sweeter and 
firmer. It’s just better.”
 