
The fashion industry is calling on the government to ensure the UK stays in 
the single market after Brexit ashundreds of international buyers arrive for 
London Fashion Week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/16/london-fashion-week-female-designers-brexit>
.

Caroline Rush, chief executive of the British Fashion Council which organises 
the UK twice-yearly festival of catwalk shows and exhibitions, said 70% of the 
British fashion industry’s £8.5bn exports go to Europe. “Continuing to have 
access to the single market is going to be vitally important to us.”

Rush said that the industry was also keen to ensure that young designers, who 
have helped build London Fashion Week’s reputation as the home of new talent, 
were still able to come to the UK to study and work.

Theresa May shows Britain is still open for business at London fashion week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/15/theresa-may-shows-britain-is-still-open-for-business-at-london-fashion-week>
She added that there also needed to be discussions about how the UK would 
replace EU funding which is supporting the revival of British clothing 
factories and training.


“We need to ensure that our changing relationship with the EU will not impact 
on the creativity of London, our access to new talent overseas or the ongoing 
education and training programmes we support,” Rush said.

Over the next five days 83 designer shows will appear on the London Fashion 
Week schedule and a further 150 designers will showcase their latest 
collections in showrooms, generating an estimated £100m of orders from the 
international audience of press and buyers from 58 countries.

Rush said the fashion industry had not wanted to exit the European Union but 
“we have to put a brave face on it” and look for opportunities.

She said there had been a bounce in luxury fashion sales following the 
European referendum vote as tourists took advantage of the drop in the value of 
the pound against the euro and the dollar.

Bag designer Anya Hindmarch agreed: “The fashion industry was a remain voter 
and it was a bit of a shock at first but then you regroup and people are saying 
there are lots of positives.

“A big advantage is obviously we are 10% cheaper [after the fall in the value 
of the pound against the dollar and the euro]. Tourists are coming to London 
and buying.”

 