
London men’s fashion week is a now familiar January feature on the the 
industry’s calendar, but the world is a different place since the last round of 
menswear shows in June.

The post-Brexit vote fallout and its impact on fashion was top of the agenda 
in the mayor of London Sadiq Khan’s speech to open the event on Friday. Dressed 
in a blue suit and white shirt – with the lack of tie becoming what the fashion 
crowd would call his signature look – Khan looked the part.

Related: The week in menswear: the Breton striped top 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2017/jan/06/the-week-in-menswear-breton-striped-top>

“Fashion is absolutely essential to our identities as Londoners,” he said. “We 
don’t just tolerate our differences, we respect and celebrate them. In London 
you are free to dress however you want to dress, and be who you want to be.”

Later, the mayor praised the international cast on the schedule of men’s 
fashion week, which features designers from across the globe.

It was a sign that “London remains open, inclusive and outward-looking. It is 
so vital that post-Brexit this continues to be the case,” Khan said, pointing 
to the fact that the sector employs about 800,000 people in the UK and 
contributes £28bn to the economy.

Topman Design was the first show on Friday. The premium collection of the high 
street brand speaks to customers who are a little more adventurous than the 
average teenage shopper replenishing his supply of skinny jeans and underpants. 
Singers Dougie Poynter and James Bay were in the front row and the theme in 
this brightly coloured show was British youth culture. There were elements of 
punk and northern soul, but the emphasis was on nineties rave and young men who 
worked and played hard through that decade.

Shapes were oversized and often with a sporty cut – there were huge hoodies 
with an equally huge Topman logo, quilted tracksuits in shocking pink and wide 
shorts worn over running leggings with a tattoo print. Rave flyers influenced 
the cartoonish fractals prints, and pair of trousers made from the fabric 
usually reserved for suits but remodelled in the style of tracksuit pants. 
These were clothes designed to look good on the dancefloor – and to dance in. 
To drive the point home, the models – including one Lennon “son of Liam” 
Gallagher – had their hair plastered to their sweaty faces. The finale was 
soundtracked with Scooter’s 1996 hit I’m raving, I’m raving.
 The MAN showcase brought work of Per Götesson, Feng Chen Wang and Charles 
Jeffrey to Topman catwalk. Photograph: Facundo Arrizabalaga/EPA 
Despite the “back to the nineties” compilation classic, Topman’s creative 
director, Gordon Richardson, said he did not see this collection as “retro or 
nostalgic”, adding that “it needed to feel modern”. To achieve that effect, he 
had used punk pioneer Ian Dury as his unlikely muse.

“He [Dury] mixed all these cultures and counter-cultures and made them his 
own,” said Richardson. “If someone was referencing all those same things now, 
what would it look like?”

The collection designed was a stab at that – punk, rave and more mixed up for 
a new era in London fashion.

Later, MAN showcases the work of three young designers – Per Götesson, Feng 
Chen Wang and Charles Jeffrey. The latter is the star here, with a point of 
view that flirts with performance art.
 Charles Jeffrey’s designs are too well-cut and considered for him to be 
dismissed as concept alone. Photograph: WWD/REX/Shutterstock 
Dancers appeared on Jeffrey’s catwalk first, dressed in nude bodysuits covered 
with mud. They were followed by models wearing everything from a red quilted 
frock coat to a suede jacket and cropped trousers to a papier-mache sculpture 
decorated in the US flag. While it’s tempting to view these things as a stunt 
for social media, Jeffrey’s designs are too well-cut and considered to be 
dismissed as concept alone.

The shows continue over the weekend with Grace Wales Bonner and JW Anderson 
the highlights on the schedule.
 