 An increasingly slurred attempt at a Wham! classic emanates from the neon-lit 
karaoke bar and disappears into the soup of sound which hangs over Ayia Napa's 
main square at midnight.
As cheesy tunes, garage, house and R&B blare out from the venues lining Platia 
Seferi and the surrounding streets, thousands of young holidaymakers are 
inside, happily dancing and drinking themselves into oblivion.

Outside in the square, which is littered with empty beer bottles and discarded 
flyers for club nights, groups of teenagers preen, swagger and flirt with each 
other as they flit between bars. It's a normal weekday night at the height of 
the Cypriot resort's summer season.

But beneath the family-friendly veneer, Ayia Napa is at the centre of a 
brewing turf war between rival factions in the UK garage music scene after a 
spate of stabbings which have raised fears of a long hot summer in bothCyprus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus> and Britain.

Despite enormous efforts to rid the resort of its reputation for violence and 
drugs, which mushroomed alongside its growth as a clubbing mecca for British 
garage music devotees, the violence has once again proved that the grittier 
reality of the resort is alive and kicking.

 Knife attack


Alarm bells began to ring on July 7 when Dylan Mills, known as MC Dizzy 
Rascal, was dragged from his scooter in broad daylight and subjected to a 
vicious knife attack before he was due to perform at the resort's Gas Club.

He was treated for wounds to the back, buttocks and chest at the Napa Olympic 
clinic, where he was kept under police protection until he discharged himself.

The 18-year-old from Bow, east London, who is widely regarded as the hottest 
new talent on the UK garage scene, is part of the Roll Deep Crew, which has a 
well-chronicled enmity with the southLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> So Solid Crew music collective.

The attack came hours after members of So Solid, their promoters North Star, 
and the Cream Cartel, who are signed to So Solid's record label, arrived 
together on the island.

Four days later another British musician, Andrew Clevell, became the second 
victim of the latest outbreak of violence. Two members of North Star, the 
promotion company which is working in association with So Solid at the resort's 
Ice Club, have appeared in court over the incident.

Wesley Anderson Lambie, 24, and Clint Michael Ippoma, 22, who are both from 
north London, pleaded not guilty to charges of assault and possession of knives 
but were remanded in custody until Monday.

The spark that lit the fuse was trivial. According to garage scene insiders, 
the stabbing followed a brawl which erupted after Dizzy pinched the bottom of 
So Solid Crew's lead female singer, Lisa Maffia.

One DJ working in the resort, who refused to be named because "lives are at 
stake", said: "Its all street politics - a London thing. She is the lady of the 
So Solid Crew and doing something like that was a sign of disrespect to the 
whole collective.

"I am sure it won't stop here. There are other crews involved too, but they 
are less well-known."

A Famagusta police source yesterday confirmed that an arrest warrant had been 
issued for two members of the Cream Cartel who were believed to have returned 
to Britain shortly after Dizzy was stabbed.

One of the MCs in the Cream Cartel is understood to be the brother of Dwayne 
Vincent, aka Megaman, So Solid's front man. Megaman was interviewed by Ayia 
Napa police about the stabbing but released without charge. He later told the 
Guardian he had no idea who was involved and insisted his collective and the 
Roll Deep Crew were on good terms.

Friends of the MC say he is very protective of Ayia Napa, where So Solid are 
doing a weekly residency at Ice Club, and is tired of being hauled in and 
questioned every time a black person does something wrong.

Arriving at a garage event in the early hours of Thursday with fellow So Solid 
members and a sizeable female entourage, Megaman, who was sporting 
diamante-studded Dior shades, told the Guardian: "There are a lot of random 
people who come out here and then use the So Solid name when they get into 
sticky situations. But it is nothing to do with us.

"There was a point where the authorities were saying they wanted to get all 
the black DJs off the island because of the trouble but I told them no one 
would come any more. So now we are working together."

Famagusta detectives maintain that the two stabbings are connected to rival 
garage crews. A source said the resort had been quiet up until two weeks ago 
when So Solid, Roll Deep and others had arrived.

"Two days later a lot of problems happened. You don't come here and suddenly 
make enemies. Everybody knows each other from England. Between them there is a 
lot of competition.

 Organised crime


"We do not expect Ayia Napa to be a church. We know it is for young people and 
we are going to have some troubles but this is different. This is organised 
crime."

So Solid have made the resort their second home, mainly because a string of 
violent incidents have marred their performances in Britain and made it nigh on 
impossible for them to appear there.

The collective are understood to have blood ties with the influential Melas 
brothers. who own Napa radio and four of the resort's biggest clubs, including 
Ice. Linos Melas dismisses any suggestion of London gang wars. "When you are 
dealing with a large number of tourists and alcohol is involved you have to 
expect that there are good and there are bad people."

Detectives are also investigating whether a third attack, on two Dutch 
holidaymakers, is connected to the other incidents. The pair say they were 
pushed by two strangers in the main square and attacked when they tried to 
remonstrate.

Speaking from his hospital bed, the less seriously injured of the two, named 
as Dominic, said: "One of them suddenly made a punching movement and then I 
felt the blood spurt out. I turned around and my friend was also soaked in 
blood."

Dominic required emergency surgery to his arm and his friend, who declined to 
be named, was left with a six-inch slash across his left cheek and serious stab 
wounds to the stomach. Police confirmed they were still searching for the 
suspects.

Yet Ayia Napa's mayor, Barbara Pericleous, is emphatic that despite four 
people being stabbed in just over a week, the resort is achieving its aim of 
becoming a more family friendly place. "These incidents are disagreements 
between friends on a very small scale and have nothing to do with any gangs."

But she confirmed the police operation in Ayia Napa was being stepped up to an 
unprecedented level. As of last night, extra patrols were being drafted in from 
Nicosia with officers walking the streets during the early morning hours when 
most of the violence occurs.
 