
The British gymnast Louis Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/louissmith> 
has been suspended for two months after appearing to mock Islam in a private 
video that was leaked online.

Smith, who has won four Olympic and five world championship medals in a 
glittering career,filmed a three-minute recording 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/19/louis-smith-misses-olympics-celebrations-video-mocking-islam>
 of him laughing and providing commentary as a former gymnast, Luke Carson, 
shouted “Allahu Akbar” and mimicked a praying pose at a wedding of a friend on 
September.

After the video was published by the Sun last month, Smith apologised for his 
behaviour saying he was “deeply sorry” for causing “deep offence with my 
thoughtless actions”.

British Gymnastics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gymnastics> said that 
Smith had subsequently admitted to an independent panel that his behaviour was 
in breech of its standards of conduct.

That panel decided to suspend Smith for two months after taking into account 
another incident in June, in which he posted a zoomed-in photograph of a 
16-year-old gymnast’s leotard-clad bottom on Instagram along with the comment 
“my sport has its moments” and a smiling emoji. Carson, meanwhile, was given a 
reprimand and allowed to continue coaching by a separate panel.

The British gymnastics chief executive, Jane Allen, said she hoped Smith and 
Carson would learn from the incident and “use their profile to have a positive 
impact on sport and communities”.

She added: “It is regrettable that following a historic summer of achievement, 
the organisation finds itself in this difficult position with two high profile 
members in breach of our standards of conduct.”

However the decision to suspend Smith was criticised as “appalling” by the 
National Secular Society, which said it worried for the consequences for free 
speech.

Its spokesman Ben Jones told the Guardian: “It is appalling that British 
Gymnastics is imposing Islamic blasphemy laws. No religion or idea should be 
above mockery, satire or criticism.

“British Gymnastics’ code of conduct is the issue here and it’s clear that it 
does kill freedom of speech. Society today is very wary of mocking or being 
critical of Islam, but Islam should not be placed in a separate category from 
other religions. Being offended from time to time is the price we all pay for 
living in a free country.”

Louis Smith v Max Whitlock, Rio's hottest rivalry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/26/louis-smith-v-max-whitlock-rios-hottest-rivalry>
Smith has been one of the UK’s highest profile gymnasts for nearly a decade, 
having won his first world championship medal in 2007 when he was still a 
teenager before becoming the first British gymnast since 1928 to win an Olympic 
medal in 2008.

After wining two more Olympic medals at London 2012, Smith went on to win 
Strictly Come Dancing later that year in a final that was watched by 14 million 
people. After taking a break from gymnastics, Smith returned in time to win a 
silver medal on the pommel horse, his favourite event, at the Rio Olympics. 
However he was criticised after appearing to sulk and question the judges’ 
decision when he was beaten by another Briton, Max Whitlock, who took gold.


After the Sun’s story, Smith decided to miss the Olympic and Paralympic 
celebrations to visit two London mosques “to learn more about the Muslim 
community”. Speaking to the BBC last month, he said had received death threats 
‘every day’ since the video was made public, but denied that he was racist.

“It’s a very scary situation,” he said. “I am very ignorant to religion but I 
am an ethnic minority myself and have been on the receiving end of racist 
comments. I do not condone racism at all.

“Some people from the Muslim community have been understanding. Some people 
have been angry, but once I have apologised, they have then said ‘we are taught 
to forgive - we are peaceful’.

“And at the other end of the spectrum I’ve had death threats. Every day 
online. I’m cautious and I’m stressed.”

The ban will not affect Smith’s gymnastic career in the short term: the 
27-year-old is taking a break from the sport and is touring as a guest 
celebrity on the Keep Dancing stage production. However he recently confirmed 
his intention to carry on competing until the 2020 Olympics in Tokyo.

 