
When a major retailer lists a startup’s products, it can be the turning point. 
Sudden exposure to a much larger audience often provides a catalyst for 
next-stage business growth. However, the stumbling block for many aspiring 
entrepreneurs is making the initial connections with those all-important big 
brand buyers.

“Buyers do want to engage with interesting suppliers but they have to filter 
ruthlessly,” says Chris Simpson, SME consultant withBusiness Doctors 
<https://www.businessdoctors.co.uk/>.

Buyers at Waitrose can get up to 10 speculative pitches a week and sometimes 
more; via phone, email, and post and sometimes in person. Waitrose pet care 
buyer Andrea Watson has experienced them all. She says: “Take the trouble to 
find the name of the buyer you need to speak to, as simply writing ‘Dear Buyer’ 
shows a lack of research. And don’t say you have been into a Waitrose if you 
haven’t. It really shows if you don’t know our range for your product area.”

Polite persistence is one thing; bombardment with calls and emails, which 
Watson has experienced many times, is another. “A follow up email is fine and 
we will get back to you,” she says. “And don’t be disheartened if we say it’s 
not one for now; we always keep new products on file for the future.”

Bombarding buyers with product samples can also backfire, as they simply don’t 
have the storage space. “Send the very best of your range, and ensure they are 
in date and are transit safe. I’ve often received products that have spilt or 
exploded,” adds Watson.



Mark Barclay, e-commerce manager at automotive retailer Autosessive 
<http://www.autosessive.com/>, says: “As a buyer, whenever we’re contacted by 
manufacturers, we’re instantly impressed when they demonstrate an in-depth 
understanding of the market by benchmarking their product against the 
competition in terms of the quality, price, and availability. This will show 
the buyer you know your stuff and deserve to be taken seriously.”

He adds: “If the buyer seems interested, a great way to seal the deal is to 
offer exclusive distribution for a period and a marketing rebate. If you can 
also demonstrate how you can support our marketing efforts, or how your 
products can be personalised with our branding, as buyers, we’re a lot more 
likely to be interested.”

Holly Anna Scarsella, founder of resort-wear startup Pampelone 
<http://www.pampelone.com/> had no background or experience in approaching 
buyers, but 18 months on from its launch her brand appears in some of the 
world’s largest department stores, including Bloomingdale’s and Shopbop.

She says: “I spent weeks researching buyers on LinkedIn, often staying up 
until four in the morning to study them, and then sent extremely targeted 
emails. Without any help, I managed to get meetings that other businesses took 
years to get.”


The best way to get on a buyer’s radar, she says, is to grab their attention 
with the first few sentences. She did this by highlighting the celebrities who 
had worn her brand, and how many times it had sold out.

“You need to give them a reason to want to read your email,” says Scarsella. 
“Instead of just a simple subject line of ‘Pampelone Clothing’, which the 
buyers will just know is another brand pitch, I used ‘Pampelone: St Tropez 
comes to Bloomingdale’s’. I always email a buyer and their assistant; buyers 
have so much admin to do, so sometimes the best approach is via their 
assistant. And make it personal. Show that you understand them and their work.”

Another way of approaching buyers is via social media. Scarsella found out 
which bloggers they follow, which publications they look at, and did everything 
she could to be seen by them.


Practical help with the procurement process is available to entrepreneurs who 
know where to look. When it came to dealing with large retail buyers, Luke 
Johnstone and Alex Stewart, co-founders ofPack’d <http://www.packd.co.uk/>, 
which makes frozen smoothie kits, were also novices. Johnstone says: “We did 
make mistakes, approaching buyers in the wrong way. The trouble was, I had no 
business background and no business connections, and we needed help.”

And they found it, firstly from the Prince’s Trust, where a former retail 
buyer was available to offer advice to new business owners, and then from 
Virgin Startup, which runs aDoing Business With Big Business 
<https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/virgin-startup-doing-business-with-big-business-tickets-29669031873?aff=erelexpmlt>
 workshop. Open to anyone, the workshop features buyers from big brands like 
Virgin Trains, Tesco, and John Lewis, sharing their insight into the best ways 
to approach them and what they are looking for.

Johnstone said: “It’s still tough getting in front of buyers, but at least I 
have a strategy, and it works, as our products are now stocked in Sainsbury’s, 
Planet Organic, Whole Foods and Tesco Express.”

Trade shows and exhibitions offer another route into the world of the retail 
buyer. Health food startupCreative Nature 
<http://www.creativenaturesuperfoods.co.uk/> has won listings with TK Maxx, 
Asda and WH Smith, largely as result of its founder, Julianne Ponan, hitting 
the trade show circuit and approaching the right buyers directly.

She says: “We attend a lot of shows throughout the year, one of which was 
Natural Products Europe at the ExCel in London, where I met buyers from Tesco, 
Ocado and many more. I managed to secure a meeting with Ocado on the stand at 
one of the shows.”

With a strong product targeted at the right market, patience and persistence 
will generally pay off. But as is often in business, success can come down to 
good timing, which was the case for Guy Blaskey, founder of canine health brand
Pooch & Mutt <http://www.poochandmutt.com/>. Launched in 2008, the products are 
listed with major multiples, including Tesco and Waitrose.

Blaskey says: “We timed our approach to Waitrose and Tesco for when they were 
preparing for a health push with their food products, reducing added sugar and 
widening their gluten-free range. We contacted them during this time with our 
grain-free health food for dogs range, as it offered them an opportunity to 
expand their vision across their pet range too. They were interested, and 
invited us to send samples, which in turn led to a meeting and a listing. It’s 
all about how relevant research into a retailer’s plans and vision can reveal 
how you can help the buyer rather than vice versa.”



Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 