 There seems to be little doubt that Christmas takes the majority of us by 
storm. People do exist who can work up the zest for present giving in 
midsummer, and will sit sewing or knitting through the most lovely days laying 
up treasures of jumpers, chair-backs, and doilies for the holiday deluge.
These same prudent creatures are able to foresee in July that baby will be 
ready to blossom into his first party suit by Christmas, when Mary will be ripe 
for the sheer folly of a chiffon scarf, and that uncle's present immaculate 
knitted silk tie will have been privately confiscated.

But it is two weeks to Christmas, and whilst ordering "Christmas" fancies by 
the gross for the Sunday-school treat the ordinary woman is painfully conscious 
that unless both her brains and her fingers function with unusual rapidity this 
same job-lot treatment awaits her nearest and dearest. Almost every woman has 
at least one person on her list to whom she wants to give something made by 
herself, not to speak of the numerous economics she had dreamt of effecting by 
the skilful use of her needle.

"She that is wise her time doth pris", and a little of this precious commodity 
expended at the outset in considering the resources at her disposal will be the 
greatest economy in the end. The salvation of the "lightning" embroiderer lies 
in the striking and unusual effects she so often obtains, so one would suggest 
an attempt after bold and effective types of stitchery on homely and unusual 
materials that are as cheap as they are unexpected.

Greenhouse Shading [This], obtainable from any of the large seed merchants in 
widths ranging from 54 to 72 inches, is an admirable medium for quick 
embroidery. This soft, creamy netting has an open mesh that makes darning and 
needle weaving as simple as darning stockings, and far more interesting. A pair 
of sash curtains, hand-embroidered, is a present of distinction, but within the 
time and skill at the disposal of the amateur. The narrow widths of the shading 
are just right for this type of curtain, and if cheered by applied bands of the 
new glazed chintz and finished with rows of simple tacking stitches in pastel 
shades of matching wools will result in a novel and dainty present.

Roller Towelling Twilled unbleached sheetings and coarse huckabacks are 
effective for runners, mats, and luncheon sets. Common roller towelling is a 
pleasing material, and may be had in narrow widths, and is so suitable and 
durable it repays one to use it as largely as possible.
 