
I come from a fashion background rather than photography. My mother is a big 
dresser and still is – even though she’s 92. And there is a tradition of women 
dressing well in Peru – parents’ day at school was like a fashion show, so I 
was used to seeing all these ladies dressed up.

Dressing is the most basic form of expression for everybody and anybody. I 
don’t think it is superficial. Growing up in a conservative society I would try 
to prove people wrong by wearing flowery suits and stripy terrycloth pants. 
I’ve always had a positive, colourful energy. I remember liking school because 
we had three uniforms. To me that was the height of glamour.

In life there is no absolute. The world just changes and we are surprised 
every day by what comes.

In my positive attitude I have a fatalistic one, too. Sometimes I think that 
everything has been decided for us – our family, environments, religions. We 
can change things by working hard and striving, but sometimes I wonder if the 
way we are is pre-decided by the personality we have been given.

A photographer just takes pictures, shows his portfolio and prays to God that 
he gets some work.Vogue magazine has never asked for my qualifications because 
it’s not about that – it’s making somebody look good and showing the clothes in 
a good light.

The greatest gift my parents gave me is this idea that everybody is the same. 
We get lost in looking at people differently, but we are all equal.

I remember liking school because we had three uniforms. To me that was the 
height of glamour

My most important work has been photographing Princess Diana 
<http://www.mariotestino.com/exhibitions/mario-testino/diana-princess-of-wales/>
. I can’t think of those images without a really strong emotion because of what 
happened to her, and now I’ve met her children and grandchildren. I feel 
England has given me a lot but Diana allowed me to give England a sort of 
present by photographing the Royals.

There’s a saying in England that blood is thicker than water and it’s true. 
Family is everything. Sometimes I fall out with my siblings but I realise they 
are me – part of my persona, and it would be weird to detach from them.

Inefficiency and mistakes make me angry. That’s when I lose my temper, but in 
a minute I forget it.

I have no children but my mother always says to me don’t worry about it – you 
can have children and they forget you. I hope my godchildren won’t. I’m working 
very hard on it.

I don’t really like being photographed myself. I have exactly the same face in 
every picture. It’s a big smile that lifts everything up and hides the jaw that 
has no definition and the neck that is like a rooster’s.

People ask my about my legacy and what I will leave behind and I say to them 
when the party’s over, it’s over. I think a lot about death lately: we are here 
on a short path and oh my God, it goes so quickly.

Fame is for people who set out to be looked at and analysed. We know Mario 
Testino <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/mario-testino> for his work. 
Nobody ever says to me, “Wow, how beautiful you are” – and thank God!

Mario Testino has shot a campaign for the Huawei Watch, featuring Karlie Kloss 
and Sean O’Pry, out now (consumer.huawei.com <http://consumer.huawei.com/en/>)
 