
British Home Stores <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> had a place in 
the heart of the 1970s shopper. It was a practical solution brand that was 
affordable and accessible.

At its heart, it delivered good quality, decent stuff for people on a budget. 
That’s the historical position of British Home Stores. And it always had a 
brilliant lighting department.

But any retail business like British Home Stores needs to constantly reimagine 
itself to connect to today’s consumer. The way we shop today has changed, 
irreversibly. The internet, international competition, the recession; all those 
things have made consumers really think about where they were spending their 
money.

Today, the consumer is absolutely king.

Shoppers on BHS: 'It's the sort of store that you go to with your nan'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-collapse-shoppers-west-end-administration>
If we look back over the history of retailing, and the history of BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs>, our choices were limited. Now, 
though, consumers can shop where they want, when they want – whatever time of 
day they want – and pretty much at whatever budget they want.

To separate yourself from the pack, you have to be the best in practice, 
whatever that means for your particular business. That can be across different 
things: the best fashion, the best product, the best price, the best social 
experience, the most desirable, the most innovative or simply the most wanted 
because you’ve got a brilliant brand.

Sadly, British Home Stores was none of those. 

It was a big chain, so it was in the right towns, in the right places. But 
today that is not as significant.

Through the years, the world has changed in so many different ways; 
international brands coming in, competition firing up, and the internet has 
given people access to and knowledge of what is fashionable and where to buy 
it. There are also social media platforms that can make the small and niche big 
and powerful. There are new kids on the block looking at innovative ways of 
connecting their businesses to consumers. There are young entrepreneurs, who 
are hungry – and creative.

Sadly, British Homes Stores didn’t change.

It sort of smartened itself up a bit and thought that would be enough – and it 
wasn’t.

BHS was a value retailer, it kept the right price, but lately it has just 
looked like the sad relation to Marks & Spencer.

If I had been at British Home Stores I would have looked at today’s market 
place and created a brand that is relevant for today’s shopper.

I would have gone totally after the value market, but made it functional and 
cool.

I would have started with where it was good – the lighting. Then I would have 
extended that to become a modern British lifestyle retailer at a great price.

Look at Tiger, which has come on to our high streets. It has done an 
extraordinary job of taking that basic fundamental market, that was the old 
Woolies, and made it sexy.

Imagine if British Home Stores’ ground floor was like Tiger, its fashion floor 
like Uniqlo or Primark and its home stuff like Ikea. Value with sex appeal all 
under one roof. Then add some small startups that are all young British makers 
or designers.

House them within a market place model and then you start a business with a 
point of view.

So, BHS is not the best value brand in town. It’s not the best homewares brand 
around. It’s not the best fashion at a good price in town. It hasn’t got the 
best brand reputation. It’s not the sexiest and it’s not the most loved.

I don’t think we will miss what it is today. I think we will miss what it was 
at a time when it was relevant. And I think we will miss the fact that it 
wasn’t made relevant. For great businesses like that it is all about the vision.

Lots of brands come back on to the market if they have been failing, and 
reimagined themselves. Just look at Woolworths. What a tragedy it was when it 
went from our high street. But look at what has taken over that gap: the pound 
shops. Woolworths when it started off – everything under one roof for a cent – 
was the first value, brilliant retailer. It let that go and that pound shop 
business is what Woolworths should have been today.

The great thing about great retailing is reimagining your business in new 
landscapes. We have never had such changeable times. British Homes Stores was 
not reimagined, and that is its problem.

Mary Portas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/mary-portas> is founder 
of Portas, a creative communications agency that advises retailers the world 
over
 