 Mr. John Thackeray, a respectable cotton spinner in this town, was indicted 
for having on the 29th March severely flogged with a large birch rod a boy 
between 12 and 13 years of age, named Michael Donovan, who was in his employ.
Mr. Ashworth contended to the jury that Mr Thackeray had been guilty of a 
flagrant breach of the law. He admitted the right of a master reasonably to 
correct his servant, but maintained that the chastisement inflicted on the boy 
was by no means of that moderate nature which the law authorises.

From the testimony for the prosecution, it appeared Mr. Thackeray took the boy 
into his counting house and gave him twenty or thirty stripes with a birch-rod; 
that the boy had been severely beaten, that his flesh was marked with black and 
red stripes to a width of about four inches, and that next morning he was so 
unwell that it was with difficulty he was induced to get out of bed, and go to 
his work.

On cross-examination, the prosecutor admitted various acts of misbehaviour 
towards some of the girls employed in Mr. Thackeray's factory, and it also came 
out, that the beating he had received was not so severe as to break his skin in 
the slightest degree.

Mr. Coltman, for the defendants, insisted that the conduct of Mr. Thackeray 
was clearly according to law, and cited various authorities to prove that a 
master was justified in administering reasonable and proper correction to a 
servant under age. There was no more proper instrument than a rod with which to 
inflict it. It was said, indeed, "he who spares the rod spoils the child".

Witnesses for the defence proved that the boy had knocked them down, struck 
them with a large whip [and] behaved with indecency. One girl had been so hurt 
in the leg that she had to be carried to bed for three weeks.

The Chairman, in summing up, held that the evidence had fully justified the 
conduct of Mr. Thackeray. Verdict of Not Guilty.

(Owing to a pressure of important parliamentary debates and of advertisements 
we are compelled to omit several interesting trials. )

The following prisoners, have received sentence, in addition to those 
mentioned in our last:

Transported Fourteen Years. John Saul, 33, for receiving two pieces of velvet, 
knowing them to be stolen. James Smith, 17, for stealing the same, imprisoned 
two years. Transported Seven Years. Daniel Herbert, 20, for stealing blankets, 
etc.
 