 They’re A Weird Mob  Puberty Blues  Age of Consent In her first major film 
role, Helen Mirren turned heads as the muse of a famous painter in this 1969 
classic from director Michael Powell.  The Daughter  These Final Hours This 
2013 end-of-the-world drama was a commercial disappointment, but it spawned an 
upcoming US TV remake to be written, directed and produced by the film’s 
writer/director Zak Hilditch.  On the Beach  Blackrock  All Men Are Liars  The 
Overlanders  The Sundowners  The Back of Beyond This 1954 documentary about one 
of the world’s longest and most remote mail runs achieved great acclaim 
overseas, including winning the coveted Grand Prix Assoluto at the Venice Film 
Festival.  Mutiny on the Bounty  Welcome to Woop Woop Savaged by critics at the 
time of its release, this wacky 1997 comedy from Stephan Elliott - the director 
of Priscilla: Queen of the Desert - went on to become a cult classic.  
Priscilla: Queen of the Desert  Muriel’s Wedding  Red Dog  Road Games For this 
1981 horror-thriller, director Richard Franklin (a protégé of Alfred Hitchcock) 
imported two American stars: Jamie Lee Curtis and Stacy Keach.  Fair Game  Long 
Weekend  Dead Calm  The Killing of Angel Street  Newsfront  Heatwave Directed 
by Phillip Noyce, 1982’s Heatwave was one of two films released around the same 
time to draw on the real-life story of publisher and activist Juanita Nielsen, 
who was never found after disappearing in the mid-70s under suspicious 
circumstances (the other was The Killing of Angel Street).  The Year of Living 
Dangerously  Wake in Fright  Sunday Too Far Away This fair dinkum story of 
hard-drinkin’ sheep shearers is regarded as one of the seminal films of Jack 
Thompson, and was selected to screen at the 1975 Cannes Film Festival.  The 
Water Diviner  The Man From Snowy River  The Man From Snowy River  The Water 
Diviner  Australia Baz Luhrmann’s epic 2008 melodrama is one of the most 
expensive Australian films ever made, with a production budget of around 
US$130m.  The Silver Brumby  Goldstone  Dead Heart  Babe: Pig in the City  
Mystery RoadDirector Ivan Sen’s outback crime film, starring Aaron Pedersen as 
Detective Jay Swan, spawned a sequel: 2016’s Goldstone.  Bungala Boys  Bra Boys 
 The Coolangatta GoldIn a case of life imitating art, this 1984 sports film led 
to the creation of the real-life iron man race, The Coolangatta Gold.  The Four 
Minute Mile  Crocodile Dundee  Walkabout This drama from 1971 was among the 
first films of the Australian New Wave. It was directed by British filmmaker 
Nicolas Roeg.  Picnic at Hanging Rock  Mad Dog Morgan  You got…  Challenge your 
friends Submit answers  