
Theresa May is a politician known for keeping her cards close to her chest and 
her appearance on Sunday’s episode ofDesert Island Discs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/desert-island-discs> proved that 
getting a glimpse behind her politician’s facade is no easy feat.

Indeed, pinning down May, the longest-serving home secretary in 50 years, on 
the specifics of anything from the part of her job she finds most challenging 
(“at any particular time a particular aspect of the work can have a different 
focus”) to whether she would ever consider running for prime minister, proved a 
challenging task for the host,Kirsty Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/kirsty-young>. Young went as far as to note 
that May was blessed with the slippery politician’s gift of being “very good at 
avoiding direct questions”.

Her music choices, ranging from two hymns and Abba’s Dancing Queen to the 
obligatory Mozart selection, proved as conservative as her political leanings 
and, with nothing from after 1976, May made no attempt to emulate either David 
Cameron’s contemporary selections of The Killers and Radiohead or even Ed 
Miliband’s penchant for A-ha.

It was an interview that provided only rare glimpses into May’s life outside 
of Westminster, from evenings spent dancing to the Jersey Boys in the local 
village hall with friends and her husband-of-35-years Philip, whom she met at 
an Oxford University Conservative Association disco, to the single shop where 
she buys most of her notably fashion-conscious outfits (and who call her up 
specially when they got “something nice in”). Her love for fashion was also 
made very evident in her choice of a lifetime subscription to Vogue as her 
desert island luxury item.

What did emerge was the picture of May as a studious only child, the daughter 
of an Anglican vicar who spent most of her childhood reading and stuffed 
envelopes for the local Conservative Association from the age of 12. Perhaps 
unsurprisingly, May, by her own admission, was not a rebellious child and the 
only outrageous element of her life growing up in the 70s appears to have been 
her wardrobe choices: “Flared trousers and … a yellow blouse that had huge 
voluminous sleeves”.

Asked by Young if she was a conscientious student, May said: “I’m afraid so, 
yes. I enjoyed reading, I did my homework, I was that sort of schoolgirl.” She 
added: “At no stage did I take issue with the church ... I didn’t feel the need 
to kick the traces.”

Her pragmatic and no-nonsense approach even seemed to extend to her own 
health. Discussing her own recent diagnosis of type 1 diabetes without an 
element of self-pity, May told Young that she handled the disease as she did 
with most things in life: “I just get on and deal with it, get on and do the 
job. I’m on an insulin regime so I’m injecting insulin four times a day … You 
just have to get into a routine.”

It seems to be in the kitchen where the wilder, more spontaneous side of May 
(who confessed to owning more than 100 cookery books) really emerges. The home 
secretary deemed Delia too precise and conservative for her culinary tastes, 
preferring the Mediterranean palette of Yotam Ottolenghi and the “throw in a 
bunch of this and a handful of that” style of Jamie Oliver.

As a leading female politician and the favourite by many within the 
Conservative party to be Cameron’s successor, the comparisons with Margaret 
Thatcher are almost unavoidable for May and Young made a direct reference to 
the Iron Lady in the first minute of the interview. May expertly refused to be 
drawn into any speculation. “My view is very simple,” she said. “David Cameron 
is a first-class leader of the party and a first-class prime minister and I 
hope he’s going to be doing that for a very long time.”

However, she was also clear that whatever she decided to do, May would not 
make herself any more “clubbable” nor join the old boys’ network to get there. 
“I’m very clear that women in politics, in business, in whatever field they are 
in, should be able to do the jobs as themselves and not feel they’ve got to 
walk like a man,” she told Young.
 