
Moroccans claim you can identify someone as a true Marrakech local if they own 
a bicycle. The streets of this north African city were once full of ardent 
cyclists, but in recent decades they’ve been overtaken by scooters and cars 
that swarm the city’s congested roads.

Now, French bike company Smoove <http://www.smoove.fr/>, is trying to revive 
Marrakech’s biking culture — and boost sustainable transport — by launching 
Africa’s first fully functioning bike share scheme in the city. The launch 
coincided with the start of the COP22 climate conference in the city.


“We have made sustainability a part of our constitution,” says Hakima El 
Haité, COP22 host and delegate minister of the environment for the Moroccan 
government, which is supporting the scheme. “So now we are implementing.” Along 
with Marrakech’s new fleet ofelectric buses 
<http://industries.ma/en/industrie/environnement/agriculture-le-maroc-premier-fournisseur-de-lue-2.html>
 that were rolled out in July, the bike share is part of the wider scheme to 
implement green transport in Moroccan cities, she says.

Smoove, which has also launched bike shares in Helsinki, Chicago, Moscow, and 
Vancouver, expanded to Marrakech after winning a tender from theUnited Nations 
Industrial Development Organisation <http://www.unido.org/> to start the 
project. Now its 300 bicycles—calledMedina bikes <https://medinabike.ma/> after 
the city’s ancient centre — will transport cyclists between 10 hubs, stationed 
at sites across the city like the iconic Koutoubia mosque, and the Jardin 
Majorelle. “This is providing a modern way of using bicycles again,” says 
Laurent Mercat, Smoove’s CEO, who started the company in 2008.

They’re working with a local organisation called Estates Vision to maintain 
the scheme during its five-year contract, and hope the project will win the 
support of locals due to Marrakech’s history of cycling. “Forty years ago, 
there were a lot of people, especially women, cycling in the medina. We have 
some nice black and white photographs where you see that,” says Damien Vander 
Heyden, Smoove’s business development manager. But, he says, “that has 
disappeared because traffic makes it impossible to cycle safely in some parts 
of Marrakech.”

For the new bike share to survive this altered environment, the city’s cycling 
infrastructure needs some improvement — like the provision of defined cycle 
lanes on its frequently chaotic roads, Vander Heyden says. “I think it will 
work, but only if other public organisations help us create the conditions for 
this. It’s not easy to cycle in Marrakech,” he concedes.

Another challenge is making the bicycles accessible to lower-income locals. 
Smoove is working to provide different payment options, like cash as well as 
the credit cards and smartphone apps typically used for bike share schemes, 
says Mercat. “We don’t want only the wealthy with credit cards to be able to 
access it,” says Mercat.

But will the price tag — 500 dirhams (£109) for an annual pass, 150 for a 
week, and 50 for a day — nevertheless deter local users? At roughly €40-45, the 
yearly fee is more expensive than the bike share system in France, Mercat says, 
because it’s not buoyed by government subsidies. Still, Smoove sees the price 
as a helpful deterrent against potential vandalism and theft, Vander Heyden 
explains. And the interest shown by passers-by — who were witnessed routinely 
stopping to try out the bikes, take selfies, and pick up pamphlets — suggests 
the cost is not too severe a deterrent.

Nezha Alami, a consultant who was at one of the bike stations near the 
conference venue, said she hoped the scheme would come to her home city of 
Casablanca inMorocco <https://www.theguardian.com/world/morocco>. “I use [bike 
shares] in Paris, Lisbon, Barcelona; it’s very practical,” she says. 
“Casablanca needs this kind of project. It’s a big city, and it’s difficult to 
travel by car. I think it would have big success there.” Indeed, the Marrakech 
scheme is the first step for expansion into more Moroccan cities, as well as 
other African locations, where bike shares could curb urban congestion.

Globally, bike share schemes have a patchy record, peppered with theft 
problems, financial insecurity, and failed uptake. And in the African context 
the challenges will be unique. In Kenya for instance, where the University of 
Nairobi recently launched a small-scalepilot bike share on its campus 
<http://afkinsider.com/130925/kenyan-university-starts-bike-sharing-scheme-to-beat-traffic-jam-in-capital/>
, researchers noted that cycling is associated with poverty — which could be a 
barrier to adoption.

But so far, Cote d’Ivoire, South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, and Kenya have already expressed 
interest in Smoove, says Mercat, who will be meeting with African 
representatives during COP22 to talk about bringing the bikes to their cities. 
If the five-year trial works in Marrakech, it could be the launching pad for 
tailor-made schemes cycling across the continent.

“We hope that many African cities will start asking, could biking be adapted 
to Africa?” he says.

 * Emma Bryce reported from Morocco on a fellowship from the International 
Reporting Project <http://www.internationalreportingproject.org> (IRP)
 