
Shigero Miyamoto's imagination has probably put an indelible stamp on your 
mind, and his creations are certainly familiar to hundreds of millions of 
children. His string of best-sellers - Donkey Kong, the SuperMario 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mario> Brothers series, and the Zelda 
role-playing games - have made him the Stephen Spielberg of video games. He's 
not a cult figure, and his games won't change your life, but he knows how to 
engage a mass audience. Indeed, he has become a superstar in Japan, no mean 
feat for a family man who works for a family company, producing family games.

Meeting him in a backroom at ECTS, the European Computer Trade Show held in 
London last week, it was all too easy to associate the man with characters like 
Mario, the little plumber, and Link, the almost androgynous lad in the Zelda 
adventures. Miyamoto is not a power-dresser, and does not dominate with the 
force of his personality. He is, instead, sensitive, soft-spoken, and 
sympathetic to point where you almost want to give him a cuddle.

He's clearly a genius, but like Mario and Link, perhaps one who succeeds by 
native wit and repeated trying.

This is one of the secrets of his success: anyone can play Miyamoto's games, 
though only the persistent few will ever get to the end. And since he speaks 
little English - our interview is conducted through a translator - it's his 
good fortune that video games largely transcend both language and cultural 
barriers. Indeed, few if any players will think of Super Mario Brothers as a 
"Japanese" product: Japan's games clearly travel better than its films and pop.

Miyamoto did not set out to conquer the world of video gaming. He studied 
industrial design at Kanazawa Municipal Art & Craft College in Japan, where he 
designed artwork for playing cards, drew cartoons, and played his guitar in 
coffee bars. Because Nintendo was a leading producer of cards, it was an 
obvious choice: he joined the firm in 1977, when he was 24. But Nintendo was 
branching out into video games, and Miyamoto found himself also designing 
casings for arcade machines and drawing characters for the games. "The first 
video game for which I was assigned sole responsibility was Donkey Kong, which 
made its debut in June of 1981," he says. "Gradually, I was given the 
opportunity to work more on the planning side, and that's how I became the game 
software director."

Donkey Kong was the first video game to feature Mario, and it was Nintendo's 
first smash hit. Donkey Kong and Super Mario Brothers were also the nearest he 
got to perfection, which, Miyamoto says, "for me is the game where I can take 
care of every minute detail. Nowadays there are so many people involved it's 
becoming very tough to make perfect games in that sense".

Today's games are, like movies, produced by large teams, and Miyamoto is 
trying to be more of a producer, letting younger people do more of the game 
design. "But sometimes it's necessary for me to be involved deeply. When I can 
have a relaxed time, it means the game development work is going very well, and 
when I am having a very busy time, it means the development team is just not 
doing a fine job," he laughs.

Things will change again with Nintendo's next-generation machine, codenamed 
Dolphin. This will be the first console where Nintendo has abandoned its 
cartridge-based system - where games must be very tightly coded to fit into 
expensive chips - for a DVD video disk, with gigabytes of storage for graphics 
and sound.

"I don't think DVD alone can change gameplay," says Miyamoto. "Everybody knows 
what video game graphics and sound will be like in a few years, and everybody 
already knows that advances in the technology alone shall not change gameplay 
any more. The things that change gameplay are solely unique and new ideas. 
Because these are actually simple ideas, they are easily copied, but because 
they are fascinating and new, everybody is tempted to imitate. But what is 
important here is the creativity in the gameplay rather than increased 
performance in the games console."

Gaming used to be a solitary activity and now it is becoming much more social 
with multi-player and internet gaming. Hasn't that changed the industry 
fundamentally?

"I think play itself, or the definition of play itself, has been changing," he 
says. "When we started, TV gaming was a new genre of entertainment. Now people 
are talking about what kind of entertainment we can produce by utilising TV 
gaming, which is quite a big difference from 20 years ago."

Pokémon, based on "pocket monsters", is an example. "Pokémon you can play - 
yes, Pokémon is a video game! - and Pokémon is also providing some new form of 
entertainment where people can train and trade Pokémon characters. Outside the 
gameplay is the so-called Pokémon world" with its trading cards, cartoons, toys 
and so on. "Before, we were discussing 'What kind of games shall we do? What 
kind of games shall we make?' But now we are discussing what we can do with 
games."

Pokémon has been a huge success but, like Nintendo's Famicom (family 
computer), it appeals to the very young. Those who grew up with games like 
Super Mario now have different interests. Can Nintendo cater for the whole 
range of ages and interests of gamers today?

"I'd like to wait for more years to pass to answer that question," he replies. 
"It is true that most Nintendo games have been played and appreciated by 
children. It means we are generating the newcomers to the industry all the 
time. You may be right that many of the people, when grown up, will graduate 
from Nintendo's platforms, and of course we have been making efforts so that it 
will not happen. But 20 years ago when I was making Donkey Kong and Super Mario 
Brothers, I never intended to make games for small children. I was obviously 
intending to target age groups of more than 10, more than 20 or so. It was just 
the result that more and more children were appreciating these games, thus the 
large demographic group for these games is occupied by young players.

"Nintendo had its own exhibition in Tokyo last week, and we were surprised to 
see so many people coming to the show, and we were surprised to see that so 
many of the people were families. People who played Nintendo games as children, 
now they are not only playing games as adults but they are playing as parents, 
together with their children. That's very important.

"There were days when people were discussing when the video game industry 
would be over, saying 'The game industry cannot survive!' " he exclaims. 
"Fortunately they are not talking about the last days of video games any more, 
and many people are talking about how video games will survive forever."
 