
The Australian Broadcasting Corporation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/australian-broadcasting-corporation> is 
going through one of its periodic meltdowns, brought about because a new 
managing director has come down from the moon and set about doing things her 
way.


Michelle Guthrie has arrived at the public broadcaster via Google and the 
House of Murdoch, with a mission to trim the budget and to keep pace with 
technology and its impact on viewing patterns.

This is not a new mission, because squeezing services into ever tighter 
financial constraints and adapting to new realities has been going on ever 
since public broadcasting got under way.

In the case of Australia that was in 1932, in Britain 1927, Canada 1936 and 
New Zealand 1975.

All the major public broadcasters are engaged in a constant process of 
creating, squeezing, chopping, slicing and reinventing. Nor is the tireless 
criticism from commercial interests and governments – and from within – 
anything new.

Jaws drop at ABC as Michelle Guthrie defends Radio National cuts | Weekly Beast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/09/jaws-drop-at-abc-as-michelle-guthrie-defends-radio-national-cuts>
Having said that, each managing director spreads his or her own brand of 
unhappiness in his or her own way. Guthrie’s appearance at the end-of-year Four 
Corners postmortem is a case in point. According to Guardian Australia’s Amanda 
Meade she told the ace reporters, researchers and producers who put together 
Australia’s premier investigative current affairs TV show that she would like 
to see in the lineupmore stories about successful business people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/09/she-doesnt-get-what-we-do-has-abc-boss-michelle-guthrie-got-the-insiders-on-her-side?INTCMP=sfl>
.

When it came to the program about children on Nauru speaking about their dire 
existence as captives of Australia’s offshore refugee policy, the managing 
director thought Four Corners should have found some happy children to 
interview.

In one breath she showed us she hadn’t a clue about journalism – yet 
journalism is a large chunk of the ABC’s core business. At least previous 
notable managing directors have had to varying degrees a foot in the journalist 
camp – Mark Scott, David Hill, Brian Johns – and consequently they had a grasp 
on how and what the news apparatus should be doing.

There are other dispiriting signs including the dismemberment of Catalyst, an 
appalling decision to strip from the schedule a weekly science program, and the 
ritualistic plunder of Radio National.

RN has been under assault for so long that it is constantly on a war footing. 
With an annual budget of $23m, the network costs peanuts while audience surveys 
show that its specialist programs are one of the factors that generate audience 
loyalty for the ABC. Radio National is where you find much of the creative 
brains of the ABC, so to tinker and mess with the formula shows management is 
not without skill when it comes to shooting itself in the neck.

Guthrie goes into defensive mode when pressed about the RN cuts, asking staff 
at a meeting in Perth, with raised voice, how they “justify their massive 
budget when their reach is so low”.

Along with much of her management, it’s evident she doesn’t “get” Radio 
National, where the mission is for more light and fluffy “flow” programming, 
while resources for documentaries, features and specialist broadcasts are 
diluted. At this rate what was once a bright shining jewel in an ocean of 
mediocrity will look and sound more and more like the mainstream sludge 
available on much of the ABC’s metropolitan radio stations, not to mention the 
drivel on the commercials.

Never mind the quality, feel the width. It’s not hard to sense that quite 
early in her reign Guthrie is on a slippery slope. Heartwarming support from 
Emma Alberici and Patricia Karvelas doesn’t amount to a hill of beans if a 
sizeable proportion of staff are offside. We’ve seen it before with the 
Jonathan Shier experiment.

There are dark mutterings that ultimately, and quite soon, the RN network will 
transmogrify into a bunch of podcasts available online and on mobile devices. A 
website that ate a radio station.

If Guthrie’s Google genes get the better of her she might entirely ditch the 
broadcasting frequencies and airwaves and turn the ABC holos-bolus into a 
website where customers can click away merrily for their radio or TV 
entertainment, sprinkled with advertisements for cars and credit cards.

The BBC saved £30m by moving BBC3 online, so imagine the savings if all the 
public broadcasting system was streamed, courtesy of one great thumping iView.

The one thing Guthrie has not mentioned as part of her reform agenda is ABC 
“news”, and herecriticism by the former PM Paul Keating 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/the-abc-is-letting-australia-down-paul-keating-slams-the-national-broadcaster-20161125-gsxmqv.html>
 is spot on, with his complaint about stories that go nowhere.

“In the case of the ABC news, if you want to watch a good news service, watch 
SBS news, which tells you what’s happening in Iraq, what’s happening in the US 
election, what’s happening with Donald Trump.

“What you get on the ABC is: ‘A truck has just overturned on the Pacific 
Highway.’ It’s like in the 1970s. The ABC is letting Australia down in terms of 
news presentation.”

It’s baffling why an organisation stuffed to the brim with journalists should 
have such a dimwitted view of news. Maybe it’s the fault of managers many of 
who, in my former experience as an ABC presenter (Late Night Live, Radio 
National Breakfast and Media Watch), only have a slender grasp of what they are 
doing.

These serried ranks of bureaucrats on fat salaries with undistinguished 
achievements have floated into positions where they could tirelessly tinker and 
interfere with talented people trying to make programs.

This is not a universal complaint, but there are enough managers who would be 
better suited as footpath spruikers outside strip clubs than running important 
parts of a public broadcaster.

Michelle Guthrie appoints Murdoch consultant to restructure ABC
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/06/michelle-guthrie-murdoch-consultant-restructure-abc-jim-rudder>
None of this is unique to Australia. The BBC and Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation have been pressured by funding cuts and accusations by 
conservatives of liberal bias, while the NZBC is a shell of what it is supposed 
to be.

In the end Guthrie and her agents may have made an unfortunate contribution to 
the dumbing down process but the structural changes are being driven by forces 
outside their control.

 While the noble mission for the great old public broadcasters was to provide 
a service that commercial operators didn’t or couldn’t, today they are expected 
to be sufficiently “popular” to justify their taxpayer funding.

Technology is making the future case for stand alone public broadcasters more 
difficult, but when you consider what else is on offer and the quality of the 
people making the complaints, then its clear we’d be a lot poorer without this 
crucial Australian institution, even with its repeats of the repeats.
 