
Rodney Sharpe, 64, and Roger Lilley, 66, might seem about 50 years too old to 
be paperboys, but they are representative of more and more people in their 60s 
taking part-time, casual or self-employed work.

Older people <https://www.theguardian.com/society/older-people> providing 
labour for companies such as Hermes, the parcel delivery giant, or Uber, the 
taxi app company, use the flexibility of self-employment, or in the case of 
other employers, casual worker status, to supplement meagre pensions or simply 
to keep occupied. Hard-working and experienced with full careers in the 
workforce behind them, they can make effective recruits. But there is also 
evidence some are bearing the brunt of the downsides to the UK’s expanding 
low-pay economy.

Nine out of 10 newly created jobs in the three months to the end of May were 
self-employed, according to official figures. There are now 4.76 million 
self-employed workers, but almost half are low paid, according to the Social 
Market Foundation thinktank. Median earnings from self-employed jobs fell in 
real terms from £14,535 in 2008 to £10,800 in 2014, almost twice the drop 
suffered by employees.

But older people are piling in. Between 2008 and 2015, the number of over-65s 
in self-employment doubled.Sharpe and Lilley are classed as “workers” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/25/midcounties-co-op-pays-out-18000-workers-minimum-wage-law>
 but faced the precariousness and lack of protections of the self-employed. 
They received no paid holiday or sick pay and could have their work withdrawn 
without notice.

Midcounties Co-op pays £14,000 to worker who earned below minimum wage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/25/midcounties-co-op-pays-out-18000-workers-minimum-wage-law>
Both their cases illustrate the dangers that arise if employers are not 
careful to avoid exploiting the growing willingness of older people to take on 
work in the so-called “gig economy”.

Sharpe is an uncomplaining and softly spoken man who has delivered newspapers 
around Maidenhead, Berkshire, for over two decades. He suffers from diabetes, 
which has caused his lower leg to inflame, and he walks with a stick. He 
doesn’t claim benefits and relied for living expenses on the £80 to £90 a week 
he was earning for delivering daily and Sunday papers on a 21-mile round for 
Midcounties Co-op. Each round would take him about four-and-a-half hours yet 
his payslips, seen by the Guardian, showed he was only taking home about £85 a 
week – well below the minimum wage. This was despite him being something of a 
star worker. When he completed 20 years on the round in 2014, the Midcounties 
Co-op chief executive, Ben Reid, congratulated him in person in the store.

But some of his customers worried about him when they saw him struggling up 
their lanes and through bad weather to bring them their daily papers.

 “I suspected for a while he was being exploited in some way,” said Colin 
Robertson, 91, a retired electrical engineer. “It is very unfortunate that a 
body like the Co-op, which purports to be a wholly ethical organisation, should 
be at the bottom of something like this. Rodney always did his utmost and was 
always absolutely determined to make the delivery.”

Lilley, on the other hand, came to the job after a career as an executive 
search consultant and then running his own businesses. He had put work on hold 
to look after his mother-in-law, who was suffering from dementia.

“She needed 24-hour care but between 5am and 8am she was fast asleep so I 
could nip out and do the work and it did me the world of good,” he said. “It is 
so isolating caring for somebody. It was meeting people, getting out, but above 
everything else putting some money on the table.”

He quickly realised that the terms on which he was working meant he was taking 
home just a couple of pounds a day after he paid his car expenses. So he 
challenged Midcounties Co-op in 2014 and then, when it rejected his claim that 
he was earning less than the national minimum wage, he complained to HM Revenue 
and Customs in 2015. Midcounties Co-op finalised its payouts to him last month.

“I don’t have a problem with them cocking up, but the tooth and claw way they 
resisted this is just indefensible,” he said. “Since I raised this with the 
shop it has been three-and-a-half years and mountains of paperwork.”

Midcounties Co-op has apologised to both men and said it has rectified the 
problems.

“HMRC has agreed a new methodology for calculating the time involved in 
completing delivery rounds and this now forms the basis of the hourly payment 
received by our colleagues,” said Reid. “Our colleagues are also asked to 
confirm if they have any health issues that we may need to take into account to 
enable us to make reasonable adjustments to their rounds and the times 
involved.”
 