
Miles Scotson started his senior professional cycling career by winning one of 
the greatest races in Australian road championships history.


The 22-year-old launched an audacious solo attack inside the last 2km of an 
epic men’s elite road race that caught the other 13 riders in the select lead 
pack at the perfect moment.


He soloed to the Buninyong finish, with race favourite Simon Gerrans finishing 
second and Nathan Haas taking third.


Related: Chris Froome refuses to back Sir Dave Brailsford over drugs questions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/chris-froome-sir-dave-brailsford-team-sky-drugs-questions-jiffy-bag>

There is speculation the nationals could move from Buninyong and Ballarat 
after 11 years and if so, this was a fitting finale.


The enormity of what he had done soon started to sink in for Scotson.


“It’s really weird – I’m going to be racing in the national champion’s jersey 
in Europe this year,” he said “It’s going to be a big jump ... it’s time to 
lift my game.”

The BMC team of Richie Porte and Rohan Dennis has signed Scotson and he will 
make his WorldTour debut next week in his Adelaide birthplace at the Tour Down 
Under.


Adding even more lustre to Scotson’s win, he had no team-mates in the race.


Scotson’s talent is undeniable – he was part of the team pursuit squad that 
won last year’s world title, but he missed out on Olympic selection.


He won the under-23 individual time trial bronze medal late last year at the 
world road championships. Scotson also won the Under-23 time trial and road 
race at the 2015 nationals.

His bold move to take out Sunday’s 183.6km race in hot conditions was the 
dramatic final act in a race that had everything.


Luke Durbridge’s race kit was covered in salt after he buried himself for 
Gerrans and Orica-Scott, riding at the front for nearly the whole race.


Brendan Canty made a solo attack and started pumping his fist as he approached 
the finish line – only to realise with horror there was one lap left.


A breakaway group that had nine riders at its peak was whittled down and 
finally caught inside the last 20km. The result was in doubt until Scotson 
played his one card and seized the moment.

Gerrans, who revealed he was sick over Christmas, was disappointed not to win 
his third national title – but paid rich tribute to Scotson.


“It’s disappointing when it’s so close,” he said. “What a great way for him to 
get his professional career started – I’m happy for a young guy to get the win 
there today, he really deserved it.”

Haas likewise tipped his hat to the winner. “Obviously Miles was an 
exceptional winner today - this course has no gifts and it takes no prisoners,” 
he said.

Earlier, Katrin Garfoot led an Orica-Scott quinella, beating team-mate Amanda 
Spratt to win the women’s road race.


Garfoot and Spratt broke clear with about 30km left in the 102km race at 
Buninyong near Ballarat, while Lucy Kennedy finished third.

Garfoot also successfully defended her time trial championship three days ago.
 