 Milton Friedman, who has died aged 94, was one of the greatest economists of 
all time. He may come to be included in the same category of pre-eminent 
figures as Adam Smith, Ricardo, Marx and John Maynard Keynes. When he began his 
main work, while professor at Chicago University in the 1950s and 60s, 
Keynesian orthodoxy dominated almost all academic macro-economics, and much of 
public policy in this field. By the time Friedman's project was mostly 
complete, in the 1970s and 80s - with a Nobel prize in 1976 - that orthodoxy 
had been shattered.
His preferred alternative, that monetary policy should be subject to rules 
designed to achieve price stability, had largely replaced the earlier Keynesian 
proposals, which used demand management, mostly in the form of fiscal policy, 
to aim for that level of unemployment which would offer the best trade-off 
between inflation and unemployment. Friedman was one of the first to show that 
that trade-off was illusory.

It had been a hopeful illusion. For a brief period in the 1950s and 60s, it 
had seemed that the use of Keynesian theory, operating in the context of 
macro-economic models that had sprung up under the influence of national income 
statistics and computer technology, would allow economists to guide politicians 
to steer the economy optimally via discretionary intervention. Friedman 
instinctively took the view that government intervention was more likely to do 
harm than good, and that the most government could do was to set an appropriate 
structure of rules - especially the rule of law - and leave the rest to 
competition and the freedom of the individual to choose in a system of free 
markets.

Ironically, one of his earlier studies, and perhaps his finest econometric 
contribution, removed a perceived threat to the maintenance of Keynesian full 
employment. In Keynes' model, saving was a positive function of income, and, 
from both cross-section studies and casual empiricism, it was obvious that the 
savings ratio rose as income increased. But this suggested that as national 
incomes rose, the savings ratio would rise inexorably, making it more and more 
difficult to generate matching investment, and leading eventually to potential 
stagnation. But the long-term time series data of the savings ratio showed no 
such tendency to rise.

Friedman reconciled these facts in A Theory of the Consumption Function 
(1957), by showing that income distribution was much influenced by temporary 
fluctuations in income, for example whether one was at the highest level of 
earnings in one's life cycle, or alternatively retired. People would naturally 
save a large proportion of temporary high incomes to be consumed later, when 
income might be temporarily low. The distinction between temporary and 
permanent economic conditions has since remained one of the main concepts in 
macroeconomics.

Friedman was not, however, an outstanding technician; he was relatively 
sparing in his use of mathematical models, and towards the end his use of 
econometrics ran into criticism. Nor was he primarily a historian. Yet, with 
his colleague Anna Schwartz, he wrote the finest ever book on economic history, 
A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960, published in 1963. Schwartz 
was a stickler for historical detail, which, combined with Friedman's vision of 
a unifying structure for tracing the effects of monetary developments on the 
economy, led to an entertaining work that changed our view of how the 
macroeconomy worked.

Before it, most people had ascribed the great depression to the 1929 Wall 
Street crash and/or to real factors such as a sharp drop in consumption. 
Friedman and Schwartz made a convincing case that it was inept monetary 
management by the Federal Reserve Bank that was the main culprit. Similarly, 
other major economic shocks, such as the US crises of 1893, 1907 and 1919, and 
the post-second world war inflation, were primarily monetary in causation and 
character.

But his greatest achievement was to show why government intervention to try to 
set output and employment at a higher level than would happen naturally was 
ultimately self-defeating and damaging. In the macro-models of the time, 
Keynesian demand-side equations had been supplemented by a supply-side 
equation, the Phillips curve, linking nominal wage and price increases to the 
level of unemployment (the lower unemployment, the higher inflation); and 
economists and politicians sought to set the unemployment level so as to 
achieve their preferred combination of output and inflation.

In his 1967 presidential address to the American Economic Association, on The 
Role of Monetary Policy, Friedman noted that economic agents, wage earners, 
firm managers, etc, were primarily concerned with real incomes and real 
profits, not just nominal outcomes. Because contracts are set in nominal terms, 
they would agree to a nominal wage, or set a price, which conditional on their 
expectations of future inflation, would get them their desired real outcome. So 
the short-run Phillips curve was conditioned on agents' inflationary 
expectations. If the government then used this (short-run) relationship to try 
to achieve a lower unemployment/higher inflation outcome than private sector 
agents had been expecting as the norm, then, after some lag, expectations would 
adjust upwards. So long as governments insisted on keeping unemployment below 
its natural rate, actual and expected inflation would chase each other upwards 
in an unending vicious spiral.

This was, indeed, what seemed to be happening in the 1970s, the decade which 
brought the optimism about controlled economic expansion to a shuddering halt. 
It was in this period that "monetarism" as an approach - and Friedman as its 
leading exponent - were at their most influential. Country after country, 
including a somewhat reluctant British Labour government in 1976, embraced 
monetary targets and renounced the belief in an ability to spend their way out 
of difficulty.

Whereas Friedman had done a devastating job in dismantling what became known 
as "naive Keynesianism" (in contrast to the various strands of new Keynesianism 
that reformulated the analysis), his positive proposals have been less 
successful. He had earlier reinterpreted the demand for money as an exercise in 
portfolio choice, for example in his paper, The Quantity Theory of Money - A 
Restatement, in the book of essays Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money 
(1956), which he edited; though this was not, in reality, that much of a break 
with Keynesian ideas. Anyhow, Friedman believed that the demand for money would 
be a predictable function of a few variables, and that that functional 
relationship would remain stable over time; indeed, early econometric work in 
the 1960s suggested that this might be so - though Friedman's empirical 
studies, for example his article on The Demand for Money, in the Journal of 
Political Economy (1959), again ran into econometric criticism.

On that basis, Friedman argued, in A Program for Monetary Stability (1960), 
that the rate of growth of money should be kept constant. Even if there were 
some unpredictable fluctuations in the demand for money, the resulting 
disturbances to nominal incomes would be much less, he believed, than would 
result from attempts at discretionary management by central banks. As a natural 
liberal, Friedman tended to doubt whether the powerful could be trusted to 
increase the welfare of the people.

Perhaps more importantly, he demonstrated in The Effects of a Full-Employment 
Policy on Economic Stability: A Formal Analysis, in Essays in Positive 
Economics (1953), that, in order to enhance welfare, the authorities had to be 
able to predict events with significantly more than 50% accuracy. Given the 
difficulty of forecasting, and the "long and variable lags", as described in 
The Lag in Effect of Monetary Policy, in The Optimum Quantity of Money and 
Other Essays (1969), between adjusting monetary instruments and their effect on 
the economy, the likelihood that intervention, even if undertaken with the 
purest motives, would prove beneficial was slim.

In his advocacy for this regime change - to bring about a shift from 
discretion to a rule for monetary growth - he was conspicuously unsuccessful. 
Demand for money functions, which had previously seemed stable, commonly broke 
down once used as an intermediate monetary target. Alternative definitions of 
the money stock often pointed in different directions, causing "broad-money" 
monetarists to argue with "narrow-money" monetarists. While central bankers in 
the 1970s and early 80s termed themselves "pragmatic monetarists", they 
remained determined to conduct monetary policy by discretionary variations in 
short-term interest rates.

Friedman refused to get caught up in a discussion of which monetary aggregate 
was in some normative sense the best one to use. His methodology, outlined in 
The Methodology of Positive Economics in Essays in Positive Economics (1953), 
was that you should use the method that works best, that best explains and 
predicts final outcomes in terms of the most parsimonious set of explanatory 
variables.

This approach also was controversial. But it was a dangerous exercise to argue 
a point with him. He was a brilliant and incisive debater, and his skill in 
argument was phenomenal. Along with George Stigler, he led intellectual 
discussion among economists at Chicago. It was, perhaps, in his application of 
logic to macroeconomic analysis that he was supreme. His command over detailed 
fact was, however, occasionally less sure than his analytical ability, as 
evidenced, for example, by his claim that Japan was an example of a liberal 
economy. He was also a naturally kind and approachable person, of small stature 
- a bit like a genial gnome - and he was prepared to change his mind when 
convinced.

He believed that government intervention did harm, and that the best economy 
would be a liberal free-market economy, as expressed vibrantly in Capitalism 
and Freedom (1962). In his more political writing on this topic, he was much 
helped by his wife, Rose, who wrote both Free to Choose (1980) and Tyranny of 
the Status Quo (1984) with him. They had a long and devoted marriage; they 
supported each other and took great joy in being together.

Friedman was born in Brooklyn. Although his name will always be connected with 
Chicago, he gained his BA at Rutgers University, New Jersey, in 1932 and his 
PhD from Columbia University, New York, in 1946, though he did receive an MA at 
Chicago in 1933. Between 1933 and 1941 he worked on research at the US national 
resources committee and the national bureau of economic research. During the 
second world war, he worked first for the treasury and then for the division of 
war research at Columbia. But it was at Chicago, where he returned as professor 
of economics in 1948 and stayed till 1983, that he became an outstanding figure.

He found in the economics department a congenial atmosphere, with a tradition 
of a preference for rules over discretion, and a liberal distrust for 
government intervention. Henry Simons and Lloyd Mints directly, and Frank 
Knight and Jacob Viner at one remove, had continued to base their 
macro-monetary analysis on the quantity theory of money, in contrast to the 
IS/LM Keynes/Hicks model. While at Chicago, he found and encouraged a 
pre-eminent group of colleagues, of whom perhaps Stigler was the other greatest 
star, with more Chicago economists receiving Nobel prizes than from any other 
centre.

After retiring from Chicago, Friedman moved to the Hoover Institute in 
California, where he continued to work, travel and teach almost up to his 
death, though he always took a summer break in his beloved holiday home in New 
England. He is survived by Rose, and his son and daughter.

· Milton Friedman, economist, born July 31 1912; died November 16 2006
 