 The modesty of the gentlemen, mostly unknown, who propose to supply London 
with railways which nobody wants, is something very remarkable, and approaches 
almost to the sublime.
They have scheduled one fourth of the entire area of the lands in the city, 
within which they seek powers to construct some twenty miles of railway. One 
scheme takes possession of the London Monument, another of Temple Bar, and a 
third of the Fleet sewer.

Many of the city halls are in the list of the doomed buildings. The whole of 
the schemes carefully avoid the City churches, which are empty; though they do 
not hesitate to run through the graveyards, which are full. Not less than three 
of the schemes propose to take possession of that great estate of the dead, St. 
Pancras burial-ground.

One takes possession of the Admiralty; while three, the most modest of all, 
propose to tunnel under the very Houses of Parliament themselves on their way 
to the Thames embankment, along which they propose to run.

They invade no end of public places. The Metropolitan Board of Works say the 
execution of one half of the schemes would render the drainage of London all 
but impossible: "The sewers would be cut off, blocked up, divided, and 
destroyed in all directions".

There are thirteen proposed crossings of Whitechapel Road, thirteen of Euston 
and Marylebone Road, nine of Bishopsgate and so on of the other main 
thoroughfares. It will scarcely be credited that, notwithstanding the gigantic 
character of the schemes, and the enormous amount of capital required to 
execute them, they have no bona fide list of subscribers. They are launched as 
mere speculations, to be carried out or abandoned as circumstances allow.

True, the projectors have made their deposits; but this guarantee for the 
execution of the works is really worthless; for, in event of a scheme 
authorised by Parliament being afterwards given up, there is never any 
difficulty in recovering the deposit from the Accountant General; the only risk 
run by the projectors being that they may have to pay the difference between 
the amount of dividends upon the stock during deposit and the interest at which 
the money is bestowed from the bankers.

But many consider it worth their while to run this risk, to have the chance of 
executing profitable railway contracts. In the meantime the property required 
for the construction of the lines is kept suspended until the necessary notices 
to purchase have been served. The property cannot be let during the interval, 
for persons in business will not incur the risks of being turned out upon short 
notice.
 