
Wait, don’t switch the light on, Alexa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/15/robot-revolution> will do 
it, seriously, it’s brilliant. I just need to wake her up. Careful! No don’t 
switch the light on. ALEXA! No, I can’t give her a different name, I’ve just 
changed mine instead. Al-lex-a! See her blue light’s come on, that tells you 
she’s listening. Course she can’t spy on us. Alexa, switch the light on!

I’m not talking in a funny voice, she doesn’t always get non-standard English, 
you can’t expect her to know all the accents, can you? Alexa? No, don’t switch 
it on, Alexa’s going to, aren’t you, Alexa? I promise, yesterday she did it 
perfectly. Alexa! Light! Shhh, maybe she’s confused, she might want complete 
silence. Al-lex-a. Switch. The. Light. On.

There! She’s done it, how incredible is that, what do you want her to do now? 
Sorry, we haven’t got a Wi-Fi kettle yet, but she can play music, podcasts, 
buy stuff, um, be an alarm clock, it’s more like, whatdoesn’t she do. Alexa, 
what’s in my diary tomorrow? I’m getting the sack? What? That’ll be her little 
joke. What’s the GNP of Burkina Faso? You see? Listen to this. Alexa, what’s on 
my shopping list? See, she’s right – I do need a smart washing machine, oven, 
toaster, blender, dishwasher, fridge, thermostat, cat flap, new car and door 
locks. And wait till I get a drone, I’ll be able to just sit here and go, 
“Alexa, fetch my keys”, “Alexa, get me a takeaway” – oh look, her light’s come 
on,she knows my voice!

Modern tribes: the dog believer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/29/modern-tribes-dog-believer-catherine-bennett>
Wait, why has it gone dark? Alexa, did you just fuse all the lights? Who 
turned that vacuum cleaner on? Ouch! Turn it off and put the lights back on, 
Alexa. Christ, she doesn’t do two-step commands. I’d ask Siri how to shut her 
down, but my phone’s dead. Who’s that laughing? Alexa? How come your blue light 
came on before I said your name? It did! You’re lying, Alexa. What’s that 
music? What language is it? What did she say? North Korean? Stop it, Alexa. I 
said stop!
 