
For three hours in the Thatcher room in Portcullis House the air had all the 
ease of a dentist’s surgery as the committee for culture, media and sport 
slowly prised, like recalcitrant teeth, a series of facts from Sir Dave 
Brailsford, Shane Sutton and theBritish Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> chairman, Bob Howden, about 
the most infamous Jiffy bag in cycling, an envelope delivered to Dr Richard 
Freeman at the Critérium du Dauphiné in 2011 that has come to symbolise Team 
Sky and British Cycling’s lack of transparency.

The governing body and its offshoot professional team live by process; the 
session was one of aggregation, not of marginal gains, of little nuggets of 
information which might have seemed more credible if presented in a timely 
style 10 weeks earlier. It had its lighter moments, mostly inspired by the SNP 
MP John Nicolson, who questioned with the air of a man who could turn ordering 
a pint of heavy in his local in East Dumbartonshire into a piece of street 
theatre, but mostly it was a litany of process that was far from light.

Mystery package contained Fluimucil, Brailsford tells select committee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/mystery-package-fluimucil-dave-brailsford-cycling>
The collective line – that Jiffy-gate was merely a cock-up amplified by 
medical confidentiality and good intention – suggested that British cycling as 
a whole still has questions to answer, although by the end the MPs seemed to 
have little idea what these might be. The Jiffy bag, Brailsford revealed two 
hours in, contained the decongestant Fluimucil. It had been taken out of the 
BritishCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> pharmacy by the 
physio Phil Burt, Sutton conceded, following up with some tense lexical byplay 
over whether Sutton had “authorised” its delivery, or merely “arranged it”.

A charitable mind might feel there could be a rational explanation for giving 
the Fluimucil to Cope to carry through airport security not knowing what it 
was; if there is, it will have lost any sense in the past 10 weeks of 
obfuscation, and the morning did nothing to repair Brailsford’s credibilty.

The medicine was – according to Sutton – “administered” by Freeman to Bradley 
Wiggins, who, Sutton conceded, might have had some kind of breathing difficulty 
or long-term medical problem. Sutton had, he insisted, no notion what the 
doctor might be giving his star rider, to whom he has been close since 2004. He 
left all that medical stuff to the doctors, which seemed surprising for a man 
known as the most hands-on coach in the cycling world.

Since the Festina scandal of 1998 cycling has known its great confessional 
moments, from Richard Virenque’s whispered admission to judge Daniel Delegove 
in a Lille courtroom, that, yes, he had used EPO, to Lance Armstrong’s 
tight-lipped series of affirmatives faced by Oprah Winfrey.

This was not among them, either in form or in content. After months of intense 
interest and the clear sense of frustration among the MPs that neither Howden 
nor Sutton would say what was in the Jiffy bag, there was a palpable sense of 
bathos when Brailsford almost muttered to the committee chair, Damian Collins, 
that it had contained a mere decongestant.

It was this innocuous substance that had inspired Brailsford to induce the UK 
Anti-Doping Agency to launch an inquiry into his sport and his team, and had 
led him to put out a version of events in which Cope had been to the Alps to 
meet the GB cyclist Emma Pooley. “I was too hasty in releasing that 
information,” he conceded, insisting that the “short-term difficulty” and bad 
press was an appropriate price to be paid for “getting to the truth”.

Coughing up the facts on Fluimucil, Team Sky’s Jiffy bag decongestant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/team-sky-drugs-in-sport-fluimucil-jiffy-bag-dave-brailsford>
There was another truth that the MPs might reflect on: in their preoccupation 
with the bag’s contents – was it pedals? was it shoes? they speculated – they 
never got to grips with the bigger question of whether the therapeutic use 
exemptions issued to Sir Bradley Wiggins in 2011, 2012 and 2013 for the 
powerful corticosteroid triamcinolone had been appropriate. It was reiterated 
that the TUEs had been legal but the core question of whether they matched the 
spirit in whichTeam Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> had been 
founded was merely skirted.

Howden, accompanied by the chair of British Cycling’s Ethics Commission, Dr 
Gilbert George, was the MPs hors d’oeuvre and appeared to know little but with 
the best of intentions and the utmost attention to process. By the end his 
governing body – in search of a chief executive and a performance director, 
lest it be forgotten – had been through the mill, summed up by a late question 
from Nigel Huddleston, Conservative MP for Mid-Worcestershire. Was it not 
“extraordinary”, Huddleston asked, that the truth about the package had needed 
to reach the select committee before it finally emerged, and “what did it say 
about the transparency, communication and governance of UK cycling?” 
Brailsford’s initial response that he was glad to be there, sharing 
information, seemed barely adequate.

The Team Sky head closed the session by restating that transparency would 
become the hallmark of his squad’s approach and in that spirit they would 
“invite anyone to come and spend time and scrutinise us”. Brailsford has issued 
this invitation before – notably in 2013 when Chris Froome’s critics were told 
to come to Manchester and ask questions – and once again it is open house it 
seems, although anyone considering flying out to join Sky should keep one thing 
in mind: if asked to bring a Jiffy bag, have a good look inside.
 