 The "Times" of Saturday last printed a letter from Mr. H. G. Wells, the 
author, which managed without attacking the institution of monarchy in this 
country to argue for the formation of republican clubs "which could enrol 
members, organise meetings of sympathy with our fellow-republicans abroad, and 
form the basis of more definitely purposeful activities."
These activities, Mr. Wells hastens to add, need not conflict in any way with 
free loyalty to the "occupant of the throne". The letter is a deft piece of 
writing, and Mr. Wells is known from his books as a very clear, logical, and 
sometimes original thinker. The "Times," less deftly, scolds Mr. Wells for 
writing foolishly, says that it only prints Mr. Wells's letter in order to show 
the absurdity of republican manifestations in this country, and then reels off 
a good school essay on the differences between the monarchy here and in 
Germany, which happily are very substantial.

The argument strikes one as unreal. The fact that the King in Germany is 
Kaiser creates no sort of presumption that Kaiserism ever could be naturalised 
here. What Mr. Wells means is that there may be such a thing as a monarchical 
trade union of which the Kaiser is president, and that it might be useful to 
form a rival trade union of republican clubs.

The power and prestige of the monarchy in England went up in the later years 
of Queen Victoria and in the reign of King Edward and active republicanism, 
which was a real force in the earlier half of the nineteenth century, almost 
disappeared. But we do not believe in the stories of King Edward as a great 
originator in foreign policy, and have always regarded them as dangerous to the 
constitutional position of the Crown.

The foreign affairs of this country cannot be entrusted to any one man whether 
he wears a crown or to any one department without control. Supposing there were 
danger of monarchical institutions being used to work mischief between the 
nations, what would our first remedy be?

Not the formation of republican clubs, and still less the abolition of the 
monarchy but the discovery and punishment of the real culprits. The monarchy in 
this country is incapable of mischief of this kind except by the clear 
dereliction of duty [by] someone responsible to the people. The maxim that the 
King can do no wrong is perfectly sound, provided that Ministers of the Crown, 
who can do wrong, do not shirk their responsibility.

If they [do], they not only do injury to the country, but expose the Crown to 
danger.
 