
Q Three years ago, my daughter and her partner bought a house together. The 
solicitor acting for them sent a letter to each of them explaining the 
difference between owning the house as joint tenants and tenants in common, and 
said they should discuss which type of ownership they wanted. They decided on 
joint tenancy. They also decided they would have wills drawn up so that my 
daughter would leave her share of the house to her nephew, and that her partner 
would leave her share to her nephews.

Three years on, her partner went away for a few days on a course and while 
away she filed with the Land Registry that she wanted it changed from joint 
tenancy to tenants in common. The first my daughter heard about this was when 
she received a registered letter from her partner with the documents in 
duplicate to say the tenancy was changed.

My daughter is upset and it has soured their relationship as she feels this 
should have been discussed. There was no indication that either of them were 
unhappy, and when her partner returned she cheerfully said, “You had my letter 
then”, and could not understand why my daughter was unhappy about this. They 
share everything equally, and my daughter thought they should have talked about 
this before any action was taken.

Can her partner do this? And what recourse can my daughter take regarding this?
JA


A Yes, your daughter’s partner can do what’s called “severing” a joint tenancy 
without your daughter’s agreement as long as she has followed the procedure 
outlined on the government’swebsite 
<https://www.gov.uk/joint-property-ownership/change-from-joint-tenants-to-tenants-in-common>
. And there’s nothing your daughter can do about it as she would need her 
partner’s agreement to revert to joint tenancy.


I agree it was a bit odd of your daughter’s partner not to discuss what she 
was doing, but it may cheer your daughter up to know that it was all for the 
best. As joint tenants, they didn’t own distinct shares in the property and on 
the death of either of them, the whole property would automatically be owned by 
the other irrespective of what it said in a will.

For each of them to be able to leave their share of the property to their 
respective nephews, they need to be tenants in common, where they each own a 
distinct share in the property that can be left to anyone they choose. So what 
they originally wanted to happen can now occur; this wouldn’t have been the 
case if they had remained joint tenants.

 