
Q When my parents died, they left me money which I used to buy my house 
outright, with no mortgage, in November 2015. It is registered at the Land 
Registry in my name only. My partner pays the household bills but I pay for 
food and the council tax.

I am not in full-time employment. Recently my partner asked me to marry him 
and in July this year I did, but now he wants a divorce. Is he entitled to 50% 
of the house?EL

A Not necessarily. How you split your assets – which include everything that 
belongs to either of you, not just things that you own jointly – on divorce 
depends on the financial agreement you come to or if you can’t agree, what a 
court decides is fair.

Given the shortness of your marriage, it may be that a court would think it 
appropriate for you to each walk away from the marriage with what you own in 
your sole names and to split jointly-owned property down the middle.

Currently, the courts generally try not to make orders that require former 
spouses to share “non-matrimonial” property. This means property acquired by 
gift or inheritance or acquired before marriage or civil partnership, and that 
would seem to exclude the house you bought before you got married.

However, the house could have to be shared if it is needed to meet your former 
husband’s financial needs after the split but that wouldn’t necessarily mean 
that he would get a 50% share. When deciding the division of assets, the courts 
take into account how long you’ve been married as well as your ages, ability to 
earn, property and money, living expenses, standard of living, role in the 
marriage and whether there are children involved.

But leaving the decision over how you split your assets to a court – by 
applying for a financial order, which costs £255 – may not get the desired 
result for either you or your former husband. Because the house is in your name 
and because the marriage will have been so short, I strongly recommend that you 
get professional legal help so that you and your ex can come to an agreement 
that you both think is fair.
 