
Nancy Reagan, who has died aged 94, had an extraordinary capacity to sit 
visibly entranced through the hundreds of speeches made by her husband, the 
40th US president (and former actor)Ronald Reagan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2004/jun/07/guardianobituaries.past>. But this 
public display was far different from the admiring conjugality of earlier first 
ladies such as Mamie Eisenhower and Pat Nixon. Behind Nancy’s gaze lay the 
reality of Ronald’s long political career – that it would probably never have 
happened without her influence.

She was born Anne Frances Robbins in New York. After her parents divorced and 
her mother, Edith, an actor, remarried, Nancy took her stepfather’s surname. 
Nancy Davis was a middle-ranking film actor in her 20s when she received her 
initial introduction to Reagan, having already told a friend that he was top of 
her list of Hollywood’s eligible bachelors.

It was at the height of the McCarthyite purges, and Reagan was head of the 
Screen Actors’ Guild. The ostensible reason for the meeting was that Nancy had 
been confused with a leftwing actor of the same name and was afraid of being 
blacklisted for her supposed communist leanings. The chemistry between the two 
emerged at this first encounter, but Reagan, still bruised by his divorce in 
1949 from the actorJane Wyman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2007/sep/11/guardianobituaries.usa>, did not 
propose for a further two years. When the couple married in 1952, the film 
industry was in turmoil and both their careers were under threat.

A US supreme court decision had severely constrained the major studios’ 
business practices, and cinema audiences had slumped by half with the rise of 
television. By 1955, however, Ronald had secured a lucrative television 
contract with General Electric and, as the family finances improved, Nancy 
embarked on a campaign of relentless networking. Central to it was an 
influential magazine publisher,Walter Annenberg 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2002/oct/02/guardianobituaries.haroldjackson>, 
whom she had met through her film connections.

Annenberg was a major Republican party contributor whose generosity was 
eventually rewarded by appointment as President Richard Nixon’s ambassador in 
London. Through his contacts, Nancy had, within a few years, worked her way 
into an influential private charity known as the Colleagues, with membership 
limited to 50 of the most socially prominent wives in Los Angeles. That, in 
turn, brought her in touch with an influential band of Republican businessmen.

They bankrolled Ronald’s political ascent and remained important as his 
unofficial “kitchen cabinet”. Holmes Tuttle was one of America’s most 
successful car dealers, Justin Dart owned a chain of pharmacies, Henry 
Salvatori was an oil prospector (alleged also to run various CIA front 
companies) and Alfred Bloomingdale was the owner of a chain of department 
stores.

The critical moment arrived for Nancy in 1962, when General Electric abruptly 
ended Ronald’s contract because he refused to tone down the political content 
of the speeches he was making on company tours. By then, however, he was much 
in demand by business and rightwing political groups, who offered thousands of 
dollars to hear him espouse an increasingly conservative philosophy.

Nancy’s own political views had been shaped by her stepfather, Loyal Davis, 
described even by his Republican friends as a bigot, given to antisemitic and 
racist outbursts. Though Nancy did not go that far, she was certainly well to 
the right of her husband and undoubtedly achieved a significant shift in his 
stance. During his union days in Hollywood, Ronald had been a Roosevelt 
Democrat. After their marriage, he moved steadily to the right and, when the 
ultra-right Senator Barry Goldwater announced his 1964 presidential bid, Ronald 
became one of his most fervent campaigners. Once Goldwater’s campaign had ended 
in one of the worst Republican defeats in history, Tuttle decided that he and 
his friends must rebuild the party, starting in California. Deeply impressed 
with Ronald’s performance and popularity, they urged him to run against the 
state’s Democratic governor, Pat Brown, whose vigorous eight years in office 
were by then running out of steam. This was when Nancy came into her own.

She masterminded much of her husband’s campaign, including a fund-raising 
drive sponsored by celebrities such as Walt Disney, James Cagney, Robert Taylor 
and Randolph Scott. She was never off the telephone to rich potential backers 
and became notorious for her gimlet-eyed vetting of campaign staff. Ronald 
romped into the governorship in 1967 by a margin of nearly two to one. His 
wife’s obvious influence on political issues soon sparked controversy – and the 
start of Nancy’s repeated feuds with the media.

Refusing to occupy the (admittedly tatty) governor’s mansion, she persuaded 
the kitchen cabinet to buy and furnish a grander alternative, and then arranged 
for their costs to be made tax-deductible. She also continued her tight control 
of staff to the extent thatMichael Deaver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/aug/20/guardianobituaries.usa1>, later 
one of Ronald’s key White House aides, was covertly assigned to a “mommy watch” 
which served to protect staff from her vengeful descent (a role at which he 
became so adept that it endured through the White House years).

When Ronald’s governorship ended, in 1975, and he clawed his way up the party 
ladder, Nancy’s political influence was well entrenched and growing. As Lou 
Cannon commented in his biography of the president: “They made a good political 
team. He was a dreamer, preoccupied with ultimate destinations. She was a 
practical person who worried about what lay around the next bend.”

She had more and more to worry about, starting with an attempted assassination 
by John Hinckley Jr just after Ronald became president in 1981. During her 
Hollywood days, she had dabbled in astrology. After the shooting she became 
almost manic about its influence and seriously disrupted a number of 
international and other political gatherings with arbitrary changes in the 
president’s schedule, made after she had consulted the astrologerJoan Quigley 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/25/us/joan-quigley-astrologer-to-a-first-lady-is-dead-at-87.html>
.

In part this may have been a reaction to the psychological impact of Ronald’s 
wounds, which was much greater than admitted at the time. He, too, was deeply 
superstitious and relied heavily on omens and instinct. By the end of his first 
term, Nancy was worried enough about his condition to try to stop him from 
seeking re-election. She failed, but spent more and more time dealing with the 
growing signs of the mental decline that eventually overtook him.

Its principal public impact came during the Iran-Contra scandal, when a 
low-level White House aide clandestinely organised illegal arms sales to Tehran 
in the hope of getting American hostages released and then diverted the money 
to equally illegal funding of rightwing rebels in Nicaragua. As details of the 
affair emerged, they brought clear evidence that the president had no idea what 
he might have authorised or what his staff had told him.

Nancy realised far earlier than most that he was in serious danger of 
impeachment. She set aside her partisan prejudices to call in the veteran 
Washington lawyer (and one-time Democratic party chairman)Robert Strauss 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/obituaries/robert-s-strauss-texas-lawyer-and-political-insider-dies-at-95/2014/03/19/56d644c4-c5dc-11df-94e1-c5afa35a9e59_story.html>
 in the hope that he could convince Ronald that he was in serious trouble. The 
president would not accept any responsibility and eventually got away with a 
televised apology for the scandal.

Ronald, by then 76 years old and showing it, was about the only American who 
did not think he was culpable. The official inquiry dodged the issue and put 
much of the blame on his chief of staff. In 1989, when Ronald left office, 
Nancy took him back to California, where his increasingly rare public 
appearances revealed growing evidence of his decline.

In 1994 the couple acknowledged that he had Alzheimer’s disease and their 
final 10 years until his death in 2004 passed with him losing every memory of 
his career, and eventually unable to recognise even Nancy.

She is survived by their daughter, Patti, and son, Ron.

Ronald Bergan writes: By far the best role Nancy Reagan ever had was as US 
first lady. However, as Nancy Davis, her acting career was by no means 
ignominious. She appeared in several reasonably good movies and TV shows. 
Unfortunately, the only leading parts she was given by MGM, who had signed her 
to a five-year contract in 1948, were in the studio’s B features, mostly as 
devoted housewives.

Having taken a degree in drama at Smith College in Massachusetts, Davis 
managed to get a role in a touring company production of the play Ramshackle 
Inn, starring ZaSu Pitts, a friend of her family. After the two-month run ended 
in New York in December 1944, she decided to stay on in order to fulfil her 
theatrical ambitions. It took a year of failed auditions, and some modelling 
work, before she landed the role of a Chinese lady-in-waiting to Mary Martin in 
the Broadway musical Lute Song.

Her screen debut came in William Dieterle’s romantic fantasy Portrait of 
Jennie (1948), where she is seen at the end of the movie, with Nancy Olson and
Anne Francis <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/jan/03/anne-francis-obituary>
, standing in awe in front of the eponymous painting. The following year, she 
played the wife of an ambitious paediatrician in The Doctor and The Girl; and 
Barbara Stanwyck’s confidante in East Side, West Side.

Shadow on the Wall (1950) gave Davis her first substantial part, as a 
cool-headed child psychiatrist, trying to get the truth of a murder witnessed 
by a young girl. The title of William Wellman’s The Next Voice You Hear … 
(1950) refers to a mysterious voice on the radio claiming to be God that Davis 
as the pregnant Mary Smith and her blue-collar worker husband Joe (James 
Whitmore) hear every night. The film was a comforting exploration of faith, in 
which Davis, according to the New York Times, “was delightful as the gentle, 
plain and understanding wife”.

In Night into Morning (1951), she is once more in a sympathetic role as a 
widowed teacher who helps to console her colleague Ray Milland after his wife 
and child are killed in an accident. In the episodic It’s a Big Country (1951), 
Davis is seen again as a teacher, who recommends that one of her pupils needs 
spectacles, against the wishes of the boy’s stubborn macho father.

Talk About a Stranger (1952), an effective liberal parable, saw Davis 
reprising the role of a pregnant mother, this time of a boy whose dog has been 
poisoned, and who blames a foreigner. Her husband was played by George Murphy, 
who became a Republican senator, and to whomRonald Reagan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ronald-reagan> once referred as “my John 
the Baptist”. Nancy then wound up her MGM contract in Shadow in the Sky (1952) 
as (what else?) a loving housewife and mother who has to cope with the 
shell-shocked best friend (Ralph Meeker) of her husband (Whitmore again).

Though by now she had married Ronald Reagan, she continued to act, mainly 
concentrating on television, and appearing with her husband in episodes of the 
Ford Television Theatre and General Electric Theater series. In addition, she 
made three further movies. In Donovan’s Brain (1953), she was the lab assistant 
and loyal wife of a scientist (Lew Ayres) who has managed to keep a dead man’s 
brain alive. When she questions his experiments on a monkey, and he explains 
the reasons why, she replies: “You’re right, darling, I’m being silly.” 
“Thanks, dear,” he says. “Now will you go and make us one of those wonderful 
stews.”

The only feature film the Reagans appeared in together was a minor war film, 
Hellcats of the Navy (1957), he as a submarine commander, she as a nurse. In 
her final movie, Crash Landing (1958), she is seen in flashback as the wife of 
a pilot in trouble (Gary Merrill), not really the sort of role to inspire her 
to continue in the acting profession.

• Nancy (Anne Frances) Reagan, actor and former US first lady, born 6 July 
1921; died 6 March 2016
 