
Next is likely to see an improvement in performance after a disappointing 
first quarter due to the cold weather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/04/next-warns-on-sales-profits-cold-weather>
, according to City analysts.

Notwithstanding the current downpours, the better weather in May is likely to 
give the fashion retailer a boots, says Michelle Wilson at Berenberg. But 
further out she believesNext <https://www.theguardian.com/business/next> will 
have to close stores as the Directory continues to steal sales from the high 
street. Cutting earnings forecasts and target price but retaining a hold 
recommendation, Wilson says:

The introduction of a mobile-adapted website in March and normalising weather 
conditions in May will remove much of the temporary headwinds that have weighed 
on Next’s recent performance in our view.

However, over the longer term, we believe Next’s changing customer base 
presents a significant structural challenge. As Directory growth continues to 
cannibalise Retail sales growth, we believe management must close stores in 
favour of offering free home delivery or face continuing revenue pressure. 
Concurrently, the shift in mix from higher-spending, more profitable account 
customers to less-loyal cash customers is also having a negative impact on 
revenue growth and profitability.

As management continues to protect profitability over market share, we cut our 
earnings per share estimates by 6%/5%/5% in 2017/2018/2019 respectively, driven 
by weaker revenue expectations. We cut our price target to £48 from £73 and re- 
iterate our hold rating.

In more detail, Berenberg says:

Store estate is squeezing profitability: Next Retail like for like sales have 
been negative in all but one of the last five years. With 55% of Next’s 
Directory orders collected from store, we believe Directory growth is simply 
cannibalising Next’s Retail revenues and putting pressure on margins. To offset 
the impact on profit, management has opened larger, more efficient stores, 
offering free click-and-collect and charging for home delivery. While this 
continued space expansion is positive for profit growth in the near term, we 
believe a better allocation of capital would be to close stores in favour of 
free home delivery.

Home delivery sales are declining: We estimate that Next Directory home 
delivery revenues have declined by around 6% per annum over the last four 
years. Historically, this decline has been more than offset by an increase in 
click- and-collect orders; however, we believe that as i) consumers have become 
increasingly comfortable with shopping online and ii) the online proposition of 
retail peers has improved, consumer preference has increasingly shifted to home 
delivery.

As such, we believe UK Directory growth will remain challenging for Next as 
management continues to protect margins. Offering free home delivery would be 
painful in the short term, diluting Directory EBIT margin by around 4 
percentage points, but it is essential to adapt to changing consumer demands in 
our view.

Loyal account customers are declining: Next account customers spend around 
£476 per annum with Next, of which we believe £404 is from product sales. This 
compares to an average cash customer spend of £210. The near- term negative 
impact of a decline in the number of account customers has been offset by the 
rising debts of the account customers that remain. Our concern is that this 
trend is unsustainable. As a result, Next may face further revenue pressure and 
an increase in bad debts.
 