
The roof of a church collapsed on to worshippers in southern Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>, killing at least 160 people with 
the toll likely to rise, according to a hospital director.

Mortuaries in the city of Uyo are overflowing after the incident, Etete 
Peters, medical director of the University of Uyo teaching hospital, told the 
Associated Press.

The Reigners Bible Church International was still under construction and 
workers had been rushing to finish it in time for Saturday’s ceremony to ordain 
its founder, Akan Weeks, as a bishop, congregants said.

Hundreds of people, including the Akwa Ibom state governor, Udom Emmanuel, 
were inside the building when metal girders fell on to worshippers and the 
corrugated iron roof caved in. Emmanuel and Weeks escaped unhurt.

 “There were trapped bodies, parts of bodies, blood all over the place and 
people’s handbags and shoes scattered,” witness Ukeme Eyibio said.

Eyibio, a computer programme analyst, said he parked his car outside the 
complex to make a phone call when he heard an explosion he thought was a bomb 
only to see that the church had disappeared.

Eyibio and three others managed to drag 10 wounded people from an overflow 
area for of worshippers just outside the collapsed church but they did not 
enter the main structure because a construction worker among them warned of the 
danger of a further collapse. The worker called his manager at Julius Berger 
construction company, who sent a crane to help lift debris off bodies.

While they waited for the crane, Eyibio tried to help a man whose legs were 
trapped under a steel girder. “I rushed to my car, got out the tyre jack and 
used that to get the beam off his legs,” he said. “We managed to get him out 
but we saw others dying all around us,” Eyibio, 27, said. “I’m so traumatised I 
could not sleep last night for the horrors repeating themselves in my mind.”

Many uncounted victims were in private mortuaries scattered across Uyo, youth 
leader Edikan Peters said. He said some people were taking the bodies of 
relatives to their homes because mortuaries were overcrowded and some did not 
have refrigeration.

A crane was being used to lift debris believed to be hiding the bodies of more 
victims, said Edikan Peters. He said he counted 90 bodies before he was told to 
stop his tally on Saturday night.

Journalists at the scene said church officials were trying to prevent them 
from documenting the incident, trying to seize cameras and forcing some to 
leave the area.

Construction company blamed after Lagos building collapse kills 34
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/10/construction-company-blamed-after-lagos-building-collapse-kills-34>
The governor’s spokesman, Ekerete Udoh, said the state government would hold 
an inquiry to investigate if anyone compromised building standards. Buildings 
collapse often in Nigeria because of endemic corruption, with contractors using 
sub-standard materials and bribing inspectors to ignore poor quality work or a 
lack of building permits.

In 2014, 116 people died when a multi-story guesthouse of the Synagogue Church 
of All Nations collapsed in Lagos, Nigeria’s largest city. Most victims were 
visiting South African followers of the church’s influential founder, TB Joshua.

Two structural engineers, Joshua and church trustees have been accused of 
criminal negligence and involuntary manslaughter after a coroner found the 
building collapsed from structural failures caused by design and detailing 
errors.
 