
A Nigerian national has been charged in connection with a hack of Los Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles> County emails that might have 
exposed personal data from more than 750,000 people who had business with 
county departments, officials said.

Kelvin Onaghinor, 37, faces nine counts, including unauthorized computer 
access and identity theft, according to the office of the Los Angeles County 
chief executive. He has not been arrested and officials are not sure if he is 
on US soil.

Authorities are searching for more suspects in the hack, which occurred in May 
when a phishing email deceived 108 county employees into providing usernames 
and passwords.

Some employees, according to officials, had “confidential client/patient 
information” in their email accounts through their county responsibilities.

Themes of 2016: is democracy itself threatened by tech disruption? | Carole 
Cadwalladr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/18/themes-of-2016-hacking-free-and-fair-elections>
A forensic examination found that about 756,000 individuals could have been 
affected through their contact with several departments,the Daily News reported 
<http://bit.ly/2hJ9f8E> on Saturday.

There was no evidence as of Friday that any confidential information was 
released because of the breach. But on Thursday officials began notifying 
people that their personal information was exposed and might have been 
compromised.

That information may have included first and last names, dates of birth, 
social security numbers, driver’s license or state identification numbers, 
payment card information, bank account information, home addresses, phone 
numbers, and/or medical information, such as Medi-Cal or insurance carrier 
identification numbers, diagnosis, treatment history or medical record numbers.

The day after the attack, county officials said they had put in place strict 
security measures.

Notification of potentially affected people was delayed to protect the 
confidentiality of the investigation and to “prevent further harm”, officials 
said.

Deputy district attorney Donn Hoffman of the office’s cybercrime division said 
it could take time to investigate as the attacker’s digital footprint must be 
tracked and because third-parties such as internet service providers may hold 
essential evidence, which must be obtained through search warrants.

“That’s a time-consuming process,” he said, adding that the case was still 
being investigated.

The county is offering free identity monitoring for those who may have been 
exposed, including credit monitoring, identity consultation and identity 
restoration.

Onaghinor faces 13 years in state prison if convicted.
 