
Every actor has a bad audition story, a recollection of how they managed to 
mangle their one big chance at stardom. These stories are so ubiquitous that, 
in La La Land, Emma Stone’s character gets to act one out for us. And the most 
effective way that Moonlight’s Mahershala Ali has thought to beat La La Land at 
the Oscars is to appear on talkshows and discussthe time he screwed up a Game 
of Thrones audition <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UWzXs7-adBU> by sitting on 
the wrong type of chair.

Related: When celebrities used Myspace: the profiles A-listers try to forget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2017/jan/03/myspace-celebrities-tyler-creator-taylor-swift-tom-hardy>

At least a bad audition is a private affair, which means that the public at 
large will never get to see just how violently you buggered up your shot at 
fame. Or at least, they were private affairs – until the invention of YouTube. 
Let’s go digging.

Chris Klein, Mamma Mia 

We’ll begin with the most notorious of bad auditions. The casting of Chris 
Klein in Mamma Mia wouldn’t have ruined the film – it did a pretty good job of 
ruining itself – but it certainly would have changed the story somewhat. In his 
version, clearly, the character who’d go on to be played by Dominic Cooper 
would be a slimy, over-confident serial killer with a genuinely chilling Mandy 
Moore fixation. Which, to be fair, does actually sound better.

Brad Pitt, Backdraft 

A universe exists where Brad Pitt <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bradpitt> 
played Brian McCaffrey in Ron Howard’s Backdraft. And in that universe, Brian 
McCaffrey is a fully checked-out space cowboy whose method of delivery involves 
saying a number of words he doesn’t understand in a manner dictated by a tiny, 
invisible goblin whispering on his shoulder. In this version of Backdraft, 
everything burns down forever and Brian McCaffrey stands in the middle of it 
all, blinking.

Scarlett Johansson, Jumanji 

Scarlett Johansson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/scarlettjohansson> is one 
of our finest actors. However, this was not always the case. Auditioning for 
Kirsten Dunst’s character in Jumanji, Johansson struck upon a weirdly Charlie 
Brownish cadence and mined it for everything it was worth. “I’ve got 
sixty-seven dollars and eight cents,” she says in a way that makes you think 
she’s just missed another kick of the football. If she’d gotten the part, 
Jumanji would have included a scene of her slowly trudging along a street 
accompanied by Christmas Time Is Here, pursued by a lion.

Matthew Fox, Lost 

Matthew Fox was a great Jack. He had exactly the right level of empty-headed 
neediness to play Lost’s ostensible protagonist. However, he also auditioned 
for the role of the slick conman Sawyer. And he auditioned poorly. Infinitely 
less laconic than Josh Holloway, Fox’s Sawyer was a wobbly-headed ball of 
misplaced intensity and bulgy neck veins who was singularly impossible to love. 
In fact, Fox would later put all these traits to work as the serial killer in 
2012’s Alex Cross, which you didn’t see because life is short and time is 
precious.

Julia Roberts, Seven Minutes in Heaven 

Even though it stars Jennifer Connelly in one of her first roles, Seven 
Minutes in Heaven is a bad film. Perhaps the reason Julia Roberts didn’t get 
Connelly’s part is because she didn’t realize this. Her audition is full of 
slow-burning resentment and overt sarcasm, when in fact everyone in the end 
product looks distracted and bored, as if they’re reading their lines from cue 
cards placed slightly too far away.Julia Roberts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/juliaroberts> didn’t get this part because 
she tried too hard, which is to say that she tried.

Meryl Streep, King Kong 

And finally, Meryl. Although no filmed record of this audition exists, it’s a 
story she’s told before. It is the mid-1970s. Streep goes for Jessica Lange’s 
role in King Kong. The audition is being held in the offices of the tastelessly 
gaudy producer Dino De Laurentiis. She enters the room. De Laurentiis 
immediately says, in Italian: “She’s too ugly.” Streep replies in Italian, to 
let him know that she could understand him. The moral is that only a genuine 
moron would evermess with Meryl Streep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/09/donald-trump-calls-meryl-streep-over-rated-golden-globes-twitter>
.
 