
This year around 900 children and young people in Australia will spend 
Christmas in jail. More than 5% of this population are between 10 and 12 years 
old and 74% of this age group are Indigenous. Most have been charged or 
convicted with petty crimes, like graffiti, vandalism, shop lifting or fare 
evasion.

More than half of the children in Australian jails have not been convicted of 
a crime. They are in jail because the authorities have not found suitable 
residential alternatives while they await a court determination. Many will be 
released following sentencing, with no time remaining to serve in custody.

Punishment, deterrence and public safety are some of the common arguments used 
to justify the imprisonment of offenders. But, to be effective, the offender 
must understand that the punishment is a result of their actions.

Jury still out on whether Dylan Voller hooding furore can deliver real change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/17/jury-still-out-on-whether-dylan-voller-hooding-furore-can-deliver-real-change>
Compared to other countries, the age threshold of 10 for treating children as 
criminally culpable and permitting their incarceration in Australia is low. In 
New Zealand and Germany, the age of criminal responsibility is 14 years old – 
the most common minimum age worldwide. In Canada it is 12 years old and in 
Portugal it is 16 years old.

The United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child recommends that the 
absolute minimum be 12 years of age.

Many studies have shown that children even well into their teens have not yet 
fully developed the ability to distinguish right from wrong, make careful 
judgments, delay gratification, restrain impulsive behaviour, or think through 
their actions.

Younger children also lack the capacity to properly engage in the criminal 
justice system, are more likely to accept a plea bargain, give false 
confessions or fail to keep track of court proceedings.

Similarly, does a 10-year-old child represent such a threat to public safety 
that we would lock them away? Is the system so poorly developed that we have no 
other solution or option?

While it is important to make clear that there are consequences for 
wrong-doing, I believe that the system should be focusing on preventing future 
crimes, rather than simply punishing old ones. AsDylan Voller, who was first 
incarcerated at the age of 11, told the royal commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/12/dylan-voller-says-he-felt-defenceless-panicked-restraint-chair-don-dale-northern-territory>
 into the protection and detention of children in the Northern Territory: “One 
of the biggest problems we face is the fact that we are being further punished 
while in prison.”

There are many examples from around the world that provide us with some useful 
alternative approaches. These include: programs to assist parents in 
supervision and control techniques; treatment and counselling; training 
courses; community service orders; child and family conferencing; intensive 
mentoring or family supervision; and professional foster or kin care.

Young Indigenous imprisonment in NT: 'You wouldn’t believe it in a modern-day 
society'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/22/young-indigenous-imprisonment-in-nt-you-wouldnt-believe-it-in-a-modern-day-society>
Police also frequently operate diversionary programs for at-risk youth. 
Depending on the age of the child and the particular circumstances, some 
interventions may be ordered by police, a court or tribunal, or child 
protection agency, while others are voluntary. Evaluations of such 
interventions for children consistently demonstrate significantly lower rates 
of recidivism and better life outcomes than for those who are incarcerated at 
an early age.

These alternatives are in line with the principles enshrined in the Convention 
of the Rights of the Child: that detention of children should be a last resort, 
that children who do offend or are at risk of offending should be understood 
and treated as children, and that, wherever possible, measures for dealing with 
such children without resorting to judicial proceedings be pursued.

It’s time to seriously think about increasing the age of criminal 
responsibility and establishing a solid suite of alternative interventions and 
pathways to support children who are at risk.

No 10-year-old should be waking up on Christmas Day in a jail.
 