
‘Blackheads are like snowflakes,” says Dr Sandra Lee. “No two are the same. 
That’s what makes them beautiful.” In 2014, theCalifornian dermatologist joined 
Instagram <https://www.instagram.com/drpimplepopper/?hl=en>. Among the usual 
SoCal posts – juice, sand, selfies – she uploaded a 15-second video of her 
extracting a blackhead. She noticed a surge in followers, so she did it again. 
The same thing. “I knew people might be interested, but it turned out there was 
a whole subculture of people who loved popping videos. A subculture that is 
still growing.”

Dr Lee – or Dr Pimple Popper, as she has playfully rebranded herself – has 2.1 
million followers. She has become a social media celebrity and launched her own 
acne cream. Her fans are, she says, mostly women between 18 and 35, often 
people who can’t afford to see a dermatologist in real life and want to learn. 
“A generation ago, people used Yellow Pages to find dermatologists. This way, 
they can connect with you before you’ve met.” Her clients now travel from 
Alaska, London and Saudi Arabia.

Related: Explosive! Behind the internet's fascination with pimple popping, zit 
zapping and squeezing cysts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/30/cyst-popping-explosion-pimple-popping-extraction-behind-community>

Her fans, called popaholics, are roughly divided into soft popaholics and hard 
popaholics. Is it a bit like porn, then? “That’s your reference,” she says, 
“but, essentially, soft pops are blackheads and whiteheads. Something simple, 
with no blood. Hard pops are what people graduate to. Cysts, rhinophyma [on the 
nose], things like that.”

The process is mundane, punctilious and disgusting. Using a comedone 
extractor, a silver stick with a looped head, she presses against the skin 
around the pimple and pulls back, squeezing out a strand of off-white 
discharge. It sounds gross because it is, but it’s also oddly fascinating. 
There’s an entire Subreddit devoted to voyeurs. “People watch them to relax, to 
go to sleep, to help with anxiety. It’s like a cleansing thing. I think there 
is a hypnotic quality, a little sense of euphoria. But I do think there is a 
feelgood side, too, watching someone being helped.” It’s a bit like watching 
Jaws for the first time, I say. “Yes, it’s that feeling of the unknown, of not 
knowing what’s going to come out.” Sometimes, in the case of abcesses, it’s 
horrific. “I don’t understand that,” she says, “although I didn’t like watching 
them, either. I’d describe myself as a born-again popaholic.”

The videos on Instagram are short. Longer ones end up on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/DrSandraLee>, where she also has an educational 
channel. Sometimes the videos are soundtracked with songs such asDuke Ellington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/duke-ellington>’s Just Squeeze Me (But Please 
Don’t Tease Me) and French Montana’s Pop That. Her patients sign a waiver form 
consenting to being filmed, “but 99% of my clients say yes. People also want me 
to film.”

Such is the strength of the commuity of popaholics that one transatlantic 
couple “solidified” their relationship through watching her videos. When they 
got married, Dr Pimple Popper sent them a wedding gift. “It wasn’t the acne 
cream, no.”
 