
Surf life savers have issued a warning for New Year’s beachgoers after a 
horror spate of holiday water deaths in NSW. There have been at least 14 water 
fatalities in the state since Christmas Day, with three deaths and two other 
bodies found on Friday alone.

Surf Life Saving NSW Acting CEO Adam Weir is urging everyone heading to the 
beach to swim between the flags and not enter the water under the influence of 
alcohol or drugs.


“We are extremely concerned about the run of tragedies in the last week and 
implore people taking to the water to be very careful,” he Weir said. 
“Lifesavers and lifeguards are out in force but we need the public to take some 
responsibility for their own safety.”

Body found in search for 14-year-old boy at Sydney's Maroubra beach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/30/body-found-search-14-year-old-boy-maroubra>
A 27-year-old Pakistani man, who had reportedly been living in Canberra, died 
after he was pulled from Mermaid Pools in Sydney’s southwestern outskirts on 
Friday afternoon. The death came a few hours after a 46-year-old died after he 
was pulled unresponsive from water at Yamba in northern NSW at about 2pm.

The death of an elderly man pulled from Lady Robinsons Beach in Sydney’s south 
was confirmed by police before 8pm. NSW water deaths since Christmas Eve are 
now more than double the state’s road toll for the same period.

An agonising wait for the family of 14-year-old Tui Gallaher came to an end at 
Sydney’s crowded Maroubra Beach on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/30/body-found-search-14-year-old-boy-maroubra>
, when a body believed to be the teenager’s was recovered by emergency 
services. Tui went missing while swimming with his cousin about 8.30pm on 
Tuesday.

“Don’t worry he’s resting is God’s arms right now. Love you, Aunty,” Katrina 
Fonuku Tamano Gallaher posted on Facebook. “Truly sorry to hear of your tragedy 
but he is resting in God’s arms now at peace and the love people have for such 
a beautiful gentle young man will shine brightly,” Billie Jean said.

Further south, a body, believed to be that of a man who went missing in the 
Murrumbidgee River at Wagga Wagga, was found near where a man disappeared on 
Wednesday.
 