
The rapid pace of growth in buy-to-let investments has been illustrated by new 
figures showing the number of landlords rising by 7% in 2013-14 to reach 1.75 
million.

Figures from estate agent ludlowthompson based on data from HM Revenue & 
Customs showed 1.75 million people declared income from property during the 
year, up from 1.63 million in 2012-13, as they chased returns on their cash 
that outstripped other investments.

Landlords banked a combined £14.2bn in net income from their rental properties 
during the year, up from £13.1bn the year before.

The HMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> figures are the latest 
data on landlord numbers, which are likely to have increased significantly 
since. Buy-to-let lending has boomed as cheap mortgages and rising rents, 
combined with low savings rates, have made property attractive to investors. 
Ludlowthompson said that over the past year the price of property in London had 
risen by 13.9% – a period when the FTSE 100 fell by 8.8%.

Changes to stamp duty introduced on 1 April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/21/rush-to-beat-stamp-duty-changes-causes-surge-in-housing-market-activity>
 increased the upfront cost of buying property, adding a 3% surcharge on second 
homes. From 2017, the ongoing cost will start to rise for landlords who pay the 
higher rate of tax as relief on mortgage repayments starts to be withdrawn.

The firm said the surge in borrowing by landlords ahead of the stamp duty 
change suggested property remained popular: figures from mortgage lenders 
showed a 226.1% year-on-year rise in the number of purchase loans taken out by 
landlords in March. The chairman of ludlowthompson, Stephen Ludlow, said: 
“Investors continue to be drawn to the buy-to-let market as the returns 
routinely outperform those of other investments.

 “Buy-to-let investments are a highly popular alternative to the volatility 
investors often risk when investing in the stock market.”

The National Landlords Association has suggested that investors will make some 
changes to mitigate the new rules. It said last week that the profits of six in 
10 landlords would fall after the removal of some tax relief. In order to 
recover costs, one in five landlords could stop renting to higher-risk tenants, 
such as those on housing benefit.

It said the removal of mortgage interest relief, combined with the 
government’s benefits freeze and the fall in social housing, would “create a 
perfect storm whereby some tenants will struggle to find any sort of housing at 
all”.
 