
Fewer affordable homes were built in the past year than any time in the past 
24 years, while there was a 52% fall in the supply of new homes in just 12 
months.

Builders put the finishing touches to 32,110 affordable homes in England in 
the year to the end of March 2016, compared with 66,600 over the previous year, 
according to figures from the Department forCommunities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> and Local Government (DCLG).

Of those, just 6,550 – about 20% – were for social rent, which critics say is 
the only truly affordable housing tenure, with the rest made available to rent 
or buy at “affordable” rates of up to 80% of market value.

Critics said the figures were disastrous, and called on the government to do 
more to encourage housebuilding. They come as the proportion of households that 
own a property is at a 30-year low and rising house prices have driven the cost 
of buying a home to more than 10 times the average salary in a third of England 
and Wales.

The Tories have made 'affordable housing' a meaningless term
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jan/07/tories-affordable-housing-meaningless-term-london>
Neal Hudson, a property market analyst for Savills, said the fall came as no 
surprise after 2014/15’s figures were inflated by developers racing to use up 
funds as the government’s previous affordable housing programme came to an end. 
Funds for a new programme were initially much lower, until more cash was 
released in last year’s autumn statement, he said.
Affordable housing completions graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-17T15:21:41/embed.html>
In a report accompanying the release, the DCLG said the fall reflected the 
transition to new affordable housing programmes. “As part of a housebuilding 
cycle, delivery is normally lower in the first year of any new housing 
programme,” it said.

But John Healey, the shadow secretary of state for housing, accused the 
government of trying to massage the figures by redefining “affordable” to 
include many at close to an already inflated market rent.


“These figures … show we are now building the lowest number of social rented 
homes since records began and the number of affordable homes to buy has fallen 
by two-thirds since 2010,” he said.

Redfern housing report 'has downplayed true reasons for homes crisis'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/16/landmark-redfern-housing-report-has-downplayed-true-reasons-for-homes-crisis-says-shelter>
“This all-time low results from Conservative ministers who have washed their 
hands of any responsibility to build the homes families on ordinary incomes 
need. We’ve seen six wasted years with the Tories in charge of housing. They 
have no long-term plan for housing and they’re doing too little to fix the 
housing crisis for millions of people, who are just managing to cover their 
housing costs.”

Anne Baxendale, the head of policy and public affairs at the housing charity 
Shelter, called the figures “not only shocking but unacceptable”.

“With 120,000 children set to spend Christmas homeless and in temporary 
accommodation and a whole generation of private renters living from one 
paycheck to the next, the new government needs to get a grip on this problem 
once and for all,” Baxendale said.

Responding to the criticism, a DCLG spokesman reiterated that housebuilding 
was cyclical and that lower completions were to be expected in the first year 
of any new housing programme.

“Building more homes is an absolute priority for this government, which is why 
we have doubled the housing budget to £8bn and we now have the largest 
affordable housing programme in 40 years,” he said.

“Furthermore, latest figures out this week show overall housebuilding is at 
its highest level in eight years and we will be publishing our white paper 
shortly, setting out our plans to build more homes and more quickly.”



 