
The fallout from British Cycling and Team Sky’s unconvincing performance in 
parliament continued on Tuesday as the chair of the culture, media and sport 
select committee, Damian Collins, told the Guardian he was considering calling 
Simon Cope, the official who travelled 900 miles to France to bringTeam Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> a decongestant that could have 
been bought in a local pharmacy for €8, for questioning.

Coughing up the facts on Fluimucil, Team Sky’s Jiffy bag decongestant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/team-sky-drugs-in-sport-fluimucil-jiffy-bag-dave-brailsford>
There was also confusion over whether Sir Bradley Wiggins’ medical records had 
been passed to UK Anti-doping (Ukad) as promised by the Team Sky team 
principal, SirDave Brailsford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dave-brailsford>, in parliament. Sources 
claimed he was yet to do so but others close to Wiggins insisted the 2012 Tour 
de France winner had done everything possible to cooperate with the inquiry.

On Monday Collins pressed Brailsford three times over the issue, asking him 
whether he agreed Wiggins’ medical details should be checked to see whether it 
corresponded with what he claimed had been treatment for the decongestant 
Fluimucil. “You’re absolutely right,” Brailsford replied. “And my understanding 
is they have been made available to Ukad.” Later the Team Sky principal said: 
“If Bradley had taken something he shouldn’t, then he was tested afterwards, 
and my understanding is that would have created an AAF [adverse analytical 
finding]. So I think the fact he has shared his medical records for that time 
is very much a step in the right direction.”

Team Sky and British Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> are 
also likely to face further questions about their use of Fluimucil – which 
Brailsford has used regularly – given it has emerged acetylcysteine (the brand 
name for Fluimucil) is a medicine only available by prescription in the UK 
because it is an unlicensed drug. That means there should be a paper trail 
stating who prescribed it and when. However, it is understood Ukad has yet to 
be presented with incontrovertible paper evidence of what was in the package.

Collins said he remained “open” to interviewing Cope and bringing back 
previous witnesses in the new year, but said he would wait for Ukad to publish 
its investigation into a medical package delivered to Sky at the Critérium du 
Dauphiné in June 2011.

In October Cope told Cycling News the package was “nothing to do with Brad” 
and that there was “no story”. Events in parliament on Monday proved otherwise. 
“We are open to calling people back to ask them further questions,” added 
Collins. “At this stage we are not ruling anything out.”

Cope would be likely to be asked explain his movements after delivering the 
package to Team Sky. On Monday Brailsford said the coach was coming to France 
anyway to help with the logistics of moving the team to another venue in 
northern Italy. However, a few minutes earlier Sutton told the committee he 
shared a car back to Geneva airport after Cope had made the delivery.

“I’m hoping to get Ukad report early in the new year, but if we feel we can 
find out extra information we will look at interviewing Cope,” Collins said. 
“Certainly we want to find out whether Cope went to Team Sky specifically to 
deliver this package or whether he was going out to France anyway.”

Collins also expressed concern about reports Brailsford had apparently offered 
a “more positive story” to the Daily Mail journalist Matt Lawton in September 
in a bid to stop him writing about Team Sky. “We need to know when he knew what 
was in the package, and why he was seeking to close down a perfectly legitimate 
enquiry,” Collins said. “It was perfectly right for Lawton to pursue this. 
Brailsford needs to explain what he knew and when – and why he didn’t tell 
Lawton what was in the package when he was first asked.”

A Team Sky spokesman said they remained fully behind their team principal 
despite the claims in the Daily Mail and his admission to the select committee 
on Monday that he had made mistakes.

“During the committee session, Dave acknowledged once again his own mistakes 
in handling the issue over recent months,” he said. “We are continuing to 
cooperate fully with Ukad and we look forward to their report. We are confident 
that when Ukad report, it will be clear there has been no wrongdoing.”

A British Cycling spokesperson said they were seeking clarification from Ukad 
about whether they were able to investigate the medical package as requested by 
the MPs on Monday.
 