
One in seven patients entering hospital emergency departments on Australia Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australia-day> were there because 
of alcohol-related harm, research by the Australasian College for Emergency 
Medicine has found.

The largest snapshot survey of its kind undertaken in Australia and the first 
to investigate the relationship between alcohol-related harm and Australia Day, 
it found that as of 11pm on Tuesday, 15% of patients across 100 emergency 
departments were there because of alcohol.

The chairwoman of the college’s public health committee, Associate Prof Diana 
Egerton-Warburton, said that figure was closer to 8% on an average weeknight.

Australian and UK alcohol industry lobbyists are hijacking policy – study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/dec/10/australian-and-uk-alcohol-industry-lobbyists-are-hijacking-policy-study>
On Friday and Saturday nights alcohol-related emergency presentations could 
reach 14%.

“We’ve been doing this survey for the past three years and this was the 
highest ever resulted recorded for Australia Day, and higher than an average 
Friday or Saturday night,” she said.

In some parts of Queensland, Western Australia and Queensland, about 30% of 
emergency department visits on Tuesday were alcohol-related, the study found.

The figures revealed a “huge and entirely unnecessary burden being placed on 
our already over-stretched emergency departments”, Egerton-Warburton said.

She urged government action on extended trading hours, low prices and heavy 
advertising of alcohol, all factors known to contribute to harmful drinking.

“For every additional late trading hour, there’s a 20% increase in serious 
assaults and injuries,” Egerton-Warburton said. “States like NSW and Queensland 
are already taking a lead on introducing early last drinks to help address this 
tide of human tragedy that arrives in our [emergency departments].

 “We need to have a national agreement on safe alcohol trading hours. It will 
save lives.”

Prof Drew Richardson, the survey’s lead researcher, said the findings revealed 
a “massive” public health problem, and a threat to the safety of hospital staff.

The chief executive of the Foundation for Alcohol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/alcohol> Research and Education, Michael 
Thorn, said the results were disappointing.

“Australian emergency departments are being inundated by people affected by 
alcohol,” he said.

“This is the cost Australia is paying for its all-too-familiar relationship 
with alcohol, and again supports our argument that governments are not doing 
enough and that the well-understood evidence about fixing this problem, 
including getting rid of quick access to booze and reducing trading hours, is 
the only way to address it.”
 