
The first series of BBC2's The Hour was not at all shabby. Once it outran the 
predictable comparisons withMad Men, it proved itself a smart and tense 
unpicking of the troubled birth of investigative TV reporting, played out by 
its impeccable characters: Dominic West,Romola Garai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/romola-garai> and Ben Whishaw. But the 
second series – blimey! Set 10 months on, in 1957, it throbs with newfound 
sass, ambition and raunch. Lead writer Abi Morgan's lines zing and fizz and the 
main cast is even better, the originals supplemented by Peter Capaldi, Hannah 
Tointon and Oona Chaplin.

The eagle-eyed among you may have noticed Chaplin in last year's run, but 
nothing like this. She spent most of that series in sumptuous A-line frocks 
hectoring Hector, her philandering husband, played by West. This time, she is 
fierce and ambitious, a formidable woman in a show not short of them. "The 
first series was much more centred on intellect; you really had to engage with 
it," she says. "But this one – mainly because of the beautiful, scantily clad 
girls – you go, 'Okey-dokey! Anything can happen.'"

Chaplin, 26, who had a peripatetic upbringing that dropped her in Switzerland, 
Cuba and Gordonstoun boarding school, Scotland, concedes she might not have 
been the obvious choice for the 50s domestic goddess, Marnie.

"I was once told on a drunken night by a casting director who will remain 
unnamed that I was classed as 'miscellaneously ethnic'," she says. "And it made 
sense – up to that point I was mainly playing terrorists or Brazilians. But I'm 
so grateful they took a chance forThe Hour and said, 'You're not an English 
rose but you can do this.'"

The lone inspiration she could draw on was her grandmother, also named Oona 
Chaplin, the fourth and most enduring wife of Charlie. "My grandmother is the 
closest thing I can think of to Marnie: very rich, very beautiful, fashionable, 
a successful woman in the shadow of her husband," she says. "She died in 1991, 
but I've read her letters and she was always very forward-thinking, incredibly 
wise." This was boosted by research in the library into pioneering TV cooks 
such as Julia Child and Fanny Cradock: "Then I went home and YouTubed the crap 
out of them."

Being "miscellaneously ethnic" is working better for Chaplin these days. After 
The Hour, she will pop up next in the third season of the powerhouse that is 
Game of Thrones. "It should be illegal to have that much fun working! It's 
incredible to be part of a show where 300 million people watch every episode 
and you're like, 'I believe in it. It's not some trashy thing, it's amazing.'"
 