
Was there any way a movie that involved Nazis, a physical disability AND 
British royalty could fail to win all the awards? Would Natalie Portman make 
another embarrassing reference to her fiance in her speech? Hollywood is, at 
heart, a traditional town and most questions asked in the run up to the event 
are pretty much known in advance. But not all. I arrived in Los Angeles armed 
with two, I believed, intractable truths: it is impossible for celebrities to 
be worse than I already imagine them to be and the Vanity Fair party is the 
only after-Oscars party to attend. Dear readers, prepare to have your core 
beliefs shaken to your, er, core. It has been a long week.

Wednesday

I arrive at my hotel at the same time as a mysterious sleek car, out of which 
emerge Joan and Jackie Collins (Jackie in the driving seat – natch) "We're 
frantic, darling, frantic!" trills Joan, trailing embalming powder in her wake.

When trying to describe what LA is like during Oscars week, one can only reach 
for analogies with the keenness of Melissa Leo grasping for an Oscar: It is 
like Disney World for fans of the E! channel, Glastonbury for Grazia readers. 
Even aside from the inability to move without bumping into one's teenage 
heroines, it is difficult to find anything in town that is not shamelessly 
dragging itself through the mud after desperately hitching itself to the 
Academy awards bandwagon.

MOCA, is not another trendy coffee shop but LA's Museum of Contemporary Art 
and, funnily enough, it just happens to be having a party tonight for its new 
exhibition dedicated to the label Rodarte who just happen to have designed the 
costumes for Black Swan which just happens to be nominated for some Oscars. 
What an incredible co-inky-dink! And down the road, the Gagosian Gallery is 
opening an exhibition by the real life Zelig and Oscars co-host, James Franco. 
What scheduling serendipity!

Many famous people are at MOCA's exhibition, though few are concentrating on 
it 100%. "I'm planning my annual Oscars brunch for Saturday," says designer 
Diane von Furstenberg. "I do it for Graydon [Carter, editor of Vanity Fair]," 
she adds, for no obvious reason. Don't you adore it when famous people 
name-drop each other?

Thursday

Early afternoon, just off Rodeo Drive, Nick Jones, founder of Soho House, and 
his membership director, Markus Anderson, are having what they describe as "a 
top level meeting" about the Oscars party they're hosting that night. However, 
they appear to be spending more time talking on their phones, fielding a stream 
of pleading calls from the uninvited. "Right!" announces the indefatigably 
friendly Jones, ending another call. "Another one to add to the guest list!" 
Anderson rolls his eyes, beleaguered as a parent.

Fortunately for Anderson, all of Jones's friends appear to be ridiculously 
famous and I mark my arrival at the party by stepping on Jon Hamm's foot, Liz 
Lemon-style.

I attempt to sound out among the guests who will win at the Oscars. Who Cares, 
What After-Parties Are You Going To? appears to be a shoo-in for Best Picture.

"Vanity Fair? Please. You need to go to the Elton John party after the Oscars 
– it'll be great," says a gentleman whose name is apparently "The DJ."

"Nah, it's all about Guy Oseary these days," his friend adds, referring to 
Madonna's manager.

"I call Oscars week the Cacophony of Egos," says Helen Mirren, who happens to 
be sitting within spitting distance of, on the one side, Leonardo DiCaprio and, 
to the other, Piers Morgan. "When you're nominated, everyone wants to talk to 
you, about you, and it's hard not to think, well, aren't I fascinating?"

But not even the force-feeding diet of Oscars fizz and puffery could alter 
Mirren's intractably British DNA: "At night I would get in bed and say to 
myself, No! Don't listen to the cacophony of egos!" God bless you, ma'am.

Friday

In a hotel suite, a shower is filled with handbags. A bathtub has been covered 
with a wooden plank to support more shoes, and a side room is filled with more 
than 400 shoe boxes on which Post-its are scrawled with gnomic instructions 
such as "Gwyneth" and "Liv". Welcome to the fashion side of Oscars week, second 
only in importance to the parties side of Oscars. I'm in the Jimmy Choo suite, 
where stylists go to procure shoes for their clients to wear to the ceremony, 
be photographed sporting, and thereby allowing everyone to live happily ever 
after, amen.

Next door to Jimmy Choo is the Calvin Klein room and down the hallway is the 
Marchesa suite, co-designed by Harvey Weinstein's wife. It is like a shopping 
mall where no money is exchanged and almost no one is admitted. There is solemn 
discussion among the Choo staff about celebrity neuroses that a shoe company 
has to consider: "Some hate their ankles and some won't show their toes – 
they're literally just like normal people." A knock on the door: "Hi, I have a 
men's shoe opportunity for you – Darren Aronofsky needs a shoe," says a young 
woman. And some celebrities, it seems, have only one foot.

The celebrities have truly infested LA by now. In the hotel lobby, within the 
space of five minutes, I spotColin Firth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/colin-firth>, Joan Rivers, Helena Bonham 
Carter, Werner Herzog and Kim Kardashian. Truly, all churches worship the 
Academy awards, and I sincerely hope that is the last time I ever write the 
words "Joan Rivers" and "Werner Herzog" in a single sentence.

The big parties tonight include a women in film event, one held by agent Ari 
"the one who inspired Entourage, brother of Rahm" Emanuel, and a frankly 
terrifying sounding one hosted by Wendi Deng and Arianna Huffington. I decline 
to grace any of the above with my presence for two reasons: one, I am not 
invited, and two, none of them can guarantee the presence of Joan Rivers and 
Donald Trump. Happily, the QVC Red Carpet Style Party, fulfils all of my 
criteria.

If you have devoted serious chunks of your life to reading reports of the 
birthday parties and barmitzvahs of children of the phenomenally wealthy – the 
offspring of Philip Green – then the QVC party would have felt deliciously 
familiar. If you have not, your reaction may have been more along the lines of 
WTF. As in "WTF is that random little bridge doing across that random little 
moat?" It takes a special kind of party to unite the likes of US reality TV 
Avatar Kim Kardashian, and Helena Bonham Carter and her mother.

I spot Donald Trump, by which I mean "Donald Trump's hair" which is not so 
much hair as a small straw hut that has landed atop his scalp. "I am 
considering running for president very seriously," he informs me.

Saturday

I waken to a thrilling missive under my door, informing me that a letter from 
Vanity Fair awaits me at the concierge's desk. I am Charlie Bucket, gifted with 
a golden ticket.

"Yes, Ms Freeman, a letter from Vanity Fair did arrive for you but you cannot 
have it. When we saw where it was from we put it in the hotel safe and only the 
manager has the key and he won't be back for a few hours."

Whilst musing on the thought that an invitation to a party is probably more 
secure than my life savings, I check out some gifting suites where, for no 
obvious reason, celebrities are bestowed with luxury gifts.

If you want to know why so many famous people in the entertainment business 
behave like such self-entitled assholes, go to a gifting suite. And if you want 
to see the definition of "venality" but can't be bothered to look it up in a 
dictionary, stand outside a gifting suite and watch the likes of those 
notorious paupers, Trump and Paris Hilton, turning up to be given free jewels, 
iPads and holidays. It's like a soup kitchen for the homeless, where the 
homeless are millionaires and the soup is made out of molten diamonds.

By the time I deal with my nausea and return to my hotel, my Vanity Fair 
ticket has been liberated and it informs me that I will be allowed to attend 
the party . . . between 12 and 12:30.

"The Vanity Fair party? Please, that is like, so two years ago," I am reliably 
informed at Harvey Weinstein's party that night. The fact that the person then 
tells me I am not allowed to use his name in this piece suggests that maybe 
Vanity Fair hasn't lost all of its power but, nonetheless, my half hour pass is 
looking yet more tarnished.

Slightly scared after Harvey charged up to me like a rabid bull and demanded 
my name ("Press," I bleat), I get in the lift to leave. Just as the door is 
about to shut, Sir Ben Kingsley and Colin Firth get in, surrounded by what I 
believe is called "a coterie". Colin cracks a small joke about his suit and the 
whole coterie laughs. But a flicker in Colin's eyes suggests he knows the 
comment does not merit the reaction. Cacophony of egos, Colin. Beware the 
cacophony of egos.

Sunday

"Yeah, that Vanity Fair party is over," says an LA friend with pity in his 
voice. "And Elton John's party is totally over, too. Are you going to Guy 
Oseary's party? Only 300 people, much more low-key – nobody knows about it. 
Really? You're not going?" In LA, concepts of "low key" and "nobody knowing 
about it" are relative. Being a mainstream kinda gal anyway, I go to the 
terribly passé Vanity Fair party.

Outside a fairly unimpressive building on Sunset Boulevard, security is 
hissing down a walkie-talkie. "We are NOT letting Ozwald Boateng in." Lo, when 
the designer turns up, he is duly sent packing.

Past the red carpet, which is lined with paparazzi who shout exactly like the 
fans outside but with more desperation ("Colin! Please! Colin!"), is an 
oak-lined gentleman's bar where a surprisingly normal looking Matt Damon is 
talking to a bunch of friends, and Anne Hathaway is braying, "And they said I 
couldn't tell jokes!" They were right, Anne, and please stop hitting me in the 
face with your giant waving hands. Photo–Me machines are scattered about, in 
case any celebrity doesn't feel they've been photographed enough and apparently 
many don't, as there are long snaking queues. Out the back is a covered garden 
where pretty much every celebrity you can think of is standing and smoking with 
a self-consciously devil-may-care air. "Passé", I'm beginning to suspect, is as 
fluid a term in LA as "low key." In classic Vanity Fair high–low culture style, 
the canapes are a mix of cheeseburgers from a fast-food outlet and disgusting 
things like tuna tartare. I wait at the bar for a glass of champagne and hear a 
woman's voice next to me: "I don't know what you're talking about, I WAS 
polite!" Ladies and gentleman, I give you Jane Fonda.

Well, hello again, Colin Firth, congratulations. "Thank you, that's very kind 
of you." I try – how are you feeling? He shakes his head, a little dazed: "It's 
all pretty strange, really." Oh, I don't know, Colin – seems pretty low key to 
me. Can I hold your Oscar, Colin Firth? "Of course you may," he smiles warmly, 
and my knees slightly buckle, from both Colin's smile and the Oscar, which 
weighs about the same as an obese toddler. "You didn't expect that, did you?" 
he says, referring to the Oscar. No I didn't, I reply, referring to something 
else. I head back to the bar to recover. Behind me, I hear Jake Gyllenhaal 
talking to a friend. "So," says Jake, "what other parties are you going to?"
 