
Just when we all thought we’d reached peak beard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/jul/24/have-we-reached-peak-beard>, a 
surprising development has happened in the fascinating world of male grooming. 
Yes, you guessed it (you probably didn’t guess it) – thelumbersexual 
<http://gearjunkie.com/the-rise-of-the-lumbersexual> is here, with his beard, 
plaid shirt, backpack and artfully scruffy hair barely contained by his 
sensible woollen hat.

He’s your Tinder date, sipping craft beer at an underground bar with his sad 
eyes and permanently unrealised dream of living in an isolated woodland shack. 
He’s your new boyfriend, who used to share a four-cheese pizza with you in bed 
after a long day, and who now looks like an extra who wandered out of the 
forest in Game of Thrones. Hell, he could even bethe groom on your hipster 
wedding day 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/the-knot/the-latest-groom-trend-lu_b_6124544.html>
.

We may have only just been given a great new portmanteau term for the type, 
but the lumbersexual has been here for a while. I know more than one 
urban-dwelling man who has suddenly acquired some sort of rurally themed 
weaponry in the last six months (axes, bows and arrows, tiny knives that they 
use to open beer cans at parties). And I’ve noticed that if you walk around 
certain areas for long enough, the proliferation of plaid (on plaid on plaid) 
will eventually make you feel as though you are living your life inside an 
optical illusion.

But the question on everybody’s lips, as with most new trends, is: guys, is 
this OK? Is it fine for my friend to adorn his walls with old bear traps he 
bought on eBay when he had to give up carving the Christmas turkey last year 
because it “looked too real”? Is there a problem with wrapping yourself up in a 
heavy duty woodsman’s jacket for your minimally hazardous commute from Peckham 
to the Apple store Genius Bar?

Is there something fundamentally wrong with calling yourself rugged when you 
actually spent 20 minutes of your morning delicately trimming your beard in the 
bathroom mirror? Or should we cut these guys some slack (preferably using a 
vintage hatchet from Colorado?)
 Lumbersexual adorns his wall with bear traps despite being unable to carve a 
turkey because it looks ‘too real’. Photograph: Sunny Miller/Corbis 
Although I personally have spent too many dates fearing that the froth from 
the latest craft beer will get stuck in my lumbersexual admirer’s facial hair 
and make it look like a sponge, I find myself cautiously defensive of the 
trend. Posers they may be, but surely lumbersexuals don’t seriously think we 
believe that their pulled pork sandwiches are made from wild boar they slew in 
the communal garden behind their high-rise apartments. Instead, this so-called 
reaction to the unashamedly femininemetrosexual 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2006/sep/18/howbigbrotherisgivingboys>
 seems to me all about playing with gender stereotypes.

I like the poseur who sits beside me at a nauseatingly hip cafe with his cold 
brew, Barbour jacket and anchor tattoos – I can’t deny it. He isn’t telling me 
he’s anything but a freelance web designer who can grow an impressively bushy 
moustache. He isn’t sitting at home, crying over his laptop and wondering why 
he can’t just get out there and be a “real man”. Instead, he’s playing with the 
concept of what masculinity looks like and does. He is at the same time both 
aggressively attached to the traditionally masculine look and completely 
removed from the lifestyle that it advertises.
 ‘Is there something fundamentally wrong with calling yourself rugged when you 
spent 20 minutes of your morning delicately trimming your beard?’ Photograph: 
Angela Cappetta/Corbis 
Men are given a harder time than women when they play with gender through 
style, since fashion still isn’t seen as their rightful domain. The metrosexual 
threw caution to the wind and started carrying his moisturiser round in his 
manbag; the lumbersexual now serves us up a hypermasculine aesthetic with an 
unashamedly ironic grin.

Did the lumbersexual, as accused, steal his look from the gay world of “bears” 
and “cubs”? It seems likely. AsTim Teeman at the Daily Beast says 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/11/12/how-straight-world-stole-gay-the-last-gasp-of-the-lumbersexual.html>
, “First, straights came for the smooth, pretty gay look … and now you have 
come for our hairier brethren.” Those who questioned straight culture in the 
first place were always better at laughing at gender, after all. Now that we 
can all share in the joy of metros, lumbersexuals and the “metrojacks”(who fall 
in the middle – yes, really), I am all too happy to laugh along.
 