
Sam Raimi <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sam-raimi>, who's spent the last 
three years on Oz The Great And Powerful, looks like a man emerging into bright 
light, blinking and slightly dazed, from a very long tunnel. Today, he's in the 
last hours of a gruelling four-day international press junket at which you can 
bet he's been asked stupid questions in two dozen languages. There's a haunted 
look in his eyes.

We meet in a huge, empty ballroom containing one table and two chairs. It 
feels like the Versailles courtroom sequences in Paths Of Glory, too much 
headroom weighing down on us, possibly exacerbating the weight of expectation 
that's bearing down on Raimi. Oz The Great And Powerful is not merely a 
gargantuan, complex, mega-budget Disney production in 3D, it dares to take on 
one of the most beloved movies of all time, The Wizard Of Oz, rated by Raimi, 
alongside film-makers as various as John Waters and John Carpenter, as a 
bedrock formative cultural experience. Raimi fought long and hard for the job, 
up through a list of 14 other directors, and had all but accepted defeat by the 
time he was finally offered the project. Still, there was trepidation even in 
victory.

"I love Victor Fleming's Wizard Of Oz," he says with absolute sincerity. "It's 
my favourite film of all time. I hold it in such high regard. The artistry of 
the actors, the production design, the music – it's my favourite musical of all 
time, too. It's the scariest movie I saw as a kid, and the most moving. Judy 
Garland: just surrealistic, beyond human performance. I hold it in as high 
regard as I can, but it's so daunting to approach a classic like this."

 It's strange and gratifying to hear these words from the director of The Evil 
Dead, whose production model – mud, blood, penury – was the extreme polar 
opposite of the sumptuously appointed, industrial-scale MGM that gave us The 
Wizard Of Oz in 1939. And yet here he is, the same 20-year-old kid – turned 53 
in October – who in 1980 pioneered a fresh, headlong, aesthetically 
self-conscious style of action film-making, now at the helm of an enterprise 
not much different in logistics and scale from the original Fleming picture.

The intervening three decades have seen Raimi move from radically transforming 
the American horror movie on indie budgets for cult audiences, on to mid-size 
studio-backed projects that finally ceased to satisfy him (after 1995's The 
Quick And The Dead). A decade ago, after a three-movie detour into serious 
drama (A Simple Plan, For Love Of The Game and The Gift), he vaulted into the 
vertiginous realm of blockbuster franchise-direction.

It turned out he was more than ready: his Spider-Man trilogy, which 
beautifully harmonised human emotion, heart and visceral action, was both the 
gratifying summit of all he had learned in film-making, and Raimi to the core.

The same applies to Oz The Great And Powerful, which is a wholly achieved 
movie fable as well as a quintessential Sam Raimi movie, utterly in thrall to 
the original in letter and spirit (in my notes I find the phrase, "I am utterly 
transported. I was"). Before I saw the film I lazily had Tim Burton in mind, 
but Raimi has narrative and perpetual-motion skills that Burton – essentially a 
prodigiously gifted production designer – has never possessed. A movie can't 
just be an environment – it has to be populated and it needs an engine. Raimi 
gives Oz both, plus heart and a note-perfect cast.
 Sam Raimi. Photograph: Ann Johansson/Corbis 
Raimi wanted to bring the story's original writer Frank L Baum, as well as 
Fleming, back to the centre of things, and he has. Oz The Great And Powerful 
adheres both to Baum's populist-era optimism and to the Depression-driven 
spirit of the Fleming adaptation. It draws visually from the book's original 
illustrations by William Wallace Denslow, and from early Disney backdrops and 
artwork, a visual inspiration for the 1939 Fleming version too.

And, yes, it starts in monochrome Kansas, then, via balloon ride and tornado, 
soon explodes into candy-coloured Oz.

"We go from an old studio-style, 1.33:1 aspect-ratio to a full 2.40:1 
widescreen," Raimi tells me, with a trace of boyish glee. "In addition, we 
played the opening 15 minutes in mono sound, then, when we get to the land of 
Oz, I took it from mono to stereo and then to fully immersive surround sound. 
The first time we enter this beautiful, strange land, we really need to feel 
and sense it thoroughly – I also dialled up the convergence of the 3D so it 
became much more dimensional at that moment – a modern tribute to the original 
classic."

It's a virtuoso passage, culminating in a lysergic rush of sugary colours and 
imagery, bell-flowers pealing, singing crocuses, skies like heaven – and an 
impossibly innocent-looking Mila Kunis, clad all in red, there to welcome 
likable but fraudulent conjurer Oscar/Oz, played by James Franco. Mila Kunis, 
Rachel Weisz andMichelle Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michelle-williams> as the three witches of 
Oz? How did Raimi pullthat off?

"I got really lucky with those girls," says Raimi. "The main worry was, do 
they have the right personality traits to play off each other? With Michelle 
Williams, it was that real sense of goodness that she exudes naturally – easy. 
And with Mila Kunis I needed someone young enough and pure enough to convey 
innocence, but then once her heart was broken to really reach inside and pull 
out that rage of a woman scorned. I saw her in Forgetting Sarah Marshall, and 
she had this real positive, sweet vibe about her, which fits in well with 
Theodora The Good. And when I saw her in Black Swan, she had this witchy 
quality about her, and I thought, that's the same girl – she's got everything 
she needs to pull off this role. Except green skin, but we can fix that!"

I ask him to time-travel back 33 years to the making of his first movie, The 
Evil Dead. Was he better off worrying and working himself to death in the 
Disney edit suites? Or on the isolated Tennessee farm, in the dead of winter, 
where he and his high school buddies made their astonishing debut feature?
 Bruce Campbell as Ash in The Evil Dead. Photograph: Allstar 
"Good question," he laughs. "The misery's not qualitatively different, but The 
Evil Dead was on such a shoestring budget. We had to work 15- to 18-hour days, 
seven days a week, no days off, constantly, constantly, constantly. And after a 
while my crew left because I didn't have money to pay them, so I had to film 
the thing myself. And in 30-degree winter weather, my hands would be covered in 
Karo syrup, fake blood, because I had to move blood-stained props all around, 
and then I had to operate the camera myself, with those same hands … "

He makes a yukking sound.

"Dude, the whole thing was just awful, it was a mess. At least now I get to 
stay warm."

Raimi, who grew up in 60s Detroit, the son of an appliance-store salesman, 
never bothered with film school, he just taught himself the business, even 
pioneering his own test-screenings by showing his Super-8 movies in school, and 
coming home to edit out all the bits that didn't get laughs. The Evil Dead was 
his doctoral thesis.

After every distributor in New York turned The Evil Dead down, Raimi was 
rescued by the emergent UK outlet Palace Pictures, which made it a national 
hit, then had to defend it in court from that dubious antique VCR-age slur 
"video-nasty".

"And finally the US started to look at it and it got taken up," he recalls.

Raimi went on to make four very Raimi-esque pictures for major studios before 
burning out and dropping out. He believes it made him a better film-maker, and 
he's right.

"It was a conscious decision," he says. "After The Quick And The Dead, I 
realised I felt absolutely empty. I thought, This is leading me nowhere. This 
exercise in style is becoming an exercise in futility, and I need to take a 
break from the movie industry for a year or two to find out what happens next."

The post-hiatus dramas – A Simple Plan, For Love of The Game and the Gift – 
were palate cleansers and learning experiences. "I thought, I'm gonna make a 
picture where I'm invisible with my style, where it's not about me or the 
camerawork. And I've never been so satisfied. Letting the actors be the 
storytellers, and not trying to dominate with my contribution – letting it all 
breathe, hands-off."
 Spider–Man 2: the best of Raimi's hugely successful web–slinging trilogy. 
Photograph: Allstar 
Those lessons enriched his Spider-Man trilogy, making it one of the best 
superhero movie franchises and a profitable one too, making $800m apiece.

So what was Raimi's wellspring cinema experience, I wonder?

"A lot of people love movies per se, that's their starting point," he says. 
"Me, I was taken by the motion-picture camera. I remember, my father filmed the 
kids at a birthday party arriving, then eating ice cream, then presents get 
opened, then they're all saying goodbye and leaving – and I thought this was 
the most wonderful miracle I'd ever seen. He captured reality and was playing 
it back on the wall – and that, more than anything, blew my mind: 'How can we 
have this technology? This should be impossible, but look! You can replay 
time!' What could be more wonderful?"

That kid is still that kid.

And he just made a great kids' movie.
 