
When the foundation of your world view is crumbling under the weight of 
inconvenient truths, you can do one of two things: revise your world view or 
descend into paranoia.

The extraordinary outburst by the recently sacked environment secretary Owen 
Paterson 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/10978678/Owen-Paterson-Im-proud-of-standing-up-to-the-green-lobby.html>
 is the latter choice. His unburdening is peppered with the language of 
conspiracy, decrying a "powerful self-serving caucus" of environmentalists and 
warning of "a mutually supportive network of environmental pressure groups... 
who keep each other well supplied with lavish funds, scare stories and green 
tape."

The ground zero of Paterson's meltdown is his denial of climate change. By 
definition, action on global warming requires communal action and that, to 
Paterson and a few other politicians from the right, sounds disturbingly like 
communism. He, like the others, tellingly tends to cite North Korea as the 
obvious end result of green policies. Like the long-gone Soviet bloc and its 
remnants, the "nationalised industries and obstructive trade unions of the 
1970s" are another ancient stick Paterson uses to beat environmental 
campaigners.

The problem is that every government and science academy on the planet agree 
that climate change is a dangerous problem caused by fossil fuel burning and 
that emissions must be slashed quickly. Given the choice between accepting this 
reality and the socialist masterplan that Paterson and his ilk believe is 
inextricably tied to it, they opt for the less torturous mental path of denial.

In this parallel universe, Paterson can praise prime ministers Tony Abbott in 
Australia and Stephen Harper in Canada for their courage in tackling the green 
conspiracy. The more plausible idea that Abbott and Harper's denial of climate 
change dangers is rooted in the titanic fossil fuel industries their nations' 
host and the accompanying industrial-scale political lobbying is plainly daft 
if climate change is a nothing but a left-wing plot.

This is where Paterson gets really unhinged. In his mind, the "highly paid 
globe-trotters of the 'Green Blob' who besieged me with their self-serving 
demands" exist only to "enhance their own income streams and influence by myth 
making and lobbying." With horror, he reveals the "staggering" €150m paid by 
the EU to green NGOs.

But look more closely and you'll see these vast riches actually amount to 
€2.8m a year per group, often to deliver specific projects in the poorest parts 
of the world. Even if the money did support lobbying, the sums fade into 
insignificance compared to the colossal war-chests deployed by the fossil fuel 
industry, the biggest businesses the world has ever seen and already awash with
$550bn of subsidies a year <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-27142377>, five 
times more than renewable energy.

Paterson sidesteps this awkward reality by depicting green campaigners as 
rich, hand-wringing liberals: "a dress designer for whom energy bills are 
trivial concerns" and "a luxury organic chocolate tycoon". Yet all this green 
lobbying is done in public unlike, for example, the secret funding of Lord 
Lawson's climate sceptic campaign group, theGlobal Warming Policy Foundation, 
with which Paterson has now associated himself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/18/owen-paterson-lecture-nigel-lawsons-climate-sceptic-thinktank>
.

Paterson enjoys baiting the greens - "judge me by my opponents" - as much as 
the greens enjoy lampooning him. But the cognitive dissonance that divides them 
is far more important than the Punch and Judy show it spawns.

The denial of the dangers of climate change from the right-wing fringe 
provides a powerful conduit for the tobacco-style delaying tactics of the 
fossil fuel companies and those old generals like Lord Lawson still in their 
minds fighting communism. The smoke screens deployed obscure the incredible
success story of the green economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/jul/05/green-growth-false-choice-cbi>
, which is growing faster than almost any other sector and already employing 
more people in the UK than teaching.

This ideologically-motivated denial also chokes the tradition of right-wing 
environmentalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jun/13/sceptical-tory-voters-climate-change>
 that stretches right back toEdmund Burke, the father of conservatism 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/comment/5581031/Conservatives-have-always-been-green.html>
, who saw society as "a partnership between those who are living, those who are 
dead, and those who are yet unborn".

I believe that Paterson, a true blue countryman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/oct/11/owen-paterson-environment-guardian-profile>
, shares that love of the land and instinctive desire for conservation. But the 
environmental crises on today's crowded planet are global as well as local and 
demand a global response. That global action needs to be seen right across the 
political spectrum as the opportunity it is – a safe, secure, clean and 
profitable world – and not as a secret red plot got up in Paterson's mind by 
"anti-capitalist agitprop groups".

Paterson believes he was defeated by the green blob, just as fellow ideologue 
Michael Gove was defeated by the education blob. But the Oxford dictionary 
defines blob as an "indeterminate roundish mass", which one could simply take 
as description of society at large.

Husky-hugging David Cameron understood the desire of the public for 
environmental responsibility, but ended up appointing Paterson as environment 
secretary to appease the Tory Tea Party fringe. The reds-under-the-bed paranoia 
remains, for a dangerous few, as powerful as ever.
 