
At the end of one of the toughest world championships in many years, through 
the desert north of Doha,Mark Cavendish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/markcavendish> ended up just over a bike 
length away from the second world road title of his career, taking the silver 
medal behind Peter Sagan, who became one of a select few male professionals to 
win a second successive title.

Cavendish was balked twice as the strong men – among the 18 survivors of 
desert heat, high winds and sandstorms – fought out the sprint. First he opted 
to remain on Sagan’s wheel as his lead-out man Adam Blythe – an excellent 12th 
in the end – began his effort to the left, visibly seeking out Cavendish but to 
no avail.

Sagan’s was, indeed, the wheel to follow but, as the Slovak nipped through a 
gap between the Italian Giacomo Nizzolo and the barriers, Cavendish seemed to 
realise in an instant that option might not work and moved right. That meant he 
had to find his way through the other riders and, while he clearly had more 
than enough speed to do so, he had to stall momentarily in order to move round 
the Australian Mike Matthews. At terminal velocity in a sprint finish he was 
simply left with too much to do to overhaul Sagan, who said afterwards that he 
was fortunate that Nizzolo was courteous enough not to shut the door on him by 
moving right.

“I’m a little bit disappointed. I feel I’ve lost gold, not won silver,” 
Cavendish said, having ridden with the after-effects of a training crash on 
Thursday which had been heavy enough for him to be taken to hospital for checks 
on a finger. “I was [on Sagan’s wheel], all of a sudden the road was blocked. I 
tried to find a way through – with less than 100m to go I had to stop pedalling 
and come round Matthews. By then it was just too late.”

Cavendish and Sagan were both outnumbered in the 28-rider group that survived 
to the final kilometres after the race split to smithereens with around 180km 
to go but they made the best of the tactical situation with the big 
disappointment reserved for the nations that had dominated the group: Belgium, 
who had six riders in the lead group but ended up with only Tom Boonen’s bronze 
to show for it, and Norway and Italy, who had three men apiece but left Doha 
empty-handed.

The crucial moments came as the peloton had just completed the initial 80km 
north out of Doha and prepared to turn south. There was a brief, intense battle 
for position before a first right turn in the desert into a crosswind, where 
Great Britain and Belgium forced an initial split in the space of a minute, 
with some 40 riders going clear as the two teams hit over 60km an hour, while 
occupying just enough road space to deny the bulk of the field any shelter. 
With most riders close to their limit, all it then took was one of the Belgians 
placed further back down the line to let a gap open and the damage was done.

There were immediate casualties: the Britons Luke Rowe and Geraint Thomas both 
punctured at key moments, with no service cars available, while sprinters, such 
as the Colombian Fernando Gaviria and Australia’s Caleb Ewan, fell victim to 
crashes, punctures or poor positioning. The pattern of the race was set with 
over 160km to go, such was the ferocity of the 25km cross winds, and a 
selection of 28 eventually emerged, dominated by the Belgians, who had the 
Olympic champion Greg Van Avermaet and four others in support of Boonen.

A second group included the German trio of Marcel Kittel, André Greipel – who 
could be seen trying to stay with the leaders and running out of strength – and 
John Degenkolb, while the Swiss had also missed out. Their attempts to chase 
were impeded by two Belgians, who had the luxury of knowing that their 
team-mates were dominating up ahead, and the frustration which that caused 
could be seen when Degenkolb had an altercation with the Belgian Jens 
Debusschere. On the 15km finishing circuit in Doha the chasers’ task became 
increasingly fruitless.

The effort in keeping the group clear eventually told on the Belgians, who 
peeled off one by one, leaving Boonen with Van Avermaet and Jürgen Roelandts 
for company, but they were caught napping by an attack in the final 2km from 
the Dutchman Tom Leezer and, once he was recaptured, that set up a chaotic 
sprint where Sagan completed a year in which he has won Classics, including the 
Tour of Flanders and Gent-Wevelgem, as well as the points jersey in the Tour de 
France for the fifth time.
 