
When it come to choosing video games for the kids, 40% of parents 
<http://www.gamedigitalplc.com/media-centre/press-releases/pr-2014/pr-20-oct-14.aspx>
 are not confident about what they are buying, according to recent research by 
the Game chain store.

Certainly, identifying best-value and most appropriate games for the family is 
more complex than it first appears. In-app purchases sell players additional 
content during the course of play. They can change the total price of a title 
substantially and fly under the radar of parents who assume games are a one-off 
cost.

In fact, concerns about games that “exploited children’s inexperience, 
vulnerability and credulity” triggered the Office of Fair Trading (OFT) to 
publish a set ofbest practice principles 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/288360/oft1519.pdf>
 for online and app-based games last year. Since then there have been a number 
of positive changes. Apple’s App Store has swapped its description on the 
purchase button for games that incur charges from “Free” to the blunter, but 
more realistic, “Get”. Similarly, the Google App Store now uses “Download” and 
Nintendo cites its free games as “Free to Try”. Going further, Apple now lists 
the top in-app purchases for each game. The high profits thatGame of War 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/game-of-war-fire-age/id667728512?mt=8> makes 
are understandable now we can see its £79.99 in-app purchase is the most 
popular.

The Competition and Markets Authority extended the OFT report with a guide for 
parents advising they check device settings before handing it to a child and 
keep an eye on bills. Parents should now expect games to provide “all the 
important information – including how to ask questions or complain – before 
[their] child starts playing”. Additional console game content is also 
increasingly tied to physical toys. Skylanders, Disney Infinity and newcomer 
Lego Dimensions each link character and level upgrades to toy sales. That they 
are described as “collectables” discloses their potentially high cost, but 
parents should know that starter packs provide everything needed to complete 
the games. Additional toys are optional extras rather than must-haves.

At this year’s Electronic Entertainment Expo, both Skylanders and Disney 
Infinity pushed the value angle with cheaper downloadable versions that reuse 
old peripherals. Disney Infinity went further this year by abandoning its 
“blind purchase” foil packs and offering better character compatibility across 
new Star Wars levels.

Over-spending isn’t the only pitfall. Appropriateness of content, and violence 
in particular, can cause parenting headaches. The awareness gap here is more 
surprising as excellent advice has been available for some years. The PEGI 
system (see box) offers simple traffic-light age badges. However, some of this 
confusion stems from the UK’s history of multiple video-game rating agencies.

Gianni Zamo, spokesman for the Video Standards Council (VSC), admits “it needs 
to establish more in the way of communicating its ratings to video game 
consumers”. He also points to the additional consumer information that 
“describes precisely what the pertinent content issues in a game are and how 
they are presented”. OnBatman: Arkham Knight (reviewed on the previous page), 
for example, this describes the “infrequent scenes of violence towards 
defenceless persons. In one, a man is tied up and beaten across the face by an 
armed thug.”

Ukie <http://ukie.org.uk>, the games industry trade body, partners with VSC to 
runAskAboutGames.com, <http://www,askaboutgames.com> which provides video 
guides on high-profile games. For Dr Jo Twist, CEO of Ukie, the message is 
simple: “Children should not be playing games that contain content that is not 
appropriate for their age. Parents need to take the time to understand the 
games that their children are playing – just as they would with any other media 
– and be aware of the age rating symbols that accompany games.”

This is a good message, although parents can still be tripped up. Provisional 
ratings applied to marketing materials sometimes remain on store shelves 
displaying different age ratings to the final product. This was the case for
Batman: Arkham Knight, provisionally a PEGI 16 but raised to PEGI 18 before 
release.

Games <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> are becoming an integral 
part of childhood, and that’s no bad thing as they enrich our lives with 
powerful interactive stories, creative new worlds and fresh ways to play. But 
assessing value and violence remains complex and needs time and involvement 
from parents. A lack of information is really no longer an excuse to ignore the 
issues. Instead of simply believing the hype about gaming, parents should now 
engage with their kids to make informed, positive choices.
 