
Shreya Tripathi sleeps most of the day. At night, she lies awake. Only 18, she 
has been fighting tuberculosis for five years. Her voice on the telephone from 
her home in Patna, eastern India, is a whisper. If she speaks for more than a 
few minutes, she becomes breathless.

Though exhausted, Shreya is also fighting another battle – in the Delhi high 
court – to demand a new TB drug. Every other medication she has tried has 
failed to beat the disease.

Related: 14,600 pills over two years – there has to be a better way to treat 
TB | Philippe Douste-Blazy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/24/pills-treat-tb-research-multi-drug-resistant-tuberculosis>

Shreya has a form of TB caused by bacteria resistant to treatment even with 
the most powerful drugs. She wants the Indian government to give her 
bedaquiline, thefirst new TB drug to be registered in more than 50 years 
<http://www.msf.org/en/article/bedaquiline-first-new-tuberculosis-drug-50-years>
. Its use is tightly controlled. Only six government hospitals are allowed to 
administer it, and even then only as a last resort.

India has one of the highest levels of drug-resistant tuberculosis 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK100386> in the world. To preserve 
bedaquiline’s effectiveness – if the bacteria mutate to resist it, there is 
nothing else available – the Indian government is strict on who can have it and 
how they are monitored. The National Institute of Tuberculosis and Respiratory 
Diseases in New Delhi, one of the authorised six centres, has refused to give 
Shreya the drug.

Shreya was diagnosed with TB in 2012, when she was 13. Doctors in Patna 
started her on a TB regimen but she proved resistant to the first and second 
lines of treatment. She and her father, Kaushal, a civil servant, are tired of 
running around hospitals getting nowhere, while Shreya’s condition worsens.

Two years ago, she had to drop out of school because she was so weak. She 
needs a wheelchair to get around. Swimming and badminton – her favourite sports 
– have become distant memories.

Shreya is a category five patient 
<http://www.tbfacts.org/tb-treatment-in-india/>, which means she needs 
treatment for “extreme” drug resistant tuberculosis, or XDR-TB.

The family only became aware of bedaquiline in October, after a visit to Dr 
Zarir Udwadia, a consultant chest physician at Hinduja hospital in Mumbai. “It 
gave us hope. I was desperate by then because nothing had worked for my 
daughter,” says Kaushal.

Udwadia knew the exact combination of drugs that Shreya needed to take with 
bedaquiline, which does not work on its own. However, government protocol 
concerning the drug prevents him, as a private doctor, from accessing it. He 
told the family to get the drugs from the national institute in New Delhi, but 
they were refused because Shreya was not a resident.

“We argued and fought with them,” says Kaushal. “They agreed to take a sputum 
sample from Shreya in November for a drug susceptibility test to see which 
drugs she is resistant to, but they already knew she was drug resistant from 
earlier such tests. They wasted precious time.”

They kept calling the hospital for the result. Two months later, they were 
told the sample had been contaminated. On 28 December, Shreya provided a fresh 
sample and was told to wait four to six weeks for the culture.

“It was then I told Papa to go to court. Even if it’s too late for me, at 
least other patients will benefit from it. Just imagine how hard it must be for 
really poor people to get this drug,” says Shreya.

The case has been heard in Delhi high court this week. Saket Sikri, counsel 
for the national institute, says that the hospital cannot prescribe the other 
drugs that must be administered with bedaquiline until it gets the culture 
report.

“A wrong combination can kill and, since this drug is her last hope, we have 
to get it right. We are being humane, not bureaucratic, and are following World
Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Organisation guidelines,” 
says Sikri. “The institute cannot choose which parts of the WHO protocol to 
follow and which to ignore.

“I think the judge’s final decision will hinge on whether he thinks my client 
is following WHO’s guidance on the use of [bedaquiline]. The judge can’t decide 
which doctor or which line of treatment is correct but he can judge if the 
guidelines are being followed and, in that respect, the institute is justified 
in waiting for the drug susceptibility test report to come.”

However, TB experts have said the culture the institute is awaiting is 
unnecessary, since it is already known that Shreya is drug resistant.

Anand Grover, a senior lawyer with the Lawyers Collective, which represents 
Shreya, says that the government has failed to update its own protocol to 
reflect the latest WHO guidance on bedaquiline, under which several XDR-TB 
patients have been put on drug regimens similar to the one prescribed by 
Udwadia. “There is evidence from other countries, including South Africa, 
showing that this combination has been successful in treating XDR-TB,” says 
Grover.

Grover has told the court that the prospect of Shreya losing her life without 
access to bedaquiline should outweigh concerns about any possible resistance 
that might occur. He has also told the court that the government is following 
the WHO protocol dating from 2013, when there was limited data on the efficacy 
and safety of the new drug.

Backing Shreya’s team is testimony from Dr Jennifer F Furin, from the 
Department of Global Health and Social Medicine at Harvard Medical School, who 
said Shreya should have been started on a bedaquiline-containing regimen in 
October.

Related: World lagging behind on global health targets, researchers warn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/21/world-lagging-behind-global-health-targets-sustainable-development-goals-2030-lancet>

 “Additional delays … threaten her life and the effectiveness of this agent. 
It is unfortunate that there have already been so many significant delays in 
providing [bedaquiline] to Ms Tripathi,” said Dr Furin in her written testimony.

Dr Furin has previously criticised India for its slow rollout of the drug 
<http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/health/Global-fears-over-India%E2%80%99s-ticking-TB-time-bomb/article16155153.ece>
. In her Delhi high court testimony she said that scientific publications have 
set a benchmark that between 30% and 45% of patients with multi-drug resistant 
TB in a country should be able to access bedaquiline.

“In India, this means a minimum of 30,000 persons per year, based on 2016 
estimates. As of 1 December 2016, only 164 individuals had been reported … to 
be receiving [bedaquiline]. This slow rollout … was noted as a problem by the 
WHO,” said Dr Furin.

There will be a further hearing on 18 January. “I don’t think the court will 
give it to me,” says Shreya. “But because of Papa’s efforts, at least other 
patients may get it later.”
 