 On Friday next the burgesses of Manchester will answer by their votes the 
question, "Will you have, on the sole condition of small yearly expenditure for 
its maintenance, one of the most magnificent gifts ever offered to a great 
community?"
Suppose some millionaire were to say, "I will give you a spacious and handsome 
building and in that building two libraries, including 21,000 volumes in 
literature and science. This building and these books have cost me upwards of 
£12,000. They are yours and your children's for ever. All I ask is that you 
maintain a librarian; secure cleaning, lighting, and repairs."

We cannot suppose that [the men of Manchester] would say, "No, thank you," to 
so noble a proposal.

Is it said that a few wealthy individuals have given considerable sums; but 
that the working men will not resort to it. The working men of Manchester have 
felt for this institution to an aggregate amount of more than £800. Upwards of 
twenty thousand working men have given their hard earnings towards this Free 
Library - to which we are modestly asked to believe they will not resort.

It would be to insult our readers to argue that reading is an important means 
of intellectual cultivation. Any one who reads at all knows that books are the 
cheapest luxury, the most rational enjoyment, within the reach of all classes, 
that in this nineteenth century can be presented to mankind.

Who does not feel and know, that reading is a perennial pleasure, enjoyable 
alike winter and summer, not dependent on weather or seasons; available whether 
travelling or at home; on steamer or in railway train almost as completely as 
by the family hearth. Of all material things, books come nearest in 
universality, variety, and perennial freshness, to the immaterial thought which 
man carries with him and invokes at pleasure.

A good library has been called a winter park; it is rather a garden of 
delight, where perpetual summer reigns. Burgesses of Manchester, cast not away 
so rich a boon! Even the apathy that abstains from voting is culpable, where 
interests so vast and so enduring are at stake.

Let everyone take honest pride in being able to say - "I helped by my vote to 
secure to Manchester the incalculable good of a large, well-chosen, and wholly 
free library, and that for no one class exclusively, and for no short fleeting 
period but, so far as can be said of any human institution, to all its 
inhabitants and for all time."

[The outcome was Britain's first rate-supported lending and reference library.]
 