
The perfect deal benefits all sides equally. At first glance, the announcement 
that Anthony d'Offay would give his £125m art collection to the National 
Galleries of Scotland and to the Tate for a knockdown £26m looked a little 
unbalanced. Closer inspection, however, revealed that the sharpest British art 
dealer of his generation has not lost his celebrated talent for shrewdness.

The headlines had it exactly as d'Offay would have wished: the creation of 50 
'artist's rooms' from the dealer's collection of 725 postwar works was the 
supreme act of philanthropy of our times, as well as a striking example of 
cross-border co-operation. The Scotsman's front page ran with the dealer's 
modest confession of 'Why I gave £100m of art to the Scots' (it was, said 
d'Offay, 'a small way of saying thank you' to the nation in which he had first 
studied art as an undergraduate at Edinburgh).

For the Times, it was more an anglophile gesture of largesse: 'Pensioner gives 
£100m to the Tate'. Even Gordon Brown, who has a foot in both camps, was moved 
to congratulate d'Offay's exemplary 'bequest'.

Students of the fine print, however, might have drawn mildly different 
conclusions. The balder facts of the story were that the parliaments in 
Edinburgh and London had paid Anthony d'Offay £26m, the cost price of work he 
had mostly acquired in the last five years, and waived his £14m tax bill. Into 
the bargain, d'Offay, now 68, had been able to design the perfect job for his 
'retirement': he would become the nation's curator, overseeing the '50 rooms' 
taking 'Warhol to the Orkneys and Arbus to Aberdeen'.

Henry Tate built a gallery to house his bequest; d'Offay's would, John 
Leighton, director of the National Galleries of Scotland, observed, explore a 
new concept, that of the 'gallery without walls'. D'Offay welcomed this idea, 
though you imagine he also has one eye on the new building block rooms of the 
£216m Tate Gallery extension, which will be completed in time for the Olympics.

The collection, d'Offay has suggested, will be added to in the coming years, 
though the precise funding arrangement of that deal is not clear. Richard 
Calvocoressi, former director of the Scottish National Gallery of ModernArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>, whose long-term friendship with 
d'Offay brokered the collaboration, hails it as a 'whole new conception of the 
possibility of public and private partnership'.

D'Offay has always seen the boundaries between commercial and museum art as 
porous. For landmark shows at his Dering Street gallery in the West End - his 
great Gwen John revival of the Seventies, for example - he routinely borrowed 
the best of an artist's work from the national collections to add depth to the 
work for sale.

In this, he demonstrated his primary skill, the one shared by all the great 
art dealers: his ability to create his own markets and to give them immediate 
credibility. D'Offay's dealing began while he was a student at Edinburgh. With 
£260 compensation he received from a swimming-pool accident, he purchased the 
papers of two very obscure Victorian poets, whose lives he spent a summer 
vacation meticulously cataloguing, before selling the papers at a decent profit.

Richard Demarco, who ran a gallery in Edinburgh at the time, recalls meeting 
d'Offay in the early Sixties. 'This extraordinarily serious young man came into 
my gallery endeavouring to interest me in a print. It seemed to me remarkable 
that he was so absolutely committed to it.' Twenty years later, Demarco watched 
d'Offay create his reputation as an international dealer, with an artist, 
Joseph Beuys, whom Demarco had introduced to Britain.

'Joseph needed £2.5m to fund his planting of 7,000 oak trees for a monumental 
piece,' he explains, 'so he asked me if I would not mind Anthony d'Offay 
representing him from London. We went down to Dering Street and took tea ... ' 
To complete a neat circle, 136 works by Beuys are at the centre of the 
collection d'Offay has sold back to Scotland.

D'Offay opened his first gallery in tiny rooms off Piccadilly at the age of 
25; in his first year, he sold a drawing by Jean Cocteau to Paul McCartney. He 
launched his new gallery near Bond Street in 1969, with pioneering shows 
devoted to the neglected brilliance of Wyndham Lewis and Stanley Spencer, 
making him his first fortune.

Oddly for someone routinely described by acquaintances as capable of being 
socially icy and 'almost impossible to speak to', his second great ability as a 
dealer was to build strong friendships with major artists. Again, this was 
something he learnt early. The late Ian Hamilton Finlay also recalled d'Offay 
coming to see him when still an undergraduate at Edinburgh. Hamilton Finlay was 
a great lover of a particular kind of gentleman's relish and d'Offay had 
discovered this fact and brought along a pot for lunch.

Hamilton Finlay knew d'Offay was destined for greatness as a dealer when, 
afterwards, he slipped the relish into a pocket and took it home with him.

In his mid-Eighties heyday, d'Offay was representing Gerhard Richter, Howard 
Hodgkin, Gilbert & George and Richard Long as well as showing Carl Andre and 
Andy Warhol. His second wife Anne, a formidable art historian who left her job 
as curator at the Tate to join him, helped him find a taste for the 
contemporary.

Times were good. Warhol recalled a typical night out in his diaries. 'Sunday 6 
July 1986. Got the Concorde, was met by Anthony d'Offay, went to the Ritz hotel 
[porters $20], had a really big double room, like three rooms. Cabbed to Mr 
Chow's [$7.50] all these great people, Mick and Jerry, all the English 
swells...'

In the Nineties, d'Offay acquired a nickname, 'the Vampire' - not so much for 
bloodsucking as bloodlessness. Even regular visitors to Dering Street would be 
lucky to be treated to a lifeless handshake from the man in the black cashmere 
jumper. Some artists felt, as artists always do, that their dealer was 
following the money. Gilbert & George parted company from him by fax, 
explaining their decision to join Jay Jopling by saying: 'D'Offay's a cunt and 
he only likes the world's most expensive artists.' Ceramicist Grayson Perry 
responded to a falling out with rather more aplomb. He exhibited a pair of 
large black pottery penises entitled 'Portrait of Anthony d'Offay'.

Despite such art-world infighting, d'Offay never overlooked what he felt to be 
the seriousness of his calling. He has retained a conviction from childhood 
that art could transform lives. Born in Sheffield in 1940, his family moved to 
Leicester after the war where his father worked as a surgeon and his mother as 
an antiques dealer. The young d'Offay got his interest in art from the 
Leicester museum, which then benefited from the European eye of émigré curator 
Hans Hess.

He came to the Old Masters in Edinburgh and has described walking round the 
galleries on the Mound as the 'experience that has defined my life'. Bringing 
Damien Hirst's pickled sheep and Robert Mapplethorpe's sado-masochism to the 
Highlands will, he says, 'make a great difference to young people, their 
appreciation of themselves and their era. It will inform what they do with 
their lives and how they see the world'.

Caroline Cuthbert who worked with d'Offay for 11 years, helping run his first 
gallery, suggests his eye on the world was always instinctive. 'If you walked 
around an auction room with him, he hardly seemed to be taking it in, but at a 
glance he immediately saw the quality there and he was prepared to back his 
judgment to buy it.'

Sadie Coles, who now shows former d'Offay artists such as Carl Andre and Sarah 
Lucas, was director of his modern gallery. 'From Anthony,' she says, 'I learnt 
how to do things properly, how to put the artists first.' Even so, she 
observes: 'Sometimes, even up close, you could not tell which way he was 
manipulating things, though you knew he always was working to a game plan. 
Whatever meeting we went to, he had always rehearsed what he wanted from that 
situation and he generally got it.'

He has, Cole suggests, never lost his third great talent either: the ability 
to surprise. In 2001, d'Offay stunned the art world by announcing in formal 
letters to the artists he represented that he was closing his galleries, which 
at the time had a £30m turnover. Sadie Coles says, not unkindly, that she 
believes he got out of the business then because he was no longer quite where 
the energy was.

Having created a platform for young British artists, d'Offay had been somewhat 
eclipsed by the brasher talents of Charles Saatchi and Jay Jopling (Jopling 
bought his first work of art from the d'Offay gallery at 14 - a limited edition 
Gilbert & George book that cost £16. Later, he went back to acquire the living 
sculptures themselves).

Anthony d'Offay has never been a stranger to playing the long game, however. 
With this in mind, his re-entry into the centre of the British art world could 
hardly have been better calculated; happily, you might say, the extraordinary 
gift is also a bloodless coup.

The d'Offay lowdown

· Born 1940 in Sheffield, father a surgeon, mother an antiques dealer. Studied 
art history at Edinburgh University; married to his business partner, Anne; his 
son Timothy runs a teashop in his former gallery in Dering Street W1.

· Best of times The 1980 opening of his second Dering Street gallery gave a 
London platform to Andy Warhol, Joseph Beuys and Gerhard Richter. 'We declare 
ourselves to be in the world rather than in London,' he proclaimed.

· Worst of times His abrupt decision to close the galleries in 2001 marked the 
end of an era in London art. 'There is never a good time to announce one's 
retirement, but I would rather step down when the gallery is at its height.'

· What he says 'Art isn't fun. Art is about mortality. Art is about ideas. In 
a time when, for many people in this country, religion no longer fulfils the 
role that it did 50-100 years ago, what you believe in becomes very important. 
Art and creativity become something you can believe in.'

· What others say 'A gift of this magnitude will completely transform the 
opportunity to experience contemporary art in the UK. Anthony d'Offay's 
imaginative generosity establishes a new dynamic for national collections and 
is without precedent anywhere in the world.'
Nicholas Serota, director, Tate Modern
 