
 Q After saving hard for years, my wife and I are in the process of buying our 
first property with completion due to in August.

We have now woken up to financial volatility following the vote to leave the 
EU, and are wondering what to do about the purchase.

 With the chancellor’s May prediction that property prices will fall by 18% 
following a leave result in the referendum in mind, is it foolish to continue 
with the purchase and end up in negative equity as soon as we complete. Or, is 
the demand on housing likely to ensure that long-term property prices in the UK 
will stabilise and rise. Should we pull out and move to Germany?
CO

A You are not alone in feeling nervous about post-Brexit house prices but I 
don’t think the answer to your worries is to jump ship and move to Germany. The 
real trouble is that nobody knows what’s going to happen to house prices nor 
when any changes will take effect.

As you say, before the referendum, the Treasury forecast a fall in house 
prices of up to 18% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/20/eu-referendum-george-osborne-house-prices-brexit>
. Other respected analysts think there will be a 15% fall while some say 5%. 
There is also a view that the fact that demand still massively outstrips supply 
could prop up prices rather then seeing them fall. Since the plummet in the 
value of sterling, rather than a decline in demand from overseas buyers, some 
report a surge in interest from foreign investors keen to pick up a property 
bargain.


So given the uncertainty about what’s going to happen and when, what should 
you do? A lot depends on where you are in the house-purchase process. If you 
have already exchanged contracts – which I suspect you have if you already have 
an agreed completion date – pulling out of the purchase will mean losing the 
deposit you paid to your solicitor to pass on to the seller’s solicitor. As 
well as deposit, you will also have wasted the money you may have paid for a 
survey and that you’ll have to pay the solicitor for his or her time spent so 
far, not to mention search and mortgage arrangement fees.


Even if you haven’t exchanged contracts – like another reader who wrote to me 
saying they were worried about “taking on £330,000 of debt in what has suddenly 
become a very unstable market” and the possibility of negative equity – pulling 
out of a deal may not be the best option.

You and another two readers are concerned that you’ll end up in negative 
equity as soon as you complete, but I’m not quite sure why. You would face 
negative equity if prices fell by more than the deposit you put towards buying 
the house. If you put in 20% cash and had a mortgage of 80% of the property’s 
value, if its value fell by 20% you would end up with a 100% mortgage not 
negative equity. True, you wouldn’t be able to sell the house and get back the 
cash you put in if prices did fall that much but given that you are buying a 
long-term home to live in, that’s fairly irrelevant.
 