
Too much of Britain’s aid money is wasted, stolen or spent on inappropriate 
projects, the new minister overseeing the aid budget has declared, as she 
served notice of plans to take an approach based on “core Conservative 
principles”.

In advance of her first appearance before MPs on the Commons international 
development committee,Priti Patel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/priti-patel> pledged to “challenge and 
reform” the global aid system in a statement of intent apparently composed very 
much with long-term domestic critics of aid spending in mind.

Poll: Which country should new secretary of state for development Priti Patel 
visit first?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jul/27/poll-which-country-should-priti-patel-visit-first>
“As secretary of state for international development, my objective will be to 
challenge and change the global aid system so that it properly serves the 
poorest people in the world and the taxpayers who foot the bill,” she wrote in 
anarticle for Wednesday’s Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3788162/My-fury-wasted-foreign-aid-International-development-secretary-Priti-Patel-pledges-major-overhaul-12billion-budget.html>
.

Concerns among some in the NGO and aid community that her appointment may 
herald a more hostile change of direction will also not have been alleviated by 
her statement that “some participants in the aid debate are resistant to 
criticism and sometimes unwilling to understand or even acknowledge genuine 
concerns”.

Nevertheless, Conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> MPs who have been hoping 
that her arrival would herald a speedy overhaul of the UK’s commitment to spend 
0.7% of national income on aid are likely to be disappointed by Patel’s pledge 
to honour pledges on development in the Tory manifesto.

She went on to add that she will “ask the tough questions and provide a fresh 
pair of eyes”.

“My approach will be built on some core Conservative principles: that the way 
to end poverty is wealth creation, not aid dependency; that wealth is 
ultimately created by people, not by the state; that poor countries need more 
investment and trade, not less.

“And that we need to empower the poorest to work and trade their way out of 
poverty, not treat them as passive recipients of our support.”

The MP, who was a prominent referendum campaigner for the UK’s withdrawal from 
the European Union, also drew a link between her new role and the post-Brexit 
geopolitical landscape sketched out by many Brexiters.

Stating that she did not see her new job “as just about aid”, Patel wrote: “We 
must seize the opportunity of leaving the EU to expand free trade with those 
who need it most, to boost investment in the poorest countries and to forge new 
alliances with the world’s emerging economies.

“And, of course, I want to use our greater freedom from leaving the EU to 
deliver better value for UK taxpapers.”

Kate Osamor, the shadow international development secretary, has said that 
Patel’s appointment was “another grim reminder that knives are being sharpened 
on the aid budget under this Tory government”.

The international development select committee, which will question Patel on 
Wednesday, also includes Labour MP Stephen Doughty, who has accused Patel of 
having “a malign rightwing agenda to scrap and undermine our support for the 
world’s poorest people”.
 