
Cutting through the web of business interests obscuring Iran’s art scene has 
long been the goal of Mahsa Mergenthaler-Shamsaei, the Geneva-based founder of 
the online platformYoung Persian Artists <http://youngpersianartists.com/about/>
 (YPA). Dedicated to promoting Iran’s young artists outside the confines of the 
commercial world, YPA is hostingHope Dreams Desire, a pop-up exhibition set in 
a former public swimming pool in Berlin. Shamsaei, who works as a maritime 
lawyer by day, discussed her motivations for running the website, setting up 
the show and promoting the art being made by millennials in Iran today.

What led you to start the Young Persian Artists (YPA) website? 


In Iran, buying and selling art is becoming a fashion, but more worryingly, a 
business. When the artists are very young and the infrastructure to support 
them outside of sales is largely missing, it pushes young vulnerable artists to 
satisfy a trend. I wanted to cut through the hype that exists both insideIran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> and outside and help artists showcase 
their artwork outside of a sales environment to a broader alternative audience.

More generally, I wanted to make art personal again. In the articles I write on
 <http://youngpersianartists.com/page/2/> my website, I try to tell the story 
of the artist and the context in which they work. I speak to them, look at what 
they have produced in their often still-budding careers, and attempt, to bring 
the readers closer to what they are looking at. Good art is relatable to 
everyone, no matter where it’s made.
 Romisa Sakaki, Grassland series Photograph: Romisa Sakaki 
The moniker ‘YPA’ references the Young British Artists movement here in the 
UK. What parallels do you see between the two?

The Young British Artists exhibited in the late 1980s and worked in a very 
anti-establishment way. Their art, close to the bone and often deeply personal 
changed the course of British art and in fact contemporary art at large.

If you look at Iranian art history, the referencing has been very Persian, 
reflective and inward-looking. This new generation is almost the opposite: 
exciting, fresh and very much outward-looking. You will often be hard-pressed 
to find any Middle Eastern aesthetics in their work at all. They are the 
Internet generation waiting to break free. Like the YBAs they are leaving all 
tradition and preconceived expectations behind in a struggle to express what is 
relevant to them, with the only difference of having to do so within the 
framework and challenges presented by working in Iran.

The website was set up early last year. What motivated the leap from writing 
about this scene to curating a pop-up exhibition?

Many readers enquired how and where to see the art I posted. There are some 
examples of contemporary Iranian art in museums in the west but they are few 
and far between. I felt the time has come for a show which gives young artists 
a chance to exhibit abroad and interested art lovers to get up-close and 
personal with brand new work by artists they may have only read about or simply 
not heard of at all.

The show is titled Hope Dreams Desire and you have asked the artists to 
produce works along this theme. Why?

As I mentioned, I really feel that the new generation of artists in Iran are 
outward looking – I felt that this theme sets the scene for them to tell us why 
and what it is they are looking for. I thought that this theme, combined with 
the fact that the work would be shown in a censorship-free environment, would 
inspire and encourage the artist to really spread their wings and visit new 
places in their work.

I am also really excited by the space. Stattbad in Berlin’s Wedding district 
used to be a local swimming pool and, for many, the easiest access to a warm 
shower. Now it’s a cultural space where exhibitions, concerts and performances 
take place. There are few places in the world where one can see an art 
exhibition in a former public swimming pool.
 