
Saddle up, Red Dead Redemption 2 is moseying into town. After two teasing 
tweets this week, Rockstar finally confirmed on Tuesday that a sequel to its 
acclaimed western adventure would be arriving in autumn 2017. A trailer will 
drop on Thursday.

It’s a big deal. The original Red Dead Redemption remains a wonderful and 
atmospheric example of open-world game design, providing a cogent plot of 
remorse and retribution, within a functioning world that seems to truly reflect 
the Frontier at the time. But since then, Rockstar’s own Grand Theft Auto V, 
released in 2013, has shifted the bar for the genre in terms of ambition, scope 
and size.

So how can the developer surpass expectations with this long-awaited return to 
the wild west? Here are some suggestions.

Interesting female protagonists

The Grand Theft Auto series is revered for a lot of things but the portrayal 
of rounded female characters is not one of them. Red Dead Redemption on the 
other hand, featured horse-rearing hero Bonnie MacFarlane, the player’s main 
ally throughout the game, and it’s to be hoped that the sequel adds more. Hell, 
this is the wild west, an era loaded with legendary female gunslingers and 
adventurers. Annie Oakley, Calamity Jane, Belle Starr, Poker Alice, Abigail 
Scott Duniway … If Deadwood can do it, then Rockstar can.

A greyer sense of morality

In most Rockstar games, you are the bad guy. Sure, the odd character may be 
slightly likeable – at least in the case of Red Dead Redemption’s John Marston 
– but the titles work as dark escapist fantasies because you get to be terrible 
people in a terrible world doing terrible things. A Red Dead sequel would, 
however, benefit from a more ambiguous moral universe, with a cast that extends 
beyond bandits, rustlers and nihilistic gunfighters. If the game does indeed 
feature a large posse of multiple playable protagonists (as the teaser image 
suggests), Rockstar has far more opportunity to create interesting motives and 
relationships between its leads.

Different perspectives

Let’s presume for a second that Red Dead Redemption 2 is a prequel – not 
necessarily that it directly precedes John Marston’s story, but that it takes 
place before the original game’s 1911 setting. Jump back 50 to 100 years and 
it’s an even more powerful, racially charged period in American history. There 
was a huge amount of prejudice towards Native Americans (just look at The 
Revenant) and this would provide a fascinating backdrop for a Rockstar 
narrative.

More mission dynamics

Grand Theft Auto V used its multiple playable protagonists to great effect, 
the constant interplay between Michael, Franklin and Trevor providing a 
compelling spectacle for its bank heists, helicopter chases and skyscraper 
break-ins. But it was highly scripted, without much room for experimentation 
between its key set-pieces. This is where Rockstar could improve greatly, 
adding dynamism to its multi-part approach to missions – whether that’s 
branching outcomes, procedurally generated content or a Shadow of Mordor-style 
Nemesis System to create brooding grudges with non-player characters. This 
would broaden the narrative possibilities and increase replayability in the 
process. Just the ability to fully plan our own mission approaches and getaways 
would be a huge addition.

More choice in the over-arching narrative


The critically acclaimed Witcher 3: Wild Hunt displayed the immense potential 
for games developers to craft open-ended in-game choices that lead to 
meaningful consequences, without sacrificing strong writing and narrative in 
the process. Red Dead 2 needs to surprise us by allowing players to determine 
where the main plot goes and providing a range of conclusions that suit this 
path.

Red Dead Redemption 2? Why people have gone crazy over a teasing image
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/17/red-dead-redemption-2-teasing-image-rockstar>
Greater customisation

Personalisation has become a much bigger deal in open-world game design since 
Red Dead Redemption was released – and this should be reflected in the sequel. 
Player characters with customisable clothing, guns, and skills would make sense 
post-Witcher and Fallout 4, allowing you to create custom western heroes with a 
variety of characteristics and traits. Also: horse customisation. It goes 
without saying.

Real events to provide a historical basis

GTA: Vice City captured the sleazy glam of the 80s, GTA: San Andreas focused 
on black culture of 90s Los Angeles and Grand Theft Auto V provided a modern 
satire on modern day LA, but all referenced real locations, people, events and 
companies to add edge and authenticity. Whatever time frame Red Dead 2 is set 
in, it needs to call on real-life incidents, characters and controversies to 
anchor it in exactly the same way.

RDR Online

GTA Online has been a hugely profitable focus for Rockstar – so much so that 
it’s rumoured to be the main reason why the game never received any story DLC. 
For Red Dead Redemption 2, Rockstar is promising an “all new multiplayer 
experience” – but we hope that it’s partly a refinement of GTA Online, taking 
the amazing Heists template and transposing it to the wild west. Multiplayer 
train robberies, saloon shootouts and cross-country horse chases with two 
groups of human opponents battling it out across an entire open world would be 
astonishing.
 