
Ten Indigenous communities in Western Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/western-australia> will be given a 
$52m upgrade as part of a plan to improve the quality of life for people living 
in remote communities.

But the Kimberley Land Council, which represents 221 of WA’s 274 remote 
Indigenous communities, is concerned the targeted funding boost will mean some 
other communities that are still reliant on state government funding will miss 
out.

It comes two years after the WA premier, Colin Barnett, suggested up to 100 
communities faced “closure” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/nov/18/wa-plan-to-close-100-remote-and-indigenous-communities-devastating>
 at the withdrawal of $90m in federal government funds.

Fears Western Australia will close remote Indigenous communities ‘by stealth’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/14/fears-western-australia-will-close-remote-indigenous-communities-by-stealth>
He later backpedalled and announced a wide-ranging review into the service 
delivery and social problems in remote communities, with a view to ensuring 
their long-term sustainability.

In a statement on Wednesday, the regional development minister, Terry Redman, 
who has headed up the remote community service reform process, said that all 
communities that currently receive state government support would continue to 
do so, despite the new funding arrangements.

The communities tapped for extra funding are some of the largest 
Aboriginal-only settlements in the state, accounting for 20% of the more than 
12,000 people who live in remote Indigenous communities.

Under a proposal announced in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/14/fears-western-australia-will-close-remote-indigenous-communities-by-stealth>
, the communities will be expanded to become regional “hubs” that will act as 
service centres for nearby smaller communities and, eventually, be gazetted and 
given the same town status as comparable non-Indigenous communities, with the 
same obligations to pay rates and other fees.

“In many remote Aboriginal communities, poor living conditions negatively 
affect the health of residents and their participation in school and work,” 
Redman said. “We believe that living conditions can be improved through mutual 
accountability between households, communities and government.”

Redman said 10 communities would receive a “significant investment in upgrades 
to power, water, wastewater and municipal infrastructure”, funded by mining 
royalties, but individual households in those communities would be expected to 
pay for water and power.

That is currently managed as a collective and paid for by state and federal 
government subsidies.

Most of the communities slated for upgrade are in the west Kimberley region. 
The largest is Bidyadanga, a community of 593 people near Broome, and the 
smallest is Lombadina with a population of 41, also near Broome.

Also singled out for funding near Broome are Beagle Bay, with a population of 
308, Ardyaloon, population 332, and Djarindjin, population 202.

Other communities include Bayulu (population 321), near Fitzroy Crossing, and 
Mowanjum (population 305) near Derby, as well as Warnum (population 344), north 
of Halls Creek.

Two communities in the Pilbara are also on the list: Wakathuni, a settlement 
of 91 people near Tom Price, and Yandeyarra, a community of 105 people inland 
of Port Hedland.

Anthony Watson, the chairman of the Kimberley Land Council, welcomed the 
funding announcement but said people who lived in the other 264 remote 
communities still faced an uncertain future.

Among those is Watson’s home community of Jarlmadangah. Also in limbo is the 
troubled community of Balgo near Halls Creek, which, with an official 
population of 508, is the second-largest remote community in WA.

Of three remote communities here, why are only the two Aboriginal ones under 
threat?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/11/of-three-remote-communities-here-why-are-only-the-two-aboriginal-ones-under-threat>
 “What remains unclear is what this means for those communities that have been 
left off this list,” Watson said. “By prioritising some communities, it may 
mean that the state government is de-prioritising others.”

Many of the homelands communities in Western Australia were established in the 
1980s as a backlash against failed attempts to move people from different 
groups into larger towns, with occasionally violent results.

Watson said he remained concerned about the viability of encouraging people to 
leave smaller communities for the larger “hub” communities, saying it increased 
the risk of poor housing and overcrowding without addressing the lack of job 
opportunities.

“Aboriginal people must be assured that they will not be abandoned and that 
government support for essential and municipal services will be maintained,” he 
said.
 