
Almost half of lettings agents are reporting nervous landlords following 
Brexit, with 12% reporting asking rents have fallen over the past 10 days.

In a report published on Monday, the Association of Residential Letting Agents 
(Arla) says last month’s referendum vote has not rocked the rental market 
“yet”, however, uncertainty over the future of Britain’s role in Europe is 
making landlords jittery.

One in nine agents told Arla they have experienced an immediate dip in rents 
following last month’s Brexit result.

Soaring rents, particularly in London and the south-east, have been partly 
pushed upwards by recent arrivals from abroad, as well as a lack of available 
properties to rent.

David Cox, managing director of Arla said the rental market has so far 
responded to Brexit in a calm fashion but warned continued uncertainty could 
cause turbulence in the rental market over the coming months.

“What we need is some certainty from the new government that housing remains a 
priority with the rental market playing a central role. For example, we want to 
avoid a situation where institutional investors start pulling away from the 
market, because ultimately this will impact tenants by squeezing supply further 
and pushing up rents. Although we’ve seen some hesitation from landlords this 
is relatively mild and it’s important they do not act in haste. Any inevitable 
longer term changes will then be taken on board with greater ease.”

Almost 36% of Arla members reported either a reduction or the same number of 
prospective tenants looking for properties.

Arla said that overall both supply and demand for rental accommodation was up 
in June. Prospective tenants saw a rise on average of 12% per Arla member, and 
properties on agents’ books were up by an average of 3%.

“If one thing is clear following Brexit, it’s that supply and demand remains a 
real issue in the rental market,” said Cox. “If supply continues to dwindle 
against growing demand, no matter what the eventual implications of Brexit are, 
renting will become more difficult and expensive for tenants.”

A separate report on Monday by the Taxpayer’s Alliance has called on stamp 
duty on homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/15/berkeley-homes-20-per-cent-drop-reservations-new-homes>
 to be cut by half and later abolished, because it is exacerbating supply 
shortages and driving up rents for tenants. It said the extra 3% stamp duty 
surcharge for buy-to-let and additional homes in particular should be 
abolished, warning that it will drive up rents for tenants as investors pass on 
costs.
 