
The gloom in the high streets is coming to an end, two leading retailers 
predicted yesterday.

 House of Fraser and Next - which only 12 months ago issued a profit warning 
and saw its share price tumble by a quarter after admitting it had the wrong 
stock - are both anticipating an upturn in consumer spending.

 Sir Brian Pitman, chairman of Next and Lloyds TSB, said: 'I don't think there 
is any need to be pessimistic. No one is predicting a hard landing for the 
economy any more. The odds are that interest rates will go down, not up, and 
for most of us that means the second half of this year will be better than the 
first.'

 At the same time, John Coleman, chief executive of House of Fraser, said he 
believed consumer confidence 'will improve significantly towards the back end 
of the spring/summer season' and that there would be a further boost then to 
business levels when 'the millennium factor' kicked in.

 The two companies were reporting declines in full-year profits, but in 
comparison with some of their main rivals - notably Marks & Spencer and Arcadia 
- their recent performance has been relatively strong.

 The recovery at Next has been swift. Last March the company was facing many 
of the same problems that have emerged now at Marks & Spencer. It had too much 
high fashion, too few 'middle England' classics and was too expensive. Shoppers 
stayed away in droves and profits in the first six months of last year slumped 
30 per cent.

 But yesterday the company showed that it had bounced back in the second half. 
For the full-year, profits were down 9 per cent from £184 million to £167 
million, and in the first seven weeks of this year like-for-like sales were 
ahead by 16 per cent.

 Next's shares, which were changing hands at about 840p at the beginning of 
1998, started strongly yesterday but closed down 23.5p at 719p, dragged lower 
by the declining market. But they are still around double their level of six 
months ago.

 Chief executive David Jones said yesterday that the company had learned 
valuable lessons from last year: 'We know what went wrong and said we would put 
it right. We didn't have a divine right to be successful. We are now a better 
company for having made that mistake.'

 House of Fraser's profits dropped from £29 million to £19 million, but 
like-for-like sales were ahead 0.6 per cent and in recent weeks have been up 
0.5 per cent.

 The shares added 2p to 78.5p, although some analysts voiced concerns that the 
group's turnaround plans were taking longer than expected to make an impact.
 