
Dozens of Nepalese migrant labourers have died in Qatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/qatar> in recent weeks and thousands more 
are enduring appalling labour abuses, a Guardian investigation has found, 
raising serious questions about Qatar's preparations to host the 2022 World Cup.

This summer, Nepalese workers died at a rate of almost one a day in Qatar, 
many of them young men who had sudden heart attacks. The investigation found 
evidence to suggest that thousands of Nepalese, who make up the single largest 
group of labourers in Qatar, face exploitation and abuses that amount to 
modern-day slavery, as defined by the International Labour Organisation, during 
a building binge paving the way for 2022.

According to documents obtained from the Nepalese embassy in Doha, at least 44 
workers died between 4 June and 8 August. More than half died of heart attacks, 
heart failure or workplace accidents.

The investigation also reveals:

• Evidence of forced labour on a huge World Cup infrastructure project.

• Some Nepalese men have alleged that they have not been paid for months and 
have had their salaries retained to stop them running away.

• Some workers on other sites say employers routinely confiscate passports and 
refuse to issue ID cards, in effect reducing them to the status of illegal 
aliens.

• Some labourers say they have been denied access to free drinking water in 
the desert heat.

• About 30 Nepalese sought refuge at their embassy in Doha to escape the 
brutal conditions of their employment.

The allegations suggest a chain of exploitation leading from poor Nepalese 
villages to Qatari leaders. The overall picture is of one of the richest 
nations exploiting one of the poorest to get ready for the world's most popular 
sporting tournament.

"We'd like to leave, but the company won't let us," said one Nepalese migrant 
employed at Lusail City development, a $45bn (£28bn) city being built from 
scratch which will include the 90,000-seater stadium that will host the World 
Cup final. "I'm angry about how this company is treating us, but we're 
helpless. I regret coming here, but what to do? We were compelled to come just 
to make a living, but we've had no luck."

The body tasked with organising the World Cup, the Qatar 2022 Supreme 
Committee, told the Guardian that work had yet to begin on projects directly 
related to the World Cup. However, it said it was "deeply concerned with the 
allegations that have been made against certain contractors/sub-contractors 
working on Lusail City's construction site and considers this issue to be of 
the utmost seriousness". It added: "We have been informed that the relevant 
government authorities are conducting an investigation into the allegations."

The Guardian's investigation also found men throughout the wider Qatari 
construction industry sleeping 12 to a room in places and getting sick through 
repulsive conditions in filthy hostels. Some say they have been forced to work 
without pay and left begging for food.

"We were working on an empty stomach for 24 hours; 12 hours' work and then no 
food all night," said Ram Kumar Mahara, 27. "When I complained, my manager 
assaulted me, kicked me out of the labour camp I lived in and refused to pay me 
anything. I had to beg for food from other workers."

Almost all migrant workers have huge debts from Nepal, accrued in order to pay 
recruitment agents for their jobs. The obligation to repay these debts, 
combined with the non-payment of wages, confiscation of documents and inability 
of workers to leave their place of work, constitute forced labour, a form of 
modern-day slavery estimated to affect up to 21 million people across the 
globe. So entrenched is this exploitation that the Nepalese ambassador to 
Qatar, Maya Kumari Sharma,recently described the emirate as an "open jail" 
<http://www.thehimalayantimes.com/fullNews.php?headline=Envoy+Sharma+in+soup+&NewsID=375975>
.
 Record of deaths in July 2013, from all causes, held by the Nepalese embassy 
in Doha. Photograph: /guardian.co.uk 
"The evidence uncovered by the Guardian is clear proof of the use of 
systematic forced labour in Qatar," said Aidan McQuade, director of 
Anti-Slavery International, which was founded in 1839. "In fact, these working 
conditions and the astonishing number of deaths of vulnerable workers go beyond 
forced labour to the slavery of old where human beings were treated as objects. 
There is no longer a risk that the World Cup might be built on forced labour. 
It is already happening."

Qatar has the highest ratio of migrant workers to domestic population in the 
world: more than 90% of the workforce are immigrants and the country is 
expected to recruit up to 1.5 million more labourers to build the stadiums, 
roads, ports and hotels needed for the tournament. Nepalese account for about 
40% of migrant labourers in Qatar. More than 100,000 Nepalese left for the 
emirate last year.

The murky system of recruitment brokers in Asia and labour contractors in 
Qatar leaves them vulnerable to exploitation. The supreme committee has 
insisted that decent labour standards will be set for all World Cup contracts, 
but underneath it a complex web of project managers, construction firms and 
labour suppliers, employment contractors and recruitment agents operate.

According to some estimates, Qatar will spend $100bn on infrastructure 
projects to support the World Cup. As well as nine state-of-the-art stadiums, 
the country has committed to $20bn worth of new roads, $4bn for a causeway 
connecting Qatar to Bahrain, $24bn for a high-speed rail network, and 55,000 
hotel rooms to accommodate visiting fans and has almost completed a new airport.

The World Cup is part of an even bigger programme of construction in Qatar 
designed to remake the tiny desert kingdom over the next two decades. Qatar has 
yet to start building stadiums for 2022, but has embarked on the big 
infrastructure projects likesuch as Lusail City that, according to the US 
project managers, Parsons, "will play a major role during the 2022Fifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> World Cup". The British engineering 
company Halcrow, part of the CH2M Hill group, is a lead consultant on the 
Lusail project responsible for "infrastructure design and construction 
supervision". CH2M Hill was recently appointed the official programme 
management consultant to the supreme committee. It says it has a "zero 
tolerance policy for the use of forced labour and other human trafficking 
practices".

Halcrow said: "Our supervision role of specific construction packages ensures 
adherence to site contract regulation for health, safety and environment. The 
terms of employment of a contractor's labour force is not under our direct 
purview."

Some Nepalese working at Lusail City tell desperate stories. They are saddled 
with huge debts they are paying back at interest rates of up to 36%, yet say 
they are forced to work without pay.

"The company has kept two months' salary from each of us to stop us running 
away," said one man who gave his name as SBD and who works at the Lusail City 
marina. SBD said he was employed by a subcontractor that supplies labourers for 
the project. Some workers say their subcontrator has confiscated their 
passports and refused to issue the ID cards they are entitled to under Qatari 
law. "Our manager always promises he'll issue [our cards] 'next week'," added a 
scaffolder who said he had worked in Qatar for two years without being given an 
ID card.

Without official documentation, migrant workers are in effect reduced to the 
status of illegal aliens, often unable to leave their place of work without 
fear of arrest and not entitled to any legal protection. Under the state-run
kafala sponsorship system, workers are also unable to change jobs or leave the 
country without their sponsor company's permission.

A third worker, who was equally reluctant to give his name for fear of 
reprisal, added: "We'd like to leave, but the company won't let us. If we run 
away, we become illegal and that makes it hard to find another job. The police 
could catch us at any time and send us back home. We can't get a resident 
permit if we leave."

Other workers said they were forced to work long hours in temperatures of up 
to 50C (122F) without access to drinking water.
 Dalli Kahtri and her husband, Lil Man, hold photos of their sons, both of 
whom died while working as migrants in Malaysia and Qatar. Their younger son 
(foreground photo) died in Qatar from a heart attack, aged 20. Photograph: 
Peter Pattison/guardian.co.uk 
The Qatari labour ministry said it had strict rules governing working in the 
heat, the provision of labour and the prompt payment of salaries.

"The ministry enforces this law through periodic inspections to ensure that 
workers have in fact received their wages in time. If a company does not comply 
with the law, the ministry applies penalties and refers the case to the 
judicial authorities."

Lusail Real Estate Company said: "Lusail City will not tolerate breaches of 
labour or health and safety law. We continually instruct our contractors and 
their subcontractors of our expectations and their contractual obligations to 
both us and individual employees. The Guardian have highlighted potentially 
illegal activities employed by one subcontractor. We take these allegations 
very seriously and have referred the allegations to the appropriate authorities 
for investigation. Based on this investigation, we will take appropriate action 
against any individual or company who has found to have broken the law or 
contract with us."

The workers' plight makes a mockery of concerns for the 2022 footballers.

"Everyone is talking about the effect of Qatar's extreme heat on a few hundred 
footballers," said Umesh Upadhyaya, general secretary of the General Federation 
of Nepalese Trade Unions. "But they are ignoring the hardships, blood and sweat 
of thousands of migrant workers, who will be building the World Cup stadiums in 
shifts that can last eight times the length of a football match."

• Read the official response to this story  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/sep/25/qatar-world-cup-official-response>

• The Guardian's investigation into modern-day slavery is supported by 
Humanity United.Click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2013/apr/03/modern-day-slavery-project-global-development>
 for more information
 