
I went to an Indian wedding recently – a glorious five-day extravaganza. There 
was a lot of food, dancing, merriment and several hundred outfit changes. I 
didn’t want to shell out for excess baggage on the flight (this column doesn’t 
pay that well), so spent a while trying to figure out what bits of clothing 
could be utilised several times, after a quick rinse in the hotel sink.

There were numerous nuptial events with varying degrees of formality, from 
black tie all the way to “casual pizza party in 40C heat”. So what is the most 
dress-up-able or dress-down-able thing in a man’s closet? What is the most 
versatile item? It should have been obvious. It’s the humble white shirt.

In a way, your entire wardrobe can be built around one or two really good 
white shirts. So it’s worth tracking down the best. There are several factors 
to consider. Given that I find silk a bit pyjama-y, the shirt has to be cotton 
and, because grotty yellow armpits are such a no-no, lightweight. In a further 
effort to prevent excessive sweating ’n’ staining I’ll always go for a classic 
rather than a slim fit. Slim fit does look sharp, but I never feel comfortable 
when I’m that trussed up, and if I’m wearing a blazer over the top I am 
guaranteed to get a Sticky Wet Back.

It’s important not to go too far the other way, though – a billowy, relaxed 
fit will make you look like Percy Shelley, minus the opium (hopefully).

Traditionally if you’re going to wear a suit or blazer over your shirt it 
should probably have French double cuffs – the fiddly ones without a button 
that require cufflinks and above-average dexterity. Personally, I find 
cufflinks annoying and a bit too formal. And if, like me, you’re looking for 
something that can be worn to a dinner in the evening, but also have its 
sleeves rolled up and worn with shorts during a balmy day, a cufflinked shirt 
won’t really do.

There is then the vexing question of the collar. I like button-down Oxford 
shirts, but a simple collar is the safer, smarter option.

In the end, I took a white Oxford shirt from NN.07 and a slightly smarter 
Whistles one, with collar straighteners. They did me proud.

There was one day when I wore the Oxford shirt untucked and unbuttoned (not 
too far, of course) with dusty pink shorts and off-white espadrilles, and 
I genuinely think it looked OK. Later that same day I wore it under a 
light-grey suit with a pale-blue tie, and no one was any the wiser. If it 
wasn’t for the creasing I would have slept in it. That’s the beauty of the 
white shirt.


Rick’s book None of the Above: Your Vote is Your Vote – Don’t Stay Silent 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/295911/> is out now

Follow Rick on Twitter @rickedwards1 <https://twitter.com/rickedwards1>

Follow the Observer Magazine on Twitter @ObsMagazine 
<https://twitter.com/obsmagazine>
 