
I went for a night out in a small town with my schoolfriends recently. We 
stood around in a bar (with a late licence) and reminisced about Mr Taylor’s 
chemistry class and so on. We were probably 10 years older than everyone else 
there. At one point Tom attempted to prove that he could keep his mouth closed 
while Gordon prised it open with some tongs (it’s not clear where the tongs had 
appeared from). I spent a bit of time staring at other people’s jeans. There 
wasn’t a man in the bar who wasn’t wearing some.Jeans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/jeans> are the ultimate wardrobe staple. 
In fact, I don’t know any man under the age of 65 who doesn’t own a pair of 
jeans. So it seems sensible to assume that we, the men of the world, would be 
able to get jeans right. And yet…

Now, there may be a time when the bootcut jean comes back into fashion for the 
gentleman. That time is not now. Even if it was, you still shouldn’t wear them. 
Ever. Your choices are simple: slim or straight. Skinny is a risk that isn’t 
worth taking; I know because I regularly take that risk and regret it. I should 
probably start taking my own advice. Loose-fit jeans may be comfortable, but 
are you a 16-year-old-skater boi? Thought not.

The most mystifying thing about the jeans in that bar though was not the 
mini-flare, but the overwhelming number of blue-jeans-and-smart-black-shoes 
combabominations* on display. I have no idea what has given rise to this. Who 
is telling people that it is an acceptable look? My only theory goes thus: when 
boys first start going to nightclubs, the door policy is “no trainers”. So in 
the absence of any other options, we are forced to wear our school shoes 
(black; squared-off toe) with our going-out trousers, which are, of course, 
jeans. And thus the habit is formed. Can we please all agree to stop this 
nonsense? There is a Tumblr site dedicated to such crimes against your own feet 
and legs (jeansandsheux.tumblr.com <http://jeansandsheux.tumblr.com/>) and it 
is not an honour to be featured on it.

Let’s be clear: any nightclub that insists on “no trainers” is obviously going 
to be terrible, but if you still insist on smart black shoes, you can just – 
just – about get away with wearing slim black jeans. That silhouette can look 
OK. Don’t think there is any leeway on the blackness of the jeans – there 
isn’t. Grey will not do. The most versatile jeans are classic indigo. You can 
dress them up with some brogue boots, or down with some basic white pumps, or 
wear them with your favourite trainers, or turn them up and over a pair of 
classic workboots. Easy.

*I am pushing for “combabomination” to enter the OED this year

Follow the Observer Magazine on Twitter @ObsMagazine 
<https://twitter.com/obsmagazine>
 