
I like suede. I suspect that this is not a widely held fondness. I know it’s a 
bit 70s, but I don’t care. It feels good; it looks good; it’s regular leather’s 
classier cousin. However, it is a bastard to look after. Even more high 
maintenance than cashmere, which is saying something. Suede looks awful when it 
gets spotted with rain. It stains in seconds. It grazes – if that’s the right 
word – easily. That protective spray you can get always seems to change the 
colour, or make it blotchy. It’s bloody annoying.

All of these considerations mean that the window for wearing suede is narrow. 
You need to know when you step out of your front door that the weather is going 
to stay dry. Clearly that’s a rarity in the UK. And you don’t want to wear 
suede in hot weather because you will be a sweaty mess. So the corridor of 
opportunity is located in late spring. To be extra careful, maybe take a brolly 
everywhere with you, or one of those enormous transparent ponchos you buy for a 
tenner at festivals.

The only garment that should never be touched by suede is the trousers. I 
mean, come on. You will look like a berk in suede trousers. Anyone will look 
like a berk. But suede shoes? Great. Suede elbow or shoulder patches on a 
jumper? Yes please. I even have a sweatshirt with suede sleeves. You read that 
right. Suede sleeves, and they get a lot of compliments. There are also quite a 
few suede overshirts on the market at the moment and they look fantastic. And 
almost everyone is making a suede bomber this year. The choice is wide. It’s a 
good, if expensive, time for suede lovers like me.

One of the best things about suede is that it looks good in brighter colours. 
You can push the boat out, palette-wise. Leather looks better in muted autumnal 
shades, but suede can handle a bit more zing. Which is exactly what you (I) 
want at this time of year. If you’re wearing suede, you’re already making a bit 
of a statement. Embrace that with some colour. Our Legacy used to do a 
terracotta (basically, very orange) shirt-jacket-hybrid that is unfortunately 
no longer availbale but they are doing a similar, zipped one in “sand” which I 
might splurge on. Oliver Sweeney, best known for shoes, have upped their 
clothing game and made a beautiful jacket. It’s available in navy for the 
cautious and a bold tan for the gamblers. Speaking of gamblers, you won’t find 
a gamble much bigger than the patterned Tod’s I’ve been ogling. Very spicy.

A word of warning: don’t wear too much suede at once. One suede piece per 
outfit. Or people will start calling you Suede Man. Or Virginia Suede. Or 
Suedrian Chiles. Or… you get the picture.


Rick’s book None of the Above: Your Vote is Your Vote – Don’t Stay Silent 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/295911/> is out now




Watch his TEDxHousesofParliament talk ‘How to get young people to vote’ 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nlYpMGI6iNQ>




Follow Rick on Twitter @rickedwards1 <https://twitter.com/rickedwards1>
 