
Actors and comedians have paid tribute to the "bonkers and brilliant" Rik 
Mayall <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/rik-mayall>, who has died at 
the age of 56.

The Essex-born actor and comedian, known for his roles in alternative comedy 
shows such as The Young Ones, Bottom and The New Statesman, died in his London 
home on Monday, his agent confirmed.

The cause of death has not yet been disclosed though Scotland Yard said it was 
not believed to be suspicious.

The much-loved actor was best known for his comedy partnership with Adrian 
Edmondson, who he first met at Manchester University. The pair went on to 
become one of the biggest comedy duos of the 1980s, first through their popular 
comedy double act The Dangerous Brothers and later as part of the comedy group 
Comic Strip alongside Dawn French and Jennifer Saunders.
 Rik Mayall (left) as Rick in the Young Ones with Adrian Edmondson as Vyvyan, 
Nigel Planer as Neil, and Christopher Ryan as Mike. Photograph: Photos 12/Alamy 
The pair's big break came in 1982 with the cult BBC sitcom The Young Ones, 
which Mayall penned with Ben Elton and Lise Mayer. In the series, Mayall played 
Rick, a sociology student with a penchant for Cliff Richard, while Edmondson 
played Vyvyan, a psychopathic punk medical student.

Mayall gained further popular success with his depiction of the fictional 
megalomaniac Conservative MP Alan Beresford B'Stard in the 1985 sitcom The New 
Statesman, which satirised Tory MPs of the time.
 Rik Mayall and Marsha Fitzalan pose as their 1980s TV characters Alan and 
Sarah B'Stard to launch the UK tour of its stage adaptation in 2006. 
Photograph: Gareth Cattermole/Getty Images 
In the 90s, Mayall and Edmondson went on to write and co-star in Bottom, a 
slapstick sitcom about two flatmates who live on the dole in Hammersmith, 
London, which ran for three series between 1991 and 1995. Despite plans to 
revive the series in 2012, they were scrapped when Edmondson got "cold feet" 
about the project.

A Scotland Yard spokesman said officers were called by London ambulance 
service to a house in Barnes, south-west London, at around 1.20pm where "a man, 
aged in his 50s, was pronounced dead at the scene".

A wave of tributes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jun/09/rik-mayall-tributes-reactions-comedians-death-twitter-comedy-young-ones>
 greeted the news of Mayall's death. Edmondson said: "There were times when Rik 
and I were writing together when we almost died laughing. They were some of the 
most carefree, stupid days I ever had, and I feel privileged to have shared 
them with him. And now he's died for real. Without me. Selfish bastard."

Ben Elton, who was friends with Mayall from university, said: "I owe him so 
much. He changed my life utterly when he asked me to co-write The Young Ones 
with him and he was with me on the day I met my wife. He always made me cry 
with laughter – now he's just made me cry."

His Young Ones co-star, Nigel Planer, told the BBC he was "very, very sad and 
upset that we've lost Rik, who was inspirational, bonkers, and a great life 
force". He described Mayall as "a brilliant comedian and someone who made 
everyone else's lives more fun. He will be really, really missed".

Comedian Alexei Sayle, another collaborator with Mayall on The Young Ones, 
wrote in the Independent: "Comedy is truly great is when it comes out of 
nothing, and the greatest of comedians, like Rik, have that rare ability to 
conjure laugh after laugh, not from endless words, but from a single look or 
one absurd gesture … It was in his bones. Sweet Rik, much loved – what a loss."

Stephen Fry, who starred in Blackadder alongside Mayall, said on Twitter: 
"Simply distraught to hear of the death of Rik Mayall. An authentic comedy 
genius and a prince among men."

Fellow comedian Bob Mortimer described him as the "funniest man of his 
generation". The impressionist Rory Bremner said he would always remember the 
actor as "a fireball of creative comic energy and inspiration".

The Monty Python star Eric Idle said: "Very sad to hear of the passing of Rik 
Mayall. Far too young. A very funny and talented man."

The Blackadder producer John Lloyd said Mayall, who appeared on the show's 
third series as Lord Flashheart, was "just extraordinary".

"It was the most extraordinary thing, him and Ade Edmondson doing the 
Dangerous Brothers, they were called, and you just felt you were in the 
presence of something, a whole revolutionary thing."

This was echoed by the BBC director of television, Danny Cohen, who called 
Mayall a truly brilliant comedian. "His comic timing was outstanding and his 
screen presence unique. For a generation of viewers he was a true comedy hero."

Among others paying tribute to Mayall was actor Helen Lederer, who appeared in 
The Young Ones: "Rik Mayall, I loved you. Gutted. The man who taught me not to 
crash laughs, has crashed. Real love to wife, children. Massive loss."

The Little Britain comedian David Walliams also expressed his sadness at the 
news: "I am heartbroken that my comedy idol growing up, Rik Mayall, has died. 
He made me want to be a comedian."

In 1998, Mayall was nearly crushed to death after he fell off his quad bike 
and the 600lb weight landed on top of him. He suffered a fractured skull and 
severe haemorrhaging and spent five days on a ventilator in a medically induced 
coma.

The comic actor later made light of the trauma at his Devon farm, and marked 
the anniversary of his accident by exchanging presents with his wife and 
children.

"I beat Jesus Christ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2006/apr/09/magazine.features7>," he 
said. "He was dead for three days at Easter. When I crashed it was the day 
before Good Friday, Crap Thursday, and I was technically dead until Easter 
Monday – that's five days … beat him 5-3."

He added: "Other people get moody in their 40s and 50s – men get the male 
menopause. I missed the whole thing. I was just really happy."

Despite the severity of his accident, Mayall returned to television, first 
playing Gideon Pryke in the BBC drama Jonathan Creek, and making a recent 
appearance in the Channel 4 sitcom Man Down.

Even Mayall's one and only venture into social media was lauded as "comedy 
genius" when in 2010 he wrote: "Opening my very own Twitter to stop another 
bastard from doing it. So fuck off & don't expect to hear from me any time 
soon. Love Rik x."
chris o'dowd (@BigBoyler) 
Very sad to hear about Rik Mayall's passing. 'Bottom' was a huge part of my 
youth. Even his single tweet was funny.pic.twitter.com/iNePxzCy6X 
<http://t.co/iNePxzCy6X>
 <https://twitter.com/BigBoyler/statuses/476017690524807168> June 9, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/BigBoyler/statuses/476017690524807168> 
The statement released by his agent, Brunskill Management, read: "We are 
deeply saddened to announce the death of Rik Mayall who passed away this 
morning. We are devastated and he will be missed by all who knew and loved him."

Mayall leaves behind his wife, the Scottish make-up artist Barbara Robbin, 
whom he married in 1985, and his three children Rosie, 28, Sidney, 26, and 
Bonnie, 19.

• This article was amended on 10 June 2014. An embedded tweet from @rikmayall 
appeared to have been sent on the day of his death, making it probable another 
person used the account to re-tweet the original. A tweet from comedian Chris 
O'Dowd has now been embedded instead to show an image of Mayall's original 2010 
tweet.
 