
30 September

As the clock strikes 10am this morning, a young man, 20-year-old Deyverson 
Avelino, is shot dead in the Canitar neighbourhood of the Alemão favela 
complex. Tension follows and some schools close during the afternoon. The 
favela is flooded with police. Armoured vehicles known ascaveirão patrol the 
streets.


According to residents, two people on a motorcycle had driven up, stopped 
beside Avelino and shot him. A police vehicle had followed rapidly and police 
had picked up the body and driven him to the emergency care unit. There was no 
investigation.

Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – 'Hopes of pacification are shattered' | 
Daiene Mendes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/14/rio-olympic-games-2016-favelas-hopes-of-pacification-are-shattered>
Residents say Avelino died on the spot, but the police claim he succumbed to 
his wounds at the emergency care unit. Sometimes the police lie. I’ve 
experienced that – I’ve seen something happen, then requested a press release 
from the police, who have provided a completely different story. If Avelino was 
already dead, the police should not have altered the crime scene.

14 October

Gunfire is reported in several areas of the complex this morning due to a 
police operation. It is the worst possible timing, occurring just as residents 
are heading off to work and school. Local people share information about what 
is happening via groups on the WhatsApp instant messaging service so they know 
whether it is safe to leave their homes. We do this on a daily basis and it is 
very important: there is no advance warning of police operations or shootouts 
between police and gangsters. We have to stay on the alert and keep connected.


22 October

During a house search, police raid a property that was being used to print a 
magazine. No one is at home so the police break in, smash open a cabinet and 
steal some of the contents. Local people protest. It is difficult to know how 
to act when things like this happen.

24 October

Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – 'We're not ready for another mega event' 
| Michel Silva
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/05/rio-olympic-games-2016-favela-not-ready-for-another-mega-event>
Commerce in Alemão is ordered to shut down after police kill a drug 
trafficking gang member, 26-year-old Paulo Ricardo da Silva, known as PL or 
Polho. The gang insists that all shops close to mourn the dead man. Police are 
unable to guarantee the safety of the traders so all business halts during a 
period of involuntary mourning.

31 October

The NGO Voice of the Community 
<http://www.vozdascomunidades.com.br/complexo-do-alemao/>, which I used to work 
for, holds a festival for children in Alemão’s Olympic Village, a large sports 
complex. The event lights up the community with the smiles of hundreds of local 
kids. It is a lot of fun. In the evening, the police hand out baskets of basic 
necessities in the Alvorada neighbourhood. It is an attempt to win over the 
residents. The gangs used to provide this service so now the police have sort 
of taken over the task.

3 November

Today, there is outrage at the outcome of an official investigation into the 
killing of a local boy by police.Ten-year-old Eduardo Ferreira was shot in the 
head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/05/protest-rio-de-janeiro-police-killing-eduardo-ferreira>
 in April while he was sitting outside his house with a mobile phone. Police 
claimed they mistook the phone for a gun. The killing led to huge protests and 
the police promised to investigate. But today, they rule that Eduardo was 
killed in “self-defence”. [On 19 November,a police officer was charged with 
homicide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/19/brazilian-police-officer-charged-with-homicide-over-death-of-10-year-old-boy>
 over Ferreira’s death.] Many deaths go unexplained here. Some have 
explanations that are incomprehensible while others, like the death of Eduardo, 
are explained but the information given is unacceptable.

8 November

A tragedy occurs today at the community’s amusement park known as Favelinha 
Skol. Two children, six-year-old Samuel Goulart Freire and eight-year-old 
Guilherme Furtado Jorge, suffer electric shocks as they play on the rides after 
heavy rains. They are sent to hospital but Samuel cannot be revived.

17 November

Police in balaclavas carry out operations in some areas of the Alemão complex 
today, stopping and searching almost everyone in their path. They are not 
wearing identification on their badges, which is prohibited. There are several 
clashes. One man, 19-year-old Patrick da Silva de Souza, is shot in the chest 
and dies in the Alvorada neighbourhood.
 