
More homes changed hands for at least £1m in the first half of this year than 
in the same period of 2015, despite high stamp duty bills and uncertainty ahead 
of the EU referendum.

The number of £1m property sales was up by 12% year-on-year to 6,684, 
according to Lloyds bank, more than offsetting a 6% fall the previous year.

However, changes to the way stamp duty is charged, introduced in 2014’s autumn 
statement, added to the upfront costs of all homes over £1m, and have dampened 
sales at the top end of the market

, prompting a fall in the average price of homes in this part of the market. 
In the first six months of 2014, high-end homes had an average selling price of 
£1.8m, although that had fallen to £1.7m by this year.

End of the property boom? UK house prices to flatline, says forecast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/04/end-property-boom-uk-house-prices-flatline-savills-forecast>
The figures, which are based on data from the Land Registry and Lloyds, show 
that 4,238 of the sales were recorded inLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, which recorded an 8% increase 
year-on-year. In the north-east of England £1m-plus sales increased by 83%, to 
just 11.

Lloyds said that during the first half of the year, Virginia Water in Surrey 
was Britain’s only “million pound town”, with the average of all recorded sales 
running into seven figures.

The fall in sales at the very top of the market has led to an increase in the 
number of “super-prime” lettings, according to data from property firms LonRes 
and Knight Frank.

The number of lets agreed at a cost of at least £5,000 a week rose by 16% in 
the 12 months to September, to 109. Tom Smith, head of super-prime lettings at 
Knight Frank, said stamp duty changes had altered the dynamics of the London 
market.

“Given the higher running costs buyers also face, stamp duty can be a concern 
unless they plan to be in a property for the long-term,” he said. “This is 
particularly the case while uncertainty surrounds the short-term prospects for 
price growth.”
 