
The jury in the long-running retrial of a man accused of killing five of his 
wife’s family members say it is having trouble reaching a unanimous verdict.

Robert Xie, 53, has faced a six-month trial after pleading not guilty to 
killings in the family’s North Epping home in July 2009.

NSW supreme court judge Elizabeth Fullerton on Thursday told the jury she had 
received its note informing her it had been unable to reach a unanimous verdict 
at this time, before sending them to deliberate further. The note came on the 
eighth day of jury deliberations.

“While I have the power to discharge you from returning verdicts, that power 
will only be exercised by me if I’m satisfied that after further deliberations 
there’s no likelihood of genuine agreement being reached and verdicts 
returned,” Fullerton said on Thursday.

“It’s the experience of the criminal justice system that juries can often 
reach agreement if they are given more time to consider the issues.”

During the trial, Xie was accused of using a hammer-like object to inflict 
horrific head injuries on his newsagent brother-in-law Min Lin, 45; his wife 
Lily Lin, 43; her sister Irene, 39; and the Lins’ two sons, Henry, 12, and 
Terry, 9.

The Crown alleged he was motivated by anger and resentment over his perceived 
“subordinate status” within the extended family and the uncritical regard given 
to his brother-in-law Min Lin. The Crown also suggested there was a sexual 
motive, but details cannot be published for legal reasons.

The defence pointed to Xie’s alibi, supported by his wife, that he was in bed 
asleep with her when the crimes occurred in the nearby Lin residence and also 
says more than one assailant was likely to have been involved. The defence said 
Xie got along with his five relatives, in particular with his nephew Henry whom 
he loved like a son.

Fullerton told jurors they must consider the opinions of their peers during 
deliberations, but reminded them they must reach a verdict that satisfies their 
genuine beliefs.

“If you are honestly and genuinely ... satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of 
the accused’s guilt, you cannot join in a verdict of not guilty,” she said. “If 
you have a reasonable doubt of his guilt, you cannot join a verdict that finds 
the accused guilty.”

Deliberations continue.
 