
Robert De Niro <https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertdeniro> is among a 
growing number of celebrities who have paid tribute to Meryl Streep following 
her attack on Donald Trump at the Golden Globe awards on 8 January.

De Niro, who last year expressed the desire to punch the president-elect in 
the face, sent his sometime co-star a letter, the text of which was obtained by 
People magazine.

It read: 

Meryl –

What you said was great. It needed to be said, and you said it beautifully. I 
have so much respect for you that you did it while the world was celebrating 
your achievements. I share your sentiments about punks and bullies. Enough is 
enough. You, with your elegance and intelligence, have a powerful voice – one 
that inspires others to speak up as they should so their voices will be heard 
too. It is so important that we ALL speak up.

We love you.

Bob.

Streep’s speech, made as she picked up the lifetime achievement award, took 
Trump to task for his impression of a disabled reporter. “It kind of broke my 
heart … and I still can’t get it out of my head, because it wasn’t in a movie,” 
she said.

“It was real life. And this instinct to humiliate when it’s modelled by 
someone in the public platform by someone powerful, it filters down into 
everybody’s life, because it kind of gives permission for other people to do 
the same thing.”

Following the ceremony, the president of the Hollywood Foreign Press 
Association sent Streep an email to praise her address.

It read: 

Dear Meryl,

Congratulations once again on being the Hollywood Foreign Press Association’s 
Cecil B DeMille award recipient. We stand proudly behind our choice, and we 
applaud your 40 years of captivating work. You’re a class act, in and out of 
character.

As an organisation of journalists, the HFPA stands by your defence of free 
expression and we reject any calls for censorship.

We thank you for your unwavering support for the arts.

With gratitude and respect,

Lorenzo Soria

Trump took to Twitter to defend himself against Streep’s speech, calling her 
“overrated”, but his social media retaliation did not find favour with many of 
Streep’s peers.

“Aren’t you supposed to be running the country?” said George Clooney, in 
response to the president-elect’s tweets. “We have to get back to talking and 
telling the truth, understanding that not everybody is an enemy, and that not 
all people who voted for Donald Trump are bigots – not even theoverwhelming 
number of people who voted forDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. They’re disenfranchised, 
they’re mad, they’re losing their jobs.”

Meanwhile Viola Davis, who introduced Streep at the Globes ceremony, before 
herself critiquing the incoming president backstage, said: “[Streep] told me 
she was going to piss off some people of so I was bracing for impact. I love it!

“I feel like anyone who was the mouthpiece of anything progressive, whether it 
was Martin Luther King or John F Kennedy, Mahatma Gandhi or whatever, pissed 
people off.

“She’s earned the right to say that, and I think all of us felt a sigh of 
relief. Sometimes you need the first person to dive in there and have the 
courage and the bravery to give a mouthpiece to what we were all feeling.”
 