
The departing head of US intelligence has publicly defended his analysts 
against attacks by Donald Trump following their conclusion that Russia 
interfered in the November election, as the unprecedented dispute between the 
president-elect and the intelligence services he will soon control broke into 
the open.

Republicans voice disdain after Trump tweets support for Julian Assange
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/republicans-break-donald-trump-tweet-julian-assange-dnc-hacks>
“There’s a difference between skepticism and disparagement,” James Clapper 
told a hearing into foreign cyber-threats to the US held by the Senate armed 
services committee, adding that US intelligence analysts “stand more 
resolutely” than ever behind their conclusion of “Russian interference in our 
electoral process”.

The testimony was delivered the day before Clapper and the heads of the CIA, 
NSA and FBI are expected to present their findings on Russian election 
interference to Trump.

It is likely to be a highly charged meeting. The president elect has publicly 
derided the agencies on the issue, and this week cited adenial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/republicans-break-donald-trump-tweet-julian-assange-dnc-hacks>
 by Julian Assange of WikiLeaks that his source for Democratic party emails 
released during the election was the Russian government or “a state party”.

US intelligence agencies have suggested that Russia passed the hacked material 
to WikiLeaks through intermediaries.

Both Clapper and Admiral Michael Rogers, the director of the National Security 
Agency, expressed concerns about intelligence analysts’ morale after Trump’s 
perceived disparagement of their work, with Rogers suggesting some may quit.

Clapper said that Russia “has clearly assumed an even more aggressive cyber 
posture,” and described the cyber-assault on the 2016 election as 
“multifaceted”.

“Hacking was only one part of it,” he said. “It also entailed classical 
propaganda, disinformation and fake news.”

Yet neither Clapper nor Rogers offered new evidence for their October 
conclusion of Russian interference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election>
. Clapper promised to release an unclassified report early next week, prepared 
by the NSA, CIA and FBI, providing additional information for the intelligence 
agencies’ conclusion that Russia deliberately hacked the Democratic National 
Committee in order to aid Trump in the 2016 presidential election.

“We stand more resolutely on that statement than we did on the seventh of 
October,” Clapper said. Next week’s report will ascribe what Clapper called 
“more than one motive” to Russian president Vladimir Putin for the assessed 
electoral interference.

Clapper, who has in the past signaled his discomfort with public intelligence 
testimony – and who has apologized forprevious false statements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/29/james-clapper-condemns-snowden-senate-testimony>
 to the Senate on the scope of domestic NSA surveillance – said he intends to 
“push the envelope as much as I can on the unclassified version” of the report 
“because I think the public should know as much of this as possible”.


“They did not change any vote tallies or anything of that sort,” Clapper said 
of the Russians. He demurred from considering their intrusion an “act of war” 
while under questioning from committee chairman John McCain, saying that would 
be a “very heavy policy call” not an intelligence judgment, particularly since 
the US also penetrates foreign digital networks.

“Every American should be alarmed by Russia’s attacks on our nation,” McCain 
said in his opening remarks. “There is no national security interest more vital 
to the United States of America than the ability to hold free and fair 
elections without foreign interference.”

Trump’s confidence in WikiLeaks has shocked and angered intelligence analysts, 
who consider Assange at the least a hostile actor, and at most a tool of Putin. 
Clapper and Rogers testified they believe Assange has no credibility. “I don’t 
think those of us in the intelligence community have a whole lot of respect for 
him,” said Clapper.

On Thursday morning, Trump denied he was “in agreement” with Assange, 
tweeting: “I simply state what he states, it is for the people to make up their 
own minds as to the truth.”

He claimed the media “lies to make it look like I am against ‘Intelligence’ 
when in fact I am a big fan!”

Asked about morale within the intelligence agencies in the wake of Trump’s 
comments, Clapper said: “I haven’t done a climate survey, but I hardly think it 
helps it.” Rogers said the “confidence of our leaders” helps motivate 
intelligence officers, “and without that confidence, I just don’t want a 
situation where our workforce decides to walk, because that’s not a good place 
for us to be”.

The Trump transition team has sought to weaken the impact of the intelligence 
findings on Russia meddling in the election by highlighting the US intelligence 
community’s failures over Iraq prior to the 2003 invasion. Clapper claimed that 
US intelligence collection and analysis had vastly improved since then.

“We do make mistakes, but we try to learn from them and makes changes,” he 
said, insisting that the contrast between US intelligence then and now was “the 
difference of night and day”.

Amid the background of distrust is a plan Trump is reportedly considering to 
reorganize the US intelligence apparatus. According to the Wall Street Journal, 
whichfirst reported the proposal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/lawmakers-officials-frown-on-donald-trumps-dismissal-of-u-s-intelligence-1483554450>
, Trump is considering diminishing the director of national intelligence and 
returning the CIA directorship, under Trump’s pick Mike Pompeo, to its prime 
role within the intelligence community. Trump’s incoming press secretary Sean 
Spicer called the report “100% false”.

Since Trump’s election, some career US intelligence officials have told the 
Guardian theyfear retaliation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/national-security-shift-us-policy-trump-presidency>
 for their assessment of Russian electoral interference. A leading figure 
behind the reported reorganization is said to be Trump’s national security 
adviser, Mike Flynn, the former Defense Intelligence Agency chief whom Clapper 
fired in 2014. Clapper said the current intelligence leadership has not been 
consulted on the plan.

While Clapper’s fate is certain, Rogers’ is not. Last month, Barack Obama 
backedcleaving the NSA from its military twin 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2016/12/23/statement-president-signing-national-defense-authorization-act-fiscal>
, the US Cyber Command, which is responsible for defending military data 
networks and waging online attack. It is unclear whether Trump will take up 
this initiative, particularly since it would leave Rogers without a job, as the 
NSA would be led by a civilian. Acongressional outcry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/19/nsa-donald-trump-michael-rogers-intelligence-agencies>
 followed leaks of the potential change in November.


McCain, who has a frosty relationship with Trump, denied the purpose of the 
hearing was to diminish Trump’s electoral victory.

McCain notably praised the “dedicated” US intelligence analysts and 
contextualized Russian interference in the election within what he said was a 
“provocative” US inability to create a deterrent to digital assault.

In a potential preview of partisan responses to the forthcoming report, 
practically no Republican defended Trump against Clapper’s and Rogers’ 
assessment.

The exception was Arkansas senator Tom Cotton, who suggested that the 
president-elect’s pledges to expand defense spending and modernize the US 
nuclear weapons arsenal meant that, contrary to received wisdom, “perhaps 
Donald Trump is not the best candidate for Russia”.

His fellow Republican Thom Tillis did not go as far as Cotton, but sought to 
minimise the significance of Russia’s actions, referring to a Carnegie Mellon 
University study that said the US had interfered in 81 foreign elections since 
the second world war, while the Soviet Union or Russia had interfered in 36.

Tim Kaine, the Virginia senator who was former Democratic presidential 
candidate Hillary Clinton’s running mate during the election, compared Russian 
interference to the Watergate break-in and implored Congress to “stand in a 
bipartisan way” against electoral subversion. The GOP congressional leadership 
is opposing a Democratic push for a special committee to investigate the hack.

McCain ally Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina Republican, urged Trump to issue 
a forceful response to Russia and said: “When one political party is 
compromised, we all are.”
 