
The full extent of the battering high street stores received last month as 
wary shoppers kept their wallets closed was revealed yesterday with a series of 
grim trading updates.

Retail analysts' worst fears were confirmed when Marks & Spencer unveiled its 
most dismal performance in living memory, with sales down by up to a fifth on 
last year's levels. More than £1.5 billion was wiped off the value of the 
company as its shares dropped 14 per cent, tumbling 53.5p to 339.75p.

But the ailing store group - which can no longer pretend that its problems are 
a mere blip - was not alone in suffering a blue Christmas.

Mothercare and Bhs group Storehouse had an equally bumpy ride, with sales down 
more than 6 per cent in its Mothercare stores and more than 4 per cent at Bhs.

The slump was not confined to clothing. Argos, now part of the GUS 
home-shopping empire, also suffered an about-turn in its fortunes and Game, a 
specialist computer games chain, said sales were down by nearly 4 per cent.

Boots, traditionally viewed as one of the most defensive retail stocks, 
managed to record slightly improved sales overall but confirmed poorer sales in 
some sectors, and shares dropped 56p to 938p, wiping £600 million off the value 
of the company.

The appalling figures sent analysts back to their desks to recalculate their 
end-of-year profit estimates. The damage done to Marks & Spencer's bottom line 
will be the worst - full-year profits could be £200 million less than 
expectated. Analysts wiped £10 million off their estimates for Storehouse, and 
some suggested that Boots could be hit by up to £30 million.

M&S's performance, however, was worse than its rivals', reflecting the reports 
of piles of unsold stock from the chain's stores.

In the five weeks to January 2, sales were 5 per cent below the 1997 level. 
But that figure understates the slump. First, there was 9 per cent extra 
selling space in the period, meaning sales from equivalent space were 13 per 
cent lower. Second, the figure includes the sale's first week. Pre-Christmas 
sales are believed to have been 15-20 per cent down.

Even with extra space, clothing sales were 5 per cent lower than 1997, while 
food halls dipped by 1.6 per cent. Home furnishings sales fell by more than 13 
per cent over Christmas, and chief executive Peter Salsbury admitted the 
company had mountains of unsold seasonal goods.

Boots chairman Lord Blyth said the group had performed "reasonably well", but 
that giftware sales had been "disappointing". Boots also admitted its new 
superstores were stealing business from existing neighbouring stores.

At Storehouse, Mothercare performed particularly badly, with most damage done 
in childrenswear. Chief executive Keith Edelman said retailers were operating 
in "the toughest trading conditions for many years".

Elsewhere House of Fraser, which slashed prices well before Christmas, 
reported sales marginally ahead. But its statement covered five months of 
trading, and sales have since declined.

Computer games retailer Game blamed its problems on lack of stock. The group's 
chief executive, Paul Lloyd Roach, said the group had been short of 25,000 
PlayStations in December.
 