
High street sales rebounded sharply last month as record discounts in the 
January sales tempted wary consumers back to the shops. But the underlying 
trend remained sluggish.

After falling 0.8 per cent in December, sales volumes surged ahead by 1.1 per 
cent, according to the latest data published by the Office for National 
Statistics. But the gains were concentrated in sectors offering the deepest 
discounts, suggesting consumers remain extremely price-conscious.

"It's the old story of big discounts getting the shoppers out in January," 
said John O'Sullivan, economist at
Greenwich NatWest in the City. "It is not clear yet whether this is indicating 
the start of a revival in consumer spending." Leading the way in January were 
textiles, clothing and footwear shops, whose sales volumes increased 2.9 per 
cent month-on-month, closely followed by household goods stores. Their sales 
volumes were up 2.6 per cent.

Inflation figures published on Tuesday showed that both sectors slashed prices 
by the biggest margins on record in January to drum up business.

Food sales, a sector dominated by the big supermarkets, were less buoyant, 
rising by 0.5 in the month and falling by 0.4 per cent year-on-year.

The ONS said January's recovery in trade had boosted the underlying trend - 
measured by comparing the latest three months to the previous three - to 0.4 
per cent from minus 0.1 in December. However, a spokesman added that the 
pick-up was modest compared to a year ago, when the three-month trend showed a 
rise of 1.4 per cent.

The figures were slightly better than expected in the City, where analysts had 
predicted a weaker recovery after a lacklustre Christmas. But they were not 
seen as an obstacle to lower interest rates.

Following figures out earlier in the week, showing inflation remaining above 
the Government's 2.5 per cent target and unemployment continuing to fall, many 
analysts expect the Bank of England's monetary policy committee to leave rates 
on hold next month at 5.5 per cent after five cuts in as many months.

But with economic activity more likely to weaken than strengthen in the months 
ahead under the weight of the global slowdown, the downward trend in rates is 
expected to resume soon.

Francesca Masson, of Goldman Sachs, said she expected rates to bottom out at 
4.5 per cent by early 2000.

Delivering a lecture at Hertfordshire University last night, Bank of England 
Governor Eddie George kept the door open to cheaper borrowing by saying that it 
would be right for industrialised countries to contemplate an easier stance to 
bolster domestic demand if global economic prospects deteriorated.

"We have no interest in the creation of unnecessary spare capacity in our 
economies as a whole, nor in a fall in the underlying general price level," 
said Mr George.

He said, however, that the MPC was not anticipating a recession in Britain and 
warned that when global economic activity picked up, it would need to put rates 
up to restrain growth in domestic demand and keep inflation on target. That was 
a "problem for the future", though.
 