
A mobile phone game that tests spatial navigation skills and has been played 
by 2.4 million people, has become the largestdementia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/dementia> study in history and raised 
hopes of a breakthrough in diagnosing the disease.

Sea Hero Quest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/head-quarters/2016/may/19/sea-hero-quest-mobile-game-dementia-alzheimers-disease-spatial-navigation>
, a collaboration betweenAlzheimer’s Research UK 
<http://www.alzheimersresearchuk.org/>, Deutsche Telekom, game designers 
Glitchers and scientists, has generated the equivalent of 9,400 years of 
lab-based research since its launch in May.

Experts hope to use the data to create the world’s first global benchmark for 
spatial navigation, one of the first abilities affected by dementia, and to 
develop the game into an early diagnostic test for the disease, which is the
leading cause of death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/14/dementia-and-alzheimers-leading-cause-of-death-england-and-wales>
 in England and Wales.

 Dr Hugo Spiers, of University College London, who presented the preliminary 
findings at the Neuroscience 2016 conference in San Diego, said: “This is the 
only study of its kind, on this scale, to date. Its accuracy greatly exceeds 
that of all previous research in this area. The findings the game is yielding 
have enormous potential to support vital developments in dementia research. The 
ability to diagnose dementia at early stages, well before patients exhibit any 
signs of general memory loss, would be a milestone.

“This study is thus now giving us the opportunity to make a real difference to 
the lives of millions of people living with dementia and those at risk of 
developing the disease in the future.”

Sea Hero Quest requires players to navigate a boat through waters in 
differently themed areas over 75 levels, collecting items along the way. It was 
designed to appeal to all gamers, rather than just people wanting to contribute 
to a good cause, and its popularity has seen the number of players soar past 
the original target of 100,000 by the end of the year.

Players provide their age and sex, allowing the scientists to chart their 
performance against other users.


Spiers said they could now create the equivalent of a height chart whereby if 
someone was particularly short – or in this case if their spatial navigation 
ability was particularly low – for their age and sex it would raise a red flag.

By testing a person’s spatial navigation abilities, the game could allow for 
diagnosis and treatment of patients far earlier.

Spiers said Sea Hero Quest, which will now be adapted for use in a clinical 
setting, could also be used to track decline and in drug trials to test the 
impact of the medication.

Alzheimer’s Research UK’s chief executive, Hilary Evans, praised the role of 
Deutsche Telekom, which has spent more than €1m (£860,000) on the project, 
including marketing.

“The early data that has very quickly been generated by Sea Hero Quest should 
inspire other corporations to consider what assets they might bring to research 
into dementia or any of our most seemingly intractable medical conditions,” she 
said.

The experts found differences in spatial navigation strategies employed by men 
and women, and also that spatial navigation abilities began to decline from 
early adulthood. For example, players aged 19 (the youngest in the study) had a 
74% chance of accurately hitting a target during the game, compared with 46% 
among 75-year-olds (the oldest in the study). This decline over time 
contradicted previous studies – typically based on less than 100 people – which 
suggested cognitive abilities do not decline until later in life.


They also found that players in Nordic countries showed notable spatial 
navigation capabilities.

The scientists will carry out further analysis of the data over the next two 
years. In the meantime,the game continues to be available for free download 
<http://www.seaheroquest.com/en> and the data generated will contribute to the 
ongoing research.
 