
I am a humanitarian. I have a car full of emergency food rations. I have fuel 
for that car. I know where to go. I know that the road is safe. I know it is 
only two hours away.

I know there are men, women and children at the border waiting for this food. 
I know they are tired, and they probably walked many days to get there. I know 
they are likely to have been beaten, raped or harassed leaving their country, 
which is embroiled in conflict. I know they will probably steal from nearby 
farms, and hope not to get caught. I know this is a problem for the local 
community.

Secret aid worker: fixing the humanitarian and development divide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/05/secret-aid-worker-fixing-the-humanitarian-and-development-divide>
I have known all this for more than a week now. Others have known for longer. 
UNHCR released a report more than a month ago after they observed children 
fainting due to hunger from their difficult journey. Many of them then had to 
wait five days until they were taken to camps with appropriate services. Border 
point staff tell me they haven’t had food there since November.

Once we found out, we organised a meeting with numerous organisations and 
attempted to lay out an emergency response to begin the next day. Our plan had 
multiple levels – the emergency delivery of food immediately, followed by the 
installation of cooking pots and a place to store food to facilitate more 
regular feeding services.

Unfortunately, this never happened, due to UNHCR’s insistence on holding a 
joint assessment three days later. This was followed by another meeting four 
days after that. We complied, holding our tongues to jump through the 
humanitarian hoops we know all too well. But when that meeting looked like it 
would require another follow up, we had had enough. We announced that we would 
mobilise food, a car, fuel and were ready to give it to anyone at the border 
who was willing to receive it. No monitoring, no reporting, not even a 
signature would be required.

So I am stuck here, looking at my car, full of food. And those people are 
waiting for us, hungry

Everyone agreed, initially. UNHCR said they would coordinate with other 
organisations who have staff placed at the border points, to receive and 
distribute our aid. “Thank you,” they said. Phone calls were made and the plans 
were set.

The next morning, the receiving agency pulled out. They required specific 
protocols for distributing to be followed, and had not received the official 
permission to accept the aid. When we discussed what exactly they needed, they 
responded: “a discussion”. I called UNHCR, and got vague answers but they 
promised to “follow up immediately”. I called the agency back multiple times 
and eventually the phone just kept ringing. UNHCR told me to call different 
people, who never answered their phones, or responded to the text messages I 
sent.

So I am stuck here, looking at my car, full of food, the driver smoking 
cigarette after cigarette. And those people are waiting for us, hungry.

Secret aid worker: by not measuring impact, NGOs are abusing their power
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/19/secret-aid-worker-ngos-abusing-power-costly-evaluations>
I think back on this process, and realise the full extent of the bureaucracy 
we are dealing with. At first, many of us were motivated and willing to discuss 
protocols, identify gaps and play out theoretical scenarios – of 100 people 
crossing, 500 people crossing, 1,000 people crossing and so on. We would 
collaborate and identify challenges, finding ways to mitigate them where we 
could. But after countless meetings and joint assessments, where questions 
about sustainable food distribution, medicine and infrastructure weren’t 
answered but were just pushed down the agenda each week, our enthusiasm to play 
by the rules wavered.

Food is a basic need. Providing it should not be a problem.

I have a car. I have food that doesn’t need a signature. I have fuel and 
someone to bring it there. People are hungry, and I have food. But I have to 
wait. The receiving agency wants to discuss protocols, but not now. UNHCR 
cannot be reached. Should I send it anyway? Would our relations sour? Would it 
delay further action? I hope the people waiting never find out I have a car 
full of food, right here, but cannot reach them.

My work within the humanitarian sphere is new, I am certainly not widely 
experienced and I am not pretending to fully understand the complicated 
questions that define a response. I get the ins and outs of identifying needs, 
ensuring beneficiaries are taken care of responsibly, thinking broadly about 
systems and ensuring sustainability. I get it. However, what I witnessed on 
that day brought up debilitating, existential crisis questions for me. If we 
can’t give food to hungry people quickly, then what the hell are we doing?

The hardest part is, where to lay the blame? Probably everywhere is the 
answer. Partially, I think it lies with poor leadership, poor action points, 
and poorly conducted meetings. Certainly our own egos are to blame. Definitely 
the bureaucracy within our own organisations, and our blind commitment to 
defend those we work for and ourselves, regardless of circumstances.

Eventually the food we had collected made it to those border points – or some 
of them at least. Mission accomplished? It was still weeks later and that isn’t 
a timeframe many of us are comfortable with.

Do you have a secret aid worker story you’d like to tell? You can contact us 
confidentially atglobaldevpros@theguardian.com 
<mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com> – please put “Secret aid worker” in the 
subject line. If you’d like to encrypt your email to us, here areinstructions 
<https://www.mailvelope.com/help> on how to set up a PGP mail client and our 
public PGP key <https://pgp.theguardian.com/PublicKeys/Global%20Devpros.pub.txt>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 