
Tim Worner, chief executive of Seven West Media, says he is “filled with the 
deepest shame and regret” over an affair with a former network executive 
assistant who is now engaged in a legal dispute with the broadcaster.

Worner apologised for his affair with Amber Harrison – which took place before 
he became CEO – as Seven West attacked what it called “wide-ranging 
inaccuracies and false statements” made by Harrison about her treatment.

The company said Worner would remain as chief executive, after the reports 
sparked an 8% drop in Seven West’s share price on Monday.

Seven West’s board held an emergency meeting on Monday after reports carrying 
allegations made by Harrison about her treatment by the network appeared in 
Fairfax and News Corp publications.

A statement from Seven West late on Monday said the broadcaster made a 
confidential settlement with Harrison, a former executive assistant to the 
company’s magazines boss, more than two years ago, with payments made to her as 
part of the terms.

In the Fairfax and News Corp reports, Harrison, who was 35 when the affair 
began in 2012, said she became distressed by the workplace relationship and 
sought unsuccessfully to end it.

Harrison alleged she was subsequently confronted with accusations of abusing 
her corporate credit card. Harrison’s employment reportedly ended in 2014.

Worner, in a statement, said he was trying to repair the damage caused by his 
affair and minimise distress to his family. “This relationship finished some 
years ago and I apologised at the time, and am still trying to make amends,” he 
said.

“I am obviously filled with the deepest regret and shame. My focus is to 
continue to work through this in private and minimise the distress to my 
family.”

The network revealed the confidential agreement with Harrison included 
payments, to be made in instalments, in recognition of her “fragile emotional 
stability” and to “enable her to move on with her life”.

There were conditions of confidentiality and “mutual non-disparagement” on the 
settlement and Seven said it is “entitled to withhold payment for 
noncompliance” with the terms of the deed.

Harrison has reportedly recently changed lawyers to continue negotiations over 
the terms of her settlement.
 