



The changing of the fashion season seems to get ever more anxious. Not so long 
ago it was easy. You had two collections a year – spring/summer, autumn/winter 
– and everyone just got on with it. I mean, there have always been these funny 
smaller collections called things like “resort” and “cruise”, but unless you 
were a womenswear buyer for Bergdorf Goodman, you didn’t have to worry about 
them.

Nowadays you can’t go for a wee without coming back to your desk to find 
someone’s released a new collection, a sneaky collaboration or a pre-collection 
that in some way redefines what’s hot right now and what we all need to buy. 
Frankly it’s a bit wearing.

Right now we’re in trans-season – a selling term rather than a made-up fashion 
word – which refers to a selection of new styles that will help you 
“transition” from summer to autumn. I seem to recall that we used to do that by 
putting on a jumper and digging out some tights, but if you’d rather buy a new 
set of clothes, here’s what to look for right now.

Wide-legged trousers are going to be the new style for autumn – especially 
worn as part of a suit – so you might as well invest in a pair now. They’re 
more forgiving than culottes but still a bit tricky: make sure your trousers 
sit properly on your waist and get someone to turn them up for you or you’ll 
come a cropper at some point between now and Christmas.

Pinafore dresses are a bit of a thing right now and they are actually good for 
all weathers: if it’s hot, wear them as is; if it’s cold, stick a jumper 
underneath. Just make sure you get one with the right apron-front to put your 
bust in. A high, square neckline or a shaped plunge V-neck style are the two 
best for grown-ups. Leave the strappy ones to the 14-year-old supermodels.

If you’re tired of sandals, then buy some Mary Janes. You’ll buy boots and 
Oxfords later in the year, so enjoy these while you can. There are some really 
pretty ones out there. Lots have more than one ankle strap, but I think two per 
shoe makes the point – though I am very impatient and the thought of all those 
buckles makes me feel a little agoraphobic.

If you buy a jumper, get a roll-neck. They’re still the most on-trend style. 
There are a lot of loose, sleeveless styles out there at the moment which will 
look pretty over a top or worn on their own, but make sure you get a more 
fitted version soon, too. The other big neckline detail for autumn is the thin 
scarf or pussy-bow shirt. Stock up on these, too.

Finally keep an eye out for A-line skirts. This year has been all about the 
70s but we’re sliding back a decade to the 60s in the autumn, to a time of 
short skirts, tunic dresses and absolutely no transitional dressing. Nostalgic 
times indeed.


Follow Alice on Instagram @aliceefisher <https://instagram.com/aliceefisher/>
 