
Tesco’s former chief executive Philip Clarke will not face charges in relation 
to an accounting scandal at the supermarket chain, it has been confirmed.

Clarke’s lawyer, David Corker, said on Monday that he had received a letter 
from the Serious Fraud Office (SFO) informing him of the decision. Unconfirmed 
reports in recent weeks had suggested Clarke would escape prosecution.


“Following a thorough review of the evidence obtained … it has been decided 
not to initiate criminal proceedings on the grounds there is insufficient 
evidence to provide a realistic prospect of conviction,” the letter read, 
according to Corker.

He had been questioned over the scandal, which left a £326m hole in Tesco’s 
books in 2014. The company admitted it had overstated profits by £263m by 
incorrectly booking payments from suppliers. It later revised the overstatement 
up by £63m.

Three other former Tesco directors in the UK have been charged over the 
allegations that the firm overstated its profits in 2014.


Carl Rogberg, Tesco UK’s former finance director, Christopher Bush, its former 
managing director, and John Scouler, the former commercial director for food, 
were each charged with one count of fraud by abuse of position and one count of 
false accounting.

They face up to 10 years in jail if found guilty of fraud by abuse and seven 
years for false accounting. They have each denied the charges and the case has 
been sent to Southwark crown court for trial.


A source told the Guardian that the decision not to charge Clarke cast doubt 
on reports that the SFO would seek to prosecute the company because the former 
directors who have been charged were not sufficiently senior to back up claims 
of corporate fraud.

The SFO declined to comment, save for indicating that its investigation is 
continuing. It is understood that its options would be to bring charges, drop 
them, or come to a deferred prosecution agreement with Tesco that would require 
the firm to agree to a set of conditions, such as allowing in monitors.
 