
These are exciting times in Japan, where Nintendo is launching its 
next-generation console, the Gamecube, next week. The Americans are also 
getting excited: Microsoft is launching the Xbox console in the US on November 
8, and Nintendo plans to follow with a Gamecube launch on November 18. But as 
last weekend's European Computer Trade Show in London illustrated, things are 
deadly dull over here.

Sony and Nintendo didn't even turn  up, and Microsoft's presence was so 
low-key it was almost invisible. According to Screen Digest, which researches 
the market, we are not actually in a trough. "Despite all the doom and gloom," 
the UK market is, it says, "value stable". Sales of leisure software grew by 
1.5% last year to £934.4m - a record - and the total is predicted to fall by 
only 1.2% this year. However, this will leave annual sales roughly where they 
were in 1998.

The UK market is expected to warm up next year. Nintendo says "spring 2002" 
for the Gamecube launch, while Microsoft says "first quarter" for the Xbox, 
with insiders tipping March 29. But Nintendo has delayed the US launch of the 
Gamecube, and Microsoft has postponed the Japanese launch of the Xbox until 
next year, so even if we had dates, it would not be wise to bank on them. 
Unfortunately, this is what game development studios and publishers are obliged 
to do.

At least Nintendo gave the European trade - mainly dealers and journalists - a 
taster, taking over Westminster Central Hall on Saturday. There were dozens of 
Gamecubes to play with, and a string of games including Luigi's Mansion (think 
Ghostbusters), Wave-race Bluestorm, Super Smash Brothers Melee, Pikmin (weird), 
Eternal Darkness (a bit like Perfect Dark) and LucasArts' Star Wars Rogue 
Squadron II: Rogue Leader (seewww.lucasarts.com/products/rogueleader/splash.htm 
<http://www.lucasarts.com/products/rogueleader/splash.htm>). 

The Gamecube in near-launch state turned out to be more impressive than I 
expected. This contrasts with Sony's PlayStation 2, which now looks less 
impressive than expected. Given that Nintendo could sell millions of machines 
if it made them out of cardboard and chewing gum - if you want a Super Mario or 
Pokémon game, you have no alternative - it should do well.

Nintendo's games business is now underpinned by massive sales of 
Pokémon-related Game Boy Color and Game Boy Advance handhelds, and the company 
is planning to launch an even smaller device: the Pokémon Mini. This will 
measure 74mm by 58mm by 23mm and weigh only 70g. The first games will include 
Pokémon Party Mini, Pokémon Pinball Mini, Pokémon Zany Cards and the Pokémon 
Puzzle Collection. It will be launched next year.

In the absence of new console hardware at ECTS, the add-on manufacturers came 
to the fore. Products on show included a wonderfully realistic-looking range of 
guns, a fighting arena for beat-'em-up fans, and a stepper for fitness fanatics.

The Dreamgun range of wireless game controllers from Korea's GameBox has 
something for almost everyone, from a bow and arrow to an early German machine 
gun to the L85 Assault Rifle out of Starship Troopers. The sniper rifle, to 
take one example, is more than a metre long, weighs 3.5kg and has recoil. It is 
not at all like those cheap plastic handguns sold for shooting games. But you'd 
better be careful about playing with yourDreamgun <http://www.dreamgun.com> out 
of doors.

Both the Thrustmaster Fighting Arena and Happy Diet stepper will help gamers 
work up a healthy sweat. The TFA has four sets of photo sensors on two poles to 
capture your movements. You do real kicks and punches to make your game 
character perform kicks and punches on the screen 
http://europe.thrustmaster.com/mediaroom/releases/0018.php 
<http://europe.thrustmaster.com/mediaroom/releases/0018.php>. 

The stepper is another way of controlling an on-screen character. But it is 
just a way of making indoor exercises a bit less boring. The stepper has 
already been launched in Japan with the Happy Diet game, and could reach the UK 
before Christmas.

The great thing about these new peripherals is their almost unlimited 
potential. For example, today you might be delighted to use XTecnologies' 
Ducati Corse II handlebars with their small but cute fairing, but tomorrow you 
might want to use Yamaha or Norton handlebars. As videogames become more 
realistic, the controllers will need to become more realistic too.

And the winners are:

 Game of the Show: Denki Blocks (Rage) for Game Boy Advance 

 PC Game of the Show: Project Nomad (CDV) 

 Console Game of the Show: Universal Studios (Kemco) for Gamecube 

 Handheld Game of the Show: Denki Blocks (Rage) for Game Boy Advance 

 Multiplayer Game of the Show: Anarchy Online (Funcom) 

 A panel of European journalists voted for the Game of the Show awards, and 
presented them at ECTS

PC game of the year 

 Benelux: Black & White (EA) 

 Eastern Europe: Black & White (EA) 

 France: Giants (Interplay) 

 Germany: Black & White (EA) 

 Italy: Black & White (EA) 

 Russia: Baldur's Gate II (Interplay) 

 Scandinavia: Black & White (EA) 

 Spain:  Black & White (EA) 

Console game of the year 

 Benelux: Gran Turismo 3 (Sony) 

 Eastern Europe: Gran Turismo 3 (Sony) 

 France: ISS Pro Evolution 2 (Konami) 

 Germany:  Gran Turismo 3 (Sony) 

 Italy:  Shen Mue (Sega) 

 Spain: Gran Turismo 3 (Sony)
 