
I think Mark Gatiss (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/04/to-an-undiscerning-critic-from-mark-gatiss>
, 5 January) is in danger of protesting too much. Perhaps Ralph Jones has 
ruffled feathers with the accuracy of his gentle critique of the latest Holmes 
offering (Sherlock is slowly and perversely morphing into Bond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/03/sherlock-slowly-perversely-morphing-into-james-bond-benedict-cumberbatch>
, theguardian.com, 3 January).

Is it the curse of TV executives that in the euphoria of huge success they 
don’t understand what got a programme there in the first place. Is it a modern 
phenomenon that we’re forever destined to see great TV creations “sexed up” and 
overblown until they lose their original appeal and become self-caricatures? 
The lessons of Bake Off should still be fresh in the mind. Jones is right to 
point to the long-running classics of old.

Whatever scrapes Gatiss can point to in Doyle’s original works, Jones has that 
more than covered in his piece. And he’s surely right that the appeal of 
Benedict Cumberbatch’s Holmes is the flawed genius using his wits to rise above 
the fight and win the day. And the brooding menace of Moriarty’s potentially 
superior cunning is the sub-plot that drove previous outings, providing a 
twisting intellectual thread that holds the whole story together. Not the size 
of his assault rifle.

We shouldn’t judge a book by its cover and perhaps a New Year’s Day launch 
event isn’t representative of the whole series. But if Gatiss can’t see the 
simple truth in Jones’ critique then it doesn’t bode well for the future of the 
franchise. Or does it, in purely box office and sell-on terms? And there’s 
perhaps the rub.

What I can be sure of is that daughters and their friends fell in love with a 
gawky-looking guy who was a bit of a social misfit but had a great brain. It 
was refreshing and charming, whimsical, clever and engaging. Everything that 
the Six Thatchers wasn’t!
John Withington
Sutton Coldfield, West Midlands

• It may surprise Sherlock Holmes aficionados (old and new) that until I read 
Mark Lawson’s review (Cumberbatch channels Bond in the most explosive outing yet
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/01/sherlock-benedict-cumberbatch-review-james-bond-margaret-thatcher-mark-gatiss-steven-moffat-detective>
, 2 January), not Ralph Jones’s that led Mark Gatiss into verse, I hadn’t 
realised which original case was involved, arguably one of the most familiar, 
The Six Napoleons. Perhaps I was half asleep. I heard an exclamation “the 
Borgia Pearl”, but the smashing of plaster busts to smithereens didn’t shock my 
memory. I understand that it is a modern interpretation, but it seemed closer 
to a war game than 007. My chief objection, because I do look forward to 
Sherlock (even if it seems I’m not concentrating) is the flashing screen notes 
(Twitter?) which I am unable to read. I have now reread the original story and 
will look forward to catch-up. If, as the review notes, this episode was close 
to the original story it will be a pleasure. It is interesting that Holmes uses 
the press, Horace Harker, to help with the case, as Mark Gatiss has used a 
press review to defend his version of Sherlock Holmes.
Graham Ullathorne
Lower Pilsley, Derbyshire

• Sherlock (The Six Thatchers) on BBC1 took just under a third of the viewing 
audience (Sherlock collars 8.1m viewers to top New Year’s Day TV ratings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/02/sherlock-tops-new-years-day-tv-ratings-81m-viewers-bbc>
, Guardian, 3 January). Therefore more than two-thirds didn’t watch this far 
from subtle Margaret Thatcher-baiting ego trip, laced with hate; witness 
Gatiss’s use of a line from one of Shakespeare’s three witches (by the pricking 
of my thumbs… Guardian readers know the rest). Rarely does a day pass without a 
rant about Thatcher – either directly, or subliminally in the form of an cosily 
evangelical Gatiss review – appearing somewhere in the Guardian. Like this 
obsession, today’s Sherlock should meet his Reichenbach Falls in the 
forthcoming Final Problem; no need for The Empty House.
Charles Foster
Chalfont St Peter, Buckinghamshire

• Mark Gatiss’s effort at verse reminds me of Morecambe and Wise and the Grieg 
Piano Concerto: all the right rhythms are there, but not necessarily in the 
right order.
Michael Bulley
Chalon-sur-Saône, France

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 