
Britain's retailers suffered their worst Christmas on record as cost-conscious 
shoppers shunned the high street and prepared for the expected economic 
slowdown, figures showed yesterday.

 The slump in sales revived hopes that the Bank of England may cut the cost of 
borrowing for the fifth month in a row at its February meeting, despite last 
month's upward blip in inflation.

 City analysts had expected a small rise in sales despite dire warnings from 
high street flagship Marks & Spencer about a Christmas downturn, and expressed 
surprise at the extent of the fall.

 Sales volumes slumped by 0.9 per cent in December, usually the peak shopping 
month, according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS). The fall is the 
largest ever recorded in December.

 In the last three months of 1998, sales volumes fell by 0.2 per cent, the 
first quarterly reduction in more than three years. The ONS said the cash value 
of sales in the final three months of 1998 increased by just 2.3 per cent, the 
lowest growth rate since they began collecting the figures in 1987.

 Industry leaders called on the Bank to cut interest rates quickly to prevent 
the economy from falling into deep recession. Chris Humphries, director general 
of the British Chambers of Commerce, said there was now no reason for the Bank 
not to cut interest rates again next month. "These figures confirm all the 
forecasts made by recent business surveys and show the Bank of England must 
stay on course for interest rate cuts to a level of 5 per cent or below by 
summer."

 Some economists said yesterday that the sales slump could have dragged the 
economy into negative growth in the last three months for the first time since 
the start of 1992. The first estimate of growth in the fourth quarter of 1998 
is published by the ONS tomorrow. Independent forecasts for growth in 1999 from 
academic and City economists showed the economy is expected to expand by just 
0.6 per cent this year.

 Yesterday's figures confirm retailers' reports of a blue Christmas. Analysts 
said many shops had kept prices too high and that consumers were saving their 
spending for the January sales.

 Heavy discounting by some retailers, such as Dixons, Harvey Nichols and 
Kingfisher, just before and after Christmas failed to claw back the lost ground 
in the first half of the month.

 The ONS said nearly all types of shops were hit by the slowdown. Clothing and 
footware sales volumes fell by nearly 2 per cent in the month, despite many 
shops starting January sales early. The only sector to buck the trend was 
furniture and household furnishing, a sign, some analysts said, that lower 
mortgage rates could be boosting house sales.

 Yesterday's figures caused dealers to sell the pound, in the expectation that 
UK interest rates are on their way down. Sterling lost half a cent against the 
dollar and nearly a pfennig against the German mark.

 The shadow chancellor, Francis Maude, said the new predictions coupled with 
the retail sales figures indicated "that the economy is doing far worse than 
the Government has been complacently pretending".

 He added: "Until Gordon Brown rips up his fantasy forecasts and makes a 
proper assessment of the state of the economy... he won't be able to get a grip 
on the problems we face."
 