
Simon Russell Beale joined us to talk about tackling King Lear – a mountain of 
a role,as Peter Brook once called it 
<http://www.rsc.org.uk/explore/shakespeare/plays/king-lear/peter-brook-1962.aspx>
 – and answered questions on everything from Lear toSpamalot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/jan/24/theatre>...

Les Dennis asked: "Having both played Arthur in @spamalotwestend ... what is 
your description of his horse?"

Simon replied: Funnily enough, I used to think that the key to Arthur was the 
fact that deep down he knew he didn't have a horse.

Q: "How much fun was king arthur in spamalot to do considering you do so many 
serious roles?"

Spamalot came as a complete surprise, absolutely out of the blue. It was just 
what I needed to do at the time. Oddly, of course, despite it's not being 
Shakespeare or anyone like that, the same method of rehearsal applies.

Q: I was just wondering whether you have any more plans to dance?
(' Strictly' perhaps) as we loved you as the duchess in Alice at ROH!!

I loved every moment of my time at the Royal Ballet. In fact I've still got 
the company pass card in my wallet to prove to any sceptic that I did actually 
for them. But it did take months of extremely hard work to get even my pathetic 
contribution up to scratch. As the only actor in the rehearsal room, I was 
surrounded by performers who were like a different species from me – and they 
worked so hard.

Q: King Lear is popularly regarded as the pinnacle of Shakespearean parts, 
both in terms of the role itself and the experience of the actor assaying it. 
Having now scaled this peak, what Shakespearean roles remain that you would 
like to perform? Can we look forward to a Prospero in the near future?

I suppose Prospero would be the logical Shakespeare role to do next – but I've 
always found the Tempest profoundly puzzling despite having played Ariel for 
for Sam Mendes years ago. So honestly, it scares a little at the moment.

SPOILER ALERT! Q: Having seen Lear last night (and very glad to have done so) 
I was a bit shocked by the way the question of the disappearance of the Fool in 
acts four and five is resolved in this production. What was the impact of this 
change--which shows Lear in a much more sinister light--on your interpretation 
of the role?

The idea of Lear killing the Fool came up quite later in rehearsal and was 
originally was a bit of cheek to explain of course why the fool disappears from 
the story, but it did feed in to my ideas about how violent a man Lear is – a 
man who in his madness would not necessarily become docile.

Q: Your 2007 Much Ado About Nothing led me to study Theatre and Performance 
Studies at Warwick. I wondered how you found the experience of Much Ado? And 
more specifically, how you found playing a role like Benedick where the 
character undergoes such a change so quickly? Is it hard to make believable 
that Benedick would fall so suddenly in love and change so rapidly after 
hearing Beatrice loves him?

What a thrilling message to read and I send you all the best for your academic 
career. I'm very envious.

Much Ado was a particularly golden experience for me. Nick Hytner was on great 
form throughout rehearsal and the production absolutely sang with love. I also 
think that Benedick is arguably one of the bravest men that Shakespeare wrote. 
Not in any macho way. He's certainly no soldier; but on a very human scale. In 
a play where the sexes are kept apart, his allying himself with the women takes 
a lot of courage.

Q: I loved your interpretation of Stalin in Collaborations - did you do any 
particular research that helped you to create this role and did it inform your 
portrayal of Lear in any way?

I did a lot of research for Stalin while I was rehearsing another play so 
every evening I immersed myself in this terrible period of history. Eventually 
I had to stop – actually at the request of my director who thought the whole 
thing was depressing me. But of course it fed directly into Collaborators the 
play and probably has left a residue in Lear too. I don't think Lear is 
particularly Stalinesque because he's loved by so many people. But he 
undoubtedly behaves cruelly and starts a vicious civil war that almost destroys 
his kingdom.

Q: Which other Shakespearean actors working today do you admire?

I admire a whole host of them... Mark Rylance has a particular genius which is 
indefinable when it comes to Shakespeare. I admire Alex Jennings for his 
breathtaking technical skills. He can make the most complex verse as clear as a 
bell. Roger Allam, whose Prospero I saw recently – what a great performance. 
And those are just the men. For the women, Zoe Wanamaker of course, Harriet 
Walter. And I'm missing out the greats like Judi Dench and Ian McKellen. The 
list goes on and on.

Q: How has your long running professional relationship with Sam Mendes changed 
you as an actor?

As for Sam Mendes – it's been about a quarter of a century since Sam and I 
first met. Actually I met Nick Hytner about the same time too. As directors, 
the two of them have been fundamentally important to me. I'm not sure I can say 
why; but both of them are brave, fantastically clever, and with a pleasingly 
vulgar streak of theatricality. They are not responsible, however, for my 
acting.

Q: Following the sad news about Araucaria, do you have a favourite amongst 
current setters? I like Arachne because she does politics and Paul because he's 
a bit smutty.

What a marvellous man Araucaria was. I was taught how to do crosswords by I 
fellow actor called Norman Rodway who was a friend of Araucaria's. So he was 
there at the beginning of my crossword obsession. I think Paul's my favourite 
now. He has a similar wit. Wasn't the easter jumbo crossword fabulous. I have 
to do my crosswords in the morning, not in the afternoon but I made an 
exception for that one which kept me going all day.

Q: Are we likely to see your Falstaff on stage?

I would love to do Falstaff on stage but given Anthony Sher's rather 
spectacular performance at the moment, I might have to wait a bit.

Q: Are we likely to see you back with the RSC?

I would love to go back to the RSC, though maybe not to do Shakespeare. 
Perhaps a play by one of his contemporaries or a new work.

Q: Any plans to work in New York again? Loved your work in "Bluebird" back in 
'11.

No plans at the moment though to be honest I'd love to play King Lear there. 
The trouble is that New York has seen a lot of Lears recently and perhaps they 
don't need to see another one.

Bluebird the play was like Spamalot, in that the idea came out of the blue. 
And like Spamalot I had a marvellous time playing in a tiny theatre on a play 
that I grew to love.

Q: Do you believe the soliloquy translates as well on screen as it does on 
stage without the immediacy of an audience?

I'm not sure. I know that in my head I always cast the audience I can see in 
front of me in a role – as friends, sceptical observers, whatever. And of 
course that's not possible on screen. I suppose there are losses and gains in 
both media. It is rare though for Shakespeare not to ask for a type of direct 
address in the soliloquys which of course can only been achieved in the 
theatre. Interestingly, Iago seems to be the only person who breaks the 
fundamental convention of soliloquys – which is that of telling the truth to 
the audience. It seems to me that Iago lies as much in soliloquy as he does 
elsewhere.

Q: What do you think about live theatre in cinemas? Have you seen a NT Live 
broadcast? Do the cameras affect your performance (or stage fright)?

Live broadcasts of performances has become a bit of phenomenon. I confess I 
was sceptical at the beginning but I've done three now (London Assurance, Timon 
of Athens and Collaborators) and my fourth is on Thursday. The atmosphere 
behind stage is a bit like a gala. It is very exciting to think of it being 
broadcast all round the world. And there's a strict rule, as far as I can see, 
that no one asks us ever to change our performances to suit the cameras. It's 
deeply impressive how little the film crew impinges on our work.

Q: You, David Horovitch and Oliver Ford-Davies seem to my old ears to have the 
most beautiful diction on the English stage. Is it something you work at or is 
it a natural instrument? And what would you advise young actors who are keen to 
be heard and understood in all parts of the house? Because I can imagine 
playing the Olivier still has challenges, even for you.

The Oliver theatre is tricky to play, it's true; but I have to confess that 
it's one of my favourite theatres. I'm not sure I think consciously about 
diction as such. I think clarity is as much to do with intention as anything 
else. You must really want to talk to people in the back row and if you really 
want to, you will. Easier said than done though.

Q: What's the most difficult thing for you in a rehearsal room when you're 
beginning a new play?

If it's a well known play, then it's getting rid of my preconceptions. Harder 
than you might imagine. If somehow I can start from scratch, then there have 
been many occasions when I have discovered things that I never expected to. The 
second thing is trying to achieve absolutely clarity of thought. Before that's 
done the emotional life of any character is a bit of a mystery for me.

Q: After Hamlet at the NT you tackled Charlotte Jones' Hamlet-inspired "Humble 
Boy." After Lear, is there a Lear-inspired contemporary play on the horizon?

Ooh, what an interesting thought. Perhaps someone will take the hint.

Q: How do you prepare before a performance, and how do you tackle nerves?

I was told by a great actor called Michael Bryant who worked a lot at the 
NationalTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> and with whom I did 
his last shows, that nerves are a type of vanity. Another actor had told him 
that years before. I suppose it's true, though as I said to Michael, I don't 
know whether it helps very much. Yes, I get nervous, and no, it's not helpful. 
I wish I didn't.

Q: What makes a good director?

A good director must above all look as if he or she couldn't think of anywhere 
better to be than watching the cast perform. I'm serious. Confidence is so 
important in our game.Confidence is so important in our game.

Q: Simon - I thought that your Widmerpool in 'A Dance to the Music of Time' 
was one of the most perfect realisations of a literary character that I've ever 
seen on television. Powell seems to be able to conjure even the most minor 
characters into vivid life. What was it like to work with the books and the 
characters? Were you involved in any of the editorial decisions required in 
adapting the books?

I wasn't involved in any of the decisions but yes, it was a huge privilege to 
play a character that I slowly realised was one of the great creations of 20th 
century literature and of whom I had had no previous knowledge. That's the 
wonderful thing about my job – all the unexpected discoveries.
 