
How do Britain’s human rights abuses fit in with Theresa May’s continual bumf 
about her government “working for everyone”? The recent UN report on Britain’s 
systemic violation of the human rights of disabled people (Report, 8 November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/07/uk-austerity-policies-amount-to-violations-of-disabled-peoples-rights>
) damned the UK as the first country in the world to be found guilty of the 
deliberate human rights abuse of disabled people. That the British state could 
use welfare reform simply with the intent to force disabled people off benefits 
and as a way of motivating them into employment is a sad indictment of a Tory 
party not just out of touch with reality, but one out of step with the rest of 
the world.

This strategy would still be abhorrent if it actually worked. But it is simply 
a strategy of sink or swim – and as a consequence disabled people have died. If 
this report had been about France, Germany or any other EU country, there would 
have arguably been much moral bleating from the corridors of Westminster. 
Instead, we simply get plans for more of the same.
Paul Dodenhoff
Leyland, Lancashire

• Much has been said recently about the government’s commitment to work, 
health and disability, and we look forward to contributing to the consultation 
on this issue. A timely review from the all-party parliamentary group for MS 
published this week identifies the obstacles people with MS face with staying 
in, or getting into, work. Worryingly, many of these obstacles are preventable, 
involving workplace cultures and lack of access to employment support services. 
The review finds too many people with MS are forced to leave work earlier than 
they would choose to.

We know that many people with MS cannot work. But for those who can, simple, 
straightforward changes from employers, such as reasonable adjustments, can 
make a huge impact. And there are areas for improvement in government policies 
and support schemes such as the Work and Health Programme and Access to Work. 
More than 100,000 people live with MS in the UK and symptoms typically start 
appearing when people are in their twenties and thirties – at a critical point 
in their working lives. With the right support more people with MS, who are 
able to work, can remain in employment for longer. And those who can no longer 
work must be able to rely on welfare support without the fear of having it 
taken away.
Michelle Mitchell
Chief executive, MS Society

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 