
With the mesmeric rhythm of a metronome and the intense concentration of a 
hamster circling in a wheel,Sir Bradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins> rode into cycling’s record 
books here, covering 218 laps of the London Olympic Games track to push the 
world one-hour distance to 54.526 kilometres. The 2012 Tour de France winner 
and London 2012 gold medallist managed to race a dizzying one and a half 
kilometres beyond the previous mark of 52.937km set by his fellow Briton Alex 
Dowsett, whose tenure at the top of the table lasted only five weeks.

The hour gives an instant picture of how fast a cyclist can go under 
prevailing conditions at a certain point in history and it is this essential 
simplicity which has given the record a lustre that has lasted since its 
inception in 1893, in spite of a recent run of convoluted rule changes. The 
cycling greats who have held this record and won the Tour de France, the 
sport’s showcase event, in the post-war years are a select group of iconic 
names: Eddy Merckx, Miguel Indurain, Jacques Anquetil and Fausto Coppi. The 
measure of Wiggins’s achievement at the age of 35 is that he is now in their 
company.

Indurain was present in the track centre and – ever the self-confessed fan – 
Wiggins made sure the five-times winner signed a yellow jersey from his 
collection. The British Hour holders are an equally exclusive club: Chris 
Boardman – who holds the ultimate distance of 56.375km which is considered 
outside the current rules – the maverick Scot Graeme Obree, Dowsett and Yvonne 
McGregor, who took the women’s distance in 1995.

Wiggins hopes that he has raised the bar enough to deter others, and it is 
likely that 7 June 2015 will become a high-water mark concluding, for a while 
at least, the spate of nine attempts on the Hour in the last seven months that 
has followed a change in the rules to permit the use of aerodynamic aids within 
current rules. It has been a window of opportunity that has led to the record 
being broken four times and it has now been slammed shut. “I think I’ve put 
down a big marker and people will think twice,” he said.

Wiggins set off four minutes before the expected start time of 6.30pm, having 
grown impatient with waiting in the track centre, and from a few minutes in it 
was clear he would pulverise Dowsett’s record if he maintained his speed. It 
was then a matter of how much his margin would be. He raced past Dowsett’s 
distance with 58min 15sec on the clock – after which even a puncture or crash 
would have made no difference as he would still have held the record – and the 
60 minutes came up a second or so after he crossed the line to complete his 
218th lap.

The Hour record has its history but Wiggins also referred to a distant echo of 
a different past: the velodrome was constructed on the site of the Eastway 
cycle circuit where Wiggins raced as a junior in the 1990s; the sky-line still 
looks the same, although as he said, he would never have imagined what was 
coming 20 years on. The resonances of London 2012 were impossible to miss, from 
Wiggins’s gold aerodynamic helmet and shoes to the presence of Sebastian Coe 
among 20 amateur cyclists riding stationary bikes in the track centre to keep 
the hero of the hour company, and the Olympic cycling team head, Shane Sutton, 
trackside.

The sideburns that became the Wiggins hallmark in that golden August are long 
gone, having been replaced by a well trimmed beard that spawned imitations 
across the cycling world, but on Saturday the aerodynamics boffins advised 
Wiggins to lose the stubble; clean-shaven and with a crewcut to reduce the heat 
building up under the gold teardrop-shaped helmet, he looked some 10 years 
younger.

Having switched from the velodrome to the road before the home Olympics, 
Wiggins missed out on the “London roar” that made the velodrome such an 
intimidating venue in August 2012. He got it on Sunday night, in spades, and 
all to himself: the applause was as deafening as back then, and the commentary 
from veteran wordsman Hugh Porter – hired at Wiggins’s request as he had talked 
him home to most of his Olympic medals – as breathless as could be expected. 
Meanwhile, the man at the centre of it all lapped the track time after time in 
complete isolation, seemingly lost in the pain and the sweat under his helmet.

In keeping with the recent British cycling tradition of marginal gains, every 
base had been covered: smoothed-out aerodynamic bike, body suit with panels to 
optimise airflow and the temperature in the velodrome set to 28 degrees, warm 
enough to give a performance advantage – an increase in temperature of three 
degrees results in a 1% increase in speed, due to the increased movement among 
the air molecules that makes it easier for the cyclist to shove himself and his 
bike through them.

Immediately beforehand, two staff members armed with a dustpan, emery paper 
and gaffer tape checked the entire track, cutting out any splinters with a 
Stanley knife to minimise the risk of punctures. The one element that was out 
of Wiggins’s control was the British weather, and that failed to co-operate; an 
anti-cyclone with pressure at 1036 cost him about 700 metres, he believed.

It looked so simple, but towards the end, Wiggins said, it was “torture”, with 
his backside killing him, and the constant need to play mental games to keep 
his concentration. “Physically, I was on that red line where you can’t go 
harder but you are hanging on to what you’ve got. It’s relentless, lap after 
lap, but it’s at a pace where you can think because it’s not so intense that 
you block everything out.”

As he said afterwards, this is the perennial attraction, the link to Coppi, 
Merckx and all the others: this record boils down to a man on his own against 
the scoreboard, counting down lap after interminable lap.
 