
It wasn’t easy for me to turn down a place at Cambridge in favour of studying 
in Amsterdam. As the end of my first year approaches, however, I’m in no doubt 
that I made the right choice.

After an international childhood spent living in four different countries, I 
wanted to be in a global city. I also wasn’t sure which subject I wanted to 
study, and the liberal arts course at Amsterdam University College allows me to 
explore a range of options.

The Netherlands is a very relaxed country – as shown by its liberal attitude 
towards drugs and prostitution – and this laid-back vibe is central to the 
student experience.

Here’s why Dutch student life trumps that in Britain.

1. You’re a part of the place you live


 Dutch universities typically offer fewer societies, so students take part in 
activities in their town or city – such as amateur sports teams and local 
choirs. I help to organiseEuropean Youth Parliament <http://eyp.org/> 
conferences in Amsterdam.

Nicole Brusa, who studied at University College Roosevelt in Middleburg 
<http://www.ucr.nl/Pages/default.aspx> last year, volunteered at her local art 
museum. She spent weekends there, “as a way of escaping the study bubble and 
doing something that has nothing to do with the university”.

Others volunteer at food banks, charities and even refugee camps. Brusa, who 
lived on campus, points out: “You need to meet people from outside the gated 
community that you live in. You know, the university world isn’t real.”
 Phoebe (left) and a friend in Amsterdam 
2. You cycle everywhere

 The idea of jumping on your bike on a summer’s day to cycle down Amsterdam’s 
canals is pretty idyllic. But you have to cycle to get around every day, no 
matter what time of year.

Cycling in sleety wind in January isn’t always blissful, but it does mean you 
get daily exercise without any extra effort.

Hero Scott, a British student at Amsterdam University College 
<http://www.auc.nl/>, says: “The Netherlands is designed for cyclists, so it’s 
by far the best way to get around, whether you’re going to the supermarket or 
the club.”

3. Sport is an integral part of life

 Children in the Netherlands are brought up playing multiple sports from a 
young age and, unlike in England, they keep this up as they get older – and 
that includes the girls.

“Most of my friends have played field hockey, tennis and football from the 
moment they could walk,” says Hannah Drooglever Fortuyn, a student at the
University of Amsterdam <http://www.uva.nl/en/home>.

Their sports teams often aren’t related to the university, giving students 
another chance to expand their friendship circles.

4. There’s time to travel

 At Dutch universities, students typically have classes for around 40 weeks 
each year. This may sounds hellish to British students who are used to a month 
off at Easter and Christmas - in the Netherlands you get a maximum of two weeks 
off for these holidays.

But after seven months here, I’ve realised I actually prefer this system. 
Because you’re here for so long, you have to build a varied life for yourself, 
organising day trips to other Dutch cities or exploring your university city.

The location of the Netherlands – in the middle of western Europe – also means 
that cheap weekend trips are very easy to do. You can get to Antwerp, Cologne 
or Paris in a few hours by coach.

Exchange students: how to survive abroad on a shoestring
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jan/02/exchange-students-how-to-survive-abroad-on-a-shoestring>
5. The work is spread out

 There is more time for academic reading and assignments – this reduces stress 
levels and means you can pursue other interests without affecting your grades.

My friends at British universities, with much shorter terms, often complain 
about not having enough time to do everything they want to do. The cliché of 
work hard, play hard really applies here.

One Cambridge student, who wanted to remain anonymous, says: “We have to cram 
about 10 weeks’ worth of work into an eight-week term, while also doing 
extracurricular activities like plays and rowing. Each term feels like a 
marathon run at sprint pace.”

6. Doing a master’s is a matter of course

 It’s very common for students at Dutch universities to do a master’s after 
their first degree, especially after aliberal arts course 
<http://www.topuniversities.com/blog/what-liberal-arts-education>, where you 
study a broad range of subjects.

Employers in the Netherlands tend to focus on your postgraduate qualification 
rather than your bachelor’s, so you have the luxury of discovering new areas of 
interest in your first degree without worrying about what you want to do later.

Thanks to the broad nature of my course, I could still end up majoring in 
anything from international relations to art history. There’s no pressure to 
decide what to do later – or even race to get internships. The working world is 
still a few years off.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 