
I don’t know when exactly, or where, but like everyone else I’m getting my 
annual urge to fling myself on to some sand. So what do I need to take to the 
beach? Well, first of all some trunks. Yes, tailored swimshorts look smart but, 
goddamn, an elasticated waist feels good after a lunchtime paella (“No, I do 
know it’s for two people, but I will eat bothraciones”). There’s a simple 
method to pick the design of your trunks and it goes like this: is your T-shirt 
or shirt patterned? If the answer’s yes, then your trunks must be plain. If the 
answer’s no, go crazy. No pattern is too bold, no colour too garish. Express 
yourself.

Next up is your top. On holiday is the only time you can justify wearing a 
vest, but you still need to proceed with caution – you don’t want to look like 
you’re auditioning for the next series ofLove Island. I’ll generally go for a 
short-sleeved shirt, ideally quite loose-fitting. A plain white linen one will 
do just fine, or get stuck into the floral trend (remember – only with plain 
shorts).

You’ll also want to take some knitwear. Knitwear on the beach, what is this 
madness? Here’s the thing – you’ll want to make a smooth transition from beach 
to bar, and a jumper can really help with that. Obviously you don’t want a 
heavy cable – go for a fine cotton knit from somewhere like John Smedley. 
Promenading down the, err, promenade at sundown, you might be tempted to tie 
your jumper loosely around your neck. Resist that temptation. Keep your jumper 
in your bag. You have a bag, right? I like tote bags and refute the idea that 
they are feminine. A decent-sized tote will swallow up all of your beach bits – 
lotion, book, headphones, binoculars, two-litre bottle of Orangina etc. Failing 
a tote take a holdall and carry everyone else’s stuff, too.

Bucket hats are currently very “in” but bear in mind that if you wear a bucket 
hat you will be a man wearing a bucket hat. Think very carefully about that. 
I’d favour renting a lounger with a parasol, or a nice Panama hat, or raging 
sunburn to the scalp, over the bucket.

The last thing on my beach packing list is a game of some description. If I 
were to come into money (fairly sizeable if), I would buy the most luxe set of 
bat ’n’ ball ever made, fromFrescobol Carioca 
<http://www.frescobolcarioca.com/pages/beach-bats?banner=2>. The bats are 
beautiful: the sort of thing you’d happily hang on the wall and call art. 
Without a sudden windfall, I’ll stick to forgetting to pack one of my cheap 
sets and buying yet another set from yet another bloody kiosk.


Follow Rick on Twitter @rickedwards1 <https://twitter.com/rickedwards1>
 