
An Australian man and his six-year-old daughter, whose disappearance on a 
catamaran from New Zealand six weeks ago sparked a massive trans-Tasman search, 
have sailed into Ulladulla on theNew South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> south coast, 
“happy” and “safe and well”.

Alan Langdon, and his daughter, Que, spend 27 days sailing across the Tasman 
Sea in a 21-foot catamaran with one broken rudder, arriving in the coastal port 
about midday on Wednesday.

Que’s mother, Ariane Wyler Langdon, lives in Switzerland and is estranged from 
Langdon. In April last year, she contracted a child recovery specialist to help 
find Langdon, and Que, so she could serve him court papers.

Wyler Langdon, who has reportedly not seen her daughter for 21 months, has 
been informed of the pair’s safe arrival in Australia.

In Ulladulla harbour on Wednesday, Langdon spoke with reporters as he tidied 
the boat and packed up from the voyage.

Fairfax Media reported 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/alan-langdon-and-sixyearold-daughter-found-in-ulladulla-after-weeks-at-sea-20170111-gtpqqo.html>
 the 46-year-old played down concerns over the potential dangers of the voyage, 
despite one of the catamaran’s rudders breaking four days into the journey, 
leaving them only one rudder with which to steer.


“Yes, we are safe and well. We were always safe, we just couldn’t let anyone 
know,” he said. “We had plenty of food and saw lots of whales.”

Langdon said his daughter was “happy” but that they were both tired, and 
planned to spend the night in an Ulladulla motel.


Australian Border Force agents have requested for the Langdons to travel north 
to Port Kembla harbour.


Langdon is an experienced sailor and Que has spent much of her young life 
living on board boats.


Langdon and his daughter sailed out of Kawhia harbour on the west coast of New 
Zealand’s North Island on 17 December. The were formally reported missing on 27 
December, having made no contact with other vessels of the coastguard.


The Royal New Zealand <https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand> Air 
Force, coast guard and marine patrols launched a massive aerial and sea search, 
scouring an area as far as 65km offshore.

Interpol was also alerted in case the boat crossed international waters. Other 
ships and boats in the region were asked to report any sightings.
 