
Imagine having something as sexy as the Bardot top named after you. I mean, 
your wellingtons and your cardigans and Mao jackets are all very well, but 
Brigitte Bardot looked so glorious lounging at the Cannes festival in an 
off-the-shoulder top that the style will be forever synonymous with her name.

You can give it a whirl this summer if you want to. Pretty tops, dresses and 
playsuits with unusual necklines have been a big hit. On the catwalk Balmain 
and Balenciaga showed 80s-style bodycon versions of the Bardot top, while 
Topshop Unique showed sloppy, ruffly tops that were closer to the original. 
Labels such as Delpozo even showed beautiful formal gowns with those lovely 
dropped shoulder straps and exquisitely framed décolletage.

There were also lots of strapless and asymmetric one-shoulder tops at Ralph 
Lauren, Costume National and Dior, but my favourite style was the 
pragamatically named “cold-shoulder top”. These are essentially Bardot tops, 
but with added straps so that only the shoulders are revealed. Victoria Beckham 
used this neckline on simple dresses and Christopher Kane’s cold-shoulder 
floral sweatshirts are innovative and pretty. And they’re currently in the sale.

Of course any top this revealing is limiting. The Bardot is not a neckline for 
job interviews or meeting your bank manager. It’s not great even if you want to 
wave your arms enthusiastically above your head, no matter how well built your 
bra. But for lazy summer days, this look is perfect. Sometimes it’s nice to buy 
clothes that can’t be converted into work wardrobe and these tops make a 
welcome change from pulling on yet another utilitarian vest or T-shirt.

For Bardoting it up, you want a floral or simply coloured loose-fitting 
version. If you have the money, look at Rachel Comey’s label. She’s a 
Brooklyn-based designer who showed her first collection over a dinner party to 
guests including Maggie Gyllenhaal and Cindy Sherman. Her second home is a 
converted laundrette in Long Island. That should give you a pretty good idea of 
who she is and what her style is. Personally I like it. But that may be because 
I’ve got more chance of pulling off Comey’s look of wealthy Brooklynite bohemia 
than making my boobs look like Brigitte Bardot’s.

If you’re looking for cheap and cheerful, the high street is happy to oblige. 
Primark does a great range of stretchy strapless tops that cost less than your 
bus fare into town. If you’re looking for classy bodycon, go to Reiss. For the 
more hippyish, flowing versions, make sure you look at Topshop. Their floral 
prints this summer are excellent – punchy colours and unusual designs – and 
they work really well on the range of pretty tops they have hanging on the 
racks there. If in doubt, go to Zara.

You may not look as memorable as Brigitte Bardot in these tops, but hopefully 
they’ll be the wardrobe in which you make happy memories of your own. Enjoy the 
summer.


Follow Alice on Instagram @aliceefisher  <https://instagram.com/aliceefisher/>
 