What is the smallest island country in the world?  Nauru Formerly known as 
Pleasant Island, Nauru is the smallest island nation in the world  Fiji  Aruba  
Madagascar Which country does this flag belong to?  Papua New Guinea  New 
Caledonia  Maldives The red represents citizens’ heroism, the green rectangle 
represents peace and the white crescent symbolises the nation's Islamic faith  
Suriname Havana is the capital of which island nation?  Barbados  Cuba Founded 
in the 16th century the city of Havana has a population of 2.1 million people  
Dominican Republic  Jamaica Which of the following countries is not located off 
the coast of Africa?  Cape Verde  Madagascar  Mauritius  Saint Lucia Saint 
Lucia is located in the Lesser Antilles in the Caribbean sea In which region is 
Palau located?  Pacific This tropical island is part of the larger group of 
islands called Micronesia in the Pacific Ocean  Caribbean  Latin America  Europe
Port Villa is the capital of which Pacific nation?  Fiji  Vanuatu Port Villa is 
located on the island of Efate in Vanuatu, and is home to more than 44,000 
people  Tuvalu  Samoa Which ocean surrounds the Seychelles?  Indian The 
Seychelles is an archipelago of 115 islands  Southern  Pacific  Atlantic Which 
of the following countries is not an island?  Mauritius  Laos Laos is a 
landlocked country bordered by Burma, China, Vietnam, Cambodia and Thailand  
Haiti  Grenada Which country does this flag belong to?  Barbados The trident is 
said to symbolise Neptune and the country's break from colonial rule  Puerto 
Rico  Dominica  Trinidad and Tobago Which of the following countries is located 
in the Caribbean?  Marshall Islands  Saint Kitts and Nevis The two-island 
country is in the West Indies region of the Caribbean  Solomon Islands  Comoros 
 You got…  You've earned an island holiday with that result! Great work  Very 
impressive, (almost) nothing gets past you!  Nice work, a result almost worthy 
of an island holiday  Nice work, a result almost worthy of an island holiday  A 
fair effort but you're clearly coasting. Have another go..  A fair effort but 
you're clearly coasting. Have another go..  Looks like you might need to brush 
up on your island knowledge! Have another go..  Looks like you might need to 
brush up on your island knowledge! Have another go..  Looks like you might need 
to brush up on your island knowledge! Have another go..  Looks like you might 
need to brush up on your island knowledge! Have another go..  Looks like you 
might need to brush up on your island knowledge! Have another go..  Challenge 
your friends Submit answers  