
For small businesses, the playing field can often feel heavily slanted towards 
the big boys, who enjoy a slew of advantages – brand recognition, seemingly 
endless resources, reams of data and more staff than sticks can be shaken at.

But where the smaller players keep their edge is agility, such as the ability 
to pivot their entire organisations quickly to maximise new technology, or 
shape their whole business model around one valuable innovation.

Add to that the fact that many big operations are designed to maximise 
internal efficiency and not customer satisfaction and you have a recipe for 
success for business owners who are able to think innovatively and put the 
customer at the heart of their business.

Take custom shoe design service Shoes of Prey 
<http://www.salesforce.com/au/customers/stories/shoes-of-prey/>. It was 
frustration at not being able to find shoes in the exact size and style 
combination she wanted that inspired co-creator Jodie Fox to challenge 
conventional wisdom about mass production and retail.

Small businesses using technology as the great equalizer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/salesforce-the-unfair-advantage/2016/oct/14/small-businesses-using-technology-as-the-great-equalizer>
Producing enormous quantities of identical shoes suits footwear manufacturers 
well, but leaves customers having to compromise on their preferences; that’s 
where the team behind Shoes of Prey saw an opening for innovation. They found 
manufacturers willing to create large volumes of one-off orders and created an 
elegant website to launch bespoke shoemaking to the masses.

“There was so much resistance from people around us, especially those in the 
footwear industry,” Fox said.

“But chasing down the dream of being able to design exactly what I want, 
without having a design degree and a factory, is the best innovation I’ve been 
part of.”

Small companies or startups have the luxury of seeing points of friction in 
traditional business practices not as built-in features of their business model 
but as opportunities to innovate.

That’s the path taken by Prospa, ranked the fastest growing technology company 
in Australia and the third fastest in Asia by Deloitte. Founded just five years 
ago, Prospa has achieved stratospheric growth by looking at how onerous loan 
applications are for small business owners and creating a better way.

Joint CEO Beau Bertoli said their innovation was to rethink the loan 
application experience, shifting it from endless forms and paperwork to a 
simple online application, allowing small businesses to apply online for loans 
of up to $250,000 and receive quick decisions and funding.

Since launching, the company has posted growth of almost 7000 percent and 
nearly quadrupled its headcount from around two dozen to more than 85, as its 
quick and easy model for approving loans for small businesses has won rave 
reviews. And it has sustained that growth while maintaining its customer 
service levels.

This is largely due to basing its operations around a cloud-based, 
increasingly automated system. No matter how a customer contacts Prospa – via 
online, phone, email or one of its 2500 finance broker partners – each 
interaction is tracked and available to the relevant service staff at any point 
in time.

What we’ve seen is the increased pace with which business can both start 
operating and scale up.
Salesforce APAC Vice President Robert Wickham 
Along the way small business applicants fill in a small number of fields in 
applying for loans of up to $250,000, most of which are approved within 24 
hours. Some alternatives in the market involve filling in forms of 15 or more 
pages, which many small business owners can struggle to find the time or 
resources for.

“Prospa is all about creating pathways that are empathetic to how time-poor 
small business owners operate,” Bertoli said. “It can be really daunting for 
owners who are wearing lots of different hats – like HR, IT, and marketing – to 
put on the finance hat and fill out a 15-page loan application form.”

The use of cloud technology and custom apps, for both customers and sales 
staff alike, is a common theme for small players innovating to punch above 
their weight.

Advances in public cloud computing and network speeds mean they are able to 
scale and grow quickly without financially crippling up-front investments in 
hardware. And clever use of technology means customer service can still remain 
personalised as customer numbers soar.

Australia’s Ivy College has earned recognition and praise for its cloud-based 
approach to education, including being named by BRW as one of the top five 
most-innovative companies in the country last year. It was also crowned the 
number one medium-sized business for service by the Customer Service Institute 
of Australia.

With a target market of busy adult learners, every element of Ivy College is 
built around their needs. That means there are no set semesters, timetables or 
deadlines, and that students can enrol online for a course at any time and 
study online wherever they are, at entirely their own pace.

The innovation that has driven Ivy College’s success, according to Executive 
Director of Operations Roger Burgess, is offering students and staff a single 
view of each student’s education journey in the cloud from day one, ensuring a 
personal touch.

“For example, they may have a few questions about an upcoming assessment, so 
they book a call with a study coach using our online scheduling solution,” he 
said. “Before the call, the study coach can view all relevant information in 
terms of activities completed, assessments submitted and units completed.”

The college is also active in collecting user data to feed back into the 
system and improve the student experience. This has helped it bring the average 
time for resolving student case issues down to just two hours.

The most important things investors seek
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/salesforce-the-unfair-advantage/2016/sep/27/the-most-important-things-investors-seek>
“The service we provide has been put into the hands of the customer – we 
continually ask for feedback and adapt our service model to improve the 
customer experience,” Burgess said.

The college currently boasts a net promoter score of 62.75, in line with some 
of the best customer service companies in the world.

Salesforce APAC Vice President Robert Wickham said cloud computing had 
fundamentally changed the requirements that companies needed to go about their 
business, delivering major advantages to smaller firms with innovative ideas.

“What we’ve seen is the increased pace with which business can both start 
operating and scale up. The cost has come down dramatically,” he said.

“Now, the next wave of promise we are seeing is artificial intelligence. That 
is going to unlock the next set of innovations and it’s already working its way 
into business and marketing at all levels.”

Case studies continued... Find out more about how Shoes of Prey are stepping 
on traditional business by offering a better customer experience 
<https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/312161213;139921108;p>
 