
I am really scruffy and untidy, particularly when it comes to what I wear. My 
clothes are only ironed if my husband volunteers to do it. I view the chair in 
my bedroom as a wardrobe. It’s so long since a hairdresser saw my messy crop 
that, when I looked in the mirror this morning, I realised my hairstyle now 
resembles Paul McCartney’s.

Of course this natural slovenliness means that what I desire most in life is 
to be immaculately turned out. I want to be smart. I want to look like I could 
chair a board meeting. I want hems held up with thread instead of masking tape. 
I just lack the willpower to make it happen.

I think this is why I’m so obsessed with monochrome outfits. Few things look 
more together than a thoughtful pairing of black and white. A pristine blend of 
opposites. Maybe if I make this my new look I won’t look such a mess.

Monochrome is big right now. In the summer shows it appeared at Balmain, 
Givenchy and Fendi, and for autumn even more designers found they just needed 
the two colours to express their ideas. There was sophisticated two tone at 
Chanel, Valentino, Céline, Victoria Beckham, Mugler and Louis Vuitton; crazy 
prints at Emilio Pucci and Saint Laurent and, even in the shows where black and 
white weren’t paired, there was a surfeit of black or white. Look at Tom Ford, 
Alexander McQueen, Stella McCartney and Givenchy’s autumn/winter 2015 shows and 
you’ll see what I mean.

If you feel like bringing order into your life, too, then start by looking in 
the sales. Marc by Marc Jacobs did some great swirly monochrone patterns for 
summer, and when these last bits of stock go, the label is gone forever and for 
good. Be nice to buy a piece to remember it by.

If you want the next big thing, however, look to Dover Street Market. If you 
like fashion, it’s always interesting to find out what new names and brands 
turn up at DSM at the start of the each season. One brand that’s joining the 
DSM family this year is Primury. It’s a unisex brand created by some groovy 
international collective. I love the high-falutin take on the old-school 
plimsoll, though. Very minimalist monochrome.

Of course, if this all seems a bit too considered for everyday life, you can 
just wear something black with something white. As I said earlier a lot of the 
autumn collections featured very simple colours. On the high street, Whistles, 
Marks & Spencer and Cos are all good for white shirts – check out their 
websites to get an idea of the different styles they offer. I’ve also got my 
eye on a By Malene Birger maxi skirt which is in the sale. Maxi skirts are 
going to be a thing this autumn – try and get one in the sale that will see you 
through the winter months.

I’m sure if I drape it just so over the chair in my bedroom I’ll hardly ever 
have to get my husband to iron it.

Follow Alice on Instagram @aliceefisher <https://instagram.com/aliceefisher/>
 