
A major consumer electronics firm has become the first to launch a mass-market 
virtual reality headset, in what could be the move that takes VR technology 
into the mainstream.

Sony <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/sony> said that its PlayStation 
VR headset, which works with the PlayStation 4 console, would be launched in 
October for $399 in the US and £349 in the UK.


The device, which fits over the wearer’s head, features a high definition 
screen and motion tracking technology, allowing players to inhabit and explore 
computer generated worlds.

The pricing, revealed at the Game Developers Conference in San Francisco on 
Tuesday, makes PlayStation VR the cheapest in the current wave of virtual 
reality devices, which include Facebook’s Oculus Rift ($599/£499) out in April .

The Rift headset however, requires a connection to a high end desktop PC which 
will cost at least £800 – the PlayStation 4 currently retails at £250. The only 
cheaper variant is made by Samsung which is also pushing a Gear VR headset, 
priced cheaper at £80, but uses a less powerful £580 Galaxy smartphone as its 
screen.

Industry experts said that this was the best opportunity for VR technology - 
long the province of Sci-Fi movies - to move into the consumer mainstream.

“The PS4 install base is huge – over 35m units have been sold – and there are 
currently more than 100 games confirmed for the PlayStation VR device,” said 
Dan Page of Opposable VR, a Bristol studio specialising in virtual reality.

“As it’s powered by the PS4 you’d expect a big compromise in terms of 
performance compared to the Rift and Vive, but some very clever thinking from 
Sony has meant this isn’t necessarily the case.”

 It will be the quality of the first VR games and applications that will 
decide whether the technology succeeds. Among PlayStationVR’s key offerings are 
a gritty gangland shoot-’em-up, London Heist, a visually impressive 3D drawing 
package Dreams, and the next title in the multimillion-selling Gran Turismo 
series of driving sims.

Sony says that more than 230 developers are working on games for the device, 
including major publishers such as Ubisoft, 2KGames 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> and Electronic Arts – the latter 
has revealed that it will release a PlayStation VR mode for its massively 
successful shooter Star Wars: Battlefront. Over 50 titles are expected to be 
available by the end of 2016.

The company is also making its VR games collection free to all purchasers of 
its headset. The demo contains one title, Monster Escape, that lets the headset 
wearer play as the monster while four other participants take part on via a TV, 
attempting to capture the creature.

Sony is heavily pushing the concept of games that use the TV screen as well as 
the PlayStation VR headset, meaning that people who are not wearing the device 
can join in. “A real issue with VR is how socially acceptable it’s going to be 
in the home,” says virtual reality developer Katie Goode. “PlayStation VR is 
directly challenging this with its social screen idea. Allowing other people to 
join in with the VR player via the TV screen means that nobody has to be a 
alone in VR, and nobody else is left out.”

However, there are still doubts about the viability of virtual reality as a 
mass consumer technology. It’s currently expensive, the headsets are large and 
unwieldy, and a percentage of users are likely to suffer motion sickness unless 
movement within the games is heavily restricted. Many point to the failure of 
3D TVs several years ago, which required users to don special glasses that were 
much less intrusive than VR headsets. Although Sony has sold almost 400m 
PlayStation consoles since the original arrived in 1994, it has struggled with 
more experimental offshoots and peripherals: its PlayStation Move motion 
controllers did not sell well, neither has the PlayStation Vita handheld 
console.

At this lower price and with the might of an established entertainment 
technology giant behind it, however, the PlayStation VR is going to be a vital 
test for consumer VR this year. “It could very well be the most important VR 
headset, at least for an early mainstream audience,” said Nick Pittom of VR 
developer Fire Panda. “Certainly Electronic Arts and other game publishers will 
be watching it with great interest and basing future investment and development 
on it’s success.”

For Sam Watts, a VR producer at Tammeka Games, the success of the platform - 
and for VR in general - will rest upon letting potential consumers try the tech 
before they buy – which is where Sony’s established retail channels will come 
into play. “It needs to be available everywhere, to try out in shops, before it 
can become a consumer success,” he said. “Many gamers are vocal critics of VR – 
you really have to try it to understand it. But when people finally get their 
hands on one, they will, like the rest of us, become converts.”

 