
Spot the Christmas turkey. It’s an annual game for retail-watchers but this 
year’s offering comes with extra helpings of gravy. Several factors mean there 
is more at stake than usual. First, the mild weather, enemy of clothing 
retailers with piles of jumpers and rails of coats to shift. Second, the rising 
popularity of online shopping, which makes current sales trends harder to read. 
Third, the fact that several big-name retailers desperately need a good 
Christmas. There are five firms in particular where reputations are on the line.

At Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco>, chief executive Dave 
Lewis was hailed a hero when he arrived a year ago. He took emergency measures 
– like cutting the price of vegetables – to ensure Christmas 2014 wasn’t the 
washout it had threatened to be only a few months earlier when the group’s 
accounting scandal broke and the boardroom was in turmoil.

Expectations should be higher this year but the share price isn’t – it is 
close to 18-year lows. Tesco appears to be struggling to rediscover its 
swagger, or land serious blows on Sainsbury’s and the discounters. A 
like-for-like sales decline of 2%-2.5% would represent a par Christmas score 
for Tesco. If it’s worse than that, faith in Lewis’s slow-but-steady recovery 
plan will be jolted.

Marks & Spencer’s share price fell more than 10% in December – the weather, 
widespread discounting and a general sense that M&S was struggling were to 
blame. These fears intensified when Fraser Ramzan, an analyst at Nomura who has 
a strong record for predicting M&S’s fate at Christmas, warned that 
like-for-likes sales in its non-food business may have fallen 5.5% during the 
festive period.

This would be a shocking result, even if the company has claimed it is focused 
on growing profit margins rather than sales. M&S Food will do better – it 
always does – but clothing is where chief executive Marc Bolland has to 
deliver. The City would tolerate minus 3% in general merchandise, but minus 5% 
would be appalling.

Meanwhile, an October profit warning from Home Retail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/homeretailgroup> Group, the owner of 
Argos and Homebase, means its investors are not confident about prospects for 
Christmas. The warning was caused by the cost of investing more in advertising 
and setting up a same-day delivery network. Argos participated heavily in Black 
Friday, offering discounts for a week leading up to the day itself, so the 
performance of the business in recent weeks is difficult to predict.

Any growth in comparable store sales for Argos would be welcome. However, the 
chain suffered a 3.4% fall in the first half of the year and there will be no 
boost from new technology launches. The signs are not promising for a chain 
still to prove it can survive in the age of Amazon.

In the department store sector, Michael Sharp is leading Debenhams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/debenhams> into Christmas for the last 
time after announcing in October that he would step down next year. He had been 
under pressure from shareholders due to the chain’s lacklustre performance and 
the trend is unlikely to have reversed over Christmas.

Debenhams may publish respectable sales figures – RBC Capital Markets has 
predicted that like-for-like sales could rise 1.9% for the year as a whole – 
but profit margins are where the damage is done. The retailer has been forced 
to slash the price of its products as the warmer-than-average weather in 
November and December has lowered demand for winter clothing.

At Morrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons>, chief executive 
David Potts is still in his honeymoon period: this is his first Christmas at 
the helm. But investors’ big worry is that, of the mainstream supermarkets, it 
is most exposed to the rise of Aldi and Lidl. Both discount chains seem to have 
tried harder this Christmas with higher-profile ad campaigns. A 2% fall in 
like-for-like sales over the Christmas period would be a decent result for 
Potts. If it’s weaker than that, the City will worry that he will have to cut 
prices even further next year.

A safety net with a hole in it


On Christmas Day about 2,000 people found presents, turkey, sherry and the 
kids all a bit too much – and sat down to do their tax returns instead.

By the end of January nearly 10 million people will submit self-assessment 
forms to HMRC, in a special punishment for all those suffering from the 
Christmas spending hangover. Adding to this year’s January financial gloom will 
be one of the more peculiar decisions taken by financial regulators – to cut 
£10,000 off the protection on offer from the Financial Services Compensation 
Scheme (FSCS).

Nobody paid much attention to the FSCS <https://www.theguardian.com/money/fscs>
 until the financial crisis. But when the queues began forming outside Northern 
Rock, politicians realised it was a dog’s dinner. Savers would get all of their 
first £2,000 back, then 90% of the next £33,000 – giving a maximum payout of 
£31,700 if a bank went bust. It meant that if you had more than £2,000 in a 
savings account, you were guaranteed to lose some of your money. No wonder 
savers were so keen to remove their cash.

Things got worse when Iceland’s Icesave collapsed in October 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/nov/17/icesave-savings-iceland>, and 
savers realised that when it came to foreign banks taking deposits in Britain, 
they had to rely on the bank’s home country safety net. Iceland’s net didn’t 
just have holes in it – it completely fell apart when called upon.

One of the reforms that emerged from the financial crisis was an overhaul of 
deposit protection. In 2010, the European Union mandated that every territory 
in the union apply a single €100,000 protection limit. In Britain that 
translated to £85,000 at then-prevailing exchange rates.

But from New Year’s Day, the figure will drop to £75,000, because sterling has 
risen against the euro. So savers in the eurozone can manage their affairs 
knowing that the €100,000 is fixed. But savers in Britain are expected to play 
a game of jiggery pokery, where the protection limit may rise, fall or go 
sideways with the euro exchange rate, and must shift their savings accordingly. 
Whoever thought this was a good idea had had too much sherry.

Storm in a pint pot


Camden Town Brewery, leading member of the craft beer industry, is selling 
itself to Megabrew, aka the evil empire of Anheuser Busch InBev, and the 
hipsters are getting hot under their beards. It’s a shocking sellout that 
undermines craft brewers’ proud spirit of independence – or so some of them say.

The purists should calm down. Founders of businesses can’t be expected to fund 
or own their ventures indefinitely. Investment doesn’t always come cheap and 
Camden Town’s founder, Jasper Cuppaidge, gave a decent account of what he’ll be 
able to do with the extra resources – build a second brewery, employ more 
people and extend the international reach of his products.

If outraged craft brewers believe Camden’s offering will be tainted by its 
association with AB InBev, they can always try to grab a bigger slice of the 
craft segment by promoting their own independence. That’s how competitive 
markets work.
 