
When it’s on

Sunday, from 6.40pm. When “Spoty” began in 1954 it was a low-key affair: 45 
minutes in total, including a no-frills 45-second trophy presentation. This 
year there’s a different vibe: two hours and 20 minutes of montage, music and 
uneasy banter, featuring an unprecedented 16-strong shortlist for the main 
award. It all takes place at Birmingham’s Genting Arena – the fourth time it 
has been staged in Birmingham. Aside from London, no other city has staged it 
more than once.

The production

1954’s effort – Sports Review of the Year, hosted by Peter Dimmock at 
Television Centre – was solemn, besuited stuff, based around theRadio Times 
asking readers to cast their votes by postcard. These days it’s an arena stage 
show featuring a live audience of 12,000, a performance from Robbie Williams and
online and phone voting <http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/sports-personality/38135745>
.

Who will win the BBC Sports Personality of the Year team award?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/17/who-will-win-sport-personality-year-team-award-2016>
The theme

This year is all about Rio. Since 2012, the shortlist has comprised either 10 
or 12 athletes, but a record-breaking year in Olympic and Paralympic sport led 
to the increase to 16. Only Gareth Bale and Jamie Vardy did not compete in Rio, 
while Danny Willett’s Masters victory forced his inclusion. It was picked by a 
12-strong panel, including Ryan Giggs, Victoria Pendleton, Baroness Tanni 
Grey-Thompson and theObserver’s Amy Lawrence.

The contenders: Sports Personality of the Year

Andy Murray is the overwhelming favourite to make Sports Personality history 
on Sunday. No athlete in the show’s 62-year history has won the main award 
three times. Henry Cooper, Nigel Mansell and Damon Hill each won it twice. 
Murray received the award in 2013, when he first won Wimbledon, and last year, 
when he led Britain’s Davis Cup triumph. He was third in 2012, thanks to his 
first Wimbledon final, claiming Olympic gold and winning the US Open, the first 
grand slam singles title for a British man since 1936. If Murray wins, expect 
another awkward, satellite-delayed link to Miami, where he is in a winter 
training block that was delayed by his father’s wedding. He is preparing for 
next month’s Australian Open, his first grand slam tournament as the No1 seed. 
“I would have [gone] if my dad wasn’t getting married,” Murray said. “I would 
have gone to Miami earlier and come back for it, but because I am not able to 
go to Miami until I am, I can’t afford to come back and lose a few days.”

The shortlist of 16: Nicola Adams (boxing), Gareth Bale (football), Alistair 
Brownlee (triathlon), Sophie Christiansen (equestrian), Kadeena Cox 
(athletics/cycling),Mo Farah (athletics), Jason Kenny (cycling), Laura Kenny 
(cycling),Andy Murray (tennis), Adam Peaty (swimming), Kate Richardson-Walsh 
(hockey),Nick Skelton (equestrian), Dame Sarah Storey (cycling), Jamie Vardy 
(football),Max Whitlock (gymnastics), Danny Willett (golf).

Team of the year

There’s plenty to ponder in Sunday’s other categories. After 2012’s Games 
there was a slight fudge to the rules and the team award was won by “Team GB 
and ParalympicsGB” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/dec/16/bradley-wiggins-sports-personality-year>
. This year has also been a record-breaking one for Team GB (67 medals) and 
ParalympicsGB (147) and there were teams within the team – women’s hockey won 
their first gold medal and British Cycling mopped up 12 medals, though various 
controversies in the sport have made 2016 somewhat mixed for them. But 
Leicester City’s 5,000-1 Premier League triumph caught the imagination of the 
world and looks even more sensational in light of the start they have made to 
this season. Wales made it to the Euro 2016 semi-finals and were knocked out by 
the eventual champions, Portugal. England’s rugby union team recorded a 100% 
year that included a grand slam and unprecedented 3-0 win in Australia in their 
13 victories.

The Anti-Sports Personality of the Year awards 2016 | Simon Burnton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/15/anti-sports-personality-year-awards-2016>
Coach of the year

There’s no nationality restriction on this award so the Australian Eddie Jones 
and Italian Claudio Ranieri are strong contenders alongside Chris Coleman for 
masterminding the aforementioned successes.

Overseas award

Usain Bolt (three more Olympic golds, taking his tally to nine) and Cristiano 
Ronaldo (Champions League win with Real Madrid and Euro 2016 triumph with 
Portugal) will slug this one out.

Young Sports Personality

This one is already in the bag – 15-year-old swimmer Ellie Robinson, who has a 
form of dwarfism that left her on crutches aged 11, won Paralympic gold in the 
S6 50m butterfly final with a Games record as well as picking up bronze in the 
100m freestyle final with a British record. The 18-year-old Ospreys wing Keelan 
Giles and 16-year-old gymnast Amy Tinkler, who won floor bronze in Rio, were 
also shortlisted. Former winners include Wayne Rooney and Andy Murray.

Also look out for

A lifetime achievement award for Michael Phelps, who, in Rio, added five golds 
and a silver to his Olympic medal collection, which from five Games stands at 
23 golds, three silvers and two bronzes. Also to be presented is the Helen 
Rollason Award (for outstanding achievement in the face of adversity) and the 
Unsung Hero award. And watch out, too, for mentions of Chris Froome, the Tour 
de France champion who did not make it on to the shortlist.
 