
I have signed up to do one of these insane obstacle races in 10 weeks’ time. 
You know – 12 swampy miles punctuated by walls that are too high to get over, 
slopes too slippery to climb, water too icy to swim in, and wires too 
electrified to touch (although they will definitely touch, and electrocute, 
you). I have been assured that when (as in, if) I finish the event I will be 
overcome by the sense of achievement, and warmth towards my fellow competitors. 
Currently that feels quite a way off. What I am embarking on is two months of 
hellish exertion and pain and frustration. I’m trying to do some form of 
exercise every day, which is bad enough, but even worse is that it means I am 
obliged to wear sports kit every day.

The words “sports kit” make my heart heavy. They immediately conjure memories 
of white vests and thick blue shorts with elasticated waists and the terror of 
forgetting to bring it to school. (“You’ll have to wear this skirt from lost 
property, etc.”) Frankly, the situation hasn’t improved much. The majority of 
athletic apparel is in colours made popular byStabilo 
<https://www.stabilo.com/uk/>. I realise that this is partly for safety, but 
you can take “being visible” too far. And given the pace I’m going at, I don’t 
want to draw attention to myself.

Consequently, I’ve been going for monochrome stuff (sometimes with lurid 
trainers, for fun). Yesterday I set out for a run in a simple grey marl Nike 
tee, quite fitted, and came back having sweated so much it was reminiscent of a 
Rorschach ink test. Not at all flattering. So from now on I’m sticking to white 
or black, and loose cut, and maybe a Sars mask for disguise purposes.

Gymwear is even trickier. I do more reps of staring at other people’s clothing 
choices than I do of, say, squats. Recently I was very taken by a man on the 
shoulder-press machine who was wearing smart black shoes, bootcut jeans and a 
military-style peacoat, done up to the collar. He would fall asleep for two 
minutes, then wake up, do some presses, and then go back to sleep again. Pretty 
lively stuff; hard to recommend. Lots of gym-goers now seem to be wearing 
“compression” tops and leggings: if you’re in shape it looks great, but if 
you’re not, you end up resembling an icing bag being squeezed. So I’m steering 
clear until I’m sufficiently lean.

I had been wearing regular jersey hoodies to go to and from the gym, or run 
in, but they just aren’t breathable enough. So I was pleased to discover a 
brand calledArc’teryx <http://arcteryx.com/Home.aspx?language=EN>, which makes 
simple, light outdoor gear – but that doesn’t look super outdoorsy. I now have 
one of their featherweight running jackets that keeps me warm, but not too 
warm, and dry.

Unfortunately I suspect that getting all the gear together is the easy bit.


Follow Rick on Twitter @rickedwards1 <https://twitter.com/rickedwards1>
 