
Sports Direct and its shareholders are struggling to agree on a heavyweight 
individual to conduct an independent review of the business before a second 
vote to re-elect its chairman that must take place by early January.

At the retailer’s annual general meeting on 7 September, a majority of 
independent shareholders voted to oust Keith Hellawell as chairman. At a tense 
meeting following the AGM, shareholders demanded an independentreview of how 
the company is run 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/09/sports-directs-biggest-investors-want-independent-review-mike-ashley-keith-hellawell>
 as a minimum requirement for working with Hellawell.

The Investor Forum, which represented big shareholders in talks with Sports 
Direct, said at the time the review could be carried out by an experienced 
person or a law firm. Two weeks after the AGM, Sports Direct agreed to 
independent scrutiny of its treatment of employees and corporate governance.

Sports Direct had wanted the law firm Reynolds Porter Chamberlain (RPC) to 
carry out the review but shareholders said it was not independent because it 
had worked for the company and its founder, Mike Ashley. But other firms could 
also have perceived conflicts of interest if they have worked for big investors 
or they might seek work from them in future.


An investor familiar with the talks said for that reason both sides were now 
looking for a credible individual rather than a professional services firm to 
conduct the review. But the number of qualified people is limited and potential 
candidates are likely to be busy or wary of putting their reputation on the 
line.


Sports Direct's biggest investors want independent review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/09/sports-directs-biggest-investors-want-independent-review-mike-ashley-keith-hellawell>
The investor said: “Finding someone acceptable to the board and investors is 
one thing and persuading them to do it is another. It’s going to be quite high 
profile and it has to be someone who is prepared to take it on and be ready for 
that sort of publicity.”

The law says Sports Direct has to hold a further meeting to vote on 
Hellawell’s appointment between 90 and 120 days after the AGM. At that meeting, 
Ashley can use his majority stake in Sports Direct to push Hellawell’s 
appointment through but it would be embarrassing if independent shareholders 
continued to oppose him.


The investor said shareholders could be prepared to vote for Hellawell to 
reward the board for engaging with investors after ignoring protests in the 
past but that appointing a credible person to lead the review might be needed 
for them to believe the company was serious about reforming itself.

Hellawell, who tried to resign before the AGM, lost the vote after the 
Guardian’s revelations about working practices at Sports Direct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
 confirmed to many shareholders that there were serious problems with the way 
the company was run. The revelations coincided with declining financial 
performance, which galvanised some shareholders who had supported the board 
before.

RPC carried out a preliminary review of working practices that was more 
critical than some had expected.Sports Direct has pledged to end zero-hours 
contracts for shop staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/06/sports-direct-to-ditch-zero-hours-contracts>
 and to start moving agency staff at its warehouse on to permanent contracts 
and to employ a welfare officer and a nurse at the site.
 