
The amount of stamp duty collected on house sales in London rose by 11% in 
2015-16 to reach £3.4bn, following theintroduction of new rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/03/george-osborne-stamp-duty-overhaul-autumn-statement>
 at the end of 2014.

The figure will dash the hopes of those who have called for the government to 
reconsider the higher rates it brought in on multimillion pound properties.

Data from HM Revenue & Customs (HMRC) showed a £340m increase in stamp duty 
receipts in the capital.

The number of transactions in London was up by just under 4% over the year, at 
159,000, but an increase in the tax on homes costing more than £937,000, 
unveiled in 2014’s autumn statement, pushed up tax bills.

Stamp duty <https://www.theguardian.com/money/stampduty> collected in the 
capital was up by 227% on the figure for 2008-09, reflecting the sharp rise in 
house prices as well as the new rates.

Outside London, the new rates reduced the amount of money collected on home 
sales.HMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> said that despite the 
number of transactions increasing across all regions, stamp duty receipts had 
fallen by up to 21%.

Total figures for the UK no longer include Scotland, where stamp duty was 
devolved in April 2015. Once figures are compared without Scotland, the total 
tax take on residential sales was up by 1%, at £7.3bn.

Of that, £7.2bn was collected on 1.1m residential transactions in England, 
with £3.4bn from London sales and £1.6bn from the rest of the south-east. In 
contrast, sales in the north-east of England brought in £55m while in Northern 
Ireland just £20m was collected.

Almost a third of receipts, £2.2bn, came from just 10 local authority areas in 
London and the south-east, with Kensington & Chelsea and Westminster accounting 
for 7% each, with receipts of £514m and £513m respectively. In Kensington, 
buyers paid an average of £135,000 each.

HMRC said receipts for sales of properties valued at £250,000 or less had 
fallen by 41%, but increased for properties over £500,000.

The greatest rise was in properties sold for between £1.5m and £2m, where 
revenue increased by 26% although the number of transactions was down by 7%.

Estate agents in London have complained about higher tax rates on multimillion 
pound properties, saying buyers were being deterred. A new higher rate on 
second homes, introduced this April, is also reported to have had an effect on 
some buyers’ appetite for property.

Lucian Cook, head of UK residential research at property firm Savills, said 
the figures had been bolstered by the rush of transactions ahead of the stamp 
duty change in April, but expectations that the amount of duty paid on more 
expensive homes would fall had been proved wrong.

“There was a lot of speculation that the stamp duty take for homes over £1m 
would have fallen because of the changes introduced in the 2014 autumn 
statement,” he said.

“These figures will make it difficult to argue that the market has become 
overtaxed and that the government should cut stamp duty at the higher level.”


However, he added that there was evidence of a fall in high-value transactions 
since the 3% stamp duty rise on second homes in April and the EU referendum.

 “These figures therefore don’t give us the whole picture of the impact of 
higher stamp duty rates,” he said.

Jeremy Leaf, former residential chairman of the Royal Institution of Chartered 
Surveyors and owner of an estate agency in north London, said: “These figures 
underline the importance of London to the growth of the economy and taxation 
revenue.


“When you look at the number of property transactions that occur in the 
capital and the revenue generated you realise just how vital London is. The 
government should be careful about trying to reduce property prices and 
activity in the capital as it is the engine of the national economy.”
 