
Amid the slick hyperbole and dead-eyed “we’re excited to announce” monotony of 
the E3 press conference weekend, Ubisoft events always stick out. Whatever the 
games are like, there will surely be something to amaze, bedazzle or bemuse – 
whether that’s adisastrous laser quest enactment 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d8JJUxOaNuE> or E3’s first passing of the 
Bechdel Test 
<http://www.theverge.com/2015/6/15/8786431/e3-2015-ubisoft-random-celebrities>. 
This year it was a bizarre opening performance of Just Dance 17 featuring 
pandas and giraffes dancing to Queen’s Don’t Stop Me know. This would 
absolutely not happen at an Electronic Arts event.

But there were certainly moments that stood out for the right reasons. Star 
Trek: The Bridge from Ubisoft’s Red Storm studio is essentially a virtual 
reality take on the brilliant multiplayer mobile game Space Team, set aboard a 
federation starship named USS Aegis. Up to four players take different 
positions on a VR representation of the bridge and have to work together to 
beat a series of missions. While the captain has overall control, a tactical 
expert navigates the combat options while the navigator steers. Apparently, 
there’s a single-player mode, but the fun is going to be playing online with 
similarly nerdy friends shouting “make it so” repeatedly until you’re kicked 
off the server. It’s out this autumn for Vive, Rift, andPlayStation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation> VR.

A sequel to last year’s hugely popular experimental title Grow Home was also 
announced. Grow Up features the same clumsy robot hero BUD, now on a more 
ambitious mission to search the galaxy for pieces of his smashed spacecraft, 
MOM. There are new mechanics including the ability to clone alien plants and 
use their properties to, say, catapult across impassable areas. It’s out on PC, 
PS4 andXbox One <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox-one> in August.

Perhaps the most intriguing reveal though was Steep a sort of open-world 
winter sports simulation in which multiple players inhabit the same stretch of 
mountainous scenery skiing, wingsuiting, paragliding and/or snowboarding their 
way to the bottom – or to the nearest casualty department. The icy landscapes 
are beautifully rendered and the whole skid in/skid out casual co-op nature 
makes it feel like a chaotic simulation of when it snows in Britain and 
everyone heads to the nearest hill with whatever flat object they can find. 
It’s out in December onXbox <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox> One, 
PS4, and PC.

Otherwise there were a few titles we already knew about. The impressive 
open-world tactical shooter Tom Clancy’s Ghost Recon: Wildlands got a release 
date (7 March 2017), as did ludicrously titles South Park role-playing sequel, 
South Park: The Fractured But Hole, which looks more tactically rich than its 
guiltily amusing predecessor. It’ll arrive on 6 December in the US, 7 December 
in Europe. Multiplayer sword combat game For Honor, will square up on 14 
February 2017, and the E3 press event saw some action from the Viking soldier 
class.

Finally, another moment of head-shaking Ubisoft idiosyncracy. Trials of the 
Blood Dragon is a new mash-up of physics-based motorcycle sim Trials with 
1980s-inspired Far Cry spin-off Blood Dragon. Yes, it is a bike stunt shooter 
where you perform two-wheeled feats of daring while blasting communist aliens 
and dragons. Go home Ubisoft, you’re ... you.
 