
Every single thing I do gets logged in my brain and eventually gets used in a 
hat. Whether it’s a conversation, the colour of the sky or the smell in the 
air. I grew up in the Wirral peninsula. It was our house, then the road, then 
the sea. All I remember is the sunset and the sky and the water – it still 
inspires me.

Boarding school helped shape my career. Aged 10 I went off to [board at] 
Liverpool. It made me very bloody-minded and made me think that if you want to 
have something you have to go out and get it yourself. But it also taught me 
reliance on one’s friends and how to work with a group of people.

Children are intrigued by watching people put things on their head. It’s a 
primary act of being. When I made hats for the Princess of Wales, I would go to 
St James’s Palace and her two young sons would be fascinated by what was going 
on.

Every youth movement has its drugs – ours was fashion. After art school I 
lived in a squat on Warren Street in London with 20 people. We were always 
stealing each other’s clothes. Boy George lived there for a while, Grayson 
Perry was always over. In a funny way it was like boarding school.

I feel very privileged to be alive. I never thought I’d turn 30, let alone 40. 
I grew up as a gay man in the 1980s in the advent of Aids and HIV. We didn’t 
really know what it was and suddenly people were dying. So many friends in 
London and New York passed away.

L’Wren Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/jun/22/lwren-scott-mysterious-suicide-of-mick-jaggers-girlfriend>
 continues to be an inspiration for me every day. I often think: “What would 
L’Wren think of this?” and remember times we had together and have a chuckle. 
We met when she was a model in Paris. When she started going out with Mick 
Jagger, I began to make his hats.

I didn’t come out to my parents until I was 40. My mum went a bit crazy, but 
then she met my husband Craig [Jones’s partner of 25 years] and realised he was 
a new son-in-law and fresh meat. So she started asking him to put up shelves.

I’m still friends with John Galliano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/jun/04/john-galliano-first-interview-dior>
. We don’t see each other much, but we text. It’s been a very long journey for 
him and I don’t think he’s over it yet. He hit rock bottom, so he now has a 
chance to get better.

A quick death is great, but then you may not say the things you want. Just 
before my father died he hadn’t spoken for a month. I had a one-sided 
heart-to-heart with him and apologised for not going into the family business. 
Out of nowhere he said: “We never imagined you would.” There I had been 
thinking he was this uncool tyrant when he was on my side all along.

I’ve made hats for horses, hats for dogs. The strangest hat I ever made had 
dry ice in it, which is incredibly dangerous, as it can burn you like acid.

Hats can transport you to another place. So that girl at Royal Ascot who’s 
wearing a giant hat, a fuchsia dress that’s too tight, heels that she can’t 
walk in – maybe that’s the one day she really goes bananas. We need more of 
that in the world.
Stephen Jones is stocked at Dover Street Market (doverstreetmarket.com 
<http://www.doverstreetmarket.com/>)
 