
Steve Martland, who has died of a heart attack aged 58, was one of the most 
vibrant, unconventional and dynamic forces in British music. He first came to 
prominence in 1983 withBabi Yar 
<http://www.myspace.com/stevemartland/music/songs/babi-yar-part-two-15625708>, 
for large orchestra in three groups, championed by the Society for the 
Promotion of New Music (SPNM) and premiered separately on the same day by the 
Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra, conducted by Nicholas Cleobury, and the 
St Louis Symphony Orchestra under Leonard Slatkin. It was later recorded to 
critical acclaim.

After that, though, he avoided the orchestra, preferring, from American 
Invention and Re-Mix (1985) onwards, to compose for smaller ensembles, not 
usually exceeding 13 players, such as those scored for his Steve Martland Band 
(formed 1992), which toured internationally like a rock group; string quartets, 
as with his Patrol (1992) or arrangement of Bach's Toccata and Fugue in D minor 
from the same year; and Wolf-Gang (1991), six operatic arias by Mozart 
reimagined for wind band.

He produced a series of successful choral works, including Street Songs (1997) 
for the King's Singers and percussionist Evelyn Glennie, carols and 
unaccompanied works such as Skywalk (1989), Three Carols (1997) and Tyger Tyger 
for Youth Music's "Sing Up" campaign.

Martland was born in Liverpool. He studied at Liverpool University (1978-81) 
and then attended the Royal Conservatory in the Hague on a Mendelssohn 
scholarship. There he was taught by Louis Andriessen, about whom he later wrote 
and directed a television film,A Temporary Arrangement With the Sea 
<http://www.lagesteefilm.nl/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=95%3Atemporaryarrangementwiththesea&catid=38%3Alijstdocumentaries&Itemid=59>
 (1992). He also studied composition at the Berkshire Music Centre, in 
Massachusetts, with Gunther Schuller.

Martland pursued a highly individual, at times iconoclastic career as 
composer, performer and teacher. His pupils held him in the highest regard 
despite his demands of them, mainly due to his warm-heartedness and humour. He 
was involved in a large number of musical and composition projects in schools 
in the UK and elsewhere as well as the annual "Strike out" course for children.

Martland was an outspoken critic of academic dogma, believing diversity of 
musical influence was of far greater benefit, as his own compositions 
eloquently demonstrated. His style was rooted ultimately in an Andriessenesque 
combination of the minimalist style – advocated from the late 1960s in the 
works of Terry Riley, Steve Reich and John Adams – with more popular elements. 
The chugging, repeating syncopated ostinatos and rhythms played by instruments 
more common in jazz, pop and rock – saxophones, electric guitar and bass, drum 
kits with high-hat cymbals – gave his music a distinctive, edgy timbre, as in 
Beat the Retreat and Horses of Instruction (1995), but it was recognisable even 
when purely acoustic ensembles were deployed, as in Principia for winds and 
percussion (1989), later used as the theme music to the BBC's The Music 
Machine, or Crossing the Border for strings (1990).

The muscular cast of his music proved continually attractive to 
choreographers, as with Crossing the Border, produced as a ballet by the 
NationalBallet <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ballet> in Amsterdam, and 
Dance Works (1993), written for the London Contemporary Dance Company, the 
music existing in two versions, for ensemble and two amplified pianos. 
Martland's music was also used in film and TV, including Albion (1988) – a 
multimedia work that gave voice to his left-of-centre political views, 
including an attack on Thatcherism and the poverty of its cultural legacy – and 
scores for the 1992 children's series Wilderness Edge, for Granada.

In the later 1990s, Martland's production slowed to a set of arrangements of 
Purcell. From 2000 to 2002 he concentrated on his role as artistic director of 
the SPNM, and resumed significant composition only in 2003 with a series of 
works for string ensembles: Plaint (2003), Tiger Dancing (2005, commissioned 
for theHenri Oguike Dance Company <http://www.henrioguikedance.co.uk/>), 
Eternity's Sunrise, Reveille (both 2007) and the test piece for string quartet 
and percussion, Starry Night, for the Tromp International music festival in 
2008. He served as composer-in-residence for the Etna music festival (2006-07) 
and in 2009 he returned to choral music composition with the cantata Darwin and 
Sea Songs (2011), written for the conductor and baritone Paul Hillier and 
premiered by Ars Nova in Denmark last year.

• Steve Martland, composer, born 10 October 1954; died 6 May 2013

• This article was amended on 14 November 2014 to correct the birthdate and 
age of Steve Martland. Before his death, Martland was thought to have been born 
in 1959, but it later emerged that he was born five years earlier.
 