
[The load line named after Samuel Plimsoll was dropped from a bill in 1875 
through shipowners' pressure; it became law in 1876 through public pressure.]

On Wednesday a large meeting of Whitby and Robin Hood's Bay Shipowners was 
held to take into consideration the bill introduced by Mr. Plimsoll for the 
compulsory survey of unclassed ships and a stringent load-line. The Chairman 
said his zeal could not be called in question, for both as an iron-ship builder 
and a shipowner he felt strongly on the subject. He admitted that he had not 
read Mr. Plimsoll's book, but was familiar with it from extracts in the papers, 
and it was obvious that most of his statements had arisen from want of 
knowledge on the subject.-(Applause.) The hon. member for Derby was a fanatic 
who rashly put forth the grossest misstatements; it was the duty of shipowners 
to petition Parliament for fair play.-(Applause).

Mr. Robert Harrowing moved- "That this meeting, while admitting the 
desirableness of further provisions for preventing the overloading of ships, is 
of the opinion that legislation should be deferred until ... the present 
feverish excitement shall have abated".

Mr Bedlington, of Robin Hood's Bay, moved- "That any legislation should be 
preceded by obtaining the best scientific and practical evidence, in order that 
no injustice may be done by adopting a hard-and-fast load-line applicable to 
vessels of every description, and other objectionable penal and ruinous 
provisions such as are entertained in Plimsoll's bill, and which, if they 
become law, will bring absolate and irretrievable ruin on a very large number 
of British shipowners.

Hartlepools Shipowners. A largely-attended and influential meeting of 
shipowners of the Hartlepools was held to-day for the purpose of considering 
steps to take to protect their interests.

A series of resolutions were proposed, to the effect that whilst fully 
recognising the great importance of the action taken by Mr. Plimsoll in 
Parliament and the magnitude of the interests involved, the Association of 
Shipowners, in view of the Royal Commissioners report, deprecated party 
legislation and urged on the House of Commons the propriety of delaying the 
passing of any measure until the presentation of such report; and that a 
committee be appointed to prepare reasons in justification thereof, to collect 
evidence to bring before the Royal Commissioners, to further watch the progress 
of Mr. Plimsoll's bill in Parliament, and to adopt any measures which may be 
necessary to prevent its passing a second reading. These resolutions, after 
considerable discussion, were unanimously adopted.
 