
The UK’s first independent anti-slavery commissioner has said people need to 
have a much more open mind regarding who might be a modern-day slave, after a 
British woman told of how she was enslaved for 13 years.

In a new book called Secret Slave, the 44-year-old woman, who uses the 
pseudonym Anna Ruston, writes about meeting a taxi driver, whom she calls 
Malik, in 1987, when she was just 15. She claims Malik held her captive in his 
family home and subjected her to sadistic sexual and psychological abuse for 
more than a decade, beating and raping her and selling the four babies she had 
in captivity.

“[Anna’s] account shows just how real modern-day slavery is, how it’s 
happening in the UK,” Kevin Hyland told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “This 
isn’t something that’s happening miles away. We look at the most recent figures 
for up to June of last year and there’s been a sharp increase in the number of 
people from the UK who have entered into the NRM (national referral mechanism). 
It’s a big problem here.”

Anna was brought up by her grandmother but following her death the girl 
experienced years of neglect and abuse, including rape, by the time she was 11, 
the BBC reported. “[Malik] wasn’t anything to look at but the smile just made 
me feel comfort, I thought he likes me, he’s going to be kind to me and 
probably give me some affection which I never had,” she told Today.

“He said come and meet my mum for a cup of tea, and I didn’t think anything of 
it. I just got in the car and went to his house, and then I wanted to go home 
and I thought any minute now he’ll say: ‘Come on, get your shoes and we’ll take 
you home,’ but it never happened.”

During her captivity, Anna said she was in and out of hospital with horrific 
and sometimes life-threatening injuries, yet no one picked up on it.

“There was three or four people [with me] so I couldn’t speak, I never 
answered the doctors; I just shook my head. I just wish that if someone had 
left the room I could say to the doctor: ‘I’m being held, I need help.’ But 
they never left the room; if I went to the toilet they waited outside the door. 
At night time they sometimes slept in the room because they said that I needed 
looking after.”

It was when Malik’s family announced they were going to Pakistan and taking 
Anna with them that she made the decision to get out, and managed to slip a 
note unnoticed to a health visitor. The health visitor, she said, agreed to 
help Anna and arranged a date to be waiting outside the house in her car.

Despite escaping and subsequently being threatened by her kidnapper, who 
tracked her down, Anna, who now lives with her childhood flame and four 
children, still hasn’t given a statement to the police.

“It’s because I’m scared for my family, I’m scared he’s going to come after me 
and kidnap me again … If anyone goes missing I always think of him, has he done 
it, or has his family done it?” she said.

The story bears striking resemblance to that of Elisabeth Fritzl, who was held 
and abused for 24 years by her father, Josef Fritzl.

Hyland said it was alarming that no one recognised that Anna needed help. “I 
don’t think there’s a complete acceptance that modern-day slavery occurs. In 
fact, recent research done by Hull university identified that only eight out of 
100 people believe that modern slavery actually was something that was a worry 
to them,” he said.

He also also reiterated calls for police to investigate cases of slavery 
without official contribution from the victim. “Sometimes there’s ways of 
collating evidence without a victim,” he said. “That’s why I’ve been saying 
continuously, and in my annual report to parliament this year, that this is 
serious organised crime, and policing needs to use the same techniques, the 
same level of resources like it does for other serious and organised crime.”

 