
Backstage after his show at men’s fashion week in London on Saturday, 
Christopher Shannon did not mince his words. “I wanted it to feel inclusive,” 
he said of his collection, “but also a tiny bit aggressive, and a bit pissed 
off.”

Shannon is a highlight of London’s men’s shows. He has a renowned ability to 
channel the zeitgeist’s chatter into wearable streetwear staples, and this time 
the seismic shifts of the last six months – Brexit, specifically – led to a 
tougher mood.

Models wore shredded flags on their faces, including that of the European 
Union. The clothes were harder than usual: boxy denim jackets, tracksuits with 
poppers, neon hoodies and combat trousers. Shannon is known as a master of 
brand parodies, and these were downbeat this season. A version of Timberland’s 
logo read “Tumbleweed”, while Boss International became “Loss International”.

“I’m not in the mood to be a fantasist,” said Shannon. “All I have seen is 
builders and couriers, so the clothes I see are hoodies and trackies and 
worn-out neons. Everything is a staple … I’m interested in clothes and not 
drama.”

This gritty take on streetwear is a wider trend across the collections at 
fashion week. Designers including Astrid Andersen, Cottweiler and Craig Green 
are exploring similar territory. Rob Nowill, senior menswear editor at 
Style.com, said authenticity was what made it work.

“Designers like Astrid Andersen and Cottweiler are delving into very specific 
memories of the clubs, music videos and subcultures,” he said. “It comes from a 
real understanding of that world – a lot more nuanced than just chucking a 
puffa jacket and a hoodie down the catwalk and inflating the price.”

Shayne Oliver is also a big name in this movement with authentic experience at 
its heart. The New York-based designer is behind Hood By Air, the label worn by 
Rihanna, Drake and Kendrick Lamar. In an interview with the New Yorker 
published in September, he talked about the idea of the “thug silhouette” with 
an exaggeratedly long T-shirt worn with oversized trousers.

It’s a look partly based on men Oliver saw on the street and the subway as a 
young teenager in New York, when men wore classic streetwear labels such as 
Fubu. Oliver spoke of his distaste for brands adapting streetwear into a 
high-fashion context, saying the interpretation was typically “disconnected 
from the real masculinity” of street culture.

Oliver contrasts the tough aesthetic with a gender fluidity inspired by his 
involvement in the gay clubbing scene in the city. Models in the Hood By Air 
show might wear tracksuits, but they combine them with high heels and veils 
over faces.

Andersen said this was crucial to the new take on streetwear. She said: “It 
only works if it is juxtaposed with something. My take has always been about 
softer things; feminine fabrics, like lace.”

Ultimately, streetwear, as it is still known, is no longer a niche category 
only worn by those in their teens and twenties. ‘’It is becoming a redundant 
term, which a lot of these designers are rejecting,” said Nowill. “It can be 
quite a reductive way of categorising a very broad spectrum of brands and 
styles.”


Accordingly, London’s fashion awards launched an “international urban luxury 
brand” category in 2016 to address this growing sector. Tough streetwear will 
arguably be the aesthetic that more and more men want to wear in 2017.

“In the old days it was rock’n’roll that was super-chic and a guy could be 
grungy but might be rich,” said Andersen. “Now you can have a guy in a 
tracksuit who is very successful.”

• This article was amended on 8 January 2017. In it, we used “he” for Astrid 
Andersen. She is of course a woman. This has been corrected.
 