
Under lock and key in a heavily guarded Tokyo office building is an electronic 
box of tricks that its makers claim will soon play a central role in millions 
of people's lives.

It is shrouded in such secrecy that even its name is unknown. Aside from a 
handful of engineers, programmers and senior executives, nobody has seen what 
it looks like or what it will be able to do.

Yet a few hints about its potential and the announcement of plans for a launch 
next year have created a surge of excitement in the electronics and 
entertainment worlds. This magic box, it is said, will change the way we spend 
our leisure time, create new industrial synergies and possibly even jump-start 
the moribund Japanese economy.

Such is the hype and expectation surrounding Sony's next-generation video game 
console, tentatively labelled PlayStation 2, which will zap its way into the 
British market in autumn 2000 after a debut next spring in Japan, the home of 
the industry.

It is the most eagerly awaited of three new superconsoles, along with Sega's 
Dreamcast and a new Nintendo machine codenamed Dolphin, that will soon be 
fighting it out for control of the global video game market. That market, 
already worth $15bn annually, is expected to overtake Hollywood's total box 
office revenue this year.

Bruising hardware battles are a regular feature of the video game industry, 
but the business stakes have never been higher nor the attempted technological 
leap so wide.

Until now, consoles have been built using parts such as processors and 
graphics cards based largely on those designed for personal computers. This 
time, however, makers are carving out new technological territory. None more so 
than Sony, which has linked with Toshiba to develop a new chip specifically for 
games.

According to its makers, the 128-bit Emotion Engine processor is so powerful 
that games will have near-film-quality sound and graphics. For video game 
lovers who get their kicks from realism, this creates all kinds of 
possibilities.

As a character moves, Sony says, the processor will be able to plot the path 
taken by each individual hair on its head, trace the play of light on facial 
wrinkles and realistically distort reflections in curved surfaces or rippling 
water. It can also simulate gravity, smoke and the refraction of light.

'The current meaning of the word 'game' needs to be redefined,' says Kenichi 
Fukunaga, corporate communications director of Sony Computer Entertainment. 'We 
want to narrow the gap between games and television to create a new form of 
entertainment - an experience like interacting with a film.'

Much of this is marketing hyperbole. After all, users will still have to 
manipulate characters with a clumsy joystick. But it is undeniable that the new 
technology represents the biggest of the many leaps made by the game industry 
over the past 20 years.

It is enough to make games players, 75% of whom are over 18, drool. For the 
businessmen, however, the biggest breakthrough is not the graphics but the 
networking potential of the new machines.

Sega's Dreamcast, which was launched in Japan in December, has a built-in 
modem that allows users to play games on the internet, send and receive email 
and engage in electronic commerce.

This feature has attracted British Telecom, which signed a deal with Sega last 
week to offer free Internet access to Dreamcast owners in Europe. The new Sony 
and Nintendo machines are also rumoured to be equipped with modems, possibly 
with the power to download and play films.

'We have moved beyond the world of games,' says Hiroyuki Mori, associate 
manager at Sega Enterprises. 'Our market has expanded to the point where it now 
draws in telecommunications companies and home appliance makers.'

This is because game machines are seen as a doorway into the wired world of 
the future, when the entertainment, computer and electrical goods industries 
will converge. The race is already on between software companies, 
telecommunications firms and home appliance makers to decide which will set the 
format for this digital network age.

Analysts say the new game consoles, which are likely to be cheaper and more 
popular than personal computers, will give their makers a head start.

According to Yasushi Okada, economist at Cr&#233dit Suisse Bank, this is good 
news for Japan. 'If Sony's plans are realised, the launch of the PlayStation 
may herald a change of leadership in the networking industry. This could be the 
point at which the influence of the Intel-Microsoft alliance starts to wane and 
Japanese firms, which have a solid reputation for engineering and software, 
start to dominate.'

Reflecting the importance of the new machine, Sony announced a reorganisation 
in March that puts the game business alongside electronics at the heart of its 
group operations. This came at the end of a year in which the PlayStation 
reached more than 50m homes worldwide and accounted for the bulk of Sony's 
earnings for the first time in the group's history.

Other companies are also prospecting for video-game gold. Last week 
Matsushita, best known for its Panasonic and National brands, said it would 
join Nintendo and IBM in producing a console, codenamed Dolphin, which will go 
on sale in Japan next April.

Matsushita's long-term aims can be seen from a visit to the 'house of the 
future' which is on display in the company's WarpSpace multimedia facilities in 
Tokyo. In this wired model home, everything from the microwave to the toilet is 
linked to a home computer, which is connected to an outside network. Naturally, 
the system also incorporates games, which can be played on a huge wall-mounted 
plasma TV screen.

With the electronics industry in the doldrums, Matsushita and other Japanese 
appliance manufacturers are counting on this new technology to generate fresh 
revenue.

Tomorrow's world, however, will not come cheap and consumers will have to be 
lured into accepting the expensive new creature comforts on offer. The new game 
consoles are likely to be the first bait.
 