
We had a taste of the posh end of the grocery trade last week with results 
from Marks & Spencer and Waitrose, but things go mainstream this week with 
Tesco, Sainsbury’s andMorrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons>
 all reporting on Christmas trading.

The trio have been battling for customers with each other, Walmart-owned Asda 
and German value chains Aldi and Lidl. Morrisons, which reports on Tuesday, may 
have the best chance to spring a nice surprise because expectations are so low. 
Sainsbury’s has been the best performer of the big grocers, but boss Mike Coupe 
is considering taking a punt on a bid for Argos’s owner, Home Retail Group. 
Sainsbury’srevealed its interest last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/05/sainsburys-1bn-bid-home-retail-argos-homebase-rejected>
 and this will add spice to its update on Wednesday. At Tesco, the sector’s 
lumbering giant, investors will look on Thursday to see if signs of revival 
under newish broom Dave Lewis lasted through Christmas.

Asda, which suffered badly at the hands of the discounters last year, puts its 
figures out in February but the Kantar and Nielsen market share surveys will 
give a good idea of its performance, as well as how Aldi and Lidl fared. Away 
from the grocers, there will be updates from JD Sports, Greggs, Debenhams, 
Mothercare, Home Retail, Dunelm,Game Digital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gamegroup>, Boohoo.com, AO.com and others.

As veteran analyst Nick Bubb rounded off his preview note: “Phew!”

Sharper relief at last?

In October, Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of England, reaffirmed his view 
that the decision to increase interest rates “comes into sharper relief around 
the turn of the year”. Well, here we are: but hardly anyone expects the Bank’s 
rate-setters to increase borrowing costs on Thursday. Market forecasts expect 
the vote to remain at 8-1 with Ian McCafferty, the former CBI economist, still 
the lone hawk. Markets increasingly think the first rate rise will be in the 
second half of this year or even in 2017.

Outside events have made a rate rise less likely, with share prices tumbling 
and concern about global growth caused by bad news from the Chinese economy and 
stock market. But domestic economic news has also got worse since Carney teed 
markets up for a rise: wage growth has slowed, and surveys have shown 
manufacturing exports stagnating and Britain’s dominant services sector 
weakening.

Neil Woodford, perhaps the UK’s most closely followed investor, has said that 
a rate rise this year would be “ludicrous” because the economy could not stand 
it. With the economy once again propped up by consumer spending, and buy-to-let 
purchases booming, things could be all the more painful when rates eventually 
do rise.

New year, new trials

On Monday, a group of the City’s former top traders will appear in court 
accused of manipulating the euro interbank offered rate. The 10 traders from 
Deutsche Bank and Barclays will be the largest group of defendants to face 
trial accused of fixing rates: a trial of six former employees of City 
interbank brokers is currently drawing to a conclusion in London.

The big names involved in the new trial include Christian Bittar, formerly of 
Deutsche Bank, and Philippe Moryoussef, who worked at Barclays. Both men 
vigorously deny the charges. Bittar was one of Deutsche Bank’s most profitable 
traders before he was fired in 2011.

The trial will be the first time Barclays traders have faced charges over 
interest rate manipulation. Bob Diamond left as the bank’s chief executive in 
the wake of the matter in 2012 and it cost Barclays £290m in fines. Moryoussef 
worked at Barclays between 2005 and 2007 before joining other banks including 
RBS and Nomura.

Tom Hayes, a former UBS and Citi trader also involved in the scandal, is 
serving 11 years after being found guilty in August. His letters describing 
prison life, including being strip-searched and witnessing fights and 
overdoses, will have made grim reading for those facing similar allegations.
 