
The supreme court of Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> has upheld a decision the 
transfer of juvenile detainees to an adult maximum security prison, where some 
of them spent Christmas Day, was unlawful.


The Andrews government had appealed the original decision, which was handed 
down last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/21/keeping-juveniles-in-adult-jail-is-unlawful-victorian-judge-rules>
. The government argued the minister for children and young people, Jenny 
Mikakos, had acted lawfully in transferring a number of children to Barwon 
maximum security prison after riots at the Parkville and Malmsbury youth 
detention centres.

But, in an expedited hearing on Wednesday, the court of appeal maintained that 
the transfer of children to an area of Barwon designated as Grevillia youth 
detention centre was unlawful.

The court then ordered that the children be moved to an appropriate youth 
justice facility by 4.30pm Friday.

 The decision comes a month after the court ruled against holding Indigenous 
children at the prison. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/victoria-says-it-wont-hold-indigenous-children-in-adult-jail-but-15-others-to-remain>

The Human Rights Law Centre, which ran the case in conjunction with the 
Fitzroy Legal Service, welcomed the court’s decision but criticised the 
government for failing to find other options for the children last week, 
meaning some spent Christmas in Barwon. There are currently 12 children in the 
Grevillia unit.

Youths to remain in adult jail despite ruling their transfer was illegal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/21/keeping-juveniles-in-adult-jail-is-unlawful-victorian-judge-rules>
“It would have been good if the government had responded to last week’s ruling 
with a plan to get the children out of Barwon adult prison,” HRLC director Hugh 
de Kretser said. “Instead, the children spent Christmas in illegal detention at 
the state’s most notorious jail.”

Fitzroy Legal Service executive officer Claudia Fatone called on the 
government to immediately remove the remaining children from Barwon and place 
them in an appropriate youth detention facility.

“The government needs to house these children in a safe environment with 
proper schooling to give them a chance to reach their potential,” she said.

The use of Barwon was deemed unlawful on the grounds that the minister did not 
take into consideration all the matters she is required to consider, before 
gazetting it as a youth justice facility.

However judge Greg Garde’s ruling that Mikakos had acted with “improper or 
extraneous purpose” was overturned.

The decision leaves the government with a loophole to keep the children in 
Barwon, provided it completes the processes required to make it a lawful youth 
justice facility within the 48-hour time frame.

“It would certainly be an act of bad faith by the government to yet again try 
and proceed with the use of Barwon as a youth justice facility, but it’s a 
possibility,” he said.

Speaking to reporters after the hearing, Mikakos said lawyers had an 
“ideological fixation” with keeping children out of Barwon and argued their 
human rights would be better served by remaining in the maximum security adult 
facility.

“The alternatives were to send young offenders to crowded conditions and this 
is something that lawyers have failed to understand,” she said.

Mikakos said the shortage of youth justice beds meant some may be held in 
isolation. The government has denied claims children were being held in 
isolation at Barwon.

“They’ve had an ideological fixation with taking on the government in relation 
to sending any young offenders to Barwon prison and they’re actually acting 
contrary to their best interests, in my view,” she said.

Mikakos would not say whether the children would be transferred, saying that 
she would wait until the court of appeal had published its full decisions and 
consider the options then.

She also did not comment on the finding that she had acted unlawfully in 
establishing the Grevillia Unit, focusing instead on the appeal court’s 
decision that she had not acted with any improper purpose.

Asked if the government had sent children to Barwon to punish them for 
suspected involvement in the Parkville riots, Mikakos referred to the court’s 
finding that there was no improper purpose.

She added: “Let’s not forget why these young offenders are down at Grevillia 
unit of Barwon prison in the first place, and that is the signifiant damage 
that they and others caused to the Parkville youth justice facility that took 
away a signficant part of our operational capacity.”

The damage, which included detainees breaking out of their cells by crawling 
through the roof cavity, left 60 beds “utterly trashed,” she said.

“We only had a very small number of beds available to us in the youth justice 
system. Let’s not forget that it was in fact the actions of the clients of 
these lawyers who brought about the circumstances that we’re now in.”


The appeal upheld the substantive decision of supreme court judge Greg Garde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/21/keeping-juveniles-in-adult-jail-is-unlawful-victorian-judge-rules>
, who found last week that the transfer was unlawful because it was made 
without taking into account relevant considerations under the Children, Youth 
and Families Act.

Garde also found it was unlawful because it was made for the “improper or 
extraneous purpose” of emergency accommodation, which was dismissed on appeal.

The court of appeal did not address Garde’s finding that the use of Barwon as 
a youth justice facility breached the Victorian charter of human rights. It is 
expected to hand down a written decision on that matter in February, which de 
Krester said would be important for any future challenges.




De Krester said if the government attempted to continue to use Barwon as a 
youth justice facility, they would mount another legal challenge.

Opposition youth justice spokesman George Crozier said the court’s decision 
showed that Mikakos was “utterly incompetent” and called for her to be sacked.

Greens MP and youth justice spokeswoman Nina Springle said she would support 
additional legal challenges if they proved necessary.

Springle said the former Liberal government was warned in a 2010 ombudsman’s 
report that Parkville was inappropriate, and that the Andrews government had 
two years to address the problem before the riots.

“This is a crisis of their own making,” she said.
 