 The report that the Victoria and Albert Museum, South Kensington, is about to 
be taken over to house the staff of the Board of Education, which has been 
displaced from its own headquarters by a new Admiralty department, is, if 
correct, a rather lamentable piece of news.
It shows that the old official attitude towards the affairs of the mind is as 
opaque as ever, and that our officials still believe that if a country has 
sufficient revues in the theatres and unparalleled films "featuring" Miss 
So-and-so in the kinemas the nation must needs be content.

It shows also that we are still working in a distracted and hand-to-mouth way 
in providing for the extensions in our public departments, although these 
extensions come as inevitably as the seasons. The argument for taking over the 
last considerable place of refreshment for the eye and mind (the National 
Gallery has been reduced to a shadow of itself) would presumably be that it is 
impossible to curtail further the hotel accommodation in London without 
severely affecting the soldiers on leave and business and visitors.

Everyone knows, however, that there are clubs and great mansions that have not 
been touched. In the whole length of Pall Mall, there is only one club yet 
affected, and the Piccadilly clubs seem much the same as ever. It was announced 
the other day that Lord Leconfield's house in Mayfair is to be used as a club 
by American officers, and that it was offered to the Government some time ago 
but never taken over.

But the possibilities seem to us to lie more in the occupation of a number of 
houses that form part of a West End street or terrace. We have been told in 
many plaintive articles and letters in the London press that servants nowadays 
are almost unprocurable, and even the best people are having to shut up part of 
their houses and live in one floor, and so on.

The West End's extremity should be the Office of Works' opportunity. It might 
be less hardship and one which affected fewer people if a block of big West End 
houses were taken over than a great block of flats such as Queen Anne's 
Mansions - which was mentioned some months ago - but in any case it is clear 
that there are in this connection many possibilities for our officials before 
they touch South Kensington, which is an essential place of refreshment to the 
people of London and to the hundreds of thousands of thinking soldiers from all 
parts of the Empire. The pressure for official accommodation in Berlin is 
probably as great as in London.
 