
How is “helping low-income families to save” a measure to help the “just about 
managing” (Hammond told to help families ‘just managing’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/17/autumn-statement-hammond-to-give-modest-boost-to-just-managing-families>
, 18 November)? On a low income you don’t have money to save. With low savings 
rates, saving doesn’t confer much benefit. On a modestly good income when I was 
young, it was very difficult to save the amount recommended for my pension.

Our politicians should have experience of the real world. Maybe we should 
raise the age to become an MP and insist on demonstrating experience of working 
in a public sector. Going from a privileged background, studying politics and 
then entering parliament is not a recipe for a fairer society and understanding 
the problems of the disadvantaged.

Short-term gains to companies in off-shoring and outsourcing jobs, leaves us 
with failing public services; an outsourcer has to make a profit, resulting in 
lesser-quality services. People cannot swap work sectors easily. Our education 
system has in the main lagged behind science and technology. No chance of 
employment in their sphere of experience and inadequate retraining leads to an 
increase in reliance on benefits, a fall in the tax take and lesser income to 
buy the products and services that help to make a healthy economy. The outcome 
of these policies and the sale of assets will come back to bite us once the 
capital from the sale has been exhausted and the loss of income and tax 
revenues is felt. Beware the day when our power and wealth is shown to be all 
smoke and mirrors.
Sue Allen-Shepherd
Tiptree, Essex

• We should be mortified that the UK ranks at the bottom of teenage literacy 
league tables among 23 developed nations. Our economic success hinges on a 
workforce with advanced skills, yet we are failing to develop basic literacy 
skills among young people. Public libraries provide everyone with equal 
opportunities to develop a love of reading, access books and develop vital 
literacy skills. Local economies receive £5 for £1 invested in library 
services. Yet since 2010, more than 340 libraries have closed and a quarter of 
librarians have lost their jobs. Addressing the UK’s literacy and skills crisis 
is critical in order to deliver economic growth and provide greater equality of 
opportunities and improved life chances for all. We call on the chancellor in 
the autumn statement to provide local authorities with emergency relief funding 
for public libraries on a needs-assessed basis as a matter of urgency.
John Bird Crossbench, House of Lords, Jeremy Beecham Labour, Nicholas Trench 
Crossbench,Sheila Hollins Crossbench, Jenny Jones Green, Frank Judd Labour, 
Kath Pinnock Lib Dem, Graham Tope Lib Dem

• I read with interest Patrick Collinson’s article on stamp duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/19/autumn-statement-stamp-duty-chancellor-homebuyers-mayfair-middle-england>
 (Money, 19 November). While I can understand the sentiment of why we should 
not be concerned about stamp duty as it only really affects those with 
properties worth over £1m, one needs to understand that such high rates are 
providing a huge disincentive to buy at the top end of the market. Yes, this is 
leading to price falls at the higher end of the London market but the falls are 
severely curtailed by the fact that there is a lack of incentive to sell.

To say this will not affect the lower end of the market is shortsighted. If 
the person who is fortunate enough to be able to trade up from a £2m house to a 
£5m cannot bring themselves to pay stamp duty, their £2m house will not be 
available for the person trading up from a £1m house and so on.

Contrary to your article, I would urge Philip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> to review the current 
rates. If there is a desire to keep prices at the top end of the market 
subdued, alternatives should be investigated. Abolition of capital gains tax 
relief above a gain of say £250,000 or a mansion tax would seem to be ways of 
curtailing market growth while producing an incentive to sell rather than 
simply a disincentive to buy.
Andrew Symington
Managing director, Symington Elvery

• Am I the only one to notice that the fiscal measures supposedly aimed at 
“Jams” (Easing austerity: Options for Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/20/autumn-statement-what-might-the-chancellor-have-up-his-sleeve>
, 21 November) – air passenger duty cut, freeze on fuel duty, increased 
personal tax allowance, increased Isa limits – in fact benefit the better off 
as much if not more? The only measure mentioned that seems to be targeted at 
the low paid, increasing the national insurance threshold, is also the only one 
that has a caveat: “would cost the Treasury billions”.
Chris George
Seaford, East Sussex

• For the autumn statement and beyond I would like to see a clear emphasis on 
the four Hs: Heathrow, Hinkley, HS2 and highways. Recent government 
announcements in these areas have been encouraging for the construction 
industry, and we need to build on this momentum to make sure we get spades in 
the ground as quickly as possible.

Public sector infrastructure investment not only boosts growth and 
productivity, it also helps the fifth H: housing. There are significant 
opportunities from HS2, Heathrow and highways to stimulate the level of house 
building the country needs in areas that would benefit the most from further 
development. But the private property sector is currently suffering from a lack 
of confidence, rather than liquidity. The biggest confidence boost that UK plc 
could receive is the certainty that these projects are going ahead, now. If 
government gets started on infrastructure, housing will surely follow.
Mark Naysmith 
UK managing director, WSP

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 