
Samantha Power, the American ambassador to the United Nations, says the world 
has reached a “turning point” over Syria. The Russians, who refuse to halt 
their relentless bombing of Aleppo, say theObama administration is “hysterical” 
 <https://www.rt.com/news/361020-us-politics-reality-show/>and blaming Moscow 
for its own failures. The UN, lost for words, believes Syria has become a 
“slaughterhouse”. Stephen O’Brien, a senior official, warns despairingly that 
Aleppo is “descending into the pitiless and merciless abyss of a humanitarian 
catastrophe”. So what is to be done?

The short answer is that nobody seems to know – or, at least, how to do it. 
This crisis has been unfolding for five long years. Repeated attempts to set a 
viable peace process in train have failed. Ceasefires have come and gone, 
always temporary, always broken by one party or another within days or even 
hours. The latest truce collapsed last week amid a welter of mutual 
recriminations.

The US now says it is examining “non-diplomatic” options, possibly new 
sanctions against the Russian and Syrian governments and individuals deemed 
responsible for using bunker-buster and incendiary bombs in Aleppo. There are 
dark mutterings about US airstrikes on Syrian military targets. The latter 
course could bring US and Russian forces into direct confrontation. It would be 
the sort of serious escalation that Barack Obama has studiously avoided until 
now, even when his“red line” on chemical weapons was crossed in 2013 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/fact-checker/wp/2013/09/06/president-obama-and-the-red-line-on-syrias-chemical-weapons/>
.

Yet this crisis is now about far more than the people of Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>, or Syria or even US-Russian 
relations. The war has destabilised neighbouring countries such as Turkey. It 
has sparked an unprecedented movement of refugees and economic migrants across 
Europe’s borders. It has fuelled the rise of jihadi terrorism. It has 
distracted attention and resources from troublespots such as Yemen. Most 
significantly, perhaps, in terms of long-term damage, it has dramatically 
exposed the inherent weakness of the UN system and the growing disrespect shown 
by states for international law.

Russia is the worst offender. It has been warned repeatedly, most recently by 
Ban Ki-moon, the UN secretary general, that its airstrikes in and around Aleppo 
and elsewhere against civilian targets, hospitals and schools, may constitute 
war crimes. The charge sheet includes the destruction of a UN-organised aid 
convoy in northern Aleppo last month that killed about 20 people. Russian and 
Syriandenials of responsibility 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/09/suspends-syria-aid-convoy-bombed-160920080213025.html>
 are widely disbelieved.

Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014 was another egregious breach of 
international law, the sort of blatant land grab that most people believed 
belonged to the bad old days of 1930s Europe. Russia’s complicity, also 
implausibly denied, in the shooting down of aMalaysian civilian airliner over 
Ukraine two years ago 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/29/world/asia/malaysia-air-flight-mh17-russia-ukraine-missile.html>
, killing nearly 300 people, was an unforgivable outrage against international 
rules, not to mention common decency. Russia’s increasing use of cyber warfare, 
notably the recent hacking of the Democratic party and online electoral systems 
in the US, is another aspect of its serial disregard for international norms. 
Russia appears only too willing to manipulate the UN security council, despite 
its responsibilities as a permanent member. This risks a fundamental erosion of 
the UN Charter, which set as an objective the “establishment [of] conditions 
under which justice and respect for the obligations arising from treaties and 
other sources of international law can be maintained”. Yet such cynicism is not 
limited to Vladimir Putin’s regime.

Earlier this year, China, another permanent member of the security council, 
flatly rejected the ruling of the UN-backed permanent court of arbitration in 
The Hague that its island building and wider maritime claims in the South China 
Seahave no legal basis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/12/philippines-wins-south-china-sea-case-against-china>
. Beijing said simply that the decision did not apply, for no better reason 
than it did not fit its strategic objectives. China has also made clear, 
following North Korea’s recent, illegal nuclear test, that it reserves the 
right to block attempts at the UN to impose further sanctions if it does not 
like them, thereby further undermining attempts to rein in the rogue regime in 
Pyongyang. Recent joint naval exercises in the South China Sea suggest Russia 
and China are grimly intent on backing up each other’s bad behaviour.

Disrespect for the UN and its institutions is a spreading problem, as seen by 
the apparent impunity enjoyed by those who attack or hinder its peacekeepers, 
aid workers and organisations. The too frequent inability of the UN to defend 
itself and those under its care was exemplified last July in Juba in South 
Sudan, when aid workers were brutally assaulted by army troops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/15/south-sudan-aid-worker-rape-attack-united-nations-un>
. In countries such as Sudan, the failing reach of international law is seen in 
President Omar al-Bashir’s continuing defiance of warrants for his arrest on 
charges of genocide and crimes against humanity.

The International Criminal Court, which issued the warrants, is not a UN 
agency. But it is a key legal arm of the international system whose authority 
is regularly flouted by states that, even though they ratified the founding 
2002 Treaty of Rome, do not respect its obligations. This tendency towards 
impunity is further encouraged by the US and other major countries that are not 
parties to the treaty even though they support ICC actions. This is the same 
double standard that allows Washington to complain about the flouting of 
international law inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> and Ukraine 
while ignoring the damaging precedent set in 2003 when the Bush administration 
invaded Iraq without explicit UN legal authority.

The suffering in Aleppo is dreadful. As we have said many times, the 
combatants must pull back and cease fire, as a prelude to resumed diplomatic 
efforts. But we must also be clear that, increasingly, long-term structural 
damage is not confined to Syria. Lawless behaviour by powerful state actors is 
corroding the crucial institutions created in 1945 to prevent another global 
conflagration. By allowing international law to be repeatedly flouted, we risk 
an even greater catastrophe.

• Comments will be opened later today. This article was amended on 2 October 
2016. In an earlier version, we said Barack Obama’s “red line” on chemical 
weapons was crossed in 2103. We of course meant 2013.
 