 Our latest intelligence on Wednesday contained the melancholy announcement, 
received by electric telegraph, of the decease of Sir Robert Peel of the 
injuries received by the fall from his horse on Saturday.
[The ex-prime minister] had called at Buckingham Palace. Proceeding up 
Constitution Hill, he had arrived nearly opposite the wicket gate leading into 
the Green Park, when he met Miss Ellis, one of Lady Dover's daughters. Sir 
Robert had scarcely exchanged salutes with this young lady, when his horse, 
becoming restive, swerved towards the rails of Green Park, and threw Sir Robert 
sideways on his left shoulder.

Sir Robert, on being raised, groaned very heavily, and [asked] whether he was 
much hurt, replied, "Yes, very much."

From A Special Correspondent: From 1841 to 1846 I heard every speech he 
delivered and [have read] every speech he ever delivered. He is open to the 
reproach of having been a dextrous party leader, often leading people who 
trusted him astray as to his real objects.

But, apart from this, his public life of forty years is associated with some 
of the most remarkable of the measures which have changed the very character of 
the government; the remodelling of the currency, the improvement of the 
executive in Ireland, the amelioration of the criminal law, catholic 
emancipation, and commercial freedom, are the monuments of his public career.

[As a young MP] Peel was in the prime of manhood, and the champion of the 
protestant interest. It would have been absurd to expect an early abandonment 
of his position.

But any one who will take the time to read his speeches during several years 
prior to catholic emancipation will detect the gradual conquest of his 
intellect over his prejudices.

Any observer, during the period between 1841 and 1846, could discern that the 
intellect of Sir Robert Peel was capitulating to the arguments of the 
economists and that the repeal of the corn laws was merely a question of time.

Had [the Irish potato] famine been followed by the European revolutions of 
1848, with the corn-law unrepealed, the Anti-corn-law League in full operation 
and the middle classes exasperated to the last pitch of endurance, the whole 
fabric of English society would have been shaken to its very foundations.

From that tremendous peril did Sir Robert Peel save us; and he accomplished it 
at the sacrifice of his power, his reputation and even his health.
 