 Portadown, Wednesday evening. Never had General, or rather King, Carson such a 
day as this. As the train with Edward Carson's party approached just before 
noon the usual detonators on the rail fired a battleship salute.
The saloon carriage was shunted round to a special platform on which half a 
company of the riflemen of the Portadown Unionist battalion was drawn up.

They were all armed with dummy rifles with solid wooden barrels and real 
triggers. A standard was lowered in salute, as is only usual before royalty, 
and the National Anthem was played.

Standing on the step of the carriage Sir Edward Carson graciously acknowledged 
his reception and addressed encouraging words to his faithful army of the clubs 
and lodges on whom, he said, the real work of the battle would fall. The 
carriage bearing King Carson, Mr. F. E. Smith [and] Lord Londonderry advanced 
into the town. [A] parade occupied about an hour, after which the royal party 
withdrew for lunch. At two, His Majesty took up his position at a saluting base 
at the top of the main street. He witnessed a march past of Unionist clubs and 
Orange lodges.

Perhaps the troops from Edenderry, the lower part of Portadown, carried off 
the prize for military grandeur. Their contingent had two field guns made of 
painted wood. This had also a full piper band in a sham military uniform. In a 
long experience I have never seen so shameless a travesty of royalty or of 
national grandeur, but neither of the King's counsellors appeared to perceive 
either the absurdity or insolence of the proceedings.

Sir Edward Carson then addressed the meeting. "Are you prepared to give me a 
mandate and follow me to the end?" - (Great cheers.) "Next Saturday you will 
bind yourselves to me, and come what may you will never desert the flag. Let 
the flag fly in every loyal house in Ireland, England, and Scotland next 
Saturday." Sir Edward Carson was then presented with a blackthorn stick from 
North Armagh, and he promised that if he had to use it, he would use it to the 
best of his ability.

Mr. F. E. Smith was the last speaker. He predicted that the Government had not 
the nerve to give the order to the British army to coerce Ulster. The populace 
would lynch them on their lamp-posts.

The meeting soon ended. King Carson and Mr. Smith resumed their places in the 
Royal cortege, the sham lancers trotting before and behind, and the general 
mass of troops following, with bands, the cannon, the ambulance, nurses, and 
stalwart infantry bearing dummy rifles, all in due order.
 