
SUNDAY

Culoz Today’s winner Jarlinson Pantano (right) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/17/tour-de-france-2016-> is one of 
a new generation of Colombians, brought up on the Tour deeds and derring-do of 
Lucho “The little gardener” Herrera and Fabio “Chute” Parra. Amusingly, 
Jarlinson – for all his old Etonian-sounding name, the son of a construction 
worker from Cali – gave the president of his country, Juan Manuel Santos, short 
shrift over inequality when he phoned to congratulate him, and began as a fan 
of the Italian Marco Pantani, owing to the similarity in their names. The glory 
days of the 1980s, when Colombia fielded two teams in the Tour and supplied 
fine coffee to the race, have gone but one thing has not changed: the Colombian 
radio reporters in the media zone at the finish, shouting live commentary into 
their phones at immense volume.

MONDAY

Berne Peter Sagan first, Alexander Kristoff second, Sondre Holst Enger (above, 
right) in third. Sorry. Come again? Who? SHE is, post EBH (Edvald 
Boasson-Hagen) 22-years-old, a former world under-23 silver medallist, the next 
big thing in Norwegian cycling. That’s not like saying he is the next great 
Devonian ice hockey player.Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> 
is serious in Norway, with two national Tours – one run by the Tour organisers 
ASO – a recent world champion in Thor Hushovd and two of the finest Classics 
hunters in the sport: EBH and Kristoff. Plus, the maddest roadside fans on the 
Tour, all face-painting, Viking helmets, bear skins, fluffy moose – one we saw 
was being carried on a roof rack down a Swiss motorway – and an infinity of 
flags. EBH, SHE, ASO, OMG.

TUESDAY

Berne Mark Cavendish goes home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/19/mark-cavendish-tour-de-france-pulls-out-olympics>
, and the rationale is clear: four Alpine stages to come in the heat against 
one possible win on the Champs Élysées with four stage wins in the bag and the 
green jersey out of reach. It’s a no brainer. Cavendish can return home proud 
of a Tour that has been utterly accomplished, his mind on Rio. As has Fabian 
Cancellara, who says warm things about the specially arranged stage into his 
home town on Monday, then quits his last Tour.

WEDNESDAY

Vallorcine The stage to Finhaut Emosson is one of the most daring ventures in 
the brave new Tour era of Christian Prudhomme, given the difficulty of access 
to what is basically a rock platform blasted out alongside a massive dam, one 
of three built here since the 1950s to provide hydroelectric power. One press 
parking is through a very low 400m tunnel; the teams are evacuated via a longer 
tunnel down to a main road. Given it takes until 7.30pm for some team buses to 
clear the tunnel, which means the riders arriving at their hotels well after 
dinnertime, the gamble isn’t a total success. Nor are all the locals happy. The 
road across the French border has been closed all day, meaning the only access 
for non bike-borne residents is via the train, which has bumped its prices up 
to €57 for a ticket, while the cable car up to the climb is equally pricy. 
Hence, perhaps, the relatively small number of spectators on the climb, which 
is mainly populated by those Norwegians. Mont Ventoux it isn’t. That is 
probably for the best.

THURSDAY

Sallanches A large image of Bernard Hinault dominates the roundabout on the 
entry to town but, as well as the 30th anniversary of Hinault’s last Tour, it 
is 30 years since Greg LeMond won America’s first Tour in an epic battle with 
the Badger. LeMond is back on the race after staying away during the Armstrong 
years, when he fell out bitterly with Big Tex. LeMond never seemed like an 
elder statesman in waiting when he was racing but the fact he was right when he 
spoke out against Armstrong and suffered for it gives him gravitas he never had 
as a rider.

FRIDAY

Saint-Gervais The Tour goes over three Cols de la Forclaz this year, two of 
them today - the Forclaz de Montmin (1st category) and Forclaz de Queige (2nd) 
- while the Swiss Forclaz (the Z is silent) was climbed on Wednesday. There are 
four in France, nine in Switzerland. Why are they are so common? In local 
dialects the wordforclia - from the latin furcula, a small fork - means a 
narrow passage between two hills. In other words, a Col, like place names in 
Scotland and Wales that mean “bridge bridge” and “hill hill”.

SATURDAY

Megéve On the final climb of the Joux-Plane a police motorbike can be seen 
close to the lead riders, clearly delegated with the job of discouraging fans 
who attempt to run alongside the riders, even if that involves coming close to 
crushing their toes. It’s a new innovation, and after the various episodes 
involving fans and riders in recent years, a more than welcome one.
 