
Victor Hugo, born in 1802 in the garrison town of Besançon, belonged to the 
first generation to write about the French Revolution of 1789 without 
personally remembering it. The son of a general in Napoleon Bonaparte’s army, 
and a precociously talented poet,Hugo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/victor-hugo> left school soon after his 
father’s fortunes collapsed alongside Napoleon’s, following the battle of 
Waterloo in 1815. By the time he was 39, he was already one of 40 “immortals” 
in the Académie Française, and in 1845 he was made apair de France or “lord of 
the realm”.

David Bellos has written a biography not of Hugo, but of his masterpiece, Les 
Misérables. Putting recent literary scholarship into narrative form, Bellos 
traces the life of the 1,500-page novel from conception to publication, 
mentioning along the way the many film and musical adaptations ofLes Misérables 
that have given it a rich life beyond the printed page.

Hugo began the novel that became Les Misérables (originally Les Misères) in 
November 1845. The first draft, painstakingly reconstructed by researchers at 
the University of Paris 7 and now accessible online, breaks off in February 
1848. There are three French revolutions involved: that of 1789, which haunted 
Hugo’s generation; the one in 1830, which falls within the timeframe of the 
novel; and the revolution of 1848, which occurred while Hugo was writing. InLes 
Misérables, he states: “Liberty radiates from France. None but the blind can 
fail to see it. Bonaparte said so!” The novel claims exceptional status for 
France because of “the magnificent and irresistibly human movement begun on the 
14th of July 1789. The French Revolution is an act of God.”

The plot of Les Misérables begins in 1815 when the main character, Jean 
Valjean, is released from a 19-year prison and hard labour sentence for 
stealing a loaf of bread. The revolutionary events described in the novel – 
such as the barricade scene in which Valjean rescues his adopted daughter’s 
injured lover, carrying him through the sewers of Paris to safety – are 
inspired by an uprising in June 1832, early in the reign of Louis Philippe. 
Hugo paid careful attention to the historical facts, but also made changes, 
Bellos argues: “Derealising the actually rather sad and sordid events of that 
night allowed him to bring out the higher and more important meanings of 
‘revolution’ for the past and future history of France.”

As Hugo was writing about his fictional barricade, the government collapsed 
and real barricades were once again erected in Paris in 1848. The writer stood 
for election to the new Constituent Assembly and was elected a representative 
of the people of Paris in June. Soon afterwards, a state of siege was declared, 
and Hugo, who had no military experience, took command of one of the battalions 
of soldiers ordered to suppress the barricades. Bellos comments that it will be 
hard for those familiar with film and theatre adaptations ofLes Misérables to 
understand that the author was not fighting on the barricades, but against 
them. Hugo found the sight of rioters in the Rue Saint‑Denis offensive: 
“Nothing can be more chilling or more sombre than the hideous heroism of 
abjection, displaying all the strength of the weak; nothing more chilling than 
civilisation attacked by cynicism and defending itself like a barbarian.”

Hugo did not return to his draft novel until 1860, when he was living in 
Hauteville House 
<http://www.maisonsvictorhugo.paris.fr/en/visitor-information/your-visit-guernsey>
 on Guernsey. “This is where thepair de France broke off and the exile carried 
on,” he wrote on the manuscript page on 30 December. When he fled France in 
1851, both his sons were in prison and Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, the new 
prince-president, was his sworn enemy. “Because we had Napoléon le Grand, do we 
have to have Napoléon le Petit?” Hugo had quipped. From a room with a view of 
the harbour and seabirds, removed from political tumult, he finished the 
enormous manuscript he called his leviathan.

The persistence of poverty, despite the Declaration of Rights of Man and of 
the Citizen 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Declaration_of_the_Rights_of_Man_and_of_the_Citizen>
 in 1789, progressive revolutionary ideals and advancements in social and 
scientific understanding, is the problem at the heart ofLes Misérables. Why, as 
the Gospel of Matthew declares, are the poor always with us? Hugo thought they 
should not be. For him, the persistence of poverty was a sign that the 
revolution was incomplete. Bellos quotes Hugo’s record of a scene he witnessed 
one day on his way to the Chambre des Pairs of a homeless man with bloody 
bandages round his ankles, staring at a beautiful woman emerging from a 
luxurious carriage: “That man was no longer a man in my eyes but the spectre of
la misère, of poverty, the misshapen and lugubrious apparition in broad 
daylight, in broad sunlight, of a revolution this is still deep in the shadows, 
but is on its way.”

In a brilliant chapter, “The Money Plot”, Bellos contextualises the financial 
transactions involved inLes Misérables. For Hugo, debt “is the beginning of 
slavery”. The character Fantine descends into debt when she is abandoned by the 
father of her child, sacked from her factory job, and resorts to selling her 
hair and teeth before becoming a prostitute. Her downward trajectory is 
mirrored by Valjean’s rise. After leaving prison with nothing, he becomes a 
factory owner. There is no inflation, so he keeps the money he has made from 
manufacturing black glass beads in a trunk in the ground for 10 years without 
it depreciating. The choice of black glass beads as the foundation for his 
fortune connects the novel to the global slave trade, because they were used as 
tokens of exchange in the purchase of human cargo from Arab and African 
middlemen. Bellos argues that Hugo seems to have known instinctively that “the 
rapid accumulation of wealth in Europe was connected with the horrors of 
colonial trade”.

When Hugo was ready to publish Les Misérables in 1862, he secured the 
publishing deal not only of the century, but, according to Bellos, of all time: 
in today’s terms, Hugo was paid around £3m as an advance on a contract allowing 
the publisher Albert Lacroix to print the book for just eight years. 
Translation rights were not included. Lacroix boasted that he did not have a 
cent of the cash he had promised Hugo; he had to get an enormous loan from the 
Oppenheim bank, where he had the necessary contacts. “There’s some irony in a 
novel so firmly opposed to debt being launched on the back of a major bank 
loan,” Bellos notes, “probably the first loan ever made by a merchant bank to 
finance a book.Les Misérables stands at the vanguard of the democratisation of 
literature and of the use of venture capital to fund the arts.”

• Ruth Scurr’s John Aubrey: My Own Life 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/john-aubrey.html> is published by Vintage.

The Novel of the Century is published by Particular Books. To order a copy for 
£17 (RRP £20) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/novel-of-the-century.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 