
Nick White wants more sex and, unusually for the head of a large London-based 
mobile-phone firm, is happy to admit it. White knows what turns him on. He 
wants erotic images and games, he wants sex messages from girlfriends and his 
virtual mistress, he wants to talk dirty. And he wants it any time, anywhere.

Laura Sigman could have been made for him. Like White, she works in telecoms, 
thinks about sex all the time and doesn't mind sharing him with other women. 
She lives in the US, but plans to come to London this year to talk about sex. 
White wants to meet her.

White is head of VirginXtras, the adult services division of Richard Branson's 
Virgin mobile phone group, while Sigman works for playboy.com, which sells 
Playboy merchandise, including Playmate images, online. What unites the two 
executives is not just sex. They want money, too. Yours and mine. And lots of 
it.

Last year mobile-phone firms spent billions of pounds on networks that will 
soon allow us to download still and moving images on to 'third-generation' 
handsets that are starting to appear in the shops. Now, to recoup their 
investment, they are resorting to the oldest sales gimmick in the book to flog 
the new phones - s-e-x.

Like schoolboys nervously eyeing the top shelf in WHSmith, telecoms executives 
want to grab a share of the 'adult services' market but don't know how. Sex is 
the fastest-growing area of third-generation mobile telecommunications research 
and development.

'Suddenly, everyone in mobile communications wants to know what the sex trade 
- or "adult entertainment" as they call it - can do for them,' says Ben Wood, 
of Gartner, a Surrey-based IT research and consultancy firm.

That sex sells is scarcely a startling discovery. What is striking, however, 
is how analysts and executives are acknowledging - for the first time - how 
important it is when it comes to driving technological advance.

As one senior industry figure put it: 'For years it has been a dirty secret 
that one of the key drivers of new consumer technology is sex, pornography. The 
need to make 3G technology work - and work fast - is exposing that secret.'

Analysts estimate that demand for sex services delivered via mobile phones 
could be worth as much as £1 billion a year in Britain by 2005. Some believe 
that the future of third-generation mobile communication depends on sex.

Dario Betti, an analyst at London-based digital media consultancy Ovum, says: 
'Like it or not, pornography drives each new, convenient visual technology, and 
3G, which combines powerful new media applications, will be no different.'

Betti certainly has history on his side. If you are reading this article at 
home, you may not have any centrefolds stashed under the bed. You may 
disapprove of porn. But the spin-offs of the industry are all around you.

The camcorder and video machine you use to capture those memorable family 
moments - baby's first steps, weddings, holidays - use VHS tapes. US 
pornographers' decision to adopt the cheap convenient VHS - rather than rival 
Betamax - when the two systems were introduced in the 1970s killed off Betamax 
while sales of pornographic films drove take-up of video recorders.

Your DVD player may be great for watching out-takes of the Mike Myers' comedy 
Austin Powers II: The Spy Who Shagged Me, but it is real sex movies which have 
driven DVD sales because, unlike videotape, users can skip quickly to and from 
their favourite scenes. The pay-per-view cable or satellite TV movie channel is 
only available on your TV because pornographers pioneered subscription 
'premium' services first in hotels and then on digital networks.

Did you watch the BBC's interactive coverage of Wimbledon on Sky's digital 
network last summer? Watching four games at once or changing the camera angle 
so you can watch your favourite player more closely may look new but it isn't. 
Pornographers perfected the technology a decade ago for an entirely different 
'sport'.

 And, then, there is the internet. If anyone ever doubted the power of sex to 
drive technological innovation, the internet proves it, several billion times 
over - every day. When the web was launched, the most popular word searches 
were 'sex' and 'porn' and it's still true. Service providers, including Yahoo! 
and Altavista, have begun excluding sex searches from their net use surveys 
because they skew the results and make them worthless.

Pornographic sites are also one of the few web services that make money. 
Forget the great dot.com crash, the Online Computer Library Centre's annual 
review of net use last year found 80,000 'major' adult websites, which 
generated profits of more than £1bn - more than any other e-commerce sector. 
Much of that money has been reinvested in developing leading-edge interactive 
services including 'virtual reality' sex games that allow users to 'join in' 
the action.

Porn providers have become so good at developing technology and making money 
online that mainstream e-businesses from banks to supermarkets are now asking 
its leading practitioners for advice.

Danni Ashe, an American 'erotic actress' who made millions selling nude 
pictures of herself on her own website - Danni's Hard Drive - is making a 
second career as a technological consultant and strategic adviser to large US 
corporations.

But why porn? What has made a product more associated with men in dirty macs 
than hi-tech industries one of the most powerful technological forces on the 
planet? Observers say porn and technology work together so well because each 
meets the needs of the other. Nerd needs anorak.

Technology is demand-driven. Cutting-edge firms develop products they think 
will sell fast. Some of the strongest demand comes from porn 'manufacturers' 
because each hi-tech leap forward helps them get over the one big problem their 
industry faces - the shame factor.

'Demand for porn is high, but it doesn't travel well,' explains Malcolm Hutty, 
general director of the Campaign against Censorship of the Internet in Britain. 
'People want porn, but they want it in the comfort of their own home, not seedy 
backstreet cinemas or sex-shops, and they don't want anyone else to know about 
it. Technology helps bring it straight to you. Each advance seems, at least, to 
bring you closer to the fantasy, and guarantee more privacy.

'Porn started in cinemas - very public. It then moved into video stores - more 
discreet. DVDs and digital TV took it direct into the home. And the internet 
means you can get it any time, anywhere. The more private it becomes, the more 
comfortable consumers feel, particularly women. They enjoy it more, so they buy 
it more.'

And now it is coming to mobile phones. It may seem odd that anyone would want 
to look at porn on a handheld-computer, much less on a mobile phone, but both 
the sex industry and mobile-phone firms believe that third-generation handsets 
represent the biggest-ever opportunity to sell sex. As one operator puts it: 
'People love mobiles. Almost every adult has one and many will buy the new 
third-generation sets. People also love the internet.

'3G phones combine the mobile phone and the internet. You're online all the 
time. It's the net in your pocket. And if you see how many people use the net 
for sex, you do not have to be a genius to see how they will use their new 
phones.'

From the earliest photographic equipment to 3G phones, there is scarcely a 
communications technology which hasn't been seized upon by pornographers and 
their heavy-breathing customers with equal relish. If the past is anything to 
go by, the future for mobile-phone firms and the flesh trade is bright. But 
it's not Orange. It's blue.

What's porn done for us?

 You may disapprove of pornography but the spin-offs of the industry are all 
around.

· Camcorder and VHS video machines were pioneered by porn barons anxious to 
find a cheap way to mass market blue movies. Take-up of DVD players was driven 
by pornographers and their customers because the technology enabled users to 
skip to and from their favourite scenes.

· Pay-per-view cable or satellite TV movies entered the market only after porn 
firms introduced 'premium' services in hotels and on digital networks. 
Interactive television, common on digital sport channels, was developed by 
pornographers to allow users to focus on favourite actors and actresses.

· Internet use and e-business have been driven by smut. There are 80,000 adult 
websites, which generate annual profits of more than £1 billion - more than any 
other e-commerce sector.

 john.arlidge@observer.co.uk <mailto:john.arlidge@observer.co.uk>
 