
Cheap imports have always been an emotive factor in the textile industry and 
there has often been an element of overkill in its reactions to them. But the 
inroads which foreign producers have made into the United Kingdom market have 
coincided with the decline in the textile cycle since last March. The situation 
is already regarded as critical in some sectors.

The cotton yarn spinners were among the first to feel the effects of 
competition. Mediterranean associates of the EEC like Turkey and Greece are 
building up their textile industries, and their access to the already liberal 
British market was further eased by our entry into the Common Market. Here, 
however, the Government is taking action to control these imports.


The clothing and knitwear manufacturers and the footwear industry is now 
facing the fiercest competition, and their difficulties have led to the CBI’s 
urgent support for protective measures.


Textile and clothing imports in 1973 increased by 44 per cent to £851 
millions, leaving a trade deficit of £81 millions; and in the first half of 
last year there was a further increase of 40 per cent. The clothing industry 
suffered its worst trade deficit of £121 millions in 1973 when imports reached 
£224 millions. Imports in the first 10 months of 1974 alone amounted to £235 
millions, a rise of 24 per cent.


There has been a trade deficit on footwear for about 10 years, but during the 
last four years the situation has deteriorated, with imports rising sharply 
while exports have been fairly static. By 1974 imports were £430 millions a 
year, by the middle of last year the trade gap had widened to £42 millions, in 
spite of a rise in the value of exports.


The East European countries are largely responsible for the increased imports 
of footwear, and partly for those in clothing – though Taiwan and South Korea 
are among the major exporters in this field.


The East European products are said to be sold at prices well below the cost 
of production, and the statistics for shoe imports from Poland in the first 11 
months of 1974 seem to bear this out. Imports of shoes rose from 2.2 million 
pairs the previous year to 4.9 million pairs, more than 120 per cent. The value 
of these imports rose only from £2.5 millions to £3.9 millions, an increase of 
56 per cent, and the implication is clear, particularly when inflation and 
rapidly rising raw material costs are taken into account.


Continue reading here <https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2017/01/16/fullfull.jpeg>

 