
Back when Team Sky was in utero, Sir Dave Brailsford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dave-brailsford> made a startling statement 
of intent. “People come into professional cycling and compromise,” he told the 
Guardian in 2009. “We can’t compromise.” He was discussing specifically why he 
was avoiding riders associated with doping, but his words carried a deeper 
message: others might sprint into grey and black to be successful but Sky’s aim 
was to be straight as well as successful.

There was always a contrast between the public projection of the Sky image – 
marginal gains, no stone left unturned, glory upon glory – and the apparent 
organisational chaos beneath. But when Brailsford and his former right-hand 
man, Shane Sutton, face MPs on Monday the questions will cut to a more 
fundamental issue: whetherBritish Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> and Team Sky followed the 
letter and spirit of the anti-doping code.

Sir Dave Brailsford puts up stout defence but questions hang in the air
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/26/sir-dave-brailsford-stout-defence-team-sky-bradley-wiggins>
The stakes are dramatically high. Brailsford must realise that this is the 
time for hard facts, not pseudo-scientific waffle. MPs need to toss any 
fanboyism into the nearest dustbin and concentrate on sustained and intense 
scrutiny. In that spirit, here are 10 questions Brailsford and Sutton should be 
asked when they appear in front of the culture, media and sport select 
committee:

1) Have either of them ever used banned drugs? 

This would be the equivalent of a lie‑detector baseline. Their openness – or 
nervousness – will give MPs a sense of how much they will cooperate.

2) Have British Cycling or Team Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> riders ever used cortisone out of 
competition?

This is legal and does not require a therapeutic use exemption certificate. 
However, it does allow riders to reduce weight while maintaining power and 
ventures into ethical boundaries. After all, theMouvement pour un Cyclisme 
Crédible,a voluntary group of teams which Sky has refused to join, has 
requested that the UCI and World Anti-Doping Agency ban the use of 
corticosteroids.

3) Have riders ever been given powerful pain medication, such as tramadol, 
before races?

The former Team Sky rider Jonathan Tiernan-Locke has alleged he was offered 
tramadol by the Team Sky and BritishCycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> doctor Richard Freeman while 
representing Great Britain at the 2012 Road World Championships and that it was 
“offered freely around”.

Sir Dave Brailsford: My handling of Team Sky bag affair threw petrol on fire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/dave-brailsford-team-sky-bag-bradley-wiggins>
4) Was there ever overt pressure to obtain results – and how did Sky 
get successful?

Sky were extremely poor prior to 2010, their first season, despite Brailsford 
unveiling a battery of marginal gains beforehand. So what changed? And were 
Brailsford or Sutton ever told “the poor performances cannot continue, we need 
to win or the money will be removed and sponsorship withdrawn”?

5) Did Team Sky know about Geert Leinders’s past when they hired him as a 
freelance consultant in 2011 and 2012?

Leinders was banned for life last year for multiple doping violations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/22/geert-leinders-life-ban-team-sky-doctor>
 while at Rabobank between 1996 and 2009, including possession, trafficking and 
administering banned substances including EPO, testosterone and 
corticosteroids. However, there were plenty of suspicions before then. What 
happened to Sky’s due diligence on him, especially given there were riders in 
the team who had worked with him before?

6) What was the exact process that led to Sir Bradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins> being given injections of 
triamcinolone, a powerful corticosteroid, just before the Tour de France in 
2011 and 2012 and the Giro D’Italia in 2013?

The committee should demand the names of those involved and also ask why 
Wiggins did not feel the need to take the drug before the 2009 or 2010 Tours. 
In his autobiography, Wiggins had insisted he was in the form of his life and 
in good health – only to claim earlier this year that in fact he was “really 
struggling” with pollen allergies.

7) What was in the medical package taken by British Cycling doctor Simon Cope 
to Team Sky on the final day of the 2011 Dauphiné Libéré?

Incredibly we still do not know, despite British Cycling insisting that the 
package did not include triamcinolone. If it knows that piece of information, 
surely it can say what was in the package?

8) Why did Brailsford initially tell the Daily Mail the courier was there to 
meet Emma Pooley, who was 700 miles away?

Again, it seems incredible that Brailsford, that master and commander of 
British Cycling and Team Sky for so long, would have got this wrong.

9) What was the nature of Sutton’s consultancy role with Sky while he was 
technical director of British Cycling?

What exactly was he doing? Are the reports of a six-figure sum accurate? And 
did it take away from his duties at British Cycling, for which he was paid from 
the public purse?

10) The former British Cycling performance director Peter Keen says the two 
bodies have become too close? Is he right?

It is worth recalling the words of Rod Carr, the chair of UK sport. “If there 
were issues in British Cycling, it fundamentally undermines everything,” he 
said. “If people don’t believe what they’re seeing on the track, if things are 
getting done in a way we as the public think is untoward, it’s really bad news.”

As he prepares to face the MPs, maybe Brailsford should reflect on these words 
of a year ago this month. “There has been a growing call for transparency and 
that is what we are trying to embrace,” he said. There is still time to live up 
to those ideals. Time, however, is rapidly running out.
 