 The fourth ordinary meeting for the present session of the Manchester 
Statistical Society was held on Wednesday in Ridgefield; Mr. D. Noble MD. in 
the chair. The Rev. Dr. Munroe read a paper on "Our unemployed females, and 
what may best be done for them".
He sketched the circumstances of the present crisis and showed what had been 
done for those thrown out of employment. He discussed the question of their 
emigration, and contended that it was inexpedient unduly to stimulate it. The 
system of sewing classes, which had hitherto averted so much evil, could not be 
expected to last long.

The girls should, in rotation, be drawn to the public wash-houses, as well as 
the public cooking establishments, there to acquire some knowledge of household 
duties. Their occupations should be further varied by their being instructed in 
the laws of health, and the best methods of ministering, as nurses, to the sick.

As the great majority of them could already read, though still ignorant, 
ladies of matronly experience, instead of continuing so to teach them, would 
effect more good by giving them oral instruction in practical matters, in self 
government, in the cardinal virtues, and minor morals. It would prove of 
incalculable advantage whether they should resume their wonted work, or become 
the mothers of families, or enter domestic service, or emigrate.

Without being hasty in interpreting the causes of those calamities which 
Providence might appoint or permit, yet it seemed as if the present distress 
was an express call demanding measures for the elevation of the character, the 
nature and functions of our females in the manufacturing classes.

We were not to suppose as some did, that manufactures necessarily produced 
deterioration of body or mind. But it was not to be denied that the confinement 
of multitudes of females to such work had come to be too continuous and 
exclusive. They had been turned into mere appendages of machinery, and nothing 
more.

It must be obvious that we were bound to hope for a state of things in which 
men shall be more and women less employed in the mill, for a time when men 
should be the bread-winners, while women should be faithful, skilful, and 
intelligent stewards of their earnings; when they should live mainly to enhance 
the household.

Happy for the community if the fearful crisis should induce us to frame 
measures which might result in raising woman, long sunk in ignorance and 
uncongenial toil, to the intelligence and moral rank for which both nature and 
Christianity designed her.
 