
The indie rock band the Rubens have topped the Triple J’s Hottest 100. The 
five-piece from Menangle, New South Wales, landed on the annual music 
countdown’s top spot with their track Hoops, beating King Kunta by Kendrick 
Lamar in second place and Lean On feat MØ/DJ Snake by Major Lazer in third.

The band told Triple J hosts Matt Okine and Alex Dyson the win represented 
being able to “have some food”. “This is insane, this is mental,” they said.

Think you know the Hottest 100? Test yourself with this never-ending* quiz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/datablog/2016/jan/26/think-you-know-the-hottest-100-test-yourself-with-this-never-ending-quiz>
Triple J’s content director, Ollie Wards, said of the song: “Dropping in July 
2015, the song’s four-to-the-floor beat and sing-along lyrics make it a total 
earworm for Triple J listeners.

“Despite it being a slower song for the band, Hoops always gets the crowd 
moving at their awesome live shows. After just a few listens the song makes you 
feel like you’ve been hearing it for years.”

It is the third consecutive year an Australian act has taken out the top spot.

The Rubens are previous winners of Triple J’s Unearthed competition and their 
song Lay it Down nabbed No 57 in the 2011 Hottest 100 countdown. They took out 
No 10 with My Gun and No 66 with The Best We Got in 2012.

Other big winners of the 2016 countdown include the psych rockers Tame Impala 
who took fourth and fifth place with The Less I Know the Better and Let it 
Happen. Jarryd James (Do You Remember) and the Weeknd (Can’t Feel My Face) also 
made the top 10. Chet Faker, who won the 2015 Hottest 100 with his track Talk 
Is Cheap, returned in a collaboration with Marcus Marr called The Trouble with 
Us, at sixth place.

The only female artists to make the top 10 featured as vocalists on tracks by 
male artists, including Lorde on the Disclosure track Magnets (she also 
co-wrote the song), and Mataya with Young Tapz on the Hermitude track The Buzz. 
According to Triple J, 37 songs out of the full 100 featured female vocals.

The two artists with the most songs in the countdown were Courtney Barnett and 
Tame Impala, with four songs each. Barnett peaked at No 43 with Pedestrian at 
Best. “When we were making the album it was one of the last songs I came up 
with and kinda wrote the lyrics really quickly on the floor,” she told Triple J 
during the countdown. “But it all kinda came together.”

Of the 100 songs, 54 were by Australian artists. There were 22 songs from the 
UK, 15 from the US, five from Canada and one each from Denmark, France, Germany 
and New Zealand, along with featured artists from Jamaica and Sweden.

This was the seventh year in a row the rapper Illy landed a spot in the 
countdown. The electronic music producer Flume appeared in his fourth 
consecutive year. Twenty-six artists who made their Hottest 100 debut.

In an interview with the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-01-26/triple-j-hottest-100-voters-set-new-record/7112504>
, Wards said more than 2m votes had been cast by 298,851 people. “That’s the 
most amount of people who have ever voted in the Hottest 100.” The countdown 
began in 1988.

Triple J released figures that showed ballots had been cast online from 172 
countries. Eighteen- to 24-year-olds made up 44% of the voters, far outweighing 
any other age group, and voted for more than 16,000 songs.

In its first official charity partnership, Triple J teamed up with the 
Australian Indigenous Mentoring Experience <https://aimementoring.com/> for 
this year’s Hottest 100. AIME helps Indigenous Australians finish high school.

The station sold T-shirts 
<http://shop.aimementoring.com/collections/hottest-100>, encouraged donations 
on-air andonline <https://aimedonations.raisely.com/> and called on listeners 
hosting Hottest 100 gatherings to take gold-coin donations for the cause.
 