
Moving social housing tenants from one council borough to another is nothing 
new: in 2007, residents reported being offered housing elsewhere. But a 
three-pronged policy shift has intensified and increased the number and 
distance of placements: rising rents, the benefits cap, and new powers under 
the Localism Act 2011. The latter allows councils to offer out-of-borough 
placements and discharge their duty to house residents if they refuse such an 
offer.

New research released exclusively to the Guardian, by Kate Hardy at the 
University of Leeds and Tom Gillespie at the University of Sheffield, offers a 
snapshot of the lives of people in the east London borough of Newham offered 
placements outside their areas.

The researchers, working with the Focus E15 housing campaign, conducted 
interviews and surveys with people leaving council offices and who had been in 
contact with the housing department in the borough. The research shows 
precisely how vulnerable those in housing need are.

Three things the government must put in the housing white paper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/nov/29/government-housing-white-paper-devolution-land-planning-london>
The findings highlight the extreme vulnerability of the people accessing the 
housing service, with 22% reporting a disability that affected their housing 
needs, and 48% a health condition that did so. Of the respondents, 58% said 
they had been offered accommodation out of the borough and 44% were offered 
housing outside of London. The flats offered to these households weren’t simply 
in adjacent boroughs: 16% were offered accommodation in Lancashire, and 13% in 
the West Midlands.

Any move involves upheaval, but moving halfway across the country when you are 
already likely to be vulnerable causes huge emotional and health problems. One 
interviewee living in hostel accommodation with her two children said she’d 
come out in welts, rashes and persistent cold sores due to the stress, but as 
with several other respondents, avoided seeking help from health professionals 
for fear of social services becoming involved and removing her children. This 
fear isn’t unfounded:in 2014 Titina Nzolameso had her children taken into care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/may/20/family-reunited-housing-battle-separation-benefits-cap>
 after refusing an out-of-borough placement, a decision that was quashed by the 
high court a year later.

The researchers found women were disproportionately hit by housing problems in 
the sample they interviewed, comprising 67% of the group. Three quarters of the 
residents had been evicted: 41% had been evicted two or more times.Housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> problems were worsening most 
people’s health and causing them to become more vulnerable: 89% mentioned 
worsening mental health, with 66% specifically mentioning depression and 25% 
suffering from insomnia. Worryingly, 9% reported suicidal feelings – double the 
average rate of 4.3% among the general population.

Half of the people interviewed had experienced problems with housing due to 
changes in benefits brought in during 2013. Ahmed, a 26-year-old in temporary 
accommodation, told researchers, “I got sanctioned last year. I missed an 
appointment because of a funeral. I started getting into rent arrears because 
of that. At that stage I got evicted due to that one sanction. The service 
charge and interest were massive. There was a two-week period where I literally 
had nothing. It was difficult, I was trying to budget, but once sanctioned it 
was too much, really hard.”

MPs damn US firm over 'cut first, think later' approach to tax credit claimants
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/01/mps-damn-us-firm-over-cut-first-think-later-approach-to-tax-credit-claimants>
By sanctioning Ahmed once, the government have incurred more costs down the 
line, instead paying for temporary accommodation when previously Ahmed was 
renting without any problems. For many moved out of their borough, the move 
means they lose work and have to claim benefits instead.

The research recommends several policy measures to improve the prospects and 
well being of households affected: ending the practice of out-of-borough 
placements in light of detrimental social, economic and health impacts on 
affected individuals; undertaking an equalities impact assessment due to the 
disproportionate effect on women; and that those seeking housing should be 
advised to bring advocates to meetings with officials.

The report further recommends all meetings between council housing 
representatives and residents should be audio recorded. It says local 
authorities should consider people facing eviction automatically as at higher 
risk of mental health problems, with attendant referrals for services, and that 
full and immediate counselling should be offered to those approaching the 
council for help with housing and homelessness.

Too often, complaints about the treatment of people facing homelessness, and 
indeed any service users, are met with grumbles about cost. But for many of the 
residents interviewed, placing them in temporary accommodation for long periods 
costs more than supporting people to stay in their homes and avoid eviction.

Allowing people to stay in the borough and in work rather than move elsewhere 
and be forced into unemployment costs less in the long term. And given the link 
between poor housing and poor health, it’s clear that investing in housing will 
improve life expectancy and quality. To do so, both the government, and local 
authorities have to commit to a more humane and thoughtful housing policy than 
shunting people around from borough to borough like unwanted units.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 