
The following extraordinary letter is published in the Liverpool Mercury, of 
yesterday:-

Gentlemen, having seen the correspondence regarding the Rev. J Wayman's 
resignation as a Wesleyan minister, I crave the insertion of this.

Mr Wayman was matrimonially engaged to me for eight years. Disregarding his 
own solemn vows, he broke off that engagement to escape a minor district 
meeting, to which my friends were determined to appeal.

Contempt will not obliterate the sad record of Mr. Wayman's shameful disregard 
of his plighted word. I give below a few extracts from letters:

"(from the Wesleyan College, Didsbury) Ah, my love, I don't care when my one 
year shall expire so that I can visit you again in dear old Barking.

(from the College) Let no-one break that sacred tie, almost as binding as if 
the knot was tied.

(from 5, Wesley Street, Liverpool) It was no new thing for me to say I love 
you. I have said so now for nearly five years. Ah! my dearest, sometimes it 
seems to me as if you were too great a treasure for me to get: and how to love 
you sufficiently I don't know."

For some months last year [the letter resumes] his letters came less 
frequently, and were less warm in expression. At the latter end of the year he 
gave me his "only reason" for this, professedly founded on a report about 
myself and family which had caused him severe mental suffering.

I wrote denying the truth and asking the author of the slanderous rumour. He 
wrote he could not remember who. In the letter he repudiated my claims, 
asserting he had never been properly engaged and had never asked me to be his 
wife.

The following was sent by the Rev Jabez Marrat, superintendent of the Barking 
and Romford circuit, to Mr Wayman: "You have very plainly given Miss Rust 
repeated assurances of undying love and repeated promises of marriage.

"To you she has given the warmth of her heart and the best years of her life. 
Have 'the jolly girls who are open to a romp and a kiss' stolen your heart?

You have, I am afraid, forgotten the old vows and the stolen kisses of 
Didsbury. Your unkindness is wearing her life out. It is not too late to make 
all right. Take a brother's advice and make it so."

No answer was sent to the foregoing appeal, but Mr Wayman resigned. James 
Wayman, there is a tribunal from the awful searchings of which no darkness can 
hide you. There you must appear.

Gentlemen, yours most respectfully,

Rebecca Rust.
 