
A standoff over the future of the Conversation’s co-founder Andrew Jaspan has 
forced the resignation of chairman Robert Johanson, who told staff his position 
“became untenable”.

Jaspan was sent on enforced leave by the Conversation board in September after 
widespread complaints about his management style 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/11/the-conversation-co-founder-andrew-jaspan-on-enforced-leave-after-editors-complaints>
.

Johanson, the chairman of Bendigo and Adelaide Bank, has been chairman of the 
board since 2012 but has been unable to resolve an ongoing management dispute 
which has seen Jaspan away from the office for three months.

Board sources told Guardian Australia they are split over Jaspan, the former 
editor of the Observer and the Age who founded the Conversation in Australia in 
2011.

The Conversation co-founder Andrew Jaspan on enforced leave after editors' 
complaints
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/11/the-conversation-co-founder-andrew-jaspan-on-enforced-leave-after-editors-complaints>
“There is one view held strongly that Andrew Jaspan is the Conversation and 
another view that he is just one person,” a source said.

The Australian board of the Conversation has been divided for months over 
pressure to cut ties with Jaspan after the Melbourne-based staff sent the board 
a long letter outlining the problems they had working with Jaspan, who is the 
executive director and editor as well as the founder and public face of the 
website.

Pressure to remove Jaspan also came from the international arm of the 
Conversation. Management of the UK, US and Africa offices wrote a letter of no 
confidence to the Conversation Media Group asking that Jaspan not have an 
active role.

“We write to inform you that we, the names listed below, have lost confidence 
in Andrew Jaspan’s ability to represent the Conversation going forward in any 
capacity,” the international groups wrote in September.

“It is with great regret that we have come to the conclusion that his position 
is now untenable. We therefore ask that he immediately resign all of his 
positions with relation to the Conversation and that he halt any work he may be 
conducting on its behalf.

“We have unfortunately come to the conclusion that it is time for Andrew to 
leave the project. It is in his interests as well as those of the Conversation 
that the current situation is resolved quickly and privately.”

It’s not the first high-profile stoush for Jaspan. The British editor was 
sacked as editor of the Age in 2008 as part of a plan to cut 550 jobs and after 
235 journalists voted unanimously to pass a motion accusing him of undermining 
their ability to report without fear or favour. He launched the Conversation in 
Australia in 2011.

The Conversation now operates in five markets – Australia, Africa, the US, the 
UK and France – and each website has its own board and executive management, 
funded by a mixture of universities, research bodies and other public grants.

Staff at the Australian arm of the Conversation were briefed in October that 
Jaspan would not return to the organisation but a stalemate has ensued.

When the board could not agree an independent adviser was brought in to assess 
the situation and interview all the senior staff.

The Conversation UK distanced itself early on from Jaspan after complaints 
from Australian and global editors about his management style.

“The Conversation UK is an independent charity, which operates separately 
under its own board of trustees,” the media group’s British arm told staff in 
an email in October. “Andrew Jaspan has no active role in the running of the 
Conversation UK and ceased to be a member of its board in 2015. The 
Conversation UK management team is fully supportive of its Australian 
equivalent. Editors and managers enjoy excellent working relationships across 
the teams.”

Sources said the editorial management of the Conversation US and the 
Conversation Africa supported the move by Australian managers who had 
complained to the Australian board they could no longer work with Jaspan.


Jaspan, who edited the Observer (published by Guardian Media Group) between 
1995 and 1996 as well as the Scotsman and Scotland on Sunday, has been at his
Melbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> home on 
enforced leave for three months, but has been lobbying to maintain his position 
at the media group, sources say.


Guardian Australia understands Jaspan’s request for his board position on 
Conversation UK to be renewed in 2016 was declined. A renewal of his board 
position on the Conversation US was also declined.


Jaspan and Johanson have been approached for comment.
 