
The maiden voyage of the White Star liner Titanic, the largest ship ever 
launched, has ended in disaster.

The Titanic started her trip from Southampton for New York on Wednesday. Late 
on Sunday night she struck an iceberg off the Grand Banks of Newfoundland. By 
wireless telegraphy she sent out signals of distress, and several liners were 
near enough to catch and respond to the call.

Conflicting news, alarming and reassuring, was current yesterday. Even after 
midnight it was said all the passengers were safe. All reports, of course, 
depended on wireless telegrams over great distances.

Late last night the White Star officials in New York announced that a message 
had been received stating that the Titanic sank at 2.20 yesterday morning after 
all her passengers and crew had been transferred to another vessel. Later they 
admitted that many lives had been lost. An unofficial message from Cape Race, 
Newfoundland, stated that only 675 have been saved out of 2,200 to 2,400 
persons on board. This was in some degree confirmed later by White Star 
officials in Liverpool, who said they were afraid the report was likely to 
prove true. Assuming that only 675 of the passengers and crew have been saved, 
and taking the smallest estimate of the number of people on board, the disaster 
is one of the most awful in the history of navigation, for at least 1,500 lives 
have been lost.

The stories of the disaster are more than usually conflicting, and it is quite 
impossible to reconcile the bulk of the earlier and optimistic reports with the 
sinister news received after midnight. There is unfortunately only too much 
reason to believe, however, that the latest and worse news is nearest the 
truth, for none of the later cables contradict each other.

The main hope that remains is that the Virginian or Parisian may have picked 
up more of the passengers and crew than those saved by the Carpathia. As to 
this there is no news at the time of writing. A list of the first class 
passengers (who are reported from New York to have been all saved) appears on 
page 6.

White Star statement in New York, 9.35pm. Mr Franklin said, "I was confident 
to-day when I made the statement that the Titanic was unsinkable that the 
steamship was safe and that there would be no loss of life. The first definite 
news to the contrary came in the message this evening from Captain Haddock".

9.50pm. The White Star officials now admit that probably only 675 out of 2,200 
passengers on board the Titanic have been saved.
 