
When Elias Canetti, 1981 Nobel Prize winner, died in August 1994 at 89, he 
stipulated in his will that his papers could not be seen for 30 years. Whether 
this was to protect the living from embarrassment or from an old-fashioned 
sense of decorum, so suspicious to our kiss-and-tell age, we shall have to wait 
and see.

A biography is due to appear on his centenary in 2005. But this most elusive 
of 20th-century writers certainly had a reputation for secretiveness. He used 
to boast that his diaries were written in code and acquaintances from his 
London days remember how he would pretend to be a Chinese cook or an 
upper-class Englishwoman when answering the phone. Close friends knew they had 
to ring a certain number of times, replace the receiver and phone again for him 
to answer as himself.

Despite the interdicts in his will, Johanna Canetti, his heir and daughter 
from his second marriage, has decided that his London diary ("From England", as 
he called it) could after all be released before 2024. It has been published in 
Germany under the title Party im Blitz. He wrote it in the early 1990s, working 
presumably from contemporary notes now under lock and key in the Zurich 
Zentralbibliothek, largely dictating to his 20-year-old daughter.

In its occasional candour it is like nothing he published in his lifetime. He 
chronicles his encounters with literary and public figures with the intention 
of giving a picture of England "in the middle years of the century". Canetti's 
chapter on his lover for three years from 1953 challenges recent portraits of 
both of them.

After the battle for the memory of "Iris" began when her husband John Bayley 
published his first memoir five years ago, Canetti's own reputation in this 
country has suffered. David Aaronovitch recently announced in the Observer that 
he would cross both Auto-da-Fé and Crowds and Power off the list of books that 
he wanted to read. All because Bayley had disclosed how Canetti's wife Veza 
would be "sometimes present in the flat when 'the Dichter' made love to Iris, 
possessing her as if he were a god", which is hardly a reason to take against 
the Dichter's books. Bayley himself calls his immediate predecessor for his 
wife's affections "the primal power figure. Iris's one-time lover, tyrant, 
dominator and master. Teacher too, and inspiration. The great all-knowing 
Dichter."

His name was the last Murdoch recognised two months before she died. According 
to her biographer, Peter Conradi, the "god-monster of Hampstead" "represented 
the artist-as-manipulative-and-sadistic-mythomaniac" in her imagination and was 
a cruel and controlling lover, who dominated a coterie of enthralled 
"disciples" and mistresses, which is a role he re-enacts in several of 
Murdoch's early novels - she dedicated her second, The Flight from the 
Enchanter (1956), to him. But what neither Bayley nor Conradi could have known 
was that Canetti had taken steps to get his retaliation in first: his account 
of their affair was written before Murdoch was stricken with Alzheimer's.

On first reading, the chapter "Iris Murdoch" appears acerbic, catty even. 
Jeremy Adler, who supplies excellent notes and an afterword to this posthumous 
volume, will not convince everyone that Canetti really respected Murdoch still 
and that this great diatribe is necessary for the book's moral and aesthetic 
coherence as autobiographical satire. Canetti expresses revulsion at what 
Murdoch became as a philosopher and novelist, for her narrow range of 
Oxford-educated characters, though he concedes that her writing could be 
amusing.

Looking back at their affair, he claims it was Murdoch who pursued him, ready 
to be seduced shortly after the death of her fiancé and Canetti's best friend, 
the émigré poet and anthropologist Franz Baermann Steiner, through whom they 
had met. Once they had become lovers Murdoch would precisely time her visits 
from Oxford, fitting in Canetti as if for a tutorial. The sex could hardly be 
more different from her own accounts of power and dominance. "She lay 
motionless and unchanging, I hardly noticed that I entered her, I did not sense 
that she noticed. Perhaps I would have been more likely to have sensed 
something if she had moved a little in response."

Yet it seems that for all his alleged attempts at control, she used him just 
as much. She needed ideas and characters for her novels and she gets this 
"booty" from her many and varied lovers ("each one a specialist in his field... 
a theologian, an economist, an ancient historian, a literary critic, an 
anthropologist, but also a philosopher, a poet"). She exchanged sex for 
one-sided conversation: for whatever her other shortcomings, Canetti testifies 
that Murdoch was a passionate listener. He both liked and attracted listeners 
and he listened with passion to others himself.

After they first made love Murdoch confided that she had imagined him to be an 
Oriental pirate who held her captive in a cave before ravishing her: "She 
wanted to see me as a robber who forced her brutally to make love, she did not 
become excited until she could imagine this Oriental pirate to herself." The 
admission amuses him at first, it must have been, he says, his account of his 
childhood in the Ottoman Balkans which inspired her fantasy. But his amusement 
is short-lived and he finds "every way to love was blocked for me by her 
dream". Soon he sees her as a pirate who robs each of her lovers not of his 
heart, but of his mind.

This casts in a new light those controlling and sexually alluring Magi-figures 
who stand at the centre of some of Murdoch's novels and who Canetti is said to 
have inspired. Is not the point about Mischa Fox in The Flight from the 
Enchanter that he is what those enthralled by him want to make him in their 
minds? Honor Klein in A Severed Head (1961) is ultimately a pathetic figure, 
the repeated descriptions of her Jewish features, complete with "tawny" 
breasts, close to caricature, which is perhaps why Canetti recalls with such 
distaste at the way in which Murdoch exoticised him.

Canetti, as everyone called him, and his wife Veza lived in proud and 
not-so-genteel poverty after arriving from Nazi-run Vienna in the aftermath of 
the Kristallnacht in January 1939. Even offering them a cooked meal in the days 
of war-time austerity could cause him to take offence. Yet the British were not 
always the most accommodating hosts and the Canettis not always willing to be 
grateful.

One of Veza's stories, finally published after 60 years in 2001, is about a 
country vicar and his wife who take in a poor London refugee couple during the 
Blitz. Each morning the Reverend and Mrs Toogood carry their excrement to the 
garden on newspaper to make compost. While they continue to eat well, their 
houseguests are given half-rotten vegetables cooked in nothing but water, a 
culinary failing which seems to offend the story's narrator nearly as much as 
the black worms she finds sharing her meal one day. "The principle of this 
retired clergyman was that if the empire admits these god-forsaken people and 
if I even take them into my house, then these refugees are to show gratitude to 
me for England's generosity, and they are to bring me as much benefit as 
possible." In Party im Blitz, Canetti is more charitable to their vegetarian, 
tee-total hosts in Chesham Bois: Mr Milburn at least shared a passion for books.

Both Canettis were Sephardic Jews, one half of her family from Sarajevo, both 
of his from Bulgaria, where he spent his first six years speaking Ladino, the 
medieval Spanish the Jews had taken to the Ottoman empire after expulsion from 
Spain. Leaving Vienna broke Veza's heart and she never returned. After her 
literary career had been cut short by the right-wing coup in February 1934, 
when the Arbeiter-Zeitung which had printed her stories was closed down, she 
tried in vain to interest British publishers in her work.

Her husband, author of the still unsung pre-war masterpiece Die Blendung or 
Auto-da-Fé (1935), was reluctant to write for publishers because he feared it 
would compromise his commitment to truth. He vowed also not to publish a word 
until he had completed his book-length essay Crowds and Power (1960), which was 
to be his reckoning with the forces that had driven him from the continent. One 
reason he lived in obscurity was that he wanted his work to last. Like fellow 
refugee, Norbert Elias, the great cultural historian who was almost un-known 
until his 70s, Canetti wrote in German, the language of culture for anyone born 
within the orbit of the Habsburgs. Only slowly, and after Veza's death in 1963, 
did he begin to make his name in either the German- or English-speaking worlds.

There was one very obvious drawback to Canetti's purist approach to the 
written word: nobody in the London literary circles he penetrated with such 
apparent ease had heard of him. The only Englishman who had read Die Blendung 
was the Sinologist Arthur Waley: "Imagine what it means in a large country, 
which for me was the country of Shakespeare and Dickens, to have one single 
reader."

Few émigrés had it much better - and there were many who arrived with higher 
reputations. Being a nobody at social gatherings irked him, but he, the great 
listener and observer, sometimes unwittingly reciprocated others' ignorance of 
him. He seems unaware that his Hampstead neighbour, Sheffield English professor 
William Empson, with whom he would have loved to talk about mass crowds in 
China, had been famously cold-shouldered by Cambridge, which was why he taught 
in such outlandish places as China and Sheffield in the first place.

Canetti ultimately created an oeuvre that is more individualist, more 
eccentric perhaps, in some ways more original, than that of any of the other 
great 20th-century modernists from central Europe. His one novel (Die Blendung 
or The Bedazzlement, rather than Auto-da-Fé in the published English 
translation) was written in his mid-20s in pre-Hitler Vienna. It is a monstrous 
but brutally funny book, which holds up the mirror to the hateful set of 
mentalities that were to breed National Socialism and does so with a ruthless 
single-mindedness some find difficult to bear.

John Bayley recalls how Canetti, rarely given to false modesty, compared its 
effect on readers to that of King Lear. The novel's hatefulness was not within 
its author, as readers to this day sometimes assume, but in the world out there 
whose folly he diagnosed. He then turned to other genres. First plays (The 
Marriage and The Comedy of Vanity in the 1930s, Their Days are Numbered, 
premiered at the Oxford Playhouse in 1956), then a travelogue (The Voices of 
Marrakesh), books of aphorisms and reflections, Aufzeichnungen or Sketches, and 
Ear Witness: Fifty Characters, modelled on Theophrastus and La Bruyère.

The switch from the novel and the reasons for it were to inspire another exile 
to these shores, who insisted on calling his writings "prose fiction", which 
sometimes baffled the non-conceptual British. WG Sebald, though nearly 40 years 
younger, was captivated by some of Canetti's mid-century themes.

The class system itself and the elite who ran it are subjects of unceasing 
fascination to this connoisseur of power. He became a close friend of Aymer 
Maxwell (Bart) and was introduced to politicians by Diana Spearman. Only rarely 
did he feel unwanted on account of being a foreigner; never, more amazingly, 
did he personally experience a hint of anti-semitic feelings. "Should any such 
have existed, which I can hardly believe, then Einstein and Freud had put paid 
to them. The renown of these men in the Anglo-Saxon world is not properly 
recognised by anyone. They are thought of as cultural heroes, benefactors of 
humanity."

Be that as it may, Canetti hated TS Eliot, whose poetry and reputation were 
indicative of all that had become wrong with England since the centuries of its 
cultural glory: "I was witness to the fame of someone like Eliot. Will they 
ever be ashamed enough of themselves for that?" His anti-Eliot diatribe, which 
might make even Tom Paulin blanch, is a rhetorical set-piece, a prose poem of 
invective. I can give just a taste: for his fellow émigré Eliot's "impotence, 
which he communicates to the whole country, surrenders itself to every order 
which is old enough, seeks to prevent every enthusiasm, a debauchee of 
nothingness, pale imitator of Hegel, desecrator of Dante (to which region of 
Hell would Dante have consigned him?), thin-lipped, cold-hearted, old before 
his time".

On the other hand, left-winger though Canetti was, he professes a liking for 
an ambitious young Tory MP, who had already been made a professor at the age of 
26. Only Enoch Powell quoted Nietzsche in fluent German or showed emotion in 
public. When asked for his views on Indian independence, Powell stopped 
demonstratively in the street and, beating his fist against his heart, cried: 
"I feel it here, here."

Canetti was also amazed at how even in the darkest days of the war Aneurin 
Bevan lambasted the prime minister in Parliament. Parliament is one British 
institution that earned his unreserved respect, Hyde Park Corner one of his 
first and regular ports of call. He recognises in Crowds and Power how 
parliamentary rituals were civilised forms of power play, which in continental 
Europe were being performed in their original and bloody form.

He loved other aspects of English life, like upper-class women, who, he 
observed, were often extremely beautiful: they needed to be as their function 
was to enhance the power displays of famous men. With stunned admiration 
Canetti observes at a Mayfair reception how the octogenarian Bertrand Russell 
walks off with one such beauty a quarter of his age moments after he had 
finished a public conversation and, laughing with joy, clapped eyes on her for 
the first time: "As if they had arranged to meet, the 80-year-old and the 
20-year-old, he left the party with her as if it were the most natural thing to 
do. He carried on laughing as he made his departure and she seemed more 
beautiful with every step."

Apart from Iris Murdoch, Canetti had other girlfriends, often concurrently it 
would seem, and he clearly enjoyed female company. He seems to have been loyal 
to them, though clearly not faithful, and the creative influences are by no 
means all one way. Adler, who through his father knew both Canettis, insists 
that his wife was no doormat: "Veza with her sharp tongue and her sense of 
humour could keep Canetti in check and poke fun at his idées fixes." Anna 
Mahler, daughter of the composer, dumped him in 1933 but remained part of the 
same social set in London exile. Marie-Louise Motesiczky, an Expressionist 
painter and pupil of Max Beckmann, was intimate with him for half a century, 
painting several personally telling portraits, just as Murdoch and Veza put him 
into their fiction.

Yet some comments in Party im Blitz will do little to dispel Canetti's 
reputation for high-handed treatment of women. He is condescending about 
Kathleen Raine who was kind about him in her memoirs, though without remotely 
getting his measure, which is perhaps what irritated him. He is also somewhat 
ungracious to Veronica Wedgwood, translator of Auto-da-Fé, not just because she 
turned to Thatcherism in her dotage but for her unoriginality as an historian.

His excoriation of Britain's first woman prime minister, die Gouvernante (the 
governess), who sealed the nation's decline from greatness, is not free from 
old-fashioned sexism. Yet if Brecht, whom he met and disliked in Berlin in the 
late 1920s, surrounded himself with female co-workers who were also his lovers, 
Canetti courted women who were fellow writers or artists. If he recognised too 
much of himself in the domineering young Brecht, his portrait of him in The 
Torch in my Ear (1980) could be a form of self-caricature.

Canetti's most unusual relationship was probably with Friedl Benedikt, who 
published three novels in English as Anna Sebastian before her death from 
Hodgkins disease at 36. As she lay dying, Murdoch took over Benedikt's role as 
mistress-novelist, just as Canetti replaced Steiner for her. His "pupil" from 
the age of 19, Benedikt was from a rich and distinguished Viennese family. In 
The Play of the Eyes (1985) Canetti recalls how she followed him like a 
love-struck teenager once she had identified her new neighbour in Grinzing, 
Vienna, as the author of Die Blendung. She wanted him to teach her to write and 
when Veza persuaded him to read 50 pages she had passed to her, he thought she 
had copied it from an unknown novel by Dostoyevsky - a hint maybe that as a 
more mature writer she would never emerge from his shadow.

She followed the Canettis to London, where a wealthy cousin lived on 
Hampstead's Downshire Hill, and is portrayed in Veza's autobiographical novel, 
The Tortoises (1999). She kept a diary for her teacher and let him impress 
other men with the "absoluteness of her devotion". Yet whatever he privately 
thought of her talent, it was Benedikt who found herself a publisher and she 
too who introduced him to Wedgwood, who made sure his own novel got published 
in English.

Canetti claims all three of Benedikt's novels were dedicated to him, but only 
two mention him by name, the other (The Monster) is "to Orion", the giant 
hunter from classical mythology who was slain by Diana, goddess of hunting and 
chastity. The women artists Canetti knew seem to have given as good as they 
got, either in life or in their work.

· Julian Preece is Reader in German and Comparative Literary Studies at the 
University of Kent. Party im Blitz: Die englischen Jahre (Hanser, September 
2003) will be published by Harvill in 2005 in a translation by Michael Hoffmann.
 