
Disney is axing its Disney Infinity series of video games, the company has 
announced.

The decision, which has resulted in a $147m write-off, will involve the 
closure of Disney’s in-house studio, Avalanche Software, and in effect marks 
the entertainment giant’s withdrawal from the console gaming sector.

Originally launched in 2013, Disney Infinity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/05/disney-infinity-30-review-plenty-of-value-but-lots-more-to-buy>
 was intended to compete with Activision’s billion-dollar Skylanders franchise. 
The company released three titles in the action adventure series, each 
accompanied by a range of compatible toy figures, which could be placed on a 
special “portal” device to interact with the game. The Infinity titles featured 
characters and scenes from its own classic movies as well as Marvel and 
Lucasfilm, companies Disney recently purchased.

Disney Infinity 3.0 review – plenty of value, but lots more to buy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/05/disney-infinity-30-review-plenty-of-value-but-lots-more-to-buy>
Although critically acclaimed, the games have struggled to make an impact in 
the crowded “toys-to-life” genre, which was introduced by Skylanders, but now 
also includes Nintendo’s Amiibo figures and, more competitively, Lego 
Dimensions.

According to its recent second-quarter earnings report, Disney’s toys and 
interactive entertainment division saw an 8% drop in operating income for the 
period, due in part to lower than expected results for the game series.

In a statement provided to the press, the company said:

“After a thorough evaluation, we have modified our approach to console gaming 
and will transition exclusively to a licensing model. This shift in strategy 
means we will cease production of Disney Infinity, where the lack of growth in 
the toys-to-life market, coupled with high development costs, has created a 
challenging business model.

“This means that we will be shutting down Avalanche, our internal studio that 
developed the game. This was a difficult decision that we did not take lightly 
given the quality of Disney Infinity and its many passionate fans.”

The company has said it will support the current title in the series, Disney 
Infinity 3.0, with two forthcoming downloadable content packs, but will not be 
making any new games. Instead, it is likely to license out properties like Star 
Wars and Marvel to other game publishers. It will continue to develop new 
titles in the smartphone gaming sector.

Disney has had a troubled presence in the console games business for a number 
of years. In 2014,it was reported 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/envelope/cotown/la-et-ct-disney-interactive-expected-to-begin-layoffs-20140203-story.html>
 that the company’s interactive division had been losing $200m a year between 
2008 and 2012. The company shut down several studios and laid off 700 staff 
members.

While the “toys-to-life” genre has been a huge success in the difficult family 
gaming sector, Activision built up a commanding lead with Skylanders, and Lego 
Dimensions successfully expanded on the bestselling Lego action adventure 
titles that have sold over 140m units worldwide.

Disney’s support for Infinity will end after the release of Alice Through the 
Looking Glass and Finding Dory sets later this year.
 