
OLYMPIANS ON TRACK

After a successful Games in Rio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/britain-women-gold-olympic-team-pursuit-rio-2016>
, Britain’s riders return to competition at the UEC European Track 
Championships on Wednesday with coverage of Saturday and Sunday’s racing on 
Eurosport. The event takes place at the Velodrome de Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines 
in Paris and is a chance for some riders to move on from Rio and for others to 
make their claim for a place at the world championships in Hong Kong next year. 
Katie Archibald and Elinor Barker, the gold medallists who were part of the 
squad that set a new world record in the pursuit in Rio will be back. So too 
will be Steven Burke, who also won team pursuit gold and is joined in the 
endurance squad by Ollie Wood, who took a team pursuit bronze at the Under-23 
European championships, alongside Mark Stewart, Matt Bostock and Kian Emadi. 
Younger members also feature in the men’s sprint with the Olympic team reserve 
Ryan Owens joined by the Senior Academy riders Jack Carlin and Joe Truman – as 
a trio they won the team sprint title at the Under-23 Championships earlier 
this year.

Chris Froome will learn what is ahead in his attempt to win a fourth Tour de 
France next year when the 2017 route is announced on Tuesday (Eurosport, 
10.30am), with the grand départ set to take place in Düsseldorf.

ALL BLACKS RECORD ATTEMPT

A 57-15 rout of South Africa in Durban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/south-africa-new-zealand-rugby-championship-match-report>
 last Saturday wrapped up the Rugby Championship for New Zealand with a 
six-match clean sweep, success enough in itself but it also placed the All 
Blacks within striking range of breaking the record for consecutive Test 
victories. The win puts them on 17, a total they have made before between 1965 
and 1969 and which was equalled by South Africa in 1997-1998, then again by New 
Zealand in 2013-14. They will look to better that feat on Saturday in the third 
and final Bledisloe Cup game against Australia and the odds look good. Their 
two meetings in the championship in August were won comprehensively by New 
Zealand:42-8 away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/bledisloe-cup-all-blacks-hammer-wallabies-in-rugby-championship-opener>
 and29-9 at home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/27/new-zealand-australia-bledisloe-cup-game-ii-match-report>
. Eden Park is host to the meeting and, most likely, some major celebrations 
(Sky Sports 3, 8am).

WOMEN’S EURO 2017 BUILDUP

England begin their run to next year’s European Championships, to be held in 
the Netherlands, with a friendly against France on Friday at Doncaster (8pm, 
BBC red button). The coach, Mark Sampson, has already named his squad for the 
game and it includes a return for the Manchester City striker Toni Duggan, 
after her side won the League and Cup double, as well as another chance for the 
promising 23-year-old Millie Bright, who plays in the midfield for Chelsea and 
made her debut against Belgian in a 2-0 win last month. England play Spain in 
another friendly the following Tuesday and the draw for Euro 2017 will be made 
on 8 November in Rotterdam.

FA CUP DRAW

With the fourth qualifying round coming to a conclusion this weekend, the draw 
for the first round proper of theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> will take place on Monday (BBC2, 
7pm) and there are already are 10 previous winners in the mix: AFC Wimbledon, 
Blackpool, Bolton, Bradford City, Bury, Coventry City, Notts County, 
Portsmouth, Sheffield United and Charlton.

LOOK OUT FOR … Chelsea’s reserves

Sounds exciting…Forget the Champions League, this is where it’s at: Chelsea’s 
U23s – the ones who aren’t out on loan – heading to Exeter on Tuesday in the 
people’s tournament: the hugely well-received and uncontroversial Checkatrade 
Trophy.

Sarcasm is the lowest form of … It is. But then the Checkatrade Trophy is 
football’s lowest form of trophy, so it fits.

How did it come to this? It’s been a tough few months. Fans launched a boycott 
the moment the old Johnstone’s Paint Trophy was reformatted – 16 ‘big-club’ 
academy sides joining 48 League One and League Two clubs. The first round of 
games in August – “Matchday One” – attracted crowds of 1,462 on average, down 
20%. On Matchday Two, Portsmouth recorded their lowest post-War crowd of 1,355, 
457 turned up to see Barnet play Norwich U23s, and Accrington tweeted after 
their 4-1 win at Chesterfield: “Reports of an away following of 2 at 
Chesterfield last night are untrue. We counted at least 6.”

What do the managers make of it all? Premier League managers don’t make 
anything of it; League managers have been openly scorning it – flouting the 
rules which force them to field five ‘first-teamers’ against the big clubs’ 
kids. Bradford subbed their first-team keeper Colin Doyle after two minutes to 
give his understudy a run out – assistant Kenny Black explaining that Doyle had 
put in “a poor 45 seconds”.

Awkward. It really is. MK Dons manager Karl Robinson called the format 
“rubbish... How can we have a development trophy for Premier League teams who 
can do what they want, yet we can’t develop our own players in it?”. Sheffield 
United manager Chris Wilder wants it killed off completely. “I wouldn’t be sad 
to see it go, not at all.”

What’s the league’s version of events? Give it time. The thinking is that 
maybe people will start to love it by the time we get to April’s heady climax 
(Chelsea U23s 1 Everton U23s 0). League head Shaun Harvey: “We need to carry on 
and judge what the benefits are at the end, not now.”

What about this Exeter contest then? In many ways it sums everything up – the 
game being played two weeks after the rest because Chelsea threatened to pull 
out if they were made to play in international breaks. Still, at least the 
people of Exeter can look forward to a big night. Chelsea’s kids suffered a 2-1 
defeat at Swindon in their opener – so is another magic of the Checkatrade 
Trophy giantkilling on the cards?

Exeter v Chelsea U23, 7,45pm Tuesday

 