
DERBY DELIGHT

Relax, the international break is almost over. On the continent, club football 
returns with a bang onnext Saturday evening when Diego Simeone’s Atlético host 
Zinedine Zidane’s Real in theMadrid derby, kick-off 7.45pm. Real sit on top of 
La Liga without yet being at their sparkling best and this game is more 
important for the hosts who are six points adrift of their neighbours. Before 
that, watchDer Klassiker as Bayern Munich travel to face the exciting, but 
unreliable, Borussia Dortmund (5.30pm).

HOLLOWAY’S RETURN

Saturday is also comeback day for Ian Holloway, who assumes duty at Queens 
Park Rangers a decade after last taking charge at Loftus Road. Since then he 
has had mixed results at Plymouth Argyle, Leicester City, Blackpool, Crystal 
Palace and Millwall – much like QPR, who sit equidistant between the play-offs 
and relegation.

WIGGINS WAVES GOODBYE

Sir Bradley Wiggins climbs on to his saddle for the final time in the city 
where it all began. The Ghent Six Day race begins on Tuesday and, in a repeat 
of last month’s event at London’s velodrome, Wiggins will join Mark Cavendish 
for a competition that the 2012 Tour de France winner has described as “the 
Monaco Grand Prix of six-day racing”. Thepair finished second in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/bradley-wiggins-london-six-day-retire-mark-cavendish>
 – can they go one better and make sure Wiggins signs off on a high? “It feels 
like the right place to bring it all to an end,” he said.

FAIRWAY FAREWELL

The European Tour season winds up with the, uh, Race to Dubai – starting 
Thursday – after this weekend’s penultimate event in, um, South Africa.Henrik 
Stenson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/henrik-stenson>, the 2013 winner, is 
the overwhelming favourite to claim the $1.5m bonus and he could have it 
clinched before travelling to the UAE. Danny Willett retains a slim chance, but 
he looks set to continue a remarkable run of Englishmen finishing second. That 
has happened in all but one year since the season finale was renamed from the 
Order the Merit – and, even then, Paul Lawrie of Scotland was next best in 2011.

THE REMATCH

Last Saturday, in Chicago, Ireland ended 111 years of hurt by beating New 
Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/ireland-new-zealand-rugby-union-report>
 in rugby union at the 29th time of asking. So what now? A rematch at the Aviva 
Stadium on Saturday at 5.30pm. One surprising headline last week was “Ireland 
can down New Zealand again, says Pope”, though it turned out not to be the view 
of the Vatican, but the verdict of RTE’s Kiwi analyst Brent Pope. “New Zealand 
will be nervous about that game,” he said.” People are saying that Ireland will 
get a backlash, but this All Blacks may not be able to recover all that 
quickly.” One to watch.
 