
Almost all injustice comes from the sense that some people are worth less than 
others. So we can behave as if women are worth less than men; foreigners less 
than we are; poor people less than rich ones, and slaves, paradigmatically, are 
worth less than free people. This is so obvious that it is difficult to think 
about, and difficult sometimes to see. One way to make it fresh and unavoidable 
would be to set it up as fact. Suppose there were a class of robot servants, 
things which were by definition not properly human, and which could not, 
because of the way they are made, suffer in the ways that we do, even if they 
appeared to be anguished. What would be the moral wrong in mistreating them?

This is the premise of Westworld <http://www.hbo.com/westworld>, the latest 
big-money, made-to-be-a-box-set television show, in which rich tourists are set 
loose in a gigantic wild west theme park populated by entirely lifelike 
androids whom they can treat exactly as they like. The violence is almost as 
enjoyable as in real cowboy movies because we know the blood, however copious, 
isn’t real. But the androids must eventually acquire consciousness, and the 
story will reach a denouement as old as Frankenstein.

Westworld is an example of the power and vitality of science fiction 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Billion-Year-Spree-History-Science/dp/0297765558> in 
both its modes. One mode is world-building, which in its elaborations appears 
to move us further and further from the real world. The other performs like 
journalism: it simplifies, and then exaggerates, to show the deep structure of 
the contemporary world more clearly than the news can do. The mode of 
simplification and exaggeration will always return to certain fundamental human 
drives and their conflicts – in Westworld, the conflict between compassion and 
the instinct to dominate and exploit – but the world-building mode is 
potentially unlimited. Each attempt becomes a reworking, as well as an 
extension, of previous worlds. In the 70 or 80 years sincescience fiction fandom
 <http://www.thewaythefutureblogs.com/> first became, like Frankenstein’s 
monster, conscious of its own existence, the original, tentative worlds have 
been explored and reworked by so many writers, directors, readers and viewers 
that they are now firm enough for anyone to walk in. We can all imagine the 
moment of contact with an alien race, or the sensation of cracking open the 
airlock on a strange planet, so easily that we might be remembering it.

People know more of these imagined futures than they know of their own real 
history. There is a lot to celebrate in this. History is invaluable as a way of 
thinking deeply about the present, but so is science fiction. Two of the great 
classics of 20th-century science fiction – Brave New World and 1984 – helped 
their readers to understand the human implications of technology in a way that 
no amount of history could have done. And history can numb us, whereas the 
future can make the present seem fresh, and properly disturbing.

Westworld is a show about power relations, but even this draws back from their 
full cruelty. Part of the show is set in a brothel, which makes it a rather 
sanitised version of the contemporary real world’s sex tourism – none of the 
android prostitutes are underage, or ill, and none have pimps, or families to 
feed. The poor inWestworld <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld> 
suffer from many ills but not from actual poverty. The series was made, after 
all, as a piece of profitable escapism. Even in safely made-up worlds, 
humankind cannot bear very much reality.
 