
Things don’t come more Da Vinci Code than a ride on the Pope’s railway – the 
centrepiece of a new tour launched by the Vatican Museums this month. The train 
departs the Vatican City’s private railway station – a marble building in the 
shadow of St Peter’s basilica – on a stretch of track that originates in a 
tunnel dug into the hillside beneath the Vatican Gardens. It travels along the 
300-metre Vatican railway line – the shortest in the world – into Rome, then 
rumbles on to the Pope’s sumptuous Castel Gandolfo summer palace in the Alban 
hills south of the city.

This day-long excursion combines existing tours of the Vatican Museums and 
gardens with a tour of the grounds of the Castel Gandolfo. And for the first 
time the locations are linked by a ride on the Papal railway. At €40pp, it’s 
also the cheapest way to explore the papal properties: a guided tour of the 
museums and gardens in the Vatican alone costs €32.
 People visit the gardens of the pope’s summer residence, Castel Gandolfo, 
south of Rome. Photograph: Vincenzo Pinto/AFP/Getty Images 
I joined the tour on its inaugural Saturday, my pre-booked ticket letting me 
dodge the queue that, at 8am, already snaked around the walls of the Vatican 
City. The first two hours are unchaperoned, so my recommendation would be to 
avoid the Sistine Chapel cattle-run and visit the quiet contemporary religious 
art galleries, which include works by Dali and Matisse.

10 of the best ways to enjoy Rome … on a budget
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/13/10-best-ways-enjoy-rome-on-a-budget>
The guided walk through the Vatican gardens that follows is the perfect 
antidote to the rammed museums. It meanders between fountains and grottos, past 
the monastery where the retired pope, Benedict XVI, lives, and on to Stazione 
Vaticana, the city’s only station.

The train – ordinary Trenitalia rolling stock, sadly, not the Papal steam 
train – takes an hour to reach the town of Albano Laziale, where a shuttle bus 
takes passengers to the summer palace (a separate tour of the palace interior 
is available at extra cost). Tourism in the towns around the palace suffered 
when Pope Francis decided not to spend his summer there, and this decision to 
open it to the public has been interpreted as a helping hand.
 Aerial shot of the Vatican gardens from St Peter’s Basilica, Rome. 
Photograph: Alamy 
The tour of the grounds, aboard a tiny land train, is revelatory. Formal 
gardens are interrupted by fields of alfalfa grazed by the cows that provide 
milk to the Vatican. Roman ruins – including a theatre built for the Emperor 
Domitian in the first century AD – jut out from behind fragrant trees.

Back in Albano Laziale, some exploration leads me to organic, vegetarian 
restaurantLe Bioalchimie <http://www.lebioalchimie.it/> (Via San Filippo Neri 
16) for a €15 buffet lunch of local produce. The train back to Rome departs 
Albano Laziale at 5.18pm, depositing us at San Pietro, a station just outside 
the Vatican walls.

A stroll to St Peter’s Square, where high walls obscure the gardens and the 
Basilica hides the 60-metre Vatican hill, makes for a tantalising end to a 
fascinating day.
• Vatican by Train tours run on Saturdays only at 8am. Book online at 
biglietteriamusei.vatican.va/musei/tickets/do 
<http://biglietteriamusei.vatican.va/musei/tickets/do>
 