 Mr. Asquith was almost swept off his feet when he rose to speak from the 
rostrum in the Theatre Royal.
In a considerable experience of public meetings I have seen nothing to equal 
and few things to compare with it - nothing so terrific as the crouch and then 
the sudden leap of the gigantic and impassioned living thing which this 
audience was; the rising of this plain of men, the tempest of the waving hats, 
the gleam of the jewelled women in the circles and the boxes on their feet with 
the rest; the passion, the hunger of the throng.

Again and again it broke out. A statistician next to me said that for seven 
minutes the demonstration went on, rising to a higher and higher rate of 
passion and resolve. And then suddenly it ceased, and Mr. Asquith launched 
himself upon a still surface of unbroken silence and attention.

Nothing has been more striking in these memorable two days than the instinct 
of the Irish race for public meeting, their gift for listening, their 
self-suppression, their tact. A city which can amid so many difficulties carry 
off two great meetings like that of last night and to-night is fit to be the 
seat of government; it can govern itself.

The meeting in the Theatre Royal to-night was a concentration within four 
walls of the passionate spirit which overran the streets last night. Behind Mr. 
Asquith and Mr. Redmond on the stage were ranged file after file the members of 
the county councils - those living arguments for Home Rule whom Lord Salisbury 
had the ill-luck or the ill-management to call into being.

Great numbers of men were in evening dress; and in the boxes and in the circle 
it looked like an opera night. A battery of opera glasses was turned on Mr. 
Asquith's ruddy face and silvered hair when his speech was on its way, but all 
classes joined in the overpowering demonstration. Mr. Asquith might have had an 
easy night feeding the roaring fire, but he chose instead to damp it down with 
a review of the past relations of the two countries, with an expository account 
of the bill.

For his peroration Mr. Asquith improvised on a passage of Burke. 'No reluctant 
tie can be a strong one.' The purpose in hand was to substitute for the 
reluctant tie one that should be voluntary and affectionate, light as air and 
yet stronger than links of iron.

[Asquith as prime minister had just introduced the third Home Rule bill. 
Implementation, for the south only, was delayed until after the first world war]
 