
With Christmas just around the corner, most of us have presents on the brain. 
The perfect novel for your Auntie Shirley, the mug that was made for your 
sister, or the token bits and pieces for the neighbours. But when it comes to 
business, we think that there are opportunities every single day of the year to 
give something thoughtful to your staff. We’ve looked at all the ‘presents’ 
staff appreciate the most, and found out the best business perks that people 
love – from unlimited holiday, regular educational or motivational sessions, to 
the Christmas party, there are hundreds of ways to provide an extra little 
something for your staff. Ultimately, a happy workforce isn’t always about how 
much staff are paid; culture and environment count a lot more than you might 
think.

What the experts say

Lots of companies compete for being lauded as one of the ‘best companies to 
work for’. It gives them immediate kudos and is a big tick for jobseekers. 
There are extensive surveys carried out to award this accolade annually. For 
the Sunday Times list, a company’s staff fill in a survey, covering everything 
from opinions on bosses, their working conditions and their employer’s values, 
and the results are compiled into a ranking. Glassdoor run a similar league 
table, based on the number of reviews posted, and the quality of those reviews. 
Glassdoor have collected so much data that they have produced ‘The DNA of the 
Best Places to Work’ – highlights include mission, culture, people and 
transparency. For example, OpenTable score highly for building an open kitchen 
at their company HQ where they host meetups, Waffle Wednesdays, and Bagel 
Mondays. As a company that’s all about food, this fits with the ethos of the 
company and the interests of those they employ.

It's never too late for entrepreneurs to learn new tricks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/kia-fleet-partner-zone/2016/nov/28/its-never-too-late-for-entrepreneurs-to-learn-new-tricks>
Training

As we discussed a couple of weeks ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/kia-fleet-partner-zone/2016/nov/28/its-never-too-late-for-entrepreneurs-to-learn-new-tricks>
, providing training for your staff is a fantastic way to promote retention and 
develop skills. McDonald’s are well known for promoting internally following 
training, and as a result, a large number of the senior team started out behind 
the till. This training doesn’t necessarily have to be directly linked to their 
job role, and in the case of employees at cloud collaboration company Huddle, 
it’s encouraged to be something different. The Huddle Cuddle is worth £500 and 
is for employees to enjoy developing a passion they’ve got – anything from 
learning a language to becoming an expert at calligraphy. As long as it’s a 
skill you want to acquire, it’s yours to learn.

Parties and events

A more traditional expectation from staff is the office Christmas party. 
Formerly the stuff of cringeworthy legend, it has moved beyond photocopier fun 
and warm wine. Now, companies wanting to attract the best talent throw amazing 
parties. Google have hosted an Indiana Jones-themed party in Los Angeles, a 
Christmas event at a San Francisco winery and even built an entire fair 
(complete with Ferris Wheel) for their Dublin office. As well as parties, 
events throughout the year are crucial to making your staff feel valued and 
provided for. Many creative and advertising agencies regularly host events with 
prolific individuals in the field such as successful Vine influencers or 
well-known artists.

Unlimited holiday

Netflix came up with this idea for their staff. By not restricting the amount 
of holiday people can take, it gives employees more responsibility and 
flexibility. It’s proved so popular that Virgin have followed suit. Netflix say 
it’s reimagined the rules of hiring and firing, and that the unlimited holiday 
is one way of expressing this. However the policy has come under fire from some 
as putting more pressure on people to take less holiday for fear of how it will 
be perceived, i.e. if you can take a lot of holiday without your work 
suffering, are you doing enough work?

Other (more low-key) holiday policies include a day off on your birthday, to 
move house and to do your Christmas shopping. AirBnB take this one step further 
and give their staff an annual budget of £1300 to spend on travel, while We Are 
Social organise company ski trips.

Providing perks for your employees is not about buying a beanbag and a ping 
pong table for the communal areas, it’s much more subtle and nuanced. As long 
as you put thought into how they reflect your company mission, these kind of 
perks won’t just benefit your current employees, but will benefit your company 
in the long run and attract exactly the right future employees.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Kia Fleet 
<http://www.kia.co.uk/kia-business-fleet-cars.aspx> sponsor of the Guardian 
Small Business Network Accessing Expertise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/accessing-expertise> hub.
 