
What do economists do to their children’s beachball after a vigorous afternoon 
session by the seaside? Do they deflate it? Don’t be daft. They negatively 
inflate it.

You may not quite get the difference between the two, but don’t worry. This 
week might provide you with the chance to enrol in one of those crash courses 
in the dismal sciences that we all adore, as there’s a chance that when the 
latest inflation data is revealed we will discover that prices have been 
falling (at least according to the consumer price index measure).

In February, Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> governor Mark 
Carney predicted the UK would experience its first bout of negative inflation 
in more than half a century – with the last time it retreated being March 1960, 
according to the closest comparable data from the Office for National 
Statistics.

Still, the Bank expects the slump in oil prices and falling food prices to 
keep inflation low in the short term, only for lower oil prices to then 
significantly boost consumer spending, which in turn should fuel growth and 
push inflation higher over the medium term.

Incidentally, the difference between deflation and negative inflation is this. 
Negative inflation is falling prices over a short period, but over the medium 
to long term it’s called deflation. Or, on the beach, a slow puncture.

Debenhams avoids cuts to prices – or the boss’s pay

There are not many achievements that the City is willing to credit to Debenhams
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/debenhams> boss Michael Sharp, but there 
is one that he can surely be proud of. The UK’s (potential) new economic model 
of falling prices is one lifted right out of the retailer’s chunky playbook of 
disasters.

The department store got itself into all sorts of trouble last year over its 
constant discounting – and after it finally grew tired of all the stick, it 
came up with a plan: fewer discounts, improved online delivery and better 
product, by introducing concessions from the likes of, er, Sports Direct.

Anyway, this year Debenhams avoided a repeat of the sharp profit warning of 
Christmas 2013, but its trading over the 2014 festive period was still 
disappointing, and we will find out this week whether it’s making progress when 
it reports much-anticipated results.

Still, while some price-slashing is hard to stop – the shares are still 
trading at a large discount to the sector – Debs has proved that other prices 
can rise. For example, in the 12 months to August, Sharp enjoyed a 32% rise in 
his pay, despite the continuing struggles at the department store. Isn’t life 
grand?

WH Smith prospers after Swann’s departure

There’s a school of thought that if the price of a bottle of water from WH 
Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/business/whsmith> was used to calculate CPI, 
we might now be in the realms from hyperinflation.

As thirsty airline and train travellers frequently moan, such are the 
retailer’s prices for H2O, that purchases must be accompanied by a free copy of 
theDaily Telegraph and a check on your own credit worthiness. Neither tends to 
be all that welcome.

Anyway, the retail chain seems to know what it’s doing, as we may find out 
again when it reports this week.

Following Kate Swann’s lengthy acclaimed spell running a shop, plenty 
(including this page) feared for her successor, Stephen Clarke, who took over 
in July 2013. But in what may yet prove to be the only case in recent history 
of a top retailer resisting the temptation to stitch up their replacement, WH 
Smith shares are close to doubling since Swann left.

All of which is something of a surprise. The rule of thumb in the shopping 
sector is that when a long-standing and widely lauded chief executive stands 
down, you sell the shares. But here, loyal WH Smith investors who held on after 
Swann left have been rewarded – and are probably now so rich that they can 
afford to buy a drink from WH Smith.
 