
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has revealed she 
will personally take charge of three new ministerial committees – on Brexit, 
the economy and social reform – to implement her priorities for government, as 
she led her first cabinet meeting in Downing Street.

The prime minister told the 22 senior politicians making up her top team that 
they must get on with the job as they gathered in No 10.

In a 90-minute discussion, she told senior ministers that “politics is not a 
game” as she insisted quitting the EU presented a huge opportunity.

“Brexit means Brexit – and we’re going to make a success of it. It will be the 
responsibility of everyone sitting around the cabinet table to make Brexit work 
for Britain,” she said ahead of the meeting.

“And it will also be their duty to deliver success on behalf of everyone in 
the UK, not just the privileged few. That is why social justice will be at the 
heart of my government.

“So we will not allow the country to be defined by Brexit; but instead build 
the education, skills and social mobility to allow everyone to prosper from the 
opportunities of leaving the EU.”

She is setting up three cabinet committees – on the economy and industrial 
strategy, leaving the EU and international trade, and social reform – that 
reflect her priorities for the next four years.

No 10 denied it was a move to keep tight control on the policy areas covered 
by Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, David Davis, the Brexit secretary, and 
Liam Fox, the international trade secretary.

“It’s because the issues that they will be discussing go to the heart of her 
agenda, the top priorities for this government and the challenges that we face 
as a country,” May’s spokeswoman said. “This idea that it is in some way to 
manage relations between other cabinet ministers and things, that is not what 
it is about.

“At cabinet this morning you saw the prime minister really encouraging a 
collective government approach.”

Also present at the first cabinet meeting were her joint chiefs of staff, 
Fiona Hill and Nick Timothy, who rejoined her team after working in the Home 
Office under the coalition.


Cameras were allowed during the initial moments of the meeting, showing May 
sitting beside Johnson and Sir Jeremy Heywood, the cabinet secretary.

May is yet to move into Downing Street, where she will live in the larger flat 
at No 11 previously occupied by David Cameron and his family.

“The prime minister took office sooner than some might have expected and she 
agreed with David Cameron a schedule for moving out and moving in,” the 
spokeswoman said.

On Wednesday, May will complete her first week in Downing Street by taking 
part in her first prime minister’s questions, beforeheading to Germany to meet 
the chancellor, Angela Merkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/18/theresa-may-berlin-paris-merkel-hollande>
.

The pair are expected to discuss Brexit despite the EU’s ban on informal 
negotiations between the UK and other member states before the official leaving 
process has begun with thetriggering of article 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/19/government-awaits-first-legal-opposition-to-brexit-in-high-court>
.

Labour dismissed May’s “warm words about reaching out and putting working 
people first”, saying her first few days in the job were not a good sign.

Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow minister without portfolio, said: “Her first 
acts were to abolish the department tasked with tackling climate change; to put 
someone who wanted to scrap the Department for International Development in 
charge of it; and to fill the rest of her cabinet with a variety of 
rightwingers, failures and disgraced returnees from the backbenches.

“Changing the faces at the top of the Tory party will do nothing for working 
people let down by this government. We need a change of direction to put 
ordinary people first.”
 