
Facebook and Google aside, it seems the only people who make money out of the 
internet are the young ones who manage to persuade anxious older ones (the ones 
with all the money) that they have worked out an entirely new way of doing 
things. If you’re in that line of work, it’s vital to sell your business to one 
of the established businesses before you’re either rumbled or superseded. InThe 
Kids Who Decide What All The Other Kids Talk About (Friday, 11am, Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 4) Paul Mason spends time with 
Social Chain, a business set up by university dropouts to harness the power of 
social media to sell advertising. Social Chain has aggregated a number of 
Twitter feeds popular with young people and accepts money for including 
commercial messages in those feeds. Is this simply the logical conclusion of a 
connected world or something potentially more worrying? Do people recognise the 
difference between editorial and advertising or do they assume that everything 
nowadays falls into the latter category?

To mark the fact that Bob Dylan can’t be bothered to pick up his Nobel prize 
for literature in person, two programmes nonetheless mark the fact that he’s 
been honoured in this fashion.Bob Dylan’s Theme Time Radio Hour (Sunday, 1pm, 6 
Music) is a repeat of the episode of his radio show devoted to songs about the 
culture of the wireless. Directly afterwards, there’sThe Weekend Documentary: 
Bob Dylan – In So Many Words (Sunday, 2pm, BBC World Service), which looks at 
why his songs continue to resonate but his public positions seem so hard to 
decipher. That’s the genius of Dylan: we know no more about him than we did in 
1963.

Back in the previous century, David Renwick wrote the celebrated “answering 
the question before last” Mastermind sketch for the Two Ronnies, so he gets a 
free pass to feature another pastiche of the famous quiz in his new show
Desolation Jests (Tuesday, 11pm, Radio 4). Here it takes its place alongside 
other imagined entertainments, such as the Klutz Brothers’ classic A Day At The 
Proctologists and Mace And Dixon’s The Fiancee Of Frankenstein.

If you have not yet consulted that valuable source of showbusiness anecdote 
and reflection known as Dora Dale, then a good place to start would bePleased 
To Meet You: A Very Dora Christmas (Friday, 10.30pm, Radio 4 Extra). In this 
programme we hear what she can remember about being at the recording session 
that produced Slade’s Merry Xmas Everybody and also sharing a bill with the 
pre-fame Beatles at Hamburg’s Bang Bang Club. As usual, Ms Dale’s interlocutor 
is Mr Martin Kelner.

Martin Jarvis directs an all-star cast, including Toby Stephens, Tom Conti, 
Alfred Molina, John Sessions, Janet Montgomery and Julian Sands, in his 
dramatisation of Ian Fleming’s 1959 nuclear thrillerJames Bond: Thunderball (
Saturday, 2.30pm, Radio 4).
 