
Mr Thomas Cook’s working men’s excursion to Paris at Whitsuntide, 1861, was 
one of the earliest examples of a tour to a foreign country arranged primarily 
for the artisan classes.


In the previous 20 years Cook had become the pioneer travel agent; after his 
success in organising excursions to London for the Great Exhibition of 1851, he 
arranged a 31s return trip from Leicester to Calais for the benefit of visitors 
to the Paris Exhibition of 1855, and the following year he advertised “a grand 
circular tour on the Continent.”


The middle classes were already interested in the formation of travel clubs 
and agencies and Cook had also aroused the interest of some of the 
working-class population in taking a holiday – albeit a short one. Hitherto 
many had never ventured beyond their native town or village, and the exceptions 
had ventured only on short-distance excursions.


The idea of the working men’s excursion to Paris replaced an earlier proposal 
for a visit by a party of Rifle Volunteers – a suggestion which met with much 
criticism since it was feared that the purpose of such a visit might be 
misunderstood in France.


On December 17, 1860, it was announced that British subjects would be admitted 
to France without passports from January 1861, and this announcement coincided 
almost exactly with the arrival of a delegation in Paris for the purpose of 
organising an excursion by British working men during the following Easter or 
Whitsuntide holidays. A committee was formed in London under the chairmanship 
of Sir Joseph Paxton, and it decided to approachThomas Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/thomascookgroup>. His co-operation was 
readily forthcoming since his enthusiasm for organising travel sprang from his 
faith in its educational benefits.


Undertaking to make arrangements at his own risk, Cook advertised the proposed 
trip principally in the Midlands and the North of England and 1,673 
reservations were made. While the abolition of the French passport system 
simplified matters for him, negotiations with the two railway companies which 
operated the Folkestone-Boulogne route to Paris were difficult. The companies 
were not accustomed to agreeing to low fares on this route, and the Northern 
Railway of France in particular frowned upon providing cheap facilities – 
especially at Whitsuntide when it might prove especially annoying to other 
passengers.


The companies insisted on a guaranteed minimum of 500 passengers on the first 
train, and it was eventually agreed to limit the number on each train to 550, 
with each passenger restricted to 28lb. of baggage. A registration fee of 1s 
was charged and the fares were fixed at 20s return from London to Paris in 
covered third-class carriages, or 26s in second-class carriages.


The party did not consist exclusively of working men, but there were about two 
hundred employees from Titus Salts Cottonworks at Bradford and a large number 
of mechanics, the majority from the North. There were few from London. Married 
men were accompanied by their wives.


On Friday, May 17 the first party left London Bridge for the seven-day visit 
to Paris and on arrival at Boulogne it was greeted enthusiastically by a large 
crowd assembled on the quayside where a triumphal arch with the inscription 
“WELCOME TO BOULOGNE” had been erected.


There was a short break for refreshment, and great difficulties were 
experienced with the bread which was handed about “in immense poles at least 
two yards long.” Most of the tourists made their acquaintance with “vin 
ordinaire” before travelling through the night to Paris by the Northern Railway 
of France in order to arrive in the French capital “with the broad daylight.” 
There was one further stop for refreshment at Amiens.


Read article in full here 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/05/19/thomascook.jpeg>

 