
I’m on a Greek ferry watching a TV news report about the Greek parliament 
voting in favour of the bailout package 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/14/greek-parliament-still-thrashing-out-rescue-deal-vote>
. There follows a segment about animals attacking drones, which is gripping.

After a week in Greece, I’ve probably learned only one thing that I’ll 
remember: that bathos, the literary term characterising the precipitous leap 
from the sublime to the ridiculous, is derived from the Greek word meaning 
“depth”. Literally: next to the pool there’s a sign saying “BATHOS – 2.2m”.

Our holiday has two extra days on the end, because our cheap flights don’t 
coincide with changeover days. We’re heading for an island on which we have 
booked rooms at the last minute. I fear it will prove a false economy.

“We’ll find out when we get there,” my wife tells me, knowing how much I hate 
that kind of answer.

Outside, an ancient landscape scrolls by, shrouded in mist. On the TV, a drone 
flies over an ape enclosure. A chimp stares up at the drone in wonder, then 
whacks it to the ground with a stick.

After a long walk uphill with our bags, we find our accommodation. The woman 
who runs it is happy to confirm that fully one of the two rooms we booked is 
available.

“But we booked two,” my wife says.

“Yes,” the woman says, smiling brightly. “There is a problem.”

She tells a story, in enthusiastic but hard-to-follow English, about some 
guests who lost their ferry tickets and became stranded. Apparently mistaking 
our bewilderment for disapproval, she tries a different story, about a sick 
child. “The doctor is saying this child cannot go on the ferry, must sleep all 
day, is taking only pharmacy, and tomorrow...”

At this point, a teenage girl – the woman’s daughter, I assume – walks up and 
starts screaming at her in Greek. The woman acts as if this is not happening. 
“We try to find the best solution,” the woman says.

Her phone rings. She answers. “Ah, OK,” she says. “I come. Please await me.”

She motions for us to put our bags into a van and to get in. She gets behind 
the wheel, the girl climbs into the passenger seat and we head off down a 
twisting road.

“Is she kidnapping us?” I ask.

The woman explains we’re being given alternative accommodation for the night, 
that our actual room will be ready for us in the morning. All the while she is 
beaming as if this were the best possible news. “Sorry for my English,” she 
says to my wife. “You are so thin! Not like me!”

We pull up in front of another hotel. The woman who runs this establishment 
comes to reception in a towel. She is not pleased to see us, but after a 
protracted discussion, to which the girl contributes a few startling outbursts, 
a room key is surrendered. Embarrassingly, the woman and her daughter insist on 
carrying our bags up four flights of stairs while we follow. More 
embarrassingly, they give up halfway. We take our bags and carry on alone.

The room is unbelievably bleak, barely big enough for the bed, with another 
door letting on to the roof.

“Do you think there really is a sick child?” my wife says.

“I want to visit it,” I reply. “I want to feel its forehead.”

I step outside and am greeted by a commanding view of the whole port at 
sunset, with white houses and cobbled streets sloping down to the sea. I turn 
around and see my wife staring at me from a door in a concrete bunker tucked 
under the water tanks, and I think, that’s how you spell bathos: B, A, Bisected 
egg, O, Sideways M.
 