
I have never been to Greece before, and I’ve seen very little of it beyond 
what I glimpsed during our unhappy four-hour drive from the airport.

Now I’m here I don’t really have to drive anywhere. There’s a taverna within 
walking distance: down the path to the beach, along the shore, up another path 
into the hills and down the road into the village – 15 minutes, I’m told. 
That’s where we’re having lunch today and, if I get my way, every day. In 
principle I’ve got nothing against exploration, but I have difficulty savouring 
the unknown.

The beach path is a little steeper than I’d imagined when I elected to wear 
flip-flops. I’m not good in flip-flops; I lack practice.

The uphill path is where the main drawback of flip-flops becomes apparent: 
there’s nothing to stop you sliding out of them backwards. I walk with 
deliberation, staring at my feet, until I am outside the taverna.

After two large beers and many small fish, I begin to feel deeply relaxed.

“What are you going to write about this week?” asks the child of a friend, 
seated across from me.

“I don’t know,” I say. “I’m starting to worry nothing bad will happen to me.”

The children head back first, before coffee. Another contingent decides to 
wade round the rocks instead of climbing the hill. Soon it’s just me and my 
friend Alex, and two bags full of stuff nobody wanted to get wet. We set off up 
the road at a stroll.

Ten minutes later we’re still strolling up the road.

“Do you remember where the turning for the path is?” I say.

“It must be just there,” Alex says, pointing. We turn down a track that leads 
to an old car and then disappears.

“I don’t recognise any of this,” I say. It’s a stupid comment: there is 
nothing to recognise.

“Perhaps we’ve come too far,” Alex says. We stomp back to the road and walk 
downhill a bit. We take another turning. It ends after 100 metres at a sheer 
precipice, dropping to the sea.

“Maybe,” I say, “we didn’t go far enough.” We return to the road and walk much 
farther uphill. The next obvious turning takes us past an abandoned farmhouse 
into an olive grove.

“This doesn’t look right,” Alex says.

“Don’t ask me,” I say. “I was looking at my feet the whole time.”

We attempt to intercept the true path somewhere along its length, moving 
further into the trees. As we climb over a rusting bedstead, it becomes unclear 
who’s leading the way. It’s been an hour since we left the taverna. My veneer 
of calm is wearing thin. Thorns work their way between my flip-flops and my 
feet.

“I’ll just check up here,” Alex says. Once he’s out of sight, I decide panic 
is appropriate. My wife picks up on the fourth ring.

“We’re lost,” I say.

“How can you possibly be lost?” It’s a good question: I can hear laughter from 
the beach below, and passing traffic on the road behind me.

“I don’t know,” I say. “Now we’ve become separated. It’s a doomed expedition.”

“I’ll have to give you to a child,” she says. “Hold, please.” She passes the 
phone to the middle one.

“What?” he says.

“Can you just remind me where the path joins the road?”

“Next to a house, by a tree with pink flowers on it,” he says.

“How did you remember that?” I say.

“We took a picture of it with a phone,” he says.

“Is it uphill or downhill from here, do you think?”

“I don’t know where you are,” he says.

“Yeah,” I say. “Me neither.” 

 