
Tough action by competition authorities to investigate over-charging by 
companies and force down the price of goods and services on the high street was 
promised yesterday by Stephen Byers.

 The Trade and Industry Secretary told the Commons that he had begun a study 
on international price comparisons amid widespread concern that the prices paid 
in the UK for goods - groceries and clothes as well as financial services and 
utilities - are higher than in other countries.

 Mr Byers, who said he would use his powers to ask the Office of Fair Trading 
to investigate particular prices, said the results of the inquiry would be 
published and used by competition watchdogs like the OFT to crack down on 
unfair practices.

 Outlining a series of post-Budget measures to promote enterprise and 
competition, he said he had asked Callum McCarthy, the energy regulator, to 
examine standing charges for electricity which varied widely by region and 
method of payment and amounted to around 13 per cent of a typical bill.

 The trade secretary's international price study won a warm backing from 
business, with the British Retail Consortium saying it had been frustrated with 
'outlandish' comparisons bandied around by the media which failed to take into 
account other factors such as levels of sales tax, excise duties and the like.

 Ann Robinson, the consortium's director-general, said: 'We hope that the 
Government's study will take into account the other factors that influence 
price and provide an authoritative basis for the debate. Retailing is not just 
about price - it is about accessibility, choice and world-beating levels of 
service.'

 Peter Agar, deputy director general of the CBI, welcoming Mr Byers' adoption 
of a consumer strategy, which went well beyond the issue of consumer 
protection, said the Government had shown that it would proceed on the basis of 
evidence before launching OFT investigations. This was an important shift in 
emphasis.

 Mr Byers said: 'Knowledgeable consumers stimulate businesses to innovate and 
so contribute to competitiveness. Equally, we won't allow consumers to be 
ripped off. We want to improve advice to consumers on their rights and to 
support honest firms by putting rogue traders out of business.'

 John Bridgeman, the director general of fair trading, said the OFT would use 
its powers under the Competition Act, which takes effect in March next year, to 
improve competition and promote price cuts, abandoning after 25 years the 
'outdated and gentlemanly' rules which had hampered rapid action on cartels or 
monopolies.

 Electricity suppliers questioned Mr Byers' decision over standing charges, 
which he said would ensure that pensioners and the poor in particular were not 
disadvantaged. People on pre-payment meters, many but not all of them poor, can 
pay up to £18.40 a quarter in charges, compared with £10.70 for those paying by 
direct debit in one region.

 The Electricity Association said it had already proposed measures to ensure 
that all customers in a particular region paid the same amount in charges. A 
spokesman said: 'The majority of the market is open, with 20 million out of 26 
million consumers able to switch suppliers, and full competition will be here 
in June.

 'There is a range of charges already on offer, with companies balancing 
higher standing charges with lower costs per unit - and that is in response to 
customer demand. The competitive market is already addressing the issues that 
Mr Byers raises, with prices down 25 per cent since 1990.'

 The trade secretary confirmed that the new competition commission will decide 
on the bulk of mergers apart from a small number of cases raising wider public 
interest issues such as defence.
 