
I read in various newspapers last week that Kim Kardashian is the worst role 
model ever and got her comeuppance inParis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris>. Is this true?

Sally, by email

 Yes, down with Kim! This was certainly the consensus among the commentariat, 
and by commentariat I mean specifically rightwing female columnists with 
terrifying byline photos. Now, as all readers of this column surely appreciate, 
anything that is written next to a terrifying photo byline of a female 
columnist is, by nature, the word of God. So it somewhat flummoxes me to 
question such words written by others. I fear this may be the columnist 
equivalent of crossing the streams, and yes, that is the second Ghostbusters 
reference in as many weeks, you’re welcome.

As I’m sure you all already know, last week Kim Kardashian was held at 
gunpoint and robbed of millions of pounds worth of jewellery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/04/kim-kardashian-police-study-cctv-footage-in-hunt-for-armed-robbers>
 while she pleaded for her life. What a horrible story, I’m sure you’re all 
thinking. Poor woman, you’re doubtless saying. I hope she’s OK, we’re all 
hoping. Or, perhaps, not.

“How much do I hate Kim Kardashian? Let me count the ways,” was one 
columnist’s response to this saga, kicking off her column there and continuing 
as it started.

“I wonder,” another columnist mused, “if there was a fleeting moment, as she 
lay tied up on the bathroom floor, when a tiny voice inside her head asked the 
nagging, awful question: have I brought this on myself?” It’s really the way 
this particular journalist takes such palpable glee in imagining Kardashian 
bound and fearing for her life on the floor that explains why she’s paid the 
big bucks, isn’t it?

Sweetly, both of these writers make sure to include a hasty, token “Of course, 
you wouldn’t wish an armed robbery on anyone”, but it’s hard to hear the 
authenticity of this statement over the shriekingly loud “BUT” implied at the 
end of that sentence.

Let’s establish a few home truths here. Is Kim Kardashian a ridiculous person? 
No doubt. I have written about the aforementioned ridiculousness myself many a 
time. Is she a bad role model to young women? Yes, probably, if not quite as 
terrible as one columnist tried to make her, tying her, somewhat awkwardly, to
the recent Guides survey about the numbers of young girls with low self-esteem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/04/girls-as-young-as-7-feel-pressure-to-be-pretty-body-confidence-girlguiding-study-reveals>
. And here is where you should hear the loud “BUT” in this column.

No matter how ridiculous Kardashian is, there is no justification in gloating 
over her being tied up and terrorised in her hotel room. She is not Osama bin 
Laden. She is a young woman who has made an enormous amount of money by 
flogging herself to the public. A crime against humanity that is not. And if 
we’re talking bad female role models, if you’re a high-profile female writer 
and you make a living by sneering at another woman being held at gunpoint, 
well, let’s just say you’re not exactly Gandhi yourself, are you? A woman 
posting selfies on social media versus women who spew bile in national 
newspapers about other women: if these are their options, no wonder girls today 
are so miserable.

And let’s talk about the gender element here, shall we? Yes, Kardashian does 
show off her wealthon social media 
<https://www.instagram.com/kimkardashian/?hl=en> and, yes, it is absurd. You 
know who else does that? Many, many, many men. Kardashian’s husband, Kanye 
West, for one. Thatbloviating Oompa Loompa Donald Trump 
<http://www.idesignarch.com/inside-donald-and-melania-trumps-manhattan-apartment-mansion/>
 is another. Allthose saddos on Instagram who take photos of their car, or 
watch, or flash holidays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/21/rich-kids-instagram-tv-review>
. And while they might be laughed at, there isn’t the same attitude that they 
shouldn’t do it, that they’re overstepping a line, that they’re asking for 
something bad to happen to them, because people don’t talk about men like that. 
They do, however, talk about women like that quite a lot. Women who are victims 
of revenge porn are told they shouldn’t have sent naked photos of themselves; 
women who are raped are asked to prove they didn’t dare to drink alcohol, or 
have sex at some point in their lives, or go out wearing anything other than a 
burlap sack. Kardashian, according to these columnists, brought her robbery on 
herself by photographing her jewellery. I’m of the school of thought that, when 
a crime is committed, the only person responsible for it is the actual 
criminal. But maybe I’m just old-fashioned.

Sticking with gender for a moment longer, it’s interesting that, in all the 
clucking over Kardashian’s personal life in these aforementioned columns, one 
aspect goes almost entirely unmentioned: that she is a mother. Personally, I 
don’t subscribe to the bullcrap theory that motherhood should define a woman, 
but at least one of these columnists does. Indeed, I once had a debate about it 
with her when she was defending that whole Andrea Leadsom (who?) nonsense in 
the summer. Oh saintly motherhood, how it gives a woman profound empathy! 
Unless, it seems, if that woman is Kim Kardashian. Or, for that matter, certain 
columnists with children who seem quite fond of kicking a woman when she’s 
down. What was that about motherhood’s profound effect?

I honestly can’t believe I’ve just written a whole column defending Kim 
Kardashian on feminist grounds, a woman I believe to represent so much that is 
absurd about our age. And yet, it seems, needs must. Because that’s the thing 
about feminism: even if you don’t like the woman, you’re genuinely fond of 
women, and you try to do right by them.

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Email ask.hadley@theguardian.com.
 