
I used to adore Mickey Mouse and watching The Mickey Mouse Club. I grew up in 
Elmira, New York. The house was small, but very pleasant. I had eight brothers 
and sisters so it was noisy. Our television was black and white and we’d all 
huddle round to watch.

My relationship with my father in the earlier years was strange. He wanted me 
to be a grade A student. He wanted me to go to an Ivy League school. I wasn’t 
great at school. It was only after I became successful that he realised I was 
more disciplined than he’d thought.

Being a fashion brand doesn’t have that depth of importance. I would rather be 
remembered for my philanthropy and for myinvolvement with autism 
<https://www.autismspeaks.org/site-wide/tommy-hilfiger>. I have children who 
have been affected by autism, a sister with MS and a daughter with Lyme 
disease. I want to do what I can.

Michael Jackson didn’t really eat. We had lunch at his house – grilled chicken 
and some salad. He was drinking a lot of Diet Coke. It was surreal meeting him. 
He was in his 30s, but like a little boy. So nice, so sweet, so talented, but a 
bit troubled. We lost touch later on.

I’ve been buried under an avalanche in Austria. I was helicopter skiing and 
went off a cliff. I went into shock. I was with a ski instructor and I was 
trying to follow him and got caught on an edge. Luckily I was wearing a beeper 
and he dug me out. I was buried for just under an hour.

I don’t cook. You wouldn’t want anything I cooked anyway. At home we eat 
organic, but I travel a lot and tend to eat out. I loveJoe’s Stone Crab 
<https://www.joesstonecrab.com/> in Miami. The crabs are only in season in the 
months of April and December. You put a bib on, crack them open and dip them in 
an amazing sauce.

I used to really mind getting older, but I’m calm about it now. I had a lot 
fun when I was younger. But I feel grounded and secure with my life and in my 
youth I wasn’t completely satisfied with where I was. I always thought I needed 
to be more successful. I now avoid drama and trauma.

I wore bell bottoms and silky shirts to Studio 54. I wanted to dress like a 
rock star. I got to knowAndy Warhol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/andywarhol> and he was very 
inspirational. We spent time in Factory, in Studio 54, La Grenouille. John F 
Kennedy Jr and I were friends. His death shook us all.

I had dinner with Zaha Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/zaha-hadid> three days before she 
died. We were beginning to talk about doing a project together. She was 
incredibly talented. At the time I thought she was a bit under the weather with 
a cold.

I’m pretty boring when it comes to clothes. I have 50 white shirts, 50 chinos, 
50 pairs of jeans and 25 pairs of white sneakers. Some navy and grey suits and 
black and brown shoes. It’s more of a uniform, really.

American Dreamer by Tommy Hilfiger with Peter Knobler, is published by 
Ballantine at £25. To order a copy for £20.50 visitbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/american-dreamer.html>

 * This article was amended on 13 November 2016 to correct the name of John F. 
Kennedy Jr and an incomplete quote about Zaha Hadid.
 