
Tony Abbott faces an internal backlash over his plans to amend the Racial 
Discrimination Act, with the Liberal party’s first Indigenous lower house 
member, Ken Wyatt, warning that he might cross the floor to vote against the 
legislation.

Another Coalition MP, Ewen Jones, told his colleagues at a joint Liberal and 
National party meeting on Tuesday that the government must be careful about the 
optics of the proposal and ensure it did not appear too ideological.

Abbott promised before the election to amend the Racial Discrimination Act in 
the interests of upholding free speech.

Unhappy with a 2011 federal court ruling about articles by the conservative 
commentator Andrew Bolt, the Coalition vowed to repeal section 18C in its 
current form. The section makes it unlawful to “offend, insult, humiliate or 
intimidate” a person or group because of their “race, colour or national or 
ethnic origin”.

The internal concerns came as community groups warned the government against 
pursuing “morally repugnant” changes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/18/racial-discrimination-groups-unite-against-morally-repugnant-law-changes>
 to racial discrimination laws, arguing Australia’s national interests were 
being sacrificed to score points in the “culture wars”.

In a blistering joint statement issued on Tuesday, representatives of the 
Indigenous, Greek, Jewish, Chinese, Arab, Armenian and Korean communities vowed 
to step up their campaign against amendments that would “license the public 
humiliation of people because of their race”.

It is understood Wyatt, Jones and other Coalition MPs David Coleman, Craig 
Laundy, Alex Hawke, George Christensen and Ian Macdonald offered their views on 
the issue at the private meeting of Liberal and National members on Tuesday.

Guardian Australia understands that Wyatt made a “very forceful” contribution 
which left open the option of crossing the floor to vote against the possible 
changes. It is understood he said he had lost friends and people close to him 
over racism.

Several MPs called on the government to make sure it handled the issue 
sensitively and noted that ethnic groups were worried about changes.

But one MP countered: “Freedom of speech is a God-given right; if we don’t 
allow things we don’t want to hear then we don’t believe in freedom.”

Jones told Guardian Australia: “As a middle-aged white man I have never 
experienced any form of discrimination. From my perspective I could be high 
about this and say it shouldn’t matter, but I’ve never experienced that and I 
think we should be very aware of listening to opinions of people who have 
experienced it.”

Abbott sought to emphasise the common ground between his colleagues.

“Everyone in this room believes in freedom of speech, everyone in the room is 
against racism, everyone in this room thinks Andrew Bolt should not have been 
prosecuted,” the prime minister told Coalition MPs.

Abbott observed that there had been a very exhaustive process of consultation 
and the party needed to reconcile the three points of views. He went on to 
praise long serving member Philip Ruddock for transforming the relationship 
between the Coalition and areas of the Australian community, referring to 
ethnic groups.

“We are the right party to represent a diverse country,” Abbott said.

The government is yet to release legislation showing the extent of proposed 
changes to the Racial Discrimination Act. Labor and the Greens, which retain 
the power to block legislation in the Senate until July, have argued against 
the need for the change.

A federal court judge in 2011 found 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/sinodisp/au/cases/cth/FCA/2011/1103.html?stem=0&synonyms=0&query=andrew%20bolt>
 that Bolt breached part 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act by publishing 
newspaper articles that questioned the motivations of fair-skinned people who 
identified as Aboriginal.

Concerned about the federal court ruling, the Coalition promised to repeal 
section 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act in its current form.
 