
Museum of Innocence

This wine-red 19th-century townhouse has become part-museum, part-art 
installation, part-novel brought to life. Pamuk conceived the project as he was 
writing thenovel of the same name 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571237029>
 and he's filled 83 wooden boxes with collected and commissioned works of art 
relating to each chapter – items the characters would have seen, worn, or owned 
over the last decades of the 20th century when the novel is set. But it's not 
just a study of obsession and the mementos of a doomed love affair between the 
novel's protagonists. With the aid of cutting-edge technology blurring fiction 
and documentary, it's a chronicle of Istanbul at a time of great cultural 
changed. Click through our picture gallery of the museumhere 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/gallery/2012/apr/27/orhan-pamuk-museum-innocence-pictures#/?picture=389312551&index=1>
.
• Çukurcuma Caddesi, Dalgiç Çikmazi 2, +90 212 252 9738, masumiyetmuzesi.org 
<http://www.masumiyetmuzesi.org>, open Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday, Saturday and 
Sunday 10am-6pm, Thursday 10am-9pm, entrance 25TL (about £8.50) for adults, 
£3.50 for students

The Works: Objects of Desire
 Objects of Desire, Istanbul 
As the sign says, this bric-a-brac emporium is aimed at "the slightly deranged 
collector seeking identifiable memories'', and it's a sensory overload for even 
the most seasoned forager. With stock spilling out on to the pavement it's 
clear that the owner of this extraordinary shop, A. Karaca Borar, is a 
consummate collector. In the house-cum-shop's bathroom, you might find a marble 
Ottoman washbasin next to a mass of rubber ducks. Vintage clothes are stacked 
alongside collections of toys, plastic gnomes, wooden hands and other 
miscellany. If you can't find it here, it probably doesn't exist.
• Faikpaşa Caddesi 6/1, +90 212 252 2527, fleaworks.com 
<http://www.fleaworks.com>, open daily 11am-6pm (closed 13-17 June), prices 
from around £3.50

A La Turca
 A La Turca Turkish rug shop, Istanbul 
A visit to Erkal Aksoy's A La Turca kilim house is like wandering around a 
delightful ethnographic museum – with price tags. A hoarders' heaven, this 
beautiful four-storey townhouse is filled with his global finds, displayed with 
the know-how of a skilled interior designer. There's plenty to covet if you can 
afford it and it's worth exploring even if you can't: the colourful, tightly 
woven antique kilims, rolled up and stored on bookshelves, the Ottoman 
embroidery draped over a chair (which is also for sale) and countless 
decorative objects. Don't forget to head down into the basement for stacks of 
green-glazed Tokat pottery.
• Faikpaşa Caddesi 4, +90 212 245 2933, alaturcahouse.com 
<http://www.alaturcahouse.com>, open Monday-Saturday 10.30am-7.30pm and by 
appointment, prices on request

Hall Istanbul
 Hall, Istanbul 
New-Zealand born interior designer, Christopher Hall, has been living in 
Istanbul for the past 12 years. His eponymous shop – open since 2003 – mixes 
antiques with his own contemporary designs. He works in stone, iron, steel, 
glass, linen, cotton, wool and wood and is inspired by the wares of the 
neighbouring junk shops, the influence of the city and Islamic form. You'll 
find some of his bronze and marble furniture in this chic showroom, along with 
more portable objets d'art, lighting, ceramics and textiles. Most pieces are 
beyond the pocket of the average visitor but a few small decorative objects 
start from around £30.
• Faikpaşa Caddesi, +90 212 292 9590, hallistanbul.com 
<http://www.hallistanbul.com>, open Monday 2pm-7pm, Tuesday-Saturday 10am-7pm

Leyla Seyhanli

This wardrobe-sized boutique is piled floor to ceiling with an eccentric 
collection of vintage clothes, hats and hat boxes, handbags, wall hangings and 
embroidered textiles. A good rummage will reveal Ottoman-era silk pillowcases 
hand sewn with gilded thread, embroidered linen towels and Anatolian velvet 
table cloths, ornate traditional kaftans, turn-of-the-century silk blouses and 
1950s taffeta party dresses. Always the genuine article, it's become a popular 
stop for collectors and Seyhanli also lends costumes and accessories to the 
Turkish film industry.
• Altipatlar Sokak 6, +90 212 293 7410, open Monday-Saturday 10.30am-6.30pm, 
prices range from around £30 to £160

Leila Butik

Virtually everything in this small, whitewashed boutique is a quirky, fun, 
one-off design. Different designers supply the store with everything from 
fascinators to ornately decorated heels, cute little prom dresses to 
hand-printed T-shirts, crazily patterned tights and leggings to customised 
straw hats. It also stocks jewellery from Anatolian-influenced crocheted 
necklaces to plastic brooches and, for men, vintage sunglasses and unique 
trilbies.
• Hayriye Caddesi 18, +90 212 245 3365, leilabutik.com 
<http://www.leilabutik.com>, open Monday-Saturday 11am-8.30pm, prices from 
around £5

Holy Coffee
 Holy Coffee, Istanbul 
With its sofas, armchairs, bookshelves and art-covered walls, a Holy Coffee 
break is like stepping into someone's living room. Just a year old, it's become 
the cafe of choice for locals, ex-pats and visitors thanks to its relaxed vibe 
and its hands-on Turkish owner, Arzu, who is more than happy to offer her tips 
on the city. The smell of freshly baked cakes and biscuits wafts from the 
kitchen, and soups, sandwiches and salads are also on offer. Drink the homemade 
bitter lemonade alfresco on a hot day – the coffee is excellent too.
• Hacioğlu Sokak 1B, +90 212 243 6869, Holy Coffee's facebook page 
<http://www.facebook.com/pages/Holy-Coffee/213658348654121>, open 
Monday-Saturday 10am-8pm

Cukurcuma Köftecisi

Traditional Turkish fare is served at this family-run lunch venue next door to 
Holy Coffee, complete with wooden tables and chairs and walls adorned with 
kitsch art and portraits of Atatürk. It's a paradise for carnivores, with all 
manner of köfte (meatballs) and şiş (skewers) sizzling on the grill, served 
with a carb overload of chips and Turkish pilaf rice. But there are also daily 
specials such as soups, stews and freshly made salads. Fridays and Saturdays 
are fry days, when you can sample the sublime courgette, aubergine and 
cauliflower fritters.
• Hacioğlu Sokak 1A, +90 212 245 0833, cukurcumakoftecisi.com 
<http://www.cukurcumakoftecisi.com>, open Monday to Saturday for lunch and 
dinner

Münferit

Award-winning interior design duo, Seyhan Özdemir and Sefer Cağlar – better 
known as Autoban – gave Münferit a retro feel with marble-top tables, 
smoked-glass mirrors and wood panelling. But the vintage aesthetic belies a 
menu filled with thoroughly modern meze, such as black couscous topped with 
sprigs of grilled calamari, baby octopus skewers and, for dessert, the 
irresistible sage ice-cream with plum sauce. Wash it down with some 
thrice-distilled Beylerbeyi Raki, Turkey's potent anise-flavoured spirit 
produced by the owner's family, or one of the inventive martinis and mojitos. 
On balmy evenings, you can dine alfresco on the terrace before it's transformed 
into a dance space.
• Yeni Carşi Caddesi 19, +90 212 252 5067, munferit.com.tr 
<http://www.munferit.com.tr>, open daily 7pm-2am, main courses around £14

House Hotel Galatsaray
 House Hotel Galatsaray, Istanbul 
The first hotel project from the owners of Istanbul's trendy House Café chain 
has turned a dilapidated 19th-century building into a design buff's dream with 
help from Autoban. Spread over four floors, the 20 rooms combine old-world 
charm with innovative design – lofty ceilings, ornate plasterwork and polished 
parquet floors, with sleek, custom-made furniture and rainforest shower 
cubicles in the middle of the bedroom. The top-floor lounge bar, with its open 
fire, large brown Chesterfields and panoramic views is the perfect place to 
relax post-sightseeing.
• Firuzağa Mahallesi, Bostanbaşi Caddesi 19, +90 212 252 0422, 
thehousehotel.com/the-house-hotel-galatasaray 
<http://www.thehousehotel.com/the-house-hotel-galatasaray>, from €139 for a 
deluxe suite on a B&B basis. If you prefer the idea of an apartment, studios 
withThe House Apart 
<http://www.thehouseapart.com/en/istanbul-residences/galatasaray-apart> start 
from €80 per night and one-bedroom apartments start from €100, including two 
breakfasts at The House Café on Istiklal Caddesi

• This article was amended on 11 February 2015 to amend opening times at the 
Museum of Innocence.
 