
Croatia has a short and intense high season. All prices cited here are valid 
for stays from mid-June to late August. Note that rates drop dramatically – 
sometimes by up to 50% – out of season. Beaches are rare in rocky Croatia, so 
these top 10 picks book out far in advance.

Hotel Solitudo, Lastovo

Lastovo is arguably the most remote of Croatia's islands, accessible via 
catamaran from Split and Dubrovnik (although from the latter only during 
summer). Actually a cluster of 46 islets, Lastovo is home to just 800 permanent 
residents. Little wonder that its only hotel is the aptly named Solitudo, 
perched on the corner of two splendid bays. Most of the hotel's simple rooms 
face the sea and possess their own terrace, surrounded by fragrant pine and 
wildflowers. Loungers are arranged on the hotel's rocky private beach opposite. 
Rent kayaks from across the street (around £10 per day) and explore the 
archipelago's pristine shores. Or explore Lastovo's tumbledown Old Town, which 
is hidden in the island's interior – an ancient protective measure against 
pirates.
• hotel-solitudo.com <http://www.hotel-solitudo.com>, +385 20 802 100, doubles 
from €97 including breakfast

La Villa, Lopud
 La Villa, Lopud Photograph: lavilla.com.hr 
Lopud is the Elafiti archipelago's second-largest island, although there's 
hardly more than a few square miles to explore. Cars are banned, beaches are 
sandy and the ferry from Dubrovnik takes just under an hour. With a seafront 
location and eight airy rooms, La Villa is the island's choice spot to bed 
down. Snorkel from the rocky beach 10 seconds away, or read under the giant 
magnolia tree out back, which opens on to a tiny botanical garden. Follow up 
with an organic lunch or dinner in La Villa's brand-new terrace restaurant. 
Best of all, as the sun sets, day-tripping tourists disappear to the mainland 
and you'll have lovely Lopud all to yourself.
• lavilla.com.hr <http://www.lavilla.com.hr/>, +385 91 322 0126, doubles from 
€100, including breakfast

Hotel Odisej, Mljet
 Hotel Odisej, Mljet 
Just over an hour's catamaran ride west of Dubrovnik, Mljet's green shores are 
the stuff of legend: it was here that the siren Calypso is said to have kept 
Odysseus captive for seven years. Lucky guy. Today around a third of the island 
is a pristine national park, crisscrossed with hiking and cycling trails, and 
lapped by two saltwater lakes. Hotel Odisej sits at the heart of this protected 
parkland on the island's western tip. Guestrooms are a little dated, so it's 
worth spending a bit extra for a terraced room overlooking the pretty port (and 
fabulous seafood restaurants) of Pomena. Or stretch out on the hotel's "beach", 
a simple stone affair dotted with sunloungers alongside the island's 
crystal-clear waters.
• adriaticluxuryhotels.com <http://www.adriaticluxuryhotels.com>, +385 20 430 
830, doubles from €75 including breakfast

Hotel Mimbelli, Orebić
 Hotel Mimbelli, Orebic 
Orebić is tucked into the underside of the 40-mile Pelješac peninsula. The 
town's far more famous neighbour, Korčula – the alleged island birthplace of 
Marco Polo – floats opposite, just a 15-minute ferry ride across a narrow 
channel. Orebić's 16th-century stone homes and courtyard gardens make it easy 
to see why the town has long been a locals' summer getaway. On Orebić's seaside 
promenade, the new Hotel Mimbelli's five contemporary rooms, one with a pretty 
olive tree mural, have exposed stone walls and antique tiles. There's also a 
top Dalmatian restaurant on site, serving local wines. The town's shallow 
public beach – which runs the length of Orebić – is across the promenade from 
the hotel.
• hotel-mimbelli.com <http://www.hotel-mimbelli.com>, +385 20 713 636, doubles 
from €100 including breakfast

Villa Rosmarinus, Hvar
 Villa Rosmarinus, Hvar 
Hvar is the hippest of Croatia's islands. International A-listers from Beyoncé 
to Prince Harry flock to these alluring shores. Accommodation rates normally 
skyrocket in high season. Not so at Villa Rosmarinus. This petite villa houses 
just three double bedrooms – each with its own spacious, south-facing terrace 
and unobstructed seascape views over the Pakleni archipelago – and three 
apartments. Pebbly Plava Laguna beach is just down a set of steps, a couple of 
minutes from the villa. Note that Villa Rosmarinus is around a 15-minute walk 
north of Hvar's Old Town – ideal for escaping the crowds that congregate here 
in July and August.
• villa-rosmarinus.com <http://www.villa-rosmarinus.com>, +385 99 7368 316, 
doubles from €75, minimum stay three days

Hotel Maestral, Prvić
 Hotel Maestral, Prvic 
Off the west coast of Šibenik, Hotel Maestral overlooks Prvić Luka's main 
square. The Horvat family spent more than a decade renovating this former 
island schoolhouse, transforming it from a holiday home into a hotel. Today, 
rooms offer parquet floors and views over the sheltered bay. Splash in the 
crystal clear waters, either at one of the small rocky beaches next to the 
hotel, or on the lovely large-pebble beach that's a 10-minute stroll away. 
Alternatively, open-water swimmers favour the doable distances between Prvić 
and its surrounding islets. Cap off the day on the terrace of the hotel's 
Restaurant Val, where traditional octopus or lambpeka (roasted in a domed pan 
under ashes) are the house specialties.
• hotelmaestral.com <http://www.hotelmaestral.com>, +385 22 448 300, doubles 
from €90 including breakfast

Camping Simuni, Pag
 Camping Simuni, Pag 
Rated one of Croatia's premier campgrounds, Simuni is nestled along two 
sheltered bays on the western shores of Pag island. Pitches, bungalows and 
apartments tumble down to the sea. Up to an incredible 4,500 guests bed down in 
the bustling grounds each day during summertime, lured by the campground's 
themed evenings and firework displays – not to mention each Wednesday's 
complimentary roast pork and beer dinners. This strip of coast is also renowned 
for its shallow waters and constant winds, ideal for windsurfing. Take an 
introductory course (six hours over three days, €100) or rent your own 
equipment (€15) and hit the water. Too taxing? Award-winning cheesemakerSirana 
Gligora <http://www.gligora.com/> is a 10-minute drive away. Cheese- and 
wine-tastings, paired with a factory visit, start at €6 a head.
• camping-simuni.hr <http://www.camping-simuni.hr>, +385 23 697 441, camping 
from €6/adult, €4.30/child six-11 years old, €3.60/child three-five, free for 
under-twos, plus pitch from €10; three-person bungalows from €72

Villa Hotel Barbat, Rab
 Villa Hotel Barbat, Rab 
An idyllic isle south-east of Istria, Rab is best-known for its hugely popular 
Rabska Fjera, or medieval carnival (late July). Yet Rab's picturesque Old Town, 
friendly residents and deserted beaches – many requiring a hike to access – 
make the island appealing any time. Villa Hotel Barbat is midway between the 
Old Town (an hour's walk via a seafront promenade) and the hip Santos Beach 
Club. Fourteen guestrooms face the island of Dolin opposite. There's a 
trampoline for kids, and direct access to the small, sandy public beach. The 
hotel's excellent gourmet restaurant presses its own olive oil, and air-dries 
its own octopus (a local speciality). Half-board is à la carte, and may be 
taken at lunch or dinner.
• hotel-barbat.com <http://www.hotel-barbat.com>, +385 51 721 858, half-board 
€75pp

Oasi, Pula
 Oasi, Pula 
Located on the Istrian coastline south of Pula, the Oasi has just nine elegant 
rooms. This hotel is the only one in this top 10 costing more than £100 a night 
B&B, as there are few budget options if you want to stay near the beach here. 
But there's an outdoor swimming pool and a small spa, as well as a gastronomic 
restaurant that's worth a detour alone. The latter dishes up local specialities 
that may include beef carpaccio with Istrian truffles, Adriatic grilled squid 
or homemade prawn and squid-ink ravioli. It's three miles from the hotel to 
Pula's impressive Roman amphitheatre and Austro-Viennese Old Town. The 
coastline's myriad beaches – from pale and pebbly to smooth flat rocks perfect 
for basking in the sun – are around a five-minute stroll away.
• oasi.hr <http://oasi.hr/>, +385 52 397 910, doubles from €123 including 
breakfast

Campsite Porto Sole, Vrsar
 Campsite Porto Sole, Vrsar 
Sitting at the mouth of the Lim Fjord – adored by the likes of Casanova for 
its oysters – Campsite Porto Sole hugs two pine-trimmed bays. The grounds are 
scattered with a dozen tennis courts, two swimming pools, a diving centre and a 
mile of sun-dappled beach. Pick of the pitches are the remote (read tranquil) 
spots in the campsite's shady cypress groves, set back from the seafront. Porto 
Sole is also an easy 10-minute walk to the fresh-off-the-boat seafood 
restaurants in the nearby fishing village of Vsrar. Want to ditch the bikinis 
and Bermudas? The bold may opt to bed down among the wild olive orchards next 
door atKoversada <http://www.campingrovinjvrsar.com>, Croatia's oldest naturist 
campsite (from €8/adult, €14/pitch).
• campingrovinjvrsar.com <http://www.campingrovinjvrsar.com>, camping from 
€7.20/adult, €4.10/child five-11, free for children four and under, plus pitch 
from €12.20
 