
A Conservative MP has spent more than £25m buying a six-storey central London 
house and a string of commercial properties over the past three years, earning 
him hundreds of thousands of pounds a year in rental income on top of his 
parliamentary salary.

Nadhim Zahawi, who is also a director of an oil company operating in 
Kurdistan, spent £10m on the commercial sites in the 18 months to December, 
adding to a family portfolio that includes a stucco property in one of the most 
exclusive streets in Belgravia, central London.

Zahawi bought the Belgravia house, which is close to former prime minister 
Margaret Thatcher’s long-time home, with his wife Lana for £13.75m in 2013. The 
couple have applied for planning permission to extend the basement and put in a 
swimming pool as part of a major overhaul. They also asked to turn the 
property, which had been divided into three flats, into a single residence.

Tory MP Nadhim Zahawi lands job with oil firm Gulf Keystone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/24/tory-mp-nadhim-zahawi-lands-job-with-oil-firm-gulf-keystone>
The commercial properties – purchased through a company Zahawi owns with his 
wife – include the former premises of a Brighton restaurant called Fishy Fishy 
once run by the TV presenter Dermot O’Leary. The MP for Stratford-upon-Avon 
also bought other properties in London and Walton-on-Thames.

The commercial properties were bought through a company called Zahawi & 
Zahawi, which the MP set up a month after he was elected in 2010. He and his 
wife each own half the company, which files “small company” accounts. According 
to its accounts, it had shareholder funds of £174,675 last year. The previous 
year, it had funds of £179,083.

Its purchases include a property on Fulham Road in London worth £2.7m and 
which is currently used by the estate agents Savills.

Another property in Wimbledon is occupied by a NatWest bank branch and 
offices. Updated land registry documents are not available, but it was last 
sold for £5.25m in 2012. A WH Smith operates from Zahawi’s premises in 
Walton-on-Thames, which cost £1.32m.

The purchases were funded by a series of loans from Santander bank. It is not 
clear from the documents how much Santander has loaned the MP’s company.

Zahawi and his wife also own a house in Putney, bought before he became an MP 
and which is now rented to private tenants, and a livery in Warwickshire.

The string of purchases is likely to raise questions about Zahawi’s extensive 
business interests outside parliament.

MP stands to make £1.5m from Kurdistan oil company sale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/14/mp-stands-to-make-15m-from-kurdistan-oil-company-sale>
Zahawi says he has listed the purchases on the MPs’ register of interests and 
that his first priority was his constituency work. “If I were lucky enough to 
be made a minister one day, I would of course take a pay cut and give up all 
outside interests so I could be part of the leadership of a department as well 
as continue as an effective MP for Stratford-on-Avon,” he said.

“My first priority, before anything else, is my constituency work and I would 
never, or have never, let anything get in the way of this. Before entering 
politics, I was a businessman. I think it is healthy for politics for backbench 
politicians to have outside interests that are properly declared, as if this 
were not possible it would be doing politics a disservice by only making it 
attractive to career politicians rather than to people from a wide variety of 
professional backgrounds.

“My private business is conducted in the normal way any private business would 
be. Zahawi & Zahawi requested best offers for loans from a number of financial 
institutions for a business plan that it wanted to execute and Santander won 
the business.”

The Guardian previously revealed that Zahawi was granted “performance units” - 
a form of bonus - just before it emerged thatChina’s state-owned oil company 
Sinopec was in talks to buy Gulf Keystone 
<http://asia.nikkei.com/Business/AC/Sinopec-soars-on-acquisition-speculation>, 
which is currently valued at £350m.

Zahawi’s stake and those of two other directors would be worth 2% if the 
business was sold in the next year, valuing the overall holding at at least 
£7m. The MP’s share would amount to £1.4m, a fifth of the directors’ pot.

Zahawi joined Gulf Keystone in July 2015 last year. As chief strategy officer, 
he earns a monthly salary of £20,125. He has also been receiving regular bonus 
payments of up to £26,000 for advising the company.







 