
There were more than a few people, myself included, who privately thought Dave 
Brailsford, Team Sky's director, may have been a bit rash in 2009 when he set a 
target of delivering a British winner of theTour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance> within five years. Maybe by 
2020, I thought. Another part of me hardly expected to see a UK cyclist on the 
top step of the podium on the Champs Elysées in my lifetime.

Brailsford's ambition was, as the Tour classifies its highest climbs, hors 
catégorie. The achievement of the Londoner Bradley Wiggins in winning this 99th 
edition of the race, founded in 1903, is more than merely historic; it is 
monumental. A number of Britons have worn the leader's yellow jersey for a day 
or a handful of stages: Sean Yates, Chris Boardman, David Millar and Tommy 
Simpson. But none came close to winning the blue riband event of world cycling; 
none closer, at any rate, than Bradley Wiggins's own fourth place in 2009.

By winning outright the 2012 Tour de France, Wiggins joins a pantheon of 
greats. For anyone as steeped as he is in the history of cycle racing and the 
Tour, to be bracketed in the same league as riders of the past such as Louison 
Bobet, Fausto Coppi, Jacques Anquetil, Eddy Merckx and Bernard Hinault is a 
lifetime achievement in itself. In its more than 100-year history, the Tour has 
belonged almost exclusively to the countries of continental Europe; Lance 
Armstrong's seven straight wins (if they stand, after Usada's doping charges 
are heard) were an aberration.

For a Briton to win the Tour is as seismic, in its way, as it was for the 
first American to do so, in 1986. Like the US, Britain has been until now an 
outsider in the "world" of professional cycling – and Bradley Wiggins is our 
Greg LeMond.

He may lack the chutzpah, charisma and craziness of LeMond, but in his 
bloody-minded dedication and grit, Wiggins has shown himself a truly British 
champion. Having raised expectations in 2009, a combination of bad luck and 
disappointing performances relegated him to 24th place in 2010; in 2011, he 
crashed out with a broken collarbone. His victory in 2012 is the final 
realisation of great potential transformed by an unimaginable amount of hard 
work – not just his own training regime, but the collective effort of his 
team-mates (most notably, second-placed Chris Froome) and the ultra-rigorous, 
appliance-of-science approach of Brailsford's Team Sky.

A large part of the story is the physical and psychological transformation of 
Wiggins himself. There was never any doubting the raw talent of the self-styled 
mod from off the Edgware Road, but he had formerly seemed a Tour contender only 
for solo stages raced against the clock – the individual time trial and 
prologue. Wiggins Mk1 was a track specialist, a pursuiter who had cornered the 
4km time trial event in the velodrome and won a fistful of Olympic medals in 
2000, 2004 and 2008. On the road, his type – a lanky physique with long levers 
and a big engine, capable of sustained high aerobic output – is known as a
rouleur.

Rouleurs can win single stages or one-day races by escaping and outrunning the 
pack. But a Tour winner has to be the perfect all-rounder: able to hang with 
the specialist climbers at 2,000m over the Col du Tourmalet, yet powerful 
enough to survive the cobbles of the French-Belgian borders and crosswinds of 
Les Landes. Therouleur is equipped for the former, but in the Alps and 
Pyrenees, where the Tour is decided, gravity is against him.

The trick of creating Wiggins 2.0 was to change the arithmetic: a rule of 
thumb says that a grand tour winner needs to be able to produce at least seven 
watts per kilo at peak aerobic output (to put that in perspective, a handy 
amateur racer might manage four watts/kg). For 2009, Wiggins shed 6kg (about a 
stone) off a frame where it was not obvious how such savings might be made. 
Maintaining "negative energy balance" is neither easy nor fun when your body is 
craving calories to compensate for the rigours of racing multiple back-to-back 
200km-plus stages. If the Wiggins we see in press conferences now seems a 
little dour and phlegmatic, this was the price: he could no longer be the bloke 
who liked a few beers and would go on the lash for weeks after winning at the 
Olympics.

The leader of a team in the Tour de France has to be serious: a budget of 
millions is riding on his efforts, and he must show himself worthy of the 
sacrifices every one of his team-mates is expected to make. It was a telling 
vignette to seeMark Cavendish <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/markcavendish> 
filling his world champion's rainbow jersey with water bottles from a Team Sky 
car to re-supply his team-mates in this year's race. Brad is answerable for 
that, and he knows it.

To some, Team Sky's ultimate domination of the 2012 Tour may have looked a 
little processional. That grossly underestimates Wiggins's and Sky's 
achievement in defending and extending his lead. The tactics are always the 
same, whoever you are, whatever the team, and in 2012 Wiggins and Sky were 
simply the best in world cycling's biggest event. Yet I also relished Wiggins's 
outburst against the "fucking wankers" among the Twitterati and press pack who 
had called into question the credibility of his performances. Wiggins's choice 
of Anglo-Saxon terms may have made Sky's press pack wince, but we needed to see 
that this coronation of a new champion was not a bloodless coup.

And Wiggins has a point. The 20 years between LeMond's last win and Wiggins's 
first were the dark era of EPO and blood-doping – low, dishonest decades that 
came close to wrecking the entire edifice of professional cycling and the 
Tour's prestige. We many burned fans are entitled to suspicion and scepticism; 
we have been lied to so often. But for this fan, at least, Bradley Wiggins's 
victory was all the more sweetly significant precisely because I believe in it. 
Chapeau Wiggo!
 