
A holiday firm has apologised after hotel staff in Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> staged an apparent mock terrorist 
attack to entertain guests.

The joke backfired as one British holidaymaker said he was left terrified by 
the stunt at the Grand Yazici Mares hotel in Icmeler.

The incident last Thursday came six weeks after an Islamic State terrorist, 
Seifeddine Rezgui Yacoubi, killed 38 people, 30 of them British holidaymakers, 
in Tunisia.

Jason Pythian, 43, an electrician from Manchester, said he was among dozens of 
British tourists lounging by the pool at the Turkish hotel when gun-toting men 
dressed in army gear appeared. Only after they ran for their lives fearing 
another massacre did they realise it was a prank.

He told the Sun: “We were so relieved – it was the hotel’s idea of 
entertainment for the day. They thought it was funny to run around the pool 
dressed as terrorists.

“One ran up to me with a bucket with ‘Fuel’ written on the side. He threw it 
over me and got out a cigarette lighter. I jumped up, not knowing what on earth 
was going on. It was disgusting to try and make light of Tunisia in that way.”

He was in a party of six who had paid the tour operator Jet2holidays more than 
£5,000 for a 12-day all-inclusive stay to celebrate his father George’s 70th 
birthday. They flew to the Dalaman coast on 30 July with Jason’s wife Maureen, 
sister Dawn Sutton, 41, and her husband, David, and nine-year-old son Tyler.

His sister also criticised the stunt on TripAdvisor, writing: “So shocked to 
see them dressed up. One was dressed in army pants walking round with a gun and 
pointing it at people. Then there were two walking about as Arabs, one with a 
rifle and one with a container with ‘Fuel’ written on – it was only water.

“He came up to a family member and poured it on his head, then pretended to 
light his head. They thought it was entertainment. I just thought it was bad 
taste since what happened in Tunisia.”

Icmeler is less than 400 miles from the border with war-torn Syria. Turkey has 
been hit by a series of terrorist outrages as the neighbouring civil war spills 
over to more countries.

A spokeswoman for Jet2holidays, said: “We are sorry to hear about the distress 
experienced by the Sutton family and on hearing this we immediately spoke to 
the hotel management. They have assured us it was never their intention to 
cause any offence or upset with their entertainment programme.

“This was a Hollywood-themed poolside show, which included the characters 
Rambo and Superman, and it is always well received by the hotel’s residents. 
The hotel management now understands that some of the costumes may have caused 
offence and they will no longer use these in their shows.”

Another British holidaymaker currently staying at the hotel played down the 
incident. They said in a comment on a Mail Online article: “The Hollywood theme 
pool entertainment could have been seen as insensitive but was in no way scary 
as the entertainers all had comedy makeup and a commentator was providing a 
running commentary.

“No one appeared scared, no one was running for their lives and although it 
provided ‘food for thought’ and lots of laughs it certainly needed to be taken 
in context. (Along with the cowboys and Indians, Rambo, Arab Sheik and other 
Hollywood characters).

“Furthermore, there are many nationalities here, the least being British. Most 
are Turks and Russians and only a smattering of Brits.”
 