
The victory against Uber by drivers and the GMB is an important one, and not 
just for the many workers suffering the effects of bogus self-employment and 
poverty wages at the hands of big companies (Uber drivers triumph in rights 
battle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status>
, 29 October). The rise of Uber has affected the livelihoods of traditional 
taxi firms all over the country and the pressure to drive down fares has 
compromised passenger safety.

Hedge-funded Uber’s success started with the Tory-Liberal coalition 
government’s deregulation legislation, which received the royal assent 18 
months ago. While the consultation around the bill was going on, I supported 
the taxi trade here in Medway and many other drivers’ associations and their 
trade unions who lobbied against deregulation because they knew it would drive 
down wages and weaken the powers of local councils to determine how many cabs 
were licensed, or to maintain safe working practices.

In spite of the overwhelming consensus in the consultation that the new 
measures were a bad thing and the achievement of one of the highest responses 
ever recorded in a legislation consultation, the bill slipped through, 
demonstrating that the consultation was a sham. Drivers have endured loss of 
earnings and security, while passengers found themselves driven to their 
destination by out-of-town strangers, reliant on a sat-nav instead of a local 
driver who knew the shortest routes. If drivers have behaved badly or their 
vehicles are in poor condition, the deregulated environment has made it much 
harder to trace the culprits or to award sanctions against them.

The latest court ruling gives me hope that things can change and will embolden 
other exploited workers to challenge their employers, but if we want a fair and 
safe taxi trade, then everyone has to play their part. The lure of a cheap fare 
costs our community much more than the few pounds we think we are saving by 
taking theUber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> option.
Cllr Teresa Murray
Deputy leader of the Labour group on Medway council

• The landmark ruling on Uber taxi drivers’ employment rights shows that the 
development of the so-called gig economy has, to date, been at the expense of 
the workers. This is hardly a surprise. Alongside the growth in self-employed 
workers we have seen a rise in the number of freelancers starting co-ops in 
order to create more security for themselves – and they have been doing this 
precisely because employers and legislation do not do it for them.

Whether the judgment on Uber will set a precedent for other employers remains 
to be seen. What is clear is that we need to find a way for self-employed 
workers – from taxi drivers to music teachers – to create greater financial 
security and less uncertainty for themselves.
Ed Mayo
Secretary general, Co-operatives UK

• I applaud the court victory of the Uber drivers and hope it begins a trend 
to ensure that workers are not exploited by rapacious organisations through 
false self-employment, zero-hours contracts or employment via an agency. It 
should also be a reminder that as consumers ever seeking lower prices we are 
unwittingly complicit in this exploitation. Perhaps we all need to remember 
that our low price is another’s low pay, and be willing only to buy from 
companies that treat their workers fairly, even if we have to pay a little more.
Michael Miller
Sheffield

• The rise of self-employment in the UK predates apps and Uber. HMRC must play 
a leading role in stemming the tide of bogus self-employment forced on workers 
by firms who regard employment status as a matter of choice rather than tax 
law. HMRC has a simple to use online tool to determine employment status – the 
Employment Status Indicator. Why does HMRC not compel firms to use the ESI for 
each new worker taken on (with sanctions for wilfully answering the questions 
wrongly) and to record the results in their records?
Malcolm Thick
Harwell, Oxfordshire

• We should welcome the Uber decision, but it is too early to celebrate. While 
there may be no obvious legal grounds for a challenge, the fact that the 
implementation of the decision will have widespread implications will not be 
lost on the government and employers. They will not be supportive. It is not 
beyond the bounds of possibility that discreet pressure, behind the scenes, 
will be brought to bear to ensure that the appeals tribunal reverses the 
findings. I hope I’m wrong, but I have little faith in the sanctity of the 
British legal system.
Tim Webb
London

• Following on from the Uber drivers’ employment status victory, the 
construction industry was also guilty of dubious practices. Persons seeking 
work on building sites were handed an officially-designed checklist designed to 
check their employed/self-employed status, and told to “just tick these boxes 
and sign it”. Such men carried out exactly the same jobs as directly employed 
men on the same site. Although their registration with HMRC was essential, the 
absence of holiday pay was a constant issue and subject to legal challenges 
from time to time.
Peter Green
Rotherham, South Yorkshire

• Is the Guardian anti-union? There was no mention of the GMB, which took the 
case against Uber, in your front page article, nothing until the end of the 
piece on page five. And no mention in the accompanying page 5 pieces by Aditya 
Chakrabortty and Miles Brignall. Without the GMB there would have been no case. 
Even the Daily Mail credited the GMB on their front page. Why not the Guardian?
Tom Wilson
Lewes, East Sussex

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 