
The British government should consider expanding a £200m aid programme that 
gives cash directly to some of the world’s poorest families and individuals, a 
watchdog has recommended.

The Independent Commission for Aid Impact (Icai), which scrutinises aid money, 
said the government’s cash transfer programmes – likened by one MP to“exporting 
the dole” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4082734/Queue-UK-s-1bn-foreign-aid-cashpoint-Just-thought-couldn-t-worse-cash-doled-envelopes-ATM-cards-loaded-money.html>
 – have improved the lives of millions of people and provided “strong value for 
money”.

The prime minister, Theresa May, staunchly defended cash transfers 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/theresa-may-foreign-aid-cash-handouts-daily-mail-attack-response-a7507136.html>
 and the foreign aid budgetearlier this month after both came under renewed 
attack. The benefits of the scheme have been recognised by the public accounts 
committee and the National Audit Office.

UK moves a step closer to dramatic rise in aid funding to private sector
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2017/jan/11/uk-step-closer-dramatic-rise-aid-funding-to-private-sector-cdc-group-dfid>
The Department for International Development spends 2% of its aid budget on 
cash transfers, which provide regular monthly payments of small sums to 
households and individuals. Recipients include pregnant women in Nigeria, who 
receive cash to provide better nutrition, parents in Pakistan, where the funds 
are intended to encourage school attendance among children, and the elderly in 
Uganda, to mitigate poverty. Payments vary between £6 a month for families in 
Uganda to £19 for a family of five in Zimbabwe.

The Icai report 
<http://icai.independent.gov.uk/html-report/effects-dfids-cash-transfer-programmes-poverty-vulnerability/>
, published on Thursday, found that between 2011 and 2015 DfID, the largest 
funder of cash transfers among bilateral donors, exceeded its target of 
reaching 6 million people through the scheme. Icai found it had met some but 
not all targets for improving school attendance and that work on health and 
nutrition and women’s empowerment could be improved. The watchdog also said 
there was a lack of a strategic approach to providing recipient governments 
with technical assistance.

But the review found that cash transfers “helped to make vulnerable people 
more resilient to shocks such as ill-health, or bad weather hitting their 
farms, by encouraging them to save and giving them access to credit”. In Kenya, 
participating households spent significantly more of their money on health and 
education and less on cigarettes and alcohol, the report found.

DfID “should consider scaling up its financial contributions in the short to 
medium-term” where there was evidence of support from national governments, 
said the watchdog.


Alison Evans, Icai’s chief commissioner, who led the review, said: “DfID’s use 
of cash transfers has helped to tackle poverty and vulnerability for some of 
the poorest people in the world.

“The department has reached millions of people, providing strong value for 
money, and helping deliver on the commitment to ‘leave no one behind’.

“But there is no room for complacency. Going forward, DfID needs to do more to 
improve on school attendance, health and nutrition and women’s empowerment, 
where the global evidence shows that cash transfers can make even more of a 
difference.”

The review awarded the DfID-supported scheme a “green-amber” rating, the 
second highest score, in recognition of “satisfactory achievement in most areas 
but partial achievement in others”.

When disaster strikes, cash transfers can offer older people a vital lifeline 
| Toby Porter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/22/cash-transfers-older-people-lifeline-nepal-earthquake>
Stephen Twigg, the chairman of the Commons international development 
committee, welcomed the report.

He said: “Icai’s review shows the value of DfID’s cash transfer programmes and 
adds to a wealth of evidence which shows that, contrary to recent coverage, 
cash transfers are an effective means of development.

“DfID should carefully consider its options for scaling up and improving its 
work in this area, based on the evidence which Icai has found, to ensure that 
it is achieving maximum value for money.”

Tim Livesey, Oxfam’s head of UK policy and government relations, said: “The 
independent review confirms what many in DfID and the development sector have 
long known: cash transfers have the potential to be one of the best, fastest 
and safest ways to help people raise themselves out of poverty by investing in 
their own, and their family’s future.”

Earlier this month, Nigel Evans, a former commons deputy speaker and member of 
the international development committee, called for a review of the scheme in 
Pakistan. He claimed cash transfers were “clearly open to fraud”.

The £4bn scheme highlighted by Evans was the Benazir income support programme 
<http://www.bisp.gov.pk/> in Pakistan, which provides support to the poorest 
25% of households. Icai said the scheme had achieved “considerable success”. 
However, the report also highlighted “targeting errors” common to cash transfer 
programmes.

The largest such error was in Pakistan, said Icai, where the World Bank had 
found a quarter of recipients to be well above the threshold of the poorest 
25%. Another occurred in Nigeria, where DfID introduced random pregnancy tests 
after fake urine samples reportedly led to the initial inclusion of women who 
were not pregnant.

 * This article was amended on 13 January to clarify the number of people 
reached by DfID’s cash transfer scheme.
 