
British authorities are failing to identify and protect Vietnamese victims of 
trafficking who are being deported back toVietnam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vietnam> without adequate support or 
protection, according to anti-trafficking activists.

Despite having been identified as one of the groups most vulnerable to 
trafficking crimes in the UK,National Crime Agency (NCA) figures 
<http://www.nationalcrimeagency.gov.uk/publications/national-referral-mechanism-statistics/676-national-referral-mechanism-statistics-end-of-year-summary-2015>
 shows that suspected Vietnamese trafficking victims are half as likely to be 
granted protection compared with other victims. Just 11% of Vietnamese 
referrals were accepted and offered protection last year, well below the 
referral average of 27%.

3,000 children enslaved in Britain after being trafficked from Vietnam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/23/vietnam-children-trafficking-nail-bar-cannabis>
The Guardian interviewed five people who had been found in the UK before being 
returned to Vietnam. All had been discovered in nail bars or brothels, 
convicted of crimes and held in British prisons before removal. They complained 
of being returned to Vietnam in huge debt and without support. Some had ongoing 
physical and mental health conditions.

Christine Beddoe, an anti-trafficking expert, said that despite the government 
recognising Vietnam as a key source country for trafficking networks in the UK, 
many victims were still not being formally identified and given the support and 
assistance they are entitled to under UK law.

Beddoe singled out the policy of tasking immigration officials with making the 
ultimate decision on Vietnamese trafficking claims. “The general attitude 
around decision-making is to find any excuse possible not to find them a victim 
of trafficking,” she said.

Fiona Mactaggart, co-chair of the all-party parliamentary group on human 
trafficking and modern-day slavery, said that while the government should be 
commended on passing the groundbreakingModern Slavery Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2015/30/contents/enacted> 2015, the focus 
should now be on implementation.

“It is all very well for the prime minister to say that Britain has 
world-leading legislation on modern-day slavery. The problem is we’re not 
effectively implementing it,” she said. “The Home Office still sees trafficking 
as an issue of immigration … these are people who are being sold, they are 
slaves, but we just look the other way. The state is completely failing in 
basic human responsibility to these victims.”

A Home Office spokesperson said: “Our world-leading Modern Slavery Act puts a 
statutory duty on public authorities to notify the Home Office when they come 
across potential victims of modern slavery and people trafficking. The number 
of Vietnamese nationals in the UK identified as potential victims more than 
doubled last year – all of whom were provided with support while we determined 
whether they were victims.”

The government estimates there are up to 13,000 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/29/13000-slaves-uk-four-times-higher-previously-thought>
 trapped in modern slavery in the UK. According to the most recent NCA figures,
895 potential victims 
<http://www.nationalcrimeagency.gov.uk/publications/national-referral-mechanism-statistics/711-human-trafficking-national-referral-mechanism-statistics-january-to-march-2016/file>
were reported into the government’s national referral mechanism to identify 
victims of trafficking between January and March this year.

Vietnamese made up the second largest nationality of those referred by 
authorities as potential victims of trafficking: Albanians were the biggest 
group. Many arrive with debts of up to £25,000 for their passage after being 
lured to the UK with promises of work. Once they arrive, they are trafficked 
into domestic servitude, forced labour and sexual exploitation in private 
homes, cannabis farms, nail bars and brothels.

Child trafficking victims disappearing from UK care at 'alarming' rate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/14/child-trafficking-victims-disappearing-from-uk-care-at-alarming-rate>
Among those most at risk are children. In 2015 a Guardian investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/23/vietnam-children-trafficking-nail-bar-cannabis>
 found that an estimated 3,000 Vietnamese children were trapped in modern 
slavery in the UK. The UN’s Office on Drugs and Crime estimates that 30 
Vietnamese children arrive illegally in the UK every month.

Lawyers say a failure to positively identify cases of trafficking is still 
leading to criminalisation of those who had been forced into illegal work.

The practice of traffickers using children to work in cannabis farms is well 
established, yet freedom of information requests to police forces across the UK 
reveal that 149 Vietnamese children have been arrested for cannabis cultivation 
in the past three years. Those convictions can lead to deportation.

“In the young offender institutes I see many children that have not been 
[identified] or referred as victims of trafficking,” said Mark Shepherd, a 
lawyer at theMigrant Legal Project <http://migrantlegalproject.com/>. “They go 
from being picked up in cannabis farms to a young offenders institute and then 
deported to Vietnam, without anyone doing anything about the fact they have 
been trafficked.”

Failure to identify victims of trafficking can lead to people who have been 
exploited for profit in the UK being sent back to Vietnam, still in debt 
bondage and often with psychological and medical conditions, where they can be 
re-trafficked back to the UK.

Ahmed Aydeed, from law firm Duncan Lewis, said some of his clients have been 
trafficked to the UK multiple times, with devastating consequences. “I’m 
overwhelmed by the scale and horror of the problem,” he said. “Our system is 
failing victims and potential victims of trafficking by not identifying and 
assisting them early enough.”

Aydeed said one of his clients, a young woman, was trafficked to the UK and 
found working in a nail bar before being deported as an illegal worker in 2012. 
According to her lawyers, “there were clear indicators that she had been 
trafficked, which were not explored”.

She was re-trafficked to the UK the following year. She said she was raped and 
forced to work in brothel in the UK. She only escaped when she miscarried. She 
was held in a detention centre for 16 months before lawyers from Duncan Lewis 
heard of her case. She had not been assessed as a trafficking victim despite 
telling the authorities she had been forced to work in a nail bar and a brothel 
where she was repeatedly raped. She also had scarring across her body 
consistent with torture.

“I have seen a lot of women being raped and sold as sex slaves,” she said. “We 
left Vietnam with the promise that we could find work and make a lot of money. 
We didn’t know we would have to have sex with anyone … If I was ever sent back 
to Vietnam [again] … I’d rather die here.”

Her lawyers are fighting for her to be recognised as a victim of trafficking 
as the Home Office moves to deport her to Vietnam for a second time.

In Vietnam there is no official support or provision for those who have been 
deported there as criminals or illegal workers instead of as victims of 
trafficking. The UK government does offer financial support for people 
identified as having been trafficked, who are returned, but provision is patchy 
and underfunded.

There are no shelters or other provisions for returning male trafficking 
victims, notable given that more than two-thirds of Vietnamese trafficking 
referrals in the UK are male.

A micro-credit scheme for trafficking survivors run by the UK government was 
stopped in 2014.

Mimi Vu, from Vietnamese anti-trafficking NGO Pacific Links 
<http://www.pacificlinks.org/>, said a lack of reintegration services for 
returning survivors could mean “they get lured back into the trade, become 
victimised or start victimising others. According to Vietnam’s ministry for 
public security, about 60% of all traffickers arrested are former victims 
themselves. This is a vicious cycle.”
 