
Britain played a key behind-the-scenes role in brokering the UN resolution 
condemning Israel for violating international law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/us-abstention-allows-un-to-demand-end-to-israeli-settlements>
 with its policy of building settlements on occupied Palestinian territory, it 
has been confirmed. The UK helped draft some of the key wording to ensure it 
met US concerns.

The UK role, first highlighted by Israeli diplomatic sources, leaves the UK on 
a collision course not just with Israel, but at odds with Donald Trump, the US 
president-elect and a strong opponent of the UN resolution, the first to be 
passed that is critical ofIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> for 
seven years.

The UK has never hidden its support for the UN resolution, voting for its 
terms, and subsequently both UK ministers and diplomats have publicly justified 
its wording. It is also usual for the UK to play a key brokering role on UN 
resolutions, especially on the Middle East.

It has been confirmed the UK helped with drafts of the resolution with Egypt 
and the Palestinians in a bid to ensure that it met with the concerns of the US 
president, Barack Obama. The US said it did not veto the resolution because it 
was balanced, condemning violence and incitement, as well as illegal 
settlements. The US has insisted it did not draft the text, and did not even 
tell other delegations how it intended to vote in the key consultations process.

Formally the Foreign Office did not deny it had been involved in the drafting 
process. It stressed “the resolution was proposed and drafted by the Egyptian 
delegation”, adding that the UK, as one of the five permanent members of the 
security council, “engaged with” the text “as we do with all security council 
texts”.


Israel claims the UK’s diplomatic activity in New York, conducted in liaison 
with the French and the US, took place behind its back. It is dubious that the 
US played a hands-off role.

Israel’s ambassador to the US, Ron Dermer, speaking to the US media this week, 
said: “This is not a text that was formulated by the Palestinians or Egypt, but 
by a western power.” It was not clear if this was a reference to the US or the 
UK.

In particular the UK is thought to have played a major role in mediating 
between the Palestinians and the Americans to ensure the text eventually put 
forward by New Zealand, and not Egypt, met the concerns of both sides.

The UK in conjunction with Gulf states said the resolution should go ahead 
even when Egypt decided not to sponsor it.

A last-minute glitch came up when Russia’s ambassador to the United Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations>, Vitaly Churkin, proposed 
postponing the vote until after Christmas, according to an interview the deputy 
Russian ambassador to Israel gave on Israel Army Radio. This reportedly 
followed a phone call between the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, 
and the Russian president, Vladi­mir Putin. The other security council 
ambassadors refused to wait, however.

The UK Foreign Office minister Tobias Ellwood welcomed the UN resolution on 
Twitter, and the UK ambassador to the UN, Matthew Rycroft, also highlighted the 
UK support for the resolution.

The British foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, has not so far issued any public 
statement either way, but it is not claimed this is significant.

The UK support for the UN resolution has already led to reports that a 
tentatively planned meeting between Theresa May, and Netanyahu scheduled for 
Davos international summit this monthhas been cancelled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/26/netanyahu-snubs-may-over-un-settlements-vote-israeli-media-says>
.

The UK role has divided opinion inside the Conservative party. Conservative 
Friends of Israel’s parliamentary chairman, Sir Eric Pickles, said: “CFI is 
disappointed by the UK’s decision to support the controversial UN security 
council resolution, which legitimises the Palestinian Authority’s attempts to 
internationalise the issue and avoid the necessary direct peace talks.

“In addition, the resolution will embolden the hardline BDS movement and the 
ramifications for Jerusalem and Judaism’s holiest site – the Western Wall – are 
seriously troubling.”

By contrast the Conservative Middle East council said the resolution affirmed 
the “establishment by Israel of settlements in the Palestinian territory 
occupied since 1967, including east Jerusalem, has no legal validity and 
constitutes a flagrant violation under international law and a major obstacle 
to the achievement of the two-state solution”.

The UK is also backing the French-hosted Middle East conference on 15 January, 
where more than 70 countries may endorse an international framework, including 
a two-state solution for peace between Israel and the Palestinians. Israel has 
long vowed not to attend, with the Israeli defence minister, Avigdor Lieberman, 
comparing the summit to “a modern version of the Dreyfus trial” at a meeting of 
his party’s deputies.

Israel says it will only hold bilateral talks with the Palestinians.
 