
The UN peacekeeping mission in South Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> failed to protect hundreds of 
civilians from death or rape because of a risk-averse culture and chaotic 
leadership, according to an independent report.


In Maj Gen Patrick Cammaert’s damning assessment, Unmiss – the UN mission in 
South Sudan – did not respond effectively to three days of intense fighting in 
Juba in July that contributed to the collapse of a fragile ceasefire between 
the president, Salva Kiir, and his former deputy Riek Machar.

Violence, fear and looting grip South Sudan's capital Juba
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/19/south-sudan-violence-fear-looting-juba>
Cammaert, a former military adviser to the UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, 
cites an overall lack of leadership, preparedness and integration within 
Unmiss, judging the command and control arrangements inadequate and citing a 
risk-averse culture among UN peacekeepers.

His report concludes that the standoff between Kiir and Machar “brought 
unrestrained violence to the capital of the world’s youngest nation and the 
participating fighters left a trail of destruction and suffering in their wake”.

A total of 73 people were killed in the violence, including 20 people who were 
under UN protection, the report says. Two UN peacekeepers were also killed and 
several more injured.

During an attack by government troops on a refugee camp just one kilometre 
from the Juba headquarters of Unmiss, “civilians were subjected to and 
witnessed gross human rights violations, including murder, intimidation, sexual 
violence and acts amounting to torture perpetrated by armed government 
soldiers”, the report says.

“Multiple requests were made to to stand up a quick reaction force to respond 
but each UN mission contingent turned down the request, indicating their troops 
were fully committed,” Cammaert writes.

The report also finds that Unmiss peacekeepers “did not operate under a 
unified command, resulting in multiple and sometimes conflicting orders to the 
four troop contingents from China, Ethiopia, Nepal and India, and ultimately 
underusing the more than 1,800 infantry troops at [headquarters]”.

At the height of the crisis in Juba, indiscriminate attacks on displaced 
people were carried out inside UN camps, and in other densely populated areas 
of the capital. Most of the crimes are believed to have been committed by 
government soldiers from the Sudan People’s Liberation Army.

UN peacekeepers refused to help as aid workers were raped in South Sudan – 
report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/06/un-peacekeepers-refused-to-help-south-sudan-rebels-raped-aid-workers-report>
The report finds that Unmiss troops did not sufficiently protect female 
humanitarian workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/06/un-peacekeepers-refused-to-help-south-sudan-rebels-raped-aid-workers-report>
 who were raped by government troops, nor did this violence prompt any response 
from UN troops.

More than two months after the crisis, the report says, Unmiss still does not 
conduct regular foot patrols, standing patrols or patrols outside its perimeter 
at night. “When the mission does conduct patrols, its soldiers peer out from 
the tiny windows of armoured personnel carriers, an approach ill-suited to 
detecting perpetrators of sexual violence and engaging with communities to 
provide a sense of security.”

Ban said he was alarmed by the report and outraged by the killings, but added 
that Unmiss had helped save several hundred thousand lives during its 
three-year mission.
 