
A tentative ceasefire is holding in most parts of Syria as the truce’s main 
backer, Russia, pushes for aUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> resolution, which it says 
would start a political process that could quickly take the steam out of six 
years of war.

As the most destructive year of the conflict drew to a close, Moscow and 
Ankara were moving frantically to secure the deal, which each side claimed 
offers the best hope yet of an end to a war that has had few boundaries and no 
apparent endpoint.

The UN security council welcomed the deal and plans for fresh peace talks but 
the resolution comes against a backdrop of deadlock among members supporting 
different approaches.

Even as the bilateral push intensified, opposition groups warned that texts of 
agreements to be put to the UN this weekend failed to enshrine a key element of 
their cause – a political transition away from Syrian leaderBashar al-Assad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad> towards a new governing 
body that would rebuild the country and reshape its body politic.

The demand was central to previous US and UN-led initiatives and senior 
opposition leaders said they would consider the ceasefire deal null and void 
unless it was honoured. The standoff marks a moment of reckoning for Russia and
Turkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> which, after earlier pursuing 
competing visions for postwar Syria, have in the past six months found much 
common ground and, along with Iran, are rapidly carving out spheres of 
influence across the once sovereign state.

Turkey, a backer of mainstream and Islamist groups, has moved away from its 
earlier insistence that Assad be defeated militarily, but remains adamant that 
he be removed in a political process. Russia, meanwhile, has hedged, insisting 
repeatedly to opposition negotiators that it is not wedded to the embattled 
president, but refusing to commit to a transition.

The bilateral push has come when the anti-Assad opposition is at its weakest 
point in the war. Having been bombed out of Aleppo and steadily abandoned by 
its regional backers, six of the seven main armed groups have signed on to the 
peace initiative, after receiving assurances that aid will start to flow to 
besieged areas if it continues to hold.

“What could we do?” asked a senior member of Jaysh al-Islam, one of the 
signatories to the truce. “Our backers [Saudi Arabia] have been nowhere to be 
seen all year. There’s no one from the Gulf here at all.” Qatar, a prominent 
backer of the opposition and ally of Turkey, has sharply scaled back its 
support in the past six months. Diplomatic sources confirmed to theObserver 
that the reduced backing is partly due to a threat from senior Russian 
officials. “That happened in around August,” said one senior regional official. 
“But the other reason they withdrew was they did not want to be associated with 
a losing cause.”

While things have fallen into line for Russia and Turkey, not all stakeholders 
in the crisis are satisfied.Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>, 
which is not a driver of the ceasefire plan, but is a pivotal player in Syria’s 
short-term future, remains implacably opposed to Assad’s exit. Along with 
Russia, it has invested blood and treasure in stabilising him and safeguarding 
the remaining pillars of regime influence. However, now that battlefield wins 
have effectively ensured Assad cannot lose, very divergent views are emerging 
about what comes next.

“The Russian and Iranian views on Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> are diametrically opposed, but the 
west is not capitalising on that,” said one senior opposition member. “The 
Iranian model is weak government, geographical areas of complete control by 
pro-Iranian forces that would guarantee a territorial passage from Iraq to 
Lebanon. There will be forced migration and cleansing.

“The Russians on the other hand want a unified Syria, a strong centralised 
government and their own interests, specifically their military bases and 
contracts, being secured. The regime is now divided into pro-Russia and 
pro-Iran elements, with Assad being closer to Iran.”

Though Assad casts himself as a battle-hardened leader who has prevailed over 
his foes, officials in Iran, Russia and Turkey are privately scathing about 
him, his military and the country’s political leadership. Far from presiding 
over a secure, sovereign state, the Syrian leader has little leverage over what 
happens next.

Turkey, which had pushed for a no-fly zone near its border for much of the 
war, has spent the past five months building a zone of influence inside Syria, 
within a 60-mile gap between the towns of Irfin and Jarabulus.

Ankara has used Syrian rebels as shock troops in a push against the Islamic 
State terror group which retains a presence in the area, and has backed them 
extensively with its own tanks and elite forces. However, even more pressing 
for the Turkish leadership than Isis is the presence of Kurdish groups that 
have used the chaos of war to move into the area and, in doing so, threatened 
to create a Kurdish presence along Turkey’s entire perimeter with Syria.

The Turkish incursion was made with Russian political cover and has served the 
dual purpose of thwarting Kurdish ambitions and curbing Isis. It has carved out 
a zone of influence which, in Turkish officials’ minds, limits the ability of 
Syria’s restive Kurds to link up with the outlawed Kurdish organisation PKK in 
southeastern Turkey, which Ankara continues to fight.

Iran too has a significant stake. Having led the ground fight for Aleppo, it 
aims to secure a foothold in eastern Syria, which it will reinforce with 
demographic shifts of Shias for Sunnis, and build through a corridor under its 
control, from Tehran to the Mediterranean.

Iran has long viewed Damascus as an essential pillar of its regional 
ambitions, vis-a-vis Hezbollah, whose presence in southern Lebanon menaces 
Israel and whose role in Syria helped lead Iran and Assad to the point of 
victory. However, establishing strategic depth, stretching through Iraq, where 
Iran also has a whip hand, consolidates a regional influence nearly 38 years in 
the making.

Amid the heft of historical ambitions being realised, and the first tangible 
diplomatic momentum of the war, there is now a sense that things are shifting 
in Syria. An all but vanquished opposition said it would again pick up arms if 
its demands were not met at the United Nations security council and if regime 
helicopters and Hezbollah did not honour the ceasefire. However, the groups 
have less leverage than when their backing remained robust, and before Russia’s 
15-month military blitz.

“There has been huge pressure to sign [the ceasefire deal],” said a senior 
member of Ahrar al-Sham. “They gave us 48 hours. There are two documents, one 
signed by the armed groups and the other by Turkey and Russia as a guarantor. 
They gave the regime the same set of documents and they returned them with 12 
changes, two of them striking, the most important of which was not to include 
Geneva 1 as a framework for a solution.

“Geneva 1 dictates that there should be a governing body with full authority 
of the president, according to the Syrian constitution. It makes the future of 
the president very clear. By ignoring that you are ignoring the fact that there 
is a need for a real political transition.”

Russia in particular has been determined to cast itself as a peacemaker in 
Syria, after a protracted role as a bludgeoning power. Its diplomatic push has 
sidelined UN-led negotiations, and the US.

Three weeks before the inauguration of Donald Trump, Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> is close to realising a goal 
of bringing relative stability to one of the most intractable conflicts of 
modern times, after helping ensure all other attempts failed. If it works, it 
will be largely on his terms, giving Russia a stake in the rest of the Middle 
East for the first time since the end of the Soviet Union.
 