
A senior Victorian minister his come under fire for using his parliamentary 
car to chauffeur his pet dogs to his holiday house in the countryside.

The corrections minister, Steve Herbert, had his driver transport the dogs – 
named Ted and Patch – in his parliamentary car from Melbourne to the house in 
Trentham, 97km north-west of Melbourne. Herbert was not in the car while the 
Jack Russell terriers were transported.

Herbert issued an apology on Wednesday night, saying, “on reflection, this use 
of the ministerial car does not meet community expectations and I apologise”. 
He did not clarify how many times he had ordered his driver to escort the dogs 
to Trentham, a historical town located on the Great Dividing Range and 
described by TourismVictoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> as “punching well above 
its weight in the eating and drinking stakes”.

The premier, Daniel Andrews, told ABC radio on Thursday morning that he would 
not be sacking Herbert, although he conceded the minister had made “an error in 
judgment”.

“He’s apologised,” Andrews said.

“That’s the right thing to do. This doesn’t meet community expectations.”

Liberal MP Steve Irons repays travel claim for flights to his own wedding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/26/liberal-mp-steve-irons-repays-travel-claim-for-flights-to-his-own-wedding>
He said he was yet to speak to Herbert about the incident but said he would be 
doing so after he returned from Brisbane, where he is attending the Coag 
domestic violence summit.

The opposition leader in the upper house, Mary Wooldridge, said the situation 
reflected a “law and order crisis in Victoria”.


“The one thing Victorians don’t want in a minister for corrections is someone 
who makes errors of judgment,” she said.

“Victorians should also be concerned by reports that Daniel Andrews has not 
yet spoken to his minister.”

She was echoed by the opposition leader, Matthew Guy, who called on Herbert to 
be sacked.

“This minister should go,” Guy told reporters on Thursday. 

“This minister has been caught rorting the system.”

Victorian MP and leader of the Australian Sex party, Fiona Patten, said 
Herbert should repay all taxpayer dollars spent on chauffeuring Ted and Patch 
around.

“Seriously, who would ever think it was OK to have your pets chauffeur-driven 
at taxpayer expense?” she said.

“I work closely with minister Herbert, and I know he is a good man, but you 
have to say that this dog debacle shows a serious lapse of judgment.”

However, she did not believe he should resign. 

“The minister should pay back any funds that were used in these dodgy doggy 
misadventures and apologise to the Victorian public,” she said.

“But this government doesn’t have the depth in its ranks in the upper house to 
replace an experienced minister like Mr Herbert – talent is a bit thin on the 
ground right now.”
 