
New York fashion week is a tempestuous place to be: it is at the mercy of 
tyrannical celebrity egos, as evidenced byKanye West’s two-hour catwalk 
spectacle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/08/kanye-wests-yeezy-show-fake-malia-obama-and-terra-firma-bodycon>
, which saw a model faint in the heat. And it has undergone a rapid shift from 
being an insider’s world of seating plans and civilised four-month lead times 
into being a consumer-facing Disneyworld of clothes which are on sale as well 
as on show, in full-sized funfairs (Tommy Hilfiger) and pop-up sweet stores 
(Alexander Wang).


Meanwhile, brands less brave or brazen continue to stage traditional catwalk 
shows to polite but dwindling audiences, ploughing on like the band on the 
Titanic.

Victoria Beckham <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/victoria-beckham> is one 
of the select few brands successfully steering a level course through this 
storm. The status of the Beckham show as one of the established must-sees on 
the fashion week schedule is quite a turn-up for the books, when you consider 
the scepticism with which the former pop star’s fashion career was initially 
greeted, but that is the fickleness of fashion for you.

 A mint-green, crushed velvet dress from the Victoria Beckham show. 
Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
With her collection for spring, Beckham once again showed a deft touch in 
putting a palatable, glossy spin on styles which have been hovering at the more 
intimidating edges of fashion. Right now, fashion’s cutting edge is all about 
oversized, louchely loose clothes, and this collection was a prettily coloured 
take on the unstructured, dressed-down silhouette. Asymmetrically panelled 
skirts and loose, low-slung trousers were balanced by pretty botanical prints 
and flashes of skin at the ribs and spine. A crushed-velvet dress in peppermint 
green was an instant standout. Flat boots underlined the cool, unfussy tone.

The breadth of appeal of the Victoria Beckham brand was clearly evident on her 
front row. There are not many catwalk shows which attract high-profile 
millennials and their parents, but David Beckham and Anna Wintour were flanked 
by their children, 17-year-old Brooklyn Beckham and 29-year-old Bee Shaffer. 
The Beckham brand bridges the fashion divide, underpinned both by a very modern 
social media power base –Brooklyn’s Instagram video of the above-mentioned mint 
green dress 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BKOGHJxBNho/?taken-by=brooklynbeckham&hl=en> had 
been watched 250,000 times within an hour of the show – and by a rather 
old-fashioned work ethic and sense of propriety.
 Brooklyn and David Beckham, Anna Wintour and Bee Shaffer at the show. 
Photograph: Trevor Collens/AFP/Getty Images 
“It’s a free spirited look – but not in a bohemian way, if you know what I 
mean. It’s about clothes that are loose and easy, but still flattering,” 
Beckham said. The relaxed structures of the clothes put the fabrics in the 
spotlight, and her team “worked hard to take traditional fabrics and evolve 
them in new ways. Like taking velvet and washing it and pleating it, so that 
you come up with something fresh,” she said.

Key to the Victoria Beckham appeal is how it combines new-season fashion with 
old-fashioned vanity, in a marketplace where many brands require you to choose 
one or the other. The look has evolved from the dresses of early seasons, but 
“my silhouette is always very flattering. That is a signature for me. But loose 
and easy can be flattering,” Beckham said.

 The Victoria Beckham show. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
Well aware that her own outfit will be as scrutinised as any of her models’, 
she underscored this message by taking her bow in loose-fitting trousers and 
flat shoes. “I have always tried to focus attention at the show on the 
collection,” said Beckham the day before the show. “That’s why other than David 
and the kids I have never had celebrities at the show. I want the focus to be 
on the product.”


The show began on a sombre note. In Lower Manhattan on the 15th anniversary of 
the September 11 attacks, the run-up to the show coincided with the minutes of 
silence marking the times at which the two towers fell. At the show, American 
Vogue’s Wintour and Grace Coddington, along with David Beckham, took the lead 
in standing to observe the silences.
 