
There’s something disturbing about seeing an old and much-beloved videogame 
character in a new redesign. Like seeing the movie version of a book you loved, 
it reveals how much of the character you had imagined, and how other people’s 
vision of them was very different.

My version of Guybrush Threepwood, will always be the cheerful pixelated chap 
inMonkey Island 2, with a toothy grin, cheery demeanour, pirate coat and messy 
hair. That’s all I ever needed to know. I didn’t want to wonder whether he was 
attractive or not, whether he was stubbly or shaven, or what colour his eyes 
were. I didn’t even like it when the pixelated cutscenes showed him in higher 
resolution. But videogame art becomes more sophisticated every year, and – just 
like TV viewers having to deal with the first colour TV, and then 
high-definition – we can’t leave as much to the imagination any more. It’s a 
shame in a way that we think of this as “progress”. Sure, it’s nice to see a 
recreation of renaissance Florence in high-resolution detail inAssassin’s Creed
. But, as Scott McCloud notes in his bookUnderstanding Comics, simpler cartoon 
imagery can be more universal: “The more cartoony a face … the more people it 
could be said to describe.”

 This means that more high-resolution characters are likely to be more 
alienating. Once Guybrush had stubble, a lantern jaw and a recognisably male 
silhouette, it was more obvious he wasn’t meant to be me. And videogames, more 
than any other medium, rely on the identification between player and the 
character you’re playing on screen, so the disconnect is even more disturbing 
than in a movie or novel. It might be partly for this reason that games are 
increasingly allowing players to design their own characters. After all, if the 
hero of the game you’re playing is you, there’s nothing more troubling than 
looking into the screen and not recognising your own face. So perhaps the 
ultimate conclusion of these high-def characters will be that I can be all of 
them: Naomi Threepwood, Naomi of Persia, Naomio the Plumber. Now there’s a 
thought to give you nightmares.
 