
The impact of the Olympic Games on the lives of residents of the 16 favelas of 
the Maré complex has passed, but it has left its mark. The same goes for those 
who visited the city of Rio de Janeiro and came across shocking everyday scenes 
that are hard to forget. The past few months have flown by and little by little 
things are falling back into place – the TV programmes, the traffic and the 
city spaces have returned to normal, after we were forced to look at the false 
“marvellous city” that was being sold to the rest of the world. I saw this as a 
process of change – but one of deterioration instead of the growth we were 
promised. Like a mask for the rest of the world to see. What the Games brought 
to the city in concrete terms mainly involves public transport and security. 
After all, if a government wants to be remembered, it’s smarter to build new 
things instead of developing what already exists.

Related: Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – ‘The segregation of Rio is 
notorious’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/12/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-the-segregation-of-rio-de-janeiro-is-notorious>

In Maré, the main changes have been in early education. Without any dialogue 
with residents, the city government launched the Schools of Tomorrow project, 
with 18 planned school units for full-time education. So far, only one unit is 
functioning, the Municipal School of Nova Holanda. The idea of the new project 
is to integrate children by increasing their time at school (also helping 
parents who work all day), and by offering new technologies, such as computers, 
in the classroom, which we don’t have in other municipal schools. The space 
also has recreational and sports areas, chessboards and pingpong tables. I have 
young neighbours who already go to this school and they told me that the water 
tastes bad, as does some of the food. In spite of this, the school – its 
windows already have bullet holes – is attracting families and promises to be 
the new model for municipal schools nationwide.

The Avenida Brasil expressway runs right past Maré, and here the authorities 
had an Olympic incentive for investing to keep the city moving – it has some of 
the worst congestion problems in the world. During the Olympics, construction 
of the TransBrasil BRT, an express lane for buses, was suspended, with the 
promise of starting again in September. Until now, nothing has happened. 
Promises to invest in transport such as the BRT – which has already been 
implemented in other parts of the city – never seem to get very far. The buses 
remain overcrowded, fares continue to rise and traffic doesn’t get any better.

We did have a necessary and symbolic victory in politics, in the 2016 
elections. For the first time, a resident of Maré was elected to the position 
of city councillor. Marielle Franco is a black woman from the margins, a 
sociologist with a master’s degree in public administration, and ranked fifth 
in number of votes in Rio de Janeiro.

Related: Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – 'Overpriced public works leave 
a bitter taste' | Michel Silva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/02/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-rocinha-overpriced-public-works-leave-a-bitter-taste>

It’s hard enough for black women to graduate from university here in Rio, but 
even more difficult to see them getting ahead in politics. What Franco 
represents is empowering for many women and poor people. Many voted for better 
known politicians, but young activists here in Maré participated directly in 
her campaign, and voted for her. This is the hope we still hold dear: that 
every person from favelas is seen for their potential, as a part of this city. 
We deserve to have representatives in power who have lived our reality.

After a tranquil October, November brought a return of the usual events that 
are part of our daily lives. We experienced fear, insecurity, and sadness. A 
lot of gunfire. I was left without an internet and telephone connection. I 
didn’t leave the house for several days. Police operations, people dead, people 
shot. After that came the calm.


What has surprised me most in 2016 is that people continue to search for ways 
to push through the crises – and the mega-events that partly triggered them. 
The protests, cultural interventions, occupations, online petitions and debates 
on the streets show that the voice of the people is one weapon that doesn’t 
kill. As the band O Rappa sings, “Peace without voice isn’t peace, it’s fear.”
 