
After riding the time trial of his life en route from Xàbia to Calp in 
south-east Spain, Chris Froome goes into Saturday’s penultimate mountain stage 
in theVuelta a España <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/vuelta-a-espana> with 
an outside chance of becoming the first British rider to take the three-week 
Spanish Tour.

Magnus Cort Nielsen takes late win in stage 18 of Vuelta a España
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/08/magnus-cort-nielsen-vuelta-a-espana-chris-froome>
The triple Tour de France winner started the 37.5km stage seemingly out of the 
picture at 3min 37sec behind the race leader, Nairo Quintana, but he regained 
more than 2min to leave himself just 1min 21sec behind the Colombian.

“This is the last race of my season so I’m really happy to be in good 
condition,” said Froome, who will miss next month’s world road race 
championships in Qatar. “For sure, you don’t enjoy a time trial but I get a lot 
of satisfaction when you hear you’re the fastest. That’s why you race. There’s 
one day of tough racing tomorrow.

“Quintana still has more than a minute but we’re going to keep fighting,” 
added the Team Sky leader, who has the possibility of joining Jacques Anquetil 
and Bernard Hinault, the only two cyclists to win the Tour and Vuelta in the 
same season. I’ll speak to my team-mates tonight and let’s see what happens. 
With Movistar Nairo has a strong team – it’s really going to be difficult to 
beat him.”

Froome’s sparkling time trial gave him reason to believe he might improve on 
his second places in 2011 and 2014 after he regained most of the 2min 37sec 
which he lost to Quintana during last Sunday’sbrief, intense mountain stage to 
Formigal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/04/vuelta-a-espana-nairo-quintana-extends-lead-over-chris-froome-after-stage-15>
, where the Colombian and Alberto Contador caught him and Team Sky napping at 
the start of the 118km.

The time trial, run in hot, humid weather along Mediterranean coastal roads 
between the two tourist resorts, suited theRio Olympic bronze medallist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/10/fabian-cancellara-rio-2016-olympic-time-trial-cycling-gold-chris-froome>
, including a lengthy drag uphill for some 6km in the first half and an 
undulating descent calling for constant changes of rhythm.

Froome had finished well ahead of Quintana in the time trial stages in this 
year’s Tour de France, and started by far the fastest, clawing back 46sec on 
the Colombian in the opening 12.5km. After 24km, the Kenyan-born Briton was 
1min 32sec ahead of Quintana, who eventually finished 11th on the stage. 
Meanwhile Quintana’s compatriot Esteban Chaves lost his third place overall to 
Contador.

“I rode a good time trial but Froome rode a much better one,” said Quintana. 
“The question now is what we all have in our legs for the stage tomorrow, which 
will be a very important day. I lost a bit more time than I expected, because 
Froome was just flying. I wondered if I might lose over three minutes, but the 
margin should be enough to get me to Madrid.”

The race finishes on Sunday in the Spanish capital, but on Saturday the last 
mountain stage covers 193km, with four categorised climbs before hitting the 
Alto de Aitana ascent, the last of the 10 summit finishes that have made this 
race one of the toughest ever, prompting complaints from some riders that it is 
too tough.

The Aitana, in the mountain massif inland from Benidorm, is relatively long, 
at 22km, to a summit 1500m above sea-level, with its toughest sections coming 
in the final 5km.

Apart from at Formigal, Quintana has consistently had the better of the 
mountain exchanges with Froome over the last three weeks, albeit never by a 
decisive margin, and while he should have the edge, the momentum is suddenly 
with the Briton.
 