
The race to re-imagine and spin off the most watched and possibly most beloved 
film in Hollywood history began in secrecy and with a codeword: Brick.

The Walt Disney Company <https://www.theguardian.com/film/walt-disney-company> 
did not own rights to the original 1939 The Wizard of Oz movie but moved 
stealthily to mount an audacious raid on the story and leave a rival studio 
flat-footed.

The result, Oz the Great and Powerful, has dominated the box office since its 
release last week, garnering over $80m domestically and $70m abroad, the 
third-biggest March opening ever, and prompting buzz about a sequel, a theme 
park ride and merchandising.

Warner Bros, which owns the rights to the MGM-made original, had mulled three 
big screen spin-offs but dozed while Disney tip-toed into production with 
director Sam Raimi and actorJames Franco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/james-franco>, conjuring up a new franchise.

"I don't know if they're laughing in the offices of Disney that they got away 
with it but I can certainly imagine that they're pretty pleased," said Matt 
Patches, movies editor at the Hollywood.com news site.

In the early stages Disney swore writers and producers to secrecy and used a 
codename lest their 3D project galvanise rival Oz productions. Hollywood's 
habit of bunching similar-themed movies together – for instance Robin Hood, 
Snow White, Truman Capote – can hurt revenue, especially for latecomers.

"To have a codename is very unusual. It was an indication of just how big a 
deal this was for Disney and how scared they were that someone would beat them 
out of the gate. I could feel the anxiety inside Disney,"said Stephen Galloway, 
of The Hollywood Reporter. 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/oz-great-powerful-disneys-200-424526>
"It's a strange phenomenon where two or three people can have the same idea at 
the same time and it clicks."

Once Warner Bros <https://www.theguardian.com/film/warner-bros> learned of the 
$235m production, its lawyers banned Disney borrowing from the 1939 musical in 
which Judy Garland playing Dorothy skips down the yellow brick road with a tin 
man, a lion and a scarecrow in search of the wizard Oz – the most watched 
picture in history according to the Library of Congress.

Disney's version, drawn on Frank Baum's original books, is a prequel in which 
Franco plays a young Oz swept in a balloon into the magic realm 20 years 
earlier. There is no Dorothy or ruby slippers. "They treaded very carefully. 
They knew if they leaned too closely they could be in trouble with lawsuits so 
they tinkered with costumes, make-up and other details," said Patches.

The result has been the biggest domestic film debut of 2013, crushing the 
likes of Dead Man Down, a Colin Farrell thriller, and Jack the Giant Slayer, a 
big budget disaster for Warner Bros.

Disney, which did not respond to interview requests, was in dire need of a hit 
following its own big budget fiasco, John Carter, last year. It has talked up 
plans for an Oz theme park attraction and sequel starring Franco and Mila 
Kunis, Michelle Wiliams andRachel Weisz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/rachel-weisz> as witches.

Just as Oz himself proves more charlatan than sorcerer, however, some question 
the reality of Disney's apparent magic.

The film has been panned by many critics. Some have accused Franco of a wooden 
performance, others have accused Raimi of producing a stilted story. Raimi had 
approached Robert Downey Jr and Johnny Depp for the title role before turning 
to Franco.

Before its release there were reports of studio-mandated reshoots to make 
Franco's character more sympathetic and to expand the dialogue of a talking 
monkey.

Audiences have been kinder than critics, giving the film a B+ CinemaScore, but 
Galloway said box office returns so far were not enough given the film's epic 
price tag.

"They haven't quite got away with it financially. This has not been a gigantic 
hit in relation to its cost." Foreign takings usually needed to outperform US 
box office for this type of blockbuster's profitability but so far Europeans 
and Asians had proved less keen than Americans, possibly because it was such an 
American story, said Galloway.

He suggested that talk of a sequel and theme park ride could be bluster. 
"Don't be taken in by the spin."

Warner Bros, though not quite swooping in on a broomstick, may have the last 
cackle. In partnership with Warner Bros, toymaker Mattel is expected to offer 
an extensive range of Oz-themed merchandise. "The way I see it they'll be able 
to piggyback on the success of Disney's movie," said Lutz Muller, chief 
executive of Klosters Trading Corps, a consumer products consultancy.

In contrast Disney was unable to sell products linked to the original movie 
and stuck with a toy partner, Jakks, which had less retail reach than Mattel. 
"I understand that Disney is not expecting much from its Jakks tie-in," said 
Muller.

Warner Bros has abandoned big screen Oz ambitions for now but is reportedly 
touting a Game of Thrones-style TV treatment 
<http://www.examiner.com/article/warner-bros-hopes-that-you-ll-follow-the-red-brick-road>
 with intrigue, politics and violence called Red Brick Road, based on the path 
that Dorothy does not take in the original film.
 