
A few days before Christmas, in the full light of an Australian summer, the 
Australian tax commissionerpublished the tax details of 1,500 large corporate 
taxpayers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/17/ato-report-shows-nearly-600-big-companies-paid-no-tax-in-2013-14>
 which showed a staggering one-third of these companies paid no tax in 2014.

This transparency measure was part of a wider package of ground-breaking 
legislation passed by the Labor government in 2013 aimed at exposing rampant 
corporate tax minimisation and evasion.

Do you pay more tax than Australia's biggest companies?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/ng-interactive/2015/dec/18/do-you-pay-more-tax-than-australias-biggest-companies>
Some 125 years prior, in 1888, British historian James Bryce said, “sunlight 
kills many of those noxious germs which are hatched where politicians 
congregate.” This sentiment was later distilled by US Supreme Court Justice 
Louis Brandeis who noted that “sunlight is said to be the best of 
disinfectants”. So it ought to prove with the release of the tax details of 
these 1,500 companies.

The UN and OECD estimate that globally the cost of multinational tax evasion 
and avoidance amounts to as much as US$240bn annually. The figure seems 
conservative, considering the wide range of evidence emerging from developed 
economies like Australia.

The Australian data gives a sense of the scale of multinational tax avoidance 
in a large developed economy; in 2013, nearly half of all foreign companies 
with total revenues of A$21.2bn paid zero tax.

The release of this data follows six months of public debate sparked by a 
parliamentary investigation on corporate tax avoidance. Two of Australia’s 
largest global mining companies, BHP Billiton and Rio Tinto, were exposed for 
aggressive transfer pricing activities costing the public billions of dollars 
in revenue. When global companies seemingly as respected and large as these 
operate in this cavalier way, it compromises the integrity of the social 
contract and green lights others to follow in their tax avoiding footsteps.

Across the Pacific a similar debate has been rumbling in the United States. It 
was triggered again in late November when Pfizer announced plans to escape its 
United States tax obligations by merging with Irish company Allergan and 
shifting its headquarters to Ireland, which has a significantly lower tax rate.

It is very clear from international evidence gathered through the OECD’s Base 
Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS) process that some foreign-owned companies, 
in the words of the Australian tax commissioner, are “overly aggressive in the 
way they structure their operations”.

As Gabriel Zucman noted in The Hidden Wealth of Nations: The Scourge of Tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tax-australia> Havens:

55% of all the foreign profits of US firms are now kept in tax havens ... its 
cost is enormous – $130 billion a year for US firms alone.

The scale of this lost revenue has been known for some time and this is why 
the London G20 summit in 2009 launched an assault on tax havens, declaring “the 
end of banking secrecy”. Since that time, as Zucman laments, the amount of 
money held in tax havens has actually increased by 25%.

A progressive tax system for corporates and individuals is central to the 
capacity of nations to fund their own growth. It is one of a number of 
structural reforms required to lift living standards across the developed and 
developing world. Rampant tax evasion torpedoes this central platform of 
inclusive growth and is now a structural cause of growing global inequality.

The implementation of a progressive tax system means challenging power elites.

Unless there is concerted global action to protect the revenue bases of both 
developed and developing economies, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
developed by the United Nations are unachievable. There is going to be a long 
and difficult road for the UN to travel between its current SDG aspirations and 
implementation of practical policy over the next 15 years. It will require 
strong and committed governments with credible fiscal and monetary policies and 
the political willpower to take on some of the largest multinational companies. 

The BEPS process is an important part of the response as are the 
recommendations of the International Commission on Corporate Tax Reform chaired 
by José Antonio Ocampo. But neither of these are enough to deal with the 
lobbying power of the large corporates intent on maintaining the status quo.

In solving this problem, political leaders should never underestimate the 
power wielded by those who are the economic beneficiaries of 
politically-inspired inequality. Some plain speaking is required; starting with 
the obvious point that tax avoidance or evasion on such a grand scale 
impoverishes us all. When companies fail to pay their fair share of tax, 
revenue must be found elsewhere – from other businesses or individual 
taxpayers. The billions of dollars extracted are forever lost to health or 
education or infrastructure investment that improves the lives of people across 
the community, but is also vital for productivity growth and so ultimately 
supports the bottom line for businesses.

There must be a debate about the ethics of this behaviour. As many prominent 
business leaders have said to me, there is a stark contrast between the esteem 
in which the boards of these participating companies expect to be held and 
their actual behaviour. The reputations of the boards who have approved these 
practices and those who have provided advice should be on the line. 
Corporations are not ends in themselves. The corporate veil should not hide the 
moral responsibility of those who run them and the decisions taken in their 
name. 

OECD hopes tax reforms will end era of aggressive avoidance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/oecd-hopes-reforms-will-end-era-of-aggressive-tax-avoidance>
Nowhere is the impact of these practices more pronounced or enduring than in 
the developing world. If rich G20 countries like Australia have not been able 
to effectively tax large corporates and wealthy corporate interests, how much 
more difficult is it for emerging nations to put in place progressive tax 
systems? The IMF has estimated that developing countries lose three times as 
much revenue as OECD countries. If they can’t get progressive tax systems in 
place, their capacity to fund affordable health and education is minimal.

The implementation of a progressive tax system means challenging power elites. 
There is deep institutional resistance to more inclusive forms of growth over 
and above acceptable levels of poverty. It is led by multinational mining 
companies profit-shifting out of resource-rich countries, IT companies paying 
tax in not a single jurisdiction, and tobacco companies trying to buy licences 
for their poisonous trade. The list is long and deep. 

The sunlight applied to corporate tax behaviour in Australia is a ray of hope, 
as are the recommendations from the International Commission on Corporate Tax 
Reform, but these are only the first steps. What is now needed is a substantial 
political and economic debate about how rampant tax evasion sabotages the SDGs 
and why progressive taxation is so critical to securing strong inclusive growth 
with rising living standards for all.
 