
Q My partner and I own our home outright. We plan to buy a second property to 
rent out using £60,000 in savings and a mortgage of £120,000 secured on our 
home rather than a buy-to-let mortgage. The second property is not for 
immediate profit but for the long term – our children will hopefully be able to 
raise cash from it to use as deposits in years to come.

We aren’t married yet, so to avoid the extra 3% stamp duty on second 
properties we are thinking that it be worth taking one of our names off the 
property we live in and buying the second property in the sole name of the 
other person. From what I have read, if you are not married you are considered 
as two parties.


We are aware of the tax implications of letting property and the capital gains 
tax, but we do not intend to sell for many years.


We are keen to see if we should do this as we will decide whether to buy now 
and marry later if it will save us the extra 3% stamp duty.KM

A You are right in thinking that the two people in a married couple or civil 
partnership are treated as one for the purposes of working out whether the 
higher rates of stamp duty land tax on second properties are payable. So, for 
example, if a married couple own a home they live in and buy a second property 
– even if each property is in the name of just one spouse – the couple is 
treated as owning two properties and so they have to pay the higher rate of 
stamp duty on the second property.


You are also right in thinking that, as an unmarried couple, if you each 
bought a property in your sole name and thus owned only one property each, the 
higher rates of stamp duty would not come into play. However, the higher rates 
would apply if you went ahead with a joint purchase of a second property.


Putting your home into your partner’s sole name and buying the property that 
you plan to rent out in your sole name before you marry is feasible, but I’m 
not convinced it is a wise move. It is true that, assuming a purchase price of 
£180,000 for the second property, it would mean a stamp duty bill of £1,100 
rather than £6,500 – a saving of £5,400. However, you need to ask yourself if 
you would feel comfortable giving away – and so losing control over – your 
share of the family home. Even if you did, you would have to go to the expense 
of getting new wills drawn up so that you would inherit the property if your 
partner died.


There are other drawbacks in doing what you propose. If your home is in your 
partner’s sole name, you won’t be able to raise cash from it by remortgaging, 
so you would need a buy-to-let mortgage for the second property, which is 
likely to cost more than remortgaging your current home.


If you buy the second property on your own, all the rental income will be 
taxed as yours, which could push you into the higher-rate tax bracket. And 
assuming that the capital gains tax (CGT) rules don’t change in the meantime, 
when you come to sell the property you will be responsible for paying the tax 
on the whole of the taxable gain. If the property were owned jointly, the gain 
would be split between the two of you and each of you would be able to take 
advantage of the CGT annual exempt amount of £11,100 (in the 2016-17 tax year).
 