
A tropical cyclone in waters off Western Australia’s north-west coast has been 
downgraded to a tropical low, but is expected to reintensify onChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> Eve, the Bureau of 
Meteorology says.

Bureau regional director Mike Bergin said the impact of ex-tropical cyclone 
Yvette was expected for Christmas Day along the Pilbara coast.

“We shouldn’t see significant impacts in terms of wind, we could see rainfall 
totals up to 100mm, it’s going to be a low end tropical cyclone impact,” he 
said.

Cyclone could form off Northern Territory, weather bureau says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/19/cyclone-could-form-off-northern-territory-weather-bureau-says>
There continues to be wild weather in the north of the state, with a severe 
weather warning in place for heavy rain and damaging wind with gusts up to 90 
km/h in Broome, Derby and Fitzroy Crossing.

There is a monsoon low in the Kimberley, producing heavy rain and squally 
winds. Broome experienced its wettest December day on record on Thursday, with 
226mm.

Graham Swift from the Department of Fire and Emergency Services reminded 
people to not travel in floodwaters and to be alert to weather warnings over 
the weekend.

“Don’t cross floodwaters as they are particularly dangerous. Most of the 
deaths that occur in floods in vehicles are people getting washed away,” he 
said.

In the event of a cyclone red alert, residents who leave their homes could 
face fines of $50,000. “The warnings will come on as the cyclone approaches, 
and have a look at which actions you should take, have a plan and implement 
that plan if the cyclone comes,” Swift said.

Six people were trapped in a vehicle between two flooded creeks in WA’s 
Kimberley region on Friday afternoon.

A Department of Fire and Emergency Services spokeswoman said a rescue 
helicopter was deployed about 2pm on Friday.

It was believed the people were on a remote pastoral station and the 
helicopter would transport them to Fitzroy Crossing.

 