
The midi skirt – by which I mean a loose skirt whose hem hits a little below 
the knee – arrived in my wardrobe as a seasonal visitor, granted a temporary 
visa by dint of being on trend. Silver, with a pleasing swishiness, it was 
meant to represent a short-term, casual kind of hook-up, so I was surprised 
when this skirt made itself indispensable and moved in on a permanent basis. 
Our happy relationship has borne fruit: I now have five midi skirts, including 
a second silver one. (Yes, I do need both, thank you. The new one is pleated, 
so it’s quite different.)

The midi skirt, which you would imagine to be an almost polar opposite look to 
black trousers, has unexpectedly edged them out of my wardrobe. Weirdly, 
despite its vaguely housewifely air, it ticks lots of the same boxes. Looking 
smart makes me feel more confident up to the point where looking smart crosses 
into looking dolled-up, when it makes me feel more self-conscious. The midi 
skirt, like a good pair of black trousers, is relaxed without being scruffy. 
Also, it works with flat shoes as well as heels, both stylistically (there is 
something pleasingly modern about a loafer or trainers with a longish skirt) 
and from a self-image perspective (your legs don’t need to look longer if they 
are hidden by your skirt). And you can walk fast in it (can’t stand anything I 
can’t march in), and you don’t need to wear tights unless it is really cold.

What I wore this week: corduroy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/oct/21/what-wore-week-corduroy-jess-cartner-morley>
But while we skip off into the sunrise together happily of a morning, no 
relationship is perfect. The midi is more fashionable than the pencil skirts 
I used to wear to work, but lacks their crisp bossiness. A simple crew neck 
works with a pencil skirt, but doesn’t cut it with a midi. You need a statement 
neckline: a ribbed polo neck, for instance, has more drama than a crew neck. 
The blouse I’m wearing here is supposed to have a pussy bow, but I’ve reworked 
it as a necktie. Any collar works well, so you can’t go wrong with a white 
shirt. The midi skirt isn’t going anywhere: the rest of my wardrobe is 
adjusting to fit.

• Jess wears skirt, £220, whistles.co.uk <http://www.whistles.co.uk>. Blouse 
<http://www.warehouse.co.uk/gb/clothing/tops/silk-tie-neck-blouse/027253.html>, 
£69, warehouse.co.uk.Heels, £85, dune.co.uk.

Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close for Carol Hayes 
Management.
 