
Is this a shirt or a blouse? Hmmm. It is cotton and crisp, with a shape 
dictated by its own seams and creases, rather than by the body wearing it, and 
it has blue stripes, all of which say: shirt. On the other hand, its primary 
distinguishing feature is a large bow, which is most definitely 
blouse-territory, and said bow throws the centre of gravity of the piece 
off-centre, which again says blouse, rather than shirt. (Masculine clothing 
tends to be more symmetrical than women’s. A shirt is embellished with a 
straight-down-the-middle necktie, in contrast to the floppier collars and 
brooch potential of a feminine blouse.)

Dunno. What do you think? Really? OK, so it’s a bit of both. So this is the 
point, normally, where we dream up a name for this new shirt-blouse hybrid. Um, 
the blirt? The shouse? Needs work. And anyway, not the point. In 2016, when we 
have men modelling skirts in Louis Vuitton womenswear ad campaigns, making a 
big deal about traditional sartorial boy-girl divides seems a little passé. 
Much more modern to shrug and say they’re just clothes, right?

Clothes that don’t slot neatly into feminine or masculine categories look at 
their most contemporary when you don’t make a big deal out of their 
nonconformity. That Helmut Newton tuxedo-jacket-with-red-lipstick, 
masculine-meets-feminine thing is a classic aesthetic, but it looks a bit 
costumey now.

What I wore this week: a summer dress you can actually wear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/25/what-i-wore-this-summer-dress-you-can-actually-wear>
A bow is a traditionally girly flourish. It is a soft, yielding way to fasten 
your clothes. (Compare with buckles, and cufflinks.) So it is a sign of 
fashion’s current spirit – not so much androgynous, as relaxed about the rules 
– that bows are cropping up on unusual places. The bow here is at the hip bone, 
but there are lots of pieces around with bows on the rear view – you’ll spot 
them in the shops soon. A bow is a gift-wrap, a flourish, a people-pleasing 
touch, so wear it in a place that makes you seem indifferent – the back of a 
white shirt, the rear hem of a loose-fitting rib sweater – and the effect is 
surprising. In a good way.

• Jess wears shirt, £350, victoriabeckham.com <http://www.victoriabeckham.com>.
Trousers, £39.99, hm.com <http://www.hm.com>. Shoes, £70, dunelondon.com 
<http://www.dunelondon.com>.

Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes 
Management.
 