
In the season that brought us the It Tracksuit, it is a stone-cold fact that 
dressing down is the new dressing up. Yay! Right? Well, not necessarily. 
DDITNDU sounds like good news: it sounds like permission to wear flat shoes all 
day, and/or justification for alternating two sweatshirts and calling it a Work 
Wardrobe. Sadly, it’s nowhere near as simple as that.

If you look gobsmackingly beautiful in, say, nylon tracksuit bottoms and a 
sports bra, then DDITNDU is good news. You can also get lost, sharpish. If you 
are an actual human being, then DDITNDU is a Trojan horse. A fleece-lined 
Trojan horse, true, but still one whose gifts are not what they seem. The 
mantra promises an easy life, but then lets you down when you look in the 
mirror and realise jersey sweatpants look glamorous only with an extra five 
inches of leg, and that, short of an injection of supermodel DNA, the only way 
you can add five inches of leg is to wear uncomfortable high heels, which sort 
of kill the loungewear mood.

For us norms, the trouble with dressing down is that it does exactly that: it 
dials you down. So while you can enjoy the comfort that it brings – no one in 
their right mind doesn’t enjoy the breathe-easy benefits of a drawstring waist 
or the cocooning sensation of a hoodie – you have to offset the 
nothing-to-see-here vibe with something to catch the eye.

What I wore this week: the statement cardigan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/29/what-i-wore-this-week-statement-cardigan-jess-cartner-morley>
The grey hoodie is a bona-fide fashion piece this season, but to feel like A 
Look, you can vamp it up with heels and big sunglasses, for pretend-casual LAX 
celebrity chic. But to look sharp, rather than glamorous, your best strategy is 
to play up the preppy, Silicon Valley credentials of the hoodie by wearing it 
over a poloneck or under a blazer – or both, until summer arrives. This look is 
three parts Mark Zuckerberg (“I’m so high status that I play it down”) and one 
part Princess Anne (“I have a small amount of status, and heaven help anyone 
who forgets it”). The power-version of dressing down is about balancing these 
two characters. The no-brainer look requires the most strategy of all.

• Jess wears hoodie, £26, and blazer, £49, both topshop.com 
<http://www.topshop.com>. Rollneck, £62, gudrunsjoden.com 
<http://www.gudrunsjoden.com>. Trousers, £185, joseph-fashion.com 
<http://www.joseph-fashion.com>.

Chair, £1,300, habitat.co.uk <http://www.habitat.co.uk>

Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes 
Management.
 