
I’m going on a beach holiday to France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> this week. What style of bathing 
suit should I wear to impress the chic French?

Amanda, by email

Ooh la la, la plage française – c’est si chic, n’est-ce pas? What on earth to 
wear to a setting celebrated by everyone from Manet to Colette to Karl 
Lagerfeld? This year, there is only one answer: a burkini.

As you’ve all probably heard by now, the burkini – or full body swimsuit 
favoured by some Muslim women (and Nigella Lawson) – is the latest item in 
France’s eyeline of things they should ban Muslim women from wearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/16/burkini-ban-defended-as-french-mayors-urged-to-cool-local-tensions>
 in order to liberate them from patriarchal rules about female appearance, or 
something. I don’t know, I’ve tried to read about a thousand articles on this 
subject and yet somehow I can never get beyond the first paragraph because my 
brain keeps exploding.

Following on from the ban on headscarves in schools and the outlawing of the 
niqab in public spaces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/22/frances-headscarf-war-attack-on-freedom>
, it’s now the turn of the burkini to be deemed incompatible with the French 
way of life. Trust the French to make exposure of female flesh an essential 
part of their national identity. So far five towns have banned the burkini and 
three more are in the process of doing so, all to save what Marine Le Pen calls 
in a totally non-dog whistle way “the soul of France”. The prime minister, 
Manuel Valls,added last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/17/french-pm-supports-local-bans-burkinis>
 “the nation must defend itself”.

Unfortunately, no one can quite decide what this soul is, or why it needs 
defending from a Muslim woman’s bathing suit. The socialist government’s 
minister for women’s rights, Laurence Rossignol, has insisted this is a 
feminist issue: “[The burkini] has the same logic as the burqa: hide women’s 
bodies in order to control them,” she said, apparently unaware that forcing 
them into bikinis could very easily be seen as another form of control. “It is 
not just the business of those women who wear it, because it is the symbol of a 
political project that is hostile to diversity and women’s emancipation,” she 
added. It really is something to hear a government minister allegedly in charge 
of women’s rights quite happily trample on individuals’ rights to wear their 
bathing suits – which do not contravene any form of French law – in order to 
make some kind of generalised theoretical point that goes against diversity, in 
the name of diversity. Is your brain exploding now? Because mine definitely 
just went again.

Do French politicians imagine these women will now come to the beach in the 
accepted French attire, ie, topless?

Look, there are plenty of things about Islam’s attitude towards women I don’t 
like. There are plenty of things I don’t like about my own religion’s attitude 
to women, for that matter, but let’s keep things focused here. Let’s not kid 
ourselves that that’s what this burkini hoo-hah is about. France has suffered 
more dreadful terrorism in the name of Islam than any other European country in 
the past few years and, at a loss of what to do about it, it is doing precisely 
what Rossignol criticises Islam for: it is singling out blameless women and 
making them feel bad about their bodies. This is what happens when French 
politicians exploit the country’s celebratedlaïcité (secularist principle) for 
political gain by playing to the lowest common denominator. Moreover, when the 
women’s rights minister finds herself on the same side as le Front National, 
well, at least one of them needs to take a cold, hard look at themselves. After 
all, if Rossignol was so concerned about clothing that is “hostile to women’s 
emancipation”, perhaps she might consider banning white wedding dresses, which 
send out the message a woman needs to be a virginal, innocent cupcake when she 
marries. Or high heels, which say women have to pretend to be gazelles who love 
walking on their tip toes for purposes of sexiness. But are either of these 
being banned? No they are not. But then they are not associated with the Muslim 
religion. This is not about cultural relativism, it is about looking at “what 
the hell is going on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/08/i-dont-care-donald-trump-brushes-off-horrified-reaction-to-his-muslim-ban>
”.

Honestly, what do these French politicians think is going to happen to these 
women, now banned from wearing their burkinis? Do they imagine that they’ll now 
come to the beach in the accepted French attire, ie, topless with their modesty 
only covered with a tiny pair of bikini bottoms and an occasional cigarette? 
No, they’ll stay home, banished inside and out of sight, unable to be on the 
beach with their children. Great soul defending there, France!

France, you know I love you. Half of my family is from you and my parents live 
in you. But really, have you learned nothing from history? Did the events from 
under a century ago really not teach you that chip chip chipping away at the 
rights of a persecuted religious minority in your country purely to make their 
lives worse so as to appease a scared and angry populace does not do your 
“soul” any good? Right now, you sound like the vaguely racist team leader of a 
nudist camp, telling Muslim women they have to be at least semi-naked in order 
to prove their worthiness. I don’t want to sound too off the ball here, but if 
you’re so worried about how persecuted these Muslim women must feel in their 
bathing suits, perhaps talk to them first about it before you start swooping in 
like some colonialist savior, insisting you know what’s best for them. Come on, 
France. You’re better than this. And for the rest of us, let’s break out the 
burkinis.
 