
The off-the-shoulder top, or cold-shoulder top, has been the headline story of 
this fashion season so far. The runaway success of the trend is all the more 
notable when you bear in mind all the things you can’t do in a cold-shoulder 
blouse. (Wear a comfortable bra, reach for any shelf above eye level, dance.) I 
think the explanation for its improbable triumph is that we really like a trend 
that lets us show some skin, but not in an overtly sexy way. Shoulders, being 
usually hidden but not actually rude, are perfect for this.

As you will have spotted, I am not wearing a cold-shoulder top today, because 
I have worn and written about them before and I am quite sure you have got the 
hang of them by now. I am wearing, instead, the post-cold-shoulder neckline. 
The shape is high at the neck but scooped at the sides, like a racer-back vest. 
It is smart but sporty, athleisure for evening.

It is still all about the shoulders, but it’s a very different look from the 
cold shoulder, because instead of being wafty and boho, it’s rigorous and 
sporty.

Cleavage, you will have noticed, is nowhere at the moment. That doesn’t mean, 
of course, that you can’t show cleavage if a low-cut top is what works for you. 
But it does mean that you have other options when it’s a bit hot and you don’t 
want to wear a long-sleeved T-shirt. It’s easy to get stuck in a time warp with 
warm-weather dressing, and find yourself wearing the same default sundress 
shape you’ve been wearing for years. Fine, but, if you were having a summer 
party in 2016, you probably wouldn’t serve Viennetta ice-cream. So why doggedly 
stand by the fashion equivalent?

This is a neckline shape that works on a cocktail dress – very modern LA red 
carpet – and on a silk top, which you can wear with loose trousers, or a long 
skirt. Not content with taking over our weekend wardrobes, athleisure has 
designs on what you wear to dress up. When it’s time to cold shoulder the cold 
shoulder, this is the look in pole position.

• Jess wears dress 
<http://www.newlook.com/shop/womens/dresses/navy-lace-trim-wrap-front-midi-dress-_377408841>
, £24.99, newlook.com andshoes 
<http://www.dunelondon.com/mexico-cross-strap-platform-sandal-0088505410035350/>
, £70, dunelondon.com.Chair 
<http://www.habitat.co.uk/abel-emerald-green-velvet-armchair-319615>, £750, 
habitat.co.uk.

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and 
makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes Management.
 