
What is MDG3?

Launched as one of the eight millennium development goals, MDG3 calls for the 
promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of women. It has one target: 
the elimination of gender disparity in primary, secondary and tertiary 
education by 2015 (an interim deadline of 2005 for primary and secondary 
schooling was missed). Progress on the goal is tracked by the ratio of girls to 
boys in class, the share of women in paid employment in sectors other than 
agriculture, and the proportion of female MPs in national parliaments.

Will the goal be met?

The goal has promoted gender equality globally, and is likely to have 
empowered some women. In that sense, it has served a purpose. But the target to 
end gender disparity in education will not be met by the end of 2015. And while 
there have been improvements in the share of women in paid employment, and the 
number of female MPs has increased, it is safe to say the achievements have 
been far from transformative for women.

Parity in education at primary level has almost been attained, but there is 
still some way to go in secondary and tertiary education.


World leaders pledge to achieve gender equality by 2030 | Liz Ford
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/10/world-leaders-pledge-womens-rights-equality-csw-2030>
South Asia has made the greatest gains in enrolling more girls into school. 
Sub-Saharan Africa has the lowest gender parity rates in primary education, but 
has had big gains in countries including Sierra Leone, Senegal, Chad and 
Burkina Faso.

In secondary education, central Asia, northern Africa, south-east and east 
Asia have achieved gender parity. But, in sub-Saharan Africa, western Asia and 
southern Asia, boys still significantly outnumber girls in class. Conversely, 
gender disparity in Latin America and the Caribbean favours girls.

Despite a significant step forward, gender disparity in tertiary education is 
still a huge global problem.

On the work front, since 1990, the percentage of women employed in 
non-agricultural settings has increased, from a global share of 35% in 1990 to 
40% in 2012. These increases are evident in all regions, with sub-Saharan 
Africa showing the most impressive gains.

According to the Inter-Parliamentary Union, the percentage of female MPs has 
doubled over the past 20 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2015/mar/08/international-womens-day-number-of-female-lawmakers-doubles-in-20-years>
, with more women taking seats in almost 90% of the 174 countries for which 
data was available. Rwanda has the most female lawmakers, with 64%, while 13 
countries have 40% or more women occupying seats in the lower houses of 
parliament, and, as of 2014, in 46 countries more than 30% of MPs were women. 
Roughly 715 women now hold ministerial posts.

Comparatively, however, the figures offer little to celebrate. Globally, women 
still occupy less than a quarter of seats in parliament (the percentage has 
risen from 11.3% in 1995 to 22.1% in 2015), and only 17% of all government 
ministerial posts. UNWomen <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> 
says that, given the slow pace of progress since the MDGs were adopted, it will 
be another 40 years before gender parity is achieved in parliament.

Just about all the issues needed to achieve gender equality and women’s 
empowerment were left out of MDG3

Which issues weren’t addressed in MDG3?

Just about all the issues needed to achieve gender equality and women’s 
empowerment were left out of MDG3. But then the goal did keep things loose by 
only calling on leaders to promote equality rather than actually realise it.

On the plus side, other MDGs – such as numbers two and five, on education and 
maternal health – did have targets that were geared towards gender equality. 
And a target in goal number one made reference to women’s role in the job 
market.

But many key issues were overlooked by MDG3, including: eliminating violence 
against women; recognising the unpaid burden of care work that falls 
disproportionately on women; women’s limited access to assets and resources, 
such as land; protecting women’s sexual and reproductive health and rights; 
ending harmful traditional practices, such as early and forced marriage and 
female genital mutilation; and the vital role women play in peace and conflict 
reconciliation.

The goal also failed to challenge discriminatory laws and constitutions that 
endorse the view that men are superior to women, and did not specifically 
mention lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) rights.

Why were these issues missed out?

Good question. None of these are easy topics to get governments to sign off 
but, by 2000,four world conferences 
<http://www.unwomen.org/en/how-we-work/intergovernmental-support/world-conferences-on-women>
 on women had made progress.

Held in Mexico, Copenhagen, Nairobi and Beijing, the conferences clearly 
highlighted the issues that needed to be addressed for gender equality and 
women’s empowerment to be realised. Declarations from each were signed by the 
majority of UN member states.

The fourth world conference in Beijing 
<http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/beijing/fwcwn.html>, in 1995, which is 
regarded as the blueprint for women’s empowerment, was signed by 189 
governments, the same number that signed the Millennium Declaration, which 
paved the way for the goals, five years later.


How does MDG3 translate to the sustainable development goals?

SDG5 is the one to watch specifically on women’s empowerment. Unlike its 
predecessor, the goal calls on governments to achieve, rather than just 
promote, gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls.

Proposed targets include ending violence, eliminating harmful practices, 
recognising the value of unpaid care, ensuring that women have full 
participation – and equal opportunities – in decision-making, and calling for 
reforms to give women equal access to economic resources. There is also a 
target to ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health and 
reproductive rights, but the absence of the phrase “sexual rights” highlights 
ongoing unease around LGBT rights.

There are also specific mentions of women’s empowerment in other SDGs. Goal 
three, for instance – to ensure healthy lives – proposes a target on universal 
access to sexual and reproductive healthcare services, including family 
planning. Goal six highlights the needs of women and girls in improving 
sanitation, while goal eight calls for decent work for all women and men.

While the SDGs are broadly welcomed, the Women’s Major Group 
<https://www.globalpolicy.org/component/content/article/252-the-millenium-development-goals/52665-womens-8-red-flags-following-the-conclusion-of-the-open-working-group-on-sustainable-development-goals.html>
 at the UN would have liked to see stronger wording in the goals in relation to 
the protection of sexual and reproductive rights, women’s unpaid care work, and 
their role in peace and security. The group also said the proposed goals would 
not transform the global economic system that deepens inequalities and 
discriminates against women. But most women’s right activists are relieved to 
have a standalone goal on empowerment with some strong targets.

 