
The curious case of the package containing “a medical substance”, the courier 
Simon Cope, Sir Bradley Wiggins, his doctor Richard Freeman, and just where the 
Team Sky bus was on the night the 2011 Critérium du Dauphiné ended raises more 
questions for the parties involved, on top of the rash of questions and 
inconsistencies that have come to light since the Fancy Bears hacking team put
Wiggins’s therapeutic use exemption (TUE) forms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/bradley-wiggins-doping-rules-fancy-bears-tues>
 into the public domain.

The facts, documented in detail in the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/sportsnews/article-3825849/UK-Anti-Doping-investigate-Sir-Bradley-Wiggins-Team-Sky.html>
, are as follows: Cope, who was the British Cycling women’s road coach, 
travelled to the Dauphiné via Geneva airport bearing the package destined for 
Freeman. The flights were booked and paid for by British Cycling. The package 
was delivered to Freeman. Cope returned to Geneva with Shane Sutton, then a 
prominent coach at British Cycling and Team Sky.

Ukad investigates ‘wrongdoing within cycling’ after Team Sky and Wiggins 
allegations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/bradley-wiggins-team-sky-ukad-investigate-wrongdoing-allegations>
Team Sky issued a statement on Friday which read: “Team Sky was contacted by 
the Daily Mail regarding an allegation of wrongdoing. We take any issues such 
as this very seriously and immediately conducted an internal review to 
establish the facts. We are confident there has been no wrongdoing. We informed
British Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> of the 
allegation and asked them to contact Ukad who we will continue to liaise with.”

Ukad would not confirm whether it had opened an investigation into Wiggins and 
Team Sky, as reported in the Daily Mail, but said an inquiry into wrongdoing 
within cycling had begun. The Guardian askedTeam Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> who had conducted their internal 
inquiry, to whom he or her had spoken, and whether the inquiry’s findings would 
be made public but was told: “We’ll be providing information to Ukad in the 
first instance and so don’t have anything to add to our statement at this 
stage.”

The fundamental question is this: what was in the package and what was it for? 
British Cycling confirmed “privately” to the Daily Mail it contained “a medical 
substance,” and suggested privately to the newspaper that it did not contain 
triamcinolone, the drug for whichWiggins received a TUE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/bradley-wiggins-full-story-asthma-allergies-tues>
 on 29 June 2011. When asked by the Guardian how it had arrived at that 
conclusion the British Cycling spokesman was unwilling to go into detail for 
fear of revealing information relevant to Ukad’s inquiry.

Other questions this raises include: what medical product would Freeman take 
delivery of which he could not acquire in a French pharmacy? Was it the case he 
did not want to transport it himself or was it the case the product arrived at 
British Cycling/Sky – which shared, and still share, a base at the Manchester 
velodrome – after he had left for the Critérium du Dauphiné, hence the need to 
get a courier to transport it? Was the product linked to a training camp in 
Sestriere to which Wiggins travelled after the Dauphiné?

The case goes to the heart of a key angle in the story of Wiggins and his 
TUEs, which is the umbilically close connection between Team Sky and the 
Lottery-funded British Cycling track programme. When BritishCycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> launched its world class 
performance programme in 1997, the then performance director, Peter Keen, made 
a conscious decision to steer clear of road racing, because of fears over 
widespread doping in professional road cycling.

When Team Sky were launched in 2009-10, there were concerns that venturing so 
deep into the pro road world carried reputational risks for a track programme 
that had been highly successful and which had avoided the faintest question 
over its ethics. The problem was the boundaries between Team Sky and British 
Cycling were blurred far beyond the mere factDave Brailsford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dave-brailsford> was running both and 
clearly he would recruit heavily for the former from the latter, as he did. For 
example, Freeman worked for British Cycling and Sky in 2010-11, and currently 
is the British Cycling doctor.

The question of who in British Cycling was working for Sky, who was paying for 
their time, how that impacted on their British Cycling duties and how that was 
being regulated, was taken seriously enough by those high up in UK Sport for a
report to be commissioned by the umbrella body in May 2010 and carried out by 
Deloitte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/may/09/team-sky-olympic-squad-review>. 
The report has never been published beyond an executive summary, but the 
Cope-Wiggins-Freeman-Dauphiné saga makes it clear just how blurred the 
boundaries were in Sky’s earlier days. Who, for example, was paying Cope’s 
wages on the weekend he spent travelling to Geneva to deliver the mysterious 
package?

The question of Team Sky’s governance goes to the top of cycling, because one 
of those who had a role in ensuring the team functioned legitimately was the 
head of British Cycling, now the head of the UCI, Brian Cookson. When the team 
were formed, Cookson, together with the current head of British Cycling, Ian 
Drake, had an observatory position on the operating board of Tour Racing 
Limited, the holding company owned by BSKyB which held Team Sky’s UCI WorldTour 
licence. “There are people on the board who are watching this relationship very 
carefully,” said Brailsford at the time. Cookson left the operating board when 
he stood for president of the UCI and it was subsequently disbanded.

The Guardian emailed the following questions to British Cycling on Friday:

1) What level of inquiry has British Cycling carried out into the Daily Mail’s 
story?

2) On what basis did British Cycling “privately” confirm the package in 
question contained “a medical substance”?

3) Which individuals told British Cycling this?

4) On what date were Simon Cope’s flights booked, how much did they cost and 
when did Sky reimburse British Cycling for them?

5) Was the package in question’s arrival at British Cycling recorded?

6) What medical supplies did Dr Freeman order around this time? Is this 
something for which any records would be kept?

7) When medical supplies were being ordered for British Cycling and/or Sky, 
how was this done and were they ordered through separate accounts?

British Cycling was unwilling to provide detailed answers for fear of 
prejudicing the Ukad investigation.

Since 15 September, when the Wiggins TUEs were leaked by Fancy Bears, clarity 
has been in short supply, in spite of Wiggins and Brailsford providing lengthy 
and apparently co-ordinated press interviews on 26 September. Part of this is 
down to the obvious issues around medical confidentiality: the only person who 
can clear Dr Freeman to make public comments about his health records is 
Wiggins. One issue on which it is hard to obtain clarity is whether the 
decision to apply for Wiggins’s TUEs was part of a move by Sky to explore the 
grey areas at the boundaries of legitimate medical care, running counter to the 
philosophy of openness and “marginal gains only” with which they were launched 
in 2010, and which they emphasisedwhen the Guardian spent time with the team 
during that Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/jul/18/team-sky-tour-de-france>.

The “Dauphiné package” may not have contained triamcinolone but it may shed 
some light on this, hence the importance of knowing precisely what it 
contained, why it was conveyed to the race in the way it was, and what was done 
with its contents.

Former Team Sky rider: Wiggins’ TUE during 2012 Tour ‘looks suspicious’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/team-sky-bradley-wiggins-former-rider-looks-suspicious>
In an attempt to gain clarity on TUE policy within Sky and its development 
over the years, with particular reference to the end of 2010, the following 
questions were put to Sir Dave Brailsford by email on 20 September:

1) What is Team Sky’s current policy on TUE?

2) More specifically what is the current policy on TUE involving conditions 
sufficiently serious for the use of corticosteroids by injection to be 
recommended?

3) Has that policy evolved since the team were founded in 2009-10 and if so, 
how?

4) The quoted number for TUEs received by Team Sky riders since its inception 
is 13. Is this figure correct?

5) Have the team received TUEs for triamcinolone acetate other than the three 
for Bradley Wiggins?

6) After Dr Geert Leinders was hired by Team Sky [over the winter of 2010-11], 
was he informed of TUEs issued to Team Sky riders in the past, including 
Bradley Wiggins? [Team Sky and Wiggins have gone on the record in stating 
Leinders was not involved in his TUE applications. Leinders was given a life 
ban by anti-doping agencies for a string of infringements relating to the 
period before he joined Sky. There have never been any allegations of improper 
practice relating to his spell at Sky.]

7) Was the decision to file Wiggins’s three TUE applications made with the 
knowledge of yourself as team principal, and/or Shane Sutton and Tim Kerrison, 
who according to Wiggins were his immediate coaching team in 2011-12?

8) Did any member of Team Sky or British Cycling working with Sky through 2010 
raise any objection to the hiring of Leinders and the change of policy adopted 
in order to hire him, and if so was that objection placed on record?

9) Did any member of staff involved in coaching Wiggins in 2010 or 2011 raise 
any objection to the initial TUE application for triamcinolone acetate? If so 
was that objection placed on record?

Brailsford replied on 20 September: “I will respond in due course to the 
questions I can respond to but just to clarify one point – no Leinders 
involvement at all.” To date no further reply has been forthcoming.

The Guardian contacted Wiggins, Cope, Freeman, Brailsford and Sutton for 
comment and clarification on the Daily Mail story but no replies were received 
by the time of publication.
 