
I’m not big on nostalgia, but I do quite miss the dress code that served 
through much of my youth, which went: “jeans and a going-out top”. This was as 
close to a formal dress code as evening engagements – as we never, ever called 
them – got. It worked a treat. You had a favourite pair of jeans, and then just 
swapped the top in and out as if you were dressing up one of those paper dolls 
with tabs on them. No heart-searching over whether you should wear tights, no 
need for complex underwear “solutions”, and no colour clashes to think about, 
because denim goes with everything.

Jeans-and-a-going-out-top hasn’t worked as a dress code for ages. Instead, 
we’ve been expected to either lean in to the party spirit with frocks that add 
to our to-do lists (fake tan application Friday morning, dry cleaner dropoff 
Saturday) or create dashing androgynous lines set off by impossible-to-source 
obscure Japanese trainers. And sometimes you think, “I’m not styling a look 
book here – I’m going to the pub. Can I not just keep my jeans on, step into 
high heels, put on a snazzier top and be done with it?”

Well, dear reader, you can. A happy side-effect of 2016’s renewed obsession 
with jeans – the weirder the better, with stepped “mullet” hems and asymmetric 
Frankenstein patches of dark and light denim – has been that jeans have climbed 
back up the food chain, from being clothes for a Monday off to clothes for a 
Saturday night out. You don’t need to go that far, but you do need a modern 
jean, by which I mean a loose shape on the leg, a high waist and a hemline that 
ends at the ankle or above. Leg-lengthening hipster skinnies are for losers. 
Harsh but true.

Now all you need is a going-out top. Anything in velvet works, as does 
anything that gets your shoulders out. Lace is excellent, but only with a high 
neckline. A bodysuit, under belted high-waist jeans, slays all-comers. That’s 
it. No fuss needed. Time to go out.

• Jess wears velvet top, £45, finerylondon.com <http://www.finerylondon.com>. 
Jeans, £49.95, gap.co.uk <http://www.gap.co.uk>. Heels, £230, kurtgeiger.com 
<http://www.kurtgeiger.com>.

Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes 
Management.
 