
It is quite hard, as a grownup, to justify buying a new pencil case. I mean, 
my job is writing stuff down, and I have a thing about sharp pencils, so there 
is always a pencil sharpener at the bottom of my handbag, but still. I would 
feel a bit ridiculous getting an actual pencil case out of my bag, especially 
since they mostly have dinosaurs on them.

But if I am too old for a dinosaur pencil case, I will never grow out of 
needing a back-to-school look when September rolls around – and it is not just 
me. The trends that fly in September are always those closest in spirit to real 
back-to-school. A new seasonal colour is always a hit at this time of year, 
because it feels as if we’ve moved en masse to a school with a new uniform. A 
hemline diktat makes us all nostalgic for the rules we railed against as 
teenagers. Logical, no; powerful, yes.

This year’s back-to-school look is the pinafore dress. Not a pinny, but a 
slightly formal dress with a dungaree shape at the top. The sort of dress you 
might pack in a trunk, along with a dundee cake to be shared later in the dorm. 
Which is exactly why it works: all the best fashion mixes function with fantasy.

The dungaree trend has made the pinafore possible. Two years ago, dungaree 
straps were still 1980s supply teacher, but their rise to a bonafide hipster 
trend has made the squared-off shape look normal. Pinafore dresses are easier 
to wear, because, not being divided at the crotch, they don’t do that awkward 
thing dungarees do of elongating your abdomen so that you look like a stag 
beetle (possibly just me).

What I wore this week: the athleisure neckline | Jess Cartner-Morley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jul/29/what-wore-week-athleisure-neckline-jess-cartner-morley>
The pitfall is primness, obviously. A Peter Pan collar might seem like 
a winsome, Alexa-Chung-at-Paris-fashion-week look in theory, but, trust me, you 
will look absurd. Even a simple white shirt might be a bit twee. A polo neck, 
on the other hand, has an almost magical ability to make everything look 
modern. It is your friend here. If that is a bit well-behaved for you, go for a 
blouse that has statement swooshy sleeves or a flouncy ruffle. The best part 
about grownup back-to-school is that you make the rules.

• Jess wears jumper, £45, cosstores.com <http://www.cosstores.com>. Dress, £46,
urbanoutfitters.com <http://www.urbanoutfitters.com>. Shoes, from a selection, 
arunaseth.com <http://www.arunaseth.com>.

Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes 
Management.
 