
This is a power coat. Yes, really. I know it doesn’t look like it. It isn’t 
cashmere, it isn’t Savile Row-tailored. It isn’t power navy or stealth-wealth 
camel. It looks like the coat you grab off the rack to walk the dog, not the 
coat around which you base your new season look. But it is, in fact, the coat 
those in the know will wear to fashion week.

At its most basic level, the rise of the padded coat is the inevitable climax 
of a year when fashion has been outplayed by sportswear and athleisure. 
Trainers have overtaken heels, tracksuit bottoms have usurped trousers, 
sweatshirts have eclipsed knits. Where the traditional coat takes its cue from 
the look of the most powerful person in a boardroom or the most glamorous 
person in a fancy restaurant, this year’s alpha coat channels the manager 
running things from the sidelines at a football match.

This does not mean that you can rummage for any old tat and call it this 
season’s new coat. The padded coat you want is, in fact, rather grand. It might 
be in a bright, lipstick red, say. Or in velvet or silk. And those practical, 
quilted jackets favoured for their slim silhouette by well-turned-out women in 
market towns will not do at all, because when I say padded, I meanreally 
padded. You know how smart hotels like to create a sense of abundance with 
plump pillows stacked so high that if you actually slept on them, you’d have a 
cricked neck for months? Same with the new padded coat. You need that sense of 
bounteous indulgence, so make it big, and take the Michelin Man jokes on the 
chin.

What I wore this week: the athleisure neckline | Jess Cartner-Morley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jul/29/what-wore-week-athleisure-neckline-jess-cartner-morley>
The most important aspect is how you wear it – as if it is a grand coat making 
a grand entrance. As if you’re walking into the opera in a leopard-printed, 
silk-lined number. Instead of huddling into it, shrug it back, so the neckline 
of your outfit underneath is visible. Not very practical, but it has the 
benefit of a breeze, so you can wear this autumn essential before the mercury 
drops. This is an image-making coat, not a practical coat, and if it’s keeping 
you warm, you are wearing it wrong.

• Jess wears jacket, £110, by Topshop Boutique, from topshop.com 
<http://www.topshop.com>. Top, £40, frenchconnection.com 
<http://www.frenchconnection.com>. Jeans, £225, 7forallmankind.co.uk 
<http://7forallmankind.co.uk>. Boots, £65, office.co.uk 
<http://www.office.co.uk>.

Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close for Carol Hayes 
Management.
 