
There’s nothing better than a wedding. Dressing up nice and drinking in the 
afternoon with a roomful of people who are giddily happy. A good reception 
feels like it’s drenched in endorphins – almost like a birth but better, 
because there’s lots of champagne and no placenta. But weddings are not a 
pleasure that come cheap. Much is made of the cost of the average British 
wedding – approximately £20,000 – but that doesn’t include the small fortune 
that guests have grudgingly spent on gifts, travel, hotels and clothes.

Well, I can help a bit with a well-priced outfit. Most wedding invitations are 
vague on dress code, so use the happy event as an excuse to buy yourself a 
summer dress. The most on-trend frock for this year would be in white lace or 
broderie anglaise. If you’re feeling bullish, give one a whirl, but brides can 
be such selfish cows about that sort of thing. I’ve included one as the catwalk 
picture in case any brides-to-be need inspiration. The rest of the clothes on 
this page are all intentionally reasonably priced.

If you want something pretty go for a pink or a floral. Both were big trends 
and if you choose the right one, you can wear it for years to come. Finery 
London is a great place to look for unfeasibly cheap dresses. It was co-founded 
by fashion directors from Topshop and Asos, and the designs and prices are 
excellent. I like this pink dress. Ballerina was a catwalk trend that will 
never take off as tulle skirts look stupid unless you’re three years old. But 
ballerina pink is flattering with a tan, so it’s a great colour for summer.

Other on-trend styles include maxi dresses, jumpsuits and anything asymmetric. 
This jumpsuit is from A Day in the Life – it’s another new label and its first 
capsule collection is very pretty. The prints are fantastic. You should have a 
look.

Weddings <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/weddings> do demand a few 
practical considerations. If it’s a good one, it will go on long into the night 
so you’ll need something warm to put on, particularly if you’re in a marquee. 
Don’t worry about whether a cardy will ruin your outfit – by the time you put 
it on, everyone should be past caring anyway. Or why not buy something like 
this lovely kimono coat from Marks and Spencer. Kimonos and Japanese style in 
general are big for summer, so this will get plenty of use throughout the 
coming months.

Also, make sure your handbag has a strap. You need a bag if you’re out for the 
day, and there’s nothing more annoying than having a clutch in one hand, a 
drink in the other, and no way of eating the canapés as they whizz past.

I’m sure you know your own feet and their limitations for standing in heels, 
so the only advice I’ll give is to look at the shoes in & Other Stories. 
Another shop that has excellent and unusual wares that are surprisingly well 
priced.

This lot should see you through the big day – have a brilliant time.


Follow Alice on Instagram @aliceefisher <https://instagram.com/aliceefisher/>
 