
We like to think of Istanbul's Grand Bazaar – open since 1461 – as the world's 
oldest shopping mall. If that's the case, shouldn't the Grand Bazaar be home to 
the world's oldest food court? That may be stretching the analogy a little too 
far, but for us the Grand Bazaar is as much of a food destination as a shopping 
one.

As we see it, one of the hidden pleasures of going to the bazaar (once you get 
past the overzealous shopkeepers hawking souvenirs) is exploring some of its 
quieter back alleys and interior courtyards for new dining possibilities, 
especially some of the smaller restaurants that cater not to tourists but 
rather to the locals who work in the sprawling marketplace. Here are three of 
our favourite places.

Gaziantep Burç Ocakbaşi

A friend directed us to Gaziantep Burç Ocakbaşi and we are forever in her 
debt. Located on a narrow side street off one of the Grand Bazaar's busy 
thoroughfares, this unassuming grill house serves up very tasty food from 
Gaziantep, a city in south-east Turkey, that is considered one of the country's 
culinary capitals.

Our ali nazik, tender morsels of marinated beef sitting on a bed of garlicky 
yogurt-eggplant purée, was perfect. The delicious salad served with it, topped 
with chopped walnuts and zingy pomegranate molasses, was impeccably fresh. We 
were even more excited about the restaurant's speciality: extremely flavourful
dolmas made out of dried eggplants and red peppers that had been rehydrated and 
stuffed with a rice and herb mixture, then served with yogurt on the side.

There are only a few tables, which are lined up along the length of the 
alleyway that is the restaurant's home. The ambiance is provided by the strings 
of dried eggplant and peppers that hang above the tables, the smoke and sizzle 
coming from the grill and the thrum of bazaar activity all around.
• Parçacilar Sokak 12, +90 212 527 1516. Open 11am-4pm, closed Sunday

Kara Mehmet Kebap Salonu
 Photograph: Melanie Einzig 
This is one of our favourite places, not only in the Grand Bazaar but in all 
of Istanbul. The restaurant, a tiny hole in the wall, serves the usual 
assortment of kebabs – including, for the daring, kidney and liver – all 
expertly grilled by the mustachioedusta. A testament to the appeal of Kara 
Mehmet: we went there with a vegetarian friend who was so taken with the 
restaurant'sadana kebab that he ended up taking his first bite of meat in 30 
years.

Food aside, what really draws us to Kara Mehmet is its location, deep inside 
the open-air courtyard of the Cebeci Han, one of the Grand Bazaar's numerous 
out-of-the-way caravanserais. Compared to the bustle of the rest of the bazaar, 
the Cebeci Han is an oasis of calm, mostly filled with small shops where people 
repair rugs, rather than sell them. Even the owner of the one actual rug shop 
inside the courtyard seems more interested in playing backgammon with his 
friends than moving carpets. When you're done with your kebab, order Kara 
Mehmet's deliciouskünefe for dessert and a tea from the small teahouse next 
door and enjoy the behind-the-scenes look at bazaar life.
• İç Cebeci Han 92, +90 212 513 5520. Open 11am-5pm, closed Sunday

Aynen Dürüm
 Photograph: Yigal Schleifer 
Aynen Dürüm is a microscopic kebab shack near the Grand Bazaar's "currency 
exchange" (essentially a small alley filled with men shouting out "buy" and 
"sell" orders) that serves exceptionally gooddürüm, or wraps. We were first 
struck by the feeding frenzy we saw at the tiny restaurant, where a crowd of 
hungry locals was chowing down with a kind of reckless abandon rarely seen in 
other places around town. The setup reminded us of a competitive eating 
contest: a double-sided outdoor counter with about 10 stools around it and a 
trough in the middle that holds containers overflowing with grilled peppers, 
sliced pickles and sprigs of parsley.

The tiny interior, meanwhile, is taken up by a charcoal grill and İsmail, the 
joint's grill master, who has been fanning the flames here for 10 years. The 
no-nonsense İsmail takes the wrap business seriously, letting customers choose 
between two different kinds oflavaş (flatbread): the traditional thin variety 
and a thicker, chewier version. İsmail clearly sets the bar high. His 
restaurant's tagline? "The Motherland of Kebab."

We found some space at Aynen's counter and ordered a dürüm of Adana kebab and 
another made with lamb shish kebab, leaving the choice of lavaş up to the 
griller. Our wraps arrived within minutes, each stuffed with a mixture of 
tomato and parsley along with the perfectly grilled meat. The Adana had a 
wonderful balance of meat, fat and spice, while the small morsels of tender 
lamb inside the second wrap were so tasty that we soon found ourselves joining 
the crowd and stuffing our faces with little regard for decorum.
• Muhafazacılar Sokak 29, +90 212 527 4728. Open 7am-6pm, closed Sunday

This is an article from our Guardian Travel Network. To find out more about it,
click here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/blog/2012/feb/29/guardian-travel-network-city-bloggers>
 