
Steve Jobs once asserted, “True innovation comes from recognising an unmet 
need and designing a creative way to fill it.” While he may not have been 
specifically referring to human centred design, you’d be forgiven for making 
the assumption. After all, the purpose of human centred design is to create 
innovative products, services and solutions through creative and collaborative 
practices.

Not surprisingly, there is increasing interest worldwide in this emerging 
methodology that puts people and their experiences and behaviours at the centre 
of the entire design process.

Alexis Baum, a consultant designer and educator who has been working in the 
human centred design space in Australia and the US for more than a decade, says 
the growing shift towards human centred design is due to its ability to provide 
a more engaging and successful outcome – and ultimately a better product.

“Human centred design is about understanding people on their own terms,” Baum 
says. “It is a practice with a philosophy of putting people first and involving 
them in every step of the design process. As such, it will 100 per cent result 
in a more meaningful and valuable outcome for the customer.

Human centred design is about understanding people on their own terms
Alexis Baum, a consultant designer and educator 
“Globally, more and more organisations are using human centred design 
methodologies to bring value to people and improve their lives. When an 
organisation includes the customer in the design process and adjusts to fit the 
needs of that customer – rather than the other way around – the product or 
service holds more value and meaning to the customer, not only because it is 
more relevant but because they were a part of it coming to fruition.”

Baum says that human centred design helps organisations to have empathy and 
truly know their customers. As a result, they are better able to understand 
customers’ wants and needs, and tailor-make solutions and products to fit. It 
also opens up a realm of new possibilities.

“Human centred design opens up the potential for new realities and experiences 
that we may not have previously imagined,” she says. “As Henry Ford famously 
said: ‘If I had asked people what they wanted, they would have said faster 
horses’. Instead, he created the Model T car.

“Human centred design is about observing, understanding and making. These 
methods help to bring future products and services to life from an imagined 
idea. It’s about going into the consumer’s world and understanding their 
experiences, then taking that and using co-design and collaboration to craft a 
new world together.”

Indeed, IDEO.org, the not-for-profit arm of global design company IDEO, uses 
human centred design to solve real world needs – from finding solutions for 
clean drinking water to establishing health and education programs. The 
challenges IDEO.org faces are immense, and so part of its methodology is to 
form collaborative partnerships with other not-for-profits, government bodies 
and community organisations so real and effective solutions can be found and 
continually implemented.

The future of work – how will you adapt?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/ing-direct-being-human-in-a-digital-world/2016/oct/25/the-future-of-work-how-will-you-adapt>
IDEO.org is considered a world leader in human centred design and has produced 
its ownField Guide to Human Centred Design, in which it describes human centred 
design as being “uniquely situated to arrive at solutions that are desirable, 
feasible and viable”.

“Embracing human centred design means believing that all problems, even the 
seemingly intractable ones like poverty, gender equality and clean water, are 
solvable... Human centred design offers problem solvers of any stripe a chance 
to design with communities, to deeply understand the people they’re looking to 
serve, to dream up scores of ideas, and to create innovative new solutions 
rooted in people’s actual needs.”

As well as helping to solve real world problems, human centred design is also 
a viable business strategy, and as our world becomes increasingly digitised, 
the role of human centred design also becomes increasingly important. Roy 
Shiladitya, Head of IT at ING DIRECT Australia, says that customer behaviour 
and empathy are key factors in the design process of all product development 
undertaken by ING DIRECT.

If we as a company can align to a human being’s values rather than just their 
needs, that is very powerful.
Roy Shiladitya, head of IT at ING DIRECT 
“There’s a lot of artificial intelligence and robotics coming into products 
now, so it is imperative that we keep focus of the human element,” Shiladitya 
says. “So we take that true customer behaviour and how they engage with us and 
build it into the product to make it more conducive and intuitive for them to 
use.

“Organisations can no longer be prescriptive in their approach. It’s about 
giving the customer control and ownership. In terms of banking, we don’t say 
you have to bank with us this way. Our customers have the control and choice to 
bank whenever they want, wherever they want and however they want, and we need 
to make it available to them.

“Taking this human-centric approach not only offers more value to the customer 
but also gives them a much richer sense of belonging. If we as a company can 
align to a person’s values rather than just their needs, that is very powerful.”

Another benefit – and appeal – of human centred design is the ability to 
fast-track prototyping. Shiladitya says ING DIRECT has developed its own human 
centred design framework called PACE, which allows the organisation to innovate 
like a start-up, enabling it to get the right services and products to market 
faster.

“PACE is based on design thinking and agile methodologies,” he says. 
“Obviously there’s a framework, but essentially rather than taking the customer 
on a journey, you are actually going on the journey with the customer. That’s 
the big shift.

“It is a much more agile way of working, and today’s technology allows us to 
build prototypes more quickly. So instead of spending six months developing a 
product, we can know within as little as three weeks the viability of a new 
product or service. It is a constant process of iteration, experimentation and 
feedback to check that the product is providing value.”

A future without cash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/ing-direct-being-human-in-a-digital-world/2016/sep/29/a-future-without-cash>
By involving the customer throughout the entire design process – effectively 
co-creating the product or service in question – innovation risk is reduced and 
the chances of engagement and therefore success are increased.

Moving forward, the involvement of consumers in the design process will only 
continue to grow, with Baum describing human centred design as the “new 
literacy” we will all require, if only at a base level.

“When people moved from the farm to the factory, it was the first time 
everyone in the company needed to know math,” say says. “You didn’t need to be 
an expert mathematician but you needed the fundamentals such addition, 
subtraction, division and multiplication. We now have math literacy.

“Jump forward to today, the innovation age, if you will, and there’s a new 
literacy, which is design – human centred design.”

This “new literacy” of human centred design will not only provide the platform 
for organisations and social enterprise to be more creative and agile in their 
approach to finding real solutions, but also help them to innovate by 
empowering the people within.
 