
Three years ago, I overheard a colleague bitching about The Sound of Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/77449/sound.of.music>. On and on he 
went about how “stupid” and “ridiculous” the film is. Being new to the company, 
I didn’t feel at liberty to give him a piece of my mind, so I kept quiet. The 
Sound of Music, exactly 50 years old today, has its fans and it has its haters, 
the two sides forming separate branches of humanity that will never be 
reconciled.

For those who don’t already know, the film tells the story of a young woman 
who leaves an Austrian convent to become a governess to the seven children of a 
naval officer widower. Following its release in 1965, SoM won five Academy 
Awards, and 50 years later its popularity is still going strong. I fell in love 
with the movie as a six-year-old, and since then I have watched it at least 150 
times. There’s something aboutRodgers and Hammerstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/aug/11/rodgers-hammerstein-proms-john-wilson>
 melodies that hits my sweet spot every time. The baselines in tunes such as 
Something Good and Climb Every Mountain are achingly beautiful. And the songs 
are funny too. The lyrical irony of Sixteen Going On Seventeen never fails to 
make me chuckle: Rolf, an 18-year-old boy who’s gullible enough to join the 
Nazis, tells his near-age mate, Liesl, that she’s a naive “little girl” who 
needs someone “older and wiser” telling her what to do.

That’s the genius of the film: it wears its social commentary lightly. Don’t 
be fooled by the sing-along frivolity – the narrative is packed with edgy, 
progressive and humorous themes. Maria’s frolic on the mountain in the opening 
scene is, to my mind, a metaphor for sexual desire. Mother Abbess, recognising 
Maria’s needs, releases the trainee nun from the abbey so that she can go and 
“get some” at Captain von Trapp’s house.

The Captain is a single dad and disciplinarian, an anti-Nazi who ironically 
recreates the Third Reich in his own home. Barking orders at everyone, his 
sternness is so camp that even his kids laugh at him during one of his 
inspections. But what the man lacks in parenting skills he makes up for by 
being the sexiest officer in naval history (who else can wear a Tyrolean 
feather hat and still look hot?). He smoulders like an S&M dungeon master, and 
the sexual tension between him and Fräulein Maria crackles deliciously.

Romance aside, the film contains life lessons everyone can benefit from. For 
starters, Maria and the kids aren’t interested in conforming to society. They 
hit the town dressed in recycled curtain fabric (a measure we could all adopt 
in these times of austerity and environmental awareness), and they do it 
without shame. How many families would go out dancing in the city centre 
dressed like shit? I have six siblings in total, and you’d have to pay us half 
a million each to pull a stunt like that.

The two boys are so secure in their masculinity that they can dress like their 
sisters yet remain emotionally unscathed. And, speaking of progressive 
identities, the unmarried and insouciant Uncle Max, who arranges for the family 
to compete at the Salzburg singing festival, is clearly gay. Though he may 
express reservations about drinking “pink lemonade”, we all know what side he 
butters his bread on. Above all, I love the badass nuns who vandalise the 
Nazis’ cars – it’s so nice to see the Catholic church bending the rules 
positively for a change.

However, I’ll admit the film’s sugariness does overlook some potentially juicy 
sub-plots. For example, Von Trapp’s girlfriend, the delectable Baroness 
Schraeder, steps aside far too easily to make way for Maria when, in reality, 
no woman would give up a man as fine as him without a catfight. With a 
narrative as soft as this, some darker fan-fiction beckons: I’m thinking a 
Maria v Baroness smackdown by the lake, perhaps, or Uncle Max getting caught in 
flagrante with the butler.

Such is my love for the movie that I made an emotional pilgrimage to Salzburg 
in 2011. I stood outside the iconic Hapsburg-yellow house, then pressed my face 
against the windows of the glass pavilion, imagining leaping between the 
benches, just like Liesl von Trapp. All around me were fellow pilgrims, a 
cross-section of humanity. I had little in common with the veiled-up women from 
Dubai, the Taiwanese couple or the Canadian geeks, but on that day we were 
united by our love for what is simply the best film musical ever. What better 
service to mankind?
 