
Say what you like about Kanye West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kanyewest>, but he sure knows his classic 
games consoles.

The normally shy and retiring rapper has tweeted that his next album will be 
called TurboGrafx-16: an announcement that may have left some of his younger 
fans staring blankly at their phone screens in confusion.

On this occasion, however, it’s likely he wasn’t being entirely serious – 
which will come as a shock to regular readers of his Twitter stream.

Instead, West went on to explain that the TurboGrafx was one of his favourite 
games consoles as a kid, bewildering much of his fanbase but instantly 
improving his credibility in the much-sought-after “massive retro game geeks” 
demographic – of which the writers of this story are definitely members.

He then went on a short, nostalgic romp through 90s gaming history.
KANYE WEST (@kanyewest) 
My next album is titled   "Turbo Grafx 16"   as of now…
 <https://twitter.com/kanyewest/status/703446573552967680> February 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/kanyewest/status/703446573552967680> KANYE WEST 
(@kanyewest) 
Blazing Lazers was probably my favorite game on that console …
 <https://twitter.com/kanyewest/status/703447606299594752> February 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/kanyewest/status/703447606299594752> KANYE WEST 
(@kanyewest) 
My boy Mali that I spoke about on the song Drive Slow actually had a Neo Geo 
in real life bro…
 <https://twitter.com/kanyewest/status/703447829734412288> February 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/kanyewest/status/703447829734412288> 
Designed and manufactured by Japan’s NEC with input from game publisher 
Hudson, the TurboGrafx console was originally launched in Japan in 1987 as the 
PC Engine.

It was the first major games machine to feature a 16-bit graphics processor, 
beating the likes of the Sega Mega Drive and Super Nintendo Entertainment 
System to market, and effectively kickstarting the modern era of consoles with 
visuals that matched the leading arcade games of the era.

Two years later, the console made it to the US, renamed the TurboGrafx-16, and 
probably would have made an impressive impact while the Mega Drive (or Genesis 
as it is known in the US) was still in its infancy.

However, the sheer variety of versions that hit the market left consumers 
confused. At least 17 distinct core models made their way to game shops through 
the 90s. There were handheld versions like the Turbo Express and the PC Engine 
GT, base console revisions including the Core Grafx, SuperGrafx and PC Engine 
Shuttle, and all manner of expansion cards and add-ons. And then there were 
CD-Roms.
 Advertisement for the TurboGrafx-16. 
The PC Engine was the first games machine to offer an expansion for CD-Rom 
releases, shaping a legacy that would dominate mainstream console design for 
several generations. But it made the PC Engine even more complicated to 
understand. The standard PC Engine format was HuCards – known as TurboChips for 
the TurboGrafx-16 – small “cartridges” that took the form of a slab of plastic 
comparable to a thick credit card.

But when the CR-Rom2 expansion console arrived in Japan in 1988, it let owners 
play the first home CR-Rom games (six years before the arrival of Sony’s 
CD-Rom-based PlayStation) – as long as they had a corresponding expansion card. 
It was a moment that changed the potential of music and audio in games forever; 
something West no doubt appreciates.

But then things got really complicated. While the likes of the TurboGrafx-CD 
and Super CD Rom2 simply plugged into their parent console, the PC Engine’s CD 
Rom2 had to be connected via an IFU – a plastic suitcase thing that held the 
console and CD expansion together. And then there were the all-in-one models, 
such as the Turbo Duo, PC Engine Duo, the Duo R and the Duo RX.


Add illogically inconsistent region-locking of games, three CD Rom formats and 
a confusing array of peripherals to the list of strange TurboGrafx quirks, and 
the picture is complete.

It’s a shame, because the games library was superb. The TurboGrafx-16 boasted 
dozens of excellent exclusives as well as sharp ports of arcade games. It 
remains a favourite for the scrolling shoot-’em-up crowd, thanks to a vast 
library of genre heavyweights and oddities. Indeed, West’s preferred 
TurboGrafx-16 game, the vertically scrolling space shooter Blazing Lazers, is a 
true gem.

Known as GunHed in Japan, it was far ahead of the pack visually, and offered 
some solid gameplay – although West has surely also played the console’s finest 
2D shooters: Super Star Soldier and Soldier Blade, and the underrated Dead 
Moon. He may also have appreciated the particularly impressive arcade ports 
like R-Type and Galaga 88, or the host of non-shooter treasures like mascot 
series Bonk, Hudson icon Bomberman, and the arcade port of gory brawler 
Splatterhouse.

Sega Mega Drive: why retro consoles are about more than nostalgia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/20/sega-mega-drive-retro-consoles-more-than-nostalgia>
The Neo Geo, by the way, is another classic 90s console series, this time 
manufactured by Japanese arcade gaming giant SNK. First released in 1990 as a 
16-bit cartridge-based machine, the Neo was – like the TurboGrafx – famed for 
its hardcore shoot-’em-ups. However, it also boasted SNK’s beautiful 2D 
fighting games (Samurai Shodown, King of Fighters, Fatal Fury) which rivalled 
the Street Fighter series throughout the decade.


Meanwhile, West is working on his own gaming project, Only One, about his 
mother’s death and transcendence to heaven. It’s not yet known which format the 
game will appear on or who he is working with, but it looks interesting, and 
very different to his wife’s hugely successful smartphone title, Kim 
Kardashian: Hollywood.

Whether West will make good on his promise and title his next album Turbo 
Grafx remains unclear. However, it’s probably one of the cooler retro Japanese 
console names he could have gone for – certainly better than, say, FM Towns 
Marty, although we would love to have seen an album named after Bandai’s 1999 
handheld machine, The WonderSwan.

How to experience the TurboGrafx for yourself

For those tempted to try West’s favourite console, there are a few simple 
routes in. If the HuCard/TurboChip library of less showy titles is enough for 
you, a standard TurboGrafx-16, PC Engine, Core Grafx or Core Grafx II will 
suffice. To access CD Rom2and Super CD Rom2 games, a Turbo Duo, PC Engine Duo, 
Duo R or Duo RX are likely your next bet; just check which variation of 
controller port your chosen machine sports.

And if you do find any games on the other TurboGrafx-16 format, Arcade CD Rom2
, you’ll need an Arcade Card or Super Arcade Card, which arrived as NEC’s final 
attempt to assert the relevance of its confused console while sales fell away. 
You’ll likely be paying between £70 and £200 for the machine, a controller and 
all the leads. Oh, and you’ll also need an old-fashioned CRT television or 
monitor to play it on, as your LCD screen may not cope.

If all of that sounds too confusing, or your devotion to Kanye West’s 
entertainment tips ceases at the point of trawling eBay, Nintendo’s Virtual 
Console for the Wii offers numerous TurboGrafx-16 games for download, including 
Blazing Lazers.


It is ironic the company the TurboGrafx-16 set out to beat now provides the 
most accessible route to playing the console’s greats, but as long as you’re 
not a hardware fetishist, the Wii provides a fine way to enjoy several dozen PC 
Engine treasures.
 