
In the last few months, my company – Mears – has taken agonising decisions to 
hand back a number of homecare contracts to local authorities, especially in 
the north of England.

Why Islington introduced the living wage for all homecare workers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/jan/29/islington-living-wage-homecare-workers>
As painful as this has been for the people we have been providing care for – 
and for our care workers – we hope others will follow our lead and help to end 
commissioning practices that should have no place in 21st-century Britain.


Exiting contracts in this way is always the last resort and follows many 
months of trying to develop a different solution with a commissioner. But, 
ultimately, it may be the only means to drive the essential change in services 
that are life-critical to our most vulnerable citizens. We are not happy with 
the disruption this creates, but we feel that we have to take a stand to lead 
positive change in the absence of leadership from elsewhere.

The contracts we have exited are those where simple mathematics shows that the 
charge rate a council wants to pay will result in a provider either not meeting 
the requirements of the “national living wage” for care staff, or not 
delivering the service needed by the user.

In the homecare world, generally, councils only pay for “contact time” – the 
time a care worker spends with a service user. They don’t pay for the time it 
takes the worker to get to the property or move on to the next. They don’t pay 
for any of the time the worker must spend on training, or for the worker’s 
“on-costs” to ensure they are looked after if they fall sick. Nor do they help 
pay into their pensions. In recent years, councils have also shortened call 
lengths in order to cut costs, and many people have lost a service altogether.

I love being a care worker, but I feel guilty when it's time to go
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2016/mar/02/i-love-being-a-care-worker-but-i-feel-guilty-when-its-time-to-go>
The “national living wage” is, of course, the bare minimum we need to pay – 
and rightly so. Being a care worker is an increasingly skilled job, requiring 
staff who can provide highly intimate personal care as well as support with 
medication. It is not for the faint-hearted and requires talent, dedication and 
strength. It is no surprise then that there is a national shortage of care 
staff. In the last 12 months alone, a lack of homecare capacity in the 
community has caused delayed discharges from hospitals to increase by 40%.

At a time when the NHS is creaking at the seams, there is an inherent 
short-sightedness in a system that focuses on cutting support for individuals, 
reducing call lengths and keeping charge rates for providers below sustainable 
levels.

Unfortunately, many care providers still choose to accept very low charge 
rates from councils. This could be due to a lack of understanding of the 
minimum wage law, but is often simply caused by local businesses feeling they 
have no choice but to accept the terms offered, or risk going under. These 
businesses are often small and rely on a single contract just to exist.

Care staff should command the same respect as doctors and nurses, and a career 
in care should be rewarded appropriately

I have huge sympathy for councils on this issue, especially as many have been 
forced to cut other services to protect social care budgets. However, there is 
no excuse for setting charge rates that will almost certainly lead to breaches 
of the minimum wage or poor service. The last few governments have talked about 
reconsidering how we, as a society, fund social care – but nothing material has 
happened. Ultimately, this means we are failing to examine how we want to look 
after older and vulnerable people who need our support. All demographics point 
to an increasingly elderly population over the next 10 to 20 years, many of 
whom will be living with multiple long-term conditions. Surely it is a measure 
of a good society that we provide proper care for those people, at a time when 
they need it most?

If we had given even 1% of the time spent discussing Brexit on trying to reach 
a solution to the social care crisis, we might have one by now.

Real integration of health and social care is important, but it is a long way 
off in most parts of the UK. In those places where it has been achieved, it is 
not all plain sailing. Our first priority should be ensuring that the care 
system is sustainable.

We must move away from a system that pays the provider for the minutes spent 
with a service user, to one that rewards quality and the impact on that 
person’s life. Having due regard for those we rely on to carry out that work is 
just as essential; care staff should command the same respect as doctors and 
nurses, and a career in care should be rewarded appropriately.

There are councils, such as Torbay and Wiltshire, that are moving to 
fundamentally different ways of working that are positive and take these 
factors into account. At Mears, we are doing everything we can to support 
positive changes to working practices, better conditions for the workforce and 
greater focus on the service user. At times, however, we feel like a lone voice.

It has been said that to care for those who once cared for us is not just a 
responsibility but an honour. Now is the chance for society to prove that.

 * Alan Long is executive director of Mears Group PLC 

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 