
Many women spend much time and money having their fingernails painted and 
decorated. Toenails, too, quite often. Is there evidence that young men find 
this attractive?
David, by email

Regular readers will know, I hope, how much this column appreciates 
correspondence. It’s you, the little people, who make this all worthwhile, I 
say, tearfully clutching my Oscar. So, believe me when I say that it does cause 
me pain to criticise the questions I receive, but, as celebrities are so fond 
of saying these days, I must live my truth. No one ever said being a journalist 
was easy. So, David, if I seem harsh in my reply, do not take it personally. 
You are merely the Watergate to my Woodward and Bernstein, and I must expose 
what’s really going on here.

I won't get my nails painted at the salon again | Steven W Thrasher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/10/nail-salons-exploit-workers-stay-profitable-theyve-lost-my-business>
The slightly awkward thing, though, is that I’ve dealt with this particular 
issue – why women do a thing even if men don’t find it attractive – in this 
column many times before. And yet, strangely, it seems that not every single 
man on the planet has received my truth. Why, only last week, a chap on a 
different, far inferior newspaper wrote, in regards to fashion’s fondness for 
skinny models: “They are not attractive to men or, surely, to women. Why then 
does this continue?” It’s hard not to enjoy that what this male columnist seems 
to find most outrageous about extremely thin models is that they don’t turn him 
on. Fingers crossed this becomes a running series in which we find what shape 
of women really does get his engine going! (Ideally silent ones, presumably, 
given that he apparently couldn’t be bothered to ask a single woman for her 
view on the subject, but was instead reliably guided by his own hormones.) So, 
as you can see, I have to keep repeating this truth over and over.

For future reference, chaps, here is your handy cut-out-and-keep guide to some 
things women do that are not about you:

Painting their nails or not painting their nails 
Being thin or not being thin
Wearing high heels or not wearing high heels
Wearing makeup or not wearing makeup
Wearing dresses or wearing jeans
Cutting their hair short or keeping it long
Caring about fashion
Getting drunk
Having opinions
Disagreeing with you
Existing on this planet

Perhaps you are sensing a message here? Am I being too subtle? Fine, I’ll 
spell it out: not everything a woman does is to turn men on. In fact, I’m going 
to go further and say the vast majority of things a woman does in a day have 
absolutely zero to do with you. Sorry! Sure, sometimes a lady wants to look 
pretty, and she’ll make some kind of effort – for some, this means makeup, for 
others it is putting on a favourite dress. But it does not follow that every 
time every woman wears heels or eyeshadow, she is trying to turn you on.

Women do things for the same reason you do things: to please themselves. 
Sometimes to impress their friends, occasionally to impress other women, but 
mainly for themselves. Because they are humans, not fembots put on this planet 
purely to tantalise you. What’s that you’re shouting? Some kind of Dawkins-lite 
evolutionary argument about how all humans are programmed to pursue sex at all 
times because the human species depends on it blah blah blah? Two-word response 
to that: cargo shorts. You know perfectly well that cargo shorts will not help 
you in your pursuit of sex, and you know this because women –including this 
woman – have told you how ugly they are 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/aug/15/cargo-shorts-practical-clothing-man-shaming-stupid-pants>
. And yet, you continue to wear them, because you like them. Just like women 
wear things you don’t like. Case, I do believe, closed.
 ‘Ring! Why won’t you ring!’ Photograph: Oliver Rossi/Getty Images/Corbis RM 
Stills 
I slept with someone two days ago and they haven’t called me since. Should I 
call first?
Everyone on the planet, at some point in their lives

Oh, humans, what sweet little misguided souls you are. Because we’ve all been 
here, haven’t we? Your fingers hovering above the number in your contacts list, 
wondering how you can call and make it sound ever so casual. I once called 
someone and when he answered I pretended I had dialled him by accident (cunning 
plan!) so was then all, “Oh! I must have butt dialled you!”, thereby achieving 
the amazing double feat of making him think of my butt and forcing him to speak 
to me. It really is astonishing I remained single until I was 35.

The thing to remember, dear people, is that you don’t actually want to call 
this person. You want them to call you, which is pretty much the opposite of 
you calling them. You know all this. You know this.

The real question you need to ask yourself is why you want to spend your time 
with someone so thoughtless they don’t even call you the next day, someone who 
you have to trick to talk to you. Because, dear readers, all of you, 
everywhere, are worth more than that.
 