
For a hacker website publishing leaked documents Fancy Bears is one of the 
better names. It is a happy combination of the frivolous (just fancy that!) and 
the threatening (help, a bear!) with resonances of a newly launched sweet, plus 
an ironic undertone of Russian‑ness. In terms of its impact on cycling, 
however, it does not leave that bitter a taste in the mouth. Rather it raises 
some familiar questions.

What the website’s leaked therapeutic use exemption (TUE) documents for Chris 
Froome and Sir Bradley Wiggins show is not massively surprising. That Froome 
had permission to use prednisolone for the 2013 and 2014 Tours de Romandie 
confirms his previous statements about having had “two TUEs in his career”, one 
of which was leaked in June 2014,the other revealed in an interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/15/chris-froome-dauphine-uci> this 
year.

What is a TUE? 11 key questions on the Fancy Bears Wada leaks | Sean Ingle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/tue-fancy-bears-wada-leaks> 
“I’ve openly discussed my TUEs with the media and have no issues with the 
leak, which only confirms my statements,” Froome said in a statement on 
Thursday. “In nine years as a professional I’ve twice required a TUE for 
exacerbated asthma; the last time was in 2014.”

His fellow Tour de France winner Wiggins had not come under the TUE spotlight 
before. The website contains documents that – although they have yet to be 
confirmed as genuine – appear to show that he used a salbutamol inhaler through 
2008 and 2009, moving to one-off injections of triamcinolone acetate in 2011, 
2012 and 2013, to treat what is described on the form as a “life long allergy 
to pollen nasal congestion/rhinorrhoea, known allergy to grass pollen, sneezing 
throat irritation, wheezing leading to dysnopnoea eye watering runny nose”. The 
documents include what appear to be detailed statements about Wiggins’s 
treatment and the development of the allergy. A statement on Wiggins’s behalf 
was similar to that issued by Froome, saying: “There’s nothing new here. 
Everyone knows Brad suffers from asthma, his medical treatment is British 
Cycling and InternationalCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> 
Union approved and like all Team GB athletes he follows Wada regulations to the 
letter. The leak of these records is an attempt to undermine the credibility of 
Wada and that’s something for them to deal with.”

The essential paradox over corticosteroids – and other TUE medicines – is 
common currency in cycling. It was shown in most stark relief in the 2001 Tour 
de France when Jonathan Vaughters suffered an allergic reaction to a bee sting 
which caused his face to swell up so that he could not see to ride his bike. 
The American needed a corticosteroid injection but this was not permitted at 
the time under the regulations of the governing UCI – his Crédit Agricole team 
opted to follow the rules, so he was unable to continue. Since then 
“fast-track” TUEs are available, forprecisely this sort of eventuality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2001/jul/25/cycling.cycling1>.

On the same day as the Vaughters episode it was revealed that half of the 
riders tested earlier in that Tour – eight out of 16 – were using cortisone 
supported by TUEs, underlining the surreal nature of the American’s 
predicament. Cortisone abuse has a long history in cycling yet here was a rider 
being penalised because he could not use it for a legitimate reason.

Thus the conundrum. Any doctor or medical website will make it clear that 
corticoids such as prednisolone and triamcinolone are essentially “go-to” drugs 
in the medical world for inflammation of many kinds once more benign treatments 
have been worked through. However, they can also be performance-enhancing 
depending on the quantity used and the way an individual reacts to them – and 
different doctors and different anti-doping experts have disparate views on 
just how big a boost they give. Cortisone is the anti-doping grey area par 
excellence: legitimate medicine, commonly prescribed, which boosts performance, 
but by how much?

David Millar, in his autobiography, Racing in the Dark, describes having an 
intramuscular cortisone injection to treat an allergic reaction and calls it 
“probably the most potent drug out there”, adding: “With the right prescription 
it could be used legally.” Triamcinolone was, famously, the substance that 
Lance Armstrong used before the 1999 Tour de France and that was found in his 
urine at the race. Vaughters’ testimony from the United States Anti-Doping 
Agency report makes it clear that Armstrong used cortisone to boost 
performance; cortisone is mentioned in the Cycling Independent Reform 
Commission report as well.

The problem with leaked or hacked information such as Fancy Bears’ output is 
that it does not do much more than open a window and let in a chink of light 
without the benefit of context. Such was the problem with Froome’s leaked TUE 
in 2014, so too the episode of Froome’s power output figures in 2015, released 
via a video that – allegedly – used data that had been hacked, although other 
sources claimed it had been leaked.

Likewise with Fancy Bears: there is little context available within which this 
data can be examined. There is no knowing how exceptional Wiggins and Froome 
are in having TUEs, compared with their peers, nor what TUEs their rivals have 
or had, nor how big an issue TUE use is in cycling, let alone the extent to 
which TUEs may or may not be abused for performance enhancing reasons. One can 
only speculate, which is far from healthy.

One initial step would be for all TUEs to be declared openly once they are 
registered, even if that involves athletes losing medical confidentiality – a 
sacrifice that could be worth the taking given that the current situation 
favours no one. At least then it would be possible to establish patterns 
through teams, nationalities, disciplines within sports and particular doctors 
and to hold athletes and those around them to account where suspicion is 
perceived. Arguably so much information might muddy the waters but at present 
they are far from clear.

Froome and Wiggins defend TUEs use as Team GB athletes warned over leaks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/chris-froome-defends-use-tues-wada-hacking-leaks> 