
One recent Tour of Britain <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tour-of-britain> 
made headlines when the bulk of the field disappeared down a back street 
somewhere in East Lancashire. The latest incarnation of the event, back on the 
calendar after a five-year absence, had not even started before its biggest 
star, the Olympic cycling hero Bradley Wiggins, went awol yesterday somewhere 
between London and the north.

The triple medallist will be present at the start in Sportcity this morning 
but he was late for a press call yesterday after the journey to Manchester took 
him seven hours. The inevitable jibe is that he should have got on his bike, 
but that is actually the point that most of the backers of this five-day event 
are trying to make.

This event is backed mainly by regional tourism agencies and Sport England, 
whereas every previous incarnation of the Tour of Britain - the amateur Milk 
Race and the professional Kellogg's Tour and PruTour - had a single major 
sponsor. The break with tradition is simply explained by the organisers, the 
former professionals Mick Bennett and Tony Doyle: the plan is that the event's 
future should not be dependent on a single company which can cut off the cash 
at a year's notice.

Like the organisers, Wiggins recognises the importance of the race's return to 
the calendar, even if he is not sure of his chances. "It's time British cycling 
was given the recognition it deserves," he said. "I'm really excited about 
this, even if my Olympic preparation was based on a short-distance event and 
this is 500 miles long." The Tour de France is even longer, but he intends to 
make a serious attempt on that too.

 In Manchester he is one of a trio of British Olympians flushed with a golden 
glow, if probably wearing a few more layers of clothing than of late in 
Greece's 30C-plus temperatures. Wiggins, who races for his professional team 
Crédit Agricole, is joined by two other British medal winners, the team 
pursuiters Paul Manning and Chris Newton, who ride for the England team.

They renew hostilities with two of the Australian quartet who relegated Great 
Britain to the silver-medal slot in Athens: Brett Lancaster and the sprinter 
Graeme Brown. There is a strong European entry, including the Belgian sprinter 
Tom Boonen, winner of the final stage of the Tour de France this July, and four 
of the US Postal squad who helped Lance Armstrong to his sixth Tour win, 
including the Portuguese climbing specialist Jose Azevedo.

It is 15 years since a British professional won a British professional tour, 
and the man most likely to succeed Robert Millar, winner of the Kellogg's Tour 
in 1989, is Roger Hammond, the quietly spoken 30-year-old from Oxford who 
shocked many by taking seventh in the Olympic road race. His Olympic team-mate 
Charly Wegelius, based in Italy but guesting for the England team, is also 
fancied.

"The form is there, to judge by what I did in Athens," said Hammond, whose 
Belgian team includes another Briton, the former national champion Jeremy Hunt. 
"There's some big names coming to the race but you can never be too sure how 
motivated they will be this late in the season.

"The race will be difficult to control, with only six riders per team, so 
you've got to be up there from day one, particularly with those hilly stages in 
the north."

At five days, this is the shortest ever British professional tour and its 
route may well have been circumscribed by the short time available to get the 
show on the road. But the cycling heartlands of Lancashire and Yorkshire are 
well served in the opening two days, and the showpiece hills of Nick of Pendle, 
Holme Moss and the Snake Pass will give fans a good chance to see their heroes, 
even if these climbs are mere pimples compared with the mountain passes of the 
Tour de France.

Recent Tours of Britain have come down to a series of mass sprint finishes, 
simply because the terrain is rarely tough enough to split professional fields, 
and this tour may well follow the trend.

The final stage, a circuit race in Whitehall, will be spectacular and is bound 
to be used as a showcase for the capital's ability to stage major sports 
events, including the 2012 Olympics and the start of the Tour de France.

Three to watch

 Bradley Wiggins 
 Great Britain
 Team: Crédit Agricole
 British cycling's man of the moment, fresh from taking three medals in the 
Athens Olympic Games, is guaranteed a hero's welcome and will be looking to 
help his sprinter Julian Dean to stage victories.

 Michele Bartoli 
Italy 
 Team: CSC 
 One of Italy's biggest stars of the 1990s, when he won the World Cup and took 
several one-day classics, "Miki" is ageing somewhat at 34 but will be assisted 
by a well-drilled team managed by the former pro Sean Yates, who will be one of 
the most popular figures on the race.

 Roger Hammond 
 Great Britain
 Team: Mr Bookmaker.com
 The 30-year-old national champion from Oxford is in the form of his life, 
having taken a surprise seventh place in the Olympic road race in Athens. 
Although not a recognised stage racer, his tenacity and sprinting ability 
should ensure he is to the fore.
 