
Q My mother and I jointly own the house where we both live. If my mother was 
to go into a care home due to poor health, would the government take her half 
share of the house to pay the care home fees even if I was still living in the 
house?

I can’t afford to buy out her share, so it will mean selling up. TW

A No, the government wouldn’t just take your mother’s share of your home to 
pay for care fees. If, however, your mother had to go into long-term care and 
she asked your local authority to arrange care for her, she would have to 
undergo a financial means test to establish who should pay for it. If the means 
test showed that your mother had more than £23,250 in capital (in the 2016-17 
financial year), she would be expected to meet the full cost of any long-term 
placement in a care home.

The share of jointly resided-in property of someone going into care is only 
included in the means test if the joint resident is not that person’s partner 
or former partner, and not a relative over the age of 60 or a child under 18. 
As you are a relative and the property is your home, you have to hope that you 
are over 60 at the time your mother has any means test done. If you are under 
60 at that point, you can ask the local authority to exercise its discretion to 
disregard the value of the property even though you don’t automatically qualify 
for the value of your mother’s share not to be included.

But even if your mother’s share of the property is included in the means test, 
rather than using half the market value, the local authority must base its 
valuation on the sale value of what’s called the “beneficial interest to a 
willing buyer on the open market”. Finding a willing buyer prepared to go into 
joint ownership with you could make the valuation of your mother’s share a lot 
lower than the market value and could even reduce it to nil. So you might find 
that you could afford to buy out your mother’s share after all.

However, if her beneficial interest together with other assets came to more 
than £23,250, money would need to be found to meet care home fees unless she 
was eligible to defer payments. This means that the local authority takes a 
legal charge over the property and payment of care costs in delayed until the 
property is sold at a later date. To be eligible to make deferred payments, the 
local authority has to decide to meet your needs in a care home and the person 
going into care has to have less than £23,250 in other assets excluding the 
value of the home.

More information is available in Factsheet 38 
<http://www.ageuk.org.uk/documents/en-gb/factsheets/fs38_treatment_of_property_in_the_means-test_for_permanent_care_home_provision_fcs.pdf?dtrk=true>
 – Treatment of property in the means test for permanent care home provision – 
published by Age UK.
 