 The evil wrought in the homes of the poor and - for the evil is not confined 
to any one stratum of society - even in the more luxurious houses of the middle 
and upper classes by intemperance amongst women can hardly be fully realised.
So long as it is possible there is a conspiracy of silence. The unhappy woman 
who has fallen into habits of inebriety conceals her vice as long as she can, 
and even when it has become obvious to the inmates of the home there is a 
strong and natural desire to keep the "family skeleton" of inebriety as much as 
possible from the view of the outer world.

This is not so easy in the home of a working man, where the wife is, with 
scarcely an exception, manager of all the domestic affairs. [She] has therefore 
the fullest opportunity of applying that which should be spent upon the food 
and clothing of her family to the purchase of intoxicants.

To what depths of cruel degradation women, kindhearted when sober, can fall 
the evidence of the police courts testifies. Repeated convictions for 
drunkenness exercise in many cases little or no reclamatory effect.

The simple reason [is] that drunkenness passes from a vice to a disease, and 
that whilst prisons are teetotal establishments they are not homes for 
inebriates.

They neither treat the disease of dipsomania nor retain their "patients" long 
enough to offer a reasonable hope of cure. The late Mr. J. A. Birch strongly 
urged the establishment of a home for inebriate women. There are legal as well 
as financial problems to be solved, and when these are overcome, as we do not 
doubt they will be, the success of the "Home" will, to a large extent, depend 
upon skilful medical treatment and a management that shall be at once firm and 
kind.

The removal of the legal difficulty, as Mrs Hughes, the President of the 
Manchester Women's Temperance Association, frankly admits, "can only be 
accomplished with the cooperation of magistrates and police court officials.

"Their aid is now freely given in the case of young offenders, who are 
frequently discharged upon expressing their willingness to place themselves 
under the care of our agent, who attends the court daily.

"We propose to ask the magistrates now to adopt a similar course with older 
and more hardened offenders when they are willing to enter the Home for twelve 
months - the shortest period which experience has proved efficacious."

Of course a single "Home" will not be able to cope with more than a fraction 
of the evil as it now exists.
 