
For most football fans, the big event this weekend is the Champions League 
final. But in Sukhumi, capital of the breakaway region of Abkhazia, attention 
will be on teams from 12 unrecognised countries – ranging from de facto 
independent states to autonomous regions with faint hopes of future autonomy – 
taking part in the World Cup for unrecognised states.

In the opening match on Sunday afternoon, Kurdistan will take on Székely Land, 
a Hungarian-speaking part of Romania. Other participants in the tournament 
include Somaliland and theChagos Islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chagos-islands>. None of the participants 
are UN members states.

The final lineup of the tournament has changed after a number of teams 
withdrew. The County of Nice declined to participate owing to “organisational 
restructuring”, the Isle of Man pulled out because the UK government advises 
against travel to Abkhazia, and the Aymara people from South America could not 
travel after promised funding from the Chilean government did not come through, 
according to tournament organisers.


The tournament is run by Conifa, which represents national sides unable to join
Fifa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa>, the world football body. The 
first tournament took place in 2014 in Östersund, Sweden, where the County of 
Nice beat the Isle of Man in the final and the Arameans beat South Ossetia in 
the third-place playoff.


Conifa’s general secretary, Sascha Düerkop, said the tournament gave 
unrecognised states a chance to play international football, and complained 
that Fifa’s regulations were often unfair or inconsistent.


“It is still absolutely not clear or transparent who can be a member of Fifa,” 
said Düerkop. Gibraltar and Kosovo were recently made members of Uefa and are 
thus eligible to play in international tournaments, despite not being UN member 
states.

“We absolutely applaud the decision that both were finally allowed into Fifa, 
as surely they are the only FAs that have de facto governmental power of the 
territories mentioned. But the same is true for the Abkhazian FA, the 
Nagorno-Karabakh FA, the Northern Cyprus FA, the Crimea FA and the South 
Ossetia FA.”

Meanwhile the Isle of Man, Jersey and Guernsey have more political 
independence from the UK than Gibraltar, according to Duerkop, but are not 
allowed to play international football.

Abkhazia, a subtropical chunk of coastline on the Black Sea that was once a 
popular Soviet holiday resort, is considered by most of the world to be part of
Georgia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/georgia-news>, but has functioned as 
a de facto independent statelet since a war after the breakup of the Soviet 
Union.

In 2009 Russia recognised the territory as independent, and it now functions 
as a Russian protectorate. Other than Russia, only Venezuela, Nicaragua and the 
Pacific island of Naururecognise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/dec/14/nauro-recognises-abkhazia-south-ossetia>
 Abkhazia’s independence.

A spokesperson for the Georgian government said no permission had been sought 
from Georgia to host the tournament, but added that by definition the Conifa 
tournament was for unrecognised states and thus “does not entail the 
legitimisation of the regime in control”.

He added that entering Abkhazia from Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> was a violation of Georgian 
territorial integrity, and as such any players who did so would be banned from 
Georgia in future, and a criminal case would be initiated against them.

Matches will be played at Sukhumi’s Dinamo stadium, which has a capacity of 
4,300, and in the town of Gagra, a resort town where Joseph Stalin had a dacha. 
Organisers expect some of the matches to sell out, thanks to demand from 
locals, holidaying Russians and a small handful of fans who plan to make the 
trip to support their teams.
 