
The World Bank has pledged to step up the fight against extreme poverty after 
announcing that tough negotiations with rich countries have left it with a 
record$75bn (£60bn) for grants and soft loans 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2016/12/15/global-community-commitment-end-poverty-ida18>
 to its poorest members over the next three years.

Despite budgetary pressures caused by slow growth and austerity, the 
Washington-based institution said 47 countries had agreed to make donations to 
theInternational Development Association <https://ida.worldbank.org> – its fund 
for providing assistance to the least-developed nations.

The bank said that for the first time in IDA’s 56-year history it would be 
using its strong credit rating to raise money for the fund from the world’s 
capital markets. A third of the $75bn will be raised in this way, with a third 
contributed by donor governments and a third coming from the bank’s own 
resources. The last IDA round raised just under $52bn.

“This is a pivotal step in the movement to end extreme poverty,” the World Bank
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/worldbank> Group president, Jim Yong 
Kim, said. “The commitments made by our partners, combined with IDA’s 
innovations to crowd in the private sector and raise funds from capital 
markets, will transform the development trajectory of the world’s poorest 
countries. We are grateful for our partners’ trust in IDA’s ability to deliver 
results.”


IDA was set up in 1960 and runs on three-year replenishment cycles. The new 
round – IDA18 – will run from 2017 to 2020 and is intended to support health 
and nutrition for 400 million people, access to water for 45 million people, 
training for 9-10 million teachers and immunisations for 130-180 million 
children.

The bank will not reveal details of the contributions made by individual 
countries until the new year. Britain was thebiggest single donor 
<http://www.brettonwoodsproject.org/2014/01/ida-17-record-size-real-terms/> to 
the last round of funding (IDA17), followed by the US.

The Department for International Development will maintain funding for IDA at 
its previous sterling level but, at a time when government aid spending has 
come under attack, will insist on reforms at the bank to ensure the money is 
well spent. The development secretary, Priti Patel, has made it clear to Kim 
that he should be able to explain why, where and how the bank is spending UK 
taxpayers’ money.

Kyle Peters, the World Bank Group’s interim managing director and co-chair of 
the IDA18 negotiations, said: “With this innovative package, the world’s 
poorest countries – especially the most fragile and vulnerable – will get the 
support they need to grow, create opportunities for people, and make themselves 
more resilient to shocks and crises. 

“IDA’s focus on issues like climate change, gender equality and preventing 
conflict and violence will also contribute to greater stability and progress 
around the world.”


Peters added that the commitment was a “decisive and inspiring” response to 
the challenge of achieving the ambitious sustainable development goals for 
poverty reduction adopted by the international community in 2015.

 The bank said it had asked donor countries to match the contributions in 
national currencies that they made to IDA17 and that in the vast majority of 
cases the call had been heeded.

Kim believes the extra money will help achieve the two key goals he has set 
for the bank: eradicating extreme poverty by 2030 and raising the living 
standards of the bottom 40% of the population in developing countries. The bank 
says IDA will be able to double the resources to address fragility, conflict 
and violence as well as additional financing for refugees and countries that 
host them.

Some of the extra funding will be channelled through the bank’s private sector 
arm, the International Finance Corporation, a decision that drew criticism from 
the development charityOxfam <https://www.oxfam.org/>. Nick Galasso, head of 
Oxfam’s World Bank office, said: “This is great and sorely needed news, when 
the world faces the crises of inequality and climate change.

“The World Bank is also proposing to dramatically increase the money it gives 
via the private sector, which would be a bad idea. The bank has a very poor 
track record in this area, bankrolling corporations that make active use of tax 
havens and others that have been involved in murderous land grabs. We urge the 
bank to significantly increase their oversight and protections before a single 
dollar is invested in this way.”


Jamie Drummond, executive director for global strategy at the One Campaign 
<https://www.one.org/us/>, said: “We expect more than half of the $75bn 
committed during this replenishment to flow to Africa over the next three 
years. Such robust backing for the bank is a real boon for the fight against 
extreme poverty, hunger, deadly diseases, and the other root causes of forced 
displacement. It offers an important opportunity as we partner to help 
countries like Nigeria and Mali tackle extreme poverty, extreme climate, and 
extreme ideology.”
 