
An inexperienced Sydney journalist and her employer, Yahoo7, face a hefty 
penalty for publishing a story thatresulted in a Melbourne murder jury being 
discharged. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/30/yahoo-7-reporters-explanation-over-aborted-trial-strains-credibility>

The Victorian supreme court judge John Dixon last month found reporter Krystal 
Johnson and Yahoo7 guilty of contempt of court for publishing details about a 
defendant that could prejudice a jury.

Johnson bypassed subeditors to publish a news story about the trial of Mataio 
Aleluia on 17 August.

The finding of contempt can be revealed after a guilty verdict was delivered 
in Aleluia’s retrial on Thursday.

Aleluia was found guilty of murdering mother-of-two Brittany Shanice Harvie, 
22, in a violent rage in Clayton South in June 2015 because he thought she had 
cheated on him.

In delivering his finding in the contempt matter, Dixon said Aleluia was 
standing trial for the most serious offence known to the law.

“As a matter of fact, the content of the article clearly had a real and 
definite tendency to prejudice the accused’s trial,” Dixon said.

The Crown prosecutor Kerri Judd QC had described the publication of the 
article as serious contempt: “What was published was effectively the 
publication of prior criminal conduct of the same kind alleged in the trial.”

The defence barrister William Houghton QC, in defending the article, had said 
modern juries should not be equated with “mere peasants”.

He said the trial judge, Justice Lex Lasry, had given a stern and solemn 
warning to the jury to ignore media coverage.

Yahoo 7 reporter's explanation over aborted murder trial 'strains credibility'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/30/yahoo-7-reporters-explanation-over-aborted-trial-strains-credibility>
The contempt trial heard there was a “large spike” in access to the Yahoo7 
article the day it was uploaded to the website and it was still receiving hits 
a day later.

The offending article was accessed about 4,000 times in Victoria, the court 
heard.

A further hearing in January will consider a penalty and costs for Yahoo7 and 
Johnson.

The judgment sent a clear message that journalists and publishers need to take 
special care when publishing material concerning matters that are before a 
court, the director of public prosecutions, John Champion SC, said in a 
statement.

 