
While progress has been made on ensuring that more women survive childbirth, 
basic maternal healthcare remains out of reach for millions of women. Around 
800 women die each day from preventable causes related to pregnancy and 
childbirth.

As the UN prepares to phase out its millennium development goals, which 
included the target of cutting maternal deaths by 75%,we asked readers to share 
their stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/07/maternal-healthcare-childbirth-your-stories>
 of maternal healthcare provision. Here are some of the responses we received.

‘I gave birth on my wedding day. The baby was three months early’

Toyin Ojora-Saraki, Nigeria
 Toyin Saraki, who gave birth on her wedding day in Nigeria. Photograph: Toyin 
Saraki 
I gave birth to twins – on my wedding day – in an urban maternity hospital in 
my home country of Nigeria. The birth was three months premature, and midwives 
and doctors were present, but there was a fatal delay in finding an 
anaesthetist to enable an emergency caesarean section by general anaesthetic 
since an epidural was neither offered nor available.


I had been preparing for the birth in the UK, receiving prenatal care in 
London from consultants. As it was a multiple birth, prenatal consultants 
provided consistent care in the months leading up to my due date. However, I 
had to prepare for my wedding in Nigeria and had to travel to the country 
before my due date. I was assured that it should be fine to return home, get 
married, and make it back to London in time to give birth.

Yet on my wedding day, and within only 24 hours, I got married, gave birth 
three months prematurely, and lost one of my twin babies in childbirth. We were 
fortunate, however, that as soon as the emergency arose, I immediately received 
two of an indicated three steroid injections to help my babies’ lungs mature 
faster.

I came close to death myself, having become severely anaemic. I had to fight 
to save my life and the life of the surviving twin. In getting through this 
harrowing process, my child and I are very lucky to be here today. The care 
following the birth was diligent, but uncomfortable and difficult due to a lack 
of modern resources.

Three days after giving birth in the hospital, I suffered from painful 
engorgement and had to express my breast milk. The nurses treating me handed me 
a white plastic bucket, without explaining what I should do. They began 
pressing my breasts to pump milk into the bucket, leading to a lot of crying 
and pain on my part.

Knowing that an experience like mine is all-too-common for mothers and infants 
around the world is heartbreaking, but it could have been worse, because, in 
fact, 14% of Nigerian women give birth without anyone present. Some of these 
women – if they survive – suffer permanent birth injuries. Stillbirths often go 
unrecorded, let alone lead to counselling. This is why I started theWellbeing 
Foundation Africa <http://wellbeingfoundationnig.org/>, which works to improve 
maternal, newborn, and child health across the continent.

What are the millennium development goals on child mortality and maternal 
health all about?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/27/millennium-development-goals-child-mortality-maternal-health-explainer>
‘Healthcare is underfunded in Poland, but I got the care I needed’

Claudia, Poland

I decided to share my story because I was very satisfied with the care I 
received in a public hospital in eastern Europe and I thought this might go 
against the usual complaints we hear about public healthcare in this part of 
the world.

At 35 weeks of pregnancy, I was diagnosed with pregnancy cholestasis [a liver 
condition], which meant I had to stay in hospital until 37 weeks, when a baby 
is considered full term, and have an induced labour. I received excellent care 
for the almost three weeks while I was in hospital, from a team of midwives in 
Warsaw. I even got to choose a vegan diet.

 At this hospital, women in labour are taken to newly renovated rooms, where 
conditions are very good: there is a bath, a private toilet, birthing balls and 
mattresses and many other items to use for finding comfort during labour. I 
gave birth with the midwife on call, who was extremely patient and discreet.

I’m just happy to say that we got this very warm, thoughtful care at a public 
hospital despite health systems in Poland and the rest of eastern European 
countries being systematically underfunded. While I was in the hospital, I read 
a notice on the wall which said that state support for this hospital covers 
about two-thirds of the cost of a birth and that they do need support from 
donations and philanthropists, but it seems that they do manage in the end to 
find the funds they need. Or they manage somehow to compensate with love and 
care.

‘My mother didn’t see a doctor for her entire pregnancy’

Name withheld, Malawi 

This is not my birthing story but my mother’s. She had my brother at age 16 
and me at 18 in Malawi. My mum never talked about her pregnancy or childbirth 
experiences, and it was only recently, on a return home to see her, that I 
found out she had given birth at home with both of us. She was with her 
mother-in-law and older sister both times, and she was in labour for two days 
with my brother. Living in the UK, my idea of homebirths is very different from 
my mother’s experience. She didn’t see a doctor or health professional for her 
entire pregnancy or labour. There was a health clinic about an hour’s drive 
away on public transport, but she says she never considered it an option. Her 
friends had all given birth at home with traditional birth attendants, and her 
mother-in-law had said that going to the clinic went against the family 
tradition of women delivering in their villages.

Things were tense with her first labour, but luckily my brother didn’t require 
vital care when he finally arrived. Mum says she felt that God had watched over 
her during that labour. She says that now women in Malawi don’t have to go 
through the same thing, and it is the norm to go to a clinic for at least one 
visit, even if you are delivering in your village. All of my friends still in 
Malawi have received all the basic care that I would receive here in the UK, 
but they’re mostly in the city. My hope is that every woman gets the choice to 
get the care they need.

Empty promises mean African mothers are dying of preventable diseases | Dr 
Joachim Osur
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/28/maternal-health-african-mothers-dying-preventable-diseases-mdg5>



‘The public health system is very good in Germany’

Anna, Germany

I had monthly pre-natal check-ups up to two months before delivery, then 
bi-monthly check-ups until delivery, done by my gynaecologist-obstetrician. 
There was a week-long prenatal class to prepare for the delivery, paid for by 
public insurance. We hired a housekeeper as I was too large to do the usual 
share of domestic work. Also, privately I got weekly massages, weekly lymphatic 
drainages, weekly private antenatal lessons, bi-weekly pre-natal yoga classes, 
weekly osteopathy and acupuncture sessions, weekly prenatal pilates and aqua 
fitness classes. I also saw a personal trainer every week.

After the delivery and two nights in hospital, we were discharged to go home. 
A midwife visited every day for 10 days after we arrived home. We had also 
hired a maternity nanny to look after the baby. A paediatrician close to our 
house checked the baby after two weeks. For my personal antenatal care, my 
insurance paid for one weekly class. Privately, I attended four others. The 
public health system is very good in Germany, although we live a comfortable 
life in an affluent part of Germany’s wealthiest city. Instead of buying a new 
car or expensive furniture, we paid for excellent care.

‘My sister-in-law gave birth in an overcrowded refugee camp’

Samantha, Kenya and Canada

My husband spent 10 years in Daadab refugee camp in Kenya, and his sister gave 
birth there. She was one of the lucky ones who received care at a clinic, and 
that saved her life because she had to have an emergency caesarean. Most of her 
friends gave birth in their homes in the camp, sometimes for cultural reasons 
and sometimes because they simply didn’t have a choice. The camp is so crowded, 
and is growing with around 1,000 births each month, apparently. I’m so grateful 
that my nephew survived and is now a healthy little boy in Tanzania, where they 
were able to emigrate.

In comparison, I gave birth in Canada with a midwife present throughout the 
birth. I had weekly check-ups and had visiting home-care for the weeks after. I 
always felt safe and cared for, and knew that if any complications arose there 
would be help at hand. How is it fair that my son had a much greater chance of 
survival at birth than his cousin?

‘I could have saved my first child if I had had the chance to learn about 
maternal and child health’

Daw Nwe Nwe (sent via World Vision), Burma
 Daw Nwe Nwe with her family. Photograph: World Vision 
I had never heard about antenatal and postnatal care for mothers when I was 
expecting my first three children. I did not understand the importance of 
immunisations and nutrition. When World Vision started working in our 
community, I got to learn about the importance of maternal and child healthcare.

I think I could have saved my first child if I had the chance to learn about 
maternal and child healthcare earlier. Now, I always attend maternal, child 
health and nutrition awareness sessions. I also received iron tablets.

I realised that I was not eating properly while I was expecting my first three 
children. But while I was expecting my fourth child, I ate nutritious foods and 
followed what I had learned, so there were no problems during delivery. I only 
breastfed my daughter until she was six months old. She is healthier than my 
other children. Now, I promptly go to the clinic when my children are sick. I 
am afraid I might lose them like my first child.

‘I lost two brothers at a young age due to no access to basic medical 
facilities’

Darjat, Pakistan

I was born in a mountain village 750km away from Islamabad, Pakistan. My 
grandmother was there but no health worker was present. During the time of my 
birth in 1959, [we] only [had] the indigenous knowledge of elder women, but 
during my kids’ time, they were provided with all the preventative vaccines and 
check-ups before and after birth in the small village, and later in the town 
and city. My wife also had access to basic check-ups before and after 
deliveries. I wish we had had basic medical facilities in the village where I 
was born. I lost two brothers at a young age due to no access to basic medical 
facilities.

‘My baby had to be resuscitated but I had full trust in the medical team’

Lotte, Australia

We had public healthcare and it was fabulous. Prenatal care was uneventful and 
I felt informed. When I was admitted for labour, a midwife was with us the 
entire time, even when there wasn’t much happening. She was there unobtrusively 
in the background doing paperwork if we didn’t need her, and was right there to 
assure, advise, and answer questions when we did. As labour progressed, things 
got complicated – the baby’s heart rate dropped and he had to be brought [out] 
quickly with forceps, then resuscitated – but the wonderful care we had 
received up until that point meant that I had full trust in the medical team. I 
am so happy with the birth, even though it was complicated.

 * How would you describe the provision of maternal healthcare in your 
country? Share your thoughts in the comment thread below 


 