
For physicians teaching in Georgian London, the solution was never in 
question. Faced with a shortage of bodies to dissect, they chopped up cadavers 
and handed parts out.


The sheer number of students passing through London’s medical schools in the 
mid 18th century made it the only city where resourceful doctors had to share 
out bodies, often acquired from dubious sources.


The revelation comes from the first large-scale investigation into dissection 
and autopsy practices across Britain from 1600-1900.

 “There were so many students, they couldn’t all be given a single cadaver,” 
said Jenna Dittmar, from the University of Cambridge. “So they were given them 
in pieces. They might have a knee one day, an elbow another. As long as they 
dissected two complete bodies they could be medically licensed. It didn’t 
matter if it was in bits.”

Dittmar studied bones from hundreds of people whose remains were used for 
medical dissections and autopsies. Some of the bodies had been dug up from 
graves, though some had been donated to science.

 She found records instructing physicians in London on how to dismember 
corpses so that students received the right parts to study. “They seemed to 
focus on the joints. Maybe they would cut mid-forearm and then you would have 
the elbow, wrist or shoulder to give to someone. The head was normally given to 
someone, the body divided in the middle, the legs given to someone else.”

Presenting her work at the American Association for the Advancement of Science 
meeting in San Jose 
<http://meetings.aaas.org/?utm_source=visualurl&utm_medium=redirect&utm_campaign=opp_am15visual>
, Dittmar said that when somebody died, their bones were sometimes accompanied 
by the remains of their pets. “If somebody died, they would have added a leg 
and arm and other pieces they were dissecting to the coffin. Maybe along with a 
dog,” she said.

“These individuals have sometimes been taken from graves and dissected, but 
they have also contributed massively to modern medicine and modern surgery. 
Whether they were willing participants or not.”
 