
Job: chief executive, All3Media
Age: 61
Industry: broadcasting
Turnover: £400m
Staff: 625
2007 ranking: 56

Steve Morrison <https://www.theguardian.com/media/stevemorrison> is the chief 
executive of one of the UK's biggest production companies that just keeps on 
getting bigger.

The home of Hollyoaks, Shameless and Midsomer Murders has expanded further in 
the past 12 months with the purchases of Peep Show producer Objective 
Productions (in a deal estimated to be worth up to £50m) and US producer Zoo.
 Steve Morrison. Photograph: Newscast  Objective, which also makes Derren 
Brown's series for Channel 4 and has grown rapidly in recent years, was the 
12th firm to be bought by All3Media, established five years ago by Morrison and 
his former Granada colleagues, Jules Burns and David Liddiment.
It also bought US producer Zoo, whose credits include Are You Smarter Than a 
5th Grader, remade in the UK as Sky One's Are You Smarter Than A 10-Year-Old?

Morrison established All3Media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media> 
five years ago with his former ITV colleagues, Jules Burn and David Liddiment. 
Among its latest ventures is Studio Lambert which it launched in partnership 
with Stephen Lambert, the former chief creative officer of RDF Media, 
responsible for the likes of Wife Swap and Faking It, who resigned over his 
part in the BBC1 "Crowngate" controversy.

It joins a stable of production companies under the All3Media umbrella 
including Lime Pictures (Hollyoaks), Company Pictures (Shameless), Bentley 
Productions (Midsomer Murders and Ultimate Force) and Maverick Television (How 
To Look Good Naked).

US venture capitalists Permira came on board two years ago, buying the company 
in a joint deal with management that made Morrison between £10m and £15m. 
Morrison and his management team remain major shareholders in the company 
following the deal, which valued the company at around £320m.

A former producer of World in Action, Glasgow-born Morrison spent 28 years at 
Granada, with credits including Cracker, Prime Suspect and the Oscar-winning 
film My Left Foot.

He rose through the ranks to become chief executive of Granada Media in 1996 
and was instrumental in its buy-up of Yorkshire TV, LWT and United News & 
Media. He left in 2002 in the wake of the ITV Digital debacle.

· To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk 
<mailto:editor@mediaguardian.co.uk> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 