
With Carson Palmer sidelined by a concussion, the one-win Arizona Cardinals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arizona-cardinals> turned to Larry 
Fitzgerald, David Johnson and an opportunistic defense for a much-needed 
victory.

NFL week five predictions: Matt Ryan and Falcons to upset unbeaten Broncos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/nfl-week-five-predictions-matt-ryan-falcons-broncos>
Drew Stanton threw two touchdown passes to Fitzgerald in the quarterback’s 
first start in two years, Johnson ran for two scores and the Cardinals 
capitalized on San Francisco mistakes to beat the 49ers 33-21 on Thursday night.

“We were a hungry team, a team that knows that we dug a hole for ourselves and 
we had to win this game,” coach Bruce Arians said.

The Cardinals (2-3) got 17 points off three turnovers by the 49ers (1-4) – two 
interceptions by Blaine Gabbert and a fumbled kickoff return by Chris Davis – 
and also had one drive extended by a running-into-the-kicker penalty.

Those three scoring drives totaled just 41 yards, but proved to be enough to 
beat the sloppy 49ers as the Cardinals survived a week with without Palmer out 
with a concussion.

“I don’t think anybody played well on offense. Nobody,” Niners coach Chip 
Kelly said. “I don’t think we protected well enough, I don’t think we threw it 
well enough and we had too many drops and two interceptions.”

Stanton didn’t produce much, going 11 for 27 for 124 yards. But Arizona didn’t 
turn the ball over and got 157 yards rushing from Johnson to get the win. 
Johnson added 28 yards receiving, and Fitzgerald caught six passes for 81 yards 
as that duo combined to gain 266 of the team’s 288 yards from scrimmage.

The defense did the rest with the two interceptions and seven sacks.

“We’ve been saying all week it just starts with one. Just get one win and try 
to stack them,” defensive lineman Calais Campbell said. “We’ve been a team in 
the past that can rip off a bunch of them. Now we have to figure out what we 
can do to keep that ball rolling.”

The game changed in a span of less than 4 minutes starting late in the second 
quarter. Campbell’s interception of a deflected pass set up Arizona’s first 
score on a 21-yard pass from Stanton to Fitzgerald with 1:40 left in the half. 
Davis’ fumble of the second-half kickoff then set up Johnson’s 4-yard run that 
put Arizona up for good.

“We got the momentum going,” Stanton said. “Unfortunately, I think, it’s one 
of those things as an offense you’re waiting to make a play, and got that spark 
from the defense. Then to come out in the second half and get the ball right 
there was huge.”

There were several thousand empty seats at the game but the fans who did show 
up were frustrated by what they saw. At one point in the third quarter, a chant 
of “We want Kap! We want Kap!” started up as fans wanted to give former starter 
Colin Kaepernick a shot at quarterback. Gabbert responded by leading an 82-yard 
TD drive fueled in part by his 24-yard run.

The chants started again after Gabbert threw his second interception.

Gabbert finished 18 for 31 for 162 yards and Kelly would not address whether 
it was time to make a quarterback change.

“We’re 1-4. We’re going to look at everything,” he said. “We have to make sure 
we’re giving our team the best chance to go out and win.”
 