
Job: chief executive, All3Media
Age: 60
Industry: broadcasting
Turnover:  £201m
2006 ranking: 80

Turn on your TV and you are never far away from an All3Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media> production. Shameless, Midsomer 
Murders, Hollyoaks, Richard & Judy, ITV's formula one coverage - all produced 
by various parts of Steve Morrison's empire, the big beast of the independent 
production sector.

Set up just four years ago by the one-time Granada Media Group chief executive 
and two of his former ITV colleagues, David Liddiment and Jules Burns, 
All3Media was bought by US venture capitalists Permira last year, netting 
Morrison a fortune estimated between £10m and £15m.

Established with the backing of another private equity group, Bridgepoint, 
All3Media began by buying the Chrysalis TV business. It then embarked on a 
spending spree scooping up the likes of Brookside producer Mersey TV, Castaway 
producer Lion Television and Company Pictures, which makes Shameless.

Morrison's empire now spans 11 independent production companies, including 
Bentley (Midsomer Murders), Cactus (Richard & Judy) and North One (formula 
one). It also moved into talent management, buying up Michael Foster's Artists 
Rights Group.

And it shows no sign of slowing down just yet, acquiring Birmingham-based 
Maverick Media, producer of Channel 4's 10 Years Younger, last month.

"I'm really enjoying myself and hope we will build a bigger production 
business," Morrison told the Independent last year.

He has said his company is built around "TV brands, new ideas and exceptional 
talent".

Morrison and his management team continue to be major shareholders in the 
company following last year's Permira deal, which valued the company at around 
£320m.

A former producer of World in Action, Glasgow-born Morrison spent 28 years at 
Granada, with credits including Cracker, Prime Suspect and Oscar-winning film 
My Left Foot.

He rose through the ranks to become chief executive of Granada Media in 1996 
and was instrumental in the broadcaster's purchase of Yorkshire TV, LWT and 
United News & Media. He left in 2002 in the wake of the ITV Digital debacle.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 