
Job: associate editor (politics), chief political commentator, the Observer
Age: 46
Industry: journalism
New entry

"If you are in government then Andrew Rawnsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewrawnsley> is one of two people you 
read on a Sunday," said one member of our panel. "Along with [Sunday Telegraph 
columnist and Spectator editor] Matthew d'Ancona. Then you know where you 
stand."

The Observer's associate editor, Rawnsley is one of the pre-eminent political 
columnists of his generation. But if Rawnsley is from the left and d'Ancona 
from the right, then the subject matter of many of their columns since the turn 
of the year has been the same - the apparent implosion of a prime minister and 
his party.
 Andrew Rawnsley  A few recent headlines from Rawnsley's column: "A 
radioactive Gordon Brown is reaching the critical point", "How the great 
clunking fist punched himself on the nose", and "Change Gordon Brown and all is 
well? Oh please".
If Labourites read Rawnsley to see what needs to be put right - and how - then 
Tories read the Observer man to see what the government might do next.

Nominated this year for the prestigious Orwell prize for political journalism, 
Rawnsley joined the Observer in 1993. He previously spent eight years at the 
Guardian, where he was the paper's parliamentary sketch writer.

Rawnsley became a familiar figure on TV and radio with Channel 4's A Week in 
Politics and BBC Radio 4's The Westminster Hour.

He also fronted Channel 4 documentaries Gordon Brown: Where Did It All Go 
Wrong? and the Rise and Fall of Tony Blair, and co-presented ITV's politics 
show, The Sunday Edition, with Andrea Catherwood.

His book, Servants of the People, traced the history of the early years of New 
Labour.

· To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk 
<mailto:editor@mediaguardian.co.uk> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 