
Job: editor, Vogue
Age: 49
Industry: publishing
Staff: 40
New entry

Alexandra Shulman <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alexandra-shulman> is now 
in her 15th year in charge of Vogue, and the circulation of the Conde Nast 
magazine just keeps on going up.

Vogue celebrated its 90th birthday last year with a record circulation of 
nearly 220,000 - its 10th consecutive sales increase.

"Something's going wrong if it's going down. I see that we should only go up," 
said Shulman, the fashion magazine industry's most influential editor.

She attributed the success of the title to "deliberately making Vogue a 
complicated and dense magazine that isn't easy to just flick through".

"Our readership spans the decades because we provide style in the broader 
sense. We creatively commission most of the content, rather than rehashing 
material that's already out there," she said of the magazine's success.

"You don't see that kind of input and creativity elsewhere because my rivals 
don't have the facilities or desire; they're selling magazines by loading them 
with paparazzi snaps."

Shulman began her career at another Conde Nast title, Tatler, after writing 
freelance articles for its then editor, Tina Brown. Rising to become the 
magazine's features editor, she spent a year at the Daily Telegraph before 
joining Vogue as its features editor in 1988.

After two years as editor of GQ she returned to Vogue as its editor in 1992.

A newspaper columnist as well as an editor, Shulman switched her allegiance 
from the Daily Telegraph to the Daily Mail last year.

Founded in 1917, Shulman's Vogue showed it was prepared to move with the times 
with photoshoots starring Wayne Rooney's girlfriend, Coleen McLaughlin, and 
Little Britain's Vicky Pollard.

Awarded an OBE for services to the magazine industry, Shulman joined the Conde 
Nast board in 1997.

She said The Devil Wears Prada, the film based on the book by former American 
Vogue intern Lauren Weisberger, was "very funny".

"Parts of it resonated. It wasn't completely unlike the existence here." But 
which parts?

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 