
Job: head of E4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/e4>, commissioning editor 
responsible for Big Brother, Channel 4
Age: 40
Industry: broadcasting
Annual programme budget: £60m
Staff: 7
New entry

Angela Jain <https://www.theguardian.com/media/angela-jain> has turned E4 from 
a repository for Big Brother spin-offs into a digital channel that genuinely 
punches above its weight with hits such as Skins, The Inbetweeners and Charlie 
Brooker's Dead Set.

As Channel 4's commissioning editor responsible for Big Brother she also 
oversees the main channel's most important show.

The 10th series is airing this summer and 1the show, commissioned until at 
least 2010, is as important toChannel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> as EastEnders is to BBC1 – a 
reliable ratings winner, if not the powerhouse it once was.

E4, meanwhile, has outgunned BBC3 despite a smaller budget. The teen drama 
Skins, a story of supercool Bristol college kids, is E4's most popular 
homegrown show to date, with a peak audience of 1.8 million, and it took home 
the audience prize, voted for by viewers, at this year's Bafta TV awards.

Skins, produced by Company Pictures, has been a hit with both critics and 
viewers and is also notable for championing a new generation of young 
scriptwriters and for its innovative use of the web.

The drama built a huge following online, premiering episodes on E4.com and 
MySpace. It also took big risks, dumping the entire cast between the second and 
third series. Jain described it as "completely channel-defining".

If Skins was E4's breakout drama, then Bafta-nominated teen sitcom The 
Inbetweeners is its breakout comedy hit.

Written by two former The 11 O'Clock Show producers, Damon Beesley and Iain 
Morris, The Inbetweeners returned for a second series with nearly 1 million 
viewers this year, beating BBC2's Graham Norton Show in the ratings.

Dead Set, a zombie thriller set in and around the Big Brother house, was E4's 
first move into the horror genre. Penned by Guardian columnist Charlie Brooker, 
it was another big hit for the channel.

Jain was appointed Channel 4's commissioning editor for factual entertainment 
in 2005 after two years at Channel Five, where she was responsible for shows 
including Pet Plastic Surgery. She took charge of E4 in 2007.

She was previously one of the launch commissioning editors of E4, ordering 
long-running strand Popworld and the reality show Chained.

She began her career working in children's television at the BBC and ITV.

Not everything Jain touches turns to gold. She was also responsible for 
Channel 4 and E4's 2005 spoof reality show Space Cadets, which attempted to 
persuade a group of gullible contestants that they were being trained to be 
astronauts. When no one tuned in, the joke was on Channel 4.

Endemol-produced Big Brother remains as controversial as ever, if not quite 
reaching the peak – or rather, the low – of the Celebrity Big Brother racism 
row two years ago.

In the show's ninth series last year, housemate Alexandra de Gale was removed 
after making alleged gangster threats, while in the 2007 series Emily Parr was 
disqualified after using racially offensive language. What will the 10th series 
bring? No one will be watching closer than Jain, who this year cut back on the 
E4's live streaming from the Big Brother house, further evidence of how her 
channel has moved away from the reality show.

One producer described Jain as an "iron fist in a velvet glove". "She's very 
smart and very tough," he said. "But unlike some commissioning editors who bang 
the table and shout and scream and let you know they're being tough, she 
manages to be polite and charming."
 