
 I've always liked a critic who doesn't think like anyone else. Someone who 
takes me so much by surprise with their opinions, approach and rigour that they 
themselves become a kind of artist. I like a critic who demonstrates that they 
deserve to evaluate and document the work and art of others by writing in such 
a way that the work makes more sense, sometimes only makes sense, because of 
what they write and why they write it. I loved critics, whether it was Kenneth 
Tynan, Susan Sontag, Tom Wolfe, Richard Meltzer, John Updike, Roland Barthes, 
Pauline Kael, Angela Carter or Lester Bangs, for the way they made it clear, 
with such evangelical poise, precision and purpose, that without the great 
critic, the world, and the worlds of those that made up the world, was never 
properly finished off. I loved critics so much – because they seemed to 
complete the shape of everything, the work of art, the performance, the show, 
the argument, the punchline, the star, the glamour, the mind itself, the past, 
the present and the future, as if time itself needed careful working out – that 
I wanted to be one.

I think of the critic at their best as a holy, inspiring being committed to 
the detection and release of fantastic information and unexpected theories 
about the abilities and visions of great, and sometime mediocre, minds. A being 
that dictates what's great and what's not, and how the hell things turned out 
the way they did, often by making up the truth, according to their own view of 
how things should be, and could be.

I always thought that the critic was immortal. I suppose I would, having 
become one. I always thought that the critic wasn't there, wherever they were, 
in whatever vaulted space, venturing towards whatever new horizon, to give 
stars, mark out of 10, or base their guidance and interpretation merely on 
economic value, routine taste or celebrity status. I always thought that as a 
critic, you wanted to be the very best, high above the rest, because if 
everyone is a critic, and we know that now, when everyone can make themselves 
seen and heard with their mere opinions, their comments, then the great critic, 
the real critic, the critic who actually follows some kind of cause, has to 
soar above the heads of this babbling collective, this milling congregation, by 
demonstrating that what the critic has, as opposed to the commentator, the 
contributor, those that simply know what they like, and disagree, or agree, or 
can't stop themselves chipping in, or cannot believe it, is a form of 
discipline, involving experience, perception, audacity, and, yes, a kind of 
courage.

The critic has always battled to survive, more so now that their role has been 
thoroughly questioned by a recent turn of events that means machines have a 
chance eventually to dictate how the world, and the mind, gets finished off. 
Because the critic is always battling, against the flow, the status quo, to 
make things better, to make things different, to locate and champion the 
underdog, the neglected, the not yet important, there's less and less room for 
such a being.

As a battling critic, wanting to be the very best, against all the odds, up 
against everyone who now knows as much, if not more, about my once protected 
field of expertise, you find yourself craving for the arrival of a critic that 
can make fresh, invigorating sense of the role, and carry on the tradition into 
this new world where all the meaning seems to be emptying all the meaning, 
where all the meaning simply passes by without the time and space, which is 
peculiar given all this new time and space, to take shape, to reveal itself. 
Oddly, though, when, rarely, a great new critic does arrive, rewriting history 
as they go along, remaking the world in their own image, the competitive 
element that the great critic must have rears up, and you can feel a kind of 
resentment. I feel this with Alex Ross, the music critic of the New Yorker, who 
has written the kind of book, The Rest is Noise, that absolutely had to be 
written, and could only have been written by him, a brilliant demonstration 
that classical music, all that monolithic history and immense discover and 
re-discovery, can be written about in a way that does not obscure and dry up 
its brilliance and beauty, but that plants it firmly in the centre of the 
modern world, as a vital part of the world that is turning into another world. 
I love the book, but I'm jealous of it. I love it, because it shows that the 
great critic makes a difference to how things are perceived, and can turn out a 
work of art. I'm jealous, because I didn't have the discipline, the knowledge, 
the motivation, to produce something quite like it. I love it, more, because it 
re-inspires me as a critic, to keep searching for the reason for the searching, 
to appreciate how much history there is still to be written, and sorted through.

Meeting Alex Ross, I imagined I would be entering a kind of arena, and that 
there might be some metaphorical equivalent of gladiatorial arm wrestling, as I 
attempted to challenge his position, and while honouring his might as a critic 
and historian, find ways to weaken him, and even overcome him. I charge towards 
the interview room, psyched up and ready for battle – I might have been the 
best music critic in the world only in my mind, although that is quite a good 
place to be the best music critic in the world, butAlex Ross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alex-ross> came out of nowhere – out of 
classical music, as much as he hates that term, and in fact as much as he 
writes about it as a fan of Dylan, Radiohead and Pere Ubu – and took my place.

I race into the interview room, and he's already sat there, looking prim and 
proper, as if he's just slipped out of a Woody Allen movie, and looking as 
though he is not really expecting a clash of the titans, or a battle of the 
critics, but simply waiting for a polite chat about his work, and his thinking. 
He looks, actually, like he's sat in the chair under the spotlight on 
Mastermind, waiting to answer some questions about his specialist subject, 
which, in the end, we might as well say is the history of classical music from 
way back when to round about now. He looks like he fully expects, but would 
never dream of letting on that he thinks this, to get 21 points out of 21.

I put down my sword and shield, and begin the questions.
 