
Gaza's population has been reduced to a "subhuman existence" where basic 
humanitarian needs are going unmet in the face of rapidly deteriorating 
conditions, according to a senior UN official.

An Israeli economic blockade on the Gaza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gaza> Strip, home to 1.5 million 
Palestinians, has produced shortages of fuel and basic supplies and has closed 
most private businesses and pushed up poverty rates.

John Ging, director of operations in Gaza for the UN Refugee and Works Agency, 
which supports Palestinian refugees, said the crisis and continuing toll of 
civilian deaths were feeding a "growing sense of injustice" among Gaza's 
population.

"It is a disaster for everybody because it's touching everybody in every 
aspect of their life, from the moment you get up in the morning until you go to 
bed at night," he said. "The way things have been reduced here, there's a very 
sub-human existence for the general population."

Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> has significantly reduced 
the amount of fuel it sells to Gaza and there are now such shortages of diesel 
and petrol that many cars run on cooking gas or vegetable oil and that many 
schools can now longer bus their pupils to class.

Israel only allows 2.2m litres of industrial diesel into Gaza for the strip's 
sole power plant each week, which means it can produce just 45-55mW of 
electricity, compared to 80mW if it was fully fuelled, and the more than 100mW 
it was able to produce before the plant's transformers were bombed by Israeli 
aircraft two years ago. On Saturday, the power plant cut back its output even 
further, leaving most of Gaza City in darkness for several hours, because not 
enough fuel had been supplied.

Fuel shortages have affected water systems, leaving the 70,000 people who rely 
on water from fuel-pumped wells with a precarious supply, and meaning that 60m 
litres of raw and partially treated sewage are being pumped straight into the 
sea every day. More than two-thirds of Gaza's 4,000 agricultural water wells 
rely on fuel-powered pumps, and shortages are leaving crops to die. The World 
Bank said last month that poverty rates in Gaza were now close to 67% and that 
economic growth was zero last year.

Israeli officials argue that they will continue to allow in enough fuel, food 
and aid to avert a humanitarian crisis and claim that Hamas is manipulating the 
situation, partly by hoarding fuel. "Israel is facilitating the entry of 
humanitarian aid into the Gaza Strip while at the same time it is being 
attacked from that territory," the government said in a statement last week. 
"Israel holds Hamas fully responsible for these attacks and their consequences."

Israeli officials also criticised the continued firing of rockets and mortars 
by militants into southern Israel. An Israeli man was killed last Friday when a 
mortar struck his home at the Kfar Aza collective farm, near the Gaza border, 
and hours later the Israeli military killed five Hamas policemen in an 
airstrike. Attacks by militants in Gaza have killed five Israeli civilians and 
five soldiers this year. Israeli military attacks on Gaza this year have killed 
at least 312 Palestinians, of whom 197 were unarmed civilians, including at 
least 44 children, according to the Palestinian Centre for Human Rights.

Ging said the delivery of aid was "inadequate for the basic needs of the 
population."

"The definitions of a humanitarian crisis are rather obscene when compared 
with just how people are having to struggle to survive here at the moment," he 
said.

"For everybody here, they have a daily crisis in their life to survive and 
that crisis is created by a policy to close the Gaza Strip off from the outside 
world."

He accepted there were "serious security challenges" in operating the 
crossings into Gaza, which have been attacked by Palestinian militants. "The 
challenge is to overcome those," he said.

"The equation cannot be reduced to actions based on the illegal actions of 
others. The rocket attacks were illegal and to be condemned, he said. "But it 
doesn't justify a retaliation that is also illegal."

Several senior international officials, including Ban Ki-moon, the UN 
secretary general, and Benita Ferrero-Waldner, the commissioner for external 
relations for the European Commission, have described Israel's policy towards 
Gaza as "collective punishment".

Ging noted that the crossings were able to operate enough to supply fuel to 
the power plant and for the UN - although the UN's food distribution to nearly 
800,000 people had to be briefly halted last month because of a lack of fuel - 
and should therefore be able to supply fuel for the civilian population.

Gaza's crisis could be eased if the crossings were opened to imports and 
exports, in line with a key agreement on access to Gaza negotiated in late 2005 
by US secretary of state Condoleezza Rice. "The solution is simple: open the 
crossings," Ging said.

The UN agency runs by far the largest aid operation in Gaza, providing food 
aid to around 80% of the population and educating 200,000 children, as well as 
operating health and social services and microfinance projects.

"The civilian population are not lost to civilisation. They have not given in 
to violence as the only way," Ging said.

"They are actually struggling to protect themselves against that and they are 
getting no support. If this were understood - that Gaza is not lost to 
violence, that Gaza is not hopeless rather that the majority of people in Gaza 
are civilised - then the whole equation would change," he said

"People respond much more positively to help than they do to force, coercion 
or violence."
 