
Jurors in the “American Sniper” trial said they found Eddie Ray Routh guilty 
of murder after deciding he was using his mental illness as an excuse to evade 
responsibility for his crimes.

'American Sniper' killer Eddie Ray Routh found guilty and sentenced to life in 
prison without parole
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/25/american-sniper-trial-eddie-ray-routh-found-guilty-and-sentenced-to-life-in-prison-without-parole>
Christina Yeager said Routh’s insanity defence regarding the deaths of Chris 
Kyle – the celebrated Navy Seal sniper who became the subject of a box-office 
hit film – and Chad Littlefield was not convincing because he had brought his 
problems on himself by abusing drugs and alcohol. Routh, 27, was convicted of 
the murders after about two and a half hours of deliberations on Tuesday night, 
following nine days of testimony.

“He would get intoxicated, get in trouble,” said Yeager, one of six jurors who 
spoke to ABC News 
<http://abcnews.go.com/US/american-sniper-trial-doubt-eddie-ray-routh-knew/story?id=29209027>
 on Wednesday, “and then the police would show up and he would say, ‘I’m a 
veteran, I have PTSD, I’m insane.’ Every time something bad happened he’d pull 
that card. And also, golly, just other evidence like his other convictions and 
his pattern of behaviours through his interviews with the specialists.”

Routh, a former marine, had been given a diagnosis of post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD), spent time in several hospitals being treated for mental 
illness and had been prescribed anti-schizophrenia medication. His defence was 
that he was in the middle of a psychotic episode when he shot dead Kyle and 
Littlefield at a gun range in February 2013. But the extent of his illness and 
its cause were questioned by the prosecution and by some veterans.

The former Navy Seal who was the subject of the 2013 film Lone Survivor issued 
a scornful warningon his Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/The.Official.Marcus.Luttrell.Fanpage/posts/10152805906558406>
 soon after the verdict. Marcus Luttrell, in a post liked by more than 130,000 
users, wrote: “Justice served for Chris and the Littlefield family. To Eddie 
Ray Routh, you thought you had PTSD before .?? Wait till the boys in TDC [Texas 
Department of Criminal Justice] Find out you killed a TX hero.”

Ahead of the trial, a veterans’ group, the Warfighter Foundation 
<http://www.warfighterfoundation.org/updates/>, was sceptical of claims that 
Routh had PTSD and put effort into trying to disprove the notion.

In his closing arguments, district attorney Alan Nash sought to convince the 
jury that Routh was using mental illness as a way to escape responsibility for 
behaviour caused by his excessive use of marijuana and alcohol, and that such a 
defence was an insult to the honour of military veterans as well as the vast 
majority of people who endure health problems without committing crimes, such 
as cancer patients.

“The minute you start saying, if you served in the armed forces, we can’t hold 
you responsible for your crimes afterwards … we can’t trust you,” Nash said. “I 
am tired of the proposition that if you have a mental illness, you can’t be 
held responsible for what you do.”

Routh was sentenced to life in prison without parole and is expected to 
appeal. Kyle’s widow, Taya, was not in court to hear the verdict but posted a 
message on Facebook on Wednesday.

“What a poetic morning when the snow is melting and the winter is thawing out 
promising a new day,”she wrote <https://www.facebook.com/HonorChrisKyle>. “God 
Bless the Jury And good people of Stephenville, Texas!!”

Insanity a tough sell in Texas

Immediately after the verdict one of Littlefield’s relatives, Jerry 
Richardson, read a victim impact statement in which he said Routh’s PTSD claims 
“have been an insult to every veteran who served with honor”.

A psychiatrist called by the defence, Mitchell Dunn, said he believed that 
Routh did not have PTSD but was suffering from schizophrenia. Medical experts 
for the state said they thought Routh had exaggerated his symptoms and also 
concluded he did not have PTSD.

Texas’s legal standard for a successful insanity defence is narrow and does 
not preclude even a severely mentally ill person from being found guilty, 
provided that the accused is judged to have known right from wrong at the time 
of the crime. It reads: “It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that, at 
the time of the conduct charged, the actor, as a result of severe mental 
disease or defect, did not know that his conduct was wrong.”

Despite evidence presented at trial that Routh grew increasingly erratic and 
violent after leaving the military in 2010, his defence was undercut by his 
admission to a police officer that he knew what he had done was wrong, as well 
as his attempt to evade arrest.

George Dix, a criminal law professor at the University of Texas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas>, said insanity defences are rare 
and hard to win, unless the prosecution made no serious effort to contest them, 
and that he suspects the verdict often comes down to which expert witnesses the 
jury believes.

He is part of an informal group that has unsuccessfully lobbied for reform of 
the definition to make it more nuanced, for example by replacing “know” with 
“appreciate”. He also said he believes “the jury should be informed that if it 
finds a defendant not guilty by reason of insanity that the defendant would not 
be immediately, as one judge put it, ‘turned loose’”, but rather be likely to 
have their mental state and potential dangerousness assessed further in a 
high-security facility.

‘I think that’s what the whole world was expecting’

Amid concerns that Kyle’s fame and local popularity would prevent a fair 
trial, prospective jurors filled out a questionnaire asking if they had seen 
Clint Eastwood’s film and read the book upon which it is based. Answering yes 
did not automatically preclude them from serving on the jury.

A juror, Barrett Hutchinson, told ABC News he had seen American Sniper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-sniper> but was convinced he was 
able to remain unbiased.

“It gave me a better outlook on Chris’s role as a marine, what that job 
[entails], a greater respect for it, but as far as the actions that took place 
on 2 February [2013] Chad was still in the picture and Chad was not in that 
movie. I basically put the fact that Chris was a marine out of my mind and just 
looked at him as a person, looked at Chad as a person, looked at Eddie as a 
person and tried to make reasonable judgment,” he said.

Standing amid rows of belts and hats and shelves stacked with hundreds of 
pairs of cowboy boots, Chick Elms said he was not surprised by the verdict. “I 
didn’t see how it couldn’t be that way. I think that’s what the whole world was 
expecting,” said Elms, the proprietor of Stephenville’s Rodeo Shop and Grand 
Entry Western Store.

“From the outside I’d say there’s no way he couldn’t have been [guilty], but 
that’s just my opinion, I didn’t know all the details the jurors got … He 
admitted right off the bat that he had done it and he felt remorse for it, so 
he knew what was right and what was wrong.”

Elms’s son, Conner, is a veteran who was wounded in Afghanistan. Elms said he 
thought local people would “probably” be sympathetic towards veterans suffering 
from PTSD, “but I don’t think that makes a person insane”.

“My son was wounded over there; if he has it we don’t notice any different, 
he’s still normal like he was when he left, in my opinion. He just came back 
with a big bullet hole in his arm.”
 