
Deliberations began in the “American Sniper” trial on Tuesday night with the 
jury asked to decide whether Eddie Ray Routh was delusional and psychotic or 
frustrated and calculated when he killed Chris Kyle and Chad Littlefield.

Kyle, the subject of Clint Eastwood’s blockbuster film, was shot dead by Routh 
two years ago along with his friend at a shooting range about a 90-minute drive 
south-west of Dallas. They had taken the troubled former marine on an outing as 
a form of therapy.

“He survived four tours of duty in Iraq and came home unscathed. He died face 
down in the dirt at a luxury resort shooting range, bleeding to death,” 
prosecutor Jane Starnes said of Kyle in her closing argument. Routh left the 
scene in Kyle’s truck and was apprehended by police after a brief standoff 
later in the day. “Crazy don’t run,” Starnes said.

Routh is pleading not guilty by reason of insanity. If convicted of capital 
murder he will receive an automatic sentence of life without parole. If 
acquitted he potentially faces spending the rest of his life in a high-security 
state psychiatric hospital.

District judge Jason Cashon instructed the 12-person jury that the verdict 
must be unanimous.

Starnes said: “I think we can all agree that Eddie’s got something wrong with 
him. He is a weird, weird guy.” But Routh still knew right from wrong, Starnes 
added, and his illness did not rise to the level of “severe mental disease or 
defect” at the time of the crime – the legal definition to meet the insanity 
standard inTexas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas>.

“He did it in a cold, methodical, calculating way. It was awful, it was bloody 
and it was a senseless crime but just because something’s a senseless crime 
doesn’t make a person insane,” Starnes said.

The defence has argued that Routh was delusional and believed Kyle and 
Littlefield planned to kill him. Earlier in the day they recalled Mitchell 
Dunn, a psychiatrist who testified last week, to return to the stand to rebutt 
the prosecution’s argument that the 27-year-old deliberately exaggerated 
symptoms that were in any case a result of drug abuse rather than a serious 
underlying condition.

Dunn said: “My diagnosis is that he does not have a cannabis-induced psychosis 
but rather that he suffers from schizophrenia. I don’t believe Mr Routh was 
actually intoxicated at the time of the offence based on a lot of the things he 
did – shooting accurately at the victims, driving 105 miles without an 
accident, not having slurred speech … I think he was psychotic.”

Dunn referred to Routh’s nonsensical ramblings after his arrest. “His thinking 
was quite scattered. If he was trying to get a message across he wasn’t doing a 
very good job at all … People who are able to think clearly, I don’t think they 
are able to replicate that,” he said. “I don’t think he’s smart enough to know 
that the character of mental illness is disorganised thinking.”

Kyle’s widow, Taya, abruptly left the courtroom during the closing statements, 
seemingly upset by the defence’s arguments.

Starnes said Routh’s personal problems did not excuse his actions. “Even if 
somebody’s mentally ill they could still be mad at somebody, they could be 
irritated at someone, they could be offended at somebody,” she said.

Starnes addressed Routh’s apparent delusion that Kyle and Littlefield were 
pig-human hybrid assassins. “There’s plenty of stuff out there in TV and movies 
about ‘pig people’,” she said, suggesting Routh could have got the idea from 
episodes of the Twilight Zone, Seinfeld or the Discovery Channel show Boss Hog.

Tim Moore, for the defence, emphasised to the jury that they must make their 
decision based purely on the trial evidence and not take into account Kyle’s 
fame or popularity in the community. Before the trial Routh’s attorneys 
attempted to have the case moved to another location because, they said, Kyle’s 
local celebrity made it impossible to hold a fair trial.

Kyle was shot six times and Littlefield six or seven times. Howard Ryan, a 
ballistics expert, testified for the state that Kyle was immediately 
incapacitated by the bullets and was not facing the shooter. He speculated that 
Routh waited until Kyle had finished shooting at the target on the range and 
used all his bullets before launching an attack from a distance of less than 10 
feet.

“He absolutely never saw this coming,” Ryan said. “He was shot in the face and 
in the right side of his body either in one violent episode or two.”

He suggested one possible scenario where a wounded Littlefield was on his 
knees looking up at the shooter when his life was finished with a shot through 
the top of his head. Another, which he considered more likely, was that 
Littlefield was shot again while lying flat on his back.

The court was again played a recording of a telephone conversation between 
Routh and a New Yorker reporter from May 2013. Routh complained that he kicked 
his girlfriend out of the house that morning, having proposed to her the night 
before, and that he had a feeling it was going to be a bad day. “There was a 
smell in the air that morning, you know. Smelt like shit,” he said.

Routh also complained that Kyle and Littlefield were terse with him and were 
not doing much shooting at the range. He was surprised they were using 
handguns. “So we’re shooting pistols here, huh? OK … That’s pretty much saying 
‘Duel, motherfucker’,” he recalled.

After that, Routh told the reporter, “I took care of business and got in the 
truck and left. It’s fucked up.”
 