
At last the Association of Online Publishers 
<http://www.ukaop.org.uk/cgi-bin/go.pl/events/details.html?uid=201;type_uid=40> 
conference has something meaty on the agenda, other back-slapping and rehashing 
the same tedious discussions about interactive media, user-generated content 
and multi-skilled journalists. Every day there's a new story about 
redundancies, ever gloomier news about advertising... and suddenly the 
realisation that for the first time since the original dot com crash, the 
stablisers are coming off.

Digital businesses can't just rely on growth

Trinity Mirror chief executive Sly Bailey used her opening keynote to lay into 
the BBC with that familiar call for the corporation's local news ambitions to 
be restrained; that topic seems like a detail in the current climate, but then 
again companies need to defend their territory even more aggressively. "It is 
anti-competitive, unnecessary and will waste public money replicating existing 
commercial offerings. We all love the BBC but I would ask you this - would we 
love it quite so much if it was the only thing we had?"

She said the regulation of the industry is still stuck in the mindset of the 
seventies and doesn't really understand the impact of convergence on the news 
industry, or "what regional media does for our communities and our democracy 
and why it must survive".

Next year is going to feel like Groundhog Day 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2008/oct/01/slybailey.trinitymirror> for the 
media, said Bailey.

"Digital businesses can no longer rely simply on a rising tide of growth. The 
latest market figures show that the downturn in the economy is now affecting 
digital media, with growth rates in internet advertising revenue falling in 
2008 and the market expected to be more challenging in 2009 and as we've seen 
even Google is not immune."

"There are tough times ahead and the weak will fall by the wayside but the 
tough, the most innovative will survive - they will be the great media brands 
and businesses of the future. When we look back in five years we will say ths 
was the defining time for our industry."

The downturn in liquidity in the markets and in advertising "is a terrible 
combination of things that we haven't seen before", she said. But she insisted 
that Trinity is running at a 30% net margin and that by achieving its 
stretching but realistic targets, Trinity would continue to make digital a 
substantial part of the company's revenue and profitability.

"We think we've got the right business model and we now have to scale it up. 
But we're not sitting here trying to work out what our business model is."
 