
Murder, sex and mobsters should attract mainstream audiences as well as the 
art-house crowd to Atom Egoyan's new movie. Where the Truth Lies is an 
ambitious thriller, exposing a side of celebrity behaviour that would shock the 
fan base of its ostensibly squeaky-clean protagonists.

The Hollywood dream factory of the 1950s provides the ideal backdrop for 
Egoyan to re-visit familiar themes. His film takes us past the cocktails and 
wise-cracks of the Rat Pack era, into the seedy world that existed off camera.

The stark contrast between appearance and reality crops up repeatedly in 
Egoyan's films, from the strip-club shennanigans of Exotica to the dreamy 
tragedies of The Sweet Hereafter. "It isn't deliberate, " he claims. "In 
hindsight the similarities are obvious, but I don't set out to re-visit these 
themes. I think with all directors there are ideas that recur, at least for the 
ones that have creative control of their films." Egoyan can count himself among 
this select group. "Obviously a lot of people are involved, but because we were 
able to get funding outside of the American studios, we had a lot of freedom." 
Where the Truth Lies is a joint Canadian-UK co-production.

A beautiful girl found dead in a hotel bathroom provides the first scratch on 
the tale's celebrity veneer. A noirish whodunnit follows, complete with a jaded 
voice-over, which is occasionally guilty of stating the obvious. The fractured 
narrative, drawing in butlers, lobsters and the mafia begins to feels a little 
convoluted by the time the truth is finally uncovered.

Alison Lohan's young journalist uses her fawn-like allure to try to get behind 
the myth, but is happy to be seduced in the process.

Egoyan recognises the "predatory male figures and the parental elements to 
their sexual relationships", from his earlier films, Exotica in particular. The 
depiction of near pubescent girls being ensnared by much older men has drawn 
criticism for Egoyan in the past. In this case, however, the wide-eyed 
vulnerability of Lohan's character belies a ruthlessness to match the men.

Unlike the tormented, manipulative characters who stalk his films, Atom Egoyan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/atom-egoyan> is friendly and relaxed, on the 
surface at least. That said, he acknowledges that much of his work has been 
pre-occupied with what he calls "certain obsessions...certain dysfunctions. 
I've always been interested in these types of relationships."

With the Rat Pack running wild in the 1950s, there is plenty of rumour and 
myth to support this picture of after-hours celebrity debauchery. In the book 
on which the film is based, the two central characters have been regarded as 
fictionalised versions of dean Martin and Jerry Lewis. To avoid this 
distracting from his story (and, one assumes potential litigation), Egoyan made 
changes to erase any resemblance. One half of the partnership is now English 
and the distinctive comedy routine has been changed beyond recognition.

Egoyan refuses to be drawn on whether this film, with a budget substantially 
bigger than he's used to, is a deliberate attempt to court a more mainstream 
audience. "It's not really for me to say whether it's more mainstream. That's 
decided by the audience."

Long time producer Robert Lantos is more forthright: "My mission was to 
preserve what is entirely original and unique to Atom's way of filmmaking, and 
to deploy it into a film that would be accessible for more mainstream 
audiences."
 