
With the Cabinet Office soon to announce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/government-computing-network/2012/feb/03/gcloud-intent-to-award>
 the initial batch of suppliers for its G-Cloud framework, talk of cloud 
services is rife among Whitehall and suppliers alike.

Adoption of cloud services is often framed within discussions on saving money. 
For South Lanarkshire council's head of ICT and Socitm VP Kay Brown, the 
assumption that cloud equals lower costs is one that should be challenged.

"It's not always a way to save money. Yes, you get shot of the hassle of 
having your own infrastructure if you want, but from an application provision 
[perspective], it's not cheaper," she says.

Cloud's positive associations around cutting costs have also seen the term 
co-opted by IT staff and vendors alike, and applied to services that may appear 
similar but are not true cloud.

"Not everybody understands what it means," says Brown who, in a discussion an 
individual from the Cabinet Office, was told: "You IT guys have always got to 
find a new word for something you've had for years".

"I understand cloud, but in line with what somebody else in the Cabinet Office 
said, and this is a very naïve view in my opinion, they said, 'It's just 
software or hardware provisioning remotely,' so it's almost as if there is 
nothing new," she adds.

South Lanarkshire's own dalliances with the cloud came with a recent 
implemention of Jadu's Weejot mobile app publishing software, which allows the 
council to automatically produce and update mobile web apps aimed at citizens. 
Using the software as a service platform the council is able to pick from 
Jadu's range of ready-made apps, which can be customised to the council's needs 
and then published, or build its own bespoke apps using Jadu's SDK with secure 
connections to its back office systems.

To date, the council has made eight apps from the ready-made palette, 
including an events calendar and an app notifying parents of school closures. 
By using jQuery mobile and HTML5, the apps can be accessed by any smartphone 
with a browser.

The council rolled out Weejot in four weeks for just under £2,000, with an 
additional annual running cost of £3,500.

"It was a very good solution for us without any capital investment in hardware 
and it meets the growing needs of our citizens, as we're finding that fewer and 
fewer of them are using fixed-line telephony. Research has shown interestingly 
enough that by 2014, more people will access the internet via a mobile device 
than from a desktop device," says Brown.

Software <https://www.theguardian.com/government-computing-network/software> 
is not being universally used across the council, however. Last year South 
Lanarkshire looked at cloud provisioning of both software and hardware for an 
IT toolkit, based on Microsoft Project.

"Overall it was less expensive, as you just have the cost as long as you are 
continuing to use it, but we did have the occasional learning problems with it, 
in that it didn't always do what we expected it to do," says Brown. "We 
expected in some ways that it would respond slightly quicker if, for example, 
you needed more space, but that was maybe our naivety and it was early days."

As well as looking to the cloud, some councils are also exploring bring your 
own device.Recent research by Socitm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/government-computing-network/2012/jan/20/byod-staff-cuts-socitm>
 indicated that there has been a change in attitude about local public service 
staff using their own technology to undertake business tasks - a trend Brown is 
witnessing.

"It's prevalent, and we're getting a lot of requests from people saying, 'I 
want to use an iPhone.' It's fine, you can use an iPhone, but you just can't 
use it on my [council] network," she says.

The reason for such a ban is that devices used for council work must be code 
of connection compliant with the GCSX network 
<http://www.ngssecure.com/services/compliance/gcsx-code-of-connection.aspx>. 
The only devices that meet code of connection standards are BlackBerrys, "which 
isn't what everybody has, so there are some issues there", she adds.

Brown believes that in theory bring your own device is a great idea, but says 
the security risks need to be fully considered. To protect an organisation, 
"huge amounts" of money may need to be invested on firewall products to allow 
devices such as iPads and iPhones to be used over a local authority's network, 
she says.

Bring your own device also poses what could be a greater challenge for 
councils - as employers, they are expected to provide all of the material staff 
need to carry out their duties. "How can you force people, especially if 
they're low paid, to bring their own device?" she asks.

Bring your own device may be some years off for the council, but it has other 
means of generating efficiences in the meantime: the council has just completed 
its second deployment of a electronic document and records management system 
(EDRMS), which has "shown up substantial financial savings".

The council is also looking at how it can work on suggestions made in last 
year'sMcClelland review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/government-computing-network/2011/oct/24/scotland-ict-strategy-mclelland>
 of ICT infrastructure in Scotland's public sector, like the majority of public 
services across the country. It also plans to continue looking at ways it can 
share its services where possible - it currently owns a datacentre, which is 
used by seven public sector organisations.

Despite the financial pressures facing local authorities across the UK, Brown 
says she is hopeful that these tough times will provide an opportunity for IT 
professionals to "step up to the mark" and deliver more business benefits for 
their organisations, whether that be through cloud, bring your own device, or 
alternative ways.

"We also have to learn to say no but nicely. Occasionally, we get asked to do 
things which are just stupid, and we just have to learn to say, 'No I don't 
really think that that's a good idea,'" she adds.

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For weekly updates on 
news, debate and best practice on public sector IT,join the Guardian Government 
Computing network here. 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing/start.php>
 