
Yesterday the family's main meal was eggs, bread and tea. Today Etedal Zanati, 
42, has stretched to a kilogram of fish and a handful of potatoes and tomatoes 
for dinner, to be shared between herself, her 10 children, her mother-in-law 
and her brother-in-law.

The fish was a once-weekly extravagance that cost her 17 shekels (£2.50). 
There is a tin of coffee in the kitchen, but it is strictly reserved for guests 
only, and there is a half-shekel on the dressing table for each of the boys to 
buy a sandwich at school today.

Zanati would like to buy an oven to replace her very basic three-ring gas 
cooker but in the wake of Israel's economic blockade of Gaza the price has 
risen seven-fold and is now way out of her reach. She has borrowed a little 
cooking gas from her brother but has to be careful not to use too much - the 
price of gas has doubled in recent months and is sometimes simply unavailable. 
In the kitchen are the opened sacks and tins from the quarterly UN food handout 
that keeps them from destitution, but Zanati faces a daily battle to make the 
supply last.

Such are the calculations required of a diligent, widowed mother trying to 
keep her children fed, cleanly-dressed and alert enough to study hard at school 
in one of Gaza's poorest districts.

"Everything is changing," she said. "If you want to buy clothes you can find 
nothing for a cheap enough price. Fruit and vegetables are still available but 
they are expensive." The traditional networks of family and community support 
are beginning to fracture. "No one cares," she said. "Everyone is thinking for 
themselves."

Zanati's husband, Mahmoud, was killed five years ago in an Israeli air strike 
near their home in the Jabaliya refugee camp in northern Gaza. He was a 
civilian, a worker on a farm, but his death brought no apology or offer of 
compensation from the Israeli military. The loss left the family traumatised 
and financially extremely vulnerable. Now she and her children - whose ages 
range from five to 17 - rely on a 900-shekel (£130) payment every three months 
from the Palestinian government, support for the families of those killed in 
the conflict, and on the UN, with its food handouts, schooling for the children 
and health and social care.

Jabaliya is one of several refugee camps in the crowded Gaza Strip, set up in 
1948 to accommodate the flood of Palestinian refugees who fled or were forced 
from their homes when Israel was created. In an area of just 1.5 sq km, the 
camp is home to at least 100,000 people, all living in cramped houses squeezed 
into narrow lanes.

The Zanatis have three main rooms, which they use for eating, sleeping and 
living, a small kitchen and a small bathroom. They have an open courtyard with 
a sink by the metal door, where their toothbrushes are jammed into a small cup, 
and their shoes into a plastic basket under the sink. An official from the UN 
Relief and Works Agency, which supports Palestinian refugees, came last autumn 
to discuss repairing the leaks in the roof and building an extra couple of 
rooms on a new upper floor. But since the blockade, the UN has had to halt most 
of its construction work, unable to import the concrete and other materials 
needed.

It is families like the Zanatis that are most acutely conscious of the 
economic crisis triggered by Israel's isolation policy towards Gaza. The 
Israeli government says it will not allow a humanitarian crisis to develop and 
insists that militants must stop their rocket fire into Israeli communities. 
Exports and most imports have been halted. UN officials say not enough aid is 
getting in.
Despite international criticism and warnings of "collective punishment", 
Israel's supreme court in January approved a government policy to cut fuel 
supply to Gaza.

However, the Israeli human rights group Gisha says there is now evidence that 
in the past five weeks fuel supplies have dropped well below even the minimum 
amount stipulated by the court. Just 69% of the court ordered amount of 
industrial diesel for the strip's one power plant has been allowed in, 
amounting to just 43% of Gaza's needs, and just 25% of the court ordered amount 
of diesel for generators, wells and transport has been allowed in, or 15% of 
Gaza's needs, according to Gisha. On Tuesday the rights group brought another 
petition to the supreme court and warned fuel supplies had been cut to 
"dangerous levels".

The crisis has had a profound effect on Zanati. Firstly, it has left her 
deeply frustrated with the Palestinian political leadership. As a conservative, 
religious woman she voted for Hamas in the elections two years ago and says 
they have never been given a chance to rule properly. However she holds both 
the former Hamas prime minister Ismail Haniyeh and his rival, the Palestinian 
president and Fatah leader, Mahmoud Abbas, responsible along with Israel for 
Gaza's current woes.

"Next time there is an election I won't even go out of the door to vote," she 
said. "I'm fed up with all the factions. I have a house of 10 children and who 
is feeding us? Hamas or Fatah? No one, of course. We are running from one place 
to another and nobody has knocked on our door to help."

Secondly, it has underlined for her again, if she had any doubt, just how 
important is her children's education. "This is my message and my life. I'm 
telling them to study and finish school and then they'll be able to do whatever 
they want. I dream of them becoming teachers, doctors, lawyers maybe." She 
talks proudly of their high grades at the local UN schools and is careful to 
warn them away from the armed groups which recruit so effectively from the 
families of the poor and disillusioned.

"I tell them we've already lost one person from the family and we can't lose 
any more. Anyway there is no aim to the fighting now. It's useless. What's it 
worth?"
 