
Anthony Minghella <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthonyminghella>, a 
central figure of the British film industry and one of the most renowned 
filmmakers it has produced, died yesterday morning aged 54 from a haemorrhage 
in hospital - days after an operation was judged to have gone well.

Tributes came from all corners of the arts, including film, television and 
opera; from colleagues at the British Film Institute, which he led for five 
years; and from politicians including the prime minister, Gordon Brown, who 
counted Minghella as a friend and called him "one of Britain's greatest 
creative talents".

Minghella will chiefly be remembered for his films, from Truly, Madly, Deeply 
to The English Patient - for which he won an Oscar - to The Talented Mr Ripley 
to Cold Mountain. But he was also an accomplished playwright and a significant 
influence in television when he worked on shows such as Grange Hill, Boon and 
Inspector Morse. When he tried his hand at opera, with Madame Butterfly for the 
English National Opera in 2005, it was a sensation.

His death was all the more shocking because it was out of the blue. His 
American publicist Leslee Dart said doctors performed surgery on Minghella last 
week for cancer of the neck and tonsils. "The surgery had gone well and they 
were very optimistic," she said. "But he developed a haemorrhage and they were 
not able to stop it." He died at 5am and leaves a wife, Carolyn Choa, and two 
grown-up children.

Actor Ralph Fiennes said he was devastated. "He directed most of The English 
Patient with an ankle in plaster, never losing his gentle humour and precision. 
He delighted in the contribution of everyone - he was a true collaborator. His 
films deal with extreme aloneness and the redemptive power of love, even at the 
moment of death. I'll remember him as a man who always wanted to get to the 
heart of the matter."

Jude Law, who appeared in three of Minghella's films, said he came to regard 
him more as a friend than a colleague. "He was a brilliantly talented writer 
and director who wrote dialogue that was a joy to speak, and then put it onto 
the screen in a way that always looked effortless."

The director and former chairman of the UK Film Council, Sir Alan Parker, 
recalled flying to Romania to persuade him to take the job of chairman of the 
BFI. "He was very gracious and he was amazingly generous to me. He asked 'Is 
this a poisoned chalice,' which of course it was, but he accepted in the end." 
He added: "He had grace, charm, eloquence and good manners in a business that 
is not generally known for these things."

One of his closest colleagues at the BFI was director Amanda Nevill. She said: 
"Anthony has been the heart and soul and leading light of the BFI for five 
years. He was on a mission to provide another window through which we can 
better understand the world we live in. This wasn't meant in a worthy way. He 
wanted people to get as excited and inspired and energised as he was by 
creative things."

His willingness to put something back impressed many. Sir Christopher 
Frayling, chairman of Arts Council England, said: "He was quite an operator, 
managing to keep so many plates in the air. At the BFI he was chairman in a key 
moment in its history and he was always up on it. Most people in the film 
industry are rather suspicious of the public sector; they associate it with 
films people don't want to watch."

At the time of his death Minghella was producing a film version of Bernard 
Schlink's novel The Reader, starring Kate Winslet and Fiennes, and adapted by 
Sir David Hare. Hare said: "He was a very unusual combination - a writer of 
great quality who also had the vision to see a project all the way through. 
That put him in an extremely distinctive category. He never lost sight of the 
value of theatre - like Mike Leigh and Stephen Frears, you could say he was a 
theatre director who made films."

Some of his last few weeks were spent promoting The No 1 Ladies Detective 
Agency which he produced, directed and co-wrote with Richard Curtis. The pilot 
will be on the BBC over Easter and a series has already been commissioned. Jane 
Tranter, head of fiction at the BBC, said Minghella considered a film version 
but thought it would make "brilliant TV". She said: "Anthony had such an 
ability to deliver the epic but he also had a terrific ability to deliver 
nuance and detail. He was a major national figure."

When Minghella first moved to London 25 years ago he stayed for 18 months in 
Hampstead at the home of conductor David Parry. It was there a plan was hatched 
to one day make a production of Madame Butterfly together. This they finally 
did in 2005. It was a great hit, and was recently put on at the Metropolitan 
Opera, New York. Parry said: "Doing Madame Butterfly was the great 
collaboration of my life. Anthony was extraordinarily musically acute, and had 
a fantastic instinct for the dramaturgy of the music. That's why Madame 
Butterfly was such a success. He was a marvellous person, incredibly kind, very 
faithful, and never had any feeling of pretence or posing."

Mary Plazas, who starred as Madame Butterfly in his production, said: 
"Directing his first opera, he took command of that ship so easily - without in 
any way trying to control us. He had a unique ability to test the temperature 
of human nature. We all know about his artistic gifts - but he also had a 
wonderful grace in the way he treated people."

CV

Born to Italian immigrant parents who ran a successful ice-cream business on 
the Isle of Wight, Anthony Minghella studied at Hull University, where he then 
lectured in drama. His broadcast career began in the early 1980s as a script 
editor on Grange Hill. He later wrote early episodes of ITV's Inspector Morse. 
His big break came in film, directing Truly, Madly, Deeply in 1991. His feature 
film Mr Wonderful (1993) was his first venture into Hollywood. Huge successes 
followed with adaptations of novels, such as The English Patient (1996), 
winning nine Oscars, including Best Director; The Talented Mr Ripley (1999), 
and Cold Mountain (2003), with a Best Supporting Actress Oscar. He was awarded 
a CBE in 2001.
 