
We'd come from all over the country and all over the world for an evening of 
celebration. Long in our calendars, the premiere screening of The No 1 Ladies' 
Detective Agency at London's BFI Southbank on Tuesday was an event all of 
Anthony Minghella's friends, colleagues and admirers eagerly awaited.

I'd flown in from Los Angeles, and was looking forward to seeing the film, 
which I'd worked on as a production executive. But even more than that, I was 
looking forward to spending some time with Anthony that evening, to see that 
wonderful, beaming smile and to feel the warmth of being part of the 
extraordinary extended family he created around him.

And then, around Tuesday lunchtime, the emails and calls started flooding in. 
Someone had heard a strange rumour; another friend had heard something bizarre 
on the radio; in the end, too many voices to ignore.

My fiancee called from Mexico, where she's travelling. Even 7,000 miles away, 
the news had broken immediately. 'Have you heard? I can't believe it. Anthony 
died.'

Like every single person who had the luck and great good fortune to encounter 
this wonderful, funny, charming, endlessly generous man, it was impossible for 
either of us to absorb.

Six months earlier, we'd been on set with him in Botswana where, with huge 
joy, energy and commitment, he was bringing to life Alexander McCall Smith's 
beautiful character, Precious Ramotswe. As Richard Curtis (his long-time friend 
and collaborator on the screenplay) reminded us at the premiere, more than one 
person remarked on the similarities between Anthony and Precious: their 
insatiable curiosity, their genuine interest in everyone around them, their 
ability to solve problems, their wisdom and insights into the mysteries of the 
human personality - and above all, just their sheer compassion and love.

Anthony - or as he was to all of us lucky to be near and dear to him, just 
simply 'Ant' - had the rare gift of making everyone who came into his orbit 
feel special. That applied to the person changing the sheets at the Gabarone 
Sun Hotel just as much as it applied to a long-standing collaborator such as 
Harvey Weinstein, who loved and admired Anthony and financed so much of his 
work.

It was through Harvey, as a production executive at first Miramax and then the 
Weinstein Company, that I came to work regularly with Anthony for nearly 10 
years. But I'd met Ant many years before, when he was a young playwright and 
television writer looking to break into films, and I was running the government 
fund that put up money for script development. The younger, thinner, hairier 
fellow he was in those days made an instant impression on me because of his 
passion for the project he was pitching (clearly not quite enough of an 
impression, though, for as he never ceased to tease me, we turned down his 
proposed adaptation of the novel Pascali's Island

Our paths crossed many times over the coming years, not least whenever I found 
myself organising a screenwriters' training course such as the Performing Arts 
Lab in England, or Scrawl in South Africa. Always ridiculously generous with 
his time, he would find a way to shoehorn into his absurdly packed schedule of 
work a few hours, and in some cases a few days, to sit with writers just 
embarking on their careers, and share real wisdom and knowledge.

But he was never prescriptive about work. Never one for preaching writing 
'formulas', his favourite metaphor came from something he saw when travelling 
with his beloved wife Carolyn. Once, in China, they saw a street artist working 
seemingly randomly on a picture. 'What are you doing?' asked Anthony. 'Taking a 
line for a walk,' the artist replied. And for Ant, that was the greatest piece 
of advice he could ever give a writer: don't tie yourself to a totally mapped 
out route - allow the work to breathe and find its own inner life.

It was something he applied very much to his own work. Famous for adapting 
novels such as The English Patient, The Talented Mr Ripley and Cold Mountain, 
his methodology was always the same - read the novel several times, then put it 
aside and never refer to it again once he started the screenplay - a wonderful 
approach that meant that the films, at least for me, never became the dreaded 
'faithful literary adaptation'.

After Cold Mountain, he started talking about writing an original screenplay, 
something he had wanted to do for a number of years - but some terrific novel 
or other had always seduced him away at the last moment. The resulting film, 
Breaking and Entering, had a very mixed reception, but with the hindsight that 
it is his last work for the cinema, it's a fascinating summary of Anthony's 
lifelong interests and passions: the clash of people from different classes and 
cultures, the need to find ways to communicate, but above all, and perhaps most 
unfashionably, the idea that there is nothing more important in the world than 
love.

A man I would describe as a realistic romantic, Anthony was not afraid of 
seeing the dark side of the world - but ultimately, he always believed there 
was hope and light. As he embarked on writing the script, he told me he was 
tired of seeing films about couples breaking up, meeting new people and going 
off into the sunset together at the end of the story. He wanted to make a film 
about a troubled marriage where the couple don't separate at the end; a love 
story about the difficulties of a long-term relationship - and what it takes to 
hold a marriage together, rather than take the easy solution of leaving. Tough 
and tender, Breaking and Entering was not to everyone's taste - but for those 
who appreciate an adult drama with complex, truthful, flawed characters, it 
continues to resonate.

It seems fitting that the funny, touching and completely unique world conjured 
up by Alexander McCall Smith in his No 1 Ladies' novels should be Anthony's 
final legacy to us. Precious's world is one that Anthony loved: a world that, 
for all its occasional darkness, is essentially a place where good people 
ultimately flourish, and a strong and compassionate woman like Mma Ramotswe can 
help others - and indeed herself - triumph and overcome their fears, doubts and 
uncertainties. There's no sense of tying things up in an overly neat bow at the 
resolution, but there's a wonderful sense of peace and joy and all - or very 
nearly all - being right with the world.

And the fact that his wife Carolyn, daughter Hannah and son Max requested that 
the premiere go ahead as planned, so that we could, in fact, celebrate Ant's 
life and work, just seemed absolutely right. A very sad evening in so many 
ways, but one filled with laughter and joy, too.

When I was asked to write this piece, I was still in a state of shock at 
losing such a wonderful friend, and I will confess that much of this was typed 
through tears, sorrow and a sense of disbelief. But sitting down to think back 
on the days I had with Anthony - whether he was engaged in furious and intense 
debate in LA with his long-time production partner, Sydney Pollack (with whom 
he enjoyed a classic 'odd couple' kind of relationship), producing a movie in 
Toronto, directing a scene in London, lecturing on a screenwriting course in 
Cape Town, enveloped by his family in a cocoon of love and affection, or just 
being the most amazing listener and consigliore over dinner or drinks at his 
favourite club, 2 Brydges Place - has made me even more grateful for the time I 
was privileged to spend with him.

It seems like only weeks, rather than months ago that my fiancee Pauline and I 
were on set with Ant in Botswana. He'd already charmed her off her feet in a 
typical way - by his amazing gift of being genuinely interested in the person 
to whom he was talking, discovering within minutes where exactly she was from, 
even what football club she supported.

We'd just got engaged, and after Ant hugged both of us, in a typically lovely, 
slightly off-the wall way, he kissed her engagement ring. 'Anthony Minghella 
kissed my ring!' she told all her friends later, with a huge smile that told 
everyone it was worth more to her than a papal blessing. Which of course it 
was, because it came from one of the most genuinely beautiful people you could 
have ever hoped to meet.

The man who held our hands: Tributes from his friends and colleagues

Patrick Marber: Playwright/actor

I first met Anthony when he took me out to lunch many years ago. It wasn't 
that long after The English Patient and I was very excited and nervous to meet 
this incredible writer-director who had moved me so deeply with his film.

We talked for hours. He made you want to talk. He was completely alive to the 
present moment. He focused on you and the conversation you were having, never 
took a call, never made you feel like it was a professional meeting. He didn't 
just treat you like an equal, he actually believed you were one.

With his great friend Sydney Pollack he'd formed a production company called 
Mirage. He asked me if I'd write something for them to produce and naturally I 
said I'd be delighted. But I never got round to it. Or he was busy or I was. 
And so on.

Years later, last year in fact, I wrote a short film called Love You More. The 
director Sam Taylor-Wood took it to Anthony who agreed with typical enthusiasm 
to produce it. I hung around the Mirage offices a fair bit in 2007. It was a 
really fun place to be, full of energised, young optimists, all of them 
mentored by him.

The last time I saw Anthony was at a production meeting a few months ago. He 
was hard at work on his own film (with all the stress that entails) but he 
never complained, just ran the meeting, beaming with pleasure at the younger 
talent assembled for the project.

The meeting broke up and I began moaning about the broadcaster's refusal to 
give us the extra five grand I felt we needed for the budget. Anthony pondered 
this a moment, smiled charmingly and said with certainty: 'Let's just use what 
we have and make a good film. We'll be alright.'

And we were. We were always all right with him.

Sam Taylor-Wood: Artist/director

My phone rings, my hand reaches out and a soft strong voice says hello. It's 
Anthony Minghella <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthonyminghella>. From 
that point on my life shifted into a new realm.

He told me he had read a heart-breaking book (Julie Myerson's The Story of 
You) that made him think of my work, and that if I felt the same after reading 
it, he would love to produce that film and for me to direct.

Come on, he said, it's time you made a film. Let me hold your hand and we'll 
do it. With those big hands he clasped mine and off we went.

He then called a few days later asking what I thought, had I read it yet, come 
on let's do it. Oh, and would I be on the board of the British Film Institute 
with him? Yes, I said with much more trepidation, do I have to? Yes, you do, we 
need people like you. It'll be fun, I'll be there.

At the first meeting I sat in the chair where my place name was, next to his. 
I was introduced and welcomed then he held my hand on and off throughout the 
four-hour meeting. I'd learned that this was his manner, not a flirtation.

He held everyone's hand.

I sent him a text one day and he called me back noting that with his big 
fingers texting was near impossible. We laughed.

We made a short film, Love You More, written by Patrick Marber; throughout the 
shoot I didn't see him once. You don't need me, he said. You know what to do.

When he told me he was going into hospital I held his hand. We talked about 
fear; we pushed it aside.

The day before he died he sent me a text saying all was good, would I go see 
him in a couple of days?

I hold his hand tighter.

Joe Wright: Director

We heard about Anthony as we arrived on set for the day's shooting. Seamus 
McGarvey, who is my cinematographer here and was also on Atonement, was 
Anthony's director of photography on No 1 Ladies Detective Agency out in 
Botswana and he had received a call very early on. Naturally, we were all 
devastated. I got up and made a little speech and said we were going to 
dedicate the day's filming to Anthony. We were filming with the entire Los 
Angeles Philharmonic Orchestra so it was a very fitting scene. About 700 of us 
were thinking of him in that beautiful Frank Gehry concert hall, and they were 
playing Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, the third movement.

Anthony was a godfather to a whole generation of film-makers, and during the 
development of the Atonement screenplay I spent a number of evenings with him 
and he'd just ask me really annoying, needling questions. He'd grill me on each 
choice I was making - it was a masterclass in storytelling, really. All the 
bits where I thought, 'Oh I'll just get away with that,' well he'd pull me up 
on them and quiz me. He made me consider very carefully everything I was doing. 
He'd make me articulate the choices I was making in the script and clarify them.

He had tremendous generosity of spirit but, although he got paid a few bob for 
it, what he actually did was way beyond the call of duty. It was an education 
for me.

The industry is a more frightening place without him as a guide - he seemed to 
know what he was doing and he had this ease to his work; it wasn't an 
angst-ridden thing for him and that attitude has taught me a lot.

When I was casting the interview scene at the climax of Atonement, I initially 
wanted a real journalist or a famous interviewer, such as Melvyn Bragg. But I 
didn't want a 'day player' because the focus had to be on Vanessa Redgrave that 
day: we didn't want anyone taking up emotional space with their nerves on the 
day of shooting. It was my fiancee Rosamund Pike who had the idea of getting 
Anthony, and he just came along and was relaxed and everyone trusted him, even 
though he hadn't really acted before. He allowed Vanessa the room to do what 
she did so well. Her performance is tribute to his generosity.

Philip French: Observer film critic

Anthony Minghella was one of our greatest filmmakers. When I first met him he 
looked like an elderly art student. Later, shorn of his beard, his disappearing 
hair cut to the skull, he came to resemble a cheerfully confident Buddhist monk.

Our first meeting was in Cannes in 1992, at a lunch given by Sam Goldwyn Jr 
for the out-of-competition screening of Minghella's second movie, Mr Wonderful, 
a charming, lightweight romantic comedy set in New York's blue-collar 
Italian-American milieu, which he understood well from his own background in 
Britain. I had admired his broadcasting writing, especially a BBC radio play 
called Cigarettes and Chocolate, in which Juliet Stevenson had appeared (as she 
did in his first movie Truly Madly Deeply), and thought his Made in Bangkok, an 
attack on the exploitation of the third world by European tourists, one of the 
best things to appear in the West End during the Eighties.

On a personal level, I was immediately struck by his charm, modesty and gifts 
as a conversationalist. At that time I thought him a talented miniaturist, part 
of the tradition David Lean had been criticising in a controversial speech at 
Cannes a few years before, when he took British film-makers

to task for parochialism and lack of large-scale vision. When in 1996 I saw 
The English Patient, I realised Minghella was now carrying the torch for 
ambitious, visionary cinema that had once been upheld by Michael Powell and 
Lean.

The English Patient is his Lawrence of Arabia, Cold Mountain his Dr Zhivago, 
films of grandeur, powerfully intelligent and epic in conception. In the way 
they linked art house and multiplex they also brought Stanley Kubrick to mind. 
Yet he was able with the ambitiously conceived but more modest Breaking and 
Entering to approach the contemporary British scene he had put aside. And he 
could take on smaller project s such as the TV version of The No 1 Ladies' 
Detective Agency being screened tonight on BBC1. In his work Minghella pursued 
complex themes of exile, journeys home, cultural reconciliation and the search 
for roots, and he was notable for his support and encouragement of others. A 
man of immense energy and enthusiasm, he was devoted to the arts and public 
service and was one of the best chairmen the BFI has ever had, guiding it 
through a crucial period. At the time of his death he was skilfully juggling 
numerous exciting projects. He will be greatly missed.

More on Minghella

Personal life

· Born 6 January 1954 on the Isle of Wight to Edward and Gloria Minghella, 
owners of an ice-cream business.

· Educated at St John's College in Portsmouth and the University of Hull, 
where he studied drama.

· Married to Hong Kong-born choreographer Carolyn Choa; two grown-up children, 
Max and Hannah.

Career

· Early 1980s: Began working in television, starting as a runner on children's 
programme Magpie before editing scripts on Grange Hill and moving on to write 
episodes of Inspector Morse

· 1990: Wrote and directed the film Truly Madly Deeply for the BBC which 
became a critical success after receiving a mainstream cinema release.

· 1997: Won the Best Director Oscar for The English Patient which also 
received eight other Academy Awards. His screenplay for The Talented Mr Ripley 
was also Oscar-nominated in 2000.

· 2003: Appointed chairman of the British Film Industry.

· 2005: Directed Puccini's Madame Butterfly for English National Opera.

· 2007/8: Alexander McCall Smith's The No 1 Ladies' Detective Agency (on BBC1 
tonight, 9pm).
 