
James McAvoy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesmcavoy> wasn't meant to be 
an actor - anything but. His father, who walked out when he was seven, was a 
roofer, his mother a psychiatric nurse. His grandfather and grandmother, with 
whom Liz McAvoy moved in with her two children after her husband left, were a 
butcher and occasional lorry driver respectively. They all lived together in 
Drumchapel, one of Glasgow's ugliest tenement estates. It is tempting to view 
them as an early version of the chaotic but loving Gallagher family in 
Shameless, the Channel 4 series that provided McAvoy's big break - though 
without the stealing, incontinence and spectacular falling-down drunkenness.

McAvoy's vague ambitions, at that stage, included joining the navy and 
becoming a priest: both, in different ways, offered a chance of escape. But 
mostly, "I wanted to be all right. I remember my friend Mark Doyle and I, this 
confidence we had that we were going to be all right. And even if we ended up 
doing something rubbish that we would be happy."

It is fair to say he has done all right. McAvoy's latest film, Atonement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/atonement>, opened the Venice film festival 
last week to the kind of reviews that actors spend entire careers barely daring 
to aspire to. His performance as Robbie Turner, the son of a housekeeper at a 
country estate, raised with ambitions but appallingly wronged, holds the movie 
together. Inevitably - it is a sweeping period tragedy, after all - both the 
film and its leads (Keira Knightley is the other) have sparked talk of Oscars. 
Marco Mueller, the director of the Venice festival, told a newspaper last week 
that he believed 28-year-old McAvoy was one of the finest acting talents in 
world cinema today.

"Who's that?" says McAvoy when I mention Mueller's comment. "Oh, that's nice 
of him. Very nice." He's been flipping a silver teaspoon between his fingers 
and suddenly drops it on the floor; he scoops it up and starts flipping it 
again. "I don't know. I don't mix with those sorts of people. I don't mix with 
film industry people. So I really am separate from it, and I try not to talk 
about it. Ehm ... I generally just try to keep it out of my head. But it's 
really nice that he's saying that. It's so much nicer than if he was saying I 
was a hugely overrated wee pikey."

McAvoy's accent has "chilled out" a lot in the past eight years or so, he 
says, when "English people couldn't understand me sometimes and Americans just 
couldnae get it", but he retains a guttural Glaswegian brogue, to the frequent 
shock of those who have only seen him playing impeccably English poshos.

It's a surprise, too, that in the flesh, McAvoy is really pretty unremarkable. 
Average height, slight build, jeans, shirt, dark hair. Plain, stubbled face; 
small neat hands. He has extraordinary blue eyes - huge and clear - but you 
have to look for them, and he gives the pointed impression that he flicks on 
the full beam only when he wants to. On screen, however, he has the ability to 
turn his lean frame into something commanding, radiating physicality and 
presence. You can't quite take your eyes off him.

For instance, the most astonishing scene in Atonement - designedly so - is a 
long, sweeping single shot of the beach at Dunkirk, where thousands of 
shattered troops await their evacuation amid scenes of carnage: burning 
buildings, horses being executed, a battered Ferris wheel rotating forlornly in 
the distance. McAvoy's character Robbie, and two colleagues, having been 
separated from their unit, have limped across northern France attempting to 
rejoin their comrades, and stumble along the beach in profound shock at what 
they are witnessing. McAvoy is dwarfed by the scale of the scene, the towering 
buildings and huge, beached boats, and is a head shorter than his two fellow 
actors, yet he is absolutely dominant, his stature boosted somehow by the 
pained slump of his shoulders.

McAvoy is fantastically proud of the film, and he is right to be. Directed by 
Joe Wright - only his second feature film after last year's Pride and 
Prejudice, also starring Knightley - it is based on Ian McEwan's 
Booker-shortlisted novel, a tale of how a misapprehension, and a terrible lie, 
can in its own way be as destructive as war itself. Cecilia (Knightley) is the 
daughter of the great house, Robbie has been raised like a son despite his 
humble origins; having acknowledged their mutual passion, the pair are 
separated by a malicious accusation by her younger sister. He is taken to 
prison, and later to war, and it is his journey, from youthful hope to 
shattered experience, that makes up the emotional heart of the film.

Wright has said that one of the reasons why he particularly wanted the actor 
for the part was because of McAvoy's own working-class roots. "I think that my 
journey in life was interesting to him," says McAvoy, a little uncomfortably. 
"I'm from a working-class environment and I suppose I have changed class. I am 
no longer working class. And I also have access to a type of class of people 
that might be construed as the modern aristocracy - do you know what I mean? - 
all this celebrity bullshit. I think that he felt that was maybe somehow 
comparable and I might have some point of reference with Robbie.

"Because he is someone who is living in a no-man's land. He is told his whole 
life is a lie, that class is not a factor for him, that you can transcend class 
if you want to and if you work hard enough, if you just get a wee break. And 
one day someone comes along and tells him that that's a lie, that he isn't who 
he thinks he is, and you're going to jail. I think I'm always slightly worried 
that something like that is going to happen. I'm always slightly worried that 
somebody is going to find me out and come along [saying], 'Ach, you're not 
actually as good as you thought you were. You are just a wee boy fae' the 
Drum.'"

The trappings of his success - today we are in a suite at Claridge's in 
London, ahead of the film's London premiere - McAvoy describes as "pockets of 
fucking madness", and he insists that his own life is "mundane, and I love it 
that way". But if he is self-conscious about celebrity, he is not about his 
remarkable career success. "Don't get me wrong," he says, "[my career] has been 
much quicker than some other people's, but it's been - what? - 10 years now of 
just getting jobs that are slightly better, slightly better, slightly better. 
And so you never go, 'Oh fuck, how did I get here?'"

His career had a pretty implausible beginning, all the same. McAvoy's big 
break came, in an oft-told tale, when the Scottish actor David Hayman came to 
address the 16-year-old's school, but was heckled by his classmates for being a 
bit "poofy". McAvoy went to apologise on behalf of his peers, and on a whim 
offered to come and make tea on Hayman's next film set. "I was just trying to 
be a nice guy, but I also found it quite interesting. He had worked with Arnold 
Schwarzenegger, for fuck's sake!" Four months later Hayman rang and asked him 
to audition for a part. ("I didn't ask to become an actor or anything like 
that. I just asked if I could come and make his tea.")

That role, as the son of a pimp in The Near Room, led to a stint at the Royal 
Scottish Academy of Music and Drama, then from small TV parts in the Bill and 
the HBO series Band of Brothers to the comedy Early Doors and Paul Abbott's 
award-winning State of Play. Abbott was so impressed he cast him for his 
equally garlanded Manchester comedy-drama-romp Shameless in 2004. McAvoy stayed 
less than two series, moving on to play such varied parts as a Dublin 
quadriplegic in Inside I'm Dancing, the faun Mr Tumnus in The Lion, the Witch 
and the Wardrobe, and the young Scottish doctor who falls under Idi Amin's 
spell in last year's adaptation of The Last King of Scotland, a terrific 
performance that was perhaps unjustly overshadowed by Forest Whitaker's 
Oscar-winning turn as the dictator.

His steep career path has also had the happy consequence of introducing him to 
his wife, Anne-Marie Duff, eight years his senior; she played his girlfriend in 
Shameless and has gone on to an impressive film and theatre career herself. The 
couple married in private last year and have a pact, she has said, never to 
discuss each other. And though McAvoy can't quite resist the occasional 
delighted reference in interviews to "the wife", they never do. (Also 
emphatically never discussed is McAvoy's missing father - also called James - 
despite the older man's periodic emergence in the tabloid papers pleading for a 
reconciliation. The pair have not spoken in more than two decades.)

"I'm very defensive and very protective of [my relationship] because you only 
get one life," says McAvoy, "and when you meet people you care about you want 
to give them a part of yourself, because you want to let them into your life, 
and if you're giving it to everybody then what is your soul? It's very cheap. I 
love you, but you're just like every other person because I freely use my 
fucking soul and life as currency ..."

Atonement will inevitably increase the curiosity, however; it's what the actor 
calls his "first conventional leading man" role. The movie is not perfect; many 
considered McEwan's novel, with its complex, contrived plotting and six-decade 
narrative, to be unfilmable. Its meaning suddenly clicked into place, McAvoy 
has said, when he realised that the role of Robbie was almost symbolic rather 
than strictly literal.

"He's wholly good," he says. "He is nearly Christ-like, or angelic, and I 
think that is why it is so hard for an audience, but also definitely for me, to 
watch him be torn apart. He is us, being ripped apart. He is humanity. He is my 
favourite character that I have ever played. I love him dearly. I wish I was 
him. I wish he existed."

After so much high emotion, his latest project, an adaptation of a comic book 
tale called Wanted, in which he plays a superhero assassin, must have come as a 
relief. "It's daft. It's fucking mad. And the director [Russian Timur 
Bekmambetov] is nuts, like his head is in a different universe really. It's 
going to be a very weird and interesting big action-y flick."

McAvoy is the lead, and Angelina Jolie and Morgan Freeman co-star, which for 
the lad from Drumchapel must be pretty nuts in itself. (He shares "one epic 
snog" with Jolie - "which is kind of weird".) Does he feel on the edge of a 
breakthrough into crazed über-celebrity? "I feel on the edge of failure quite a 
lot." But he must be daunted at his move into the absolute A-list. Keira 
Knightley is one thing, but Jolie ...?

"Yeah. I don't know. I hope I'm right in this, but unless you're an idealised 
human being, the Brad Pitts and the Angelinas and the Keiras and stuff .. See, 
if I won 20 Oscars next year, right? I still think that given the choice of 
running after me down the street and running after Keira, they would run after 
Keira. And that's fine with me, by the way. I'm more than happy with that".

· Atonement is on general release.
 