
Ayaan Hirsi Ali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayaan-hirsi-ali> has called 
the prophet Muhammad a "lecherous tyrant", Islam a "backward religion", and the 
Koran "in part a licence for oppression". Theo van Gogh dubbed Muslims 
"goat-fuckers", a radical Islamic leader "Allah's pimp", and Islam a 
"retrograde and aggressive" faith.

Van Gogh, the 47-year-old great-grandson of Vincent's brother and a talented 
if wildly provocative film-maker, columnist and TV interviewer, died on a 
street in eastern Amsterdam on Tuesday morning, slain by a suspect whom police 
yesterday described as an Islamic fundamentalist with terrorist ties.

"I feel terribly guilty," a shocked Hirsi Ali told Dutch media yesterday, 
adding that she was "very much afraid" that Submission, an 11-minute film about 
Islamic violence against women that she wrote and the film-maker produced, was 
the direct cause of his death. Unlike van Gogh, Hirsi Ali lives under 24-hour 
police protection.

The elegant 34-year-old MP for the free-market VVD party, a Somalian refugee 
who 12 years ago fled an arranged marriage and now calls herself an 
"ex-Muslim", has every reason to be distressed: the manner of Van Gogh's death 
was brutal - and, it emerged yesterday, depressingly familiar.

The film-maker was shot several times as he rode on his bicycle down the 
Linnaeusstraat to his office, but still managed to stagger some distance - 30 
or 40 metres, witnesses said - before being caught in a second hail of gunfire 
by his attacker, a 26-year-old man with joint Dutch and Moroccan nationality. 
On his knees, the eyewitnesses said, Van Gogh twice begged for mercy. But the 
suspect, described as having a beard and wearing a long jellaba, fired again 
and then drew two butcher's knives, slitting his victim's throat before driving 
the blades into his chest. Police found a letter on the body, but have yet to 
reveal its contents.

The Dutch justice minister, Piet Hein Donner, said yesterday that the suspect, 
captured after a shootout with police and currently in a prison hospital with 
gunshot wounds, "acted out of radical Islamic fundamentalist convictions" and 
had contacts with a fundamentalist group that was under surveillance by the 
Dutch secret service. Dutch media also reported that the suspect was a close 
friend of Samir Azzouz, an 18-year-old Muslim of Moroccan origin who is 
awaiting trial on charges of planning terrorist attacks on targets including a 
nuclear reactor and Amsterdam's Schiphol Airport.

The assassination has sparked a heartfelt national outcry in the traditionally 
tolerant Netherlands, sparking fears of a dangerous rise in racial tension in a 
country whose population of 16 million includes some one million Muslims, 
mainly of Turkish or North African origin. Fanning fears further, a recent 
government estimated that by 2010, several large Dutch cities like Rotterdam, 
Amsterdam, the Hague and Utrecht would have Muslim majorities.

Recent opinion polls show the Dutch to be increasingly hostile towards 
immigrants and fearful of Muslim extremism. Islam, immigration and integration 
have shot to the top of the political agenda since the rise of Pim Fortuyn, the 
populist anti-immigrant politician who was himself shot dead by an 
animal-rights activist in May 2002, and whose party finished second in general 
elections just days later. The centre-right Dutch government has only succeeded 
in fanning the flames by calling for greater integration of immigrants through 
language tests and citizenship classes, and recently fuelled even more 
controversy with plans to repatriate up to 26,000 failed asylum seekers.

In the midst of this tinderbox, insisting on their right to speak freely and 
with the support of many Dutch people, Hirsi Ali and Van Gogh scattered their 
sparks - a blistering critique of Islam - with magnificent disregard for the 
feelings they might be offending.

The slender, couture-clad Hirsi Ali has had several fatwas issued against her 
and spends her life in the company of a brace of six-foot bodyguards; Van Gogh 
also received death threats but refused protection, saying the bullets would 
surely never come for him. "No one can seriously want to shoot the village 
idiot," he said recently.

Their film was broadcast on Dutch national television in August. It depicts, 
among other scenes, a beautiful young Muslim girl addressing Allah in a mosque. 
She wears a veil that covers her face, but her naked body is clearly visible 
through a transparent gown.

"All praise to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds," says the text that scrolls 
across the actress's throat and down her breasts: the fatiha, or opening of the 
Koran. Other scenes portray a Muslim woman who is forced into an arranged 
marriage, abused by her husband, raped by her uncle and then brutally punished 
for adultery.

In a third, a woman's bruised and beaten shoulders are covered with lines from 
verse 34, chapter 4 of the Koran. "Men are the maintainers of women because 
Allah has made them excel ... " it reads. "The good women are therefore 
obedient. Those on whose part you fear desertion, admonish them, and leave them 
alone in the sleeping-places, and beat them."

The film was a potent, if undeniably provocative, interpretation of Hirsi 
Ali's thesis. Brought up as a Muslim in Somalia, she suffered female 
circumcision at the age of five and, sent to Germany to meet her intended 
Somali partner in an arranged marriage, fled across the border to the 
Netherlands in 1992. Penniless, speaking no Dutch, she worked as a cleaner, in 
a biscuit factory and as a translator before studying political science at 
Leiden University.

In 2001, after graduating, she wrote a report on "honour killings" of Muslim 
women that also served as a savage indictment of Holland's 30-year experiment 
with multiculturalism, describing it as a "disastrous error" born of "misplaced 
guilt". The report embarrassed the Dutch Labour party, which comissioned it, 
but the VVD - which has a tough "boat is full" stance on immigration - welcomed 
her with open arms, first as a researcher, then as a candidate. She has sat in 
The Hague as an MP since January 2003.

On TV talk shows and in newspaper columns, Hirsi Ali has denounced the 
"cruelty and abuse" meted out to many Muslim women living in western societies.

Damning Islam as a "backward, 12th- century religion", a "medieval, misogynist 
cult incapable of self-criticism and blind to modern science", Hirsi Ali says 
orthodox Muslim men routinely indulge in domestic violence against women, as 
well as incest and child abuse. To make matters worse, she argues, their 
behaviour is invariably hushed up.

"The Netherlands is a country that worships consensus and peace, but here you 
have newcomers who are not integrated into this system," she said last year. 
"They exploit an open, liberal society to reach illiberal ends. Everyone knows 
the position of women in Islamic countries is horrendous, but the Dutch like to 
think it doesn't happen here. They don't want to believe Muslim women in the 
Netherlands are beaten and locked up in their homes, or that girls are murdered 
for holding hands with a non-Muslim boy."

The solution, Hirsi Ali argues, is for fundamentalist Islamic books to be 
banned, Mullahs to be banished and for western societies "not to bend over 
backwards to accommodate a culture that advocates the degradation of women ... 
but to ensure that the Muslim men who perpetrate such barbarity are brought to 
justice".

The "lapsed Muslim" last year found an effective and articulate artistic 
partner in Van Gogh who, as well as having made a dozen feature films in his 
25-year career, was also a much-loved, deliberately provocative and often 
obscene columnist and pamphleteer who published numerous indictments of an 
over-radical Islam in an over-tolerant Netherlands. Fired over the years by 
almost every Dutch newspaper and magazine for offending its readers, he wrote 
most recently for the daily freesheet Metro and ran his own highly popular 
website, De Gezonde Roker (The Healthy Smoker).

But in the no-longer-tolerant-Netherlands, he paid the price. Fraught Dutch 
commentators had no hesitation yesterday in saying that Holland had become a 
"front-line state" in a brutal collision between two cultures. "In France or 
Belgium, you don't have this same kind of very Dutch cabaret-like figure who 
rages about goat-fuckers," one commentator, Rene Cuperus, told De Volkskrant.

"They must know that they've landed up in the most liberal country in the 
world, the land of abortions and gays and all that - but Muslims don't see it. 
There's just no way to bridge that gulf in a politically correct way." 
Sociologist, Herman Vuisje, described Van Gogh's murder as "not a turning 
point, but the after-effect of a historical failure". And an academic, Norbert 
Both, posed the question that, one imagines, is now troubling Ayaan Hirsi Ali - 
as well as a great many less outspoken Dutch people.

"The great dilemma, in confronting intolerance, is that you cannot reply with 
tolerance," he said. "But if you answer intolerance with intolerance, you lose 
your own identity. Can we, despite the emotion, remain ourselves? That's the 
question."
 