
A week after the George W Bush v Al Gore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/algore> presidential election, when the 
result was still in the balance and the Florida recount in full swing, I got a 
call. It was the chief judge of the canvassing board in Broward County, Florida.

“The supervisor of elections is physically exhausted,” he said. “It has fallen 
to me to select her replacement, and both the Democrats and Republicans agree 
that you’ll be fair and diligent.”

I replied: “Can’t you find anyone else?”

The following day, I reported for duty. The issue seemed to be about chads – 
the tiny circles of paper that are punched out when a ballot paper is 
submitted. The problem was, no one had cleaned the apparatus, so chads were 
building up, stopping new ones being smoothly punched.

My job was to examine every disputed ballot, one at a time, to try to work out 
which candidate each person was voting for, and make my call. I then held each 
paper up to a Republican and Democrat observer, who were sitting beside me, to 
get their agreement. I suppose my role was like that of an umpire. I must have 
been doing something right – the politicians did not object to any of my 
decisions.

I was there for nearly two weeks, and examined thousands of ballots. We worked 
long days, 8am to sometimes 11pm. They brought us lunch and dinner; 
I love Italian food, but how much rigatoni can you eat? I must have put on 
weight. I even had a police escort; they followed me to the bathroom, and home 
every night. I even worked on Thanksgiving, which I wasn’t delighted about, 
but I wanted to see the job through.

That day, we finished at 4pm and the escort came back with me. I invited them 
in for food, and my sons, who were young then, loved it: the police were the 
size of football players.

Back then, I had an astigmatism. The job was a strain on my eyes, so on my 
first day, I called a clerk over and said, “Do you have a magnifying glass?” It 
helped enormously – I wanted to see each chad clearly, so I could make as 
accurate a call as possible.

As well as being a physically stressful job, it carried a lot of 
responsibility. There were crowds gathered outside the courtrooms, and police 
barriers at both ends of the street. I remember thinking, “This sort of thing 
doesn’t happen in America. This is serious business – we have to get it right.”

The magnifying glass had another effect – the press went crackers. That first 
night, my son said, “Dad, you’re all over the news!” The photographs were 
everywhere.

‘Periodically, the panda used to lose its temper and go berserk’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/03/peter-ming-panda-photograph-london-zoo>
Once it was over, I went straight back to my job as a judge. I never looked 
back, and I didn’t give any interviews. But it feels like a long time ago. They 
changed the ballot papers after 2000; you now mark a piece of paper that looks 
like a long railroad ticket, which is read by a computer. I expect no voting 
system is perfect, and they all need continuous refinements.

I’m in history books. If you say to someone, “Do you remember the recount in 
Broward County, Florida?” they’ll look blank. But if you say, “Do you remember 
the guy with the magnifying glass?”, they always do.

Interview: Hannah Booth

• Are you in a notable photograph? Email thatsme@theguardian.com 
<mailto:thatsme@theguardian.com>
 