
"I was not born blind," says Agnes. "When I was 13, I contracted a pox, which 
went into my eyes. I was taken to the hospital but it was to no avail. They 
spoke to us of African mischief [voodoo] so I was taken to the traditional 
herbalist. He rubbed herbs into my eyes. In the process my eyes went out."

As Agnes struggled to adjust to her life without sight, her mother also 
struggled to cope. "When I became blind, I lost my mother's love. She would 
leave me so hungry, she did nothing to care for me. I only survived with the 
help of neighbours."

When the rebels came during the civil war, Agnes's mother gathered her 
daughters and ran. Agnes was left behind. Unable to follow, she sat in the 
empty house and listened in terror as people raced past. A voice inside told 
her that she would die if she stayed there. "So I crawled to the door and 
waited. As soon as I heard somebody I grabbed hold of that person and hung on. 
We ran. Later I was found and taken to a church in Freetown."

After the war, Agnes was enrolled in school, where she learned to read 
braille. Eight years later, she is about to start university. With the Young 
Voices programme, she has spoken out about disability rights to audiences 
across the country. She has also forgiven her mother.Libby Powell

Civil war amputees play on

As a national footballer, Mohamed Kamara has represented Sierra Leone across 
the world. From his training ground on Freetown city beach, the 26 year old, 
known to his team mates as Soccermed, has travelled as far as Argentina to play 
for his country. But football is more than just a sport for Soccermed, it has 
given him back his life.

"My leg was amputated during the war in 1999, when the rebels caught me and 
fired gun shots directly through it. They captured my whole family and they 
killed my father. At the hospital they couldn't save my leg so they cut it off."

After the war, the Sierra Leonean government set up displacement camps to 
house the thousands who suffered amputations. Soccermed was brought to Aberdeen 
Amputee Camp in Freetown. He still remembers the communal shock of those who 
found themselves there. "For a while we just stopped feeling. Many said they 
wanted to die. I had to live on my own because not all my family could accept 
me."

"In 2001, everything changed when I found out about the Single Leg Amputee 
football club," says Soccermed. The club was founded by a group of young men, 
determined to continue to enjoy the sport that they so loved before the war 
started and took away their childhoods. It has become a symbol of national 
pride in post-war Sierra Leone. "Football can make me forget my problems. On 
the pitch I cannot think of anything else. When we play together, I cannot feel 
that things are any other way."

An orphan on the street

The rains have come. In Ibrahim's small street shelter in Freetown, water has 
saturated the roof and lies in puddles on the floor. "Come in," he says, 
brushing aside a T-shirt hanging from a wire across a dank tin hut. In the 
middle of the floor a wooden plank lies covered with a dirty rag. "This is 
where I sleep," he says nudging the plank with his crutch.

Ibrahim looks younger than his 15 years. His life has already been marked by 
much tragedy. He lost his father as an infant, and he was just seven years old 
when his mother was killed by rebel forces during the civil war. In 2009, he 
contracted polio. "I was in the fields when I felt a pain in my leg. When my 
leg began to shrink, the people made me leave. They said it was voodoo."

Ibrahim arrived in Freetown alone last Christmas in search of his only 
surviving relative, an older brother who had left for the capital years ago. He 
found him living on the streets and Ibrahim had no choice but to join him. A 
year later, the brothers are struggling to make ends meet. They spend their 
days begging at car windows and Ibrahim's body is thin under his bright blue 
T-shirt.

But like most teenagers, his sense of fun tumbles out onto the street with 
him. On the pavement, he chatters with friends about wrestling and Manchester 
United's current form. For a moment they betray nothing of the life that has 
left them so vulnerable and their laughter rises above the grind of the city.

A milestone in disability legislation

There is stern silence in the Sierra Leonean parliament library until MP 
Julius Cuffie arrives. His warm voice comes before him, as he limps across the 
wooden floor. In 2007, Cuffie made Sierra Leonean history when he became the 
first disabled member of parliament. On the first day of the new term, he is 
clearly looking forward to it. He has a busy time ahead.

"My disability shaped me. As a child I realised my plight, and I knew that 
education was going to lift me up. Male chauvinism often drives a father to 
disown a disabled child, but my father pushed me through education. In the end 
I was the first of his children to go to university."

Cuffie was in his last year of university when he became part of a small group 
who formed the Sierra Leone Union for Polio Persons. Together they made the 
first inroads for disability rights. Like so many young people with a vision, 
they took to the streets. "I called my colleagues together and said it's time 
to make our voices heard. We staged a mass rally. We marched through Freetown 
to parliament." Seven years later, and now on the inside of the political 
system, preparing for the most important debate of his career.

"After years of neglected rights, a national disability bill is finally being 
considered. We need to make sure this bill is enacted. It will be a huge 
challenge but I believe we are ready for it and I will be in the vanguard," 
says Cuffie.
 