
Garry Essendine is one of those characters that actors dream of playing - 
until the opportunity arises, and they discover he's the stuff of nightmares. 
Noel Coward created the role, in Present Laughter, for himself. An Aston Martin 
of a star vehicle, it allowed him to spend three hours on stage in a dressing 
gown, preening, fending off admirers and firing off arrow-sharp witticisms. The 
farce is about to open at the National for the first time, withAlex Jennings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alex-jennings> playing Essendine. And 
Jennings is scared.

"We're at that stage in rehearsal where nothing seems remotely funny," he 
says. "I imagine the sound of silence, tumbleweed blowing through the 
auditorium. People say, 'You were born to do it,' but the last time they said 
that about me was when I played Benedick in Much Ado About Nothing, and it was 
a disaster." He winces, his dismay augmented by the awareness that this is the 
sort of neuroticism Coward lovingly satirised in the play.

Jennings is trying to ignore the fact that Present Laughter is, to a degree, 
autobiographical; to attempt the Coward style now would be absurd. "He was an 
extraordinary writer," says Jennings. "But as an actor, he's weird. I've 
listened to recordings of him and, by normal standards of what's good, he ain't 
good."

Plus, there's the issue of age. Coward wrote Present Laughter as he turned 40, 
about a suave matinee idol approaching his 40th birthday; Jennings turned 50 
earlier this year. But this, too, makes him curiously appropriate for the role. 
The critic Kenneth Tynan thought there was something of Peter Pan about Coward, 
and the same could be said of Jennings, who celebrated his own 40th birthday 
while playing Hamlet, the quintessential young man's role. Everything about 
him, from his buoyant curls to his crisp jeans, exudes youthfulness. No wonder, 
turning 50, he went into "a big sulk. I just don't feel it - none of us do. My 
kids are doing GCSEs and A-levels this year. Where did it go?"

It went into forging a fantastically successful theatre career. With three 
Olivier awards under his belt (it's a mark of his range that they are for 
theatre as diverse as the Russian comedy Too Clever by Half, Ibsen's Peer Gynt, 
and Henry Higgins in My Fair Lady), he no longer has to audition; he is simply 
offered work. Nicholas Hytner, director of the National, ranks him among the 
pre-eminent actors of his generation - a John Gielgud for the 21st century.

He and Hytner first worked together in 1985, when Hytner took over a 
production of The Scarlet Pimpernel in Chichester. They've since collaborated 
eight times, a process that tests their friendship as much as reinforces it. 
"We're quite scratchy with one another in rehearsal," says Jennings, "which 
we're not in life at all."

Even so, Hytner is unstinting in his praise. "There are actors," says the 
director, "who are immediately accessible and attractive because they show you 
everything, and actors who are fascinating because they have secrets. Alex can 
do both." That's what Jennings is like in interview, too: charming, amusing, 
yet a touch evasive. There always seems to be something more, hidden behind his 
penetrating blue eyes.

Jennings is yet to become a household name, though that's not for want of 
trying. He takes time out to concentrate on TV and film, something that needs 
"a deep breath, because you have to put yourself out of work". His most recent 
leap in the dark led to him playing Prince Charles in the Stephen Frears/Peter 
Morgan film The Queen, an unexpectedly empathetic portrayal and now the role 
for which he is best known.

You can't help wondering why he bothers working elsewhere, when he is so well 
established in theatre. "I would be lying if I didn't say that part of the 
reason one becomes an actor is to be approved of, to be clapped at the end of 
the evening," he says. But he wouldn't want the madness experienced by Brad 
Pitt, which he witnessed at close hand when doing "the tiniest part ever" in 
Babel. "As soon as people got sight of him, they were all screaming and 
hollering and taking pictures." He seems to have found the whole spectacle 
shockingly uncouth.

Nor does he find it entirely satisfying being on a film set. "There's so much 
sitting around. After your third day of not doing much, you think, 'This isn't 
proper work.'" He recently finished recording Cranford, the big new BBC period 
drama, alongside Judi Dench, Michael Gambon and Imelda Staunton. "It was 
amazing, a hoot, but there were quite a few of us in it who were doing not a 
lot. That's a sign of the times."

So why does he persist? Partly, it's the challenge. There are actors, he says, 
for whom "something happens between them and a camera", something mysterious 
that he, too, would like to achieve. But you get the impression that, deep 
down, he wants anything he hasn't got. A regular on the National's big stages, 
he wants to work in the intimate Cottesloe. A renowned Shakespearean actor, he 
wants to do new plays at the Royal Court.

Unfortunately, the thing he covets more than anything is a world that no 
longer exists: the debonair glamour of cinema's romantic/screwball comedy 
heyday. "Growing up, I loved golden-age Hollywood. British films of that 
period, too. Those are my desert island movies. You can still learn from those 
actors: James Stewart, the passion of his acting, never stops astonishing me. I 
wanted that. I wanted to be Fred Astaire, that's what I wanted."

Ten years ago, he thought he'd try living in LA, and found that "I just loved 
being in Hollywood-land". He might have stayed, only Lesley, his partner of 27 
years, wasn't so keen, and there wasn't enough work to justify the move. "I had 
interviews for ridiculous jobs, playing Chicago heavies." But he still harbours 
a dream of returning, "to have another go at sitting by a pool".

Jennings recognises that he can be "a bit of a nightmare" when he's building 
up to a press night or chasing screen work, though his family are no longer so 
willing to humour him. They won't help with learning lines, for instance: 
"They're bored to sobs." And they won't tolerate any hint of false modesty. 
Flicking channels on TV recently, he came across The Queen and "put my head in 
my hands - and my family just thought that was pathetic".

It's just the sort of actorly insecurity Coward so scintillatingly punctured 
in Present Laughter. He doesn't like to admit it, but Jennings has realised 
that, 60 years after its premiere, the play still rings horribly true. 
"Constantly," he says, wincing again, "one is faced with one's own life in it, 
and one's own indulgences".

Present Laughter opens at the National, London, on October 2. Box office: 
020-7452 3000.
 