
Deep in the basement of a Mexican bar in downtown Los Angeles, past boxes of 
beans and cartons of juice, Jamie Foxx is wearing a spangly, silver sequined 
jacket, a grubby yellow T-shirt and fat white trainers with graffiti all over 
them. His hair is matted down and he's muttering to himself and scratching his 
head rather manically.

Director Joe Wright <https://www.theguardian.com/film/joe-wright> looks into 
his monitor and shouts 'Cut! Thanks Jamie, see you tomorrow.' Jamie shuffles 
off and, like a well-drilled army, the crew start dismantling the lights and 
camera. Joe looks up at me and grins widely from underneath the peak of a white 
cap. 'Can you believe this?' he mouths.

Right now, this week, this moment, 36-year-old Joe Wright, from Islington, 
north London, is the hottest property in Hollywood. His filmAtonement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/atonement> is nominated for 14 Baftas tonight 
and has just received seven nods, including Best Picture, for the Oscars. We 
skip excitedly back up the stairs to the main restaurant, which Joe has 
commandeered for a key scene in his first Hollywood movie, a true-life story 
called The Soloist. Jamie Foxx is Nathaniel Ayers, a homeless schizophrenic 
violin genius; Robert Downey Jnr is Steve Lopez, a dissolute LA Times 
journalist who befriends him and, through a series of articles, draws attention 
to the nigh-on 7,000 souls who sleep in boxes and tents every night on LA's 
Skid Row.

Joe plonks me in his director's chair and I watch on a monitor as he gently 
but firmly directs Robert Downey Jnr having an argument with his ex-wife played 
by the superb indie actress Catherine Keener. Downey waits for his close up, 
slugs a tequila at the bar and coolly tips a black trilby over those bright 
buttons he has for eyes. 'Cut!' says Joe again. 'Let's go for lunch.'

It's no exaggeration to say that the Hollywood vortex is revolving around Joe 
Wright right now. They love Atonement out here. Huge posters of his romantic, 
wartorn love story line the freeways, and everyone I meet seems to think it a 
scandal that Joe didn't get nominated for Best Director.

Robert Downey Jnr - clean and sober, smoking and offering chunks of pineapple 
out of a huge Tupperware container - can barely contain himself. 'I grew up 
with the Robert Altmans and the Hal Ashbys of this world so, like, I know the 
Tao of film-making,' he gabbles. 'And hey, it's a fucking crime Joe wasn't 
nominated. He's the goods, man, he really is.'

Joe seems very at home as we grab some seared scallops on spicy rice in his 
ridiculously beige trailer. 'The catering on American films is amazing,' he 
says. 'I'm getting fat.' Does he mind about the Oscar snub? 'Well out here it's 
all they bloody talk about, so yes for 12 hours or so I was gutted because 
everyone seemed so angry about it on my behalf. Then I just looked around and 
thought: What am I even thinking? I'm making a movie in Hollywood with these 
amazing actors I'd only ever seen sitting there in my cinema seat like a mad 
fan - and they seem excited to work with me for some reason.'

It must, however, all seem a long way from the Little Angel Theatre in London, 
a 120-seat puppet space in a back alley between Upper Street and Essex Road, 
where Joe spent his first 23 years, helping his sister, mother and father run 
the place. He was teased at the local school for being from a puppet theatre 
and for being dyslexic, and he left at 16 with no GCSEs.

'There was the house, the garden with a workshop in it and a door that led to 
the theatre,' he recalls the next day at the bougainvillea-clad villa he and 
his fiancee, the British actress Rosamund Pike, are renting up in the Hollywood 
Hills. From his bedroom window you can almost touch the 50ft-high letters of 
the world's most famous sign. 'For years, that theatre was all I knew and it 
was like a magic kingdom of puppets and hippy types wafting around. I'd get 
beaten up at school, but I just sat in the art room drawing pictures of the 
Great Fire of London until I could go home.'

Home was where little Joe learned showbusiness: 'The box- office phone came 
through to the house and I was taught to answer: "Hello, Little Angel Theatre, 
how can I help you?" And there was this big red booking book on the table with 
a seating plan and you'd take the booking and you'd cross out the seats. This 
book dominated our lives. If the crosses on the seats were full, then the house 
was happy - but if the book wasn't full the house would be anxious, even 
depressed. So I knew from a very early age: it's all about bums on seats.'

Unlike many young British filmmakers, Joe isn't afraid of making things 
populist. He turned Pride and Prejudice into a worldwide hit, despite having 
only read the script, not the novel. Similarly, Atonement has been accumulating 
impressive global box-office figures since its release in the UK last 
September. During its first two months in the US, it hasn't left the top 10, 
which, in a country in thrall to cartoons, teen spoofs, blockbusters and big 
stars, is nothing short of astounding for a literary tale about posh people in 
an English country house.

Tim Bevan, who produced Pride and Prejudice and Atonement, and co-runs 
Britain's only real hit film factory, Working Title, says: 'Joe was one of a 
bunch of young Brits we interviewed five years ago when we were looking for a 
director for Pride. He just came in and pitched images and emotions. There was 
no clever-clever, literary take on the story because he hadn't read the book, 
so he just had an instinctive feel for the atmosphere he wanted. It pricked my 
attention immediately.' Joe had also seen enough costume dramas to know what he 
didn't want from this. 'It's a very rare touch,' Bevan adds. 'Joe takes 
complicated, intellectual ideas which swamp many others and smoothly translates 
them into images.'

Working Title has signed Wright up for three more films and Bevan is 
understandably delighted. 'I've had Americans going crazy about hot stars 
before, like Hugh Grant, but now the fuss is about a director. It's the Joe 
Show out there, and for good reason - he understands what audiences want on the 
screen and knows how to give it to them.'

I think of this talent the next day, as I watch Joe in discussion with his 
regular crew - cinematographer Seamus McGarvey and production designers Sarah 
Greenwood and Katie Spencer, who are all Oscar-nominated for Atonement - 
location-scouting at a dusty, time-warped Masonic lodge in west Hollywood. Joe 
ambles about and suddenly perks up when he envisages a shot through a doorway. 
He suggests it to Seamus, who immediately thinks how to light it and where to 
put his camera tracks; Sarah, meanwhile, is dressing the room with her 
imagination. This is the Joe Show in motion, impressively harmonious and 
intuitive.

After a successful scout, Joe's happy and hungry. Seamus goes off to the 
cinematographers awards. (As Woody Allen says in Annie Hall, 'They do nothing 
but give out awards here: greatest fascist dictator, Adolf Hitler.') Joe takes 
me in his big black Jeep to get burgers at the wonderfully Fifties-feeling 101 
Coffee Shop on Franklin Avenue. 'You know, every summer when I was a kid, Mum 
and Dad would pack up two vans with us kids and a young company of hippies and 
drive across Europe for six weeks,' he says as we munch at the bar. 'We'd drive 
to France and to Greece. We went to Poland in 1981 - which is incredible, 
considering it was the year that Lech Walesa was arrested and the country was 
in turmoil. I still feel those are the happiest times of my life and I think 
that's what I'm replicating now, a touring company with my vanload - that's 
what I'm doing here, setting up our show.'

He says he loves being part of a company where everyone knows their parts and 
places. 'I couldn't be a cameraman or a designer or an actor - I have to be a 
director because I learned how to do that from my dad. Generally, I've never 
known quite how to fit in in civilian life, but on set, making a film, I know 
exactly where to go, how to behave and how I fit.'

Joe's father was 65 when Joe was born, and he died when Joe was 19, an 
experience that made him wake up and apply to art colleges. Somebody, he says, 
was going to have to run the puppet theatre. After a foundation course at 
Camberwell, he went to St Martin's to study fine art, film and video. 'It was 
all very theoretical and fascinating, but I was the only one who wanted to make 
films that actually had a narrative,' he says.

However, his real education came in after-school and weekend classes at Anna 
Scher's legendary theatre workshop in Islington, the place that launched 
hundreds of TV faces - most of Grange Hill and EastEnders went there for 
classes - as well as Ray Winstone and Kathy Burke. He still cites the actress 
as the biggest single influence on his life.

'She's been my mentor and best mate,' he says of the winner of the Best 
Actress at Cannes for her performance in Gary Oldman's Nil by Mouth, as well as 
immortalising Waynetta Slob and Perry the sullen teenager for Harry Enfield's 
sketch shows. He fondly tells the story of how she took him under her wing when 
he was a tubby teen actor playing one of a gang of thugs in a film called 
Revolution, starring Al Pacino but shot partly in the UK by British director 
Hugh Hudson.

'I knocked on the door of her caravan and I said, "All the other kids in the 
cast are calling me Doughnut." And she said, "Oh, you eat a lot of doughnuts 
then, Joe?" And I said, "Well, yeah, I do like a doughnut." And she just said: 
"Well try not eating so many fucking doughnuts then, you bastard." And that was 
the beginning of a lifetime of the best advice anyone could ever give. I love 
her.'

Burke has currently swapped performing for directing new works at the Royal 
Court Theatre. If Wright has one burning wish at the moment, it's to capture 
her on-screen brilliance so few directors have tapped into. 'She's the most 
brilliant, funny, smart, soulful, loveable, amazing person ever. She's my hero. 
I'd love to find her a good part, get her back acting again. She's said she 
wouldn't, but if it was right...' and he tails off, thinking about casting 
Kathy Burke.

For all his visual instinct, Wright has a remarkable ease and empathy with 
actors, getting them to work the way his father once controlled puppets. Keira 
Knightley, for example, shone for him as Elizabeth Bennet in Pride and 
Prejudice, earning herself a nomination at the Oscars, but famously not one on 
home turf for theBaftas <https://www.theguardian.com/film/baftas>, something 
Joe, who won the Carl Foreman award for best newcomer that year, berated Bafta 
members for in his acceptance speech. She's exquisite for him again as Cecilia 
Tallis in Atonement, earning a Bafta nomination but no Oscar this time.

'Actors aren't something to be scared of, you know,' sighs Joe. 'You have to 
treat them as artists and work with them. Often, it's something simple and tiny 
that's key to their performance and I'm not afraid of saying what it is. With 
Keira, I just tell her every now and then not to pout and she's wonderful.'

Back on the set of The Soloist, Robert Downey Jnr puts it another way. 'New 
guys come and go here in LA, overwhelmed by trepidation from the actors and the 
crews - they can't handle it, because this is our turf dude, this is like West 
Side Story - we're the Jets and they're the Sharks. That's how it goes down.

'First day, I said, "Listen Joe, just don't fuck with me and we'll be OK." But 
the whole point is that we're supposed to fuck with each other and he did fuck 
with me - for some reason he got under my skin and fuck, it worked. And the 
truth is we're doing a movie about getting under people's skin, into their 
heads and about having faith, man.

'So,' Downey Jr says, 'we locked horns and agreed that both the director and 
the actor make the character. Somehow I find I'm now giving him more - not of 
what I would want to give, but of what I trust his vision requires.'

As Joe says later, it must be exhausting being Robert Downey Jnr. But he's 
proud of having reached the point where this notoriously gifted but volatile 
star is turning in what looks like, in the brief scenes I saw, some excellent 
work. Of all the actors he's worked with, however, Joe is closest to Rosamund 
Pike, whom he met when he directed her in Pride and Prejudice and to whom he's 
now engaged.

They began seeing each other tentatively during the shoot, but romance only 
blossomed after. They've been together for four years now and Joe proposed on 
the shores of Lake Como as they journeyed down to the Venice Film Festival last 
September, when Atonement played as the opening-night film, complete with 
banquet and fireworks on the beach. They plan to get married in Italy this 
autumn.

'I just properly love her,' smiles Joe. 'She's so intelligent and 
uncompromising. She impresses me so much in every way and we have a laugh. I 
feel I can do anything with her, go anywhere, do anything, if we want to. The 
pipe dreams happen with her. Such as being here.' He gestures at the Hollywood 
sign.

'I spent so many years trying to be cool, to be someone I wasn't really, but 
now after four years with her, I find I'm accepting that fat kid who wore 
cravats to school and who couldn't read. I had a dream the night I got engaged, 
in Italy, that I had a heart transplant, and it really feels like I'm a new 
person, a person I like much more.'

Joe hasn't had a drink for nine months, which, to anyone who knew him a few 
years ago, will be a surprise. Wright hit the London rave scene in the early 
Nineties, when he and a friend, Adam Smith (currently directing hit TV show 
Skins) were part of an outfit called Vegetable Vision, creating visuals for 
acts including the Chemical Brothers, Darren Emerson and Andrew Weatherall. 'I 
was definitely off my head on ecstasy for quite a few years,' he admits. 'I was 
up a scaffold, 60ft above this seething mass of people, matching visuals to 
music from these amazing DJs. I'd put a slide of raw meat next to maggots, or a 
shot of police in riot uniform next to Campbell's tinned soup and I'd flash 
between the two to the music and the crowd.'

I wonder if Wright isn't part of a first flourishing of graduates - maybe 
'survivors' is a better word - from that secret scene that affected so much of 
English youth in the Nineties, one that's never really been acknowledged in the 
mainstream of film and television. Maybe, I venture, the rave generation is 
reaching Hollywood. The idea clearly pleases him. 'At last, I think producers 
who were part of the rave generation themselves are trusting directors 
influenced by it with bigger budgets now. I know I managed to get that rave 
feeling into Pride and Prejudice, just little suggestions of it in all the 
pastoral beauty. I love dawn shots, or shots after the rain has stopped, 
because I always loved staying up all night till dawn, when it all got still 
and calm. Scenes like that act as emotional recall for me and I'm sure for 
anyone who was doing ecstasy back then.

'Those feelings are in Atonement, too,' he says, referring to the remarkable 
six-minute tracking shot of the British army in chaos that James McAvoy's 
character encounters on the beach. 'That's like one big rave, a really trippy 
scene,' says Joe. 'And then there's the use of the graphics in the earlier 
scene when Bryony reads the wrong, lewd letter from Robbie to Cecilia. I 
managed to get the word "cunt" to fill the screen in old Courier font - we used 
to do that for Underworld lightshows.'

I can't believe that Joe has had the chutzpah to get a Best Picture nomination 
for a film that does indeed flash up the C word three times. On the plane over 
to LA, I watch Atonement again on the in-flight movie channel. As the scene of 
Robbie typing his fateful letter to Cecilia comes up, I glance along the cabin 
to see the C-word emblazoned on dozens of little seat-back screens. When you're 
hot in Hollywood, you can get away with anything.

Later, I go out to dinner with Joe. We get the best table in the Sunset Tower 
and Dmitri, the maitre d', can't stop telling Joe how much he loved his movie. 
It's all a bit embarrassing. Until later, when Joe leaves me having several 
French Martinis in the Chateau Marmont bar and I somehow find myself stranded, 
jet-lagged and inebriated in the pouring rain, in the middle of a deserted 3am 
Hollywood, with no mobile phone and no idea where I am. I see a petrol station 
in the distance. I wander in and find two young California Highway Patrolmen 
ordering doughnuts. I decide to do as Joe would and try my best to speak 
coherently and in my best English accent. The cops take pity and speak into 
their radios to order a cab for 'a white male from out of country wearing a wet 
blue jacket, pink T-shirt and white sneakers'. Still, no cab comes and even 
Officers Clein and Hazelwood can't flag one down. They ask me what I'm doing in 
LA and I tell them I've come to interview Joe Wright.

'Oh, the director of Atonement? Wow, that's up for Best Picture - but he 
didn't get nominated,' they both say, to my stupefaction. Can you imagine an 
English policemen even having heard of Atonement? 'I didn't see the movie,' 
says Officer Hazelwood. 'It doesn't look like my thing. But my fiancee loved it 
- damn, she was still crying when she got home.'

It's now 5am and they offer to drive me back to my hotel, at least 30 minutes 
away. We get in the cop car. 'You want us to put the lights on and everything?' 
they say. 'Maybe you can get us tickets for theOscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars>.' When even the cops give your idiot 
drunk friends a lift home, that's when you know you've made it in Hollywood.
 