
'Holy shit! Twenty bucks for breakfast!" says Paul Giamatti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/paul-giamatti> in a tone combining horror 
with a kind of beatific wonderment. "And 10 bucks for a bagel. Jesus!" "Relax," 
I tell him, casting an eye around the well-appointed sterility of the dining 
room at the Four Seasons Hotel in Beverly Hills, "The Guardian's picking up the 
tab on this one." "Weeeell, OK then," he says, rubbing his hands together in 
satirical, Starvin'-Marvin glee, before refocusing on the outrageous bill of 
fare. "But still: 10 bucks for a bagel. I could live with that kind of guilt 
for years!"

It's 11am and two weeks of apocalyptic Los Angeles weather - storms, 
mudslides, flooding - have subsided overnight to afford us a clear bright day. 
Giamatti, New York-based, more slender than he looks on screen, but no less 
average-looking, is in town to talk about his breakout hitSideways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sideways>, a movie whose critical reception 
over the Christmas period is in the process of transforming him from contented 
character actor into something of a star.

He's finding it a strange and only partly welcome phenomenon. "It'd be 
disingenuous to say I don't like attention - I'm an actor for God's sake - and 
it's flattering and all, but attention was never my big goal. I just like to 
work and have a good time. This whole business feels kind of intense, like a 
bad fit. Round peg, square hole. But whatever, I'll take it."

He may have to learn to like it. Sideways, directed by Election and About 
Schmidt's Alexander Payne, was the critical favourite of the pre-Oscar season. 
Its print ad is simply dozens of raves from critics nationwide, the kind of 
unfaked adulation that most directors and actors would sell their souls for.

Based on a novel by Rex Pickett, it's about two old college buddies in their 
40s who take a week-long trip to the wine country inland from Santa Barbara 
before one of them gets married. Giamatti plays Miles, a tightly wound 
grade-school teacher and wine enthusiast waiting to hear if his third fat, 
quasi-autobiographical novel will be the one that gets published. Thomas Haden 
Church, who some will remember as the surreally-minded mechanic on the 1990s US 
TV sitcom Wings, plays his horndog pal Jack, whose bachelor holiday this is, 
and is in fierce contest with Giamatti throughout the movie for the most 
memorable moments. Miles is interested in wine. Jack is interested in pussy, 
pussy and, oh yeah, pussy - and to hell with his impending nuptials. Ever the 
good friend, he's determined that Miles is also "gonna get [his] joint smooched 
if it fuckin' kills me".

Together the utterly ill-matched, but somehow perfectly well-matched pair cut 
a drunken, squabbling swathe through the snooty vineyards. Jack chases wantonly 
after single mother Sandra Oh (the underrated Korean-Canadian actress who's now 
married to Payne) while Miles, despite his terminal uselessness as a man and 
his grief over his recently collapsed marriage, starts to nurse a fondness for 
Maya, a soulful grad-student waitress played by Virginia Madsen. Certain of the 
movie's lines are already entering the popular imagination and Giamatti is 
heartily sick of people approaching him in the street and screaming, as Miles 
does at one point, "I am NOT drinkin' any fuckin' MERLOT!"

He's managed to avoid the worst of the insanity surrounding Sideways, having 
worked on another project until about a week ago. Now he's here for a series of 
awards shows, and it's evident to him that his career is different now.

"This movie has caught on way more than I expected. I'm comfortable in my 
life, and I'm just a little worried about not being comfortable anymore. All of 
a sudden it's more intense on the press line and it kind of bums me out. It 
definitely seems like there's more crazy - crazier - people coming up to me and 
saying, 'My friend made a tape of his fish singing and, dude, you gotta listen 
to it.' Crazy fucker last night gave me his chatline number: 'You gotta call 
me, man!' Some woman came up to me after the Critics' Choice awards and gave me 
cookies, talking all this crazy shit about birds and flowers, and it was 
creepy. And me, I like crazy people, but I like being able to study them from a 
distance."

Does he have any interest in or knowledge of wine? After all, some of the 
movie's funniest moments, and one of its most touching scenes, centre around 
Miles sticking his hooter in wine glasses and detecting bouquets of, for 
instance: "Mmm, strawberries, a hint of asparagus ... and a little odour of, 
aaahhh, Edam cheese."

He chuckles. "I don't have any knowledge of wine whatsoever. Faked it all. 
Every last bit of it. And frankly it couldn't interest me less. I think it's 
just really kinda queer. I just think it's really fuckin' goofy. I didn't want 
make fun of it, because its ridiculous enough without making fun of it. When I 
read the script I thought: this is great, but who the fuck cares about wine? It 
worked way better than I expected it to do."

One of Sideways' more endearing elements is the casting of Church and Madsen, 
two talented performers mired for a decade in low-paying B-movies and bad TV. 
Each is a revelation. How was it to work with this pair? "This was the perfect 
thing for Tom. He's a really eccentric guy. He was doing more ad-libbing and 
improv than me. Alexander wants you to do what's on the page, which is fine by 
me - I don't think I'm particularly good at improvising, but Tom is. He's a 
little bit less disciplined - in a good way - than I am, and we complemented 
each other. He's loose and I'm more tightly wrapped. He's a smart guy, too, and 
it was clever of Alexander to cast a smart actor because a lot of people would 
made the character dumb, but Tom doesn't. That's one of the things that makes 
the friendship work. Jack's a fucking goofball and a trainwreck and an asshole 
and delusional and weird, but he's not stupid. Virginia, on the other hand, 
like her character, is much more steady and grounded, sort of the opposite of 
Tom."

All of a sudden Giamatti drops his voice to a stage whisper: "Hey, man ... is 
that Larry Flynt sitting over there?" And there indeed, at the next table, 
surrounded by his wife and a couple of his executives, is my old boss, the 
golden wheelchair-bound Frog Prince of Porn himself. I tell Paul I used to 
write the dirty-letters page for Flynt's flagship rag, Hustler. His eyes widen 
and we have a brief and thoroughly unprintable digression on pornography. 
Giamatti is still enough of a new kid on the block to be unjaded about stuff 
like this and for a minute or two he's actually interviewing me (Sample 
dialogue: "No way, man! A what? A cowgirl with a ... bovine inseminator? That's 
fuckin' brilliant - and dis-gust-ing!). It's an endearing reprise of the 
10-dollar bagel moment; the starry-eyed kid on the loose in sicko Hollywood, 
drinking in all the outrage and dementia with great joy.

A real movie star - one with all the ego and self-absorbed boisterousness that 
nice-guy Giamatti lacks - would have been over at Flynt's table questing for 
free babes in a trice. It's worth bearing in mind, however, that Giamatti is 
the son of a college English lit professor who became the president of Yale 
University (Giamatti's alma mater) and was later the commissioner of baseball, 
in which post he gained notoriety for expelling the legendary crooked player 
Pete Rose out of the game. So he's grounded and seriously bright in ways that 
come less naturally to the pretty boys off the prairie who top most movie 
marquees.

I tell him his career so far reminds me of William H Macy's about 10 years 
ago. You saw Macy in Boogie Nights and asked, who is that guy? Then you looked 
him up and found you'd already seen him in a dozen movies - or rather, that 
he'd been in a dozen movies you'd seen, but hadn't quite registered as the same 
person.

"So you were in Saving Private Ryan?"

"I know," he guffaws, "my back catalogue is insane, kind of random and all 
over the place." He's also in two Woody Allen movies, Mighty Aphrodite and 
Deconstructing Harry. "He doesn't even give you the script, he just gives you 
your scenes. On Harry, I was working with Philip Bosco and we were in it a lot 
- that Screen Actors' Guild scale minimum payment he gives you sure mounts up 
after a while - and then we were cut right out of it."

Giamatti was also Howard Stern's nemesis in Private Parts, playing the radio 
station nazi Stern dubs "Pig Vomit". Any actor who can steal a movie from under 
Stern's prominent proboscis is surely onto something. He also co-starred in The 
Truman Show and Man in the Moon with Jim Carrey, who he believes is a comic 
genius and, more surprisingly, a great actor.

"He's gotta be good. You can't do the goofy stuff he does without being a good 
actor. Exciting to work with, but hard. You gotta find a way to work with him. 
He's so frickin' intense all the time that you gotta get a break from it once 
in a while. Not that he's always 'on', he's just an intense guy. Everything is 
just burning away inside of him. I dunno how he gets through the day. Another 
really smart guy, too."

His proudest moment so far, he says, is American Splendor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-splendor>, partly because it was 
such an enjoyable experience, and possibly because it set him up for Sideways 
it was a relief after being dyed blue all over - among myriad humiliations - by 
teen star Frankie Muniz in Big Fat Liar). When I ask him who his dream 
collaborators would be, he says he'd like to work again with Splendor's makers, 
Shari Springer Berman and Robert Pulcini. "I just liked them a whole lot." And 
there was me expecting him to roll out all the big boring mega-director names. 
Modesty - in all things, modesty.

Finally, how's he enjoying Sideways' acclaim? "It's great," he says, before 
immediately, and characteristically, backtracking a little. "It's a little 
freaky, actually. You start to really lose perspective on the movie when the 
critical response is as weirdly, regressively unanimous as it is. I'm such a 
natural skeptic that I start thinking, 'Maybe it actually sucks.'"

On that score, he should, as I told him before, just relax.

·  Sideways is released on January 28.
 