
Celtic’s Leigh Griffiths said the Ukrainian referee Serhiy Boiko had laughed 
at him after disallowing what would have been a late winner as the Scottish 
champions drew againstAstra Giurgiu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/astra-giurgiu> in Romania.

Had the goal stood Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> would 
have qualified for the knockout stages, given that Dinamo Zagreb had lost 5-1 
at home to Salzburg. But Ronnie Deila’s side are in a strong position in group 
D, five points ahead Zagreb with two games left.

Griffiths was adjudged to have nudged a defender but denied the foul. “I knew 
it wasn’t a foul, I just stood my ground and the boy jumped into me The ref 
didn’t even blow straight away, he let me go away and celebrate and then 
brought it back and started laughing about it. It seemed like every foul he 
gave against us he started laughing.

“It was a poor result in the end for us, we dominated large spells of the game 
and with the chances we created we should have walked away with the three 
points. It’s just one of those things and in our next game we’ve got to take 
three points to get through the group stages.”

Celtic had been heading for the last 32 following Stefan Johansen’s brilliant 
strike after 32 minutes. Stefan Scepovic missed a good chance to double 
Celtic’s lead and Charlie Mulgrew had a shot pushed on to the post just before 
William de Amorim equalised in the 79th minute, the Brazilian curling a shot 
past Craig Gordon from a difficult position.

The match began in near-farcical conditions with serious discussion taking 
place over a postponement until Friday lunchtime because of the fog. But after 
discussions involving the Uefa delegate it was deemed that the game could go 
ahead.

Deila had restored Gordon to the Celtic team while Callum McGregor and 
Scepovic came in for the ill Anthony Stokes and ineligible John Guidetti.

Celtic looked comfortable early on despite the foggy conditions and Johansen 
forced the first save. Emilio Izaguirre nutmegged an opponent inside the box 
and drove the ball across for the Norwegian to strike first time from 12 yards 
but Astra’s goalkeeper Silviu Lung parried his effort.

Gordon continued his impressive Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> form with a stunning 
save in the 27th minute from Seidou Yahaya’s swerving 20-yard drive that was 
destined for the top corner .

Celtic were ahead five minutes later as Johansen made the most of Mulgrew’s 
blocked free-kick to score against Astra for the second successive game. The 
Norwegian won the free-kick after being fouled by Ben Youssef on the edge of 
the box and stood over the ball before Mulgrew fired into the wall. But a home 
player sent a very weak clearance straight to Johansen, who responded with a 
first-time left-footed effort that dipped into the top corner with the aid of a 
slight deflection.

Mulgrew soon saw his bouncing 30-yard effort pushed on to the post by Lung. 
The save proved crucial. A precise Astra passing move ended with George 
Florescu laying the ball off to De Amorim, who curled a first-time effort into 
the far top corner from wide-left of the box.The former Hibernian striker had 
the ball in the net seconds later but he was penalised for nudging Cristian Oro 
as the Romanian defender went to head away after a half-cleared corner was 
headed back into the box.

Gordon had a rare fumble with three minutes left following Florescu’s bouncing 
long-range strike but Mikael Lustig swept up the danger.

There was more drama in injury time when Vincent Laban was sent off for a 
terrible, flying late challenge on Mulgrew, with Van Dijk somewhat fortunate to 
escape with a yellow card for smacking the offender on the back of his head.

Deila said: “We deserved to win. It was two points lost. We were the best 
team, in the first half we were excellent and scored a nice goal. In the second 
half we controlled it quite well but they scored a fantastic goal.

“There was nothing we could do about it - it was a fantastic shot. We had 
enough chances to kill the game and to win it - but in the end we have one 
point and while I am not happy with that, it is better than nothing.

“Maybe we could have played more forward and attacked more, but we seemed 
quite confident and had control. I am frustrated by that and we have something 
to work on when we go 1-0 ahead. We have to keep on playing offensively instead 
of trying to win the game 1-0. The performance was okay, the results should be 
better.”
 