
Two of the country’s most significant regional art galleries, the New Art 
Gallery in Walsall <http://thenewartgallerywalsall.org.uk/> and Inverleith 
House in Edinburgh 
<http://www.rbge.org.uk/the-gardens/edinburgh/inverleith-house>, face closure 
following threats to their funding.

The New Art Gallery, which opened in 2000 with £16.5m in National Lottery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/lottery> funding, learned on Wednesday that its 
local authority funding could be reduced by 25% each year for the next four 
years. Although there will be a consultation period before a final decision is 
made, the proposed cut would leave the gallery, which has 170,000 visitors a 
year, scrambling to find more than £800,000 currently provided by Walsall 
council.

“The council fully appreciates that the art gallery is much loved by those who 
use it,” the council said. “However, this authority can’t ignore the fact that 
savings have to be made … at a time when we are seeing a greater demand for 
social care services, increasing demands on children’s services and reductions 
in NHS spending.”

Sean Coughlan, the council’s Labour leader, said: “If we continue with these 
austerity measures then in four years time we will be left with one library, no 
youth service, no art gallery and no performing arts centre. Public services 
are at the point of breaking right acrossWalsall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/walsall>.”

Meanwhile Inverleith House, which draws about 200,000 visitors a year to its 
home in the Royal Botanic Garden inEdinburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/edinburgh>, will close its doors for the last 
time as a contemporary art gallery when the current exhibition celebrating its 
30th anniversary finishes. The exhibition, I Still Believe in Miracles, 
features works by many of the artists, both local and international, to have 
exhibited at the gallery, including Edward Ruscha, Douglas Gordon, Robert 
Rauschenberg and Louise Bourgeois.

Simon Milne, regius keeper at the garden, defended the decision: “Like most 
public bodies we are under increasing financial pressure. We looked at the 
budget and concluded that the proposed business plan presented too many risks. 
We were not prepared to continue the risk of underpinning the art gallery at 
the expense of our core programmes of botany and horticulture.”

Creative Scotland, which contributes up to £90,000 a year to Inverleith House, 
said it was “disappointed” at the decision. “The importance of the gallery to 
contemporary visual art and artists in Scotland cannot be overstated and its 
loss will be profoundly felt,” said a spokesperson. “We would have hoped that 
the value that Inverleith House brings as a space for art and creativity could 
have been better recognised and resulted in a different decision.”

The artist Patrick Brill, under the pseudonym Bob and Roberta Smith, has 
worked extensively at Walsall. “It’s just nuts,” he said. “It’s a perfect storm 
of stupidity and a lack of balls. I’m not unsympathetic to the plight of 
councils but they and the Arts Council have got to come up with another way of 
funding galleries.”

He also pointed to the threats facing other galleries born at a time when arts 
institutions embarked on a programme of building funded by the National 
Lottery. “Walsall is the canary in the cage,” he said. “All these 
lottery-funded projects face the same fate. It’s a complete failure of the 
creative imagination of politicians.

“When there’s money around politicians like to turn up to arts events. But 
that love for the arts has completely evaporated. There’s a culture of rampant 
philistinism.”

The architectural practice Caruso St John, winner of the Royal Institute of 
British Architects’ 2016 Stirling prize for London’s Newport Street Gallery, 
was nominated in 2000 for the New Art Gallery in Walsall. It credits the 
project for propelling the partnership to prominence.

“It’s tragic,” said Adam Caruso. “The gallery was enormously significant. It 
was one of many regional arts initiatives that were made possible with the 
National Lottery. The amount of return that a very small amount of public 
investment unlocked is incredible. These are vital cultural and social places. 
Their value is not being appreciated.”

The achievements of the gallery since its inception led Tate director Nicholas 
Serota to recently cite Walsall alongside Tate Modern as being responsible for 
the sea-change in attitudes towards visual art in the UK in the last 30 years.

Should the council press ahead with its plan to reduce funding, it is likely 
that the Arts Council will be obliged to reconsider the matching funding of 
£900,000 it gives to the gallery each year. It may also contemplate clawing 
back some of the initial capital grant towards the building and the £500m 
refurbishment grant awarded in 2013.

Stephen Deuchar, director of the Art Fund, the national fundraising charity 
for art, said that local authorities should look to the examples of councils 
such as Folkestone and Margate. “Museums and galleries are under huge 
pressure,” he said. “There’s no automatic reason that they should be the first 
to suffer. What we would love to see is an open-minded, creative and ambitious 
approach to moving forward. There are many examples of local authorities acting 
very creatively and boldly in defence of maintaining cultural provision in the 
belief that it is something worth investing in.”
 