
Public tensions over the progress of modern science are at their most intense 
for decades and threaten to undermine efforts to better human lives, warns one 
of the most senior scientists in the US.


A raft of issues have left much of the public alienated from the latest 
scientific thinking and fuelled the rise of groups that misrepresent science to 
push their own agendas, said Alan Leshner, chief executive of theAmerican 
Association for the Advancement of Science <http://www.aaas.org/> (AAAS), the 
world’s largest general scientific society.

The deepening gulf between public and scientific viewpoints lies behind some 
of the most visible clashes in society, from the blanket rejection of 
genetically modified organisms, the growth of anti-vaccine campaigns, 
confrontations between scientists and Creationists, and the dismissal of 
climate change research.

Speaking to the Guardian ahead of the AAAS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/aaas> annual meeting in San Jose on 
Thursday, Leshner said that the disconnect between the public and mainstream 
scientists was the greatest problem the research community faced.

“This plays out in multiple ways, from the public support of science, which is 
falling off in the US, to the appropriate use of science in policy and personal 
life, and in making decisions based on rational grounds,” he said. “It is 
already a big deal. The tension is greater than it has ever been before.”

Before leading the AAAS, Leshner served as director of the US National 
Institute on Drug Abuse <http://www.drugabuse.gov/>. He was appointed to the 
National Science Board by George W Bush in 2004 and re-appointed by Barack 
Obama in 2011. Leshner steps down as chief executive of the AAAS this year, and 
will be replaced by the former CongressmanRush Holt 
<http://www.aaas.org/news/AAASCEO>, who trained as a physicist.

Rather than blame the public for their unease over science, Leshner points to 
three factors that have driven a wedge between the thinking of mainstream 
scientists and that of the broader population. The first is that scientific 
advances, in fields as diverse as stem cells, genetics, evolution, and the 
origins of the universe, are encroaching ever more on people’s religious 
beliefs, common intuitions, and core values. The second is that science is 
moving so fast, people find it difficult to keep up. Third, more publicity is 
now given to cases of scientific misconduct and problems with reproducing 
research results, which together undermine public trust in science.

The combined effect, according to Leshner, is greater public tension over 
scientific findings and their implications. The lack of confidence in the 
process plays into the hands of people who distort science to promote their own 
causes, he said.

“When this happens, science becomes an easy target for deniers, whether that’s 
around GMOs, climate change, evolution or anything else. It gives them 
ammunition and fuel,” said Leshner, who said many anti-science voices often 
find a willing platform in media outlets. “People have been playing fast and 
loose with scientific information, especially in the past decade. Famous 
columnists are writing absurd columns that show a lack of understanding that 
frankly scares me.”

In January, a survey 
<http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/01/29/public-and-scientists-views-on-science-and-society/>
 by the AAAS and the Pew Research Center in Washington DC found that 55% of the 
US public believed that humans had either not evolved during their time on 
Earth, or had only changed under the guidance of a supreme being. More than 
half, 57%, considered GM foods unsafe to eat. Only half of the population 
agreed with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change view that climate 
change was largely driven by human activity, such as the burning of fossil 
fuels.

Last year, Sir Paul Nurse, Britain’s most senior scientist, launched a 
stinging attack on politicians and other influential figures who distorted 
scientific evidence to support their own agendas. Nurse, the president of the 
Royal Society, said offenders should be called out in the media and challenged 
in the strongest way possible. “When they are serial offenders they should be 
crushed and buried,” he added. Those in his sights ranged from politicians and 
NGOs to religious leaders and charities.

In what amounts to a call to arms, Leshner urged scientists to make a priority 
of explaining their work to the public, so that discussions around modern 
research and its implications for society were not misinformed.

“Anything that diminishes the public trust or confidence in science gets in 
the way of science doing its job, and that is the betterment of humankind. 
Ultimately, that is what it’s all about,” he said.
 