
Ten people accused of spying for Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> have tonight pleaded guilty to a 
conspiracy charge, setting up what could be one of the biggest, most unusual 
and least secret spy swaps known to superpower espionage.

The defendants, members of a deep-cover spy ring broken up last week, all told 
the federal judge in New York they would plead guilty.

They were charged with being long term "deep cover" spies, eight of them 
posing as married couples with children. But they were not accused of 
collecting classified information.

Two Obama administration sources said tonight that the Russian government 
would release four alleged western agents.

Igor Sutyagin, a Russian scientist convicted of working for the US, was 
reportedly flown to Vienna today as a first step toward the release of more 
than 20 alleged agents held in the US and Russia.

Britain was directly involved in the swap, officials made clear.

Sutyagin, an arms control analyst jailed for 14 years for passing military 
secrets to a British company the Russian authorities said was a CIA front, was 
reported to be bound for the UK after his release from a Moscow prison.

Today, riot police secured the perimeter of the former KGB Lefortovo jail in 
Moscow where Sutyagin was being held, as a convoy of armoured vehicles arrived. 
A few hours later the Russian media reported he was seen leaving a plane in 
Vienna, but his family said it was "speculation".

Sutyagin's father, Vyacheslav, said he had received no official confirmation 
of his son leaving Moscow or arriving in Vienna.

"There have been some unconfirmed reports that Igor flew in to Austria earlier 
this afternoon, but so far it seems to be wishful thinking. We are waiting for 
Igor to call us himself. We had expected it to be today, but it looks like it 
could be tomorrow."

The Russian Gazeta.ru website reported that Anna Chapman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-chapman>, one of the Russian spy 
suspects arrested in America, might be delivered to Moscow in exchange for 
Sutyagin.

It quoted a diplomatic saying the 28-year old businesswoman would be flown 
home in the coming days.

Sutyagin has consistently denied being a spy, saying the information he 
supplied was available from open sources. But his family said he agreed to 
effectively be forced in to exile rather than face another four and half years 
in the "harsh regime" penal colony at Kholmogory near Arkhangelsk. His mother, 
Svetlana, said he was unshaven and gaunt when she saw him today at Lefortovo.

Moscow was reportedly preparing to release several Russians convicted of 
working for the CIA or MI6.

Lawyers for the alleged deep cover Russian agents held in the US speculated 
that they could be on their way to Moscow within hours provided a court 
approves a deal for them to plead guilty to a single charge of failing to 
declare payments from a foreign government. They are likely to receive a 
minimal sentence of the time they have spent in jail since their arrests and 
then agree to be deported.

The true identities of five of the 10 alleged spies detained in the US are 
still not known to the US authorities.

Eight were living as married couples with children, some of whom were born in 
the US. They explained away their accents by claiming to be from Canada or 
Italy.

The fate of at least two of the accused agents remains in question. Chapman is 
believed to hold a British passport as well as Russian nationality, while 
another of the 10 is a US citizen.

An eleventh suspect, Christopher Metsos, who is accused of being the spy 
ring's paymaster, is on the run after skipping bail in Cyprus.

While their departure may avoid any potential embarrassment to either 
government that a trial might pose, the alleged spies leave behind them 
considerable disagreement over how seriously to take their espionage ring.

While the FBI has portrayed the deep-cover "sleeper" agents as a threat to 
American security, their at times bumbling attempts to infiltrate high 
policymaking circles has made them figures of fun to many Americans.

Chapman has become such a celebrity that a New York newspaper lamented her 
departure and asked if the city could keep her.

Yet there is evidence that the Russian intelligence service, the SVR, put 
considerable effort in to the operation, obtaining false identities using, in 
one instance, that of a Canadian who died as a child in 1963. The SVR also sent 
hundreds of thousands of dollars in funds.

The putative swap deal emerged when Sutyagin's lawyer and relatives told the 
media that prison authorities had abruptly moved him from the penal colony near 
Arkhangelsk to Lefortovo on Monday.

There is speculation in Russia about which other prisoners jailed for treason 
and espionage might be part of the swap.

Sutyagin, who is married with two daughters, told his mother he had learned of 
one other name on the list to be exchanged: Sergei Skripal, a military 
intelligence officer jailed in Russia in 2006 for giving information to MI6.

A Russian intelligence source told the Kommersant newspaper of two other 
proposed individuals: Alexander Zaporozhsky, an SVR operative sentenced to 18 
years for espionage in 2003, and Alexander Sypachev, jailed for eight years in 
2002 for working for the CIA. But Sypachev's lawyer said he would not agree to 
such a deal.

The putative exchange is particularly interesting as the Russians rarely give 
up Russians they have jailed on spying charges, well-placed sources said.

One reason given for the extreme reticence of British agencies to talk about 
the spy swap was the fear the Russians might make fresh arrests to use more 
people as potential collateral for exchanges. It is possible they were already 
placing potentially vulnerable people under surveillance now, the sources added.
 