
The march towards alternative business structures (ABSs) took a significant 
stride forward on Thursday. ABSs, commonly dubbed "Tesco law", represent the 
radical relaxation of the tight ownership restrictions on legal businesses and 
mean that from 6 October this year, non-lawyers will for the first time be able 
to invest in and own them. It could even mean law firms floating on the stock 
market.

On Thursday the Law Society decided that its independent regulatory arm – the 
Solicitors Regulation Authority (SRA) – shouldapply to regulate ABSs as well 
<http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/latest-news/law-society-council-gives-green-light-to-sra-regulating-abss>
. As the dominant regulator in the sector, this will make the introduction of 
ABSs far more straightforward for the overarching regulator responsible for 
doing so, the Legal Services Board.

The other, smaller legal regulators can apply to issue ABS licences – one 
already has – and the Legal Services Act 2007, which underpins this regime, 
introduces the slightly odd concept of regulators competing with each other for 
ABSs' business. It will be for the board, which is not overly keen on this 
aspect of the act, to ensure there is not a race to the bottom.

Had the Law Society not approved the application, the act would have forced 
the board itself to regulate ABSs, making it both a supervisory and frontline 
regulator. This could have in turn unravelled the whole regulatory 
infrastructure and led to the end of the SRA and its ilk, and the board 
morphing into a Financial Services Authority for lawyers. Given that prospect, 
the Law Society's options were not huge, despite residual concerns about ABSs 
on principle and also the ability of the SRA to deliver effective regulation of 
these new businesses.

Indeed, the group representing 4,500 sole practitioner solicitors is 
considering whether to call a special general meeting of the Law Society and 
then trigger a profession-wide poll on solicitors' support for ABSs – although 
any result would be symbolic at most. They argue that allowing commercial 
interests to dominate the law will damage the independence of the profession 
and ultimately access to justice.

Certainly one of the SRA's biggest challenges will be to ensure that the 
"fitness to own" test it will apply to all prospective non-lawyer owners is 
sufficiently robust. Law firms, through holding client money, have a 
quasi-banking role and access to other's people cash, making them "attractive 
targets for organised crime", the Law Society chief executive, Des Hudson, said 
on Thursday.

ABSs aim to promote competition and innovation in a market where both are 
lacking. While it is commonly held that there are too many solicitors (there 
are about 10,500 law firms), competition between them is gentlemanly – there is 
no "We're cheaper than Bloggs & Co" advertising. Instead law firms tend to sell 
themselves in similar ways, as a quality, personal service, making it hard for 
consumers to distinguish between them.

The Legal Services Board and its consumer panel are looking at the problems 
consumers have in identifying quality in legal services – research shows that 
people focus on service levels, which they can understand, rather than the 
ability of the lawyer to do the job, which is much harder to judge. They have a 
degree of respect "bordering on awe" for lawyers, the panel reported recently, 
and trust that the lawyer knows what he or she is talking about.

It is into this void that solicitors fear brand names will come and offer a 
consumer-friendly service that will win the loyalty of a public intimidated by 
the legal process. Arecent survey 
<http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/legal-services-act/market-monitor/60-of-consumers-would-buy-legal-advice-from-brands-like-barclays-aa-co-op-and-virgin>
 by YouGov found that 60% of people would consider buying legal services from 
one of 16 named brands, from Barclays to Kwik-Fit, indicating interest in the 
concept but also a certain doubt at such a radical change in the traditional 
model.

Research consistently shows that there remains a place for an accessible, good 
quality and local legal service, and there are fledgling efforts to bring order 
to the current chaos, most notably in the form ofQualitySolicitors 
<http://www.qualitysolicitors.com/index.html>, a franchise-like grouping of 
rebranded existing law firms up and down the country, while other initiatives 
such asHighStreetLawyer.com <http://www.highstreetlawyer.com/> and Face2Face 
Solicitors <http://www.face2facesolicitors.net/> are also trying to get off the 
ground. This is in addition to the flourishing number of comparison websites.

Nobody yet knows what the new market will look like – and Hudson says that 
anyone predicting whether ABSs will be good or bad for the public is "chancing 
their arm".

But this is what makes it exciting; without doubt some people are quietly 
hatching some groundbreaking ideas. There has been growing interest in the 
market for some time as only a relatively small number of legal activities must 
actually by law be handled by qualified lawyers working in law firms or 
barristers' chambers.

A few big names have made their intentions clear, most notably the Co-op, 
which since 2006 has grown its legal services from offering nothing to a 
£20m-plus business and intends to become an ABS. Others, such as the AA, Saga, 
Halifax and a host of other financial services businesses have dipped their 
toes into the water by offering online legal document production and other 
relatively straightforward services.

For many years lawyers have largely ignored the oncoming storm, but with less 
than seven months to go, they can do so no longer. To generalise, lawyers are 
second movers and there is a great deal of "wait and see" going on at the 
moment, although the profession's history is littered with moments when it has 
let others take the initiative and eat its breakfast.

This October will not be the "big bang" some characterise it as – the law just 
doesn't move that quickly. But in five or 10 years' time, the face of legal 
services could look very, very different.

Neil Rose is the editor of legalfutures.co.uk <http://www.legalfutures.co.uk>
 