
Jonty Olliff-Cooper has an ideology. As director of policy and strategy at the 
troubled Work Programme provider A4E, he believes the lines drawn between the 
public, private and voluntary sectors are becoming meaningless. Charities now 
provide services and are paid by their results; councils commission the private 
sector on matters of social value.

Yet a recent attempt to re-brand A4e as a "social purpose company" was 
thwarted when the Advertising Standards Authoritydeemed the claim to be 
misleading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/aug/22/a4e-banned-social-purpose-company>, 
arguing it may indicate the company is not-for-profit. So why is the label so 
important?

"The idea of a [professional] sector doesn't mean much in reality," 
Olliff-Cooper claims. "There are charities that have no voluntary donations at 
all; there are charities who do exactly the same contracts that we do. There is 
a difference between the NSPCC and Bethnal Green football club – and one isn't 
even a charity. There's a massive spectrum in between [these] and the 
touchiness that people feel is quite unevenly spread."

He says the organisation is trying to describe its work within this "funny 
terrain that doesn't have a name". "If you're a business that wants to make 
social value everything you do, then we get into this really anxious territory. 
I want to understand why that is, and how we can change it."

A4E has faced criticism over the profit it makes getting unemployed people 
back into work – as much as£13,000 per successful case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/feb/21/emma-harrison-a4e-nice-work> 
– as well as its relationship with smaller organisations over complex 
referrals. The payment-by-results model has also come under scrutiny, but 
Olliff-Cooper argues that his company's warnings that small charities are not 
prepared to take on contracts have fallen largely on deaf ears. Building 
capacity among these smaller, more specialised organistions may be the key to 
success, but today it's A4E that is bearing the brunt of the anger.

"The smaller guys," he says, "don't often see all the wiring in policy and 
politics and they tend to go, 'I'm in pain, and you're the nearest organisation 
to me' and they get cross with us about it.' That's not to say there isn't a 
problem, but that could be an issue of readiness, ability to negotiate 
contracts, or whether there's enough money in the programme to pay for tackling 
long-term unemployment and capacity building. There probably isn't."

Olliff-Cooper, an executive member of the young Conservative thinktank Bright 
Blue, has worked across Whitehall, first in the Conservative Party Policy Unit 
and later for the Cabinet Office. His criticism of the way the coalition 
government has run the Work Programme is telling. A call for ministers to set 
aside more money to help the market develop is perhaps underpinned by a desire 
to ensure the blame isn't laid at the door ofA4e 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/a4e> if small providers begin to fail and close 
down.

"In some areas Jobcentres are not sending the kind of volumes of people that 
they said that they would, that we thought they would," he admits. "The problem 
is that we use most of our specialist partners for specific stuff, but, if we 
don't get anybody with specific needs sent to us, then we can't send them on."

The critical issue with the Work Programme is that specialist providers, often 
tackling entrenched issues and dealing with vulnerable people who it is not 
easy to place in work, receive the least financial reward. This raises 
questions over the validity of a payment-by-results model.

"Unemployment is a problem millions of people across Europe face. If you can 
find a really good way of fixing that, then you deserve to become a millionaire 
because it's a really good thing to try and solve," says Olliff-Cooper.

He certainly has solutions at hand: more exposure for organisations such as 
A4E, describing why they're important and should be valued; government 
flexibility to take on contracts across a range of sectors to create a 
joined-up support system. Ultimately, in a world of Whitehall silos and a shaky 
economy, it's an uphill battle.

"I'm not hopeful about the direction of public service reform, and I'm amazed 
that there are as many breakthroughs as there are given the systemic barriers 
that exist," he adds.

"The Treasury should top slice the budgets of all departments at the next 
comprehensive spending review. It should take a chunk off the top and hold it 
back to pay providers. Departments might commission work and set a tariff and 
outcomes for providers to work towards, but they don't have to pay for it: the 
Treasury pays directly from the central pot. The benefit of doing that is the 
departments wouldn't have to make a cashable saving."

Olliff-Cooper still believes the payment-by-results system is the fairest way 
to run contracts. "I'm not of the opinion that if you're in the public sector 
you can't be more efficient than the private sector, but being paid to be 
successful is a really good way of being successful. We need a system where 
you're free to be a genius, and if you are a genius you get rewarded, and 
that's payment by results."

He accepts there is a risk involved in this kind of provision. "There is a 
risk per person, because you might get a bad provider, and that's bad for your 
life. But the bigger risk is that we end up with a totally shite system. It's 
incumbent on policy makers to strike the right balance between the humanity of 
individuals and also have the boldness to say someone in society is responsible 
for working on that big canvas. I think that is a risk worth taking."

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Join the local 
government network <https://register.theguardian.com/local-government/> to sign 
up first for future events in London and across the country
 