
The Ministry of Justice plans to pardon gay and bisexual men convicted of 
sexual offences that are no longer illegal. In a symbolic gesture, the MoJ said 
there would be no historical limit in relation to past offences – with those 
convicted set to be exonerated. Our readers have had their say on this issue.


Duncan Roy, 56, from New York: ‘An apology is needed because many people were 
let down’

Public acknowledgement that these laws were wrong is great, but I believe many 
are also owed an apology. I was born in the 1960s when sex between men was 
still illegal. The law may have changed in 1967 but attitudes did not, and I 
experienced homophobia all through childhood. It destroyed my confidence and 
ideas about myself. There was a real hangover of hate from that appalling law.


So as a young man I was deeply affected by the fact people were allowed to 
hate me for being gay. If they could hate me for something I couldn’t change, I 
decided I would hate them right back. I devoted myself to gay filmmaking, which 
is what I do now and much of my work is very confrontational. Therefore I think 
that as well as pardoning gay men who are now dead, many people still living 
are owed an apology for the impact of anti-gay laws.


Alan Turing <https://www.theguardian.com/science/alan-turing>, the gay 
mathematician who killed himself following his conviction for gross indecency, 
is an important person to remember but there are lots of other ordinary men who 
had their lives ruined. The horror and shame continued well into the 1960s and 
1970s and it was only really the 1980s when gay men became more visible. It 
took 20 years for people to realise that it’s not OK to be homophobic. So yes 
an apology from the government is needed because there were many people let 
down by these laws.

Kamaal Hussain, 48, from London: ‘This does nothing to amend the damage done 
by those convictions’

This should have happened decades ago, but I’m pleased to see it now. Of 
course it cannot compensate for the years of pain and stigma, let alone the 
actual bodily harm done through techniques such as chemical castration, which 
Alan Turing was subjected to, but it’s a half win.


While it is a step in the right direction, it does no good for those who are 
already deceased, and lacks the compensation for those who are still living. 
Homosexual acts between men may have been decriminalised in 1967, but the age 
of consent was not equalised until the beginning of this century. So it wasn’t 
lowered to 18 until 1994, and finally 16 in England and Scotland in2000 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sexual_Offences_(Amendment)_Act_2000>. There are 
relatively young men who have been deeply affected by this: put on child abuse 
registers, carrying around sex offender records, serving time in prison.


The pardoning of people is a start, but it does nothing to amend the damage 
done by those convictions. Maybe nothing can.

Tom Katsumi, 36, from London: ‘It implies that we are helpless and grateful 
subjects of a forgiving government’


I’m a gay man who thinks it’s wrong to issue a pardon. A pardon is forgiveness 
for an error or offence, the only offence here was by the UK government and so 
the idea of being “forgiven” by them is highly offensive. After the 
Conservatives managed to dispel their “nasty party” image through the 
legalisation of same sex-marriage (despite a majority of them voting against) 
they seem to be going back to tried-and-tested methods and are using us as 
pawns once again to distract from their seemingly total destruction of the UK. 
I don’t have any historic convictions, nor do I know anyone who does, but this 
ruling affects all gay men – in that it sets the tone that we are helpless and 
grateful subjects of a forgiving Tory government.

Emer O’Farrell, 43, from London: ‘A pardon feels like a gift rather than 
something that’s necessary’

A pardon feels like it’s a gift rather than a necessity. The message should be 
that the crime no longer exists and these people are innocent. This would be 
how I prefer it to be done. It still feels like it’s in the realm of – “you 
have offended, but we forgive you”. It’s strange to offer a pardon when nothing 
has been done wrong. Pardoning is a problematic word, so maybe the way this has 
been approached is wrong.

Richard Beresford, 56, from Surrey: ‘These tiny steps forward are very 
positive’

You could argue, what is the point in pardoning people who are dead and 
buried? What difference does that make? Other than make the nation feel better. 
I might not be gay but I believe it sends out a positive message. It might be a 
good way to move forward. Alan Turing was wrongfully punished and a posthumous 
pardon brings this to people’s attention. It is a more significant move for the 
people who have a negative perception of homosexuality. It might make them 
think twice about their prejudice. If anything I hope it benefits society as a 
whole and these tiny little steps forwards are very positive in overcoming 
prejudice of any description.




 