
Her bed is on the third floor of Gaza's Shifa hospital, where shafts of warm 
afternoon sunshine reach in from the window. The ward is crowded, and the bed 
on which Asma'a Abu Me'tiq lay is curtained off from the rest and surrounded by 
the blankets her sister-in-law uses when she sleeps on the floor next to her at 
night.

It may be the best hospital in Gaza <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gaza> 
but even the poorest families, like the Abu Me'tiqs, must provide extra food 
themselves. Asma'a's father, Ahmad, returns from downstairs with a cheap 
electric hot-plate, which he bought on credit from a shopkeeper he knows. He 
plugs it into the wall to heat a pot of thin homemade soup for his 13-year-old 
daughter, but there is either no electricity or the hot-plate didn't work. 
"What bad luck," he says quietly to himself.

Then he reaches over to his daughter, who is coughing and struggling to 
breathe from the deep wound in her chest. She hasn't touched her food since she 
was rushed to hospital 10 days earlier: the day an explosion in the street 
outside demolished the metal front door of their house as the family were 
eating breakfast, impaling her and her younger sister, Shaima, seven, with 
shrapnel and killing outright four other brothers and sisters and her mother 
too.

"I'm waiting to see you eat," says her father. "Later," says Asma'a. Several 
minutes passed. "Let me see you eat," he says again. "Tomorrow," she replies.

As is frequently the case in this most gruelling of conflicts the cause of the 
explosion that killed the wife and four children of Ahmad Abu Me'tiq is 
disputed. Early in the morning of April 28 there was fighting in Beit Hanoun 
after Israeli troops and armoured vehicles raided the east of the Gaza Strip.

In an air strike the Israeli military fired two missiles into the street 
outside the Abu Me'tiq's house, which they said were aimed at four armed men 
who they said were "carrying backpacks loaded with ammunition and various 
weaponry." The Israeli military insists it was a secondary explosion caused by 
the "weaponry" that killed five members of the Abu Me'tiq family.

"The professional opinion of the IDF [Israel Defence Force] states that the 
family was hit during the explosion of the second missile that ignited the 
secondary explosions or from objects that had flown towards them from the 
strength of the explosion," it said. "The IDF wishes to express sorrow for any 
harm to unassociated civilians caused due to terrorist organisations [which] 
operate from populated centres, using them as human shields."

However, the family holds the Israeli military responsible for the killings, 
as does Israel's leading human rights group, B'Tselem, which saidIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> bears an obligation to distinguish 
between civilians and those taking part in the fighting. "Whoever fired the 
original missile bears responsibility for the explosion that led to the deaths 
of the family members," it said. "The missile was fired at a militant who was 
on the doorstep of a densely populated residential compound, knowing he was 
carrying ammunition."

Abu Me'tiq, 70, said he had received no direct apology from the Israeli 
military and no offer of compensation for the loss of his wife Meyasar, 40, and 
his children Rudeina, six; Salah, four; Hana, three; and year-old Mes'id. Their 
deaths add to the growing and striking toll of children killed in the conflict 
in Gaza. This year alone at least 44 Palestinian children have been killed, 
according to a count at the end of April by the Palestinian Centre for Human 
Rights. The UN has put the figure at 53 children dead and 177 children injured 
so far this year.

Despite talks about a ceasefire the death toll on both sides continues to 
rise. At least 312 Palestinians, more than half civilians, have been killed 
this year, according to the Palestinian Centre for Human Rights. On the Israeli 
side six soldiers and six civilians have died, the latest Shuli Katz, 70, who 
was killed on Monday by a rocket fired by Gazan militants into Yesha, a village 
in southern Israel.

The Abu Me'tiqs live in a simple, single-storey concrete house with only mats 
and cushions for furniture and a broken radio in the front room. There was no 
glass on the windows and there were large holes in the corrugated iron and 
asbestos roof. Several political parties had come to the house promising money 
and support, and two Hamas posters and a flag flew outside. However Abu Me'tiq 
said he had received no money, and there seemed no evidence of any financial 
support for the family. "Just those damn posters," he said. He could not 
remember who he voted for in elections two years ago, though he thought it was 
one of the smaller leftist factions, which now carries little sway in 
Palestinian politics.

Abu Me'tiq is from a family of Bedouin and was born in a village near Ashdod, 
in what is now Israel. He fled as a boy with his parents during the 1948 war 
and lived the simple life of a farmer, never learning to read or write. Now 
with the Bedouin traditions all but gone in Gaza he has no land and no 
livestock and relies on UN food handouts and support from his older children, 
two of whom are married and in their forties. "We are almost dead. We have no 
money, nothing. We are exhausted," he said.

Abu Me'tiq was was out collecting medicine from a nearby pharmacy at the time 
of the missile strike. When he rushed home the ambulances were still retrieving 
the bodies of his children and he collapsed on the ground in front of them. 
Since then he has been pressing the Palestinian doctors to send his daughter 
for treatment in Israel, but they have so far refused saying they can do the 
necessary surgery in Gaza. "Israel must treat her because they did this thing 
to us. She's what's left of our family," he said.

His second injured daughter, Shaima, is less seriously hurt, with her right 
leg in plaster and should recover well, the doctors say. The six other children 
are staying with one of the older sons, Ibrahim, 42. "The children can't sleep 
here at night. Even I can't bear it," said Abu Me'tiq. "This house is empty. 
There is nothing for us here."
 