
Apichatpong Weerasethakul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/apichatpong-weerasethakul> has been asked to 
explain himself a lot in recent months. One reason is that his new film, 
Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives, won the Palme D'Or at the Cannes 
film festival this May, surprising most of the world's critics; the other is 
that it's about the least straightforward movie to have done so in living 
memory – an episodic, non-linear, open-ended head-scratcher. So for the past 
year, touring the world's film festivals – Toronto, Chicago, Rio de Janeiro, 
New York, Sitges, and, most recently, London – Thailand's auteur of the moment 
has been in a Groundhog Day of perplexed questioning. Why is your film so slow? 
Why the sex scene between the princess and the catfish? Is the runaway buffalo 
really Uncle Boonmee? Is the cave a metaphor, or just a cave? Do you believe in 
reincarnation? What the hell does it all mean, Mr Weerasethakul?

"But that's life, no?" says Weerasethakul. He is a delicate, softly spoken 
man. "Sometimes you don't need to understand everything to appreciate a certain 
beauty. And I think the film operates in the same way. It's like tapping into 
someone's mind. The thinking pattern is quite random, jumping here and there 
like a monkey."

Weerasethakul possesses an aura of gentle, zen-like calm that's all of a piece 
his films. Far from being a showy, cryptic mind-melter, Uncle Boonmee is a 
hypnotic, sensual, rapturous dream of a movie. It doesn't so much confront 
western notions of reality as casually disregard them. Boundaries dissolve 
between the living and the dead, the past and the present, man and nature, 
the strange and the everyday. Before you know it, it becomes perfectly natural 
to see Uncle Boonmee chatting on the verandah with the ghost of his wife and 
their long-lost son, who turns up looking like Chewbacca with glowing red eyes 
– the result of having mated with a "monkey spirit". "Why did you grow hair so 
long?" his translucent mother asks him matter of factly.

Weerasethakul prefers not to explain anything about the film. "This is open 
cinema," he says. "I have my own take, but sometimes that spoils the audience's 
imagination. I can say, in short, it's a movie about a dying man. It talks 
about death and at the same time life and dreams, and also the memory of how I 
grew up with this landscape."

The landscape in question is northeast Thailand, close to where Weerasethakul 
grew up. In 2008, he was commissioned by the cutting-edge London-based 
animation outfit Animate to create a multimedia project called Primitive, which 
centred on a village called Nabua. This peaceful place was once the centre of 
violent clashes between government forces and communist forces. Uncle Boonmee 
was an offshoot of Primitive, partly inspired by a book he chanced upon about a 
real-life man who really did claim to be able to recall his past lives. 
But other memories are folded into the story: Weerasethakul's own father, 
who died of kidney failure; the area's violent history; the ape creature and 
the stylised jungle settings that hark back to Thai movies and comic books 
of his childhood – elements of a rapidly disappearing landscape. "I want to 
treasure them and say goodbye to them, because they are dying, like 
Uncle Boonmee."

The collision between spirituality and modernity in his films is easy to find 
in today's Thailand, says Weerasethakul. He cites the street protests that 
gripped Bangkok earlier this year. Crowds were campaigning for modern 
democratic reforms, but one of their actions was to draw their own blood, mix 
it together and daub the ministers' gates with it. "This kind of very 
primitive, animist belief is still ingrained in daily life. When we shoot a 
film, we make a ritual offering of food to Ganetra, the god of arts. Everybody 
does it.

"Also, when people in the film industry feel they're having bad luck, they 
make offerings of black-coloured food to the god of darkness, because we 
associate darkness with cinema. But at the same time, you see new Tescos 
springing up everywhere."

Weerasethakul has had his own run-ins with the Thai authorities over the 
years. The homosexual content of his work seems to be acceptable, but in 2007 
the censorship board demanded he remove scenes from his movie Syndromes and a 
Century depicting doctors drinking and kissing, and Buddhist monks playing 
with a remote-controlled UFO. Weerasethakul refused, and instead jointly 
founded the Free Thai Cinema movement, which called for greater artistic 
freedom. In one interview, a culture ministry official responded: "Nobody goes 
to see films by Apichatpong. Thai people want to see comedy. We like a laugh."

But the campaign appears to have had some impact. In Uncle Boonmee, a monk 
changes out of his robes to go to a karaoke bar, but the film has had no 
problems with the censors. "That's the magic of Cannes," Weerasethakul says. 
"When I won, it was a very dark time for Thailand, so good news like this was 
embraced. It became a diversion for people emotionally, but also for the 
government." Contrary to the minister's put-downs, the film was a commercial 
success, and is the country's official submission for this year's best foreign 
film Oscar.

It would be a mistake to cordon off Weerasethakul in the ghetto of "world 
cinema", though. For one thing, he learned film-making in the US. The son of 
two doctors, he first studied architecture in Thailand as a fallback position, 
but while doing a masters at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, he 
became absorbed by the avant-garde work of Andy Warhol, Bruce Baillie, Maya 
Deren and the like. There was no going back. "After that, I said to myself, 
'OK, I want to make films in black and white, on 16mm, for the rest of my 
life,'" he laughs. "It's a shame that when I went back to Thailand, there were 
no laboratories to print 16mm film."

From then on, technological issues aside, Weerasethakul's career has seen a 
sure, steady ascent up the international scale. Both his feature debut, 
Blissfully Yours, and its followup, Tropical Malady, also won awards at Cannes. 
His next project involves his heroine, Tilda Swinton. It concerns the Mekong 
river, he explains, and will address the relationship between man and water, 
the catastrophic flooding which is blamed on Chinese dams and diseases spread 
by industrial-scale pig farming. None of which particularly brings to mind 
Tilda Swinton. "It's definitely not going to be a film that will just have a 
foreign movie star for the sake of it. It's going to be an exchange of ideas, 
of images, of … I don't know. It's like a game for me: the river, the pigs, and 
Tilda Swinton." He laughs at how absurd it sounds when he says it, but it's 
less crazy than princesses having sex with catfish.

Not everyone adores Weerasethakul's jumping-monkey logic. Alongside the 
critical adulation, his films are frequently accused of being wilfully 
confusing, impenetrable, pointless and boring – one critic renamed Uncle 
Boonmee "Uncle bong hit". Weerasethakul isn't bothered in the slightest: "I 
always say a film should have a personality. And like a person, if he or she is 
very popular, I would feel very suspicious. Maybe my good film is not your good 
film. It's very subjective. But if I make a film that divides the audience, I 
feel like that's a certain level of success. Film should divide people. "

The danger with Weerasethakul is that the public stays on the other side of 
the divide to the adoring critics. Uncle Boonmee is unlikely to give Harry 
Potter a run for its money at the UK box office, but in broader terms, it's 
about time someone shook things up. Even Godard's dictum that a film should 
have a beginning, a middle and an end, "but not necessarily in that order" is 
now half a century old. With Weerasethakul's boundary-dissolving films, the 
very idea of narrative beginnings and ends becomes redundant. It's not spoiling 
a great deal to disclose that Uncle Boonmee ends with two sets of the same 
characters in one room – as if parallel universes have accidentally collided, 
or time has split into two. Furthermore, these are characters who have appeared 
in his previous films – a self-referential flourish that casts a different 
light on his other works. Like any good avant-garde film-maker, he's ignoring 
the rules and finding new possibilities – and in years to come, his methods 
will doubtless be absorbed by the mainstream, and future generations wonder how 
we failed to understand what he was doing.

"For me, film-making is still young," he says. "It still has room to grow, and 
now it's still attached to other kinds of art, like literature, or theatre. I'm 
not saying I'm trying to create some revolutionary style, but each film has 
its own language – the movie tells you how it wants to be told. But we tend to 
stick to very few modes of expression."

Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives is out next week
 