
Stuart Webb was mandated to become an A4e <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/a4e> 
"customer" under the government's Work Programme in January this year. The 
40-year-old from Lincoln, having worked as a bus driver, had been unemployed 
for a year.

As with all Work Programme participants, A4e was paid an initial "attachment 
fee" of £400 for its work with him, with the prospect of two further tranches 
of money if he stayed in a job for at least three months, and "sustainment 
payments", made "every four weeks when a participant stays in work longer", 
according to the Department of Work and Pensions.

During his first appointment with an A4e adviser, Webb was told he would have 
to attend weekly two-hour sessions, titled "structured job searches". He 
expected "an individual, tailor-made service", but found he was "just expected 
to sit in front of a computer for two hours" in the company of about eight 
other people, and "go through job sites".

His adviser's motivation, he claims, appeared to be "to get you to fill out as 
many job applications as you could within a two hour period. He wasn't bothered 
about what you were applying for."

On two occasions Webb was called to A4e's Lincoln offices for meetings, but 
the people he was meant to see were absent. One of these visits involved a 
round trip by foot of 90 minutes; the other, petrol and parking costs of about 
£8. "When you're getting £135 a fortnight, that's a lot of money," he told the 
Guardian.

When he complained to the company about these experiences, their written 
response claimed that one member of staff was called to "attend training on the 
same day" and "forgot to rebook" the appointment (though there was an apology 
for "the oversight"), and that another had tried to reschedule their meeting, 
but had been "unable to speak" to him.

Webb says no messages were left on either his home or mobile voicemail, and he 
received no emails about changing the latter appointment, either.

During the fourth session, Webb found a vacancy as a carpet salesman, and was 
offered the job. "I could just as easily have found it the day before or the 
day after on my own computer," he says. "They didn't flag it or highlight it to 
me … There was no help from them, other than providing the computer. All they 
did was switch it on."

When he told A4e staff he had been invited for an interview, "they were really 
happy and cheerful, shaking my hand and patting me on the back.

And I was leaving their office, I suddenly remembered that they get money when 
I find work: they'll say it was down to them that I got that job. And it 
absolutely wasn't." "

A4e said that some of his comments about Job Search sessions were "entirely 
subjective", and that advisers are always available to "support individuals" as 
well as helping them "structure their job search".

They said their "staff are always 'bothered' ", and that Webb's view of his 
adviser was "disingenuous". They also refuted the claim that A4e gave him no 
help. One of its staff had informed Webb of the vacancy that led to his new 
job, the firm claimed.

Webb also received a letter notifying him of an appointment with an A4e 
adviser named "Ann Other". He says he was told that this was "a made-up name" 
A4e staff attach to appointments "when they don't know who the appointment is 
with".

A4e said: "It is not our standard practice to issue letters in the name 'Ann 
Other'. This is something that was done at a local level, and we are addressing 
it directly with the Lincoln office."
 