
The Home Office is lining up A4e for another major government contract, 
despite the jobs agency being at the centre of a fraud inquiry, according to the
investigative website Exaro <http://www.exaronews.com/>.

Ministers have made the firm – owned by David Cameron's fallen "family 
champion" Emma Harrison – the preferred bidder to take over theEquality and 
Human Rights Commission (EHRC) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/equality-and-human-rights-commission-ehrc> 
helpline to advise people of their rights in discrimination cases.

Ministers ordered an audit of all Whitehall contracts with A4e 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/a4e> to run alongside two police inquiries over 
allegations of attempted fraud involving the company. The Department for Work 
and Pensions, which provides most of A4e's UK income, is also investigating.

A4e has been "preferred" for the contract over Sitel, which ran the disability 
helpline for the EHRC before it was taken inhouse, and also over Citizens 
Advice and Vertex.

The privatisation of the helpline was sought by the Home Office and the 
Government Equalities Office. It costs £2.1m a year to run, employs 85 staff in 
Birmingham, Cardiff and Glasgow, and handles 50,000 calls and 15,000 emails 
every year. Staff are trained to provide detailed advice on discrimination 
issues covering disability, gender, race and sexuality, and advise on mediation 
services.

One service, which supported disabled passengers acting against operators they 
said had breached an EU directive protecting their rights when travelling by 
air, ended abruptly last month.

"Unfortunately due to our funding being cut we are no longer able to offer 
conciliation for cases related to EC Air Regulations 1107. Therefore we are 
unable to intervene in your case," the EHRC has told people contacting them.

Despite government guarantees that existing staff can apply to keep their 
jobs, many will be laid off because they are disabled and will not be able to 
relocate easily from Cardiff and Glasgow.

Mark Serwotka, general secretary of the Public and Commercial Services Union, 
which opposes the privatisation, said: "Speculation about A4e's involvement in 
plans to privatise the EHRC helpline have fuelled concerns about what is a 
totally unnecessary and damaging selloff.

"Instead of selling this vital lifeline for some of the most vulnerable people 
in our communities, the government should be investing to ensure people get the 
help they need, particularly at a time when its wider spending cuts are 
threatening to make our society even more unequal." The EHRC said the decision 
to outsource the service was taken by the Government Equalities Office after 
its review in late 2010.

"The commission was consulted on the tender specification and was asked to 
score one question on the tender responses."

The Home Office has defended the privatisation, saying: "The new advisory and 
support service will offer more in-depth support than the EHRC's helpline. 
Funding for free legal advice on discrimination will continue to be available 
through legal aid.

"The decision to stop funding the EHRC's helpline and grants system was taken 
because they did not represent value for money or support the commission in 
carrying out its core functions."

On Tuesday A4e said in a statement to Exaro: "The Home Office procurement 
process for this contract has not concluded as yet. We have not been informed 
that we are a preferred bidder. Given that the process is ongoing, you would 
not expect us to comment on the detail of our bid."

Harrison quit as chair of the company, which she set up, and has stepped down 
as the coalition government's "family champion", a voluntary role aimed at 
helping long-term unemployed families, after the firm called in independent 
auditors to check its accounts.

Thames Valley police have arrested five former employees on suspicion of fraud 
as part of its investigation. There are two other police investigations into 
allegations of fraud linked to the company, although the latter is believed to 
involve a subcontractor.

An internal audit report, leaked to BBC2's Newsnight programme, concluded: 
"Potential fraudulent or irregular activity is not confined to one particular 
geographical area … and shows a potential systematic failure to mitigate the 
risk towards this behaviour at both an office and regional level."

A4e said in a press statement earlier this month: "The board has made 
consistently clear in all previous statements that we take any allegations of 
fraudulent or otherwise illegal activity extremely seriously. There is 
absolutely no place for this type of misconduct at A4e.

"We obviously acknowledge the concerns raised by DWP, and we welcome and will 
co-operate fully with their planned investigations."
 