
The welfare-to-work company A4e <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/a4e> was 
forced to withdraw from part of a £900,000 project to place vulnerable people 
into work after an employee forged signatures on official forms.

A4e was helping to place 630 youngsters with disabilities and mental health 
difficulties into jobs in Teesside in a project funded with European Union 
money.

Former colleagues said the employee invented signatures to increase the number 
of people who appeared to have been placed in jobs or on courses.

The disclosure will add to questions concerning governance within A4e. The 
company, which has £180m worth of public contracts, is at the centre of a fraud 
investigation in Slough, where four people have been arrested. A subcontractor 
of A4e is also subject to an official inquiry. An inquiry into its Hull office 
resulted in one former employee being fined for falsifying job outcomes.

On Monday, Margaret Hodge, chair of the public accounts committee, told MPs 
she has received new allegations of fraud against the company. A spokesman for 
A4e said the company did not know about these allegations.

In February company founder Emma Harrison, who was paid an £8.6m dividend last 
year, resigned as an unpaid Downing Street adviser and as chairman of A4e. She 
denies any wrongdoing.

David Cameron told the parliamentary liason committee on Tuesday that if 
allegations of fraud against A4e are proven and show that problems in the 
company are systemic, then government contracts with the company could be 
halted.

The inquiry into forged signatures dates back to 2009 when A4e was among 
subcontractors working to Redcar and Cleveland borough council in the Elite 
Project, funded with European Social Fund cash, to help hundreds of young 
people who might otherwise slip through the net.

They included teenage parents, those with learning difficulties and disabled 
people. But a council inquiry found that learners' signatures had been forged. 
A source close to the inquiry said: "The fraud was obvious and was an attempt 
to make it look as if the individual had got more vulnerable people involved 
than was the case."

A spokeswoman for A4e said the employee resigned before disciplinary action 
was taken. "We would have treated this as a disciplinary matter," she said.

There had been no financial gain and no evidence of criminal activity. "This 
was a case of poor administration, nothing more," she said. "The individual 
involved admitted that she was the only person involved in this activity and 
had undertaken this activity of her own volition."

A spokesman for the council said: "In 2010, Redcar and Cleveland council had a 
contract with A4e to deliver part of a programme to support young people who 
were not in education, employment or training. After scrutiny regarding some of 
this work, part of this contract was discontinued."

Another part of A4e's contract – to evaluate the Elite project by interviewing 
young people – continued, sources close to the project said.

In a further development, Labour accused the prime minister of misleading 
parliament by failing to disclose A4e was subject to a fraud inquiry when 
Harrison was recruited as his adviser on troubled families in December 2010.

Last month, Cameron told MPs: "At the time she [Harrison] was appointed there 
were no formal investigations into A4e, there was just the company's own probe 
into irregularities."

The Department of Work and Pensions said in a statement that an inquiry into 
fraud in A4e's Hull office – first reported in the Observer in November 2009 – 
resulted in a successful prosecution in July 2011. A DWP official said this was 
a "live case" in 2010.Liam Byrne, the shadow cabinet office minister, called 
for Cameron to apologise to MPs.

"Incredibly, David Cameron is simply flat wrong. There was actually an 
investigation under way when he appointed Emma Harrison that was so serious 
that someone has been convicted.

"The government must publish all correspondence between officials and A4e so 
that we can start to get to the bottom of what's going on in this huge 
government contract."Downing Street has been accused of ignoring warnings that 
appointing Harrison as an adviser could lead to a conflict of interest.

Figures released to this newspaper show that the DWP has launched nine fraud 
investigations since 2005 into A4e's involvement in the Labour government's 
Flexible New Deal scheme and has asked the company to pay back money on five 
occasions since 2005. There was no case to answer in three of the inquiries, 
and there was no evidence of systemic problems in any of them, officials said.

DWP officials have told the Financial Times they warned No 10 of their 
concerns. Cameron told the Commons that information about alleged fraud at A4e 
had not been passed to ministers quickly enough and he had asked the cabinet 
secretary, Sir Jeremy Heywood, to investigate.

It has also emerged that A4e has been advising No 10 on value for money in 
privatisation, including writing a guide on contracting out.
 