
The welfare-to-work provider A4e <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/a4e> has 
prematurely pulled out of a £17m contract to deliver education and training to 
prisoners in 12 London prisons on the grounds that it was unable to run the 
contract at a profit.

The decision was criticised by prison charities as likely to cause significant 
disruption for inmates.

Announcing that it would be terminating its contract, the company said 
delivering the Offender Learning and Skills Service (OLASS) had become 
"extremely challenging" in the past two years because of "a number of 
constraints" which had "a heavy impact on learner attendance, completion and 
achievements".

"We have concluded, in order to not continue to deliver the contract at a 
loss, to terminate our provision of [the contract] in London," it said. "This 
has been a very hard decision to make because A4e and its employees are 
passionate about the delivery of education services to offenders and believe 
education is critical to an offender's long-term rehabilitation."

The company, which was due to continue providing training until July 2016, 
employs 400 teaching and support staff within London prisons. A4e runs another 
teaching contract in prisons in the east of England which it has decided not to 
terminate.

A4e did not specify the constraints it cited in its statement but prison 
charities said access to education in a number of prisons had been impeded by 
staff shortages which had hampered prisoners' ability to get to lessons. The 
company is paid according to the amount of training it provides.

Juliet Lyon, director of the Prison Reform Trust, said: "It's difficult to 
know precisely why A4e finds itself running this contract at a loss but it is 
clear that prisoners are spending more and more time locked down in overcrowded 
cells in understaffed prisons. Wasting time rather than doing time is a far cry 
from the rehabilitation revolution. Withdrawal of prison education calls into 
question both this government's capacity to award contracts for delivery of 
essential services and its commitment to rehabilitation. Our prisons are being 
reduced to warehouses – nothing more."

Rod Clark, chief executive of the Prisoners Education Trust, said: "The 
delivery of education for prisoners across the country is being seriously 
affected by overcrowding and staff shortages which are leaving people locked up 
for longer, so they can't get to class and providers struggle to meet their 
targets. These pressures are having a negative impact on safety and 
rehabilitation. It may be that this latest decision by A4e to stop working in 
London's prisons is a result of these problems."

The Skills Funding Agency said efforts had been made to find ways to allow A4e 
to continue delivering the contract but discussions had failed. The agency said 
it was working "to minimise disruption for learners in London prisons".

The start of A4e's prison education contract was complicated by a delay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/sep/25/a4e-prison-contracts-delayed-anti-fraud>
 of several months as the company underwent an extra level of auditing, amid 
fraud allegations in its welfare-to-work contracts.

This is not the first time that A4e has prematurely terminated a prison 
education contract; the firmended 
<http://www.kentonline.co.uk/kent/news/education-firm-pulls-out-of-pr-a38296/> 
a similar contract providing education to eight prisons in Kent early in 2008, 
citing huge losses.

The decision to terminate service provision then was criticised by teaching 
unions, as evidence that outsourcing education contracts to private providers 
was not a reliable way to guarantee a good quality service.

Sadiq Khan, shadow secretary of state for justice, said: "This is a vote of no 
confidence by the private sector in the disastrous way the Government have 
allowed our prisons to descend into crisis. Providing good training and skills 
to offenders in prison is crucial in rehabilitation to stop them reoffending on 
release. Leaving prisoners to fester in their cells or on landings as a result 
of this shambles is no good for anyone."

The A4e announcement came as the Prisons and Probation Ombudsman published 
conclusions from his investigation into the 89 self-inflicted deaths of 
18-24-year-old prisoners that occurred between April 2007 and March 2014. He 
noted that "in too many cases, suicide risk assessments and monitoring 
arrangements were poor", and that "67% of the young adults had mental health 
needs and 27% had previously been admitted for psychiatric care". Many young 
adults were distressed to find themselves in a crowded system and many had 
spent time in segregation. Nigel Newcomen, prisons and probation ombudsman, 
called for "more timely referrals for mental health treatment". "In too many 
cases, suicide risk assessments and monitoring arrangements were poor. In a 
number of cases, concerns expressed by families were not acted upon by staff," 
the report said.
 