
The Department of Work and Pensions has terminated a contract with a 
back-to-work company some of whose employees are under police investigation for 
fraud.

In a statement on Tuesday afternoon, the DWP said that after its own 
investigation into the company,A4e <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/a4e>, it had 
found no evidence of fraud but felt that it was "too risky" to allow the 
contract for organising mandatory work placements in the south-east region to 
continue.

A4e says it still operates 16 other contracts for several back-to-work schemes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/reality-check-with-polly-curtis/2012/feb/22/unemployment-work-programme-welfare>
 and that these will remain in place.

In a written statement to the House of Commons, the department found
that in an investigation of A4e's Epsom office 97% of
payments to the company under the mandatory work activity (MWA)
programme were correctly billed for and logged.

"In the remaining 3% of cases," the statement said, "DWP investigators were 
nevertheless satisfied that the anomalies were attributable to inadequate 
procedures rather than fraud.

"The audits for the work programme, the new enterprise allowance programme and 
mandatory work activity are now complete. They have found no evidence of fraud 
in any of these contracts.

"However, while the team found no evidence of fraud, it identified significant 
weaknesses in A4e's internal controls on the mandatory work activity contract 
in the south-east."

The DWP's most severe criticism was about A4e's supporting paperwork, which it 
described as "seriously inadequate", and in a small number of cases it said 
claims were "erroneous".

The most recent figures show that across the country 24,010 jobseekers have 
been referred by jobcentres to do MWA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/feb/15/thousands-unemployed-work-without-pay>
, which means they must work for four weeks unpaid for 30 hours a week. When 
the scheme was set up last year, numerous private companies and charities bid 
to organise the placements on behalf of Jobcentre Plus. Companies are paid an 
upfront fee for each month-long placement in a charity or business that they 
organise.

The DWP added that the company, some of whose employees are under 
investigation for fraud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/feb/22/staff-welfare-work-company-4ae-arrested>
 relating to its other back-to-work contracts, was also not compliant with its 
own internal guidance.

"The process established prior to March fell significantly short of our 
expectations. As a result, the department has concluded that continuing with 
this contract presents too great a risk and we have terminated the mandatory 
work activity contract with A4e for the south-east," it said.

The DWP said contingency plans were in place to keep placements going.

In its own statement the company, whose former chair Emma Harrison recently 
resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/feb/23/a4e-emma-harrison-steps-down-family-champion>
, said it welcomed the "positive findings" of the investigation and dismissed 
the MWA contract as "small".

"A4e today welcomed the positive findings of the audits undertaken by the 
Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) and the Skills Funding Agency (SFA) into 
allegations of fraudulent activity. Both confirmed they identified no evidence 
of fraud, systemic, attempted or otherwise in relation to any audit 
completed of the contracts they hold with A4e," the company said.

"Along with reviews by the Welsh and Northern Ireland assembly governments, 
this means that the majority of A4e's business has been fully examined by 
external auditors – ensuring our customers and government funders can have full 
confidence in our organisation."

A4e added that just five staff members were employed on the £1m contract and 
it made up just 0.5% of the company's total revenues.

The chief executive, Andrew Dutton, said: "These findings demonstrate what I 
have always maintained to be true – that there is no place for fraud at A4e and 
make it clear that A4e has strong controls around its flagship contract, the 
work programme. Our immediate task is to further enhance our controls to cement 
our position as a trusted provider of frontline public services.

"As a company, I recognise that we haven't got it right all of the time, but 
we are committed to taking responsibility for our mistakes and remedying them.

"No other provider has undergone such a thorough and forensic review of its 
contracts, and the positive outcome speaks for itself – this is huge 
reassurance for taxpayers and our customers."

The company added: "Our administrative processes fell short of our own 
standards and those required by DWP, and to this end we have accepted that the 
MWA contract will be terminated."

• This article was amended on 16 May 2012. In the original, we wrongly stated 
that the DWP's investigation was of A4e's Windsor office. The actual office 
under investigation is located in Epsom. This has been corrected.
 