
Last week the Advertising Standards Authority <http://www.asa.org.uk/> ruled 
that my business, the public service providerA4e <http://www.mya4e.com/>, can 
no longer describe itself as a "social purpose company" 
<http://www.asa.org.uk/ASA-action/Adjudications/2012/8/A4e-Ltd/SHP_ADJ_193333.aspx>
. Fair enough. What's in a name? But the ruling reveals two pieces of fuzziness 
in our wider national debate on sectors and the role of businesses that deliver 
services for government that should concern us all. The first is in our 
language; the second in our thinking.

The authority's opinion was that the term "social purpose company" gives the 
false impression A4e is a not-for-profit enterprise. Let's be clear.A4e 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/a4e> is a profit-making business. We have never 
sought to hide that, and we are more than happy to be known as such. But the 
implication of the ruling, that turning a profit precludes private companies 
building in a social purpose, is neither fair, nor an accurate reflection of 
reality.

In the past 20 years, the boundaries between the three clearly-defined sectors 
that dominated the 20th century – government running public services, business 
making profit, and charities in receipt of donations to do good – have blurred 
in all directions. A wealth of organisations has grown in the gaps between 
sectors: charities, businesses, and hybrids. This Blurred Sector has worked 
hard to deliver public contracts well, making a profit or generating surplus, 
and seeking to create wider social impact over and above their contracts, too.

Clearly, there is a difference between a private company such as A4e and, say, 
a social care charity. But is that a bigger difference than the one between A4e 
and, say, a supermarket, which are both private sector companies? In terms of 
operations, certainly not. These days, many charities and private firms work 
alongside each other delivering identical contracts.

Neither is the difference whether money and cost drive decisions in the 
organisation, as plenty of small charities living hand to mouth can attest. It 
is sometimes claimed the difference is ethos – the type of people attracted to 
different sectors. But that does not stack up either. It is not that there is 
some sort of Manichean separation between the sectors, where altruists work for 
charities and hard headedRandites <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ayn_Rand> work 
in the private sector. Lots of business people care deeply about changing the 
world – Bill Gates, for instance. Besides, many people have worked in all three 
sectors. Although we may not have the adequate language to describe this 
blurring, it is happening whether we define it or not.

But behind the confused language is a bigger problem: confused thinking, too. 
As a society, we approve of charities that strive to become more commercially 
efficient and back them with publicly funded capacity building and grants. 
Equally, we applaud businesses that put money into community projects or 
environmental schemes. But if a profit-making organisation, such as A4e, 
attempts to tackle poverty not through corporate social responsbility but 
through its core business, it stokes anxiety in some quarters.

Why? After all, no one seems overly bothered that for decades the private 
sector has been the bedrock of the NHS in the form of thousands of for-profit 
GP practices.

Does the ASA ruling signal that profit and social values are cannot be 
combined? We feel like they can. As far as A4e is concerned, the real and 
demonstrable impact we have on the lives of the customers across all our 
contracts – in employment, skills, training, health, money advice and legal aid 
– is not some happy accident on the road to making money. Perhaps it is hard to 
believe that a company with a turnover of more than £200m cares about solving 
social problems, but when I meet colleagues – people who have swapped clothes 
with a customer so they've got a suit to wear to an interview, or invited 
troubled teens over for Christmas dinner because their family has left them – I 
see their commitment and belief in the services they deliver.

In fact, not only does profit not preclude a social purpose, profit or surplus 
is actually essential to social impact. Without a little money to invest, you 
cannot get innovations in service design. Moreover, it is impossible to 
navigate the choppy waters of boom and bust, or deal with the changes you face 
in a market shifting with the ebb and flow of new governments and their 
policies, without creating some headroom from one year to the next. Others 
might disagree, but I would argue that A4e's success has been good for our 
customers, good for taxpayers and good for the economy.

Perhaps, collectively, we are fiddling while Rome burns. We face huge social 
and economic problems. What we as a country need are organisations with the 
ideas, ethos and resources to help us tackle those challenges. The truth is 
that those attributes are not confined to any one sector. Ultimately, what 
matters is what the user needs and how that is best delivered. A4e is arms wide 
and ears open and eager for that debate. In the past companies such as ours 
have been poor at explaining what we do and why. We want to change that now. 
Where we have failed, we want to learn and improve. So come on, let's have a 
debate about the real issues, not get lost in semantics.

Jonty Olliff-Cooper is director of strategy & policy at A4e 
<http://www.mya4e.com/>. You can follow Jonty on twitter at @jontyoc 
<https://twitter.com/JontyOC>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. To join the social 
enterprise network,click here 
<https://socialenterprise.guardian.co.uk/en/accounts/join>.
 