
A$AP Mob, Manchester & London

In hip-hop there’s historically been a thin line between band and entourage. 
A$AP Mob, the half-dozen or so Harlem-based artists gathered around A$AP Rocky, 
seem a more evenly balanced team than, say, D12. No one’s saying they all rap 
quite as well as Rocky – who quickly became the flag-planter for the group – 
but the independent emergence of A$APs Ferg, Nast and Twelvyy with their own 
strong singles suggests there’s a lot more to their team than star players. 
They play Manchester’s Warehouse Project then a special soundclash-style event, 
facing off against the UK grime crew Boy Better Know.

Store Street, Manchester, Tue; Earls Court, SW5, Thu

JR

Royal Blood, On tour

Very much a hairy rock wolf in more fashionable sheep’s clothing, Royal Blood 
are successfully selling nu-metal dynamics under cover of a White Stripes 
format. It might sound unworkable, but the pair have pulled it off. When Arctic 
Monkeys play live, they interpolate a good chunk of Black Sabbath’s War Pigs 
into their own song Arabella. Royal Blood, themselves a recent Arctic Monkeys 
support act, aren’t anywhere near so subtle. All whomping riffs and barechested 
yearning, Mike Kerr (bass and vocals) and Ben Thatcher (drums) are proving that 
even a genre synonymous with excess can economise on lineup. It remains to be 
seen how far they can push the template, but since it’s only taken them a year 
to have a No 1 album, time is on their side.

The Academy, Dublin, Mon; Riverside, Newcastle upon Tyne, Tue; O2 ABC, 
Glasgow, Thu; The Leadmill, Sheffield, Fri; touring to 12 Nov

JR

Foxygen, On tour

From California, Foxygen adhere to the visualisation philosophy: “If you build 
it, they will come.” A duo comprising Jonathan Rado and Sam France, Foxygen 
play a middling indie-rock, but dream much bigger: private jets, rock operas, 
perhaps a dissolute and legendary death in the presidential suite. That’s the 
beat of their current album …And Star Power, a work in four subtitled parts, 
and of the band onstage, where France is his own Ziggy Stardust, an avatar for 
a fatal crowd adoration. It’s an impressive idea: classic conceptual rock that 
is somehow more interesting for having much of the actual rock left out. That’s 
the bit they’ve not mastered yet, their mixture of interesting textures and 
pilfered melodies is never quite convincing on its own. Still, what with their 
whole concept being about the trials of fame, they know rock can probably stand 
a few false idols.

Komedia, Brighton, Wed; Ruby Lounge, Manchester, Thu; Village Underground, 
EC1, Fri

JR

Lady Godiva’s Operation, Coventry

Q: What ties together the Velvet Underground and Coventry? A: Trembling Bells 
founder Alex Neilson, whose new events series, Lady Godiva’s Operation, is 
named after the Velvet Underground song. The lineup for the first edition 
features three groups with blurred edges, starting with Ben Chasny’s 
longstanding acoustic guitar and drone project Six Organs Of Admittance, 
followed by folk trio the Family Elan, who play Greek bouzouki, drums and bass 
(among other instruments). The night will also act as an album launch of sorts 
for Neilson’s the Crying Lion, an unaccompanied polyphonic vocal group who are 
releasing an album via Honest Jon’s imminently.

Drapers’ Hall, Sun

JA

Gregory Porter, On tour

The dramatic baritone voice of Gregory Porter, the Grammy-winning American 
R&B, gospel and jazz singer, has swept him from the club circuit to the world’s 
great concert halls in four packed years. LA-raised Porter has widened his 
appeal beyond jazz through the powerful authenticity he’s brought to soul 
songs, yet he’s always had formidable jazz-improv powers. Last year’s Liquid 
Spirit album, Porter’s debut for the Blue Note label, mixed all the signature 
ingredients of his charismatic stage shows: handclapping swingers, mid-tempo 
soul-jazzy groovers, plus frank and revealing ballads. Porter has also been 
elevated to a podium occupied by the likes of Gil Scott-Heron as an artist 
mixing soul, passion and intelligence. His London gig is one of the standout 
turns in a 2014 BluesFest programme that also features Van Morrison (Tue), 
Elvis Costello (Wed) and Sheryl Crow (Fri).

Royal Albert Hall, SW7, Mon; York Barbican, Tue; Sage, Gateshead, Thu; Corn 
Exchange, Cambridge, Fri

JF

My Friend Dylan Thomas, Bangor

This year’s Dylan Thomas centenary has been celebrated throughout Wales and 
across the artforms. There have already been a number of musical tributes: 
earlier this month his home town of Swansea saw the first British performances 
of the Dylan Thomas Trilogy, a major work by the New York composer John 
Corigliano, for instance. This week Bangor University is putting on its own 
week of concerts, recitals and multimedia events which centre on Thomas’s 
association with the composer Daniel Jones, who wrote a memoir of their 
friendship that gives the series its title. It all ends with a concert (Thu) by 
the BBC National Orchestra Of Wales conducted by Grant Llewellyn, with 
Mark-Anthony Turnage’s setting of Thomas’s When I Woke, sung by baritone 
Roderick Williams, and Jones’s own Fourth Symphony, In Memory Of Dylan Thomas.

Bangor University School of Music, Sat to Thu

AC
 