
Q I have recently moved into a late-Victorian house which has a hall window 
that's about 2m high and 1m wide. I would like to have a blind at this window 
in keeping with the period. Can you tell me if there is such a thing as a 
late-Victorian style for window blinds and where I can find a supplier?
 Julie Baker, Gloucester

A Unfortunately the Victorians believed that sunlight was of no benefit to 
themselves and damaging to their interiors, so they fitted a combination of 
lace curtains and thick drapes to reduce the sun's 'harmful' qualities. Blinds 
were a much later invention. Needless to say, their homes were very dark. 
However, should this be your chosen style, take a look at John Lewis's 
Victorian-style Liz lace panel (£99) orwww.shaftesburys.co.uk 
<http://www.shaftesburys.co.uk> for a range of solid wooden shutters. But for a 
clever contemporary twist, try Emma Jeffs's witty lace window film at
www.surfacematerialdesign.co.uk <http://www.surfacematerialdesign.co.uk> - go 
on, you know you want to live in the 21st century really!

Q We currently have a uPVC door in a vile wood-effect grain and would really 
like to exchange it for something classier, although we can't spend a fortune. 
Our window frames are also uPVC, so we need something which wouldn't jar with 
them. Our house is a barn conversion, and I wouldn't mind something funky or 
contemporary (eg aqua with a porthole window). We would be grateful for any 
suggestions.
 Helen Misell 

A Your front door is of the utmost importance as it is the first point that 
visitors make contact with. PVC is an environmentally damaging material through 
its production and disposal, and is reported to have a lifespan of under 25 
years. Think about using a material that will (like us, I hope) improve with 
age, such as timber or patinated metal. Timber is sustainable and has good 
insulating qualities. You can either search for a vintage one at a local 
reclaim yard, or go for an affordable forest stewardship-certificated hardwood 
timber door.

Magnet Trade is bringing out an insulated range early next year (
www.magnettrade.co.uk <http://www.magnettrade.co.uk>). Alternatively, if you're 
interested in a bespoke or designer option, look atwww.urbanfront.co.uk 
<http://www.urbanfront.co.uk>.

· If you have a decorating/design question for Oliver, email 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
 