
The women sit cross-legged on a worn rug on the dusty ground, heads lowered 
shyly but listening intently. Premkumari Idrishi sits tall among the rainbow of 
coloured veils. "Our paralegal committee is number one in this whole district," 
she says proudly, holding her index finger aloft. "We are illiterate but still 
we have been able to run this and still we're number one."

Idrishi, 43, is president of the women's paralegal committee (PLC) in Purena, 
a predominantly Muslim village in Banke district, mid-west Nepal. Established 
in 1997 by NGO Plan Nepal, the committee's 25 volunteers visit homes to mediate 
cases of domestic violence, sexual harassment and child marriage, and property 
disputes.

If the volunteers cannot reconcile the parties, or they are faced with 
incidents such as rape, Idrishi says they refer the case to Saathi, a local NGO 
working to eliminate violence against women. "Saathi approaches the police and 
takes the necessary action because it has legal facilities and access to 
formal, state justice mechanisms," she explains.

Unlike many areas of Nepal, the police post is just two kilometres away, but 
Idrishi says women rarely go there for help. "If the women are illiterate, the 
police usually ask them for bribes," she says.

Feisty and determined, Idrishi is an exception in Nepal's highly patriarchal 
society; husbands not willing to change their ways must face her wrath. "If 
they don't understand, then of course I have to threaten them," she shrugs. "I 
tell them 'I will send you to the police if you continue to do this'."

Reconciling women with their abusers may not sit comfortably with westerners, 
but in a country still recovering from a decade of civil war, PLCs are a 
lifeline for many vulnerable women.

According to Simon Arthy, peace building adviser for the UK's Department for 
International Development (DfID) office in Nepal, around 80% of the country's 
disputes are resolved by informal processes. "So if we're looking at how we can 
support improvements for the poor and excluded, then we know those non-state 
mechanisms are the kind they are most likely to be going to," he says.

The Himalayan nation remains the poorest and most unequal in Asia. Over a 
quarter of the population live on less than 80p a day; women, lower caste 
Dalits, indigenous Janajatis and Muslims remain on the fringes of society. 
Tellingly, it is one of the few countries where women have a lower life 
expectancy than men.

Fuelled by this grinding poverty and inequality, Maoist rebels embarked on the 
"People's War" in 1996, a bloody insurgency against monarchy and state that 
left 13,000 dead and drove up to 100,000 people from their homes, before a 
peace deal was reached in November 2006.

Despite the ceasefire, the political situation remains fraught and violence 
flourishes. "Since 1990, we've had one prime minister on average each year," 
says Nishchal Nath Pandey, director of the Centre for South Asian Studies, 
Kathmandu. "Governance is really a shambles because the political parties are 
not worried about delivery, but rather saving their own position, so this has 
affected security and the entire state system."

So while the country's leaders are consumed by party politics, NGOs are trying 
to help everyday Nepalis voice their concerns about security and justice, and 
lobby stakeholders to ensure their message is heard.

UK NGO Saferworld has surveyed people in six districts and found high levels 
of violent crime are very real concerns in some areas, while violence against 
women is a serious problem in all districts.

"The good thing is that Nepal Police is taking these [surveys] seriously," 
says Saferworld's project co-ordinator, Subindra Bogati. "They've been sending 
them to training centres and we have discussions with police officers, telling 
them 'this is what people want'. So it's having an impact but it's a long 
process."

Trust in the police and judiciary remains low, but Bogati says there are 
encouraging signs. "In 2007 when we went to the districts people used to say 
'no we don't want police, having police means having troubles'; but now there 
is demand for police posts," he says.

People may want increased police presence but capacity is limited and 
resources stretched. Inspector general of police (IGP), Ramesh Chand Thakuri, 
says they lost 1,400 police officers and staff during the conflict, and up to 
700 police posts were damaged.

"We have a strategic plan to develop our capacity but it depends on resources. 
We need vehicles, we need fuel, we need equipment," says IGP Chand. "Donors 
have supported reconstruction with funds for rebuilding about 100 
infrastructures, and we have prioritised these according to the demands of 
local people."

According to Geja Sharma Wagle from the thinktank, Nepal Institute for Policy 
Studies (NIPS), wider-level reform is on the agenda. "All political parties, 
including government agencies, have realised we need to reform the security 
agencies. In the past, security was not in the public domain. People considered 
security to be the domain of the army," he says.

But just what reform means and how feasible it really is, remains in doubt 
among many international donors and NGOs.

"It would be nice theoretically to do big programmes of intervention from 
police to prosecutors to courts to prisons to oversight mechanisms, but in this 
fragile political context, that's pretty impossible at the moment," says Arthy.

For the moment, donors are turning their attention to building capacity in the 
informal sector. DfID has contributed £6.5m to Unicef's three-year programme 
aimed at increasing the number of women's PLCs from 500 to 1,300 committees 
across Nepal's 75 districts. However, it acknowledges their limitations: "The 
reality is that serious cases [such as rape] still do get mediated," admits 
Arthy. "Part of the trick is working with other institutions to make sure there 
are linkages between PLCs, police and formal courts."

DfID is also working with other foreign donors to strengthen the parliamentary 
oversight committee, although Arthy says they have to be realistic about how 
bullish it can be in taking on the powerful security and justice institutions. 
"But it's all about changing that dynamic, that it's not business as usual, 
there is some accountability required," he says.

In Purena, Idrishi says the PLC wants more legal training, a small office and 
respect from the community for the work it does. "It was very bad before 
because women knew nothing, they were not aware," she says. "We are a small 
spider in a huge web. All we can do is approach bigger people and plead with 
them to help a person from our village get justice."

In Nepal's tangled web of politics and prejudice, the spider is making a real 
difference to the lives of the country's women.

Targeted by traffickers

Meena Sharma settles her young son Bhuwan in her lap at the Saathi shelter in 
Nepalgunj, Banke district, and wipes her brow. She has a fever and the humidity 
is taking its toll.

Meena was an easy target for traffickers after her abusive husband kicked her 
out of their home in Chisapani, 75 kilometres from Nepalgunj, and refused to 
let her take their four children. She was rescued by Saathi at the Nepal-India 
border at Rupadiya and reunited with her son.

"My husband was an alcoholic and he would beat me and not give me food," she 
says. He also took a second wife; although polygamy is illegal in Nepal, it is 
still common in some communities and rarely prosecuted.

"Twice I had mediation with village elders and reconciled with my husband. 
Both times agreement papers were made but he still continued to beat me," Meena 
says. "I did not think about going to the police. If my husband knew, he would 
beat me more."

Ojaswi Shah from Saferworld says Meena's story is sadly familiar, and better 
co-ordination is needed between mediation committees, police and formal state 
mechanisms.

"Mediation centres are definitely a start but I think they do need to be 
evaluated. Are they resourced? Do they have adequate training?" she says.

Saathi has started legal proceedings for Meena to try to gain access to her 
husband's property and she hopes for "whatever I should get according to the 
law of the land and according to justice".

Regaining trust

Binod Ghimire is deputy superintendent of police (DSP) for Banke district. 
Domestic violence and extortion are commonplace, while the nearby open border 
with India gives rise to people trafficking and armed gangs. Like all police 
forces in Nepal, it is chronically under-resourced.

The district is roughly the size of Northamptonshire, but DSP Ghimire says: 
"We just have one vehicle that is used by the office chief and one more vehicle 
that is used for immediate rescue operations."

He says there are 683 police officers and around 500,000 people; twice as many 
officers are needed if the force is to meet the national target of one officer 
for every 400 people.

The force has a dedicated women's unit, but it is little more than a room with 
a desk and there is no privacy for victims. PC Rama Shreesh from the unit says: 
"We don't have computers or cameras so if women or girls have suffered from 
rape or torture, we can't take pictures and collect evidence."

Cases are often referred here by paralegal committees and DSP Ghimire 
acknowledges the contribution they make in assisting an already stretched 
police force. "But people should understand that the Nepal Police is the 
primary organisation that should be resolving disputes."

He believes the police are slowly regaining the public's trust but knows the 
culture of bribes still exists. "What can I say? No sectors have purity. If the 
salary was enough then police would not try to seek money from outside," he 
says.

Lara Brunt's assignment to Nepal was hosted by Saferworld
 