
A&E is no place for a suicidal patient and yet this is where they come, at 
least one or two cases a day, to the chaos of our busy department. It is hardly 
conducive to dealing with someone who views life itself as a disease. Staff 
process patients while forced to meet four-hour targets, and always have one 
eye on the clock to avoid financial penalty-incurring breaches. Sometimes the 
irony of the situation cannot be missed: in one cubicle is a patient so sick 
they are fighting for their life and in the next is another wanting to give up 
theirs.

The descriptions on our computer screens vary. Overdose, deliberate self-harm 
and sometimes simply “unable to cope”. If patients have harmed themselves in 
any way they need to be examined to ensure nothing life-threatening lingers. We 
make sure their paracetamol levels are not within liver-killing range and call 
the psychiatry teams. But how can you really ask a patient properly about the 
reasons they have ended up here, when you have a tsunami of others lined up 
behind you?

For patients with mental health issues we call psychiatry liaison and some 
people who I would never envisage being safe to go home, I see being discharged 
for follow-up in the community. I have to accept that they have focused 
specialism in this area of medicine and their judgment outweighs mine. But how 
much of their decisions are partially influenced by resources? It flickers 
through my mind cynically that we may see that patient again at their next 
attempt.

It’s not just the depressed and suicidal we see. Those with psychosis come in 
scared and wide-eyed – confused by the voices in their heads and their 
experience made much worse by the noise around them in the department. We wear 
scrub uniforms which for a paranoid patient can be deeply unnerving. If they 
become agitated, security arrives in black uniforms making it even worse. One 
woman became fixated by me and was threatening violence. I spent most of the 
shift repeatedly calling psychiatry.

Then there are the children, for whom we have to call the child and adolescent 
mental health service (CAMHS) team. Some are depressed, some display new 
psychosis, or others as young as 11 are diagnosed with personality disorders 
and have taken life-threatening overdoses. Sometimes they hear voices 
threatening violence to their family and so act to protect them, which can 
involve harming others or themselves.

One A&E consultant described paediatric psychiatry as a Cinderella speciality 
– sidelined and under-resourced. As the numbers of such patients appear to be 
increasing, the network to care for them does not. A patient referred to CAMHS 
waits in an A&E cubicle, thus limiting space to see other patients. At night 
CAMHS staff often suggest admitting them under paediatrics until they arrive in 
the morning. The paediatric team understandably refuse for a multitude of 
reasons such as lack of space, or because a psychotic patient on a ward with 
other sick children would be difficult to manage. The bottom line is that these 
children will be better served being in the right facility, with experienced 
mental health staff, so they stay in A&E.

People will keep coming to A&E for their mental health problems because they 
do not know where else to go. We can help them to get access to the right 
people but it appears that demand far exceeds existing capacity. A&E is just a 
small sticking plaster for a whole host of mental health conditions that 
warrant the right care, backed by better resources.

One thing is certain, judging by the number of attempted suicides we see in 
A&E: there are a lot of people out there who need help. Depression and its 
consequences seem to be as common as a year-round seasonal viral infection. Why 
are we not calling it an outbreak?
 