
When writers judge his tone, the word "thunderous" comes to mind. When 
historians consider the impact of One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich, The 
First Circle, Cancer Ward and The Gulag Archipelago, Alexander Solzhenitsyn's 
denunciation of the Soviet labour camp system achieves monumental proportions. 
For much of the century that he came to dominate, he was simply Russia's 
greatest writer.

Solzhenitsyn, who died at the age of 89 at his home outside Moscow on Sunday, 
survived the Soviet Union by nearly 17 years. And yet it is an abiding irony of 
his literary life that nothing he wrote in freedom, either in exile in Vermont 
or in post-SovietRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, achieved 
the status of those banned manuscripts smuggled out on microfilm to the west. 
There, he was compared to Anna Akhmatova or Boris Pasternak. As a literary 
victim of a repressive system with no news, his work achieved an intensity of 
truth that reached a global audience and shook the Soviet system to its core. 
As a free man in a country inundated with news and changing daily, the 
messianic figure with a long beard was simply bemused.

Solzhenitsyn had his Soviet citizenship restored in 1990, but he took four 
more years to return to Russia, ignoring entreaties by President Boris Yeltsin 
to come back sooner. In that time he completed his historical cycle of the 
Russian Revolution, The Red Wheel, which critics called wooden in more ways 
than one. Solzhenitsyn was mortified by the reception it got. His return to 
Russia was another grand statement that misfired. He landed in Magadan, a 
former Gulag outpost and embarked on a seven-week train journey, partly paid 
for by the BBC, across the expanse of Russia to reacquaint himself with the 
motherland. He railed against privatisation and the degradation of the Russian 
language, but failed to communicate to a people who had their other eye on 
western brand names. He was irritated that few he met in the country that he 
had helped liberate had read his books. A television chatshow which 
Solzhenitsyn hosted was pulled when the questions got steadily longer than the 
answers.

Russia's greatest refugee retreated to address future generations in a wooded 
retreat outside Moscow. He built a luxury dacha in Troitse-Lykovo on land once 
occupied by his KGB tormentors, and rarely emerged from behind its high fence. 
Solzhenitsyn found the closest reflection of his political views in Vladimir 
Putin, and the reclusive writer was once again being praised from the ramparts 
of the Kremlin. His last major work was a history of Russia and the Jews. A 
fiercely independent voice burned to the last inside a man who was rarely 
comfortable with his contemporary surroundings.
 