
If you are over the age of 35 – or possibly even a bit younger, if you're 
female – these men will almost certainly need no introduction. When their debut 
single, Take On Me, got to No 2 in the charts back in 1985, overnight their 
chiselled cheekbones and soaring vocals soldered themselves on to the memory of 
several million lovestruck fans, who, for a few a fleeting but heady years, 
postered their bedrooms with the Nordic beauties, sportedA-ha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/a-ha> wristbands, and rejoiced in the 
perfection of synthesised pop at its finest. I should know, because of course I 
was one of them.

And so, it turns out, were half the people I know today. Such is the flurry of 
envy when I tell friends that I'm going to meet Morten Harket, one even begs to 
come along too, under the pretence of being my "assistant". As she can name all 
three band membersand recite lyrics from memory, it seems churlish to say no. 
We fall about laughing at the pathos of the "50 things you didn't know about 
A-ha" list compiled by the record label (number 23: Paul, the guitarist, was 
voted the 10th-best-dressed man in Norway in 2002; number 45: Magne, the 
keyboardist, shares a birthday with porn baron Larry Flynt), and giggle at the 
retro 80s synth beats of the band's new album, Foot of the Mountain. A day with 
the heartthrob of our teenage dreams – what could be more fun, more hilariously 
kitsch, than that? What a hoot!

What a terrible misjudgment. The first inkling that Harket may not see himself 
in quite the same ironic light as, say, Take That or Duran Duran – those other 
one-time teen idols currently enjoying a summer revival – comes in an email 
from the PR. "Morten can drift a little in interviews sometimes," he ventures 
diplomatically; the singer can be a bit "philosophical". Are we sure we 
wouldn't like his bandmate, Magne Furuholmen, to come along too? "Magne really 
keeps him on track." The advice has the ominous ring of experience, so we take 
it.

Then comes the discovery that A-ha have not, as I had assumed, recently 
reformed. Nor is this a tongue-in-cheek, one-off comeback pitched at the 
nostalgia market. Oh no, Foot of the Mountain is in fact A-ha'sninth album; the 
band split in 1993, but reformed in 1998, and while they may not have troubled 
the airwaves much here in Britain, they have apparently been "big in Germany" – 
words to strike fear in the heart of any music lover.

It gets even worse. The recent revival of interest has been inspired chiefly 
by unexpected tributes from Coldplay, Keane, Oasis and U2's Adam Clayton, the 
latter of whom described A-ha as "a rather misunderstood band. They were looked 
upon as a group for teenage girls, but in reality they were a very creative 
band." For years poor old Harket had been insisting he was a serious artist, 
and grumbling about all the attention to his wretched cheekbones. And now, at 
last, vindication! If Chris Martin can credit A-ha as a formative creative 
influence, won't the world now take him seriously too?

Well, the world would have a job to take Harket as seriously as Harket does. 
When we arrive he is having his makeup done, which is a little surprising, 
given his legendary disdain for his good looks – and quite unnecessary, given 
their extraordinary durability. Just months away from his 50th birthday, the 
singer looks at least 15 years younger – but then, so does Furuholmen, though 
the keyboardist's beauty has a less contrived quality. If Harket was the poster 
boy, Furuholmen was always cast as the band's joker – the Robbie Williams of 
the act – and it is easy to see why, for although also nearing 50 he still has 
a boyish, laid-back good humour, and chatters away easily as we head into Hyde 
Park for the photo shoot. Paul Waaktaar-Savoy, the third member of A-ha, is not 
here today and rarely gives interviews.

It feels as if Harket is trying his best to be upbeat, but he has the slightly 
forced manners of a man playing the pop star through gritted teeth, dutifully 
crinkling his eyes for the camera in a pose that makes him look a bit like 
Patrick Swayze. The first real hint of his discomfort comes when he suddenly 
decides he must put his shoes back on, as his feet are getting cold. "I have 
responsibilities which go far beyond this interview," he explains rather 
spikily. "I actually do sing sometimes."

The pair discuss Harket's voice with the sort of studied intensity that is 
simultaneously rather touching, and a reminder of why musicians can be so open 
to parody. They never really liked pop music at all, Harket explains; when the 
band first arrived in London in 1983 as three "Norwegian music nerds", they 
were listening to the Doors, Led Zeppelin, Hendrix – "anything but pop, 
really". But then they heard pop bands such as Soft Cell in London – "and there 
was a kind of desolation and a yearning in that that was quite similar to the 
music we were listening to and making," Furuholmen agrees. "There's something 
really interesting in the clinical kind of cold sound of a synthetic 
soundscape. I find the grandeur of the songwriting, and the almost operatic 
approach of Morten's singing, much more appealing to me as a listener in that 
setting."

"I have to disagree about me having an operatic approach to singing," Harket 
interrupts earnestly, "because I never have. But I do agree very much that 
there is a great area in the synthetic coldness of that landscape, against my 
voice. But it's more of a sonic thing."

This, I have to say, is not the sort of conversation I can recall ever taking 
place among even the band's most ardent fans back in the 80s. Having almost 
stumbled into pop music, A-ha found themselves with a fanatical fanbase – but 
not one unduly preoccupied with the "synthetic coldness" of a "soundscape". Did 
they, I ask, truthfully even like their fans?

Harket considers cagily. "I never liked the term 'fans'. I respond to 
individuals, and I know none of them would wish to subscribe to the type of fan 
that's been portrayed in the media." Actually, in my experience the typical 
A-ha fan was precisely the hormonal hysteric portrayed in the media – but as 
I'm wondering how to say this, Furuholmen chips in.

"It's a question we've never been asked – but actually, it goes right to the 
core. It goes right to the core of how comfortable were we with our own 
success. And the truth is we were not comfortable. If you say the politically 
correct thing, yes, of course we love our fans, then – "

"You can love someone and not like them," Harket interjects glumly.

"Sure," continues Furuholmen, "and if you say no, obviously you're doing the 
completely wrong thing strategically. The truth is, the fans become a symbol, a 
mirror, of what you've created. And the truth is we've struggled with that 
mirror image throughout our career."

But surely, there must have been at least a brief spell during their early 
success, before it became onerous, when they felt as if all their dreams had 
come true?

"Well, I think that experience, that cycle, is very common, very normal," 
Furuholmen agrees. His bandmate just looks doleful. Did Harket never, I ask, 
enjoy even that?

"No, but that has to do with his personality," Furoholmen laughs. "He's 
extremely difficult to please. So embracing it is a big issue in this band. 
Embracing our history is a big problem. We were always very reluctant pop 
stars. Reluctance has been part of our history throughout. Even reluctance 
towards each other's role. I remember clearly Paul and me trying to rein Morten 
in, to be less pop star-like – thinking, oh shit, it's taking away from the 
music, don't stick your bum out in interviews, don't do all those silly things! 
We had serious music going on, let's not do this!"

Harket is now very quiet, and not looking particularly happy. Did their 
attempts to rein in his pop star role annoy him, I ask?

"I don't remember," Harket says coolly, "the bum sticking out."

Furuholmen snorts. "Look at the pictures if you want!"

What I cannot understand is this. If they found the whole experience of being 
pop stars so objectionable the first time around – and if, as they claim, they 
don't need the money – then why are they here? Both had pursued solo careers 
during A-ha's hiatus; Furuholmen has been a sculptor, while Harket apparently 
likes to indulge his passion for rare orchids, and between them they have seven 
children. They have experimented with acoustic and rock aesthetics, either of 
which seem more suited to their temperaments. So why make an album now that 
deliberately harks back to their 80s synthesiser sound – and, if successful, 
could only pitch them right back into the frothy pop world they say they 
deplored? I'm not entirely sure I ever get the answer.

"For me," Furuholmen tries to explain, "it's more about reclaiming territory 
that was already ours. The whole generation of artists coming out now who are 
citing the band are quite varied; they're not like one musical direction, it's 
people growing up in the 80s and remembering A-ha for something other than 
cheekbones. So something you left behind made an impact, had importance, was 
part of shaping musical history in some way."

"And still is," Harket adds quickly.

"And still is. And that's a good feeling. That alone is almost worth coming 
back to it for. You know, it's taken us 25 years to lighten up. I think when 
you come back at 50 you have to ask yourself, well, if I'm going back in it's 
got to be because I'm enjoying it. Or I must make sure I enjoy it."

So where exactly is the pleasure? For the life of me, I can't see it. "In 
making an album," Harket says, "and giving it also to people who can receive 
it. There's great pleasure in making something that we respond to ourselves."

"Well, actually," Furuholmen interrupts, "making and finishing the album is a 
pain in the neck. But the initial moments, when you have something and it turns 
into something, when you're writing – there is an energy among the three of us 
that only happens when the three of us are together. That energy is still 
infectious."

"But you still don't really want to be there," Harket laughs drily.

"OK, yes, but the real reason that we're in it, for me, is that spark – and 
then you're willing to go through almost any amount of crap to get it again, to 
do it again."

And now they're off again, tussling over some abstract philosophical point. 
"It's all about committing to this reality," Harket says, "when you talk about 
what is real and what isn't real." Furuholmen: "You don't see the difference?" 
Harket: "Yes, they are different, uniquely different – but one thing isn't more 
real than the other. When you're absent-minded, you're present-minded somewhere 
else."

What are they talking about? I have literally no idea. And then, dear God, 
they start quoting Søren Kierkegaard to one another – and even bickering about 
the correct translation. "In the same way that the Danish philosopher 
Kierkegaard speaks of becoming real in your own life," says Furuholmen. "That's 
partly what we're talking about – chaining yourself down to the moment and not 
just being in flux."

"You mean whilst the grass is growing, the spectator dies."

"Hmm, I'm not aware of that translation – I'm sure it's translated in a more 
elegant way."

"OK, whilst the grass is growing the spectator is withering away. So be the 
grass."

And on and on they go, more or less forgetting that I'm even there. It's more 
like being with a pair of rather self-conscious philosophy A-level students 
than middle-aged pop stars, and I can't help starting to laugh. When they hang 
out with other bands, I ask, do they find that they are different?

"Quite different," Furuholmen agrees, laughing. "In every way. Yes! Yes, 
you're absolutely right. We are quite useless at being pop stars. And that's 
the irony of it all. I hope we never become really good at being pop stars."

"I agree," Harket smiles. "But you don't," he adds drily, "have to worry about 
that."

My "assistant" and I can't stop laughing all the way home afterwards. If 
anyone had told us back in 1985 that the boys on our bedroom walls would one 
day be arguing over Kierkegaard before our eyes, we would never have believed 
them. What an extraordinary thing it must be, to write one perfect three-minute 
pop song in your 20s – and then be mortgaged to the emotional power of what it 
brings for the rest of your life, when you don't even really like it.

We're still laughing about it a few days later when we go to see A-ha play 
live in Camden. We're confidently predicting hordes of middle-aged women at the 
gig, squeezed into their old A-ha gear, squealing at their childhood idols, 
oblivious to the band's unease. But the last laugh, it turns out, is on us.

The venue is crammed with young, edgy, credible-looking music fans, with not a 
wristband in sight. If anything, the men seem to outnumber the women and surge 
fervently to the front, chanting lyrics to even the most obscure numbers from 
the band's wilderness years. Amazingly, it would seem that Harket – and Adam 
Clayton – are right after all; A-ha really do appear to mean something, even 
today. They finish with Take On Me and, as the venue dissolves into euphoria, I 
look around and find I'm not the only one who has been moved to tears.
 