
Abdielo Amwa is unhappy with his top-bar hives; encouraged to keep them in the 
forest, two have been vandalised and the honey stolen from the rest. "If your 
wife is not bearing children," he says, "then what are the fruits?" He 
complains, "This project has not helped me. We were given these hives to fight 
poverty and up to this time we are still facing a lot of problems." He suggests 
they are given away: "That wife who is not bearing a child can try another 
husband," he says.

Africans have traditionally used hollowed-out logs as hives. Development 
projects generally provide modern hives - such as the top-bar (where honeycomb 
hangs from a bar) or Langstroth (where honey fills a ready-made wax frame). 
Farm-Africa has recently imported Langstroth-style hives. Each hive costs 
90,000 TZS (£45) but beekeepers only pay 8,000 TZS (£4) as an initial 
contribution, but they eventually pay the full cost of the hive from the honey 
when it is harvested. The money paid is reinvested into the group in a 
revolving fund.

Nicola Bradbear, of Bees for Development, believes modern hives are 
inappropriate for poor beekeepers - needing inputs that are too difficult and 
costly to obtain. Nor do they suit tropical African bees, which abandon a hive 
at the slightest disturbance (costly, if you rely on a few expensive hives). 
Furthermore, you can't harvest beeswax - worth more than honey - from them. 
"We're now worn out," she says, "with project after project who come and 
introduce frame hives to poor people. They don't work very well and somehow the 
people get blamed."

Farm-Africa's representative, George Odhiambo, says this isn't necessarily the 
case. "We have established a demonstration centre that showcases three hive 
technologies. These expose beekeepers to the technology choices and the 
different levels of performance."

Bradbear advocates local methods. "In every circumstance," she says, "we find 
the ways people have worked out to do it in their place, with their bees, are 
much better than some foreigner introducing something brought from somewhere 
else."
 