
As the dust settles on the education secretary Michael Gove's recent plan to 
reform A-levels 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2012/apr/02/michael-gove-universities-a-level-examinations>
, one of the unanswered questions is how universities should be involved. The 
Russell Group, for example, has already spoken out with concerns over how much 
time it will take up – and what does this mean for schools, who have just 
returned from the Easter break to a whole new world?

The idea of involving universities in school exam reform is, in my view, a 
strong one. Not only are they going to teach some of the students as they 
progress from A-level but, more importantly, they are in the best position to 
know what is relevant in their particular disciplines at any given moment. 
Although there are many courses now run by universities to help update 
teachers' knowledge, it is often difficult for teachers to stay on top of the 
latest developments in their subjects, in addition to preparing and giving 
lessons (not to mention the great increase in paperwork they are expected to 
undertake).

The challenge comes in getting the level of involvement right and balancing 
any involvement from universities with continuing engagement from schools to 
create a collaboration between universities, schools and examination boards. 
This three-pronged approach was taken when drawing up the plans for the 
relatively new qualification,Cambridge Pre-U 
<http://www.cie.org.uk/qualifications/academic/uppersec/preu>. The big 
challenge in developing this post-16 qualification was forging strong, 
productive, relationships with teachers.

In trying to introduce any new syllabus, or even a new topic into a syllabus, 
there is always reluctance from the side of the teachers until it is understood 
why this new approach is being taken and how it will improve their lessons and 
their students' understanding. When I was first asked to look at an A-level 
syllabus, many years ago, and made recommendations, I was told that they could 
not be implemented since the topics would not be in the existing textbooks. 
Essentially, we could only remove things from the existing syllabus, not add to 
it.

Perhaps one of the most worrying changes in the science syllabuses is the 
gradual exclusion of maths. It is simply not possible to study the physical 
sciences at university without some understanding of mathematics. We are in 
danger of giving students the impression that it is not necessary to study 
maths for the sciences, which can lead to a nasty shock at university. What is 
needed is a thorough look at what is on the syllabus and why it is there. This 
is certainly something that the universities could have a valuable hand in.

An example from my own subject, chemistry. The analytical topic of nuclear 
magnetic resonance (NMR) had crept into the A-level syllabus. I remember 
encountering this during my A-levels some 25 years ago and being bewildered by 
it then. This is a subject that atUniversity of Cambridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/cambridgeuniversity> we have felt is 
better left to the second year to teach properly since it rapidly becomes so 
complicated. However, there are variations that are simpler to grasp, notably 
carbon-NMR. In designing Cambridge Pre-U, we included carbon NMR because it was 
easier to understand and was also more interesting to teach. This is because 
real-life molecules can actually be analysed using it, even by weaker students.

By working hand-in-hand with schools, the course we eventually produced – 
Cambridge Pre-U – gives the students a great understanding of their subject and 
certainly prepares them for continued study in their chosen areas. One of my 
colleagues at Cambridge has commented, only slightly tongue-in-cheek, that if 
the students all came here knowing the content of this course, we would not 
have to teach our first year. Of course, this is not true, nor is it what 
Cambridge Pre-U is about; it is about providing a sound educational course that 
is still accessible to all students of varying ability but one that gives them 
the skills to truly understand their chosen subjects and further develop these 
if they choose to go on to university. This can only be accomplished with the 
co-operation of all parties involved: teachers, universities and exam boards.

So that's the lesson for Gove – definitely involve academics but remember 
we're one of a number of voices and the real key is get everyone working 
together to develop qualifications that allow our students to be truly fit for 
the future.

Dr Peter Wothers is a fellow and director of studies in Chemistry at St 
Catharine's College <http://www.caths.cam.ac.uk/home/>. He was instrumental in 
developing the syllabus for the Chemistry Pre-University qualification.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network <http://www.guardian.co.uk/higher-education-network>.
 