
Q The roof space immediately above my flat is a large communal area, partially 
broken up only by the chimney flues. Also, directly above me, are two large 
cold-water tanks for the block of 12 flats. Will I gain anything by just 
installing loft insulation in the area above my flat? I do have access. Regards,
Jenny, London

A The simple answer is yes - providing you insulate over the perimeter walls 
of your flat, you will prevent vertical heat loss. But looking at the bigger 
picture, insulation isn't just about saving money and keeping warm, it's about 
preserving resources and reducing carbon emissions. So call a freeholders/ 
leaseholders meeting and propose insulating the building properly: the Energy 
Saving Trust (0800 512012;www.est.org.uk <http://www.est.org.uk>) can give you 
advice and suggest ways of getting grants.

Q On my stairs there's a beautiful banister, but the varnish is old and dark. 
How do I remove it? Is it best to get in a professional? The only other option 
I have is to paint it. I'd like to use a light (white/off white) colour. The 
doors and skirting also have this wood/varnish, which I do not mind, but the 
banister is too much. If it did clean up nicely, could I stain/wax it or 
varnish it to retain the colour?
Marie O'Hare, Troon

A Natural materials such as wood improve with age and keep us grounded. It's 
important to remember the sensual qualities of your home: it may only be a 
handrail, but you have contact with it every time you circulate around the 
house. So put in the elbow work and go for a natural wood finish. Strip the old 
varnish with Home Strip (www.strip-paint.com <http://www.strip-paint.com>), an 
environmentally and user-friendly alternative to skin-burning acid strippers. 
Next, apply one coat of high-solids floor oil - EarthBorn (
www.earthbornpaints.co.uk <http://www.earthbornpaints.co.uk> does a low-solvent 
version) - with a scouring pad to drive it into the grain. Wipe off any excess, 
then apply a natural wax (such as carnauba) to bring out the beauty of the wood 
and protect it, producing a handrail to be proud of.
 