
When the day comes to sack Kevin Keegan (maybe sooner than you expect in these 
feverish times), there will be no relays of postmen humping up sacks of 
commiserating letters to his home, as they did 25 years ago to Sir Alf Ramsey's 
pleasant detached in Valley Road, Ipswich.

 Nor will there be a national benefactor - Watney's the brewer in Alf's case - 
paying for full-page ads in all the morning papers so that the people of 
England could read the appreciative words that the Football Association 
international committee were too mean, provincial and curmudgeonly to say.

 They had paid him badly, dismissed him brusquely and, until Alf reminded them 
that he had won the World Cup and lost only 18 of his 113 internationals, 
intended to publish a one-paragraph announcement without even a sliver of 
thanks.

 The dirty deed was done by a Scottish doctor from Sheffield who was the FA's 
chairman. Sir Andrew Stephen by name and greatly in need of prescribing himself 
a sedative on the Saturday morning when Alf, inoculated the day before in 
readiness for England's summer tour behind the Iron Curtain, was summoned to 
meet him at Lancaster Gate. Ramsey told me: 'First, he said that he must go and 
spend a penny. When he came back, he paced round the office and said "I'm 
thirsty. Do you fancy a drink?" I declined. "You won't mind if I have one?" 
said the chairman and took a bottle of tonic water from the cocktail cabinet.

 'I watched while he struggled for several minutes to remove the cap. Finally, 
he gave up, placed the bottle on his desk and revealed the unanimous decision 
of an FA sub-committee that I should be replaced.

 'The chairman seemed relieved to have got that off his chest. For he picked 
up the bottle again and opened it first turn.'

 Alf then went off to watch Crystal Palace lose 2-0 at home to Hull City, 
chatted in the boardroom to Colin Cowdrey, caught the train home and confirmed 
his wife's worst suspicions about Saturday meetings.

 He was devoted to his mother in Dagenham, so next he drove to her cottage and 
told her first. Then he told his daughter, his sister, a few close friends and 
his three brothers - one of whom was Charlie, owner-trainer of greyhounds but 
never of a winner to compare with the day he entered Alf for football 
management.

 Nat Shaw was boss of the Ipswich track and a director of the football club 
where the board were looking to replace dapper manager Scott Duncan, who was 67 
and wanting to retire. 'Might your brother be interested?' said Shaw to 
Charlie, knowing that Alf, a captain of England, had been left out of 
Tottenham's 1955 pre-season match.

 Well, yes in a fashion. He was, she wasn't. She being Victoria, the girl he 
met through wartime football at Southampton. More often than not, he addressed 
and referred to her by the full monicker just as, in nearly 50 years of 
acquaintance, I never heard her use the familiar Alf. It was always Alfred.

 They were a loving couple, two in harmony except on the August day of being 
invited to Ipswich for the Possibles v Probables trial. She saw a cricket 
pavilion for dressing-rooms, a hut for the directors, railway sleepers for 
terraces and some truly awful players on the pitch. But he saw an opportunity 
and, when at half-time she said, 'Let's go home', quelled her with a look. What 
happened afterwards stamps Ramsey as a football manager whose deeds can never 
be equalled.

 In saying that, I am not attempting daft, unprovable comparisons with Alex 
Ferguson, Jock Stein, Bill Shankly, Herbert Chapman, Ramsey's old Spurs 
team-mate Bill Nicholson or any other truly outstanding manager you care to 
throw into the frame.

 Instead, I put forward the simple and undeniable fact that no manager before, 
since, nor from here to eternity has - or can - match Ramsey's achievement of 
winning the championships of the Third Division (South), the Second Division 
and the League Championship in a five-year spell at Ipswich . . . then 
following up with the World Cup.

 Yet they didn't want him, you know, those duck-eggs at the Football 
Association. Their first choice was Jimmy Adamson, an admirable Burnley 
wing-half and a one-cap 'B' international but whose later managerial successes 
in 10 years of trying amounted to no more than a Second Division title at 
Burnley.

 Adamson, showing more sense than the international committee, declined the 
offer and thereby left the field open to Alf as champion manager and original 
thinker. He had been identified as such in his first pro match by team-mate Ted 
Bates, a true Mr Southampton for his lifetime of playing, managing and 
directing at The Dell. 'He was in the Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry and 
determined to make a go of being a footballer despite lacking both height and 
speed. What he had, instead, was a razor-sharp brain. He would never get into a 
situation that exposed him.'

 It was the intelligence, the bright perceptiveness of those brown eyes that 
struck me when I first met Alf. This was in Spurs' dressing-room at Maine Road, 
and the occasion was Danny Blanchflower's first away match for Spurs. We met 
again a year or two later when he managed a Third South representative team 
against the Third North at Stockport. When, a little later, I was working from 
Fleet Street hardly a week went by without my meeting or phoning Alf.

 When he won the Second Division title in 1961, the bookies took notice but 
only of a cynical nature by marking them down for a price that indicated 
instant relegation next season.

 It was April 1962 and a 3-0 victory at Highbury at last alerted the mockers 
to the likelihood of the championship being snitched by a £30,000 ragbag of 
cast-offs. There was skinny Jimmy Leadbetter playing outside left alongside his 
left-back, Larry Carberry signed at right-back for his train fare from an Army 
camp, and Bill Baxter the midfield driver and £500 soldier. Ted Phillips from 
non-League Stowmarket scored 47 League goals for the season and then 'Jungle 
Boy' Ray Crawford went from a Hampshire Regiment battalion in Malaya to a 
couple of England caps after being cast off for £3,500 by Portsmouth as clumsy 
and overweight.

 Ipswich travelled everywhere by train in those days and there was a 
competition among the team one season to see how long they could engage Alf in 
conversation without football cropping up. The record was four minutes. One 
contestant who had tried to get Alf on gardening came back claiming: 'He thinks 
hydrangeas are in the Scottish League.'

 The final great journey of that championship year was to London and the 
Savoy, but not just the team, their largely Old Etonian directors and sundry 
civic dignitaries. Alf, with that firmness which brooked no argument, informed 
the board: 'This championship was everyone's success, so everyone comes. If 
they don't, I won't go.'

 So all 28 players on the books were invited, including the aptly named 
reserve Kenneth Stiff. Also the groundsman and his assistant Stan Prendergast. 
The office staff as well. Alf, and this was his secret with England after 
Ipswich, overlooked nobody. Unity was his game, and so the Savoy played host to 
old-age pensioners who swept up at the ground.

I've been around professional football since the war ended and, in all that 
time, have never heard (or heard of) a player uttering a word of personal 
criticism aboutAlf Ramsey <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alf-ramsey>. He 
capped 100 players in his 11 years as England manager and all but one of them, 
who happened to be on the far side of the world at the time, came to his 
farewell dinner in London.

 The FA had nothing to do with this. Oh, dear no! The event was organised by 
football writers. It was said he disliked journalists and, truth to tell, most 
of us had suffered at times from the lacerating look and brush-off grunt - yet 
loved him just the same.

 I was at ITV's Elstree studios on the Sunday after the World Cup final when 
Alfred, Victoria and England's whole 22 (not looking at all hangover) attended 
a celebration lunch hosted by Lord Grade. It was there that Ramsey, saying 
huffily 'This is my day off', snubbed an interview request from three of his 
loyallest Fleet Street supporters.

 That's the story, often told as an instance of his cussedness, but nobody 
mentions how soon he relented and gave them just sufficient quotes to keep 
their editors happy.

 Nobody spoke, either, at the time of Ramsey's total lack of greed and 
commercialism. Let me tell you a story, one that has never been published until 
here and now. A story known only to the smallest, innermost circles of Fleet 
Street.

 On the night of England's 4-2 victory over West Germany, Kensington High 
Street was choked from kerb-to-kerb by a delirious and uncountable multitude 
adoring the players who were waving from the balcony of the Royal Garden Hotel.

 Alf, although being hero-worshipped was never his thing, stood with his squad 
for a time then left. He had been called to the phone by a Sunday paper sports 
editor who he had known for a long time and with whom he was on good terms.

 The caller wanted a few quotes. Nothing contentious or controversial, but 
simply a 'How happy I am. . . Greatest day of my life' statement of the 
manager's feelings. In short, he wanted Ramsey's name on the front page of his 
newspaper next morning.

 For this, a 10-minute chat at the longest, he would pay £10,000, which was 
much more than a year's pay for Ramsey. 'No,' said Alf. No negotiation, no 
ducking or diving but simply refusal.

 The sports editor was satisfied to the extent that he knew from Alf's 
reaction that no rival would be able to scoop him. To this day, instead of 
annoyance at such a brisk brush-off, he feels only admiration for the manager's 
probity.

 Eight years went by before Alf at last accepted Fleet Street money, which is 
how I came to be inside his house after entering by a secret path through the 
garden to talk with him in a darkened kitchen while all the front blinds were 
drawn against besieging photographers.

 My paper was paying £21,000 for three signed articles, which obliterated the 
record of £14,000 paid to manager Stan Cullis, the Master of Molineux, when 
sacked by Wolves 10 years earlier.

 Until that night, I had no idea that England could pay a World Cup winner so 
skinnily. Ramsey was on a remuneration inferior to at least a third of First 
Division managers, such as Brian Clough, Bertie Mee, Don Revie and Tommy 
Docherty.

 His basic was £6,000, a rise of only £20 a week after 11 years. And £10 of 
that was awarded in recognition of the World Cup victory. Oh, yes! There was 
also a cost-of-living allowance. Twenty quid a week.

 So Alf, with no pension worth mentioning and no fortune offshore or anywhere 
else (except for a deposit in his local building society) required some 
provision for his future. He also needed a change of luck.

 From the night at Leon in 1970 when some nasty Mexican bug laid low Gordon 
Banks, the wand of Alf the Wizard began to suffer from whatever is a 
near-teetotaller's form of brewer's droop. It wasn't the substituting of Bobby 
Charlton and Martin Peters that cost us a semi-final place against Italy in the 
World Cup, but the mistakes against Germany of Peter Bonetti keeping goal when, 
according to camp gossip, he was in no psychological shape.

 It wasn't the size 11 boots of Gunther Netzer that sent us reeling out of the 
European Championship quarter-finals of 1972 but the stroke pulled by a man 
whose name Ramsey couldn't bring himself to utter. Here's why: 'The Derby 
manager [Brian Clough] sent a message that it was impossible for Roy McFarland 
and Colin Todd [the intended centre-backs] to play on the Saturday night 
against Germany; they had both failed try-outs. Yet on Monday they both played 
against Liverpool and, I was told, without either showing sign or semblance of 
injury.'

 It wasn't the failure to conjure a Wembley winner against Poland from 35 goal 
attempts and 23 corners that eliminated England from the 1974 World Cup 
qualifiers, but the cramping misfortune of being drawn in a three-team group.

 There was no room for manoeuvre after the hundreds-to-one fluke of a ball 
skidding off Bobby Moore's toe for an own goal and defeat in Chorzow, 
especially when it followed a dropped home point to Wales (scorer John Toshack) 
at Wembley.

 Sir Geoff Hurst told me during the thirtieth anniversary tour of the 1966 
world champions: 'We had five world-class players: Banks, Charlton, Moore, 
Greaves and Wilson. We had a great manager who used players in the way they 
played for their clubs. And we had strict discipline. Alf never raised his 
voice but had a powerful manner.'

 Too powerful by half for the liking of the artful chemistry professor Sir 
Harold Thompson. Alf stopped Thompson, addicted to pungent cigars, from smoking 
in the players' dining-room.

 Thompson, biding his time, countered by browbeating the international 
committee, who reversed a vote of confidence into one for Alf's replacement. 
Much good it did Thompson or England, for the replacement was Don Revie, who 
also failed to qualify in his turn.

 They are both forgotten now. Thompson everywhere and Revie everywhere outside 
Leeds. But the memory of Sir Alf Ramsey lives forever.

 They say he is dead at 79 but I say this to everybody who gloried in his 
teams, watched TV on Saturday, 30 July, 1966 or who has kept the videos...

 YOU DON'T HAVE TO BELIEVE IT IF YOU DON'T WANT TO!
 