
The photographic collage on our kitchen wall took two years to make but is 
finally finished. It already looks a bit dated because the pictures of our 
youngest show him as a toothless baby and now he can ride a scooter and say 
"Shut up". But it's sort of pleasing as we've used stacks of snaps to mark out 
a timeline and story to our life, for the amusement – if nothing else – of our 
family.

While we are eating dinner, my daughter tries to punish me for not being 
allowed out to an all-night rave, by piping up: "It's amazing how much you look 
like a man when you smile."

I then laugh like a man, just to annoy her.

Admittedly, it's hard to avoid how much I look like my father, when the 
evidence is there in front of me, his various facial expressions juxtaposed 
against mine, confirming that yes, take away his facial hair and glasses, and I 
look remarkably like him: the cleft chin, the Napoleonic frown and the short 
legs, which I have spent years trying to elongate with the aid of high-waisted 
jeans and a slight heel. My father, alas, can't do quite the same.

"The more you don't want to become your father, the more you are like him," 
said Akram Khan – the brilliant choreographer and dancer – in an interview with 
Michael Parkinson recently. Of course, he wasn't talking so much about the 
physical similarities, but the behaviour. Although I'm female and Khan seemed 
to be talking specifically about a father/son relationship, I felt like 
punching the air and saying "Exactly!" Although I'm closer to my mother, I 
think I'm far more like my father when it comes to looks, habits and behaviour.

It's useful in some ways because my father seems to like himself; I hope he 
sees the similarities between us, and thinks about me, "Quite impressive."

Joking aside, I hate to admit that I've spent my adult life trying to impress 
my parents by trying to like the things that they like. I sometimes try to 
emulate the things that I see them do, too, because, like peering into the 
mirror at a familiar reflection, at least they will feel at home in the company 
of their daughter. Even when I hated my father with the venom of a thousand 
snakes, I secretly wanted to behave like him, because he seemed to have so much 
power.

My mother was even more powerful, though, and I wanted to be as capable as 
her, as efficient, a giver of unconditional love. When I became a mother, I 
tried to copy some of the things she did in the belief that I could take on 
some of her brilliance. But also, I wanted to impress her with things as inane 
as the way in which I cleaned my bathroom. At one time I was obsessed with my 
sink. She once jokily tut-tutted – after ducking her head underneath the 
porcelain bowl to inspect – that I had missed cleaning the underside. "The way 
to tell if someone is really clean is by checking the bits that no one can 
see." Bonkers as it might seem, every time she visited for years after that 
day, I made sure to clean the underbelly of the sink before she arrived.

Essentially, to move on and stop concerning myself with the unimportant bits 
of sinks, I have to kill my mother and my father. Not literally, of course, but 
simply by trying to obsess less about pleasing them. Of course, I can be a 
kind, empathetic, loving daughter without having to do the things that they do. 
My ideals can be different. Akram Khan said something along the lines of, 
"There's a moment where you have to kill certain bits of relationships in order 
to find your own voice."

This brings me to R. We have had the "And what were your parents like when you 
were growing up?" conversation in therapy, and have enjoyed re-telling some of 
the more humorous childhood events in our lives, such as R's father throwing a 
faulty photocopier out of a fifth-floor apartment window in a rage, prompting 
me to joke: "Do you think you have similar problems with releasing anger, and 
have used alcohol as a way to calm you down?"

We can recognise that some of our behaviour is like our parents' but to move 
on, we have to stop caring what our parents think; have to stop acting as if we 
are trying to impress them; have to stop second-guessing what we think they 
want to hear. We are, after all, practically middle aged. Only recently have we 
both come to the uncomfortable realisation that we have often behaved like 
teenagers (albeit far better behaved versions of the actual teenagers that we 
were) in the face of our parents, despite being parents of a teenager 
ourselves. It's time to grow up.
 