
There's a lot of talk in garden design circles about creating a sense of 
place. This 15m x 12m town garden has it in spades. A pair of gnarled olives 
create a distinct Mediterranean feel, enhanced by the pale Portuguese limestone 
paving. The compacted gravel is reminiscent of a French pétanque pitch.

The brief given to designer Chris Moss was for a modern garden that would 
reflect the minimalist interior of the house from which it needed to flow. All 
the materials, including the parchment-coloured walls, were chosen for their 
harmonious, muted colours, which echo the light interior. The main focal point 
is a "water table" edged with limestone. Linking it with the terrace visually 
joins the two halves of the garden together.

The lawn was removed, which from a design perspective can be liberating in a 
small garden. The garden's owner loves plants, so Moss decided to dedicate half 
the space to grasses, perennials and bulbs.

The gravel paths that cut through the garden are hidden from the house and 
terrace by the planting, creating the illusion that the back half of the garden 
is virtually filled with plants. The result is remarkably exuberant and 
cleverly counterbalances the rigid symmetrical formality of the hard 
landscaping.

· Pale walls often need regular repainting in crisp modern schemes, but 
parchment colour doesn't show the dirt readily and makes a good foil for the 
wisteria foliage

· Grasses including Miscanthus 'Morning Light' and Stipa tenuissima hide the 
leaves of alliums, knautia and cirsium, so their flowers appear to dance 
through the foliage

· Neatly clipped box balls sit within the loose planting, holding the scheme 
together like living architecture

· The trunks of the Himalayan birch (Betula utilis) echo the colour of the 
limestone. They are a good choice for a small garden, casting a dappled shade 
so plants can grow beneath

· Breedon gravel is a compacted self-binding gravel; with only a few loose 
stones on the surface, cats aren't attracted to it and nothing gets walked into 
the house
 