
It’s been a rough winter in New York City - cold, icy and unforgiving. 
Luckily, for the legions of baseball fans who streamed out of the subway, on to 
a sun-drenched River Avenue and into Yankee Stadium, spring sprung just in time 
for thehome team to play the Toronto Blue Jays on Opening Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/06/alex-rodriguez-returns-to-cheers-after-drugs-ban-but-yankees-lose-opener>
.

The cloudless Bronx skies weren’t enough to brighten the moods of some Yankees 
fans however. They’re still struggling to come to grips with what they won’t be 
seeing during the 2015 season: Derek Jeter.

“It’s not going to be like a regular New York Yankees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-yankees> Opening Day,” said Paul 
from Waterbury, Connecticut. “It’s going to be dry, there’s not going to be no 
excitement. No El Capitano. Derek Jeter made the Yankees the Yankees. There’s 
nobody here exciting to watch.”

“Jeter’s gone,” said Pat from New Jersey. “But he’s still in my mind, you 
know?”

A year ago, Jeter was getting set for a league-wide, epic goodbye tour, where 
fans home and away could pay their respects to an all-time great and future 
hall-of-famer - the iconic shortstop at the core of five World Series titles 
who accumulated more than 3,000 hits while authoring a series of memorable 
Yankees moments.

Now, for the first Opening Day since 1996, Jeter’s name cannot be found 
anywhere on the Yankees roster. After 2,905 regular and post-season games in 
pinstripes, he’s moved on,pursuing publishing greatness 
<http://www.theplayerstribune.com/> while the Yankees enter an era that doesn’t 
include the famed No2, or any of the other “Core Four” players - Mariano 
Rivera, Andy Pettitte and Jorge Posada - a group that helped them to 17 playoff 
appearances in 20 seasons.

“It’s gong to be weird,” the Blue Jays manager, John Gibbons, told the 
Guardian before first pitch. “He was such a mainstay, one of the great players 
in the game for a lot of years. The game keeps moving on, you know it’s a young 
man’s game, and Didi Gregorius (Jeter’s slick fielding replacement) is a 
special kid, a special shortstop. I’m sure the fans will fall in love with him. 
But there’s only one Derek Jeter, so they’ll miss that.”

That’s definitely true of Jen, a fan whose husband Mike forced her to attend. 
“I didn’t even want to come. I didn’t want to come because he’s not going to be 
here. It’s not the same. His presence isn’t here, his leadership isn’t here.”

The Yankees transition extends into the shirt and memorabilia shops which line 
the periphery outside the ballpark. What will sales be like without the Yankees 
Captain on the Bronx diamond?

“It’s unchartered waters,” according to Steve Martucci, owner of Stan’s Sports 
World. “Nobody knows what it’s going to be like.”

Ray from Wall, New Jersey was trying his best to move on, selecting a hooded 
sweatshirt with Jacoby Ellsbury’s name on the back. “I’m hoping he can become 
the face of the Yankees so to speak, hoping he can kind of take the torch from 
Jeter.”


Perhaps the Yankees dynamic center fielder will gain traction in that role 
over the next few years, but for now, with Jeter out of the picture, much to 
the chagrin of Yankees ownership, the unchallenged face of the franchise is 
none other thanAlex Rodriguez <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-rodriguez>
.

A-Rod, who is currently fifth on the all-time 654 career home runs, returned 
from a year-long suspension for his involvement in the Biogenesis performance 
enhancing drugs scandal on Monday. He remains the biggest story in baseball, 
partly because he always elicits strong opinion.

“I don’t know about A-Rod,” said Jason, a lifelong Yankees fan who made the 
trip with his 12-year-old son from Jacksonville, Florida. “We hope he performs. 
But here’s the thing - he is not a good role model for him [gesturing to his 
son]. From my perspective, I wish we weren’t saddled with his contract, but we 
are.”

Inside the ballpark, all eyes were on A-Rod, who was steady during Spring 
Training, performing well enough on two surgically replaced hips to earn a spot 
in the Opening Day line-up as the designated hitter.

Proving yet again that fans care little about the use of performance enhancing 
drugs,Rodriguez received a loud ovation from the crowd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/06/alex-rodriguez-returns-to-cheers-after-drugs-ban-but-yankees-lose-opener>
, call it 70% cheers and about 30% boos while being announced during the 
opening ceremony. That was arguably louder than the hand that four-time World 
Series champion manager Joe Torre received from fans as he tossed out the 
ceremonial first pitch.

By the time Rodriguez got to the plate for his first at-bat, one that coaxed 
another round of reasonably hearty applause, his Yankees were down. Ace hurler 
Masahiro Tanaka,whose questionable right arm carries the key to the Yankees’ 
season 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/07/sports/baseball/yankees-blue-jays-alex-rodriguez-opener.html?_r=0>
, allowed a two-run homer to Edwin Encarnacion, capping a five-run second 
inning.

Rodriguez worked a walk, had a base-hit and hit the ball hard in two at-bats, 
but the home team suffered a 6-1 defeat, putting a damper on the first game of 
the post-Derek Jeter era.
 Alex Rodriguez addresses reporters after his first game back with the New 
York Yankees following a season-long suspension relating to his involvement in 
the Biogenesis performance enhancing drugs scandal. Photograph: David Lengel 
for the Guardian 
Throngs of reporters awaited A-Rod post-game to get reaction from the slugger 
following his first day back at work since 25 September 2013.


When asked by the Guardian what it meant to him to return to the sport, 
Rodriguez said: “It means the world to me. I don’t think I ever took for 
granted. But I can guarantee you I won’t take this year for granted. And being 
back in uniform, wearing the pinstripes ... look, I have one of the greatest 
jobs in America, to be able to be a Major LeagueBaseball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baseball> player, and perhaps in the past I 
didn’t think like that.”

For fans and players alike then, it seemed to be an appropriate day to move on 
from recent history.

 