
A yaan Hirsi Ali and her sister, Haweya, grew up in conditions that most 
western psychologists would consider traumatic. Circumcised as little girls in 
Somalia, and abandoned by their father, a rebel leader, they were raised as 
refugees in Saudi Arabia, Ethiopia and Kenya. Isolated and desperate, their 
mother would beat them mercilessly. Subjected to harsh Islamic teachings, they 
were also beaten by their ma'alim - once so badly that Ayaan nearly died. The 
sisters grew up against a background of tyranny, war, exile, famine and 
religious dogma.

This story, told by Ayaan in her memoir, Infidel, might seem to allow plenty 
of room for the view that trauma lay behind the mental illness that would 
eventually consume Haweya. In 1994, after destroying her honour by having an 
abortion, she joined Ayaan as an asylum-seeker in Holland. There she had 
another abortion. In 1996, she was admitted to a psychiatric hospital with a 
severe psychotic disorder. She had been smashing her head against walls, 
screaming, "Allaahu Akbar! Allaahu Akbar!"

Yet, for Ayaan, the idea that her sister became schizophrenic due to religion 
or upbringing is simplistic. For a start, it is the same type of interpretation 
that is often used to undermine her own arguments against female oppression in 
Islam. If Haweya went mad because of hardship, Ayaan's uncompromising views can 
be explained the same way. Her enemies deride her as a self-hating Islamophobe, 
incensed by her Muslim upbringing, sexually frustrated by circumcision, and 
haunted by the death of Theo van Gogh - the director who was murdered in 
Amsterdam in 2004, after making Ayaan's anti-Qur'anic film, Submission: Part 1. 
But to use trauma to diminish her critique of Islam is, she says, "just a means 
of not listening to what I have to say".

Furthermore, Ayaan points out that while she and Haweya might have had a hard 
life by European standards, by African standards "it was not so bad". As much 
as anything, what she remembers is laughter and sisterhood. She and Haweya were 
deeply bonded. They confided in each other, made trouble together, protected 
one another. At home, Haweya would rage against their mother and Ayaan would 
intervene, taking on the mantle of maternal care, washing Haweya gently when 
their mother wanted to scrub her "like you'd scrub the floor". Out in the 
dangerous streets of Nairobi or Mogadishu, meanwhile, Haweya was the fearless 
one, standing up for her more delicate older sister. Ayaan still thinks of her 
as "my guardian angel".

Why, then, did Haweya lose her mind? Ayaan provides the same answer you would 
get from any honest psychiatrist: "It's mostly guesswork." For sure, the events 
of their lives contained "stressors". Perhaps Haweya's flight to Holland, which 
removed the privations of clan life, also removed a psychological safety net. 
Rates of psychosis increase among migrants and, statistically, African 
populations are among the most vulnerable. But this doesn't explain why one 
sister should become a politician and the other a psychotic. Perhaps there was 
a fault-line of vulnerability in Haweya's childhood defiance that would 
eventually shatter her mind. This kind of guesswork only heightens the 
difficulty of the question. How, after all, do such predispositions of 
character emerge in the first place?

Behavioural geneticists, who study the biological basis of character, would 
begin where Ayaan begins, with the story of how her nomadic grandmother drummed 
into the sisters the lesson of who they were: "I am Ayaan ... I am Haweya," 
they were taught to recite, "the daughter of Hirsi, the son of Magan, the son 
of Isse ..." They learned to list their forefathers going back 800 years, to 
the dawn of the Darod clan.

Yet Haweya's madness seems to have come not from their father's side of the 
family but from their mother's - with three maternal cousins suffering from 
similar psychotic illnesses. And therein lies an enigma: in the Somali clan 
system, matrilineal inheritance is deemed worthless, and nobody recalls the 
names or characteristics of women. As her grandmother warned the girls, a woman 
alone is disposable, like a piece of sheep fat in the sun.

Ayaan believes she has inherited the strength of the women in her family, only 
putting it to a different use. Where her mother and grandmother enforced 
Islamic traditions, she has fought against them. Yet - who knows? - perhaps she 
also has something of her father's clan character: born to lead.

Haweya inherited other things. During an electrical storm in Nairobi in 1998, 
she ran out into the night in a psychotic fit, miscarried and died.

For five years afterwards, Ayaan lost the ability to laugh. The irrepressible 
giggling of her childhood would never return. "Something has gone for good," 
she says. "Part of me went with Haweya."
 