
One night in 1937, a teenage musician called Charlie Parker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/charlie-parker> joined a queue of players 
waiting to jam onstage at Kansas City's Reno Club. It was a special occasion. A 
star guest in the rhythm section was Jo Jones, drummer for Count Basie's 
Orchestra, one of the biggest swing bands in the US.

Charlie Parker thought his moment had come, 16 years old or not. He had been 
practising an improv method of his own, deploying keys rarely used in jazz 
tunes, and modulating between them to free up new ways of phrasing – and he'd 
bought a new Selmer saxophone. When his turn came, he blew a chorus over the 
chords of I Got Rhythm that Jones, to judge by the warming of his wave-like 
cymbal sound, seemed to like. Then Parker introduced a passing chord, 
improvised fluently in a new key, and sensed the audience's and the band's 
intrigued surprise.

But now he'd left the world he knew. A college-trained musician could have 
called out the next chord to him in an instant, but Parker was a high school 
dropout making it up for himself. While Jones's pulse surged on behind him, the 
teenager lost the tune, and then the beat. Jones stopped, and Parker froze, 
clutching his gleaming new saxophone. Jones contemptuously threw a cymbal at 
his feet, and the reverberations were followed by the sound of laughter and 
catcalls. Ross Russell, Charlie Parker's biographer, has the teenager leaving 
the club saying to himself, "I'll be back" and he kept his promise – not only 
returning to square things with doubters, but to show everybody with an open 
mind and open ears a new kind of 20th-century music-making.

Charlie Parker (nicknamed "Yardbird" or usually just "Bird" in the jazz world) 
was the JS Bach of jazz; an instinctive master of complex harmony with a 
dizzying melodic ingenuity to match, who became a messiah to the hipster and 
beat poetry generation of the late 1940s and early 50s. When he died – broke 
and broken down by self-neglect and dangerous addictions – at the age of only 
34, graffiti artists scrawled "Bird Lives!" on Harlem walls.

He was born in Kansas City in 1920 and raised by a devoted single mother, 
Addie. She gave her son his first sax when he was 13, and the following year 
Charlie was hanging out in the city's clubland listening to his saxophone hero 
Lester Young and others while Addie was at work as a night cleaner. He mostly 
skipped formal education, but schooled himself on the saxophone with Young as 
his model. He learned to play in every key because he didn't know jazz 
musicians only used a few – and with a little help from some older Kansas 
musicians, figured out how to shift between keys within solos. In 1939 (a 
couple of years after the Reno Club nightmare and already married, divorced, 
the father of a son, and struggling with a drugs and booze habit that had begun 
in his teens), Parker joined Jay McShann's band and stayed with them until 1942.

At Minton's Playhouse, a Harlem jamming joint, Parker met such like-minded 
young swing dissidents as drummer Kenny Clarke, former church pianist 
Thelonious Monk, Benny Goodman's star guitarist Charlie Christian and the 
harmonically advanced trumpeter John Birks "Dizzy" Gillespie. In the small 
hours at Minton's, bebop, or just bop, was forged.

To unprepared musicians and audiences, bop could sound at first as if soloists 
had arrived in the wrong places, forgotten to resolve phrases, used chords too 
stacked with extra notes to play on, and perversely accented traditionally weak 
beats instead of strong ones. Many established stars, including Louis 
Armstrong, hated it. But bop was eventually recognised as a natural progression 
from the jazz that had gone before. From 1944 on, partnered by Gillespie and, 
later, by a teenage Miles Davis, Parker created some of the most dynamic jazz 
in the music's history, with tunes such as Now's the Time, Ornithology, 
Billie's Bounce, Yardbird Suite and Ko-Ko often scribbled on scraps of paper on 
the way to sessions, or during warm-ups.

Some fans felt that bop shifted jazz away from dance music to highbrow art, 
but with rock'n'roll around the corner, that was inevitable – and what was 
often regarded as a cerebral and wilfully complex music back then sounds as 
natural as whistling now. Some played bop blues-drenched and impassioned like 
Parker; some played it quiet and cool, like pianist Lennie Tristano and 
saxophonists Lee Konitz and Warne Marsh. It could be dissected and juggled, as 
practised by Ornette Coleman, or it could turn up in the rock music of Frank 
Zappa or Steely Dan. Contemporary players, such as American saxophonist Joe 
Lovano or British pianist Django Bates, can revisit Parker's timeless themes in 
ways that cherish the tradition while being totally fresh. That defiant 
proclamation "Bird Lives!" is as true now as it was in 1955.
 