
At the height of the Burundian civil war, Maggy Barankitse remembers: "staring 
at all the children that were coming in - some mutilated, all orphaned - and 
thinking 'why are they bringing them to me?'"

Before the war began in Burundi in 1994, tensions between the ruling Tutsi and 
the majority Hutu had been escalating. Within months of the election of the 
country's first Hutu leader, Melchior Ndadaye, the president had been 
assassinated, leading to an explosion of Tutsi-Hutu violence, and triggering 
the Rwandan genocide.

"I am a Tutsi woman," says Barankitse simply. "But my ethnicity has never 
defined me. I believe we are all born equal. That was instilled in me as a 
child by my mother."

This belief, and the actions that rose out of it, have led Barankitse to win 
the first Guardian Achievements in International Development award. She won 
this award by public vote from an extremely strong shortlist agreed by a panel 
that included development experts and the editor of the Guardian, Alan 
Rusbridger.

In her early 20s, Barankitse adopted seven orphaned children - four Hutu and 
three Tutsi. "When the killing began in the 1990s," she says, "people were 
demanding to know who was Hutu and who was Tutsi. I said, 'you can't separate 
children.' But no one would protect us. So we went to the Catholic Bishop's 
dwelling, thinking we would be protected in God's house."

On 24 October 1993, a Tutsi mob came to the house. Barankitse was stripped 
naked, beaten and tied up. "There was a big crowd - including members of my own 
family - with weapons. They surrounded and set fire to the building. Then the 
slaughtering of Hutus began. I saw two of my closest friends beheaded, children 
with their eyes gouged out and other, terrible things."

The massacre started at nine in the morning and finished at seven at night. 
When it was over, 70 Hutu children had been murdered alongside countless 
adults. "I stayed with the bodies for an hour," says Barankitse . "I couldn't 
move or think. For a moment I lost my reason to live, but then I heard my 
daughter's voice calling me."

Barankitse took her own children and 25 others who had escaped the mob to the 
cemetery to try and find a safe place.

"I knew that if people saw the children, they would try and kill them. I 
thought, 'where can we go to be safe?' So we went to the home of a German man 
who was working for ActionAid, and that is where Maison Shalom begins."

An estimated 558,000 children lost at least one parent in the Burundian civil 
war; about 77,000 lost both. Up to 300,000 people are believed to have been 
killed.

"They kept bringing more and more orphaned children to me," says Barankitse. 
"They weren't just from the war in Burundi, but from the genocide in Rwanda. 
For a while, I was just stunned, wondering how I could support them 
financially. But then I realised this was a call to my heart - it would be my 
vocation."

What started as a home for the 25 orphaned children who survived the massacre, 
Maison Shalom - or House of Peace has since grown into a children's village, 
helping heal and support 30,000 young people and families.

Over time, the project has branched out in several ways - farms have been 
established to provide food for the children, training provided for 
ex-combatants in mechanics or computer literacy, and a creche.

"Maggy has been a key mover in bringing peace and a future to Ruyigi," says 
Jane Moyo from the NGO ActionAid, who nominated her for the Award. "The results 
have been miraculous."

"I was so surprised and honoured to learn I had won the Guardian award," says 
Barankitse. "It is a recognition that these children have become lights amid 
the darkness of war. It shows to people, politicians and all ethnic groups that 
it's possible, even after terrible horror, to love one another."
 