
The vast expanse of the harsh landscape is broken by a gathering of a few 
hundred people, standing and crouched down in an unruly circle, all eyes 
focused on the centre. Emotions are running high among the ashen women, with 
some having slumped and collapsed to the ground. The men, desperately trying to 
take control of the situation, wave their long sticks furiously and yell 
agitatedly into the circle. Bellowing goats, sheep and cattle recklessly try to 
break into the ring.

They are all desperate for water. Abumon throws her arms up in the air, breaks 
out of the circle and in resignation crashes to the ground. She looks fretfully 
into the horizon. "I don't care any more, I will die here." She lifts a weak 
arm to point at the mountains. 'They will come and take everything." She 
beckons her small, severely malnourished child towards her. Suddenly there is 
great clamour from within the circle. A small container is making its way up, 
passed from hand to hand. A fresh flurry of yelling and stick-brandishing 
follows from the men, until the yellow plastic container finally arrives. The 
black sludgy water is first fed to the children, who lap it up quickly and cry 
for more.

It has not rained adequately for four years in Turkana, northern Kenya. The 
district is 80,000 sq km and is populated by nearly 500,000 nomadic 
pastoralists. For hundreds of years, the Turkana people have been herdsmen, 
rearing cattle, sheep and goat. They are one of the most nomadic people in the 
world, at times moving every month looking for pasture for their livestock. 
Climate change and marginalisation by successive governments have seen 
resources deplete at an alarming rate across their traditional home.

Lorus, where the tribe has gathered to fetch water, is a natural underground 
spring close to the Sudan border. In desperation, they have dug and blasted 
their way to the eye of the spring to get to the water, which is several metres 
from the scorched surface. Sand, mud and faeces from livestock slither into the 
rocky well, turning the water into a dangerous, dark sludge. The threat of 
heavily armed, ruthless cattle-raiders from neighbouring countries constantly 
hangs in the air. "The Topoza from Sudan took away 60 of my cattle," Namuge 
gestures with his head at the mountains. "I now have four left and they are 
dying." He pours the black liquid into a trough for the cattle; one of them has 
gone down on its knees, refusing the water. "I am waiting for it to die." he 
says, adjusting a long knife fastened around his waist.

Eberhard Zeyhle, a German parasitologist, came to Kenya 28 years ago to 
investigate Hydatid disease, a tapeworm infestation passed on from livestock to 
humans. Since then, as part of Amref (African Medical Research Foundation), he 
has been involved in providing general healthcare and facilitating social 
development for this remote community.

"Turkana district has enough water resources to feed the entire population, it 
just needs to be scientifically harnessed," he says. He also thinks that large 
parts of the land are fertile. If irrigated, farming could become an additional 
and fall back source of income for the Turkana. He points into the depths of 
the blasted rock "We need to protect the eye of the spring. It needs to be 
sealed and the water led to an underground tank. This will ensure clean water 
without any contamination." Though the solution seems simple, he says it is 
hard to do it now because the Turkana are terrified of the water depleting if 
the eye of the spring is sealed.

Eberhard thinks that donors, NGOs and the government can do their part, but 
the Turkana have to co-operate and the initiative has to come from within. This 
opinion is shared by Alex Lama, coordinator at Akosi (which translated from the 
Turkana language means "ours") an organisation involved in various development 
projects.

"The CDF [community development fund] allocated to the district, by the 
government is a drop in the ocean," says Lama.

Ekono is a 60-year-old man of very few words. He sports a grey cap with a 
feather in it and a large ivory coloured finger ring that he polishes 
constantly. Ekono is an Emeron, a revered spiritual leader for the whole of the 
Turkana district.

Sitting at one of Amref's container clinics, a robust health centre made from 
a shipping container located along the Turkana's migratory routes, he says 
slowly: "I will mobilise my people to part with a cow each, we can raise half 
the money needed for a borehole." He looks around the people gathered. "My 
people are dying, I only ask the government and donors to contribute the other 
half."

Elimnon Peunon, a Turkana from a neighbouring village who is squatting beside 
Ekono, stares intensely at the ground. "I had nine children," he says. "The 
drought killed two of my youngest children and two more were gunned down by the 
Topoza. We have tried to contact the government many times through our 
councillors. Our so-called MP has not once come here."

Raising his voice and standing up, he continues: "We want the government to 
give us protection and water." He sweeps his hand across the never-ending 
landscape and lowering his voice as if to tell a secret. "This land is fertile, 
the water is there, all it needs is irrigation; we are willing to diversify."

John Munyes is the elected MP for the district and a cabinet minister in the 
Kenyan government. Over the years he has been minister for various departments 
including water. "The reason the Turkana are being marginalised is political," 
he says. "The executives in the government see Turkana as a low-potential area. 
They are seen as not contributing to the GDP." He says because of bureaucracy 
the government of Kenya has not raised the threat level high enough to provide 
security along the border to tackle raids from Sudan and Uganda. "We need to 
improve our water sources to target dry-season grazing. We can plan water pans 
and boreholes along migratory routes and allow a system where it is used only 
during the dry season."

There has been pressure from the state for the Turkana to lead a more 
sedentary life, making it easier for services to be provided. Experts believe 
this will only devastate the climate even more. As pastures start dwindling, 
the Turkana target trees and large shrubs, cutting them down unscrupulously and 
burning them to produce charcoal. Sarah Mathew, a doctoral research student 
from the University of California, Los Angeles, says that there is general 
misconception that the nomadism of the Turkana is the problem, whereas nomadism 
is actually the solution to it.

Namuge has taken a break from retrieving water from the spring. He looks 
plainly at his collapsed cow. "We are nomadic; give us water during the dry 
season and then we will move on," he says. With collected energy the cow jerks 
its head, lets out a moan and dies. Namuge has come prepared. The withered 
animal is dragged away from the spring and with the help of his four sons, 
butchered into smaller pieces, to be carried back to the village. "At least my 
family can eat for a few days; I did not have the heart to slaughter it while 
it was alive."
 