
"Killing Spoke," says Justin Moorhouse to his drive-time posse on Key 103 as 
he reads out a listener's pun-based attempt to combine music and cycling. There 
is silence from Moorhouse's young compadres, who seconds ago had been laughing 
their toes off at an offering of You Can Ring My Bell – and that wasn't even a 
pun.

"Killing Joke," explains the DJ and comedian most fondly remembered for the 
Phoenix Nights episode he spent with his face permanently made up as a tiger. 
"They were a band from the 80s, although to be fair I seriously doubt anyone 
who knows who Killing Joke are is listening to Key 103."

Well, I own a copy of Love Like Blood, Killing Joke's excellent 1985 single. 
And not only that, but thanks to the wonders of the internet, last week I was 
listening to Manchester's leading commercial station from "that London". Next 
up, Moorhouse guessed the age of a listener just by listening to her voice – 
the fact that she had a sore throat because she'd drunk too many vodkas the 
previous evening was but a minor obstacle as he correctly plumped for 39.

It is rather odd listening to a local radio station when you are hundreds of 
miles away, unaffected by the travel and weather, unable to act on the special 
bargain deal of a facial for just £39 in King Street. But distance aside, Key 
103 has much to enjoy, not least marvellous breakfast double act Mike Toolan 
and Chelsea Norris. Mike & Chelsea in the Morning's dynamic is familiar to many 
other breakfast show double acts but they make the business of being funny and 
upbeat at 7.30am on a Wednesday seem natural and easy.

Despite the insults they hurl at each other – how many women would let 
somebody get away with calling them piggy featured? – the pair appear to 
genuinely enjoy each others company. Dominating much of their chat last week 
was Chelsea's forthcoming wedding (to afternoon DJ Matt Spokes) - an event that 
their colleague Matt Haslam chose to commemorate with an innuendo laden ballad 
about his own adulterous evening with Chelsea at a local Travelodge where "I 
was David Furnish you were Elton John". Move over Mitch Benn.

Sadly, Chelsea is now off for a whole month but I'll listen again – how can 
you not respect a woman who, rather than travel to London to attend the 
CommercialRadio <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> Awards, went to see 
Neil Diamond with her mates. "We never win anyway," she reasoned before 
bursting into a couple of verses of Cracklin' Rosie.

Excellent Sunday evening pop-kid Chris Younie aside, it's obvious that nobody 
at Key 103 is particularly bothered by the music they play. Between breakfast 
and drive time, Key 103 goes a little flat, filling its "no repeat guarantee" 
hours with two-year-old pop alongside the occasional new release. After playing 
Coldplay's latest, mid-morning man Darren Proctor remarked excitedly "where 
else can you get songs like this? Nowhere!". Or indeed "everywhere!"

Over on the more sedate BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Radio 
Manchester the first thing I noticed was that the same voiceover artist – Craig 
Kelly of Queer as Folk and Coronation Street – does both stations idents, which 
more or less makes him The Voice of Manchester.

BBC Radio Manchester is a lot more "local" than Key 103, but the music seems 
equally unimportant and, occasional Beverley Knight tune aside, identical to 
Radio 2's playlist circa 1985. None of this matters come early afternoon, 
however, when Broom Cupboard evacuee Andy Crane is on air. Crane is excellent; 
like a less annoying Jeremy Vine he straddles the serious and the friendly with 
ease. Although he does let some of his callers get away with murder – after the 
government awarded the Thameslink project to German conglomerate Siemens rather 
than a company based in Derbyshire one elderly gentleman called in to say that 
"Germany had basically achieved what Hitler set out to do". Crane talked him 
down calmly then stuck on I Won't Let The Sun Go Down On Me by Nik Kershaw. It 
was all very sweet.

Also enjoyable – if only it didn't share scheduling with Mike and Chelsea – 
was Beswick at Breakfast, presented by the brilliantly deadpan veteran DJ Allan 
Beswick who I couldn't stop thinking of as Mark E Smith's friendlier older 
brother. "Put your hands up if you know what's going on at Stockport County?" 
he asked on Monday. "It's a football club," he clarified, "It's been taken over 
– some bloke walking past with a fiver."

You don't get levels of sarcasm like that down south. So if you listen to 
local radio in Manchester what do you think of it – and what decent shows did I 
miss?
 