
You don't have to be mad to listen to Kerrang! Radio  
<http://www.kerrangradio.co.uk/>but you do have to be a little mad to work 
there. Kerrang! DJs fall into two categories – sensibly named and a little bit 
crazy (or should that be Krayzee) or crazily named and a little bit, well, 
sensible. Falling into the latter category is the legendary Johnny Doom, ruler 
of the station's post-midnight show The Late Licence, who in sharp contrast to 
the extreme metal he favours (sample lyric: "I burned out my eyes/ I cut off my 
tongue) is a mild mannered, softly spoken Brummie.

Doom has been on Kerrang! since it started in 2003 – back when its offices 
were inside Birmingham City's St Andrew's stadium and Karren Brady was on the 
board. Originally a brand extension of the magazine of the same name, Kerrang! 
Radio became a force in its own right whenit won an FM licence to broadcast 
across the West Midlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2003/oct/03/arts.radio>. Today, it has a 
simultaneous existence as a local radio station and a national broadcaster 
across DAB and digital TV. The occasional traffic report, commercial or trail 
for a club night in Dudley aside, you would barely know it, though.

Kerrang!'s Birmingham base makes sense considering the region's role in the 
genesis of heavy metal – not that you hear a great deal of metal on Kerrang!, 
at least not during the daytime. Despite a couple of anti-pop idents mocking 
Cher Lloyd (a snatch of Swagger Jagger followed by someone saying No) their 
daylight offering is as mainstream as rock gets. You are never 20 minutes away 
from hearing either Foo Fighters or My Chemical Romance or, terrifyingly, 
Nickelback; but you'll also hear The Pigeon Detectives, The Wombats and Arctic 
Monkeys, whose latest single, The Hellcat Spangled Shalalala, caused DJ Henry 
Evans to have a little outburst last Thursday afternoon about silly song titles.

"Everyone should name their songs after men," he suggested. "Dave, John or 
Phillip."

As I listened, I became increasingly concerned – as I did throughout my week 
listening to Kerrang! – for Evans's mental wellbeing. Later, discussing 
Sonisphere Festival, he claimed that a pint of lager cost £10 – a considerable 
distance from the real price of £4. Still, Evans's ramblings were preferable to 
Danielle Perry – who on World Scout Day said the words "big up to all scouts 
everywhere" without any trace of irony – and drivetime's Big Brother 
winner-turned-DJ, Kate Lawler, whose time-filling waffle included the 
information on Monday that she'd faced her fear and been on Apocalypse at Alton 
Towers at the weekend: "I was OK on the way up but I got really scared at the 
top." Thrilling.

The breakfast show's banter is of a more enjoyable variety – even if the level 
of the gags barely gets beyond the likes of "I don't think I've ever panicked 
at a disco" (after they've played Panic! at the Disco). If Johnny Doom is the 
Kerrang! operation's Neil from The Young Ones then Simon James and Hill (yup, 
just Hill) are the station's Rick and Vyvyan. Although, while discussing how 
friendly you should get with shopkeepers on Monday, the pair's off-air life 
bore a closer resemblance to I'm Alan Partridge when Hill revealed that he'd 
become such a good customer at his local Texaco garage that they'd invited him 
to the staff Christmas party.

"I didn't go, though," he deadpanned. "I didn't fancy talking about petrol all 
night."

There might be "the occasional conversation about charcoal briquettes," 
suggested Jones. "Or the price of Fridge Raiders."

On Sunday night, The Alex Baker Show was a riot. Baker started his show with a 
dance track that sounded as if it was being sung by a hamster before revealing 
that he was a big fan of Jessie J – a position he later recovered from by 
saying that after reading her tweets about Amy Winehouse he'd decided she was a 
"sanctimonious knob". Baker's rants about gym etiquette were equally unbridled, 
detailing the perils of being in confined spaces with naked men moisturising 
their testicles when you're trying to get into your locker. "I'm not body 
confident," revealed Baker. "But if I was I wouldn't chase people around with 
my cock."

Another feature of Baker's show is a contest for one lucky listener to win a 
date with his co-host Hayley. Yes, an actual date. It's OK, though – serial 
killers aren't allowed to apply, although so far the one person who has entered 
is called BloodSharinganMaster. Is this kind of thing actually allowed? Either 
way, like much of Kerrang!Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 
it's a little disturbing.

What do you think? Ever listened to Kerrang! now or in the past? What other 
rock stations would you recommend?
 