
Because my dentist plays Classic FM in her surgery, I will forever associate 
it with a rather painful series of root canal treatments. But I too have 
employed it for its soothing properties – tuning in as a last ditch attempt to 
calm frayed nerves on long family car journeys. It never works but due to 
Classic FM's land-grab of the dialbetween 100 and 102MHz 
<http://www.classicfm.co.uk/on-air/ways-of-listening/> its often the only 
station my temperamental car radio can pick up. Not that we ever stay listening 
for long – I think eight minutes is our record before the quest to find a bit 
of Rihanna or Lady Gaga starts up again.

This week I endeavoured to listen to quite a bit more. It wasn't always easy. 
I have always been a snob about pop, but my ignorance about classical music 
means this is the best I can do when describing what I like and dislike: if it 
sounds as if it could have been in a Hitchcock movie I'll like it; if it sounds 
as if it'd be played during some show-jumping highlights I probably won't. 
Sadly Classic FM seems rather full of the latter.

But then this is the point. Whereas Radio 3 can be viewed as somewhat 
intimidating and professorial, Classic FM is approachable and demystifying. 
During the daytime, when smooth but slightly simpering presenters Mark Forrest, 
John Suchet and Jamie Crick reign supreme, fielding listener requests, Handel 
and Mozart rule the schedule much as Adele and The Wanted do onRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 1.

The days float by and if it wasn't for the constant reminders that I was 
listening to Classic FM, "now with more music", followed by commercials for 
Classic FM compilations, Classic FM concerts and Classic FM's dating services, 
then I would have disappeared into a permanent orchestral trance. It is these 
interruptions, alongside such furniture as "The weather bought to you by 
Benecol" that I'd imagine many find rather vulgar. I was thankful for the 
punctuation.

Classic FM in the evening is much better, when John Brunning's enthusiasm and 
knowledge lift the station beyond the realms of pleasant background music. The 
big star names pad out the weekend schedule where Changing Rooms fop Laurence 
Llewelyn-Bowen and Myleene Klass bookend the schedules. Klass's mission is to 
"keep things relaxed", an objective she achieves with some panache. There was 
no rambling or irrelevant chatter during her late Sunday show, just respectful 
announcing of what she'd just played and was about to play, rather like I very 
vaguely remember them doing on pop radio once – although she did reveal that 
she had "giant man hands".

The A to Z of Classic FM Music with Alex James on Sunday afternoon delivered a 
little more personality with the Blur bassist turned Barbour-wearing cheese 
lord waxing lyrical through "classical alphabetti spaghetti". This week it was 
the letter B. I was expecting James to draw some analogies between classical 
music and pop but he completely neglected to ponder if the bandModest Mouse 
<http://www.modestmousemusic.com/> and composer Modest Mussorgsky 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modest_Mussorgsky> were related . Instead James 
furnished us with the information that to him brass bands were the "musical 
equivalent of freshly baked bread, but mixed with heavenly clouds and fresh 
roast coffee, not to mention rolling verdant valleys". I wonder what the 
roadies down The Good Mixer would have to say about that?

Sadly, as well as the dentists, Classic FM did remind me of something else I'd 
rather forget existed -David Mellor 
<http://www.classicfm.co.uk/on-air/presenters/david-mellor/>. His Saturday 
teatime rundown of new CDs found him goshing and gollying about the latest 
Naxos reissue and bemoaning soprano Kate Royal, whose "diction sometimes leaves 
a bit to be desired".

Ever listened to Classic FM? What do you make of it? And what classical music 
radio shows elsewhere should we be listening to?
 