
For the past week I have been listening to nothing but Absolute Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/absolute-radio>. Well, I did slip once. I 
had a long drive to Stoke-on-Trent on Saturday and staying tuned to Absolute 
beyond Northampton is a challenge that requires dangerous retuning, as 
depending where you are in the country the station broadcasts on a series of 
obscure medium wave frequencies. Yes, medium wave. This may be why their 
afternoon show is called Home Time rather than Drive Time. Listening to 
something on medium wave feels as counter-intuitive as wearing jeans to the gym 
or making coffee with a teapot. But there it is.

Absolute though is trying everything it can to be heard by somebody. There's 
iPhone apps and BlackBerry apps, you can listen on your PlayStation and they're 
one of the few UK stations who have realised that there's a very handy radio 
section in iTunes. You can also find them on digital radio of course, where 
they've spawned numerous offspring in the form of Absolute 80s, Absolute 90s, 
Absolute 00s and Absolute Classic Rock. On Frank Skinner's Sunday morning show 
he revealed that there were two further stations planned – Absolute Avant Garde 
"music isn't just for fools" and Absolute Absolution "for estranged roman 
catholics, because sorry seems to be the hardest word".

Like a pizza company that promises to deliver your meal in 30 minutes much of 
Absolute's daytime schedule is branded under the banner of something they call 
"the no repeat guarantee" although there's no mention of what you get if you do 
spot them repeating themselves. Their trails and jingles – all performed by 
actor and bon viveur Matt Berry in his finest Des Lynam tones – are repeated 
rather a lot though. Currently they're plugging "faces for radio" tying 
together their three star presenters – Christian O'Connell, Dave Gorman and the 
aforementioned Skinner – as unpleasant looking fellas who make fairly decent 
radio.

Actually all three are pretty great, O'Connell is excellent when riffing with 
an idea – last week bullying his producer into a spontaneous mission to the 
Monster Munch packing plant – while Gorman and Skinner, who host Saturday and 
Sunday morning shows respectively use their time on air to ramble 
entertainingly. Thankfully, unlike your standard DJs, the contents of Gorman 
and Skinner's minds are very funny. Frank revealed that he had been the recent 
victim of a "drive-by egging" an event he wondered could be connected to his 
over exposure as the face of Walkers Comic Relief crisps. "I'm fed up with the 
whole crisp thing," he grizzled before recalling that last week he'd been at a 
football match where they handed out 8,000 free packets. After the game the 
streets were littered with empty packets with "my stupid face with my seven 
quid haircut just blowing around West Bromwich". Gorman meanwhile was fielding 
listener suggestions for people's names for their TV remotes of which "the 
telly commander" was the best. As has become gang show tradition (Chris 
Addison's 5 Live show is the worst offender), Gorman had several people in the 
studio laughing not very convincingly along to his jokes, which was a bit 
irritating. One of them, Danielle Ward, would have been brilliantly funny if 
she didn't sound as if she was reading her jokes from a notebook (lots of 
comedians on the radio fail to realise the difference between reading and 
speaking).

When Absolute is home to comedy people it's great fun – although Ian Lee's 
late night show does give a frightening glimpse of what the world would be like 
if it was entirely populated by whacky students (one feature this week included 
a syncronised swimmer and a deep sea diver conversing to each other via dolphin 
noises – yes it's that krazy). When it does football it's a bit Lidl FM with 
its combination of the worst Premier League game of the day and Ian Wright 
shouting about ARSE-nal. But when it's just about the music it's like an 
endless K-tel Father's Day compilation album. The lack of interference by their 
non big-name DJs is admirable – one day I heard the full 10-minute version of 
Layla complete with lengthy fade out, you'd never get that on a BBC station.

After 48 hours my wife cracked, complaining that listening to Absolute had 
made her feel as if she was a 45-year-old man. A bit cruel, I thought, until I 
realised I was a 45-year-old man and therefore capable of withstanding far 
higher proportions of Paul Weller and Kings of Leon than any other demographic. 
You can go for hours on Absolute without hearing a female singer, let alone 
presenter, and when you do chances are it'll be Sheryl Crow – a female artist 
who has somehow snuck under their bloke detector – or a Weight Watchers advert.

Thankfully Absolute is available in nice podcast-sized chunks with all the Dad 
Rock and ads taken out. I'd recommend full exposure to Skinner and Gorman and 
bite-size chunks of the rest when you fancy something somewhere betweenRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 2 and 6 Music. It's absolutely sort 
of OK.
 