
With it's mellow-toned presenters, husky-voiced newsreaders and easy-listening 
playlist, daytime Radio 2 remains the sound of middle-aged Britain. As a child 
I was forced to listen to Terry Wogan at breakfast and endless hours of Acker 
Bilk and The Carpenters on long car journeys. I hated it. But what do you do 
when you find yourself too old for Radio 1 and too young for Radio 4? Accept 
your fate or resist at all costs? After spending 30 years avoiding it, I now 
find myself magnetically drawn toRadio 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-2>.

I'd put in some groundwork by surviving 90 minutes of Vanessa Feltz's morning 
show 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/jan/17/vanessa-feltz-radio-2>
 without vomiting in the line of duty. But what would a whole week listening to 
Radio 2 teach me? First: that Chris Evans is a hell of a lot less annoying than 
he was in the 90s when he once brought the whole zoo radio concept to its knees 
by talking about his radiators for three hours and playing just five records.

Evans was a brat, but now he's all grown up and mildly ashamed by his past and 
is actually a brilliant listen. His enthusiasm might be unquenchable and he's 
disgustingly upbeat for someone who has to get up at 4.30 every day but it's 
hard not to be jollied by him even if you're a cynical morning grump. Although 
he does then tend to ruin it all by saying something stupid like "and here's 
the new single by Bob Geldof" – a sequence of words that nobody deserves to 
hear, particularly not at 7.46am.

The problem with daytime Radio 2 is that if you are any kind of music snob – 
of the classic rock, indie, soul or even big-band variety – you will hear music 
that will repulse you. Playing something as brilliant as Shine on You Crazy 
Diamond right before Down Under by Men at Work can only lead you to believe 
that Radio 2 is a station controlled by people who don't understand music and 
listened to by people who aren't particularly bothered what they hear as long 
as it's not Rihanna.

Music aside, what remains of the daytime schedule is very enjoyable indeed – 
if you can handle being trapped in a 1985Gambols cartoon 
<http://www.stripcartoons.com/gambols.html> vortex. Jovial Ken Bruce with his 
incredibly rich Scottish baritone has a lovely chuckle as he reads out the best 
bits of the Daily Express. As Bruce himself said one morning last week, he'd 
make an excellent voiceover man for film trailers.

Jeremy Vine is an odd mix of niggly and charming; listening to him is like 
being prodded by a pointy stick after the bumbling charm of Bruce. But his show 
does at least give a sense that there are things happening beyond the 
parameters of listeners' text messages about their lunch – last week that 
politicians were screwing up and Egypt was burning. The most pressing concern 
on Steve Wright's afternoon show was falling sales of potpourri.

With his factoids, pre-recorded showbiz interviews and chats with his studio 
friends, Wright seems to be doing the same show as he did on Radio 1 in the old 
century. Admittedly he now sounds more natural and less chippy, but the 
downside is that he's more inclined to do one of his heroically abysmal 
impressions.

After Wright, Simon Mayo Drivetime is only ever going to be a relief – but the 
two hours positively whizz by. Like all his Radio 2 colleagues, Mayo sounds at 
home on the station. But no matter how much I'm amused by the jokes with 
listeners and mild flirting with Sally Traffic or newsreaders, Radio 2 is never 
going to be home for me. It may be more attuned to the modern world these days, 
play tracks from the actual charts (well, play Adele from the actual charts) 
and use the word "download", but Radio 2 still feels like the place DJs and 
listeners go to retire and put their feet up.

There are a couple of safe havens for music snobs. Tony Blackburn's Pick Of 
The Pops finds the former King of the Jungle filleting all the rubbish from a 
vintage chart and playing the good stuff – Herman's Hermits aside, February 
1969 appears to have been a remarkable month. And, of course, Mark Radcliffe's 
evening show (he was without Stuart Maconie when I tuned in) is as brilliant as 
the man himself. Last week, in honour of Britain's Got Talent entrants Take 
Fat, he corralled listeners into contributing to his list of fictional 
overweight tribute bands: Bun Loving Criminal got my vote. Radcliffe and 
Maconie are, however,shortly off to 6 Music 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2011/feb/01/mark-radcliffe-stuart-maconie-radio-2-6-music>
. Their replacement will be Jo Whiley.

So what do you think? Have I've let my snobbery and phobia of saxophone solos 
blur my judgement? Or is Radio 2 in 2011 worse than I thought? Your thoughts, 
please.
 