
On Saturday afternoon all seemed right with the world on BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> London 94.9 – Gary Crowley was 
compiling his ultimate summer mixtape (the Style Council figuring prominently), 
Phil Parry was bringing us coverage of Crystal Palace's defeat at Peterborough 
United and married presenters Sunny and Shay celebrated their wedding 
anniversary on air. Lovely.

By Sunday morning the world, and 94.9, was a different place entirely. Unlike 
Boris, who took two days to return from his holiday, the station was able to 
bring back the big guns immediately with Eddie Nestor and Jeni Barnett drafted 
in to replace Tony Blackburn. It was here the human toll of the Tottenham riot 
first hit home with local residents phoning in detailing the destruction to 
their neighbourhood.

"I'm looking at my neighbour's flat and there is nothing left," Victoria from 
Lansdowne Road told Barnett, her voice cracking, "there's nothing left."

Her account of a horrific night, along with her dignity and defiance ("I will 
not leave, no, no way") made for compelling radio and a stark contrast to some 
of the justification of the events that followed.

As the riots spread across the capital on Monday, Nestor's Drivetime show 
featured a man who'd phoned in to report a disturbance in Lewisham and then 
Woolwich as he cycled home. It was extraordinary; bizarre end of days stuff. 
Switching between TV and Twitter to keep up, it was clear that BBC London 94.9 
had the tightest hold on the emerging picture.

The next day Robert Elms dispensed with his usual mix of London trivia, 
football nostalgia and mellow tunes and dedicated his show to "making sense of 
what seems like a senseless eruption". As a prelude he began with a lengthy 
monologue that culminated in a rallying cry for the city – "we will come back 
from this" – and an extremely well chosen John Martyn track whose opening line 
"I don't want to know about evil" set the tone for a thoughtful debate. 
Fascinating as it was though, as the extra police were drafted in and calm 
descended (on London at least), some relief was needed from the barrage of 
opinion. Instead, Danny Baker's show was presumably deemed too enjoyable, and 
Nestor saw his airtime extended so that he could bring us every conceivable 
angle on looting and disenfranchised youth, alongside a niggly interview with 
Nick Clegg who he instantly rubbed the wrong way by asking him to give the 
government response a mark out of 10. "This isn't a beauty contest," Clegg 
snapped.

Normal service and the regular schedule resumed on Wednesday. It felt like the 
end of the blitz, not that it prevented breakfast bulldog Paul Ross from 
altering his gruff tone – Jonathan Ross's brother is a fearless broadcaster but 
even when he's being flippant it's all a little confrontational, which is very 
possibly why he is accompanied by fluffy Gaby Roslin who occasionally bubbles 
about penguins or telly inbetween his shouty hectoring.

As the day progresses 94.9 gets better and better before hell descends once 
more at night (Steve Bunce high-pitched yelps about Cesc Fábregas and early 
morning crank calls).

Barnett (an able sub for Vanessa Feltz in the 9-12 slot) has a rare quality 
among phone-in hosts in that she actually listens to people and retains 
calmness even in the company of unhinged lunatics such as one charming caller 
from Harrow on Wednesday who labelled the youth of Britain "little scrotes".

Elms has been on this constantly rebranded station since its often remarked 
upon glory days of the late 90s when it was known as GLR. Despite the nostalgia 
for that era the station is as vibrant as ever and the prime reason for that is 
Elms's music taste and fascination with the city he lives in and the wonderful 
mischief of Baker. He is not to everyone's taste, but then neither is 
champagne, but to these ears Baker's two hours every afternoon are as good as 
radio gets (I urge you to dig around iplayer if you live beyond the M25). On 
Wednesday and Thursday he was on crackling form, sticking a pin in the 
hyperbole surrounding the riots by beginning his show with a Stephen Colbert 
audio extract about giant insects munching mini-vans in a post-apocalyptic 
world where Christmas no longer exists and doing his bit to "heal London" with 
something he swore he'd never do.

"People have been out there cleaning up the city with brooms and that's 
magnificent," he piped, "but I've played a Queen record. What will you do?"

Later, when his partner in radio crime, Baylen, questioned his assertion that 
couples who stayed together the longest were the ones with the same sized faces 
he rankled "give me a break, Baylen, London's in flames".

So do you listen to BBC London 94.9? What do you think of it and what did you 
make of their state of emergency coverage? If you listened to other stations 
how did they deal with the debate?
 