
Being a middle-aged indie fan I am not Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 1Xtra's target audience, but the 
first voice I heard was a familiar one – Sarah Cox. Poor Sarah, once breakfast 
show queen now relegated to emergency DJ: last Monday she hosted three hours of 
waffle launching a two-day festival 1Xtra is hosting in Hackney in 2012. The 
programme, broadcast live from inside the Olympic park, was supposed to be 
co-hosted by regular mid-morning smooth talker Trevor Nelson but because he'd 
been delayed in traffic Cox had to fill for almost the entire show – a task, 
considering that she hasn't stopped talking since 1996, she did with aplomb. 
Among the many facts we discovered about Hackney was that Lord Alan Sugar was 
born here – a really little-known fact that – and that "Barbara Windsor grew 
her boobs right where the Velodrome is today". I wonder if there's a plaque.

Later in the drivetime slot, as he often seems to be, Tim Westwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/tim-westwood> seemed similarly preoccupied 
with the female anatomy. Asking his listeners about their exams he was excited 
by a call from a young woman who, we were told, had just taken her PE exam. It 
turned out to be just a PE lesson but Westwood's interest was piqued.

"Was it an all-girl rounders game?" he asked.

The caller told him that it was, which led to the DJ making some peculiar 
purring noises before informing us that he'd purchased some tickets for the 
women's beach volleyball at the Olympics.

"That's what I'm talking about," he leered.

I knew Westwood was a strange character – a 53-year-old vicar's son from East 
Anglia who talks as if he was born and raised in the Brooklyn projects couldn't 
really be anything else – but I wasn't fully prepared for this side of his 
character. Often he seems like some time-warped 1970s comedian who's forever 
being given set ups for sexist punchlines but has no idea how to deliver them. 
A text from a law student found him repeating the words "penal law" a few times.

I warmed to Westwood though and although his exchanges with the public seem 
awkward at worst and corny at best, he's brilliant at interviewing rappers. 
Hip-hop is all about inhabiting a character and Westwood's hyped ego pitches 
him at their level.

Westwood wasn't the only sexually obsessed 1Xtra DJ. Breakfast bon viveur Twin 
B seemed constantly excited that people could be listening to him while they 
were having a shower. "I'm sitting here talking into this foamy thing and 
you're listening to me, maybe you're in the shower and we can connect," he told 
us at 7am on Wednesday. Er, thanks but no thanks.

Despite being just slightly creepy it's impossible not to be charmed by Twin 
B's lyrical talking style – the man deserves a much bigger audience if only to 
impress us with his many invented phrases such as "lipsing you down", which was 
his way of describing a lady being snogged over-enthusiastically in public.

During the daytime when Gemma Cairney whiles away our time with cheeky banter, 
R&B's dominance of mainstream culture means there isn't much difference 
musically between 1Xtra's playlist and any other pop station. But it's a 
different story at night time when garage, dancehall, hip-hop and drum and bass 
all have dedicated airtime. Although slightly alarming, I loved Robbo Ranx's 
dancehall show. With his fairground-announcer shouting style – everything in 
capitals and exclamations – and constant peppering of every single track with a 
barrage of dynamite explosions and car horns it was brilliantly psychotic and 
as close as radio listening experience gets to being constantly hit in the face.

My favourite DJ occupied an even more extreme end of the shouty spectrum – the 
brilliantly monikered Charlie Sloth, who can be heard on Saturday mornings. 
Charlie, who casts himself as "the best-looking fat man on the planet" told us: 
"Its so important to stay positive and I'm the guy that can feed you up with 
that positive goodness, know what I mean?"

I didn't but he did. Among Sloth's guests was his own son whose Champions 
League prediction that Lionel Messi "can twist Rooney up, trust me", proved 
accurate. But it wasn't the gags, it was Sloth's energy (oh, the irony) that 
made the show such a blast.

Unless you hate the music, it's hard not to feel lifted by the spirit, madness 
and occasional hilarious corniness of 1Xtra. But what do you think?
 