
Capital FM is currently running a contest encouraging listeners to tune in at 
work and win £1,000 for their workplace. How I pity anyone who works somewhere 
where this listening torture is forced upon them.

It is not the commercials that are so bad, or the inane banter of the DJs, or 
even the constant trails for the aforementioned workplace competition, it's not 
even the music itself – it is the relentless repetition of the same 10 songs 
over and over and over again. Listen for an hour and you will get a snapshot of 
the nation's favourite pop music; you won't hear a guitar but you will hear 
plenty of Auto-Tune. Fine. Listen for longer and you will hear that same 
snapshot again and again and again.

Capital's tight playlist policy would be fine if it was just a jukebox station 
you tuned into for a quick pop fix, but the nine stations that now comprise 
this national network used to be individual local radio stations. Now they are 
just part of some "McRadio" franchise similar to the otherGlobal Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/globalradio> (Capital's owner which now 
controls vast swathes of the FM dial) multiple locals operation, Heart.

If you live somewhere where Capital has taken over, I'd like to hear if you 
think it's an improvement.

Local identity hasn't been completely abandoned. Although all nine stations 
share a simultaneously controlled music soundtrack, the news, ads and traffic 
reports are tailored to each area. Then again, when I chanced upon a travel 
bulletin from the Derbyshire version of Capital it said there were "problems in 
all the usual areas" which would have worked equally well for anywhere.

The other clever thing Global has done is to make each station's breakfast 
show individual – a smart move, particularly when theLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> flagship station features Johnny 
Vaughan whose wideboy demeanour confirms every stereotype about flashy 
southerners held by people north of Watford Gap.

Thanks to the excellent Radioplayer website <http://www.radioplayer.co.uk/> 
it's easy to dip in and out of the various Capital breakfast shows. Everyone 
outside London seemed a lot calmer but they all relied on the newspapers to 
feed them banter.

One morning last week Vaughan read out a story from the newspaper about a city 
worker who'd emailed his friend asking if he wouldn't mind if he "had a go at 
his ex" but had accidentally cc'd the aforementioned "ex". Vaughan and his 
co-host Lisa Snowdon seized on the story as a chance to discuss their favourite 
topic – the battle of the sexes (yawn). "You girls do it too," piped Vaughan 
controversially. "No, we don't, come on, back me up girls," volleyed Lisa.

The next day the same story had made it to the breakfast crew in Yorkshire but 
rather than discuss the sexual politics of the email, they jumped on the fact 
that the "city" in the story must be London. "Other cities are available," 
piped one of the team comically. "Other cities that don't smell," added a 
superfluous member of the gang.

Regionalism aside, I found myself coming back to the Yorkshire version of 
Capital FM. If Capital is the McDonald's of British radio then Hirsty, Danny 
and Jo Jo were the Grand Royale With Cheese – the same but different. 
Different, as in actually pretty funny.

They were certainly more entertaining than Vaughan and his straight man – 
sorry, "girl" – Lisa Snowdon. Throughout the day when a pair of DJ drones 
called Roberto and Bassman take over you are never more than 20 minutes away 
from hearing Rihanna. With Vaughan and Snowdon the same rule applies to "funny" 
accents or some similarly 70s flavoured sexual innuendo. When a dog expert was 
interviewed about methods to stop dogs chewing furniture and suggested people 
purchase a "smoky bone", this was all the ammunition Vaughan needed to see him 
through the next 20 minutes. "You like a smoky bone, don't you Lisa?" he 
quipped. Last week, news that Wills and Kate would be honeymooning in Corfu 
meant 30 minutes of Stavros impressions and tales of the in-laws' "gaff" on the 
island.

For Londoners who grew up in the 70s, 80s and 90s Capital was more than a 
local radio station, it was the cool countercultural alternative to the stuffy 
BBC – even the adverts, like the one for "the big red building in Petticoat 
Lane", became iconic. Today the network it has spawned is as countercultural as 
a cheese sandwich and just as unimaginative.

Despite its formulaic and dull approach to pop music its commercial muscle is 
such that Lady Gaga has changed the opening line of her single Born This Way 
for them from "It doesn't matter if you love him or capital H-I-M" to "It 
doesn't matter if you love him or Capital FM". It's probably assured her a few 
thousand more plays but I can't help but think less of her because of it.

As for Capital FM. I won't be back. Unless I move to Yorkshire.

So, have you ever listened to Capital? What do you think? And have you ever 
been to the "big red building in Petticoat Lane"?
 