
It requires persistence to visit Al Evans. After you have surrendered your 
passport, declared any explosives and locked your mobile you must wait for the 
next openings of two sets of electronic doors. Then it's a quarter of a mile of 
concrete corridors, some inside between locked steel gates and some across the 
grounds, caged in metal. "I've overdosed on Night Nurse," says the drugs 
counsellor when I reach her, "so I'm sorry if I'm a bit out of it!"

If the woman I meet is out of it I'm alarmed at the thought of the force she 
must be when she's in it. No quantity of barred windows or locked gates could 
thwart Evan's determined energy. Her ambition is to penetrate every jail in 
Britain within 10 years and coaxing inmates out of substance addictions in a 
bid to slash the national reoffending rate. "I like a fight," she says.

Evans, 49, is an area manager for The Rehabilitation For Addicted Prisoners 
Trust (RAPt), a charity founded 21 years ago. Then there were no drug 
rehabilitation programmes in UK prisons; now RAPt runs intensive recovery 
regimes in 17 jails and shorter courses in a further nine. Evans manages its 
work in six prisons around the Home Counties, including The Mount, a Category C 
jail near Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, which has just contracted the charity 
to add an alcohol dependency programme and a scheme for non-addicts who need 
help with lesser substance abuse.

"Take your life back," reads a poster on the wall behind Evans. And, it seems, 
hundreds do, for a survey of police data validated by Manchester University 
found that fewer than a third of RAPt graduates reoffend compared to over half 
of other addicted prisoners. "The association between addiction and crime is 
overwhelming, but it's always been a missed market," she says. "Addicts are 
just seen as problematic, but are victims themselves, usually with horrific 
backgrounds."

Evans was studying psychology and had gained a diploma in counselling when, 
seven years ago, she applied to RAPt, but another qualification has been 
crucial to her work: she is herself a recovered addict and memories of her own 
unsupported battles keep her motivated. "There's a different level of passion 
when you've been through it yourself," she says. "I draw on my own experiences 
hugely."

Despite her small stature and a disability which leaves her partially 
dependent on a wheelchair, she says she was unfazed by her first encounter with 
inmates at an all-male prison: "I never saw them as prisoners, just as 
suffering human beings. These people have never been shown respect or taught 
boundaries. It took me back to when my three children were growing up and my 
maternal instincts kicked in. I don't condone their behaviour, but I try to 
lovingly support them and if they become challenging I use my counselling 
training to bracket my natural reactions and not take it personally. The most 
difficult people are often the most wounded."

Occasionally abusive behaviour has threatened to become violent, yet Evans 
says she feels safer inside prison than out. "The prisoners have an in-house 
moral hierarchy and are quite protective of women. Once when a new inmate 
became abusive they all grouped round me as a shield."

Most prisoners enrol voluntarily on the six-week intensive rehabilitation 
courses and follow-up rolling programmes and at The Mount those who do are 
housed separately in their own wing so that they can support each other through 
the process. "The risks these people take in exposing their vulnerability in 
group sessions humbles me," says Evans. "Their perception is that vulnerability 
is weakness and they can't show it in a predatory environment, but learning to 
manage this vulnerability helps them start coping with other emotions. Peer 
support is intrinsic to success and empathy is a key element that they learn."

As area manager much of Evans' work is deskbound, line managing the managers 
of around 40 staff in the clutch of prisons she oversees and establishing 
supportive relations with the prison staff to ensure the rehabilitation work 
complements their own. However, she tries to mix with the inmates as often as 
possible and knows every prisoner at her Surrey base in Coldingley prison by 
name: "To be an effective manager you have to be on the front line. I have 
informal chats and lecture them if they're pushing boundaries and being 
disruptive."

It may be the fact that Evans rebuilt her own life from the ruins of addiction 
that she possesses such extraordinary zest. She has survived two gangrenous 
legs, a stroke and a benign brain tumour, yet considers herself lucky: "I look 
at what I've got, not what I haven't got, and I've no time for 'why me?' Why 
not me?"

The fact that she is alive, smiling and in motion must, alone, be an 
inspiration to inmates who struggle to see a future. To the many who keep in 
touch long after they have served their sentence, she is the nearest they have 
to a mother. "One of them told staff that if they'd threatened him with the 
all-powerful prison security governor or me he'd pick the security governor 
every time," she says. "Because when I told him off it hurt."

CV

Salary: £40,000-£45,000.

Hours: "Forty a week, although often I do more because I feel so passionate 
about the work."

Work/Life balance: "I love the fact that there's no set routine; every day is 
different. And the hours are flexible so that I can fit work round the demands 
of my disability. My training allows me to switch off and leave the burden of 
other people's problems behind at the end of the day."

Best thing: "That light-bulb moment when you and the prisoner glimpse the 
difference the treatment can make."

Worst thing: "Bureaucracy. If you never saw the human results, you'd get so 
demoralised by all the red tape. Having to quantify everything we do gets so 
depressing."
 