
Judy Bentinck carries hats inside her head, but rarely on it. If she visits a 
cathedral she'll see hats in the stone tracery and the gargoyles; on a walk 
through the park hats flutter around her in the form of leaves and flower 
heads. There are hats on bakers' shelves, in zoo enclosures and in the 
ironmongery of station platforms. "We call a hat a hat, yet so long as it stays 
securely on the head, it's more like a sculpture," she says. "There are 
never-ending possibilities with shapes and trimmings and everything – nature, 
architecture, art and mathematics – can inspire me."

Bentinck, 53, inhabits a sensual world of fur and feathers in a secret corner 
of central London. Concealed in a courtyard off a back street, up flights of 
concrete stairs, down lengths of concrete corridors and behind menacing steel 
security doors, is her studio, shared with a jeweller and a textile designer.

The building is prison-like, the rows of large "cells" occupied by a hundred 
different craftspeople, but the impression is misleading. Millinery, says 
Bentinck, is wonderfully liberating.

"It's all about transforming ordinary things into art. I used to think I was 
two-dimensional – I created wallpapers, textiles and prints – but millinery 
unlocked the sculptor in me."

Frank Sinatra once advised that hats should always be cocked. "Angles," he 
declared, "are attitudes." Bentinck has more than the usual share of attitude. 
In her tiny portion of studio are hats cocked at every angle. Feathered hats 
like nesting cygnets, coloured whorls of banana fibre, pert felt ovals and 
giant hoops of Ascot bombast.

She herself cuts an unexpectedly demure figure with her plain clothes and 
no-nonsense hair; her sometimes audacious fantasies are channelled entirely 
through headgear, but she seldom wears hats herself. "I used to be happy to be 
the only person in a room wearing a hat, but now I'm worried people will roll 
their eyes and think I'm shouting my wares," she says.

Her passion for millinery began young when she was the only child in her 
school who enjoyed wearing a straw boater. However, she arrived at the 
profession in mid-life after a circuitous route via textile design, film and 
theatre costuming and an unhappy year undertaking a PGCE in art and design.

A magazine advertisement for one-to-one tuition with royal milliner Rose Cory 
reminded her of her first love; she enrolled for a two-day course and remained 
for two years, funding herself while raising her children. "Rose is almost the 
only person left who knows the traditional techniques," she says. "I fell 
completely in love with it all."

Her first commission, a year into her apprenticeship, was to fit out the 
mother of the bride at a family wedding. "It was a challenge, because all eyes 
would be on it," she says, but the result – a cocktail hat with draped silk, 
feathers and a sexy touch of veiling – earned her a second commission from an 
impressed guest.

In 2001 she rented a corner of a studio in Cockpit Arts, a community of 
craftspeople from glass blowers to furniture restorers and, using a collection 
she had built up during her studies and a website created by her husband, she 
launched her own business.

Since then Bentinck has sent heads to Ascot clad in a giant ice cream cone and 
a carton of spilling milk. She's crowned the comedy musical band Fascinating 
Aida, glamourised several guests at this year's royal wedding and supplies the 
only dedicated hat shop in Hong Kong.

Economic gloom has, curiously, stimulated an interest in headgear. "The demand 
for tuition has become huge," says Bentinck. "Partly because of the recession 
people want to do something different."

The fantastical confections borne by guests at the Duke and Duchess of 
Cambridge's wedding has also reignited a fashion which Princess Diana helped 
rescue from two decades of oblivion.

"Hat-wearing started dying out in the 1960s because the beehive hair-dos 
couldn't accommodate them," says Bentinck. "But when Diana started to wear them 
and when Philip Treacy began designing for the royal family, they came back 
into the public eye."

Victoria Beckham confirmed the rise of the fascinator – millinery circles call 
them head-pieces – by wearing an explosion of black feathers to Buckingham 
Palace when her husband collected his OBE in 2003. Camilla, Duchess of 
Cornwall, balanced a lofty crest of feathers on her own bridal head two years 
later and Bentinck is now frequently required to unleash her fantasies on these 
"little pieces of nonsense" to mark family milestones.

Her ingredients are kept in plastic boxes stacked up the walls: off-cuts of 
bright fabrics, a spray of ostrich feathers, coils of ribbon and sparkly 
gewgaws. The drawers in her solemn-looking desk are stuffed with fur and 
coloured feathers. There's a Blue Peter air about such a confusion of oddments 
and yet Bentinck can conjure them into miraculously harmonious art.

"The trick," she says, "is to make trimmings look as though they've fallen 
from the sky. Manufactured hats are stiffer and thicker because they'll be 
handled by many people on a shop stand, but bespoke ones should be light and 
artless. You should never suffer 'hat hair' with a bespoke creation."

I expect to see strangely shaped, exotically named implements for moulding a 
crown and teasing trimmings, but the tools are startlingly culinary. You could 
knock up a hat-like structure in the average British kitchen. An electric 
kettle is on stand-by to provide the steam to dampen the fabrics that are then 
moulded round the upturned wooden salad bowl (or another from her assortment of 
shaped wooden blocks).

Fabric stiffening paste can be mixed effectively in a measuring jug and tea 
bags and coffee granules provide a useful colour wash to help along an vintage 
effect. A cook's palette knife eases the moulded crown off the block and, 
straying into bathrooms, a bottle of nail varnish remover is an emergency 
remedy for removing excess stiffener. And although double-bladed flower-making 
tools with bulbous wooden handles are a handsome ornament to the worktop, a 
pair of kitchen scissors and some cutlery for shaping and veining craft flowers 
work just as reliably.

Bentinck has small, seasonal collections with which she beguiles the Chinese 
market, but most of her work is bespoke. She turns out around three hats a week 
ranging from £150 to £850, a sum which includes a face-to-face consultation and 
fittings. Today, half-assembled, are two domes of purple fur, both commissioned 
by a regular client; poised above them is a drama of black feathers protruding 
like wheel spokes from a brim.

Devising a way to secure the feathers firmly enough to survive jostling at 
Ascot required hours of scientific thinking. "Millinery is a lot about physics 
and engineering because however original your ideas, your creation has to 
balance firmly on the head," says Bentinck, who spends large chunks of time 
parading her small space in extravagant creations to test looks, feel and 
equilibrium.

Another essential skill is psychology. Bentinck can read hats. "A hat with a 
veil says the wearer wants to be alluring and mysterious," she says. "The 
Victorian-style mini riding hats proclaim sexiness." Whether or not she 
personally likes the style of a commission, she can tell if it suits the wearer 
by their posture. "When people feel good in a hat they immediately stand 
straighter," she says.

There is a psychological intimacy about millinery, partly because a hat 
proclaims a personality more emphatically than any other article of clothing 
and partly because hats are usually commissioned to mark one of life's 
landmarks. People seek out Bentinck when their daughters marry, they bury their 
dead or celebrate a triumph. Occasionally they commission a hat to bolster 
flagging spirits. "Taking time out of a stressful life to have something 
created especially for you can be very therapeutic," she says.

A listening ear and an ability to capture a mood with a twist of felt or 
feathers are essential skills. "The mother of a bride once came to me and 
wanted something big and showy," she recalls. "The first thing she said to me 
was, 'I don't want this wedding to happen.' And so the hat was all about 
deflecting attention to her."

There's something riveting about having oneself translated into a hat. 
I, Bentinck decides after careful study of face and features, am decidedly a 
purple cloche. Someone else might just as emphatically be a pillbox, or a 
beret, or a pink fur sensation.

Should, I decide that I wish to be sexy, or sassy, powerful or enigmatic, 
Bentinck can reinvent me with a wisp of veiling or coloured straw. As the 
author Margaret Atwood once wrote: "I myself have 12 hats and each one 
represents a different personality. Why just be yourself."
 