
When a colleague heard I was off to interview a traffic warden his reaction 
was: "Give him hell!". Denis Sarpong, scourge of errant drivers in the London 
Borough of Enfield, is unmoved. "There is so much hatred," he says tranquilly. 
"Before I got this job I was once given a parking ticket and I was very upset, 
so I know how customers feel."

Customers? The term suggests an orderly queue of motorists wanting to pay £50 
for an hour's parking on a zigzag. But then traffic wardens operate in a world 
of singular phrases. They are not even called "traffic wardens". Civil 
enforcement officer is emblazoned on Sarpong's fluorescent yellow jacket, 
making him easily mistakable for a community police officer.

I do not like "civil enforcement officers" any more than my colleagues. One – 
possibly Sarpong – nabbed me for placing an inch of tyre on a broad kerb in a 
road where signs tell you to mount the kerb. We had just moved to Enfield. 
"Everyone gets done when they arrive," said our neighbour. "We call it a 'new 
residents tax'."

The sight of a warden implacably ambling along, chills me, whether or not I am 
on wheels. It is that spurt of illogical guilt and fear that a police officer, 
or customs official, can stir in the innocent. How must it feel, therefore, to 
be the person who can ignite that fear in the blameless, and with a flick of a 
handheld computer turn placid citizens into bawling avengers.

Sarpong shrugs. He does not seem a man who wears emotions easily. Presumably, 
impassivity is an essential defence after four years of facing down irate 
"customers".

"You get verbal abuse all the time," he says, "but I never take it personally. 
I never take any offence personally."

Sarpong, 35, cannot remember all the jobs he did before finding his forte on 
the streets. His previous work involved motors for wind turbines and he 
recollects a stint at Tesco.

Civil enforcement was the idea of his aunt and mentor, who discovered a 
vacancy and encouraged him to apply. "I was a very quiet person and she thought 
it would bring me out a bit," he says. "Now, because of the communications with 
customers that can bring out things you don't expect, I am no longer shy.'

After a week of intensive training on the meanings of kerbside stripes and 
squiggles, on conflict management ("stand side on if someone gets aggressive 
and prepare to walk away") and the curious rules that must be adhered to before 
the yellow sticker can be slapped on a windscreen ("I must wait five minutes 
before I can issue a ticket in a pay-and-display car park, and two minutes for 
someone on yellow lines, unless the lines are zigzags or stripes on the kerb, 
which means no loading, in which case it's an instant fine"), and after a week 
patrolling the streets in the company of a supervisor, Sarpong was unleashed.

Locals would have witnessed that rare novelty: a nervous traffic warden. "I 
felt very vulnerable that first week," says Sarpong. "The first ticket I ever 
issued I did wrongly and it had to be voided when I got back to the office."

Four years on, four 12-hour shifts a week have changed him. "I am more 
confident," he says, "because I have to be able to deal with every scenario. 
Sometimes people are nice and will apologise when I give them a ticket. Most 
are defensive and some are aggressive. The penalty charge notice makes you 
realise the situations people are going through – it's a trigger that can let 
loose built-up stress."

Whatever the circumstances, however, Sarpong says that he remains unmoved. The 
rules are clear and he upholds them rigorously. Recently in the news, there was 
the case of a driver who received a ticket when he pulled over at a bus stop to 
help an elderly lady who had fallen. Would he issue a penalty notice in a 
similar situation? "Yes," he says. "The driver can appeal, and I leave it to 
the council to decide."

Personal sentiment is no deterrent, either. He says he would nick his beloved 
auntie if he found her straddling a zigzag, and once he booked a good friend. 
"He was very upset but, long-term, he came to see that I was right."

This implacability is both chilling and admirable. In the motorist's eyes 
Sarpong is penalising incautious manoeuvres without mercy or humanity; in his 
own view, he is paid to be an impartial upholder of rules. "It's my 
responsibility to make sure the traffic is flowing and that drivers are doing 
the right thing," he says. "You want to make sure everything is perfect – not 
be distracted by sympathy."

Enfield council has contracted out parking enforcement to NSL Services, a 
private equity-owned company which patrols for more than 60 councils. Last 
month, a judge cited evidence that its Kensington and Chelsea branch had
illegally issued officers with a minimum quota of tickets 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2107251/Hakim-Berkani-Traffic-warden-revealed-10-day-ticket-quota-gets-20k-payout.html?ito=feeds-newsxml>
 that must be issued per day. The company denies it.

Sarpong insists that he has never been set a quota or target. "There are lots 
of days when I don't issue any penalty notices," he claims. Which must make the 
daily beat pretty boring – does he feel a thrill when, after hours of blameless 
drivers, he spots a culprit?

There is a long pause. "I don't want to answer that," he says with the 
faintest of smiles.

Each day, when they report in at 7am, Sarpong and his colleagues are allocated 
a different beat. Today it is quiet residential streets near the town centre. 
An Everest van is parked on the wide pavement. Two men are fitting windows to 
the house alongside. Surprisingly, Sarpong strolls by. "When you are working 
with glass, rules state that you must park very close to the spot, so on the 
pavement is allowable."

A little further on, a Virgin Media van is pulled up on double yellow lines 
and a head emerges from a hole in the pavement: "All right boss? I need 15 
minutes. You're not going to nick me, are you?" Sarpong explains that the man 
is doing essential work laying cables and may therefore park.

The worst offenders can be disabled badge owners who, through ignorance or 
defiance, deem themselves exempt. "Some of them think they can park anywhere, 
for however long," Sarpong says. But he has a secret strategy to identify 
drivers, disabled or otherwise, who, once they have exhausted the specified 
time limit in a free parking bay, return instantly and illicitly to the same 
spot. Sarpong records the position of the wheel valves on his handheld computer 
so that, later, he can tell whether if it has been re-parked. Petty it may 
seem, but, he says, it's for the common good. "Otherwise one person can hog a 
temporary space all day."

There is a magisterial dignity about him as he perambulates the quiet 
roadsides, pausing now and then to squint at a windscreen. An old lady, 
climbing into her car, beams a nervous greeting as he passes. A motorist brakes 
abruptly to let him cross the road.

Nonetheless, I am reminded of a predator sniffing for blood. There is suspense 
in the air as he breaks off mid-sentence to peer at dashboard permits, or to 
note streets visited and vehicles to be monitored.

Then, suddenly, Sarpong moves in for the kill. A van is parked on a yellow 
line at a junction, hazard lights flashing as an impotent safeguard. In the 
hallway of the house beside it, a builder is audibly at work sawing wood.

Sarpong types in the van details, flicks open the plastic rectangle on his 
lapel, which is a name badge-sized video recorder, and waits the required two 
minutes before he can issue the penalty notice. "It's called continual 
observation," he says.

I am thrilled and appalled. Thrilled by the suspense, appalled that the 
culprit could so easily be alerted before the deadline through the open front 
door. Just as the two minutes expires, a visitor warns the builder. The sawing 
stops and he hurries out bearing two hastily grabbed sacks. He claims that he 
was loading and can therefore legitimately park. Sarpong declares that there 
was no evidence of loading and remains impassive as the man yells at him and 
roars off.

"He thinks he's got away with it because he drove away before I could attach 
the notice, but he hasn't," he says and he radios through the van's details to 
the office so that an address can be traced and the notice posted."

Then he strolls on through the sunshine, no trace of the encounter visible in 
his demeanour. Naturalschadenfreude gives me some pleasure as someone who is 
not me is being booked, but I am unnerved by the inexorable, clinical nature of 
the process. Sarpong and his colleagues brook no excuses, no extentuating 
circumstances and, although he regards his role to be as much about deterring 
as penalising, he does not do friendly warnings or consoling chit-chat.

"People would miss us a lot if we weren't here because there would be chaos," 
Sarpong says. Probably he is right, but that will never endear him and his 
colleagues to the public.

"Have you heard the one about the traffic warden?" asks my churchgoing 
neighbour with uncharacteristic viciousness. "As he was being nailed into his 
coffin he regained consciousness and hammered on the lid to be let out.

"I'm sorry," said the undertaker, "But the paperwork's all done now."

Overtime

Dennis is an armchair sports fan "I am glued to Sky sports on my days off – I 
love football although I no longer play it. I get enough exercise on the beat."
He reads a lot of non-fiction, especially about geography – "climate change, 
and such like. I always want to know what's going on."Dennis relaxes by baking 
"a lot of cakes and biscuits and I love cooking for my family – mainly African 
dishes."Dennis's favourite food is fou fou, "made with powdered plantain and 
cassava mixed into a ball with peanut soup and all kinds of meat."

Curriculum vitae

Pay £18,000-£20,000 depending on rank.

Hours Four 12-hour shifts, 7am to 7pm, with two hour breaks a day.

Work-life balance Very good. "My colleagues are very close and supportive – 
like family. If we've had a really difficult encounter with a customer we can 
offload on our colleagues and share the odd joke."

Best thing Being out and about on sunny days. "People ask me about the job and 
I might ask someone about theirs. There's a lot of social interaction."

Worst thing "Heavy rain and snowy days when you have to keep walking. This 
winter I slipped and fell really hard on my bum. I find, by 5pm when I've been 
on my feet all day, I start to get a bit distracted."
 