
"Sorry to keep you waiting. My snake is about to shed." In 25 years of writing 
this is certainly the most unusual excuse I have ever heard, and Maeve 
Moorcroft is one of very few people who could get away with it.

Moorcroft is head of pets for Pets at Home <http://www.petsathome.com/>, 
responsible for all areas of health and welfare of the thousands of animals 
that pass through the doors of the nationwide chain.

I am meeting her the morning after a very difficult evening for both her and 
Pets at Home: BBC's Watchdog programme had run a lengthy feature on the health 
of a few of the pets sold by the store. I thoughtPets at Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pets-at-home> was going to fare quite 
well after seeing the first segment, which mostly related to a couple of cases 
of ringworm in guinea pigs; but the second part involved undercover filming in 
several stores, showing dead fish in tanks. A few looked like they had been 
dead for several days.

"We were answering calls until 11pm last night," Moorcroft says. As we walk 
around the head office in Wilmslow, Cheshire, it's clear more are still coming 
in, and one or two colleagues (you are not allowed to use the word "staff" at
Pets <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/pets> at Home, everyone is a 
colleague) stop Moorcroft for advice or to ask her to talk to the pet owner on 
the other end of the line.

Moorcroft, who is Irish, qualified as a vet in Dublin in 1990 and spent 10 
years working in the Peak District dealing mainly with domestic animals, "with 
the odd sheep and wildlife emergency thrown in". She met her husband to be, a 
shepherd who now runs their farm, after treating one of his sheepdogs on New 
Year's Eve, and now has two sons aged seven and five.

Like many vets, Moorcroft found that the long and often unsociable hours of 
being in practice did not fit well with having a family. She switched to 
working for a pet product manufacturer as their veterinary adviser, helping to 
make sure their products were safe and suitable.

Three years ago she moved to Pets at Home, becoming the first vet to hold the 
position of head of pets, involved in all areas of health and welfare of the 
company's pets, fish and reptiles. Among other things, the role involves 
liaising with suppliers, checking where animals come from, supervising their 
care in store and overseeing the stores' adoption centres.

She runs a team of about 10, including specialists in reptiles and fish, and 
two veterinary nurses working in a support role. Given the size of the company 
– 320 stores employing about 5,500 people with a turnover of £12m a week – this 
seems quite a modest number.

Moorcroft spends part of the morning answering emails and calls, mostly from 
the stores or vets contacting her about animals bought from Pets at Home, and 
is briefed by her team on the progress of a new range of guides published in 
association with the RSPCA and the licensing of various stores.

The open-plan office she sits in is like no other I've ever visited. There are 
a couple of dogs meandering between a selection of baskets and bean bags, and 
nearly every desk includes an aquarium or vivarium holding a wide array of 
fish, snakes, reptiles and amphibians. Moorcroft's snake, Jean Genie, sits in a 
tank on her desk.

She moves on to visit a Stockport store with a specialist aquatic centre and 
featured prominently in the Watchdog programme. The staff are upset, and there 
is a high manager-to-colleague ratio on the shop floor to reassure staff and 
deal with customer inquiries.

While Pets at Home disagreed with some of the points 
<http://www.petsathome.com/webapp/wcs/stores/servlet/Info_10601_watchdog_-1_10551>
 made by the BBC programme,chief executive Nick Wood issued a statement 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006mg74/features/pets-at-home> saying the 
company would review its health check training and the frequency of the checks 
on its fish tanks.

We meet "Fishy" Pete, a marine biologist who is one of Moorcroft's team, to 
inspect the fish: cold water, tropical and marine. The tanks are spotless and 
the only inverted fish is one which Pete assures me likes being upside down.

Some vets have a poor opinion of pet shops, and until recently the RSPCA has 
opposed the sale of animals through a shop environment. Has Moorcroft received 
flack from her veterinary peers for switching over to pet sales? "Veterinary 
science is a vocation, and I spent all those years in college because I wanted 
to help animals. Now I'm in a really good position to do that. Yes I'm one step 
removed, but I can get things in place to make things better," she says.

Curriculum vitae

Hours Officially 8.30am to 5pm. Five weeks holiday plus bank holidays.

Work-life balance "It's better than when I was in practice, and getting better 
still because of my veterinary nurses."

Salary The average starting salary for a vet can be anything between £21,800 
and £33,500 a year, depending on experience. However, further training and 
experience can increase the average salary to around £36,500. Moorcroft's 
salary is equivalent to that of a senior vet, who can earn upwards of £50,000.

Best thing "Getting the chance to influence the health of thousands of animals 
all around the country."

Worst thing "Laying awake at 4am, worrying about guinea pigs and rabbits."
 