
I am going to put £20 on Razldazl Jayfkay to win the English Greyhound Derby 
because I know what he gets for breakfast. Jayfkay, a three-year-old brindle 
dog, eats so healthily he would put many Guardian readers to shame: he gets a 
potent mix of natural yogurt, Weetabix, milk, manuka honey and sardines.

His dinner – which I am honoured to carry to him in his kennel – is equally 
impressive: his owner Dolores Ruth has brought fine cuts of marbled sirloin 
beef from Ireland, ground it into mince and has mixed about 1lb of this with a 
soup made from liver and salmon, and biscuits. Although Ruth is staying in 
Essex with friends who have kennels with about 20 of their own greyhounds, she 
has brought an astounding range of vitamins and conditioners, taking up most of 
one shelf in the dogs' food room.

"I feed them the best of everything," Ruth says. I can believe it: the dog 
looks fantastically healthy. His fur is soft and shiny, his eyes bright, his 
teeth – which get brushed every day – are whiter than the average X Factor 
contestant. His muscles are defined and there isn't a scrap of fat on him.

He is also clearly in love with Ruth. She sits on the low bed, lined with 
golden straw with him and he nestles up to her, licking her face and proffering 
his paw.

A lot of controversy surrounds greyhound racing. The media have carried 
numerous reports of abuse of and cruelty to greyhounds over the years, but the
Retired Greyhound Trust <http://www.retiredgreyhounds.co.uk/>, which rehomed 
more that 4,000 dogs last year, says the treatment of greyhounds has improved a 
lot in the last few years. The RSPCA is less sanguine: "Every year at least 
10,000 greyhounds are retired from racing. The fate of many is unknown and many 
simply 'disappear'. Welfare issues can occur at any life stage, so we believe 
that all aspects of the industry, from breeding to kennelling, racing, 
transportation, management and retirement need to be regulated. We want to see 
greyhounds protected from cradle to grave."

Cruelty undoubtedly happens in some kennels, but, as Ruth's track record 
proves, trainers have far greater success by treating their animals well. She 
won the English Greyhound Derby – also known as the Williamhill.com Greyhound 
Derby – in 1996 with Shanless Slippy, and the Irish Derby twice, with Razldazl 
Billy in 2006 and withRazldazl George 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EP6-iLTPZXI> in 2011.

This is no mean feat. These races are the top greyhound competitions in their 
respective countries: the winner of this year's English Derby will gallop away 
with a cool £125,000. Dogs she trains also won several other prestigious races 
last year, including the Easter Cup, the Hegarty 600 and the Irish Laurels, and 
these wins, together with revenue raised from breeding puppies and training 
fees, clocked up an annual income of about £250,000.

Ruth is part of a greyhound racing dynasty. Her dad was a trainer, her brother 
James, who has five dogs in training, is over with her for the English Derby, 
and her brother-in-law is dual Derby-winning Irish trainer Matt O'Donnell. 
"When I was young that was all I wanted to do, to be involved with the dogs," 
she says.

She persuaded her father to let her leave school at 16 to start training, "to 
take up the passion", as she puts it. She set up her own kennels at the age of 
22 in County Kildare and just five years later won her first Derby.

Some 20 years on, she trains just 11 dogs – her own and those belonging to 
family and friends. "I've always believed in quality, not quantity – that's the 
key to a champion. I've been successful for a reason."

Her techniques are clearly respected by those who understand greyhound racing. 
When theIrish Greyhound Board 
<http://www.sportsnewsireland.com/racing_irish/greyhound-razldazl-seeks-win-for-omuircheartaigh/>
 decided to buy the RTE sports broadcaster andall-round national hero 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-14679809> Micheal 
O'Muircheartaigh a greyhound to celebrate his retirement, he chose Ruth to be 
his trainer.

Her day starts at 8am, which she admits is quite late for most trainers. The 
dogs are "paddocked" – taken for a pee and poo – and the kennels cleaned out. 
After breakfast, the dogs are walked (they don't need to go for four-mile hikes 
says Ruth, "but they do love to go out into a field to do doggy things"), 
groomed, have their feet washed, teeth brushed and are checked for injuries.

Some dogs may get special attention at this point – ultrasound, laser 
treatments or massages if they have a sore back, cuts or bone injuries. Some of 
the dogs go on a treadmill (no doubt listening to Who Let the Dogs Out? or You 
Ain't Nothing But A Hound Dog). Ruth used to have a swimming pool for training, 
but says she has found other techniques get better results.

After this, any dogs that are not racing that week are galloped – run along a 
special track to build up their strength and fitness. Young dogs – known as 
saplings – start by running 250m after a lure with a "hand slip" start: Ruth 
holds and releases the dogs, rather than putting them into a trap.

The distance is gradually built up to the standard 480m run at the racetracks. 
Getting the dogs to chase the lure is not an issue: "They chase anything that 
moves," says Ruth.

Afternoons are taken up with trips to the vet, dealing with emails, filling in 
entries for races and at least once a week going to the races. Dinner, the main 
meal of the day, is served at 4pm, although a light meal is given at 3pm to 
dogs that are racing that evening.

"I mostly race just once a week, every Saturday," she says. "It's sociable in 
that you talk to other trainers and have a bit of a crack." On normal days she 
will finish by paddocking the dogs at about 9pm, but if she is racing, she will 
be lucky to be home by midnight.

Ruth lives near Shelbourne Park, "one of the greatest tracks in the world", 
says Ruth. "It's a very fair running track. Some are tighter but those don't 
suit my dogs because they are pacey dogs rather than sprinters – they have 
longer strides."

She usually sets off for the racetrack at 6pm. "The dogs love travelling 
because they know they are going racing," says Ruth. They travel in a specially 
adapted van, with two large cages at the rear and one dog in the space in front 
of them, all lying on beds of straw. Underneath the cages are two large drawers 
filled with rugs, muzzles, leads – all the paraphernalia they might need at the 
races.

The dogs must be weighed in by 7pm and kennelled, then Ruth eats her own 
supper – usually chicken, brown bread, and a big slice of apple or rhubarb 
tart, washed down with a flask of tea. She takes her dinner with her, because 
"if you go over to the restaurant, it's a rush". Once the dogs have been 
kennelled trainers are not allowed near them until just before the race.

Ruth also breeds puppies, with good quality ones raising between £4,000 and 
£5,000. Her previous brood bitch, Pearl, won the Puppy Oaks – another greyhound 
classic. But she is eight now and has retired to a life indoors with Ruth and 
another retired greyhound called William.

The next time I see Ruth is at Wimbledon Greyhound Stadium. She is running 
three dogs – Razldazl Bugatti, Razldazl Rioga and the hot contender Razldazl 
Jayfkay – in the first round heats of the Williamhill.com Greyhound Derby.

We go down to the kennel, the room where the greyhounds are being muzzled and 
rugged up ready for their races. The last time I saw Jayfkay he was eating his 
supper after a calm walk around a field. Now he is clearly excited, tugging the 
slight figure of Ruth around the room. Although she says her dogs are average 
size, at between 70lbs and 78lbs, they are built of solid muscle and very 
powerful.

Most greyhound trainers are men, and although there are more women training in 
England than in Ireland, she jokes in a slight American accent: "This is a 
man's world. But there ain't nothing a woman can't do."

Ruth chats with fellow competitors, and beams in our direction when she sees 
us standing in the doorway – the furthest we are allowed in. While the other 
dogs just have one rug over their racing jackets, Ruth's have a cosy fleece 
underneath. They really are treated like canine superstars.

It's time for the race. We stand behind the traps and watch the dogs being 
shut in: some are a bit reluctant and have to be lifted, but Jayfkay walks 
straight in. The trainers all move away from the side of the track – the last 
thing they want is for their dog to catch sight of them and decide they look 
more interesting than the lure. But we stay by the traps and watch as the dogs 
spring into action – a blur of fur and jackets chasing a dayglo hare.

Jayfkay immediately takes the lead by several lengths. Having watched the 
previous races, we have learned that unless something goes seriously wrong, 
like a collision, the dog that leads from the start is often leading at the 
finish.

Jayfkay is no exception – he streaks past the finishing post and then carries 
on round the track to where Ruth is waiting for him on the other side. As he 
pulls up, his tail is wagging furiously.

Overtime

Dolores loves horses, and has a 16.1hh Belgian Warmblood called Razldazl Magic 
at livery with theformer Olympic showjumper Jack Doyle 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ow9pT40cl2Q>. She says: "I ride about five 
times a week, jumping around 1m 20cm. I got into it late – it's a great 
release."Dolores takes retired dogs Pearl and William for regular trips to 
McDonald's, where their favourite fix is a cheeseburger with no gherkin. No 
fries, "too much salt".'Razldazl' was inspired by the song Razzle Dazzle in the 
musical Chicago.Dolores loves travelling and reading travel writers like Paul 
Theroux.
 