
The rain may have ruined a chunk of most people's summer, but for Lewis Taylor 
it marks a refreshing change from having to worry about drought. Taylor, who 
has 30 parks and green spaces to nurture in the London borough of Haringey, 
says the impact of climate change is playing havoc with his budgets and work 
schedules.

"Ten years ago you'd cut grass between April and October, now we're still 
mowing in November. Given that grass cutting is by far the biggest and most 
visible job here, it is really stretching us," he says. "But it's swings and 
roundabouts. In drought grass grows less quickly, but we have to water more."

Taylor, 51, is one of Haringey's parks operations managers and for the past 
decade has been in charge of green spaces in half the borough. He allocates the 
budget; manages the maintenance of trees, grass playgrounds and buildings; and 
oversees 35 staff – as well as maintaining the communal grassed areas around 
council housing estates.

In 2011, the council's parks budget was cut in half and Taylor now has to pay 
his staff and fund repairs and maintenance with £1m. "We've been hit pretty 
hard," he says. "Not many park services have been cut so severely."

A decade ago, a £3.4m Heritage Lottery Fund grant helped rescue Finsbury Park 
from years of decline. The boating lake, which was so polluted its water birds 
died of botulism, was dredged; its pavilions, flowerbeds and gazebos were 
restored; and a cafe, playgrounds, gallery and sports facilities were built.

Haringey's vital green lung, which had become a wilderness of drug dealing, 
cruising and vandalism, has now been reappropriated by families and 
leisure-seekers. This resurrection is Taylor's joy and his despair. "I feel a 
huge emotional attachment to this place after seeing it transformed," he says. 
"The biggest challenge, though, is future investment. I dream of putting 
troughs of sustainable planting in the parks and streets and getting the 
community to look after them."

Taylor manages his green empire from a collection of low brick buildings 
resembling a farmyard. "Morning and evening is a hubub of tractors and 
machinery, but they're all out on jobs now," he says. "It's just me and the 
assistant park manager here in the day."

His office is a cramped, beige cube off a cramped, beige common room where the 
only natural views are the posters of plants and birds hanging on the walls. 
Far too much of his life is spent in here for his liking. "Bureaucracy is 
taking over," Taylor says. "I spend 80% of the day in front of the computer 
answering emails and looking at complaints and queries and budgets, and I'm 
envious of the guys who get to do all the hands-on stuff. I love getting the 
earth under my fingernails."

Once, a team of keepers in brown suits and fedoras ranged the 115 acres while 
60 gardeners tended them, but now, Taylor says, park managers would be putting 
themselves in danger if they attempted the same vigilance. Many of the calls 
that besiege his mobile are reports of vandalism and if the culprits are still 
in action Taylor will call the police rather than confront them. Dog walkers, 
he says, are his eyes and ears and alert him to trouble spots.

Taylor worked as a farm labourer when he left school then, after a three-year 
stint in the navy and a year on a kibbutz in Israel, he got a job as a gardener 
in a nearby Haringey park. He had finally found his forte and embarked on a 
series of qualifications in horticulture and ecology which, ironically, ensured 
his rise from overalls to pinstripes.

He arrives at his office at 7.30am and is immediately claimed by his computer. 
At some point in the day he goes round the parks checking work schedules and 
standards of maintenance, then is back on his computer until 5pm – unless there 
is an evening meeting. "It's all about maintenance rather than creativity," he 
admits.

A council-owned nursery, which is a hub for educational and volunteer 
programmes, supplies the parks with plants and a group of local volunteers from 
theHaringey Friends of Parks <http://haringeyfriendsofparks.org.uk/> forum lend 
their skills to help with planning, maintenance and general vigilance. 
"Community involvement is definitely on the increase," Taylor says. "People are 
realising, especially in a recession, what a valuable and free amenity a local 
park is."

Almost 150 years after it first opened, the revitalised Finsbury Park is now a 
venue for circuses, exhibitions and occasional live concerts. Taylor says: "A 
fascinating article would be a day in the life of that gazebo or that bench, 
because at every point in the day there's a different group of people using 
them. And it's the sight of people enjoying the park that makes it all 
worthwhile."

Curriculum vitae

Salary £25,000-£30,000.

Hours 7.30am until 5pm, the occasional evening and one in four weekends.

Work-life balance "Three hours of the day is spent commuting to and from home, 
but that shows my commitment because I could find another job closer to where I 
live."

Best thing "When you get a moment to pause and look at the planting and 
watching a once-degraded place come back to life. My favourite spot is the new 
avenue of Italian poplars that we planted at one end and which will be 
magnificent when they mature."

Worst thing "The vandalism and the litter and when people disrespect the 
place."
 