
The taxi driver does a jaw-dropping double-take as he delivers me outside the 
neat, modern townhouse where Margaret Southcoat waits to welcome me. She smiles 
knowingly and, dare I say, regally, as though this is something she is clearly 
used to.

Resplendent in a shimmering floor-length white damask dress swagged with a red 
sash and an eye-catching crown nestling on her soft grey hair – in full regalia 
on a sunny weekday morning – she cuts an unlikely figure on the doorstep on 
this private housing estate in Kingston upon Hull.

"Do you need to use the toilet, dear?" she asks, before offering me a cup of 
tea and a comfortable chair in the cosy lounge. Having worked as a professional 
lookalike of Queen Elizabeth II for the past 13 years, and booked for 
everything from opening supermarkets, department stores and fetes to handing 
over charity cheques and promoting foreign car dealerships, people often forget 
that, although she is a dead ringer for the Queen, she also needs to do basic 
things such as respond to the call of nature.

I have already seen "HRH Margaret" (as she cheerily signs off her emails) in 
action at a toy trade fair at London's Olympia, when she appeared alongside a 
Prince Philip lookalike to publicise a limited edition Diamond Jubilee chess 
set made by Studio Anne Carlton.

The couple were paid to sit and play chess – in silence – for two hours while 
a stream of photographers snapped away and trade buyers dropped by. "Sometimes 
there can be a lot of just sitting around and smiling," Southcoat admits.

"But I've had such an interesting time. I've travelled to places I would never 
have been to and I've met so many people from all walks of life. It has given 
me something to get up for in the mornings – a reason to enjoy my retirement."

Southcoat is now 77, although with her youthful skin and apparently boundless 
energy she doesn't look it, and one of a handful of Queen lookalikes who have 
made money by mimicking HRH at various stages of her life. Born and raised in 
Hull, she was first "discovered" at the age of 60 in 1996 at her office 
Christmas party, while working as an examinations officer, when a scout from a 
modelling agency gave her a business card. Prior to that she had worked as an 
English and business studies teacher, and always enjoyed having a career, 
juggling her work to have her two sons.

People had always remarked on her uncanny resemblance to the Queen, nicknaming 
her "Your Majesty", and it was only after she was made redundant that she and 
her husband agreed that it was time to give it a go.

After spotting an advertisement for lookalikes in The Stage, Southcoat signed 
up with an agency. Her first "proper" engagement was an event at the National 
Railway Museum in York – a swanky Victorian-style champagne party hosted by 
"Queen Victoria" and "Prince Albert". It was reported in the local newspaper 
and the phone never stopped ringing, though with varying reactions: "My friends 
said 'We told you so' as they had been nagging me for ages to sign up as a 
lookalike. But one of my sons told me he thought I had gone completely mad."

Since then, with the Susan Scott agency, HRH Margaret has enjoyed a variety of 
engagements which have been beamed across global TV channels. Among the high 
points, she starred in the film Mad Cows with Joanna Lumley (sadly, a box 
office flop) and even met Archbishop Desmond Tutu (who thought she really was 
the Queen) at an event to commemorate the end of slavery. Her local celebrity 
status also brought her the unwelcome attentions of a stalker – thankfully 
nipped in the bud by BT.

She takes attention to detail seriously and, as a seasoned watcher of the 
Queen, has made it her business to know her tastes in fashion and colour, right 
down to the shade of lipstick she wears. When she poses for a photo, she knows 
just how to stand, pushing her shoulders back and crossing her arms over her 
tummy. She admits she was worried when she saw the TV coverage of the Queen 
giving her annual speech to parliament the day before: "She just looked a bit 
off-colour and her hair had not been properly done. She didn't look right to 
me."

Upstairs, I view the full contents of the regal wardrobe. Instead of hangers 
groaning with furs and extravagant ballgowns, there is just a handful of 
carefully-chosen outfits for daytime and more formal wear. Ninety-nine times 
out of a hundred, she explains, "people want me in what I call my 'state' 
outfit". The key piece is the white dress she had made by a shop specialising 
in theatrical wear (it cost nearly £1,000) and a copy of one that the Queen 
wore to the state opening of parliament. "It is the most important item – it 
had to be of an expensive material and of a plain classical design."

She made the sash along with the fringed ribbon badges (which feature small 
photos of the Queen's parents, George VI and Elizabeth, cut out from Majesty 
magazine) worn on her left shoulder. The heavy crown was also custom-made by a 
fashion student but she also has tiaras and some enviable vintage bling bought 
from charity shops.

Slightly taller than the Queen, she tends to wear flat shoes when on a job 
rather than the Queen's higher court shoes. Her "mufti" clothes are also smart: 
"You'd never catch me in jeans and I'd never go out without make-up."

Southcoat has snapped up plenty of work from the Germans, who are endlessly 
fascinated with the British royals. One of her most interesting assignments was 
being booked to confer a Land Rover dealership in Leipzig, East Germany: "I 
spoke no German, hardly anybody spoke English and I travelled across the 
country accompanied by two motorcyle outriders. I was at the front of a convoy 
in a Silver Cloud Rolls-Royce, followed by a double-decker open-top red London 
bus with six Scottish pipers on the top playing Scotland the Brave. I can never 
hear that music without remembering that event. It was quite bizarre."

Another unusual event for Loaded magazine in London involved being 
photographed alongside "a very large cheque" for charity behind which were 
three topless models. Her bookings can be unpredictable but have been healthy 
in the year of the Diamond Jubilee, with many options for the Bank Holiday 
weekend. On the Saturday she has been booked to appear at Wembley by the 
advertising agency M&C Saatchi. Not kicking a ball on the pitch, she hastens to 
add (England will be playing Belgium) but at an agency lunch in the Bobby Moore 
hospitality suite.

Sometimes she is asked to make a speech, or say a few words in public, 
although she admits that, given her strong Yorkshire accent – a far cry from 
the Queen's English – she prefers not to. Her contracts stipulate what she is 
required to do at an event, although, inevitably, sometimes she has to "ad 
lib". It helps that she enjoys chatting and meeting new people "I don't get 
nervous, thank goodness."

Whenever the National Anthem is (understandably) played or sung in her honour, 
she admits: "I try to keep a straight face throughout, keeping my dignity is 
paramount to the situation."

But she has had to pick the job up as she goes along: "No one teaches you how 
to be a lookalike. There are not examples to follow or even rules – you can 
never fall back on past experiences because every assignment is so different. 
It helps to be well-organised and flexible and have a sense of humour."

Husband Ted was her gofer and chauffeur in the earlier days but nowadays she 
pays for her own "lady in waiting" – Jane Reid – who organises travel 
arrangements and accompanies her on some engagements, helping with her hair and 
make-up and paying hotel and taxi expenses, because "as the Queen, I don't 
carry any money with me. I only have lipstick, powder and a couple of tissues 
in my handbag," she says.

It's a relief to hear that Southcoat is a big fan of the royal family – the 
hand that feeds her: "They have a stabilising effect on the country and most of 
the rest of the world are in awe of them. They add glamour and glitz to 
important affairs and are a big tourist attraction. I like to think of them as 
the eighth wonder of the world."

A highlight was fleetingly meeting the Queen herself in Hull, which came about 
through her husband's naval connections as he served with Prince Philip on HMS 
Magpie in 1950. The Southcoats each shook hands with the Prince, and the Queen 
nodded to her "in a knowing way and I nodded back", she recalls. "But I'd love 
to know a bit more about what she is really like. Does she relax in front of 
the TV in an old pair of slippers?"

That's one thing Soathcoat is unlikely to do herself. "I could never have been 
a pensioner just sitting at home all day. If I bring a smile to people's faces, 
then I'm happy."

Curriculum Vitae

Pay Typically £500 for a four-hour session, plus expenses which are 
negotiable. Margaret's agent Susan Scott takes 20% of her earnings.

Best thing "No two jobs are ever the same. I love the variety and all the 
interesting people I have met and extraordinary places I have been to."

Worst thing Losing an opportunity to appear in a Mike Myers film, Goldmember, 
as she had flu. Sometimes the work itself can be a bit boring if there is some 
sitting around, "but it's rarely for very long". People forgetting that she 
needs to have a drink, eat and use the toilet.

Work/life balance Good: "I usually get plenty of notice of bookings so can 
plan around that, particularly if there is travel involved."

Overtime

Margaret loves pottering around in her garden and is happy to be out there all 
day if the weather is fine. She has just finished two autobiographies – Sheila 
Hancock's Just Me and Julie Walters' That's Another Story.She is not a fan of 
fiction, preferring factual books 'as I love to educate myself and find out 
about things. I read newspapers every day to keep up with current events'.
Margaret enjoys playing the piano, 'when I can, as my husband likes to watch 
lots of sport on the TV in the same room. I would love to have been a concert 
pianist.'
 