
On the night of the recent England v Sweden international football friendly, 
fans are swarming along Olympic Way, the main route from Wembley Stadium to the 
nearest underground station. Some are running, others are hooting horns and 
there's even some half-hearted chanting of football songs. But the police 
horses, who are spread in a line facing the crowd, stand rock solid with their 
ears pricked.

Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> horse number 65, a dark bay 
(brown fur with black mane and tail), otherwise known as Lexington, turns his 
head to get a good look. When people get too close, he nudges them with his 
nose on their shoulder.

Nevertheless, one man caresses the horse's shoulder then moves on to stroke 
the knee of Lexington's rider, PC Cath I'anson. She rolls her eyes and says: 
"We get a lot of that."

The Metropolitan Police has 150 officers and 120 horses at eight stables 
across London who perform a variety of roles, from high visibility patrolling 
to appearing at ceremonial functions and carrying out public order duties such 
as this match. I'anson has been in the mounted branch for six years. She is an 
instructor, assessing and supervising students on top of her normal duties.

She started riding at the age of nine and worked with horses after leaving 
school, reaching aBritish Horse Society <http://www.britishhorse.com/> level 3 
qualification and attaining horse management qualifications at agricultural 
college.

She took a job with a carriage-driving stables but admits that, as with much 
horse-related work, the pay was terrible and her work-life balance non-existent.

She quit, and went back to college to study a degree in sports science, but 
missed horses too much and joined the police with the intention of moving into 
the mounted branch.

"I did two years probation, then a year and a half in the crime squad," she 
says. "That was a dilemma – it was taking me down the road to becoming a 
detective and it was really interesting. Then I applied to the Territorial 
Support Group and loved every minute."

Nevertheless, the pull of horses was too strong, and "being short I was at a 
disadvantage. I was generally surrounded by huge men and could never see 
anything".

Her first football match on horseback, at Tottenham Hotspur's White Hart Lane 
ground, proved to be a revelation in more ways than one. "I remember thinking, 
Wow! I can see everything!" she recalls.

In the days before the match, I visit her at the Met's stables in West 
Hampstead, where she is on the B patrol. This involves arriving at 7am to feed 
the horses, after which they are left in peace for half an hour. Then the 
officers muck out the stables, wash out the water and food buckets, groom them 
and change their rugs.

Most police horses have the hair clipped from their entire body, including 
legs and heads, to stop them sweating too heavily and losing condition. To 
compensate, they wear thick rugs to stop them getting chilly.

It's not just the horses that get cold. I'anson says she often feels like the 
Michelin man in the winter, wearing so many thermal layers under her uniform. 
On top of this she wears a belt which incorporates her truncheon, CS spray, 
handcuffs and first-aid kit, and sometimes body armour, too.

A couple of the stables have a second door leading to an outdoor area with 
toys – yes, there are such things as horse toys – enabling one horse at a time 
to stretch its legs and relax. The horses are permanently stabled, apart from 
two weeks every year when they go to the Imber Court training centre in Surrey. 
Canters across Hampstead Heath or trotting circles on smaller greens are 
therefore vital for keeping them supple and fit. "We're lucky around here 
because there's a lot of green space," says I'anson. "… which helps de-stress 
the young horses."

Horses typically patrol for nine or 10 miles each day, but that can rise to 16 
if escorting the King's Troop of soldiers from their barracks in St John's Wood 
to the centre of town.

Each stable has a board giving details about its equine occupant – name, 
colour and behavioural traits. The big chestnut mare called Jeanette, for 
example, might bite and kick and so needs a double stall in the horse box.

Many come from Ireland where breeding big, athletic horses is a specialism. 
The 10 at West Hampstead are a mixture of Irish sport horses, warmbloods and 
Irish draught/thoroughbred crosses, while one named Fred has "a bit of Shire in 
him".

Lexington, at 16 hands high, or 5ft 3ins at his withers (the high point just 
before the neck), is considered small for a police horse. Most are around 17hh 
or more, and tower above me.

Morning stable duties are followed by breakfast and a briefing – details of 
the route they must take and who to look out for. There's a kitchen for 
two-legged officers right next to the stables, and as we sit at the table 
drinking tea, a mouse scuttles across the floor. "Don't tell the men," she says 
quickly. "They'll put a trap out."

On the day I visit, the officers are patrolling an area of West Hampstead 
targeted by burglars. The officers tack up (the tack is cleaned every day – 
with boot polish on the outside surfaces to get high shine) and paint their 
horse's hooves with oil (it conditions and makes their feet look smart) before 
mounting.

"We use oil every day except when we're going to protests and there's a risk 
of fire," I'anson says. Lexington is very good with fire, she adds.

The horses have studs in their shoes to stop them slipping, but these seem to 
have little effect as they slide down the slope from their stables, and the 
problem is even worse when it snows. "The last two winters have been awful for 
snow and ice," she says. "We went out but stuck to main roads for the best part 
of two weeks last winter."

On the high street, the horses wait in a traffic jam, reluctant to go past an 
enormous, grinding cement mixer. A couple with a child in a pushchair 
enthusiastically take photos, and I'anson warns them not to push the child too 
close in case they get spooked by traffic.

On the previous day, she had been outside the Old Bailey helping to police the 
student protests, and was on duty from 5am to 9pm. But because of the horse's 
youth and relative inexperience, Lexington had the day off, and is therefore 
likely to be quite frisky.

Not that everything always goes according to plan. On one occasion, she and 
her colleague Sgt Alex Baker had stopped by a restaurant in Camden to chat with 
diners sitting outside when a message came over the radio asking for an arrest 
to be made inside. Baker handed his horse to I'anson and went in first. "I 
asked a security guard to hold both the horses so I could help," she says. "I 
told the guard just to be firm with them if they played up."

Having handcuffed the suspect, I'anson went back to call for a van to collect 
him. "I got outside and couldn't see any horse or security guard – just skid 
marks on the cobbles."

She followed the marks through the twisting alleyways of Camden Market: "It 
was heaving with people but no one had seen the horses. My stomach was knotted, 
just thinking about what could have happened."

Thankfully, she met someone leading Knightsbridge – Sgt Baker's horse – 
closely followed by Lexington, still loose but looking for his companion. "I 
got them back to the restaurant by the time Sgt Baker came out with the 
suspect. He had no idea anything had happened," she admits.

This sets me wondering: how do you arrest someone if you're on a horse? An 
incident soon afterwards gives me an insight, when the officers spot a young 
man they consider suspicious walking along the road.

Caucasian and dressed in tracksuit bottoms and hoody, I can hear him from my 
vantage point across the road complaining about discrimination. A horse stands 
closely on either side of him, forming a triangle with the hedge behind, neatly 
corralling him.

Lexington soon gets bored and starts eating the hedge, but Knightsbridge 
stands quietly, allowing I'anson (who is riding him today) to continue 
questioning the young man.

After a few minutes the interviewee relaxes and tells I'anson his name and 
address, and admits he has been caught with drugs in the past. He pulls out his 
pockets and takes his shoes off. "I don't have anything on me – I would have 
legged it if I had," he says.

Back at Wembley, the crowd is in full flow, and a Transport for London 
employee warns the commanding officer that the tube station is at full 
capacity. I'anson orders the other officers to turn their horses side-on to the 
crowd. There are still gaps in between, but when the officers raise their 
hands, the fans stop without protest.

It is incredibly moving to watch a line of just six horses effortlessly 
holding back 35,000 fans. The relationship between the police and the British 
public may be troubled, but judging by this night at least, it seems the 
force's equine members still draw a healthy respect.

Curriculum vitae
 