
It's known by the hospital staff only as "the chair" and for Jackie Lyons it 
symbolises the most difficult and painful aspect of her job. When a woman comes 
into this small, windowless room to see a consultant for the results of 
investigative tests to find out whether she might have breast disease, it is 
bad news if Lyons, or a nursing colleague, is sitting there.

It means the patient is about to be told she is one of the nearly 50,000 in 
the UK diagnosed every year with breast cancer. It is still the second-biggest 
cause of death from cancer for women in the UK, but thanks to earlier diagnosis 
through "one-stop clinics" like this – and improved treatment – the mortality 
rate has fallen by about 30% in the past 15 years.

Here in the basement of the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson wing at University 
College Hospital in central London, Lyons is holding one of her regular daily 
clinics. Here she advises patients, at various stages, about what to expect 
next from their often lengthy and gruelling treatment. Crucially, she gives 
them information to help them make decisions about breast reconstruction.

"It has to be their choice," she explains. "We take the time to tell them 
exactly what they can do now or even further down the line, but – for the 
purposes of informed consent – it has to be their decision."

Lyons, and her colleague Nikki Bailey, specialise in issues relating to 
surgery, while oncology counterparts advise on chemotherapy and radiotherapy.

Until relatively recently women forced to lose a breast through mastectomy 
were not routinely offered reconstruction by theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>. But in pioneering work by its 
clinical team, UCH is now aiming at breast conservation where possible and, 
where it is not, a range of different types of reconstruction.

In her soft Australian accent, and with a friendly but informative manner 
peppered with a few jokes and giggles along the way, Lyons explains to her 
first patient that breast reconstruction is "a journey – it's never a single 
event – which can be as long, or as short, as is necessary".

As a surgical breast clinical nurse specialist, she supports the medical team 
– consultant surgeons, radiologists, medical and surgical oncologists. The 
clinic – headed by lead consultant surgeon Robert Carpenter – is a symptomatic 
one which does not perform routine NHS mammographic screening. Instead, women 
(and sometimes men, too) are referred by their own doctors, having spotted 
changes in their breasts ranging from lumps, to thickening, to nipple discharge.

"So how are you today?" Lyons cheerfully asks the patient, a 41-year-old 
teaching assistant who has just finished chemotherapy to shrink a tumour in her 
left breast and has lost all of the hair on her head (hidden by a black cap and 
scarf), her eyelashes and eyebrows. With surgery due in early December when she 
will have a mastectomy and lymph node removal, she must decide in the next two 
weeks whether or not to have a reconstruction at the same time.

On the computer are images not for the faint-hearted. Pointing at the 
photograph of a real patient (cropped to the neck to avoid identification), 
Lyons cuts straight to the chase: "If you chose to go just for a mastectomy, 
this is what it would look like." Seeing the straight line – a long scar 
several inches along a flat chest wall, with no nipple – the patient seems 
intrigued, rather than shocked.

On the desk is a large "Celebrations" chocolate tin containing a most unlikely 
assortment of paraphernalia which Lyons shows patients as she talks, including 
gel-filled prostheses and an inflatable implant inserted into a woman's chest 
under her pectoral major muscle as one of several types of reconstruction. 
There are also "stick-on" artificial nipples and a clear plastic bottle – or 
drain – with lengthy tubes, used to drain blood and other bodily fluid after 
surgery.

Lyons also shows the results of different types of reconstruction including the
latissimus dorsi flap method 
<http://www.macmillan.org.uk/Cancerinformation/Cancertreatment/Treatmenttypes/Surgery/Breastreconstruction/Usingmuscleskinflaps.aspx>
 – which involves taking muscle from the back to create a new breast – and a 
more radical procedure (DIEP 
<http://www.macmillan.org.uk/Cancerinformation/Cancertreatment/Treatmenttypes/Surgery/Breastreconstruction/Usingtummyarea.aspx>
) involving tissue from the tummy.

Pre and post-operation photos are shown, the former with the black markings 
done by the surgeons. The stark reality of bilateral – double – mastectomies 
are revealed as well as "the bad" – a reconstruction involving an implant which 
has been misshapen as a result of radiotherapy. Lyons tells the patient that 
"it's horrendous, but it is something that happens only once in a blue moon".

But good can come out of the bad, she stresses: "We can make your nipples, 
using your own skin or using tattoos, and we can even adjust your breast on the 
other side to make you more symmetrical. You have lots of options and it is a 
lot to take in."

Indeed, it is hard to believe that some of the natural-looking breasts in the 
photos are elaborate surgical reconstructions, and Lyons hails the breast 
conservation work done by the surgical team as "amazing – we take the cancer 
out and then we repair the breast tissue. Breast reductions can also be carried 
out, and women can end up with a better shape than they had before. Overall, it 
helps women enormously with the psychological aspects of dealing with the 
cancer."

During a half-hour session with 52-year-old Barbara Wilewska, Lyons inflates 
her implant with a needle – one of the medical procedures she can do as she 
completes her advanced practitioner training. There is friendly banter between 
the two about her return to work and her excitement at going to a wedding in 
Poland next year.

The job is far from clinic-based; Lyons' eyes light up as she describes 
assisting in theatre with operations. "I enjoy it enormously from a learning 
point of view, and I do volunteer when I have the time." And she pays regular 
visits to the surgical ward, encouraging and helping a woman to look at herself 
in the mirror after surgery. She smiles as she tells the patient: "When doctors 
come in the morning after surgery they like to admire their handiwork … but it 
may take you a while."

At the regular weekly multi-disciplinary team meeting, when patient cases and 
recommendations for treatment are discussed and the results of imaging such as 
mammograms, ultrasounds, MRI, histology results and bone scans are shown, Lyons 
may have to speak on behalf of patients who have voiced a desire for breast 
conservation.

Research has revealed that women value continuity of care through the same 
breast care nurse, particularly given that they will rarely see the same 
consultant, registrar or doctor.

Between 200 and 250 women are seen each week, including patients attending for 
regular check-ups (at regular intervals for the first five years since 
diagnosis). One in 10 of the 70 or so seen at the one-stop clinic will receive 
bad news, making them the 10 to 15 cases of breast cancer diagnoses every 
month. Benign conditions may be simply cysts or harmless lumps.

Although the average age of those diagnosed is mid to late 40s to late 60s, 
Lyons reveals that her youngest patient is 21, and the oldest 98. "We see a lot 
of younger women and their cases become complex because you have to think about 
issues such as fertility," she says. Aged just 32, she admits that "some of the 
diagnoses of younger women do get to me".

Being there when bad news is broken is important. "We hear exactly what the 
patient is being told and we know what is facing them. Some people are very 
stoic and don't want to cry. Others are in tears all the way through. They are 
offered some time alone with us afterwards. But often they cannot wait to get 
out of here," she says.

Lyons was born and brought up in Melbourne, Australia, and had always wanted 
to be a nurse. After completing her nursing degree there, she worked for five 
years before coming to London with a friend: "The plan was to stay here for six 
months, but that was seven and a half years ago," she recalls. "I was such a 
homebody that my brother said I would be on the first plane back from Heathrow."

Starting with agency work, she moved to the oncology ward at the old Middlesex 
Hospital before a more permanent job at the private London Breast Clinic on 
Harley Street, where she stayed for four and a half years. Keen to switch back 
to the NHS, she began her current position, which gave her "a pay rise and a 
lot more autonomy", in June 2009.

Lyons seems to have a natural empathy with her patients, and says she has 
learned a lot on the job: "It's all about listening – and sometimes also 
reading between the lines."

She advises newly-diagnosed patients thirsty for more information to "be 
choosy" and only to use websites such asMacmillan <http://www.macmillan.org.uk/>
,Breast Cancer Care  <http://www.breastcancercare.org.uk/> and Cancer Research 
UK <http://cancerresearchuk.org>.

Next April the clinic will move to the new state-of-the-art UCH Macmillan 
Cancer Centre <http://www.uclh.org/OurServices/OurHospitals/CC/Pages/Home.aspx>
, bringing all the diagnostic testing facilities together under one roof. The 
hope is it may come to redefine cancer care. "It is going to be very 
patient-friendly and it is all very exciting," says Lyons.

Rebecca Smithers was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2008 at the old Elizabeth 
Garrett Anderson and Obstetric Hospital at UCH
 