
Emu, a very handsome nine-year-old male harris hawk, is sitting on the roof of 
a flatbed truck in Eaton Square, London. Although the driver can't often have 
seen a bird of prey sitting on his truck, he is not at all amused. In fact he 
is glaring at the bird with considerable antagonism. Emu takes the hint and 
flies back across the road to handler David Bishop.

Bishop and Emu both work for Van Vynck Environmental <http://www.vvenv.co.uk/>
, and every Thursday morning they can be found patrolling the square, giving 
the local pigeons a hard time.

Eaton Square is one of the poshest addresses in London – the rubbish left 
outside the six-storey houses include empty Pol Roger bottles; one or two 
buildings have flags (not British) or blue plaques detailing how the likes of 
Neville Chamberlain once lived there. Top-of-the-range Mercedes vie with 
Rolls-Royces, Ferraris and Bentleys for parking space. So it's hardly 
surprising that the owner of the Grosvenor Estate, which owns the lease to 
Eaton Square, the Duke of Westminster, has recruited such an elegant way to 
control pests.

Bishop's role as a pest controller started in 2005 in slightly humbler 
surroundings, whenKen Livingstone decided to rid Trafalgar Square of pigeons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2006/sep/29/uk.localgovernment>. "The 
feeding was gradually stopped and a controlled feed introduced, so the pigeons 
didn't starve, and this was depleted over an 18-month period. Then we started 
to fly the hawks after they fed," he explains. "We were there seven days a 
week, eight hours a day to start with. There were an estimated 12,000 pigeons 
on the ground at any one time."

The work was very high-profile and attracted a lot of criticism from pigeon 
lovers. "No one attacked us physically, but they did verbally," Bishop recalls. 
"The Pigeon Alliance put posters of me, labelled pigeon murderer and spattered 
with red paint, all around the West End."

Ironically, the one thing the falconers patrolling London aim not to do is 
kill pigeons. They simply scare them away, to prevent them fouling the 
buildings and pavements and spreading disease. Key to this is keeping the hawks 
slightly overweight – when you weigh 1lb 7¾oz, just one extra ounce is enough 
to make the difference between a few worried pigeons and feathers all over the 
pavement.

"If a pigeon doesn't react, it's putting itself in temptation's way. But Emu 
doesn't catch them very often. He works as a visual deterrent," says Bishop.

He only flies Emu in London one day a week – another venue is the Victoria and 
Albert Museum. The rest of the week he drives to other city centres and 
commercial sites, with Emu sitting on a perch in a large wooden box in the back 
of the van. The box means he does not have to be hooded for his excursions.

Harris hawks are not known for their speed but they are social birds and easy 
to train, making them popular for falconry. Van Vynck breeds a variety of birds 
to use in different locations, and training to ensure the handler is recognised 
as the sole source of food and to ignore the kinds of disturbance they might 
come across in city centres takes about 12 months.

As we stand by the edge of the Eaton Square Gardens, I can see a magpie or two 
hopping around, squawking at the hawk. A blackbird is broadcasting its 
mellifluous song, a squirrel runs up a nearby tree and surprisingly, given that 
we are in central London, we can both hear a woodpecker knocking. Does Emu ever 
go for smaller prey? I ask.

"They tend to hunt large targets," says Bishop. "It takes as much energy to 
hunt a small bird as a big one, and the hawks are very greedy. All they want to 
do is hunt, gorge themselves and then sleep."

Instead, Bishop feeds Emu on day-old chicks, supplemented with quail on 
Fridays (because he doesn't work at weekends). And although he gets small 
snacks during work to encourage him to fly back to Bishop, he eats his main 
meal after work.

Van Vynck recruited Bishop to work on the Trafalgar Square clearance because 
his then job as head falconer at the English School of Falconry had given him 
plenty of experience of dealing with the public. Years of displaying birds of 
prey – including a golden eagle called Fluffy – meant he was the ideal person 
to explain the falconers' work and introduce the hawks to the public.

As we talk, parents and children on their way to school come up to say hello 
and ask about Emu. "How far do you think he can see?" Bishop asks one small 
boy. "Right to the end of the square," the boy replies. "You're right, and he 
can see so well – about 42 to 44 times better than we can – that he could read 
a newspaper being held there," Bishop says.

One thing he never does is offer to let people stroke the harris hawk. 
"Normally harris hawks are very laid back. But Emu is a one-man bird – a bit 
stand-offish if other people try to touch him," says Bishop.

The hawk stomps around on Bishop's wrist, and is then set into flight towards 
the balcony of the house opposite. Unlike the other balconies in the square, 
this one is like a jungle – absolutely covered in trees and bushes, obscuring 
any view into the building. The inhabitants obviously value their privacy.

Emu, however, does not. First he sits in one of the trees on the balcony, then 
shifts to the railings. "It's perfect pigeon nesting ground there," says Bishop.

Bishop says he has been "obsessed with birds in general since I was a kid, and 
I got my first kestrel when I was 11. It's almost terminal. Once you start 
[being interested in falconry], you just keep going and going."

Just as well, given the hours he has to work. To keep out of the way of 
traffic and the general public, the pair generally set off for work before 
dawn, starting at 4am in summer and 5am in winter. It also means he finishes 
work by lunchtime, and can fly his own birds, including a gyr peregrine falcon, 
in the afternoon. He lives in Hertfordshire, where he also grew up, and still 
hunts with his birds and his two English pointer dogs in the Hertfordshire 
countryside. His freezer is full of partridge, pheasant and grouse, "and 
there's no lead shot in them – no trips to the dentist".

While we talk, Emu is sauntering around the middle of the square, gliding from 
branch to branch to balcony rail and then back to Bishop for a treat. He wears 
a ring on his leg, denoting that he is listed in the independent bird register, 
andalymeri anklets <http://www.themodernapprentice.com/jesses.htm> to which 
jesses are fitted.

He is also sporting a tracker device attached to a "backpack", a harness that 
Bishop has fitted to all the firm's birds. "I've only lost one bird 
permanently," he says. "It was a peregrine back in the big storms of 1987. His 
mews blew over and he wasn't tethered."

Emu protests a bit when the tracker is fitted, stretching his wings into 
Bishop's face and hopping around. "Must we go through this every time? Really?" 
says Bishop. Emu and Bishop seem more like an old married couple than working 
colleagues.

Bishop's affair with birds of prey predates him meeting his wife, Elizabeth, 
and she is completely accepting of them, or so he claims anyway: "It was made 
quite clear from the outset that the birds took precedence. They take a lot of 
commitment, a lot of looking after."

However he admits Elizabeth is not very keen on the hawks. "She thinks they 
are scary – the way they look at her and their mannerisms," he says.

Bishop holds Emu so their faces are very close. Does he ever peck you? I ask. 
"No, that's the dangerous end," he says, indicating the very sharp talons.

The birds live in a mews – a shed in Bishop's back garden that is unheated but 
protects them from the wind and draughts – which is cleaned out on a daily 
basis.

I wonder who looks after the birds when he goes on holiday. "We go to Scotland 
so I can fly the birds," he says. On seeing my face, he bursts out laughing and 
adds: "Not really," he confesses. "There's another falconer lives very close to 
us, and we look after each other's birds when we go away."

There are thousands of falconers in the UK ("there also are a lot of falconry 
widows out there"), and several firms use the technique for pest control in 
London, according to Bishop. Van Vynck Environmental alone employs about 10 
falconers and owns 40 birds, which are used to control seagulls and Canada 
geese besides pigeons.

The work is perhaps less glamorous than conducting displays at bird of prey 
centres or on the circuit of county shows, but it pays a lot better: "Working 
for a pest control company means you can live," says Bishop. "When you have a 
family, you have to go where the money is."

We have been standing on the pavement chatting while Emu works, but suddenly 
Bishop steps behind me and says: "Do you want to know what it's like to be a 
pigeon?" Before I can say anything, he holds out his arm. Emu swoops down and 
flies straight towards me, a blur of beak and wings, wafting my hair as he 
swoops over my head to Bishop's wrist.

I decide it might be a good time to switch territory.
 