
Mandy Haberman became an inventor by accident. Her third child, Emily, was 
born with Stickler syndrome, a genetic condition which often causes feeding 
problems: with conventional medical devices failing to help, she decided to 
work on a solution.

Symptoms of Stickler syndrome frequently include a cleft palate and a tongue 
too large for the space formed by an underdeveloped lower jaw: this makes 
sucking very difficult for babies. "Emily had terrible problems with feeding 
and ended up being fed with a naso-gastric tube," Haberman says. "It was hell. 
She was failing to grow and at one stage the hospital said she wasn't going to 
survive," she says.

Emily was transferred to Great Ormond Street, and her condition improved. 
Although she still wasn't feeding orally, Haberman realised that the baby was 
enjoying sucking on a rubber dummy. "I used a syringe to get milk into the 
corner of her mouth while she was sucking on the dummy. It worked," she says.

This gave Haberman, a graphic designer, the idea for a bottle with a long teat 
enabling babies with malformed mouths to suckle by stripping milk along its 
length in the same way you milk a cow by hand, rather than straightforward 
sucking. She spent five years researching and working on the bottle before 
setting up a company from her kitchen table to bring theHaberman Feeder 
<http://www.mandyhaberman.com/haberman-feeder> to market as a medical tool 
supplied to hospitals and parents by mail order. She went on to develop the
Anywayup Cup <http://www.mandyhaberman.com/anywayup-cup> – "the world's first 
totally non-spill cup", which was soon selling 60,000 a week from stores such 
as Safeway and Tesco.

Now, inspired by the number of mothers with healthy babies who, despite its 
retail price of £18.50, seek out the Haberman Feeder because it has been 
described by experts as the closest bottle alternative to breastfeeding, she is 
developing a range of bottles which is still under wraps.

So how does she come up with an idea and set about putting it into production? 
"I start by identifying a need," she says. "Some people come up with an idea 
and create a need for it, but I look for something that needs a solution – a 
gap in the market." She does preliminary searches online on patent databases to 
check whether anyone else has come up with a similar idea. "You can get the 
searches done professionally, but can get a feel for what is out there yourself 
and this saves money," she says.

After months at the kitchen sink, "sticking things together", it's time to 
involve a design engineer to develop the components. "We want something that is 
good to use and cheap and feasible to produce," she says.

At this point she might apply for a patent. In her earlier designs, when she 
was working alone, Haberman applied for a patent when she had a rough working 
model: as a result she ended up applying for two patents per product as the 
design changed. Now that she works alongside design engineers, she feels she 
can take the design further before applying.

"It doesn't cost a lot to apply for a patent. In theory, you can do it 
yourself, but it is quite specialised work and I think it's a waste of time and 
money to do it yourself because the patent is likely to be full of holes," she 
says.

There is also an art to applying for a patent which is not too broad so it 
does not clash with other registered intellectual properties, but not too 
narrow, either, so you can tweak the design but still protect your original 
idea.

The Anywayup Cup had been on the market for 18 months and 70 people had been 
employed to produce it when Jackel International launched the Super Seal Cup 
under the Tommy Tippee brand. Its non-spill valve bore a striking similarity to 
that of the Anywayup Cup, which immediately lost a huge amount of market share, 
so Haberman took Jackel International to court.

Jackel argued that the design of the valve was "obvious" 
<http://www.thelawyer.com/small-time-inventor-wins-patent-claim/80791.article>, 
that nothing in the technology involved in Haberman's valve was outside normal 
workshop modifications, and that its operating principles had been known of for 
a long time. But its claim was rejected by the judge, who ruled that although 
Haberman had only taken a small and simple step, it had been a very effective 
one and had been sufficiently inventive to deserve the grant of a patent 
monopoly. Jackel was forced to withdraw its patent-infringing product.

Haberman says: "There's a cynicism [among large companies] about the 
intellectual property rights of the little guy. If they reckon you haven't got 
the resources to protect your copyright, they'll have a pop at you."

The David and Goliath-style case had a lasting effect: "I used to be very meek 
and mild. If you had said 'You will find yourself in the high court fighting an 
international company …' It's amazing what you're capable of when it comes to 
the crunch."

Before development, the next stage is to assess the potential market. This 
involves asking the target audience – mums with babies – whether they would be 
prepared to spend a certain amount to buy a product that performed in a 
particular way. "If not, you have to go back to the drawing board to see if 
there's a different way of solving the problem," she says.

The initial focus groups involve quite a small number – about 20 mothers in 
total. The second stage involves asking one to try the product with her baby to 
see if there are any immediately obvious flaws. Haberman has asked Debi, her 
interior designer, to test her latest invention, and I sit in on a meeting with 
Debbie, seven-month-old Elsa and Debi's mum, who has been looking after Elsa 
while Debi is at work.

Haberman sits on the floor with Debi while Elsa plays and gurgles in between 
them. After an hour, the photographer and I are flagging – I didn't realise 
there were so many questions you could ask about feeding a baby. But Debi is 
answering each one carefully and thoughtfully, and Haberman is taking detailed 
notes. Next it will be tested on five or six mums, tweaked, and then sent to 
about 100. "Once we've done that we're ready to start selling it," she says.

She and Paul Bottomley, her director of design and engineering, spend part of 
the afternoon discussing the name of the new product and how this is to be 
represented. They play with designs on the computer in Haberman's office, 
printing off variations and sticking them on the walls. Everything is under 
scrutiny: name, colour and size of the lettering, whether the lettering is 
printed horizontally or vertically, even the way the name is spelled.

Haberman does the rounds of companies likely to be interested in taking out a 
licence to manufacture and sell the product, or just to sell it. The companies 
she visits are required to sign a non-disclosure agreement to prevent her idea 
from seeping out.

The more advanced the product is when demonstrated to potential licencees, the 
better – they are usually reluctant to invest time and money in something if 
they don't know for sure that it will work. The Anywayup Cup went out of 
production for a year because the previous licencee went into administration. 
But Haberman has just found a factory in Poland to produce it, and by the time 
you read this it should be on sale again.

Her next venture is a range of products, and, for the first time, she has 
sought an angel investor to help with the development costs – she had already 
spent £800,000 before bringing them on board. Part of the agreement was that 
the manufacture of the range should initially be outsourced, but Haberman is 
keen to produce her products in her own factory in the UK.

"We have a facility that is waiting for us," she says. "We've done the 
costings to the nth degree and it's more cost-effective for us to manufacture 
in the UK than anywhere else, even China, where you have to order your products 
and pay for them even before they're made. If the [retailers] you are selling 
to don't pay you until much later, it increases the risk hugely."

She admits this project has been expensive, largely because she set up a 
company and has been paying salaries. "We needed finance just as we went into 
the credit crunch. We wasted a year talking to an American company [which was 
interested in manufacturing and selling the product] so it's been slow. The 
range is also sophisticated and requires a lot of modelling and engineering. 
We've got to get it right."

So what is her end goal? Is she one of those entrepreneurs addicted to work, 
who cannot sit back and enjoy life even when they've made a bundle of money? 
Far from it, says Haberman: "This house [tucked away in a mews near Regents 
Park] in town is my big investment – I look on it as my pension. We've always 
lived modestly – I'm not one for fast cars and jewellery. Our plan is to exit 
the business, get it up and running with new products coming on stream and then 
sell."
 