
I am standing in a room filled with metal cages, row upon row, stacked three 
cages high. Each is filled with tightly wrapped, plastic-covered packets of 
pristine £50 and £20 notes. It seems like a good idea to ask Victoria Cleland, 
head of notes at theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor>, how much money is 
in each cage. "Well, there are 40 packets in each – you can do the maths," she 
says. A label on one says it contains 5,000 £50 notes. By my mental arithmetic, 
that's £250,000 per packet. Or £10m in each cage.

To get into the vaults underneath the Bank of England, I have surrendered my 
purse (you are not allowed to carry money in, because you are certainly not 
allowed to carry any out) and my mobile, in case I take photos of the security 
measures.

In fact, down here there quite a few things you are not allowed to do. These 
include looking at the gold (Gordon Brown only sold about half of the UK 
store), giants or titans – notes worth £1m and £100m each respectively.

Cleland explains that one of the Bank's roles is to underwrite the value of 
notes issued by the Banks of Northern Ireland and Scotland, and these immense 
notes make storage easier.

Nor am I allowed to reveal how many vaults there are, how much money there is 
in this particular room, or how thick or heavy the solid metal door is (a clue: 
it takes two men to shift it and has the longest key I've ever seen).

Yet until the notes are taken across the threshold of the Bank, they have no 
value. They are just pieces of printed paper.

It is Cleland's responsibility to ensure that the quality and design is of 
such a high standard that we – the great British public – are prepared to work 
long hours to collect them, to exchange goods that we have made for them, and 
to hand them over to banks and other financial institutions so we have enough 
to live on in our old age.

"It's my job to maintain confidence in the currency," she says, "to make sure 
we have banknotes out there where they are needed to meet demand."

The demise of sterling in its paper form has been predicted many times over 
the years as different electronic payment methods are launched.

But cash is used more than ever, says Cleland, and demand is particularly high 
at Christmas, Easter, and special occasions such as royal wedding bank 
holidays, jubilees and the Olympics.

With regard to the latter, the Bank of England will have to ensure there is 
sufficient cash in bureaux de change, both here and abroad through the notes 
circulation scheme, to supply people coming into the country to watch the games.

Cleland has worked for the Bank of England for nearly 20 years having studied 
philosophy, politics and economics at Oxford and after a brief, abortive foray 
into accountancy.

She started in a department working on the financing of small businesses, 
researching whether they were getting appropriate funding from banks (not a 
role performed by the Bank of England now). From there she moved into the 
wholesale market supervision division, followed by graduate recruitment.

The Bank hires from a wide range of academic backgrounds: admittedly many are 
economists and mathematicians, but it took on 48 people last year, including 
historians, linguists and scientists, and "only six had PhDs". This very bright 
intake has no time to become bored in a job: new recruits tend to stay two or 
three years in their first role before moving on to a different job or division.

Development of staff is considered very important: Cleland was sponsored 
through her MBA at Imperial College, for example. There is, she says, always 
something new to learn, and with 1,808 full-time staff and 254 part-timers, 
vacancies are always advertised internally.

The Bank of England may seem a bit fusty to those who work outside its 
environs. Employees are paid a lot less than those working for the private City 
banks surrounding it, and walking around the beautiful but dark ground floor, I 
am reminded strongly ofGringotts Wizarding Bank 
<http://pottermore.wikia.com/wiki/File:Gringotts_wizarding_bank.jpg> in Harry 
Potter and the Philosopher's Stone.

But upstairs is very different: bright lights, several computer screens on 
every desk, glass offices and a clean desk policy brings the Bank into the 21st 
century. Most of the staff in Cleland's team are staring in concentration at 
their screens, but there are clusters chatting and laughing quietly.

A pile of cake and biscuit tins sits on a filing cabinet, and Cleland tells me 
that during the BBC2 seriesThe Great British Bake Off 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b013pqnm>, the team ran its own competition. 
"We lived on ginger snaps, victoria sponges, whatever was on the previous 
week's show," she says.

Cleland had gained huge insight into the Bank's operations by working for 
three years as the private secretary to the deputy governor responsible for 
financial stability – writing speeches, researching and being his eyes and ears 
in the organisation.

Having worked on the resolution of Northern Rock she was asked to set up the 
"special resolutions" unit to deal with failing banks. "Northern Rock was the 
busiest time of my working life," she recalls. "We were doing very long hours – 
often over weekends and all through the night. But you just thought, this is so 
important, you see it in the press and you are right in the centre of what is 
going on. You are driven by adrenaline."

Even then Cleland, who is tall and slender, and cycles about six miles into 
work each day before hitting the Bank of England's gym, looked after her mental 
and physical health. "I never slept in the office and I made sure I kept going 
to the gym enough and caught up with my friends at least once a week," she says.

The notes division, which she has headed for exactly two years, is less 
frenetic. But Cleland is still at her desk every day by 8am, dealing with 
emails, preparing for meetings ("I can have up to nine meetings a day") and 
thinking.

Her team is 135 strong, and she is in charge of, among other things, the 
Bank's two cash centres (from where notes are distributed to banks, the Post 
Office and security firms) in Leeds and Debden in Essex, anti-counterfeiting, 
educating banks and retailers on identifying genuine notes, compliance over 
storage, research and development into cash and the design of new notes.

Banknotes, typically, last for three to four years, depending on how much they 
are used; £5 notes have a shorter life than £50s, which spend quite a lot of 
time in safes. Their longevity also depends on treatment: washing machines and 
dogs are good at destroying notes, and holders have been known to microwave 
them or store them in tea caddies which have then been caught up in house fires.

The Bank has a special counter on the ground floor where outdated notes can be 
exchanged for new ones and, as Cleland explains, it can determine if even the 
very badly damaged ones are genuine.

Old notes are delivered to the cash centres and destroyed before they become 
too scraggy, and then they are "granulated and made into compost", she says.

Cleland is also the person you have to thank for access to more £5 notes. Cash 
machine operators dislike fivers because they take up a lot of space relative 
to their value, meaning that busy machines are likely to run out sooner. But, 
in response to public demand, her team has developed a pilot programme in 
collaboration with HSBC to establish which machines could incorporate fivers 
without diminishing service.

"You can't put £5 notes into every machine, because some have very intense 
demand for cash, while others aren't filled up very often," she points out.

Nevertheless, she has set ATM providers a target of increasing the amount of 
fivers in machines to 1.2% during 2012. "It doesn't sound a lot, but it will 
make a big difference because those notes will be in circulation all the time."

Amid all the big decisions, there's one other burning responsibility – the 
issue of whose images should adorn the banknotes in the purses and back pockets 
of the nation.

The designs are not changed often – Cleland has just overseen the first new 
£50 note, featuring steam engine pioneers Matthew Boulton and James Watt, to be 
printed in 17 years.

Interestingly, there is a list so that members of the public can add their 
suggestions. So far these include Mick Jagger, Richard Branson, Princess Diana, 
David Beckham and Robbie Williams. Perhaps it's best to leave that decision to 
Cleland for now.

Even so, I can't help asking whether my personal choice, Alan Turing – who 
played such a crucial role in breaking German ciphers during the Second World 
War – is likely to make it on to the back of a note any time soon.

Perhaps as you would expect, Cleland is giving nothing away. "We'll certainly 
be looking at him," she says, smiling enigmatically.

Curriculum vitae
 