
Will Torrent cooks in his sleep. A pad of Post-it notes and a pen reside on 
his bedside table and, when he awakes, he frequently finds it scrawled with 
daring culinary adventures. "I often have 3am moments and I look at what I've 
written in the morning and think, 'What on earth was I doing?'" he says. "The 
other night it was blackcurrant and chocolate mousse with liquorice and fennel. 
I'm still not sure it's going to work."

Torrent, 25, is a pastry chef and patisserie development consultant for 
Waitrose, and he likes to do things differently whether it's turning chocolate 
to gravel or soaking strawberries in basil and olive oil.

"We know, as chefs, what works and what doesn't work, but are always trying to 
push the boundaries without going over the edge," he says. "We don't put chilli 
in chocolate for the sake of it, but because just enough chilli will highlight 
the chocolate flavour – a trick the Aztecs knew well."

Torrent's main function is to develop new recipes for his employer, including 
for its Heston and Duchy Originals ranges. Recently he has been working on a 
picnic hamper to provide patriotic nourishment during the Queen's diamond 
jubilee celebrations and, as usual, he has been trying to reinvent tradition.

"We've been taking classic dishes and giving them a modern twist," he says. 
"We thought, 'What are some of the great dishes of the Queen's reign?' and 
decided on Eton mess since the princes went to Eton. We asked ourselves how it 
could be made more modern and so we looked at altering the cream with yoghurt 
marbled with rosewater and strawberries from Sandringham and we topped it with 
meringue pieces, oat butter crumble and fresh strawberries."

Torrent's main culinary laboratory is a surprisingly compact, surprisingly 
quiet kitchen on an industrial estate in Bracknell and he shares it with half a 
dozen other chefs, all of whom devise different aspects of the firm's products. 
Torrent, the sole pastry chef, is conjuring chocolate "gravel" out of a syrup 
in a saucepan, while a colleague experiments with jellified gazpacho topped 
with crab and avocado, and another moulds a tray of fishcakes.

"Although we're all responsible for different things, it's a collaboration 
because we're constantly tasting each other's food," he says, summoning his 
colleague from his cold soup in order to pronounce on a rhubarb consommé.

He spends three days a week developing pastries and puddings for Waitrose and 
the remainder on other projects. He is writing a book, devising a pudding menu 
for a high-street restaurant chain he cannot yet name, and is an ambassador for
VQ Day <http://www.vqday.org.uk/>, an annual celebration of vocational 
qualifications. "Every year there's so much media emphasis on the celebration 
side of academic qualifications, but you don't read of great chefs and plumbers 
and gardeners being feted for getting their VQs," he says. "I wasn't the 
brightest lad in school and remember coming back from holiday to find my GCSE 
results and feeling awful as people celebrated their high grades."

Torrent coveted a culinary career from childhood. His grandfather was a chef 
and his grandmother baked copiously at home, but it was a taste of mustard ice 
cream that set him on his career path. "I was 15 and looking for work 
experience through my school in Maidenhead and someone suggested a new 
restaurant called the Fat Duck in nearby Bray," he says. "I applied and up 
popped this scary ginger guy with snail porridge and dry ice."

The "scary ginger guy" was Heston Blumenthal, and the Fat Duck was to become 
the three Michelin star-rated hub of culinary experimentalism.

"My first job was to butcher a pig's head," says Torrent. "At the end of each 
day Heston would ask me what I liked and didn't like. I loved it, but it was 
when he said we were going to make mustard ice cream that I was hooked. That's 
when I realised that you can set your own ideas going and do a familiar thing 
differently. That week changed my life."

At 16 he got his first paid job in a pub kitchen near Slough. "It was a 
baptism of fire. I was plunged straight into cooking which gave me all the 
basic skills," he says. "There's nothing like the buzz of service when it goes 
right, although when it goes wrong it's the worst thing ever. I've done service 
in restaurants where plates have been thrown and, in one place, I remember 
having a box of spinach flung at me. I nearly left the industry because of it."

It was while doing a degree in culinary arts management at the University of 
West London that Torrent met his next mentor, pastry lecturer Yolande Stanley. 
"The first weeks of the course were spent learning how to butcher meat and 
fillet fish, but it was when we walked into the pastry kitchen that everything 
just clicked," he says. "It excited me far more than slicing flesh in a bloody 
apron, I could express myself more with dessert menus."

Stanley entered her young protegè for national and international competitions 
and in 2007 he became the first British pastry chef ever to win a medallion of 
excellence at theWorldSkills 
<http://www.worldskills.org/index.php?option=com_frontpage&Itemid=1> 
competition that year.

He was invited to do consultancy work last year after spending two years 
perfecting his craft at a Surrey patisserie. "I met one of the supermarket's 
directors at my church and he was struck by a christening cake I'd made for one 
of the congregation and suggested that I apply," he says.

The work allows him to give free rein to his adventurous imagination – if a 
wild idea occurs to him and the ingredients are to hand, he can knock it up 
there and then in the kitchen – and has reunited him with Blumenthal who has 
lent his name to an in-store range and who visits weekly for consultations.

On his three days a week, Torrent clocks in at 8am and surveys the diary. 
Frequently he and his colleagues have to devise banquets to thank suppliers, 
launch new products or titillate the taste buds of the company directors.

He spends whole days with suppliers helping them perfect a product planned for 
the supermarket shelves and he works on his own creations. This morning's first 
job was to bake a Christmas cake using a new recipe that he is developing.

"I wouldn't go back to hotels or restaurants," he says. "When I was training 
for WorldSkills I was sent to top hotels and I realised that there was not 
enough room in hotel kitchens for a brain that is always wondering what it can 
do that is different."

Instead, his adrenalin is fired by seeing products he has helped create on the 
shop shelves, even though his contribution is anonymous. "I worked on the royal 
trifle created for last year's royal wedding and I went into my local store and 
heard a customer say 'That looks nice!' and she put it in her basket. That," he 
says, "was more exciting than getting a customer's empty plate sent back in a 
restaurant."

His inspiration comes from his extensive travels participating in and judging 
competitions and, surprisingly, from the programmes designed for armchair 
cooks. "As chefs we never switch off," he says. "We all watch MasterChef and 
Great British Menu and discuss them and I get all the celebrity chefs' books to 
keep on top of what the stars are doing. People always want what they see on 
TV."

His own rarified menus have not spoiled his palate for the humbler fare of 
cafes and his friends' kitchens. "There's nothing better than a greasy spoon," 
he says. "And after a long day at work I'll just stick a pizza in the oven or 
go to the drive -thru McDonald's. People say chefs are food snobs and my 
friends hate cooking for me because they think I'll be standing there 
pronouncing judgment, but snobbery is a bad habit to get into. We should be 
tasting everything."

This outlook tempers his demeanour when the heat is on in the kitchens. 
"People ask me how, as a Christian, I find being a chef in a cut-throat 
atmosphere that's all about Michelin stars," he says. "I see it as being about 
hospitality and encouragement."

A significant part of his role is encouraging youthful talent. The day before 
I meet him he was testing students at Westminster Kingsway College and the day 
after he helped select the UK team for the next WorldSkills competition. He 
takes pains, he says, to offer unsuccessful candidates constructive advice 
rather than criticism. "The most important thing Heston told me after that week 
of work experience was: 'If you want to do something go and do it because the 
only person standing in your way is yourself,'" he says. "I'm so glad I 
listened because this job has taken me to places I could never have imagined – 
Buckingham Palace to launch the picnic hamper one day, Kensington Palace for a 
PR reception, and Eton College to judge WorldSkills on others. I'm now living 
the rock'n'roll pastry lifestyle."

Curriculum vitae

Salary Range as a Waitrose consultant, £25,000 to £30,000.

Hours "On the three days that I work with Waitrose I arrive at 8am and leave 
around 5.30pm. We might have a teabreak but not lunch because we're tasting all 
day long."

Work-life balance "Very good, although the chef in me is mentally working all 
the time. I live at home with my parents so when I'm not at Waitrose or 
travelling I can work from there. My mum's fridge is crammed with my stuff and 
at the moment the conservatory is half filled with olive oil because I'm 
working with a new supplier."

Best thing "Tasting food all the time and constantly being surrounded by food 
and foodies. Everyone, even the receptionists, is constantly thinking about 
food and you'll bump into someone on the staircase and start talking about it."

Worst thing "When a product you think is amazing doesn't make it."

Overtime

Music is Will's other great passion: "I'm a British Bublé and sing with a trio 
and present all the concerts of Laurie Holloway, the first musical director for 
Strictly Come Dancing."If he's had a stressful day he will play the piano – 
"usually worship songs from our church, where I lead a group, which annoys my

mum because she was a church organist and wishes I'd play hymns." Will also 
loves visiting restaurants – "I am probably their worst customer, because if 
something is wrong I'll speak out."He plays five-a-side football with friends 
once a week.
 