
Giuseppe Cannas discreetly pops a strong mint into his mouth as he reaches for 
his "pouch" – his black canvas roll of make-up brushes – and checks his phone 
before we disappear into the labyrinthine backstage corridors of the National
Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>. "You cannot take any 
chances if you are leaning over someone doing their make-up – whether for hours 
or just minutes," he smiles.

I clock a large colour photograph pinned up on the wall behind his desk which 
epitomises the cutting-edge and unforgettable work done by his department – 
hair and make-up – here at the National. The close-up portrait of actor Jonny 
Lee Miller as The Creature in the National's 2011 sell-out Frankenstein shows, 
in full gory detail, his brutally stapled-together head, bald but for some 
grisly tufts of hair.

Frankenstein pre-dated Cannas's appointment last September as head of make-up 
and hair, but, as he whips me at staggering pace through the number of 
productions and future productions currently in rehearsal, I am under no 
illusion about the huge scale of the job. "I oversee two current productions 
and one in the making for each of the three in-house theatres – the Olivier, 
Lyttelton and Cottesloe – as well as providing technical support for cast 
changes and touring for external shows such as One Man, Two Guvnors at the 
Haymarket and War Horse at the New London," he explains. "So I typically have 
11 shows to manage at once."

The day-to-day work of theatrical make-up artists like Cannas and his team can 
be more "bread and butter", but there is still plenty of variety, he explains. 
"We work to the blueprint already given to us by the play's designers, which 
means we have to produce a creative and technically accurate visual 
representation which looks good under the strong theatre lights. Sometimes it's 
more basic make-up and, at other times, more complex period make-up or special 
effects.

"Often it's Shakespeare but with a modern, or unusual, take. Our work involves 
creating images and characters through make-up, hairstyles and prosthetics in 
accordance with the brief we have been given."

On our way out he shows me the mind-boggling spreadsheet on the wall showing 
the schedule for technical and dress rehearsals in the run-up to opening 
nights, previews and press night; along with the locations of the actors' 
dressing rooms on the floor below, where all but very technically complex 
make-up will be done.

Given that all wigs are made in-house there is surprisingly little time – 
often days, rather than weeks – to get everything ready for productions. In the 
large airy hair and make-up studio on the fifth floor of the National (it looks 
out on to an internal courtyard with the feel of a scruffy 1960s' office block) 
Cannas's colleague Sarah Lou is "hand-knotting" a multi-layered hippy-style wig 
for the actress Helen McCrory for her part in the new play The Last of the 
Haussmans, which opens in just a week's time. This could take at least 45 hours 
to complete.

In the world of theatre and entertainment, the highly-skilled roles of make-up 
artist and wig-maker are intertwined, and most courses train people to do both. 
All the wigs used at the National are created from human hair and made 
especially for the relevant actors, which means that separate ones are also 
made for under-studies, too – even if they are rarely used. Coloured swatches, 
to help with orders, are stacked up in plastic boxes, and the wigs will usually 
be styled closer to the production itself, depending on what is required by the 
designer, Cannas says. Members of his team act as supervisors for individual 
productions.

Cannas has a demanding managerial role at the National, where he reports 
directly to the Theatre's Head of Costume. Although he is in charge of a 
10-strong department, with all the administrative and financial 
responsibilities that brings, he likes to keep his hand in, and enjoys "putting 
on his blacks and grabbing his pouch" to do make-up himself.

Blacks – black clothing – are typically worn by staff backstage to reduce the 
chances of being seen by the audience. And Cannas is a big fan of hats – today 
he is sporting a black beret, but on other days he favours a sloppy woollen 
beanie or even a baseball cap. His style is "casual but comfortable", with 
practical outfits he could wear to a meeting with director Nicholas Hytner or 
attending an opening night.

Today he has come in especially over the Jubilee bank holiday to lend a hand 
with a series of workshops the National is running in its "pop-up" space as 
part of its summer programme, "National Theatre Inside Out", to demystify and 
explain its activities to the public. Two members of his team have wig stands 
and pouches to hand, creating fifties-style makeovers for mums (as their 
daughters look on in wide-eyed wonder) and a plate of prosthetic "stitches", 
warts and putrefying flesh fascinate the little boys.

Cannas – who says he used to enjoy watching his own mother putting on her 
make-up in front of her dressing table mirror – unrolls the pouch and, with 
chuckles of laughter and great enthusiasm, he works some magic of his own. 
"This is a great line of communication with the public", he says. "There is 
something rather elitist about working in TV and the theatre, so we are trying 
to show what we actually do. People think this is glamorous but it is very long 
hours."

Cannas's route to working at the National Theatre began in his native Sardinia 
where, after studying languages (including Latin and Greek) for his national 
diploma, he dropped out of an engineering course at university. After 
compulsory army service in Italy, he came to London at 22 and decided to stay. 
"My mum said goodbye to me at the airport and gave me three months", he 
recalls. "That was 20 years ago."

Although he did not speak English when he arrived, he picked up the language 
by working as a pizza delivery boy and in a bar, before securing a place on a 
year-long beauty therapy course at the Hammersmith and West London College. 
That led him to an HNC and HND in make-up and hairdressing at the University of 
Westminster, including business studies and marketing "which have been 
absolutely critical for what I am doing now". Initially, he did freelance work 
assisting on big-name advertising campaigns for the likes of designer Alexander 
McQueen, with whom he also worked on London Fashion Week.

Keen to put something back into the English education system, a talent for 
teaching saw him returning to Hammersmith and West London College where he 
eventually became a full-time lecturer in hair and make-up for three years, 
while creating numerous specialist courses in make-up.

In 2000 he went to Australia "for love" just as Disney's touring production of 
The Lion King was coming to south-east Asia. He became head of hair and 
make-up, working with a 60-strong cast and a team of six make-up artists to 
bring the famous two-dimensional characters to life.

Cannas worked on The Lion King in Sydney, Melbourne, Shanghai, Johannesburg, 
Taiwan and Singapore. "It was absolutely fantastic and it was very difficult to 
say goodbye to the team I had worked for. I think I was married to my job, 
albeit in not a very healthy way." Now only 40, he claims the biggest challenge 
of his working life to date has been stepping into the shoes of Joyce Beagarie, 
the NT's former head of wigs, who had been at the National for 38 years until 
she retired last year.

"I was thrilled to get the job but terrified at the same time," he admits. "I 
had a very clear idea of what I wanted to do here, which is to make my own mark 
– to create another layer. I have an average of six meetings here a week. There 
is a lot of planning, scheduling and so on, but I am fortunate to have a great 
team."

I sit in with Cannas on the dress rehearsal of The Last of the Haussmans just 
hours before the production's official opening, where about 50 staff, 
representing various departments including lighting, costume and hair and 
make-up, gather to scrutinise the final run-through and order changes if 
necessary. I see Helen McCrory in her (now finished) full-length wig, alongside 
Julie Walters whose long silver-grey wig - described by one critic as a "mad 
grey mane" – has been crimped to within an inch of its life. He thinks it 
obscures her face at times, so this will be fixed.

All the makeup and wigs are applied and fitted one hour before the show in the 
actors' dressing rooms, and when the make-up is minimal they are taught to do 
it themselves. Very specific show plots are written to allow a smooth run of 
quick changes backstage.

Interestingly, Cannas says that the make-up and hair are as much for the 
actors, to help them to get into character, as for those watching the play. 
"About 80% of the job we do is actually for the actors, not the audience."

And with a chuckle, he is off backstage to touch up Julie Walters's make-up 
for the second half.
 