
People born with abnormal eyes could – within our lifetime – benefit from 
replacements that match their own DNA, thanks to research by scientists like 
Joe Rainger.

The 35-year-old geneticist is researching a human gene mutations that cause 
microphthalmia (one or both eyes abnormally small), anophthalmia (absence of 
one or both eyes), and coloboma (a gap in the structure of the eye). The 
conditions are recessive; which means you need both parents to carry the 
defective gene for the conditions to appear. They are therefore most common in 
families where first cousins marry.

Rainger, who works at the Medical Research Council's human genetics unit at 
the University of Edinburgh, has spent the last seven years establishing what 
happens to particular genes to cause these conditions.

A recent breakthrough came when his principal investigator, Professor David 
Fitzpatrick, HGU's head of medical and developmental genetics, read about a 
mouse that was exposed to radiation by US scientists in the 1960s. The mouse 
went on to father offspring with similar problems to people born with deformed 
eyes, a reduced number of toes and fingers and, in one third of cases, brain 
disfunction.

Rainger has established which genes are responsible for the conditions, in 
both the mice and people. In lay terms, two bits at either end of the gene 
break: if the bits then float off and are lost, the mouse ends up with dodgy 
digits, but no eye malformation. But if the broken parts of the gene transpose 
positions, proteins – that would normally travel out of cells in the eye – 
become stuck on the inside. This prevents these cells from developing into 
proper eye cells and from forming the correct structures. The affected mouse is 
then born with small, or no, eyes.

Although a different gene is affected in the human condition, it is hoped 
lessons learned can be applied to how some people come to have such small and 
deformed eyes.

It seems incredible that Rainger has proved this working at a lab bench 
measuring about 12ft long which he shares with two other scientists. It is 
covered with racks of test tubes, pipettes, a centrifuge, bottles of liquids, 
petri dishes and a box of crushed ice. The unit packs them in like battery 
chickens, which is a sign of a successful laboratory. The more outstanding 
research it produces, the more geneticists want to work here – bringing their 
funding with them.

On the other side of the bench, separated by shelves, his wife Jacqui is 
researching the gene mutations that cause cleft palettes and lips. I don't even 
bother asking if they find it difficult being in such close quarters: everyone 
in the lab (and there are serried ranks of benches) is working with intense 
concentration, and there is very little noise.

Rainger takes me to visit his mouse stem cells, sitting in flasks in an 
incubator. "They're not doing very well," he says, after squinting through a 
microscope. I take a look. Some roundish cells are floating on the surface, 
while uniform, squarish shaped cells – some with spiky points – are stuck to 
the surface of the flask below. It's the square ones without spikes that 
Rainger wants. To rejuvenate them, he pipettes off the round ones on top, 
swishes the square ones with an enzyme to stop them sticking, centrifuges the 
resulting liquid and puts the desired cells back in the incubator in some fresh 
medium.

Aren't these rather basic duties for someone at his level? Rainger admits it 
would be good to have some technical support but adds: "It's important to know, 
at every single stage, what the problems and challenges are going to be. I want 
to deal with them myself, write the protocol and move on to the next stage. The 
more data we produce, the more project grants we can apply for and get others 
in to help out."

We visit some of the more sophisticated equipment: time-lapse microscopes that 
enable you to watch cells growing, huge vats of smoking liquid nitrogen into 
which a technician is placing polystyrene boxes full of cells, and the new 
star, an Ion Torrent, a machine about the size of a domestic printer that 
sequences hundreds of genes, far quicker than any previous technology, by 
assessing the pH levels of each bit of DNA.

I wonder where the DNA goes in. Dubiously, he stares at it before admitting he 
also doesn't know – but then neither does one of the HGU's professors who comes 
in while we are gazing at this wondrous machine.

The Ion Torrent is performing a function that used to occupy many scientists – 
one reason why Rainger says scientists must remain flexible. Technology is 
developing so rapidly, geneticists have to mutate just as quickly as the cells 
they study.

The unit has strict rules preventing any staff from sequencing their own DNA. 
Rainger says that people have a genetic predisposition as to whether or not 
they will develop a certain illness or condition in a permissive environment: 
some fat people can genuinely blame their obesity on their genes, but their 
weight gain will be exacerbated if they spend all their time in McDonald's. 
But, he says, he would not be tempted to check his own genes, even though he 
and Jacqui are expecting a baby in the summer. "For some illnesses you only 
need to look at your parents and previous generations to see what might happen, 
and whether you should think about your lifestyle choices," he says.

Rainger attributes his interest in research to his father. "My brother and I 
were brought up in Stroud by my dad. He encouraged us to get involved with 
nature groups; to ask questions."

Despite this good start, his progression through academia then became rather 
rocky. He moved to Edinburgh after GCSEs to live with his mother and her 
husband, a scientist at Edinburgh University. He didn't excel academically – he 
had to resit two of his five highers – but ended up reading environmental 
chemistry at Edinburgh.

"I lasted a term," he recalls. "I regret going to university in the same city 
that I went to school, because I never integrated with the other students. I 
had moved into a flat in the city, so I wasn't living at home, but I still saw 
my old school friends instead of meeting new people. I was so disenchanted, I 
didn't even bother finding out where the exams were being held," he says.

He had already been a waiter in his spare time, but thought that the kitchen 
looked much more satisfying – not least because it didn't involve dealing with 
customers. He applied and started as a junior chef.

Four years later he was a chef de partie in Nobu on Park Lane, making seaweed 
salads for the likes of Tom, Nicole and Kylie. "I'm pretty certain I was 
working there when Boris Becker had his indiscretion in the cupboard," he says.

He loved it, but had to return to Edinburgh, half-heartedly applying for 
chefs' jobs, but ending up at Heriot-Watt to study food science. After 
switching to biochemistry, and coming first in his honours year, he spent the 
summer researching how the parasite that causes malaria in mice (no, I didn't 
know mice got malaria, either) mutates to combat antimalarial drugs.

It provided him with a strong base from which to apply to do a PhD at the HGU. 
"It's a very good time to do this," says Rainger. "The funding is not taxed, 
making it cheaper to employ a PhD student than a post-doc. And it gives you a 
few years to decide what you're going to do, while these savage [public sector] 
cuts are going on."

Rainger completed his PhD in 2008 and is now on staff. He says: "Most 
scientists go to the US to really escalate their career. To the Rockefeller 
University in New York, for example, or California. It's not so much the labs, 
but the people – the ones who've been published several times in Nature (the 
magazine all scientists aspire to) in the last couple of years."

For now, Rainger is unlikely to be able to do this as he shares the care of 
his six-year-old son, Otto, from a previous relationship. But he can start an 
exciting collaboration with the Centre for Regenerative Medicine in Edinburgh 
on the growth of eyes in the laboratory, and is applying for three years' 
funding to cover his salary and equipment.

To thrive as a scientist, he says, you need to be meticulous, open-minded, 
patient, have an investigative nature, not be motivated by money and able to 
collaborate.

While some, if not all, these criteria are equally in demand in a professional 
kitchen, Rainger adds: "Cheffing is intense tension followed by quick 
gratification, unless the customer doesn't like the dish. But this [he points 
to the lab] results in longer-term chronic stresses followed by unbelievable 
fulfilment … the wonder and excitement of finding out how things work."

• This article was amended on 1 February 2012. The original said that Joe 
Rainger has been working to establish "what happens to the gene to cause these 
mutations". This has been clarified to read "what happens to particular genes 
to cause these conditions".

Curriculum vitae
 