
People turn to Michael Wormack when they have joys to celebrate and disasters 
to bear. He helps them realise their weddings plans and organise their 
funerals. Often, armed with tea bags and a bourbon cream, he counsels them 
through abuse, penury and bereavement. It never occurred to me before that 
priests and pawnbrokers have so much in common.

"A large part of the job is counselling," he says. "A lot of people return 
just for a chat or some advice and we give them a cup of tea and a biscuit and 
direct them to somewhere that can help them."

Wormack, 26, is the manager of H&T Pawnbrokers in Tottenham, north London. The 
economic hardships, widely blamed for the riots that tore through the area last 
summer, are instantly visible on the high street where, among the proliferation 
of ramshackle pound emporiums, are at least two other pawnbrokers (a third was 
destroyed in the riots), five betting shops and half a dozen cheque-cashing 
outlets.

H&T, one of 160 branches owned by the century-old company, stands out from the 
shabby line-up with its polished windows displaying elegantly arranged silver. 
It looks more like a jewellers than my preconception of a pawnshop. There is 
another difference; whereas the optician a few doors down requires customers to 
press a buzzer and be assessed through a locked door before admission, H&T 
keeps its portals open, despite the thousands of pounds worth of treasure laid 
out in glass cases. "I'm passionate about being somewhere people feel 
comfortable coming to," says Wormack.

I had expected a jumble sale: a miscellany of heirloom teddy bears, family 
china, mantel clocks and hi-fi. Most modern pawnbrokers, however, prefer to 
specialise and many, like the Tottenham H&T, specialise in gold, silver and 
diamonds, either hocked or bought. "If you don't specialise, you don't build up 
the expertise," says Wormack. "Some pawnbrokers try to take on too much and 
sometimes they'll turn away gold thinking it's fake when it's not."

Heavy bunches of metalwork dangle from the waistbands of the three young staff 
on duty. They look like housekeeping keys, but are the tools that can measure a 
diamond and analyse gold. There's a tiny 10-times magnifying glass, notched 
metal gauges to size gemstones and a UV torch to identify diamonds.

In one of the wooden drawers banked up beneath the glass-screened service 
counter are bottles of acid to test gold in full view of customers. "We're 
trying to remove the cloak and dagger image of pawnbroking so we try to be like 
a traditional jewellers," says Wormack who, on the morning I visit, has been 
giving his staff a training session on window polishing and how to space and 
angle the jewellery displays.

Business has accelerated since the economic downturn and, although there is 
only a trickle of customers while I am there, this can swell to a queue during 
the lunchtime and evening peak. "We're seeing a lot of people who have just 
been made redundant," he says.

H&T has opened more than 50 new outlets in the past year on the back of the 
new demand and Wormack has had to train his staff in the art of watchmaking in 
order to identify fakes from the steady stream of designer brands that has 
started coursing in from the newly needy. "That's my favourite bit, looking at 
watches," he says. "Tottenham is not the right area for high-end jewellery, but 
when you get a genuine, premium watch it's a beacon of technical perfection."

Pawnbroking was never an intended career for Wormack, who studied metalwork 
and jewellery design at the Surrey Institute of Art & Design and began work in 
a fine art gallery. "I moved to London in 2009 without any money and was 
applying for jobs and the first interview I got was with H&T," he says. "I 
hadn't a clue about pawnbrokers. I thought they were sinister backstreet places 
where you went to offload stolen goods."

His perception was not entirely misguided. On the sheaf of audit forms used to 
catalogue items, I notice a section labelled "police". Not all of the treasure 
brought into the shop is legitimately acquired and the local police supply the 
staff with lists of stolen goods and wanted individuals to look out for. "When 
I started here last May there were a lot of problems with crime," he says. 
"Everyone was new and it was all about promoting ourselves with not enough 
attention to making ourselves legitimate and ethical."

Experience has taught him to detect customers who might not be bona fide. "You 
start learning to read people and what sort of jewellery they might own," he 
says. "Different cultures and classes tend to go for different things. White 
British tend to bring in 9-carat gold, for instance, whereas Afro-Caribbeans 
prefer 18-carat; and Indian gold, which is traditionally given at special 
events, is up to 22-carat."

I decide to test him. I own no jewels and have no aspirations to acquire any; 
M&S serves my ornamental needs. I ask him what kind of thing he would expect me 
to bring in. He studies me and, before I realise that my resin necklace is 
poking out of my coat, awes me with his perception: "I'd assume you would go 
for aesthetically pleasing rather than valuable material," he concludes.

A general preference for monetary value over design, is, he confesses, one of 
the disappointments of the job. A necklace is worth £8 per gram of gold, 
regardless of whether it's a rare antique or a moment of 1980s recklessness 
from Ratners. "We've lost sight of beauty in the business," he says. "People 
are not interested in craftsmanship; only in how much the materials are worth."

The most exquisite piece he was ever offered was a Van Cleef & Arpels necklace 
in gold and diamonds for which H&T could only pay £200, but which was worth 
over £10,000. Now, if he realises that an item is worth more than the £8 a gram 
to which he is limited, Wormack directs customers wishing to sell, rather than 
to pawn, to a dealer or auction house.

Some 95% of the gold and silver pawned at 8% interest at H&T is redeemed and 
Wormack says his staff go to long lengths to track down customers and encourage 
them to reclaim their heirlooms.

In an area where many residents lack a steady wage or a bank account to put it 
in, a pawnbroker – which also offers payday loans – can be regarded like a high 
street bank and staff are put through regular training in customer care, 
selling techniques and presentation to help blur the boundaries.

"Some people will pawn gold to fund a wedding dress or weekend away, like 
using a credit card," says Wormack. "One woman wanted to sell some broken gold 
jewellery to buy herself a dress for her work Christmas party. We were able to 
offer triple what she had expected so she bought the dress and hired a limo to 
transport herself and her colleagues."

Most customers, however, are in desperate situations. "I come from a 
privileged background and have been shocked by the circumstances people find 
themselves in," says Wormack, who talks them through their predicament, 
calculates the minimum they can get away with borrowing to spare them further 
debt, and drafts a feasible repayment plan.

"You have to appreciate what it takes for these people to come to us with 
treasured heirlooms or wedding rings.

"A couple of customers who have spent thousands of pounds buying gold from us 
over the years have fallen on hard times and are now coming back for loans," he 
says. "It's made me realise how fragile life is and it's prompted me to protect 
myself to the hilt with life insurance, pension and securities."

He and his staff are, in a different way, also vulnerable to the economic 
hardship. Opportunist thieves posing as customers will try to grab a clutch of 
silver which the assistants are showing them and some customers, angry if a 
loan is declined, can turn violent. "Security is a major issue," says Wormack 
who has been attacked on several occasions. "People at their most vulnerable 
can get aggressive, and we all look out for each other and will call a 
colleague inside on a pretext if a situation looks as though it might turn 
ugly."

Although pawnbrokers have to identify precious metals, weigh a diamond, 
wrestle finances, spot a con, counsel the needy, spot thieves and fight off 
desperados, no formal qualifications are needed. Wormack is unusual with his 
arts and jewellery background.

"I only thought I'd be in this job for a few months, but I became so 
involved," he says. "I tell applicants that because some of the situations we 
deal with are so depressing, the only skill they need is to be able to cope 
with anything."
 