
The man sitting next to his wife has had enough. The couple are getting 
divorced and are going through mediation in an attempt to make the process less 
traumatic for their children and avoid expensive court action.

They have been sitting in a small room with two mediators and me for the past 
hour-and-a-quarter discussing their finances, but their communication has 
ground to a halt. Compromising on sensitive issues with someone you don't like 
any more is an exhausting and emotionally draining experience: the father can 
barely bring himself to speak.

Neil Robinson, director of The Mediation Centre in Stafford, immediately picks 
up on the change in mood: "I think you've probably had enough for one day, 
haven't you? Would it help if we saw both of you individually for a couple of 
minutes before you leave?"

The husband and wife both nod – the first thing they have agreed about in the 
last half hour.

After each person has had a chance to speak to Robinson, and Katherine, 
a trainee mediator who has been leading the meeting, Robinson says: "I wouldn't 
normally do that, but they both needed to vent their feelings about the meeting 
and I thought they would be all right about it."

He is referring to the requirement that mediators remain absolutely impartial: 
their role is to facilitate negotiations between people who are in conflict, 
not to take sides. Allowing them to talk separately could lead to the suspicion 
– however erroneous – that the mediators favour one partner over the other.

Robinson became a mediator some 20 years ago, when the profession was still in 
its infancy in the UK. He qualified as a solicitor specialising in family law 
after studying at Oxford, but admits he never felt truly comfortable in the 
role. "I've never believed in the adversarial route for families," he says. 
"It's not a good way of finding the truth, fairness or meeting the needs of 
children."

Robinson has been happily married for 21 years and, although his parents 
divorced when he was 17, does not feel that was a particular influence on him 
choosing this career path: "I have simply been clear ever since I started 
[mediation] that there has to be a better way of doing things."

He has spent many years building up a mediation practice within the firm he 
was working for – Nowell Meller solicitors in Stafford – and The Mediation 
Centre now has "outposts" in Hanley, Crewe, Burton, Cannock and Burslem – home 
toArnold Bennett <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arnold_Bennett>, who changed its 
name to Burlsey in his "Five Towns" novels – with plans for further growth.

When he started, Robinson believed that the centre's clients would, in the 
main, be low in volume, highly-motivated and with a reasonable level of income 
and assets. Instead, about 75% of its work has been publicly funded, as people 
on legal aid are required to be assessed to see whether mediation is suitable 
for their circumstances.

While domestic violence and abuse, a power imbalance in the relationship, or a 
total lack of trust, can be a bar to mediation, high conflict, by itself, is 
not. This means he and his colleagues are dealing with "a high volume of not 
very well-off couples in the early stages of separation. A high proportion of 
people don't want to be here."

Mediation can dramatically cut the cost of divorcing: while typically costing 
£500 per person, it can lead to a non-contested divorce costing about £1,000, 
much less than the £5,000 to £20,000 of a contested divorce.

Cohabiting couples, whose situations tend to be more complicated, and 
therefore end up in civil courts, face costs of up to £30,000.

The savings produced by mediation are so great that in 2011 the government 
decided that any divorcing couple in England and Wales should be referred to 
mediation assessment before resorting to the courts.

But the government's decision comes with a sting in its tail: although 
separating couples will still get public funding for mediation, many will have 
to have to pay for their own legal advice and court representation or go 
without. Robinson says this is far from ideal: "The best results happen when 
mediators work alongside solicitors."

Nevertheless, he is clearly excited by the chance to extend mediation to an 
even greater audience. Not only have more people started seeking it out on a 
voluntary basis (the proportion the centre is now handling has risen to about 
30% of its cases), trainee numbers have also soared since the announcement.

Training involves completing a course which typically takes eight days, 
followed by co-working on cases with a trained mediator, including leading 
some, and writing them up for submission.

Accreditation takes about two years, and is not limited to solicitors – 
Katherine is a former marketing specialist from Norfolk, while Ann, one of the 
mediators, was a psychologist.

The Mediation Centre is one of the biggest privately run operations offering 
this service in the UK. Three full-time and seven part-time mediators, plus 
eight trainees, are supported by six administrators whose job it is to arrange 
appointments and make sure that everyone is clear what it is about, and what is 
expected of them.

This is much harder than it sounds; clients who don't want it can be very 
tricky to pin down, and the flimsiest of excuses will be used to cancel an 
appointment. The first pair on Robinson's list for the day were supposed to be 
discussing parental arrangements – surely the most important thing a divorcing 
couple must discuss – but have cancelled because their boiler has broken down.

Robinson uses the time, instead, to catch up with his team: he supervises the 
trainees, and even the fully-trained mediators welcome the opportunity to ask 
advice and compare experiences. Ann asks for advice on a case she has mediated 
that morning. The client was frightened of her ex-partner to the point where 
she panicked at the thought of him being in the same building.

She had also brought her toddler, even though this is specifically against the 
rules, indicating that she has not really taken on board what mediation is all 
about. Robinson says that sometimes clients' solicitors are invited to the 
sessions to give support to their clients, but, in this case, he confirms Ann's 
decision that the person involved was not suitable for mediation. They then 
discuss the progress of another trainee, who "has a good rapport and is very 
calm", according to Ann.

"It's all about the balance between intuition and rapport," says Robinson. 
"There's a dialogue with the client going on, but at the same time there's a 
checklist in the back of your head of things you want to cover by the end of 
the session." He adds that mediators have to be optimists: "If not, they 
shouldn't be doing it."

While Robinson conducts two initial assessments, Ann and fellow mediator, 
Paul, will be doing a "shuttle" mediation in the two rooms on either side. This 
means that, for some reason, the clients involved do not want to be in the same 
room as each other, so the mediators act as go-betweens.

Robinson takes the first of two men through their assessments. He explains 
that he is impartial and not there to decide who is right or wrong: "My job is 
to help you sort this out without going to court. It's a voluntary process."

It's also voluntary for the man's former partner, and she has already told the 
centre's administrators that she is not interested in participating. Robinson 
tells the man he thinks it very unlikely she will change her mind, but 
discusses his eligibility for legal aid nevertheless, then takes him through 
his case.

The second assessment – also a man – is in a very similar position, as he has 
voluntarily sought out mediation to discuss parental arrangements ("access" is 
very old-fashioned and fails to give the correct impression of the shared 
responsibility for children, I'm told by Robinson, though I notice all his 
clients use the word). But the administrators have been unable to speak to his 
former partner.

Even so, Robinson is encouraged that people are actively seeking help in 
sorting out their separations, and foresees a time when people will seek out 
mediation on a preventative basis: for will planning, pre-nuptial agreements 
and sorting out childcare arrangements when parents make second marriages.

"We're certainly at a stage where people think, as they separate, that the 
first port of call is a mediator," he says. "It's very exciting, but a bit 
scary."
 