
There are some in the restaurant trade who believe the rivalry between the 
kitchen and the front of house equals that of Athens versus Sparta or Napoleon 
facing off against Wellington – but I see no sign of any professional enmity as 
I breeze intoClos Maggiore <http://www.closmaggiore.com> in London's Covent 
Garden. There's no Gordon Ramsay-esque chef screaming expletives at terrified 
waiting staff – just a lot of quiet efficiency orchestrated by Daniel Kapp, the 
restaurant's maître d'.

In the pressure-cooker environment of a leading West End restaurant it's 
easier said than done to ensure things run smoothly. But as Kapp guides me 
around, all I sense is calm, which is exactly the way he likes it.

As ringmaster and public face of the restaurant, Kapp is responsible for the 
front-of-house operation, with responsibility for around 20 staff. "It can be 
stressful at times, but my job is to keep tensions low by making the restaurant 
a friendly place to work. I have a feeling the chefs at this restaurant are 
better than in many venues, because everyone seems to get on and we all seem to 
be able to function socially," he says with a grin, as industrious waiting 
staff saunter past.

Kapp, an American born on the east coast but raised in the west, moved to 
London in September 2010 from San Diego, California, where his previous role 
was food and beverages manager at the 120-room, ocean-frontL'Auberge hotel 
<http://www.laubergedelmar.com/> in Del Mar. "I came to London for professional 
growth, to explore new cultures and experiences. I'm not getting to explore as 
much as I'd like but I'm definitely getting the professional growth."

His knowledge is mainly experience-based, after he decided not to pursue the 
subject he studied. "I did a degree in business and computing and dabbled in 
the business world for a little while after college, but I soon realised it's 
not social enough for me. I much prefer to meet people and office life can be a 
little dull."

For Kapp, life at Clos Maggiore is anything but. His day usually begins with a 
quick walk of the restaurant to check everything is in order followed by some 
admin. "I have to look at all the bookings for the day, make sure the private 
dining room is ready, the menu is correct, the wine is ordered, and the staff 
are all OK."

Just before the venue opens for lunch, he will walk from the top of the 
building to the bottom, checking the floors are clean, the pictures on the 
walls are straight, all the lights are working and performing a spot-check of 
everything else.

I like to make sure guests are comfortable and relaxed and part of that is 
creating an atmosphere they expect and appreciate," he says. "The slightest 
thing might spoil that, so it all has to be checked."

Most of the staff arrive in time for the lunchtime sitting – the restaurant 
opens for lunch at noon. Last orders are at 2.30pm but diners will often stay 
until 4pm, eating into a bit of Kapp's downtime.

"I like to try and take a break between 4pm and 5pm, which is when we 
officially re-open for dinner, so it's nice if the restaurant is clear by 4pm," 
he says, a hint of weariness creeping into his voice at the memory of many long 
days.

It's clearly hard work. Like most people in the hospitality trade, Kapp works 
at least a 12-hour day, always Saturdays and often six days a week. "General 
managers will take Sunday off because it's the least busy day for most 
restaurants, but it's very rare for a maître d' to take both a Sunday and a 
Monday off – in fact, it's nice if we have two days off in a row at any time."

For this reason, Kapp says work in the restaurant trade best suits young 
singles or couples without children, which is where he finds himself. "People 
with children tend to find it a little more difficult to fit everything in," he 
says.

Clos Maggiore caters to theatregoers, meaning it opens its doors to a wave of 
diners keen to fill their tummies before a show, as well as the post-theatre 
crowd. "We open until 11pm six nights a week for that reason," Kapp says, "and 
we will still find a table for someone off the street at 10.55pm if we are not 
already full. Everyone's heart sinks a little if someone comes in late, but it 
happens so often that you get used to it. It's no big deal."

I feel tired just watching him at work – he's constantly on the move, watching 
everything like a hawk, talking to staff and diners alike. But it's all done 
quietly and, unless I'm right next to him, I can't hear him above the general 
bustle. I realise just how social the job is – while I might spend a good hour 
in silence writing in front of a computer, Kapp barely goes a minute without 
talking to someone.

The most common complaints restaurants receive are about the food but Kapp 
says Clos Maggiore, which serves traditional French cuisine in a Tuscan-style 
setting, does not get too many.

I watch him at work, seeing him check with a waiter if he knows exactly where 
a particular plate of food should be going.

Later, he diligently checks a plate of pan-fried scallops as it floats past on 
a waiter's hand – one final check that the dish is up to the standard he and 
his guests expect.

A guest asks Kapp for a wine recommendation. He first asks the customer if he 
has any preference or a favourite type of grape, before suggesting a different 
glass of wine to taste with each course, describing which type would go well 
with the food.

He chooses white with the starter and a red with the main course, done 
professionally, without too much wine snobbery going on. Has he studied wine, I 
wonder? He quickly mentions a couple of courses he has done, but I sense he is 
being modest and he smiles: "I was also a wine director in my previous job, so 
I do know a little bit. I've passed the exams."

Even if the prices at Clos Maggiore are a tad expensive for some, the wine 
list doesn't exclude anyone not trousering a City of London salary – although 
fat-cat bankers will find plenty of exorbitant bottles to splash their cash on. 
Alongside Romanée-Conti Grand Cru at a ridiculous £10,050 each I spot Italian 
red at £18.50 and glasses of house wine vying for attention at just £4.75; 
while the menu also finds room for an abundance of vegetarian options and 
a vast selection of teas – no wonder the clientele is so mixed. It all makes 
for a cheery atmosphere.

With parts of the dining area clad in foliage, the venue's stand-out feature 
is its conservatory, complete with log fire and a canopy of pretty flowers, 
which, perhaps not surprisingly, has served as the stage for many a marriage 
proposal between dining couples.

"We get one [proposal] a week sometimes," Kapp says, "and because it's so 
sought after, people call to ask for tables in the conservatory two months in 
advance.

Sometimes even the regulars are amazed when they try to book eight weeks in 
advance and we have to tell them they've all gone. They can get annoyed at 
that, so I have to try to manage expectations and any disappointment."

The restaurant may well be a relaxed setting, but there is nothing casual 
about the staff. They are all immaculately turned out. "You always need to look 
sharp. I like to be as friendly as possible with the customers and will 
sometimes have a laugh and a joke. The maître d' is the one greeting them in 
person and often by phone, so he or she should maintain high standards 
throughout the experience but also appear relaxed."

Another skill, especially for a maître d' in London, is discretion. "We've had 
a lot of celebrities in here. I guess some people might react strangely, but I 
don't get star struck so I find it easy to greet them and make sure they are 
comfortable like any other guest."

An occasion on which Prince Harry and his then-girlfriend Chelsy Davy visited 
comes about as close as it gets to raising his pulse. He and his staff were 
inundated with tabloid requests for information, right down to which dishes 
they ate, the wine they drank and the size of tip they left (he assures me the 
staff refused to oblige).

He greets a table of regulars by their first name and spends a good four or 
five minutes chatting. "It's about making all guests feel special and valued," 
he explains later. "We do that with all guests but if people want to keep 
coming back, it's nice to get to know them."

Kapp has tried all the dishes in his time at Clos Maggiore, but does not get 
to eat gourmet cuisine every day. "The chef cooks staff meals twice a day, but 
they're not the dishes on our menu sadly, unless there are ingredients that are 
going to be thrown away," he says. "Even so, it's still great food. I'm not 
fussy, so I like most things."

Ever the obliging host, he bids me farewell as I leave, swivelling with 
perfect timing to greet an older gentleman and his wife who have just come in 
from the cold.

As he shakes their hands, it looks like Kapp is welcoming a couple of old 
friends for lunch – for all I know, he is.

Curriculum vitae

Pay £40,000-50,000.

Hours Around 9am-10am until 10pm-11pm. "It's at least a 12-hour day and often 
longer."

Work-life balance "It's challenging and really depends on your personal life. 
You do not have a lot of time outside work, which is why restaurant staff often 
socialise with each other. They're all in the same boat and can meet at similar 
times of the day or week."

Best thing "The day-to-day interaction with so many different people. The fact 
that I'm not stuck behind a desk and that I am instead active, on my feet all 
day and never bored."

Worst thing "Definitely the hours and the pressured environment. Tensions will 
rise, especially at busy times of year such as Christmas."

Overtime

When Daniel is not working he enjoys exploring the city of London, "especially 
the different areas of the city that I am not familiar with (and there are many 
since I am only one-year-old here)". Daniel also spends a lot oftime in 
London's art museums, especially the Tate. "I love my family time with my wife 
and my dog. I really like to be at home cooking dinner and trying new recipes, 
and just relaxing at my flat." ButDaniel's favourite past time is surfing. "The 
closer to warm weather and water I can get, the better."
 