
From ballot to web
 Cath Elliott

In 1928, women were granted equal voting rights with men: it had been 10 years 
since the Representation of the People Act first enabled them to take their 
place at the ballot box, but during those years, while men over 21 could vote, 
women had to wait until they were 30.

In July 1928 that all changed when royal assent was given to the Equal 
Franchise Act, and the dreams of the suffragettes were finally realised. But 
what has been the impact of the vote on women's lives; and how have women, in 
all sorts of ways, all over the world, moved into the public realm, an area 
that was once a strictly male preserve?

When I first became involved in politics at the grand old age of 14, and for 
many years afterwards, political activism for women meant endless meetings, 
sexist jibes on the picket line, and being roped in to help out with the 
crêche. Men still dominated the political discourse while women were expected 
to make the tea and sandwiches. If women wanted to participate in the debates, 
we had to learn to be as vocal as them, to speak up instead of waiting to be 
asked for our opinions, and then we had to be prepared to fight our corner 
along with the best of them.

For a bit of respite from all that testosterone, and to help ensure that 
women's issues were kept on the agenda, we organised ourselves into women's 
groups - safe, women-only spaces where we could plan strategies to increase 
women's involvement in political life, and discuss our experiences, and where 
those who weren't yet comfortable with speaking out in public meetings could 
air their opinions.

This grounding in such a male-dominated environment stood me in good stead for 
my later involvement in the trade union movement, where even today there are 
plenty of men who continue to treat women activists with a level of tokenism 
that would have incensed our suffragist foremothers.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> are welcome in trade unions of 
course, but it has been an uphill struggle for us to get our issues taken 
seriously, or for women's equality to be paid much more than lip service.

The internet is helping with this change. Where we once had a very real fight 
on our hands to get our voices heard above the male fray, women have now 
created a space where we not only can be heard but, if we choose, we can shut 
out the brouhaha coming from some of the more unreconstructed men on the net.

The blogosphere is the biggest public space we've ever had; we owe it to the 
women who fought so hard to secure us the vote 80 years ago to make the most of 
the opportunities a forum such as this gives us, and to ensure that women are 
and always will be playing an equal role with men in the political and public 
life of this country, in all its manifestations.

Posted on Comment is free

· Nine times in 10, we don't know the sex of a poster on Comment is free. 
Surely this means there can be no sexual prejudice? (necroflangerie)

· At first I did find some of the more "straightforward posters" on the 
website a bit intimidating. But I have learned to give as good as I get in my 
own way. I was called a "retired slapper" this morning. (annetan42)

· Even on Comment is free, there are men who call on others to be banned 
merely because they disagree with them. Luckily you can't interrupt in Cif. In 
fact there are many advantages we can take in the web; no need to fear physical 
violence for one, anonymity is another, and it's always possible to pose as a 
man. (ultimathule)

Where are all the MPs?
 Lesley Abdela

In 1928, when the Equal Franchise Act was passed, it raised among British 
women huge hopes that quite soon they would become equal participants with men 
in the House of Commons. Eighty years on, the UK parliament rates 69th in the 
world league of women in parliament, one ignoble place below Cambodia.

Women's representation in politics is not linked to whether a country is rich 
or poor. The US has 16.8% women representatives. Japan has 9.4% women in the 
Diet. Rwanda, with 48.8%, and Sweden, with 47%, have the highest representation 
of women in any parliament in the world, versus the UK at just over 19% women 
MPs.

If the Tories win the next election, the percentage of women in the mother of 
parliaments is likely to tumble even lower down the league. For over a quarter 
of a century, the political parties have said, repetitively and routinely, that 
they want to increase the number of female MPs. Party leaders have simply not 
delivered the goods. There is still only one woman in every five MPs.

Posted on Cif

· Perhaps it's not the number of women politicians that count so much as the 
quality of the ones in Parliament. Blair's Babes, as they were known, were an 
identikit bunch who were instantly forgettable. (Brusselsexpats)

· We had a very good female MP - Julia Drown - who campaigned on behalf of 
victims of domestic abuse, more child-friendly facilities in the House of 
Commons, and lower speed limits outside schools. Unfortunately she found that 
she could not combine her parliamentary duties with those of being a mother of 
two young children.(angrygranny)

Not all bad
 Jackie Ashley

It's wrong to assume that women's suffrage has made little difference. A 
recent book, Women in Parliament: the New Suffragettes, by Boni Sones, 
chronicles the experiences of many of today's MPs and asks for their assessment 
of what women have achieved in parliament. And when you hear the catalogue of 
new laws that have been passed, largely due to the backing of women MPs, you 
realise that yes, they have shaken things up quite a lot.

Think of many of the key achievements of the Blair/Brown years and you are 
thinking of women's achievements - from Sure Start, the New Deal for lone 
parents, the big extension in childcare, the increase in both maternity and 
paternity leave, the introduction and extension of flexible working for 
parents, the minimum wage, and progress on the pay gap. Only this week we have 
seen the new equalities bill in parliament, piloted by Harriet Harman, ending 
discrimination for older people as well as women and ethnic minorities. Might 
the men have got there alone? I doubt it, because women MPs have themselves 
experienced how hard it is to juggle work and family, making them much more 
forceful in agitating for new laws. They have also lobbied women journalists, 
in the unofficial circles that exist at Westminster, to push such issues up the 
political agenda.

There have been less mainstream issues too, such as domestic violence, rape, 
trafficking of women and access to cancer services that have all been 
championed by women MPs.

While Blair's Babes looked naive, fresh-faced and aware of how different they 
were, today's MPs look less excited and more ordinary. And that perhaps is the 
biggest achievement of the women MPs: today it's quite normal to see women at 
the centre of power, without anyone batting an eye.

Posted on Cif

· A recent study by Women in Journalism discovered that women featured in only 
25% of newspaper photographs of professionals and 14% of those of politicians. 
This influences the choices we make in terms of our education and our careers. 
It also influences our choices as to whether to enter politics. We need to 
widen our perception of what success is and rather than ridiculing or shouting 
down the women who are succeeding - allow them to share what it actually is 
that has driven them. This debate is a great start. (maddy1)
 