
The small glazed plaque by the front door is the only hint of what lies behind 
the row of 1970s houses on an urban street close to the border between Cheshire 
and North Staffordshire. Sporting a clay-spattered canvas apron, Anne Rodgers 
leads me through to her back garden, which is dominated by the chalet-style 
workshop where she has been making pottery for more than 30 years.

Alsager is just a few miles from the sprawl of Stoke-on-Trent, once the 
world-famous heart of the pottery industry but now a shadow of its former self, 
factories mothballed and production shipped abroad, with the devastating loss 
of thousands of jobs.

And in this unlikely residential setting, yards fr om a busy railway line, 
Rodgers – who has spent most of her working life keeping the traditional skills 
of handmade pottery alive – is single-handedly continuing to do so despite the 
challenges of the recession.

She and her late husband, Ken – who died of cancer in 2003 – set up their 
business in 1981 after leaving their jobs in the ceramics industry, where they 
had worked in senior technical and scientific roles. Having dabbled with 
pottery as a hobby from their garage, they made the leap into setting up a 
full-scale business using the proceeds of her redundancy.

Sitting at her workshop bench, she explains her philosophy. "I like to think I 
am making friendly, useful, honest pots that people can use every day," she 
says. "It's very important to me when I sit at my wheel, making shapes with my 
hands out of a piece of the Earth. Two hundred years ago, everything would have 
been handmade – with all the quirkiness and idiosyncracies and the soul that 
handmade things have. Often people today think, 'Oh, handmade, better put that 
away in a cabinet'."

The couple chose to specialise in slipware, a traditional decorative effect 
using coloured "slip" (liquid clay) which lends itself well to lettering and 
swirling freehand patterns such as flowers and leaves. In a mini-history 
lesson, Rodgers explains that it was made as long ago as 5,000BC, but the range 
she produces is based on the hand-thrown pottery made in England from the early 
17th to the mid-19th century. In addition to the older-style, traditional dark 
brown glaze, typically seen in museum pieces, the pair branched out into 
pastels which they developed in the workshop.

As well as everyday items, such as mugs, jugs, bowls and plates, Alsager 
Pottery <http://www.alsagerpottery.co.uk> makes more expensive commemorative 
ware for special events such as weddings and christenings. Rodgers reflects: "I 
like to think of them as heirlooms or modern antiques."

In the workshop – which, in the depths of winter, is warm thanks to the bubble 
wrap "double glazing" over the windows – she is surrounded by the tools of her 
trade. At the far end is her wheel, powered by a foot-operated electric motor, 
and the results of two hours of throwing that morning – eight dinner and 
charger plates which she will decorate before they get too dry.

Before throwing, she takes the clay she needs from a chest freezer (which no 
longer works, but provides insulated, sealed storage with no moisture 
fluctuations), weighs the exact amount and kneads it into a spiral shape. "It's 
a bit like making bread," she says. "It takes me about three minutes to throw 
each plate. The more you do it, the better you get."

For the decoration, she uses a "slip-trailer" to pipe the slip carefully on to 
the plate. She may follow a sketch or a template, but it is all done by hand 
and carefully trained eye. Then, after drying, the ware is taken to the kilns 
in the garage for two firings of 12 hours each.

The fledgling business got off to a good start after being signed up to supply 
slipware to the shop at the Potteries Museum. Then a contact at the 
Staffordshire Peak Arts Centre suggested the Rodgers exhibited at the British 
Craft Trade Fair.

Rodgers recalls: "We went there with a three-month-old baby and toddler, 
thinking it would be a fancy craft fair, but it was a serious four-day trade 
show and we got enough orders for a year. In 1992 we entered the competition 
for best traditional product – which had over 700 entrants – and won. That was 
a high point. Then, after that, the economy changed and things became very 
difficult."

The business also suffered when gift shops began to import cheaper, 
mass-produced ware. By her own admission, money has always been tight, as 
overheads for craftspeople and "makers" have rocketed while only the price of 
labour and clay have remained low.

Rodgers was born and brought up in Sheffield in a "naturally creative" family: 
"My dad was a pilot in the RAF and when he was demobbed, he trained to be a 
craft teacher. My mother made our clothes, our food. He made our furniture – 
the ironing board, the garden gate, a canoe."

Despite her own artistic talent she was encouraged to study sciences by her 
father, with the promise that "times were coming for women". With a physics 
degree and a master's in geo-chemistry under her belt, she went to work for the 
BritishCeramics <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ceramics> Research 
Association in Stoke-on-Trent, where she helped develop British Standard tests 
for fibre insulation material. At the interview she spotted her future husband, 
and the rest is history.

The pair were largely self-taught, learning from courses, films, books and 
even friends. But they always ran a tight ship and resisted the temptation to 
expand when orders spiked, or to rely on limited sales outlets.

Rodgers explains: "My husband was very cautious and always said: 'Don't risk 
what you can't afford to lose.' But when times were difficult we kept going, 
and we have never been in debt. Thank goodness for [the government scheme] 
working tax credit and living here, in a close-knit community."

Working from home gave the couple flexibility when bringing up their two 
daughters, but Ken's death led to some difficult decisions. Rodgers remembers: 
"Working together was a very important part of our life. When Ken died I had to 
decide whether I could carry on. We'd had a good division of labour – he did 
the throwing and I did the decorating. I found once I'd started throwing, I 
loved it. It has been wonderful to have something practical and satisfying to 
involve myself in."

She also had to rethink their sales policy – through a trade show once a year, 
and specialist shops and galleries. Now she sells regularly at craft fairs and 
farmers' markets while gearing up to sell more via the internet – including 
through membership of theMade By Hands of Britain 
<http://www.madebyhandsofbritain.com/> consortium.

Despite the popularity of the likes of Emma Bridgewater's "spotty" ceramics 
and ubiquitous pottery cafes, Rodgers makes it clear she is not a follower of 
fashion. And while not a technical perfectionist, she is shocked by the "shoddy 
workmanship" of other products: "I wouldn't send things out with a poor rim or 
crazed glaze and I get very cross when I see lids that don't fit and spouts 
that don't pour."

The collapse of the industry has had knock-on effects: "As the main pottery 
industry has declined and gone abroad, the supply sources of local products 
have shrunk. One of my main suppliers – which had 200 years'-worth of clay in 
its quarry – was forced to shut. I then had some disasters with sub-standard 
products and one year lost two-thirds of Christmas production."

The roles of scientist and artist are intertwined in this job and she seems to 
relish both. One of the biggest and most difficult things she has created was a 
dark green, domed, cheese dish, decorated with oak trees: "It was a tremendous 
challenge and they waited a long time for it. Thankfully, the things that could 
have gone wrong did not …"

Less successful was a friend's idea for a golden jubilee plate, featuring the 
Queen in full regalia – tiara, ballgown and even handbag: "Someone said I could 
make a killing with them. I made a few and only sold one."

Her advice to any prospective potters is to be "very determined and willing to 
work long hours. You have to develop people skills because you are selling an 
experience. And you have to have the making skills. There's no point working 
this hard if you are not enjoying it."

Despite many challenges and obstacles, her enthusiasm and passion appear 
undimmed. "I have made 1,120-odd commemorative plates which are spread across 
the world," she says, pointing out how satisfying it is to have handmade 
something unique that people will treasure all their lives. And invested 
somewhere in each of them is a small part of her late husband. "I always 
imagined that Ken and I would be making pots together into our old age," she 
admits. "That was not to be, but his legacy is most definitely there."

Curriculum vitae
 