
The rest of the country might be fed up with it, but Mark Eves had been 
praying for rain for some time. I am visiting the 20-acre headquarters of the 
flower growing business – where Eves works as general manager – at the 
beginning of the seemingly endless wet weather in April.

The sky is grey and the temperature low enough that, by the end of the visit, 
I can't feel my feet and the water is running down the windscreen of Eves' 
truck in endless rivulets.

But he is happy, he tells me, as we skirt around fields of daffodils. "We have 
been wanting some rain, it's very important," he says.

The fields we are driving around, just outside the village of 
Terrington-St-Clement in Norfolk, make up only a tiny fraction of Belmont 
Nurseries' business. The real gem is the whopping 163 acres of tulips (50 more 
than the previous year) which the family is cropping this year. As the soil 
around the Terrington-St-Clement nursery is too saline for tulips, they are 
grown 15 miles away in Narborough.

Belmont Nurseries was started by Eves' father-in-law Peter Ward in the late 
1960s when he and his father bought the land to grow vegetables. He expanded 
into flowers for the wholesale market and became one of the first people to 
supply supermarkets.

Now Belmont is the only commercially viable tulip grower in the country, 
regularly supplying two of the major supermarket chains. In 1996 Eves joined 
Ward to help expand the business. And it really is a huge commercial operation, 
with all the packing and labelling on site to keep costs streamlined and the 
flowers at their best.

The weather has scuppered my idea of walking among dozens of ruddy-faced 
workers picking flowers in the sun. But, as it turns out, my vision was pure 
fantasy, anyway. Almost all the labour is now done by huge machines, many of 
them driven by GPS. Eves is extremely proud of the business's use of 
technology. "It steers the tractor and is accurate to within 2cm, so I can 
drive in the same place for the next 20 years if I want to," he explains.

"We've ended up getting more produce in the fields, lowering our costs and our 
input. GPS is widely used in agriculture – but not horticulture."

Eves is so much of a "tech-head" that he confesses that, "as a hobby", he 
sells this sort of equipment and advises other growers on how to use it. "It's 
crackers, I know, but I do like doing it."

Eves is also a sharp businessman, so much so that he seems quite detached from 
the idea of flowers as aesthetically pleasing. He can't name his favourite 
flower, confesses to looking at a field of tulips with a commercial, often 
critical, eye, and tells me I'd have to ask his wife, Susanne, whether he has 
flowers on display at home. That is not to denigrate his love of flowers as a 
product, and his expertise in growing them – I just wouldn't bother to get him 
any for his birthday.

He wants more young people to see horticulture as a real business opportunity 
and a long-term career. "As an industry, we are not doing enough to encourage 
people into what is a very rewarding career," says Eves. "If you want to be a 
gardener, or learn the skills it's easy to do that at college. But the same 
colleges don't do commercial horticulture, and it's a shame."

We move into the packing house where Wake Up Boo! by the Boo Radleys is 
playing on the radio. It is in here that it really dawns on me how much time 
and effort goes into a £5 bunch of tulips. Before they even reach the point of 
packing, they have taken an incredible three years to grow.

"We planted the ones you are looking at in 2010 and harvested the bulbs in 
2011," says Eves. "That crop is taken back to the yard, dried and stored. It 
then goes back to the glasshouses in 2012 before being picked."

It might seem like madness but Eves explains that the first crop is not of a 
good enough quality to sell – once the heads are removed, the goodness goes 
back into the bulb, making for a better flower the second time around.

Many of the dead heads turn to mulch but thousands of others go to the 
Spalding Flower Parade, an important local event that dates back to the 1920s 
and takes place every April or May. The heads are used to make elaborate floral 
designs paraded around on floats.

There are 42 people in the packing shed today, mainly eastern Europeans, 
dressed in some pretty warm-looking layers. I'm not surprised. I thought the 
air-con in our office was overzealous but these workers spend all day in 
temperatures of between five and six degrees to best preserve the flowers. They 
process 100,000 tulips a day.

The first job is the debulbing. "The stem goes right into the bulb so, by 
splitting the bulb open, rather than cutting the stem above it, you get a 
longer stem," explains Eves. Moving on to the bunching, two women are rapidly 
sorting through the stems in front of them. "This is the pick stage. They are 
making sure all the tight stems and all the wide ones are matched up," he says.

Another group of workers cuts the stems to the same length, while others wrap 
them in paper and stack them upright in cold water ready to go into the cold 
store.

Another lady labels them with £5 stickers. The same flowers can be in a 
supermarket less than 24 hours later.

So what's the best way to keep tulips at home? I ask. Eves gives me a slightly 
withering look. "Put them in water," he says. What about the plant food you 
sometimes get Sellotaped to the flowers? "It's the supermarkets that sometimes 
ask for that to be included," he says. "Some varieties do need feed but by and 
large it's unnecessary."

It's not just tulips and daffodils that are grown at Belmont. One and a half 
million stems of Sweet Williams, nine to 10m gladioli, 1.5m stocks and millions 
more asters, peonies and lilies will be grown and packed on site this year. The 
numbers are determined partly by what seed Eves has, but also by supermarket 
demand.

That is often dictated by fashion, as well as one-off events. Lilies are out 
of fashion and sales have dropped, says Eves, while the Olympics means there 
will be more call for red, white and blue bunches.

"Because we plant so far ahead, with the tulips we have to guess which colours 
are going to be popular in three years time," he says. "It's difficult to judge 
and we do speak to people in the fashion industry as it normally takes a year 
or two for something to become fashionable.

"With other crops that are grown from seed during the summer months, we can 
modify for demand as we go along."

Eves is rarely off his mobile and we are interrupted at one point by a call 
from one of the supermarket chains wanting to place an order for peonies – but 
he has to say no.

"I hate doing that, turning an order down," he says, after hanging up. "But 
they weren't sure for ages whether they wanted the peonies and now they do, 
they've gone elsewhere."

Competition is pretty fierce in the industry and I ask whether he sees his 
main rival as imports from the Netherlands and, increasingly, much further 
afield. "Actually no, our main rival is a tin of beans," he says.

"What I mean by that is that it's other supermarket products, probably more 
accurately things such as bottles of wine. You go into a supermarket and think, 
do I buy this bottle of wine or a bunch of flowers? So when we lose business, 
it's not all about losing out to other growers."

One of the fun-sounding things about Eves' job is his work with breeders to 
develop new varieties of flowers. He has named one tulip after his daughter, 
Olivia, while his 12-year-old son, Lewis, was allowed to name a new breed of 
gladioli after his girlfriend.

"He was going out with a young girl from the village and he wanted to give her 
something different for her birthday," recalls Eves with a smile.

"So he chose a gladioli and named it after her – and two months later she 
dumped him."

It's time for me to go and Eves has a list of things to do as I leave. He has 
an academic from North Carolina State university arriving to talk flowers, a 
bit of dodgy equipment to fix, and a field of daffodils to check – and all in 
the rain, which just keeps falling.

One thing is for sure: if the old adage "April showers brings May flowers" is 
true, Eves is going to have a bumper crop this year.

CV

Hours On a normal day, 7am until 5pm or 6pm. "At the end of the day I usually 
go back round the fields and have one last walk round."

Pay A starter packer/picker salary is £16,000 to £20,000 while a truck 
driver/foreman could expect to earn £30,000 plus. Managerial salaries are over 
£30,000.

Work-life balance "Not great, to be honest. The work is almost like a drug. 
You get drawn into it and it is a way of life, rather than a job. When things 
are going right, it is better than any drug. And I am a bit of an anorak. I 
will sit on the computer at home looking at work-related stuff until I get told 
to stop."

Highs "The best bit of the job is growing and nurturing the flowers and seeing 
the product at the end. And also the interaction with other growers. We work 
quite closely with them and socialise with them."

Lows "The pressure can be immense, especially around Mother's Day and 
Valentine's Day. For example, there was a problem with transport being delayed 
and I ended up loading lorries until 2am."

Overtime

Mark admits that sometimes his wife Susanne makes him hit "the big red button" 
to stop work and socialise. "We go out with friends, often other growers, on a 
fairly regular basis."Mark enjoys tinkering in the garage with a kit car he 
built for his wedding in 1996. "We are trying to get it on the road again this 
year with the roof down and the kids in the back. They get to play with dad in 
the garage in the meantime."Mark is a parish councillor, but he also manages to 
get in the odd game of squash when council meetings don't get in the way.
 