
It's 10am and Padra Martins has already completed four train journeys in and 
out of King's Cross. I have merely endured one in the London rush hour crush 
and am exhausted, but Martin's diminutive frame – energised, perhaps, by the 
two fare dodgers she has just fined – is electrified.

"I get a bit of an adrenalin rush when I have to issue a penalty fare, I can't 
deny it," she confesses, "but I consider it a lucky day when I don't have to 
issue any. Yesterday, I only did one."

Martins, 41, is one of those rare beings who is visibly in love with her job. 
It's not immediately obvious why. Her presence makes even blameless hearts 
sink. When she erupts into the silence of a rush-hour carriage the atmosphere 
instantly charges. Newspapers are reluctantly folded, iPads put aside and the 
ordinarily blank face of the London commuter turns anxious or pleading as they 
proffer their tickets in readiness.

"People are grumpiest in the mornings when they're rushing to get to work, and 
they don't want to have to rummage for their ticket, so I try to soften them 
up," she says. "I apologise for disturbing them and always say 'thank you' with 
a smile."

Her days, when she's on the early rota, begin at 6am which means that her 
alarm is set for 4am, but she loves that, too. "I'm definitely a morning 
person." And, during the course of her seven-hour shift she has to face 
defiance, cunning and sometimes intimidation. Not even that fazes her. 
"Sometimes, if it's a very busy train, I get nervous because I might get a hard 
time, but I've always believed that there's nothing I can't do."

Her sense of omnipotence won her the job of revenue protection officer 
(otherwise known as a ticket inspector) for First Capital Connect after a 
lengthy career journey in and around the railways. She applied three times for 
the post while managing a station snack outlet, working for First Capital 
customer services and leading an area team in "train presentation" (the latest 
term for on-board cleaning) and she eventually realised her ambition after 
a day-long selection process.

Candidates are not simply interviewed; they are observed interacting and 
performing challenges to ensure that their personalities are right for the job. 
They need to be big on patience, friendly, adaptable and have a fondness for 
dawn wakenings. "They are trying to break the mould of the impassive 
inspector," says Martins. "They're bringing in more women, we're given 
behavioural training and taught conflict avoidance and one of my colleagues has 
learned sign language."

After a month of training in ticket types (there are 20 different kinds in and 
out of London), the finer points of penalty fares, common and less-common 
dodges employed by those intent on a free journey and the psychology of 
confrontation, Martins was dispatched on to First Capital Connect services out 
of north London.

She was once caught fare dodging after she failed to buy a ticket for her 
daughter, but since working in revenue protection she has felt compelled to 
tread the straight and narrow in all areas of daily life and the attitude of 
many of the public astonishes her.

"People don't regard it as stealing," she says. "When I try to explain why 
they must have a valid ticket other passengers always interfere and yet it's 
the fare-paying public who are being stolen from. The industry loses £400m a 
year and ticket prices have to reflect that."

Martins and her colleagues divide their shifts between staffing station ticket 
barriers and patrolling trains as far as Welwyn Garden City and Stevenage, at 
which point inspectors from a different depot take over. It's the hours on 
board that she likes best – "it's more like an adventure!" – although she 
recoils when she learns that I commute along the stretch into Moorgate known as 
the Hertford loop.

"Jesus!" she says. "The passengers on that line just don't care. They walk 
away. The Finsbury Park to Moorgate stretch is the worst because people think, 
since it's on the loop, no one will be checking tickets."

Despite heavy investment in new ticket barriers and an 11-strong fraud team 
which patrols trains in plain clothes, organised fraud is on the increase and, 
with a rise in fake tickets, it's becoming more sophisticated. First Capital 
Connect issued 6,061 penalty fares in the last four-week period for which 
figures have been collated, of which 470 went to appeal and only 99 were 
overturned.

What is less clear is how many were cases of deliberate fare dodging and how 
many genuine misunderstandings. Martins starts to mention staff targets and the 
word is pounced upon by the company public relations official, who explains 
that there are no formal targets or incentives, but staff performance is 
monitored to check that the job is being done vigilantly. "Obviously, if 
someone worked a full week without issuing a penalty fare, eyebrows would be 
raised," she says.

One aspect of the job that Martins prizes is that she is trusted to use her 
own discretion. "It's never pleasant slapping a penalty fare and often I do it 
very reluctantly or, if my sympathies are really roused, I'll just sell them a 
ticket," she says. "You learn to recognise whether someone is trying it on or 
not, although you have to be careful because if you let someone off it gets 
absorbed by the people around who might hold it against you if they ever get 
caught without a valid ticket."

The £20 penalty is not enough to deter hardened fare dodgers who merely give 
false addresses and refuse to pay. "There's one guy who has nine outstanding 
penalty charges. I've lost count of how many times he's been caught, and the 
last time he was told he might go to prison. Another, who gets on at Hitchin, 
I've caught three times and then I found he has five unpaid charges."

Most passengers pay up, however protestingly. A minority are apologetic. "One 
man paid a penalty without fuss after being late for his train and getting on 
without a ticket. And then he helped me with my bags when I got off so I felt 
awful!" A larger minority deploy aggression.

When matters look poised to turn nasty, Martins has been trained to back off. 
"If you can't do it safely, don't do it at all," she says. "If they start 
raising their voice, I say, 'Thank you Sir, but it may not be me on duty 
tomorrow'."

Occasionally, especially on late shifts, Martins' gender is held against her. 
"They'll say, 'You're just a girl; what are you going to do?' But I am adamant 
and I don't give up."

Her strategy is kindly patience. When a defiant young woman, who has not 
swiped her season ticket, starts to rant, Martins hears her out politely then 
repeatedly explains her omission. "People want to make a point," she says. 
"They don't want to listen to you; you're the bad guy. We explain as many times 
as is necessary but we are told never to argue."

This ability to listen can be unexpectedly disarming. "There was one lady who 
rushed on to a train without a ticket and I gave her a penalty fare and she 
ended up telling me her life story and we're now friends. She looks out for me 
whenever she comes through the station," says Martins. "Sometimes people just 
want someone to talk to and I have listening ears."

As I trail Martins through the train on the dreaded Hertford loop, I am 
hopeful of high drama. She stops to question four different passengers and I am 
appalled by my excitement, but all four are let off with a warning because 
Martins decided that ignorance, rather than dishonesty, was to blame. She sees 
her role as an educator as much as an enforcer. "Some people are oblivious to 
the rules and by informing them I can stop them being the next up at 
a magistrates court."

The job, she says, has made her more confident in herself and in her ability 
to deal with different personalities and scenarios. But her three years of 
experience have not inured her to every situation. "I did a night operation 
once and found that homeless people board the trains every night and travel to 
Peterborough and back because they've got nowhere else to sleep," she says.

"I had to get them off the train because they had no money to pay for a 
ticket, but it's times like that when you have to suppress your natural 
sympathies in order to do your job properly. It haunted me."

Overtime

Padra loves reading "I'll read any kind of fiction and am currently absorbed 
in a romance by Nora Roberts."Her husband is a chef, "but he's happy for me to 
take over the kitchen and I enjoy cooking African dishes."Padra's father taught 
her to knit"I find that therapeutic." One of Padra's other passions is dancing 
"Any kind of music gets me going but especially R&B and soul. With three 
children, I don't get the chance so often. I like to go clubbing and I have a 
cousin who organises electrifying African nights with music from the 80s."

Curriculum vitae

Salary In the region of £19,000.

Hours Five seven-hour shifts with 20 minutes' break.

Work-Life Balance "I like early shifts best because I can be at the school 
gate for my three children, and late shifts allow me to drop them off. 
Sometimes I have to work weekends, but the railway is based on camaraderie – 
there are so many mothers and sons and fathers and daughters working on it that 
it feels like a family. You get to know everyone."

Best thing "Being where I can help and knowing that I am doing the right 
thing."

Worst thing "The late night shifts when people have had too much to drink and 
tell you you should be at home."
 