
The competition to build a new generation of mega turbines is heating up. Last 
November, British-led efforts to build a radically designed giant offshore wind 
turbine with a 275m wingspan were given a shot across the bows when a group of 
Spanish companies announced they were starting work on an even larger and more 
powerful turbine.

At stake is dominance of the nascent offshore wind sector as it steps up to 
the sort of scale that will enable it to compete with gigawatt-sized coal, gas 
and nuclear power stations.

Most of today's large wind turbines are now more than 100m tall and generate 
about 3MW, meaning more than 300 or even up to a thousand such turbines are 
needed to match the output of a conventional power plant. By contrast, just one 
of the British 10MW "Aerogenerator" turbines being developed by designers and 
engineers, including Arup and Rolls Royce, could power 5,000-10,000 homes.

The dramatic-looking project is also unusual in its vertical axis design – it 
rotates like a sycamore leaf – rather than the horizontal axis turbines that 
currently dot the UK coast.

Feargal Brennan, head of offshore engineering at Cranfield University, where 
work is being carried out on the design, says: "The UK has come late to the 
race, but with 40 years of oil and gas experience we have the chance to lead 
the world. The new [Aerogenerator] turbine is based on semi-submersible oil 
platform technology and does not have the same weight constraints as a normal 
wind turbine. The radical new design is half the height of an equivalent 
[conventional] turbine." The first Aerogenerator turbines are unlikely to be 
built until 2013-14.

But even such grand ambitions are likely to be dwarfed by Spain's "Azimut 
project", which hopes to build an enormous 15 MW turbine as soon as 2020. 
Spanish turbine-maker Gamesa is leading the €25m (£21m) effort, along with 11 
wind and engineering companies and 22 research centres.

A Gamesa spokeswoman says: "The initiative, scheduled to finalise in 2013, is 
designed to establish the technological groundwork for the subsequent 
development, in around 2020, of a large-scale offshore wind turbine. The 
programme's initial objectives call for developing a turbine with unit capacity 
of 15 MW that is capable of overcoming the technical and financial hurdles 
currently limiting the rollout of offshore wind energy."

The company believes connections to the grid and foundations for the turbines 
will prove to be two of the toughest technical obstacles. Spain is already a 
world leader in wind, with installed wind power rising by 18.5% last year and 
now providing 16% of the country's electricity needs.

Spain and the UK are not alone in the big wind battle. US wind turbine-maker 
Clipper is working on a 10 MW offshore turbine dubbed the "Britannia project", 
with a prototype expected as early as 2012. The 72m-long blades will be made in 
the UK, on Tyneside, and Clipper has been awarded a £4.46m government grant for 
offshore wind development.

The world's leading turbine-maker, Danish firm Vestas, is also eyeing bigger 
turbines, and has told industry press that it is working on a 6 MW model. 
Elsewhere in Europe, Upwind, an EU-funded project that has been working since 
2006 to tackle the technical challenges of building 8-10 MW-sized turbines, 
draws to a close this year.

All the players in the race have an eye on the huge offshore wind plans being 
encouraged by governments around the world, from the British coast to the 
Yellow Sea off South Korea and the Google-backed offshore farms off the US's 
eastern seaboard. Who will succeed is unclear, but one things seems certain: 
large scale could bring colossal rewards.

In search of jobs as well as energy

Britain's lead on offshore wind presents a major opportunity in the global 
scramble for green jobs and business, experts predict.

"For once in a very long time, Britain is leading in a cutting edge 
technological sector, both in terms of policy frameworks and expertise," says 
Peter Madigan, head of offshore at green energy trade body, RenewableUK. "We 
are seeing an increasing number of foreign delegations from places as far as 
China, Thailand, Singapore, Japan and the United States visiting the UK to 
discover 'the secret' of our success in this sector."

But despite having the most installed offshore wind in the world and some of 
the planet's best natural resources around its coast, the UK must not get 
complacent, he warns. "There has to be a sense that this kudos is based as much 
on our current success as it will draw on our ability to rollout further 
projects. Continual development of our offshore market will send a clear signal 
that the technology has a future and that we are in the best position to assist 
everyone else."

Madigan also points to the importance of moving the manufacture of offshore 
wind turbines to the UK, most of which are currently made in Europe, the US and 
China. The turbines are the single largest items of expenditure when a new 
offshore wind farm is built. Siemens recently announced plans to buildBritain's 
first major offshore wind turbine manufacturing plant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/jan/20/siemens-associated-british-ports-wind-turbines>
 in Hull and other firms, such as Mitsubishi and GE, are also planning turbine 
factories in the UK.

Robert Gross, the director of the centre for energy policy and technology, 
Imperial College London, says that while the UK catches up on turbine-making, 
other companies still benefit from offshore wind's rise. "One of the main myths 
about wind power is that because British-owned companies do not produce 
turbines there is no role for UK industry in offshore wind. In fact UK 
companies are active in many parts of the supply chain, from specialist 
components used within turbines to towers, foundations and cables." UK 
expertise in design, support services and vessels is another opportunity, he 
says.
 