
As the bright red helicopter I'm sitting in shudders and shakes its way off 
the ground, I think to myself – David Fletcher has one hell of a company car. 
An air ambulance paramedic, Fletcher spends much of his day 1,500ft in the air, 
rushing to the scene of accidents and emergencies – making his working life a 
little like Casualty mixed with Airwolf.

On the day I visit the base of the North West Air Ambulance (NWAA 
<http://nwaa.net/>) at Manchester city airport, the weather has finally cleared 
up enough for me to see Fletcher at work. But Bond Air Services, the company 
NWAA leases its helicopters from, has grounded its two vivid yellow Eurocopter 
EC135 vehicles (called Katie and Teddy) due to a fault in the rotors. It means 
I never get to see them in action, but instead experience an older helicopter 
that's scrambled from elsewhere in the country.

The wait for it to arrive gives Fletcher a lengthy opportunity to talk about 
his work from the confines of an unassuming Portakabin at the airfield. Safety, 
I discover, is everything. "It is key to everything we do and runs throughout 
every task we perform. We have to plan for every eventuality …" he says, " … 
including the weather. We can fly in anything up to 55 knots but we avoid 
thunderstorms and will not take any risks. The biggest thing that hinders us is 
fog."

While the paramedics' main objective is to treat injured or sick people, the 
charity's pilots ensure the safety of the helicopter and the people inside. 
Fletcher says this arrangement works well – in other countries the pilots can 
be more patient-focused, leading to them taking risks in order to reach a 
destination and land quickly. "If it's unsafe to fly or land, we won't. We 
can't treat patients if we've crashed ourselves, and losing a £2m aircraft will 
not help the people of the north west, either."

Nevertheless, the air ambulance can respond much faster than a road ambulance. 
Each crew can treat and fly patients to a specialist hospital in record time – 
both helicopters have a maximum flying time of 10 minutes to the nearest 
appropriate hospital. It can save the lives of people with major trauma, 
particularly head or spinal injuries, and Fletcher says the charity receives 
countless thanks from people they have treated. "It's very different from road 
paramedics, when you wonder what happened to a patient and never get the chance 
to find out. Here, people send letters of thanks and even pop in to thank you 
for saving their life. It's lovely."

The NWAA flies around 1,200 life-saving missions each year. The aircrew are 
often the first on the scene, whether it is a motorway pile-up or someone 
having a stroke. First, they assess a patient's condition before giving 
treatment and transferring them to the nearest hospital.

When a helicopter takes off, the rotor generates three tons of air, which 
allows the craft to lift off the ground. Anyone in the near vicinity can be 
knocked off their feet by the force. "We need clearance of about two tennis 
courts next to each other to be able to safely land or take off," Fletcher 
says. Despite that, wherever Fletcher and his crew go the helicopter draws 
close interest from the public: "At the scene of a rescue, we often get a lot 
of people watching and they do sometimes come a bit close. I have to be stern 
with them, for their own safety, of course."

The helicopters have bear paws at their base rather than a rail, meaning 
Fletcher and his pilot can land their ambulance in sodden marshes and boggy 
ground – useful in the region covered by the NWAA. The charity, which has a 
second base in Blackpool, will attend emergencies as far north as the top of 
Cumbria, down to south Cheshire and Stoke – an area of 5,500 square miles and a 
population of roughly eight million people. It makes every working day 
different.

"You never know what you're going to get," Fletcher says. "About four months 
ago we had an incident when a plane took off from right here, and crashed into 
some nearby flats. Even though it was just around the corner, we flew to the 
scene because we were able to take the injured man to a hospital more quickly 
than a road ambulance. We took him to the burns unit at Wythenshawe Hospital, 
but it didn't have a happy outcome. Still, we bought him a little more time, if 
nothing else."

Fletcher looks at the ground briefly, recalling the incident. But says he is 
unaffected by the things he sees and can switch off when he finishes work, even 
after a day of tragedy and drama: "I can treat an open femur fracture and be 
back at home later that day without even thinking about it."

Fletcher's stoicism is no doubt a byproduct of the familiarity of his work, 
but it may also be borne from nursing his father through a terminal illness 
when Fletcher was 16. "He had a brain tumour and would regularly have seizures, 
so I learned a lot while caring from him. It made me realise I enjoyed helping 
people, and ultimately made me want to be a paramedic."

Fletcher is from Wolverhampton, where he performed a number of different jobs 
growing up. "I've been a holiday rep, a bingo caller and I even worked at a 
reptile house," he laughs. A semi-professional footballer, Fletcher went to 
Manchester to study before becoming a paramedic in 2008. He is currently 
seconded from the NHS for a two-year term, at which point he will likely return 
to performing his duties out of a road ambulance, though he says he would be 
keen to try and stay in the air for longer.

We pop out to look at the grounded 135 helicopter. Up front, the inside is a 
riot of buttons, dials and lights; while Fletcher's life-saving equipment is 
stored at the back: "We've got everything you get in a Mercedes Sprinter road 
ambulance, such as thedefibrillator 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Defibrillation> and ventilator, it's just packed 
in a bit tighter." Each helicopter can house the pilot and up to two paramedics 
plus a patient on a stretcher.

Once airborne, the paramedics will assist the pilot with navigation as well as 
"keeping constant track of other aircraft, liaising with the coastguard, 
speaking to the police, keeping in touch with air traffic control, speaking to 
hospitals – it's never dull". Once a patient is in the helicopter, the 
paramedics' attention turns to treatment and care, leaving the pilot to find 
his own way to their destination – every hospital in the country has a 
dedicated landing site for an air ambulance.

I hear a distant rumbling and the signature sound of a helicopter's blades 
gets louder, and Fletcher and I watch as it lands. The air ambulance crew also 
have to re-fuel the aircraft themselves which, on a busy summer day when they 
might be called out to job after job ("12 or 13 in one day sometimes"), must be 
done safely as well as efficiently.

While that is taken care of, I suit up and am given a safety briefing by pilot 
John Cutler. I'm asked by another paramedic if I'm nervous and pretend I'm not 
– in truth I'm a little jittery. I get in, put a helmet on and can hear the 
pilot talking to air traffic control. Once he has run through some pre-flight 
safety checks with Fletcher, we're off. There's a scene at the end of the Tom 
Tykwer filmHeaven <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0246677/>, where the two central 
protagonists ascend towards the heavens in a helicopter, sky filling the screen 
before fading to black. I think of this as the helicopter lifts off the ground 
and we fly towards Belmont Reservoir, north of Bolton – it feels like being in 
a movie.

But Fletcher tells me it's routine for him: "People see it as a sexy role, but 
I'm as much of a paramedic as a road paramedic, I just have a different way of 
getting to people who need care. It's a fantastic environment to work in, and 
has certainly added another string to my bow, but I don't think of it as 
glamorous. Not many people know that the NWAA is a charity. Many people think 
it is paid for by the NHS, but it's not and so I tend to try raise awareness if 
I'm talking to someone."

There's no actual emergency taking place on my flight, but the pilot circles a 
possible landing site to teach me what factors they would consider before 
landing (is the ground stable? Is there enough clearance? What other hazards 
are there?). Then we fly back to base, Bolton's Reebok stadium visible from the 
craft, and my stomach finally settles – I can't imagine doing that all day long 
without losing my lunch.

Fletcher laughs at this, explaining that air ambulance paramedics don't always 
have time for lunch if they're having a particularly busy day. "We do a 
nine-and-a-half hour shift, with 30 minutes for lunch, but we don't always get 
to take it. I don't mind because if we haven't got time to eat it's because 
we're helping someone."

Later, I tell a taxi driver that I've just been in a helicopter and he says my 
life is like a rock star's. He couldn't be more wrong, but Fletcher's life may 
well be as exciting as any performer's – though you'll never find him boasting 
about it. Every time I hear that rotor noise, I'll think of Fletcher humbly 
going about his work caring for the people of the north west, rather than 
wondering which celebrity is flying overhead.

Curriculum vitae
 