
.

Preamble: The last British side left in this competition has a 2-0 lead going 
into the second leg of their last 16 tie against Aalborg. However, it is away 
from home, where in the league they are so bad they would give even the word 
hopeless at least a glimmer of hope. Vincent Kompany has passed a late fitness 
test and Ched Evans comes into the side, with Elano and first-leg 
opening-goalscorer Caicedo making way.

Here, courtesty of Aalborg's website because I can't find them anywhere else, 
are the teams:
AaB: Zaza, Bøgelund, Beauchamp, Lasse Nielsen, Jakobsen, Augustinussen, Caca, 
Johansson, Risgård, Due, Shelton.Subs: 
Kenneth Nielsen, Sorensen, Nomvethe, Tracy, Kristensen, 
Ronnie Nielsen, Dalsgaard. 
Manchester City: Given, Richards, Onuoha, Dunne, Bridge, Zabaleta, Ireland, 
Company, Wright-Phillips, Robinho, Evans.Subs: Hart, Berti, Garrido, Elano, 
Fernandes, Caicedo, Etuhu.
Referee: Stephane Lannoy (France)

-4mins: Five are discussing Ched Evans. Apparently he's "not quite as big a 
name as Robinho". You heard it here first.

0mins: It's under way in Aalborg. Manchester United won 3-0 here in September 
in the Champions League. Can City beat that? Well, they don't need to, but it 
would be nice. The bad news: Aalborg have dropped the hapless left-back who 
Shaun Wright-Phillips took to pieces in the first leg. The good news: If that's 
what SWP did to their first-choice left-back, what's he going to do with his 
reserve?

1 min: SWP takes on the reserve left-back and sets up Ireland for a blocked 
shot. A taste of things to come?

4mins: Will Peck, who can't see Five from his house and is stuck with us 
instead, wants to know if that's the way he'll be forced to follow the rest of 
Manchester City's European adventure. The short answer:yes 
<http://www.brandrepublic.com/News/814576/Five-wins-first-pick-Uefa-Cup-games-exclusive-final/>
.

6mins: Aalborg string about 30 passes together before giving the ball away 
somewhere near the halfway line at the first sign of a challenge.

7mins: "There seems to be no urgency to their play," says Five's match 
summariser of Aalborg's start. 83 minutes to go. Urgency can wait, I reckon.

10mins:Either the Aalborg fans are singing in impressive English, or they're 
not singing at all and City's fans are making all the noise.

12mins: Robinho found in space by SWP's excellent pass. He shimmies a bit then 
sends in an optimistic shot that's deflected for a corner.

15mins: Both teams are hitting as many passes out of play as successfully at a 
teammate. They're also falling over quite a lot.

17mins: Ireland has the first decent shooting chance of the night, from the 
edge of the area. The ball floats about 10 yards high.

18mins: SWP finds Richards in a good position on the right wing, but his cross 
is deeply rubbish. Aalborg break and find Bøgelund in a good position on the 
right wing, but his cross is also deeply rubbish. Uncanny.

22mins: In response to John Willoughby, I reckon that Ireland hasn't shaved 
his head since the weekend, which means he has roughly uniform levels of growth 
on pate and chin and therefore looks a little less ridiculous than he has in 
the past. Does that answer your question?

25mins: Really good left-wing cross from Aalborg, but Onuoha just beats the 
striker, Shelton, to the ball

29mins: This is very much going City's way so far. In other words, naff all's 
happened.

30mins: Al Loch thinks he's heard the Aalborg fans singing Karma Chameleon and 
wonders whether other 80s classics have been adopted by random European club 
sides. Anyone?

32mins: City keep insisting on playing one-twos whenever they approach the 
Aalborg area. None of them has so far got past the one stage.

33mins: "It's not been the most exciting football match here tonight," says 
our commentator. Me, I'm looking forward to the point when Aalborg decide that 
some concerted attacking might help them claw back their 2-0 aggregate deficit

36mins: Aalborg's subs are shown warming up on the touchline, wearing moon 
boots. Apparently it's going to hit -2C tonight in Aalborg, but they're not 
only practical – they also look quite funny.

41mins: Extended treatment to Due stops the game for a couple of minutes, 
after a seemingly harmless little challenge from Zabaleta turns out to have 
been a bit more painful than it looked. He's now hobbling about on the 
touchline while a sub changes out of his moon boots.

43mins: Robinho brilliantly gets past Bogelund, then tries a totally ludicrous 
shot from the goalline which the keeper taps out of play for a corner. A cross 
must have been a better idea there.

45mins: One minute's stoppage time to come. Nothing will happen in it, and 
then we can all have a break from this breathless thrill-a-minute suspensorama.

46mins: Peep!

Half-time update: Zzzzzzz. In short.

45mins: Second-half peep!

46mins: If you're a Manchester City watching this game, scratching your head 
and thinking: "Aalborg striker Luton Sheldon, I'm sure that name rings a bell", 
you might want to watchthis <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GcxhnvJO3Tc>. Then 
again, you might not.

47mins: Risgard goes over under Kompany's challenge as a cross floats 
harmlessly over the penalty area, then gets really annoyed when the referee 
ignores him.

50mins: Ireland plays Evans through. Faced with a difficult but far from 
impossible shooting chance, 15 yards out and to the right of the penalty area, 
he mishits the ball directly ahead and very, very up. Still, a chance of sorts.

53mins: Kompany has been booked for stopping Aalborg from taking a quick 
free-kick. Or just because the referee wanted something to do.

54mins: Caca's shot from the edge of the area bobbles wide – "the first decent 
bit of play we've seen from Aalborg", summarises Danny Mills.

55mins: Garrido's coming on for Wayne Bridge. "He's been feeling slightly 
under the weather, maybe coming down with something," summarises Danny Mills.

57mins: uefa.com's latest telling match statistics: Shots on target - Aalborg 
0, Man City 0

60mins: OK, Aalborg. You now have only half an hour to score at least two 
goals or you will be out of the Uefa Cup for ever. Would it be wrong of us to 
suggest you do some attacking? Hang, on, no sooner do I write that than 
Johansson gets into the penalty area, Garrido brings him down with a mistimed 
tackle and the referee ... er ... doesn't give anything then books the Dane for 
complaining. They should have had a penalty there.

64mins: Uefa Cup news: Galatasaray lose 3-2 on the night and 4-3 on aggregate 
to Hamburg despite at one point being 2-0 up tonight through Liverpool rejects 
Kewell and Baros. Ivica Olic scored a last-minute winner. Oh to have been asked 
to watch that one.

67mins: Beauchamp goes down this time, but it's a blatant dive with Onuoha and 
Robinho both being not particularly close to him at the time. He gets booked.

68mins: Is Stephen Ireland (currently rexeiving treatment after a nasty fall) 
the best player in the Premier League outside the top four, wonders Hugh 
Collins. Ashley Young would be my pick. Any other offers?

72mins: Public service announcement, on behalf of an emailing Ben Shepherd: 
"Can any readers recommend a pub with wifi that'll be showing the cricket 
tomorrow? Preferably in East London? I'm 'working from home' tomorrow..." Let's 
hope his boss isn't reading, eh...

74mins: Robinho gives the ball away really stupidly at the edge of his area, 
and a bit of ping-pong ends with Risgard's shot being deflected narrowly wide.

76mins: City are finally starting to come under pressure now. If Aalborg keep 
this up, I can see someone having a shot on target before this match is out.

77mins: Marcus Tracy just came on for Risgard, who's still fuming about the 
penalty incident. Stian - watch it on x30, then you'll only lose three minutes 
of your time. Or just delete it, and spend three minutes picking your nose or 
something.

80mins: SHOT ON TARGET!!! Shelton's played through and by the time he gets the 
bouncing ball under control and gets his shot in he's only five yards from 
goal. Given gets down really sharply to keep the ball out.

82mins: SHOT OFF TARGET BUT QUITE GOOD ANYWAY! Ireland gets down the right of 
the area, lays the ball back and Robinho smacks it against the underside of the 
crossbar from about eight yards. This is hotting up now.

83mins: ANOTHER SHOT ON TARGET!!! Another nice little ball from Ireland and 
Evans hits it too close to the keeper, also from about eight yards.

85mins: GOAL! Aalborg 1 Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> 0! Five minutes of magic 
ends with Luton Shelton controlling a cross with his arm (this might not have 
happened, no one else seems to have spotted it) and tucking it low into the 
bottom left corner of Given's goal. Game, astonishingly, belatedly, on!

88mins: Someone else has finally spotted the handball. I think, looking at the 
replays, it came off Shelton's just-about-chest, bounced off his left forearm 
and then fell nicely for him to score – could have been disallowed, but it 
might have been a bit harsh. Richards just denies Tracy a really good chance.

89mins: Penalty! A corner comes in, gets flicked on at the near post and hits 
Evans' hand. I don't think he knew much about it, to be honest.

90mins: GOAL! Aalborg 2 Manchester City 0!!! Jakobsen hammers in the penalty 
really rather splendidly, and this is going to extra time. It's a crazy, crazy, 
messed up game and so it is.

92mins: Full-time of normal-time peeep! Extra-time here we come. So long as 
it's like the last 10 minutes, and not the preceeding 80, I don't mind...

90+1mins: Extra-time peep! And surely I'm not the only one shaking my head and 
wondering how this happened.

90+3mins: Best players outside the top four poll news - we've had a couple of 
votes for Mikel Arteta. And none for Ireland. Sorry, Hugh.

90+5mins: Aalborg still in charge here. Caicedo is coming on for Robinho.

90+6mins: Robinho plays for 96 minutes in gloves, then takes them off when 
he's substituted. Wouldn't it make more sense to play without gloves, but then 
put some on when you're taken off? What's going on with the lad's hand 
temperature?

90+7mins: Good news, Hugh - a vote for Ireland. Sadly I can't tell you who it 
came from because my email thing has scrambled his name, but it still counts.

90+11mins: SWP jinks into the box, but Aalborg are all motivated now and he's 
closed down, as is Ireland when he tries to magic a shot from the loose ball.

90+13mins: "Robinho is by far and away the best player outside the top four," 
says Sean Cassidy, "but he doesn't like to show it."

90+15mins: First-half extra-time peep!

90+15mins: And another vote for Ireland, who has snuck into the lead. But 
then, given that a lot of people reading this probably have an interest in 
Manchester City, and he's perhaps their only decent player, that's as it should 
be. Caca's off and Kristensen, the player SWP humiliated in the first leg, is 
on.

90+16mins: Elano's coming on, with penalties perhaps in mind, and Kompany's 
off.

90+17mins: Aaron Lennon and Phil Jagielka both get a vote for best player 
outside the top four, which says something about the quality of players outside 
the top four.

90+20mins: Aalborg clearly don't want this to go to penalties. All Mark Hughes 
wants, presumably, is for someone to invent an instant cure for humiliation, 
and fast.

90+21mins: And the Jagielka-voter's changed her mind and gone for Ireland 
instead. Talking of the potato-headed maestro, he's got his defending boots on 
and has put the ball out for a corner which is promptly wasted.

90+23mins: And an apparently non-ironic vote for Titus Bramble from Philip 
Jacobs, based on a decent game against Chelsea. It's looking like penalties 
here.

90+24mins: Tim Cahill gets a vote in the BPOT4 poll – the third Everton player 
to get a mention. Does that make them the best team outside the top four?

90+26mins: And, slightly more relevantly, Lars Vognsen reckons that Nomvethe, 
who came on at half-time and has occasionally troubled Micah Richards since 
then, is the man of the match here. Well, it ain't Robinho.

90+28mins: Shay Given gets the latest vote. There's certainly no consensus on 
the BPOT4 front, that's for sure.

90+30mins: Full-time in extra-time peep! Time to polish the penalty spot, 
because that's where we're headed.

BPOT4 final score: With the excitement of penalties about to make this kind of 
discussion quite unnecessary, let's draw a line under it with the winner, 
thanks to two last-minute votes, Mikel Arteta by a nose, from Ireland. Lennon 
and Given both got multiple votes, and a lot of people got just one. Now, let's 
get this thing finished.

Penalty 1: GOAL! Jakobsen slaps the ball high and to Given's left, just like 
the one he scored earlier.

Penalty 2: GOAL! Evans goes low and left, and beats the keeper's dive.

Penalty 3: GOAL! Johansson sends Given the wrong way, and the clips the inside 
of the post on its way in.

Penalty 4: GOAL! Elano jogs casually up to the ball and hits the left corner, 
with Zaza again going the right way.

Penalty 5: MISS! Aalborg captain Augustinussen goes low and left and weak and 
woeful and Given pushes it wide.

Penalty 6: GOAL! Aalborg 2 Man City 3 SWP slams the ball right down the 
middle, and the keeper jumps out the way.

Penalty 7: GOAL! Nomvethe chips the ball into the left corner – cocky, but 
cool.

Penalty 8: GOAL! They keep going low to the keeper's right, he keeps going the 
right way, but he still can't save one. Dunne's the latest scorer.

Penalty 9: MISS! Aalborg 3 Manchester City 4 and it's all over! Luton Shelton 
passes the ball low and left (something of a theme there) straight at Given's 
dive, and City are through.

Conclusion: So Manchester City are through after all, though they made life 
hard for themselves. Basically they're a half-decent side, with a strong streak 
of total moronicness built in. They were lucky, in the end, to get away with 
this, but their European adventure continues. And Mikel Arteta is the best 
player in the Premier League outside the top four clubs. Official.
 