
Clive Palmer's shock announcement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/25/pup-senators-will-vote-repeal-carbon-price>
 on Wednesday night next to former vice president Al Gore has been very 
cautiously welcomed by Australia's environment movement.

Palmer's announcement effectively leaves Abbott completely isolated on climate 
policy, both domestically, and as Al Gore's presence demonstrates, 
internationally as well. It is remarkable that one of Australia's largest coal 
barons has firmly declared his support for renewables, taking action on global 
warming, and introducing an emissions trading scheme.

Senior leaders of some of the largest environment groups told me that they 
welcome Palmer's position on the renewable energy target, the Clean Energy 
Finance Corporation and the Climate Change Authority, while approaching the 
details with caution and a large grain of salt. It was labelled as "definitely 
surprising", "very smart politically", "surprising" and "courageous".

There are no details behind Palmer's announcement, and it is unclear what 
approach he will take with his decision to support the abolition of the carbon 
"tax" and its replacement with an emissions trading scheme. Palmer also 
stated that he would not support prime minister Abbott's "direct action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/southern-crossroads/2014/jan/12/greg-hunt-negligent-direct-action-climate-change-denialist>
" policy, criticising it as a waste of money.

Kelly O'Shanassy, the new CEO of the Australian Conservation Foundation, who 
is organising the Climate Reality project that Gore is in Australia for, said 
"keeping the 'clean three' of the RET, the CEFC, and the CCA is great news for 
all Australians. It's great to see thatClive Palmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/clive-palmer> has the courage to 
listen to the voices of Australians when they say they support clean energy and 
they support cutting pollution."

Several recent polls showed that a large majority of 72 percent of Australians 
support keeping or expanding the renewable energy target 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/21/australians-want-renewable-energy-target-retained-by-big-margin>
. Similarly, the polls show 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/poll-finds-support-growing-for-carbon-pricing-laws-20140622-zsi40.html>
 that Australians support putting a price on carbon, and just 22 percent 
support thediscredited "direct action" policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/southern-crossroads/2013/jul/08/tony-abbott-climate-policy-australia>
.

The Clean Energy Council was effusive in its congratulations. Deputy Chief 
Executive Kane Thornton described the announcement as "a Titanic boost for the 
clean energy industry". Increasing the proportion of Australia's energy from 
renewable sources would mean lower costs for consumers and potentially 
thousands of extra jobs. Kane said in a statement, "what we need is 
policy stability to unlock these benefits, and the best outcome for the 
industry is if the policy is left alone to continue working."

A senior environment campaigner noted to me that "we are approaching Palmer's 
announcement with caution, especially on the RET. This is not the first time 
the Palmer United Party has made an announcement about renewables, only to see 
it reversed less than 24 hours later."

What is clear is that Tony Abbott's offensive against renewable energy and the 
Clean Energy Finance Corporation are effectively dead.

CEO of Environment Victoria, Mark Wakeham said to me, "Palmer's announcement 
is definitely surprising, but is a pretty productive intervention that will 
change climate politics in Australia. The government should now give up on its 
attack on the RET and the CEFC immediately."

Ben Pearson, the head of campaigning for Greenpeace Australia-Pacific agreed, 
saying to me: "if this position holds, Palmer has turned climate politics on 
its axis."

The most ambiguous part of Palmer's announcement related to his position on 
the carbon price. He has said he wants to abolish the carbon tax and replace it 
with an emissions trading scheme. The catch is that he doesn't want the ETS to 
kick in until our major trading partners have one.

I spoke to someone intimately involved in creating the architecture of the 
carbon price under Labor and asked them whether what Palmer was proposing was 
even possible. If Palmer votes to keep the architecture of the carbon price, 
by simply amending the existing legislation to set the price to zero dollars, 
and delays the automatic linkage of the carbon price to Europe's scheme, then 
it would be relatively simple to re-start Australia's emissions trading scheme 
in the future.

ACF's O'Shanassy said, "what the Palmer United Party has proposed around the 
carbon price is basically like taking the battery out of your car. The car 
still runs fine, and a smart person can always come along, replace the battery, 
and be off to the races."

However, I'm told it would become a "nightmare" if the entire carbon pricing 
framework was torn up and rewritten from scratch.

National campaign director for the Wilderness Society, Lyndon Schneiders, told 
me that "it's fantastic that Palmer is supporting an ETS and retaining the 
renewable energy target. It would be great to now see him to renounce his 
Galilee coal projects."

The CEO of The Climate Institute, John Connor, however, described the 
potential repeal of the carbon price as "ugly" and said it was unclear "whether 
the Palmer United Party's call for an emissions trading scheme is a 
pre-condition for repeal of the carbon price and exactly what is intended. The 
devil is in the detail."

This concern was held by several other eNGO leaders, who told me that they 
fear Palmer is more interested in creating a political bargaining chip, rather 
than having any real commitment to climate action.

The cautious welcome to Palmer's announcement extended beyond the environment 
movement.

I also spoke to several union leaders, and the opposition Labor party.

Colin Long, the Victorian secretary of the National Tertiary Education Union, 
a union that has been a strong advocate for climate action, told me that 
"Palmer's acknowledgement of the importance of dealing with climate change is 
significant, and the idea of an ETS is an improvement on Abbott's useless 
"direct action" corporate subsidy policy. Palmer's commitment to the renewable 
energy target and the CEFC is a great relief and will hopefully thwart the 
Coalition's attempt to destroy the renewable energy industry."

Long-standing carbon price supporter and national president of the union 
representing coal miners, Tony Maher of the CFMEU, told me, "our concern about 
abolishing the ETS was that it would mean we had to renegotiate all the 
consumer and job protections all over again in the future. It's not clear 
whether PUP is proposing to leave all those protections in place or not. We 
will be urging them to do so."

Federal Labor also welcomed Palmer's support for an emissions trading scheme. 
An opposition spokesman said, "Labor's position on climate change has not 
changed. We will not support the repeal of the carbon tax unless there is a 
credible alternative that will deliver meaningful action to tackle climate 
change."

It is clear that Palmer (and Gore) has completely rewritten climate politics 
in Australia. Why he has done this is not clear, and there are elements of 
incomprehensibility in what has said.

However, as a political tactic, it could potentially be a master stroke, and 
consigns Abbott's almost non-existent climate policy to the dust bin. As 
Greenpeace's Pearson quipped, "tonight Al Gore has deliveredTony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> an inconvenient 
senate."
 