
The first results from Afghanistan's presidential election show the country is 
headed for a runoff next month between former ministers, with two other 
candidates securing enough of the vote to potentially act as kingmakers.

After a week of waiting, the election commission finally unveiled on Sunday a 
snapshot of the overall vote: 10% of the results from about three-quarters of 
Afghanistan's provinces.

Following a spate of rumours, wild claims and fierce accusations, the first 
solid evidence came with a strict warning that fluctuations were not only 
possible but likely as more results are tallied.

"I must tell you, there will be changes in the days ahead as we announce 
further results," said Ahmad Yusuf Nuristani, chairman of the Independent 
Election Commission. "We are checking the partial results to ensure the final 
result is clear, and we will share it with the nation."

The tally gave Abdullah Abdullah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah>, a former foreign 
minister andmujahideen fighter, a slim lead at about 42%, followed by the 
former finance minister and World Bank technocrat Ashraf Ghani on 38%. If no 
candidate gets more than half the vote, there is a runoff between the top two .

Lagging far behind in third place with less than 10% was Zalmai Rassoul, a 
moderate former minister widely believed to be the incumbent Hamid Karzai's 
preferred successor. Winning barely 5% – but still enough to potentially 
influence a runoff – was a hardline Islamist, Abdul Rasul Sayyaf, the man who 
first invited Osama bin Laden toAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>.

The candidates are competing to take over from Karzai, who has ruled for more 
than a decade but was barred by the constitution from standing again. If the 
drawn-out election process continues as successfully as it began, it will 
herald the country's first ever peaceful, democratic transfer of power.

Just over a week ago Afghans flocked to the polls in unexpectedly high numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/05/afghanistan-presidential-election-voters-hamid-karzai>
, and although dozens of polling stations in rural and insecure areas came 
under Taliban attack, the voting overall was not seriously disrupted by 
violence.

Because the votes have to be brought to Kabul from around the country, 
including areas so remote that ballot boxes must be transported there and back 
on donkeys, the vote-counting process is painfully slow. Full preliminary 
results are not expected until 24 April, and there are then several weeks for 
election organisers to shift through hundreds of fraud allegations and any 
other complaints.

Both of the frontrunners still have their hopes set on a first-round win and 
called on election organisers to root out fraud.

Ghani, lagging marginally behind Abdullah, compared the preliminary results to 
the first 10 minutes of a football game, while Abdullah said he expected to 
build from a position of strength.

"To be honest, this result is not news for me," Abdullah told the Guardian 
when asked about his lead. "We didn't expect every partial count will come out 
the same way, and there is another caveat: that in the eight provinces that 
have not been counted, we have the majority vote in all except one or two."

Overall, observers and election organisers say they think there was less 
cheating in this election than the 2009 vote that returned Karzai to power, 
when more than 1m votes were eventually thrown out as fakes. However, there 
have still been many serious accusations, and videos and photos of alleged 
violations have been circulating on social media.

The vote watchdog said there had been nearly 1,900 complaints, almost half of 
them serious enough to affect poll results. However, a significant proportion 
of those were about candidates from provincial-level elections held at the same 
time as the presidential vote. The watchdog promised to tackle all of them.

"We are very serious about separating fraudulent votes from valid ones," said 
Nader Mohseni, of the Independent Election Complaints Commission, vowing full 
transparency in its work. "The doors of [the commission's] offices in all 
provinces are open to observers."
 