
Fears grew in Afghanistan today that supporters of the failed presidential 
candidate,Abdullah Abdullah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah>, may resort to violence 
to protest over what they regard as a stolen election.

A close aide of Abdullah said his campaign had been overwhelmed by furious 
supporters, particularly in the northern provinces, registering their protests. 
They urged Abdullah, who is in a delicate political position, to denounce Hamid 
Karzai's reappointment as president.

Abdullah is scheduled to make a statement to reporters tomorrow in which he is 
expected to say the decision by the International Election Commission of
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> to make Karzai 
president without going to a runoff was unconstitutional.

The statement will allow Abdullah to keep up pressure on Karzai by continuing 
to question his legitimacy but at the same time without angering the US and 
Britain. The two countries have warned Abdullah they might not be prepared to 
work with him in the future if he does anything to incite his followers to 
violence.

The internal political wrangling came as the US and its allies redoubled their 
efforts to press Karzai to tackle endemic corruption, embark on constitutional 
reform, reduce cronyism and bring into his government figures such as Abdullah.

Karzai, reaffirmed as president on Monday after Abdullah pulled out of a 
planned election re-run on Saturday, vowed to tackle corruption and reach out 
to political opponents but gave no commitments to take specific action. He did 
not offer a place in government to Abdullah, whom the US regard as relatively 
efficient and whom it would like to see installed in a senior government post.

Underlining how hard it will be to force Karzai to move towards reform, the 
Afghanistan president made his speech today flanked by his two vice-presidents, 
one, Mohammad Qasim Fahim, a notorious former warlord selected as a running 
mate by Karzai despite strong opposition from the international community.

The US, Britain and other allies face the same dilemma as they did before the 
disputed election. They want Karzai to introduce reforms but they do not have 
the leverage to force him: the US has ruled out withdrawing its forces, at 
least until it has defeated al-Qaida and elements of the Taliban.

With the election out of the way, the US, which has little faith in Karzai, is 
leading an international effort to persuade him to consider shifting from a 
presidential system to a parliamentary one that would open the way to more 
players.

A parliamentary system would allow for the appointment of a prime minister to 
share power with Karzai. Failing that, the US would like to see the appointment 
of a western-style chief executive to help run the country in tandem with 
Karzai.

Abdullah has to balance the demands of the US and Britain with keeping onside 
the supporters he attracted during the election campaign. He could see some of 
that support drift away if he is seen to be acquiescing in what they regard as 
Karzai's election theft.

The UN is planning to hold an international conference in Kabul to discuss 
Karzai's promise to clean up a government riddled with cronyism and corruption. 
No date has been set for the conference, which will be co-chaired by Ban 
Ki-moon, the UN secretary-general, and Karzai, but the Afghan president would 
be under pressure to present his plans for a root and branch reform of his 
government.

Speaking in London after flying overnight from Kabul, Ban said he had told 
Karzai: "Unless you take very bold measures to eradicate corruption it will be 
very difficult for you to meet the expectations of the international community."

Ban, who met Gordon Brown in London, denied the UN had closed its eyes to 
election fraud and diminished the standing of its own workers on the ground by 
endorsing Karzai's re-election.

He defended his decision to sack Peter Galbraith, the former deputy head of 
the UN mission in Afghanistan, who had warned repeatedly that the organisation 
was standing idly by as officials and ministers loyal to the president 
organised the fraud.

Ban said he dismissed Galbraith, not because he had spoken out in public, but 
because he insisted on limiting the number of polling stations. He said this 
contradicted a "fundamental principle" of the right of the Afghan voters to 
cast their votes.
 