
The university is central to life in "Aber": in a town of 12,000 people, the 
addition of 9,000 students is going to make an impact. It's frequently rated 
highly in student satisfaction surveys. Encouragingly, more than 90% of the 
undergraduate population come from the state sector. The town itself, while 
small, has a lovely, breezy position on the west coast of Wales, and is known 
for a thriving local music scene. Good transport links, too, should you need to 
get away.

Fees
 £3,145 a year for all full-time undergraduate courses in 2008-9. Welsh 
students will qualify for a fee subsidy paid directly to the institution and 
will effectively be liable for a fee of approximately £1,225.

Bursaries
 Bursaries are means-tested, currently ranging from £1,000 for students on a 
maximum grant to £200 for students who receive the minimum grant. There are 
also subject-specific excellence bursaries available of £2,000 over three 
years, dependent on Ucas points. A £500 discount off first-year hall fees for 
all UK/EU students who hold Aberystwyth as their firm choice through Ucas by 
June 30. Music bursaries, entrance scholarships and merit awards are also 
available.

Accommodation
 Guaranteed for first-years. Accommodation prices start at £42 a week, with a 
wide range to choose from. Catered single rooms are £92.50 a week.

Facilities
 The university library is very well equipped but should it fall short you can 
always pay a visit to the National Library of Wales, which is based in 
Aberystwyth. It's a copyright library, meaning it's entitled to a copy of every 
book published in Britain. That's your reading list covered, then.

Transport
 Although it's out on the west coast, trains will whisk you to Birmingham and 
beyond. Road links will take you to north or south-west Wales with ease.

Contact
Tel: 01970 622021
Email: ug-admissions@aber.ac.uk <mailto:ug-admissions@aber.ac.uk>
Web: www.aber.ac.uk <http://www.aber.ac.uk/>
Accommodation: accommodation@aber.ac.uk <mailto:accommodation@aber.ac.uk>
 