
On Union Street, Aberdeen rises to meet you, grey in all its granite 
rectitude. But two years ago its citizens basked in the glory of an unexpected 
accolade, when it was namedone of the three happiest places to live in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/nov/24/aberdeen-happiest-place-scotland>.

It’s not that Aberdonians are regarded as joyless people; it’s simply that 
happiness andjoie de vivre are not attributes most commonly associated with the 
place. It’s sturdy, robust and upstanding certainly, but gaiety and a carefree 
attitude might once have been considered too frivolous in this place of serious 
money and stony facades.

You didn’t have to look far to see the source of the locals’ happiness: an 
unemployment rate of 1%, two fine universities and oil money – oodles and 
oodles of it.Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/aberdeen>, it seemed back 
then, was recession-proof, having sailed through the credit crunch and 
subsequent recession of 2008 untouched by the storms and upheavals that had 
buffeted the rest of western Europe.

But now the old city is gathering its skirts about itself for an economic 
hurricane that once would have seemed as unlikely as snow in St Tropez. 
Following the global collapse in oil prices, North Seaoil revenues have been in 
freefall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jan/15/aberdeen-energy-rich-town-counting-cost-oil-shock>
. In the first three months of this year they fell by 75%, continuing the 
downward spiral from the middle of last year. The downturn seemed to have 
justified the fears expressed by No campaigners in the referendum on Scottish 
independence. Indeed, tax receipts from oil accruing to Scotland between 
January and March this year were £168m, down from the £742m gathered in the 
final quarter of 2014. And nowhere is the economic wind-chill factor being more 
sharply felt than in Aberdeen.

Amid tens of thousands of job layoffs in a region long regarded as Scotland’s 
Klondike, the big oil operators are putting an end to the longstanding “two 
weeks on, three weeks off” working model for oil-rig workers. Crews are being 
pressured into signing up to a “three weeks on, three weeks off” equal-time 
rota. This is a tougher regime than in Norway, but is comparable with working 
practices in regions such as the Gulf of Mexico.

In the city itself the previously unthinkable has happened. Once it was almost 
impossible to secure a room in a decent hotel for less than £100 a night and 
the airport, the business gateway to the city, thrummed with commerce and 
workers. Now both these barometers of Aberdeen’s once bountiful economy have 
seen pronounced drop-offs.

Figures published last month 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-scotland-business-33093208> by Aberdeen 
international airport show that passenger numbers in May took a hit of 8.1% 
against the same month last year. The occupancy rate for city hotels, 
meanwhile, was 68.9% in April, down from 77.9% in April 2014. More than 1,200 
oil workers have been laid off in the region since the downturn began last 
year, while local businesses – minicab firms, hotels and restaurants – are 
reporting fewer customers. The property market, once seen as the most buoyant 
outside London, has begun to retreat, with worse expected.

Eight bookies, six charity shops … it was like finding your maiden aunt was 
selling the candlesticks on eBay

And so, on grey, wet Union Street last week, I felt impelled to conduct my own 
somewhat rudimentary survey of Aberdeen’s economic health. First, I began to 
count the number of empty shopfronts. For those who have never been there, an 
empty shopfront amid the granite splendour seems like a violation. By the time 
I’d stravaiged up and down it twice, I’d counted 18 empty facades, their 
windows disfigured by swirls of grey polish. Adding to the creeping sense of 
faded glamour were eight betting shops, six charity shops and around a dozen 
fast-food emporiums. No one is suggesting there isn’t a place for these 
outlets, but in Union Street, Aberdeen, and in such numbers? It was like 
visiting your formidable but beloved maiden aunt in the Cotswolds and 
discovering that she’d been taking in lodgers and selling the candlesticks on 
eBay.

Standing tall among Union Street’s economic tumbleweed is Eclectic Fizz, the 
city’s premier champagne bar. On a Thursday lunchtime there were fewer than a 
handful of customers in a space heavy with the promise of wasted afternoons 
amid elegance and cocktails. The manager, Stuart Cooper, is a local lad who’s 
worked all over the UK and is compellingly upbeat about how his beloved 
Aberdeen is coping with the storm. “There’s still a lot of money in this place. 
You might ask yourself where it’s coming from, but it’s still there and it’s 
still evident.

“Of course, the falling oil prices have had an adverse effect, but that’s 
happened all over the world. If this is what it’s like when money is supposed 
to be scarce, I’d love to see this place when the good times roll.”

Sales of Moët, the house champagne, remain healthy, he says, while prosecco 
and cava are still sold in high numbers for those who want as close an 
approximation of the high life as they can get.

The Enid Hutt art gallery at the other end of Union Street is showcasing 
original work by a galaxy of local talent amid prints by Jolomo and Jack 
Vettriano. It’s the sort of shop where you rebuke yourself if you depart 
without making a purchase. On my visit, several others evidently thought so 
too. Eileen from Bridge of Don was similarly robust about the challenges facing 
her city. “I keep waiting to see the effects of the recession, and I don’t 
disbelieve what you’re telling me, but we still have two great universities 
here.”

But what about all those empty shopfronts and betting shops? She was 
dismissive. “Have you not seen the new shopping mall down by the station? 
That’s where all the smart shops have gone. They’re not far away, you know.”

Worse may yet befall Aberdeen, but rarely have Ladbrokes and Subway looked 
more splendid in this, their silver, granite raiment.
 