
As of Friday morning, the Solicitors Regulation Authority (SRA) had accepted 
30 applications <> from those businesses that want to become alternative 
business structures (ABSs).

The first is likely to be approved next month. Among the first movers are the 
Co-op – looking to build on what is already a substantial legal arm – and 
national law firm Irwin Mitchell, which last year became the first practice to 
say it wanted external investment.

Legal expenses insurer DAS is also committed to becoming an ABS, while online 
conveyancing business In-deed – chaired by Rightmove founder Harry Hill – has 
signalled its intention to invest in law firms.

Others that have been in serious talks with the SRA in the run-up to ABS day 
include claims management companies, accountancy firms, loss adjusters and 
private equity houses. Might other big brands enter the fray? I'm hearing that 
some very big retailers may well do so. The AA and Saga (both owned by the same 
private equity house) dipped their toes into legal services a couple of years 
ago but have yet to show their hand.

But as I have written previously 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/oct/19/licensing-delays-legal-services>, 
the last couple of years have seen an increasing number of lawyers and 
non-lawyers launching new approaches to the law – mainly for consumers, but 
expect more for businesses too – that have not needed the structural 
liberalisation and opportunities for external investment offered by ABSs.

There are various efforts to build national legal brands, backed up by 
networks of law firms, most notably QualitySolicitors, which is shortly to 
launch a £10m advertising campaign after securing significant private equity 
investment.

Law firms on the stock exchange? Don't rule it out – other professional 
services businesses have floated and it has already happened in Australia, the 
only country in the world further down the line on this than England and Wales 
(a more limited form of ABS is coming to Scotland later this year).

Then there are plans for a national chain of city-centre law shops, hatched by 
Freeserve founder Ajaz Ahmed and Yorkshire law firm Last Cawthra Feather, and 
even therecent launch 
<http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/legal-services-act/market-monitor/exclusive-video-conferencing-kiosks-hit-shopping-centres-in-new-legal-advice-push>
 of video-conferencing kiosks in shopping centres that will give users instant 
access to a solicitor, a service also available from home.

No doubt some, if not many, of these first attempts to change the way law is 
delivered will fail to hit the mark. But there are some trends that seem 
inevitable for ABSs and traditional law firms alike, such as more use of fixed 
fees, better communication with clients and smarter use of technology to strip 
much of the manual process out of the system, leaving the focus on the 
specialist advice that only a qualified lawyer can provide.

The government – naturally keen on the pro-competition impact of ABSs – also 
sees them as one potential answer to the legal aid cuts; the hope is that by 
encouraging innovation, those both within and without the contracted scheme 
will have other affordable options. It was very interesting to see the Co-op
recruit two very well-known family law solicitors <> to launch a family service 
next year, an area where legal aid is largely being withdrawn but there are 
arguably sound business reasons to avoid.

So long as the SRA and other, smaller ABS regulators are up to the job of 
supervising these more complex new business, ABSs will hopefully be good for 
both consumers – by making the law more accessible – and for lawyers by thus 
increasing the size of the market. But market shares will change and that is 
where the battle lies.

Neil Rose is the editor of legalfutures.co.uk <http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/>
 