
The son of the Islamist cleric Abu Hamza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza> turned to crime after being 
shunned by schoolmates because of his father's notoriety, a court has heard.

Norwich crown court was told that Imran Mostafa, 20, was sucked into offending 
because he had been isolated from mainstream society as parents warned their 
children to stay away from him. As he was sentenced to 11 years for his part in 
a robbery inNorfolk <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/norfolk>, Mostafa's 
barrister told how he had a "normal relationship" with his father until the age 
of 11, when Abu Hamza was jailed.

Roderick Price added: "He had an unusual childhood and young adulthood … 
Attempts to socialise outside his home often failed because of who his father 
was. He became more and more isolated and his social life became centred around 
his family.

"Friendships proved difficult because children would be told by their parents 
not to play with him."

Mostafa threw himself into school work gaining 11 GCSEs at A or B grade 
followed by A-levels, Price added.

But he dropped out of a civil engineering course at university after attempts 
to break away from his reputation faltered and he experienced similar isolation.

Since being remanded in custody over the offence, he had been placed in 
segregation because of the identity of his father.

Price said Mostafa had been hit hard by Abu Hamza's recent extradition to the 
US, adding: "He knows he will never see his father again.

"This is very hard for him because his father treated him in an entirely 
normal way as a son."

Mostafa, of Slough, was part of a gang who used a handgun and sledgehammer in 
a "sophisticated and well planned" raid.

The robbery happened at the Francis Wain store in King's Lynn, Norfolk, on 31 
January. Gems worth about £70,000 were stolen in the smash and grab raid.

Prosecuting, Ian James said: "Some kind of smoke producing device was set off 
causing the attention of the public to be diverted to the van they used and 
shielding from public view the identity of those involved."

James added that the raid was captured on CCTV and showed one of the robbers 
waving a handgun.

"For those who had the misfortune to be working in the premises it must have 
been an absolutely terrifying experience," he said.

Mostafa had denied robbery and possessing a firearm with intent to commit an 
offence along with Jonathan Abdul, 18, from London, but both were convicted 
after a trial in September.

On Thursday, they were sentenced alongside Ossama Hamed, 19, from Fulham, west 
London, and Ahmed Ahmed, 20, fromEnfield, north London, who had previously 
admitted the same charges.

Passing sentence, the judge Peter Jacobs said: "This was plainly a terrifying 
robbery. Staff were praying that they would not be shot and they continue to 
suffer trauma."

Abdul will serve 11 years in a youth offenders institute, Hamed will serve 
eight years and three months and Ahmed seven years and four months.
 