
Jury selection began amid tight security in a New York court on Monday in the 
trial ofAbu Hamza <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza> al-Masri, the 
radical Islamic cleric extradited from the UK who faces charges he conspired to 
support al-Qaida, partly by setting up training camps in Oregon.

Before the trial opened, trained sniffer dogs were led in and officers 
conducted a radiation sweep of the Manhattan courtroom. The trial opened with 
the selection of 12 jurors and 4 alternates.

Wearing a blue t-shirt, grey sweat pants and glasses, the white-haired 
preacher was instructed to stand as judge Katherine Forrest told jurors he had 
both hands amputated. She asked them if there was anything about his appearance 
or disability that would affect their ability to be impartial.

Abu Hamza, who is also missing an eye, claims to have lost both hands while 
fighting against Soviet forces in Afghanistan. He was not wearing his trademark 
prosthetic hook, which had been removed for security purposes.

A single prosthetic device with a pen attached lay on the table in front of 
him.

Abu Hamza has informed the judge and his lawyers he will testify on his own 
behalf. In a pretrial hearing last week, he told the judge: “I think I am 
innocent. I need to go through it, have a chance to defend myself.”

The grey-bearded Egyptian preacher, 55, indicted under the name Mustafa Kamel 
Mustafa, faces charges of setting up training camps in Bly, Oregon, 15 years 
ago, advocating jihad in Afghanistan and of ensuring there was satellite phone 
service for hostage takers in Yemen in 1998, in which three Britons and an 
Australian were killed.

He denies all charges.

The prospective jurors were read a list of names of witnesses, entities and 
locations likely to come up in the trial, including the Finsbury Park mosque, 
in London, where Abu Hamza was an imam in the 1990s, the Dar-as-Salam mosque in 
Seattle, Washington; Bly, Oregon, as well as Afghanistan, Pakistan and Yemen. 
They were also told of Saajid Badat, a British man who plotted with "shoe 
bomber" Richard Reid, to blow up airplanes who was due to testify against Abu 
Hamza.


Abu Hamza was jailed in 2004 in Britain, on separate charges of inciting 
racial hatred and encouraging supporters to kill non-Muslims. Members of the 
London mosque included Zacarias Moussaoui, a conspirator on the September 11 
terror attacks and Reid.

He was extradited to the US in 2012.

Abu Hamza's trial is expected to last between four and five weeks. The court 
will not sit on Tuesday or Wednesday, due to the Jewish passover holiday, and 
opening statements are scheduled for Thursday.

The trial comes a month after a Manhattan jury convicted Sulaiman Abu Ghaith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/26/osama-bin-laden-son-in-law-found-guilty>
, Osama bin Laden's son-in-law and al-Qaida's spokesman after the 2001 
terrorist attacks, of charges that will likely result in a life sentence.
 