
The Islamist cleric Abu Hamza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/18/abu-hamza-trial-cleric-speeches-bite-him>
, who was extradited from Britain to the US to face terror charges, claimed on 
Thursday that he lost his hands and one of his eyes in an accidental explosion 
while working for the Pakistani army more than 20 years ago.

During a rambling day of testimony, in which he wept, professed love for Osama 
bin Laden and claimed that the World Trade Center was brought down on 9/11 by a 
controlled demolition, Hamza gave a jury in New York a new account of how he 
suffered his notorious disabilities.


Hamza said the injuries that forced him to use a prosthetic hooked hand and a 
glass eye were inflicted when an experiment involving liquid explosives that he 
was carrying out in Lahore in 1993, as part of a mysterious roads project for 
the Pakistani military, went badly wrong.


The 56-year-old said he was holding a bottle containing nitro-benzine, "cheap 
material" that was shipped to the military compound where he and some allies 
were working. It was intended for use in a device involving a steel plate that 
was to be covered in earth and used on a road, he claimed, without explaining 
in detail.


The device was detonated accidentally. "I see it getting hot, I went to throw 
it in the bathroom, but somebody was standing by the sink," Hamza said from the 
witness stand, at the federal court in lower Manhattan. “I didn't know how much 
time I had. I didn't know how dangerous it was. I just wanted to get rid of it. 
And it just went off.


"I was looking at it like this," he said of the device, leaning in with the 
left side of his face. “That's why in this eye I can't see. This one survived." 
He said: "I just felt the explosion. I lost a lot of blood … After that I went 
into a coma. And when I went out in a coma I didn't know I had lost my arms."


Conflicting accounts of how exactly Hamza suffered the injuries that led him 
to use a hook and other prosthetics proliferated in the years since he rose to 
prominence as the radical preacher who delivered extremist sermons to the 
Finsbury Park mosque in London, in the late 1990s.


Hamza told the court he was aware of the various theories. “Yes, of course," 
he said under questioning from his lawyer, Joshua Dratel. "Some people say I 
went to Saudi Arabia and they caught me stealing and they cut off my hands,” he 
added, prompting laughter in the public gallery. “All sorts of stories – the 
gossip never ends."


The Egyptian-born preacher was known to have been in Afghanistan around that 
timea <>ssisting the Afghan mujaheddin <> with reconstructing the country, 
following the withdrawal of Soviet forces after war in the country. It was once 
claimed that he sustained his injuries on the battlefield. “I wish I had,” he 
said on Thursday. Reports later blamed an accident inside Afghanistan.


However, Hamza said on Thursday that it happened after he and a small group of 
colleagues had been carrying out controlled explosions between two villas on 
the compound in Lahore in the days beforhand. “I was surprised that the 
neighbours would not complain, why they did not call the police,” he said.


Indicted under the name Mustafa Kamel Mustafa, Hamza is charged with 11 
criminal counts including setting up training camps in Bly, Oregon, 15 years 
ago, advocating jihad in Afghanistan and of securing satellite phone service 
for hostage takers in a kidnapping in Yemen in 1998 in which three Britons and 
an Australian were killed. He denies all the charges and faces life in prison 
if convicted.


On Wednesday, Dratel claimed in court that Hamza had been working with British 
intelligence services to help keep London safe by "cooling hotheads". The 
lawyer held up what he claimed were official documents that showed he 
cooperated with MI5 in attempts to defuse tensions within the British Muslim 
community.


Hamza was jailed in the UK in 2006 for inciting racial hatred and soliciting 
murder, and made similar claims at that trial. After six years in jail, he was 
extradited to the US, where he now faces much more serious charges.


He told the Manhattan court that after treatment in a military hospital in 
Lahore, he returned to England, where he was given the prosthetics. Hamza was 
not permitted to wear his hook in court for security reasons. He wore a blue 
T-shirt and dark trousers, and occasionally sipped from a cup of water held 
between his two stumps.


Hamza told the court on Thursday that after his return from Afghanistan, he 
travelled several times in 1994 to Bosnia, where he assisted Muslims during 
their persecution by Serbia. He said he had orchestrated the supplying of 
money, Land Rovers and other aid.


He travelled under a false name disguised as an NGO worker delivering food 
aid, he said, claiming that entering at the time with genuine papers and for 
other purposes "for an Arab is a death sentence".


"It's very very simple," said Hamza. "You pay £25, you write an application 
saying 'I want to be John Travolta, and you are John Travolta.'" Asked amid 
more laughter in the court if he had in fact used the name of the American 
actor, Hamza replied: "No, I was, I believe, Adam Ramsay Ayman."


Hamza became tearful on the stand as he described the massacre of Muslims in 
the town of Srebrenica in July 1995. He criticised Dutch-led UN forces for 
turning civilians away from the gates of their compound and leaving them to 
advancing Serb forces. "They were not protected, and they were not allowed to 
go in," said Hamza. His voice cracked, and he began to cry and sniff loudly. 
Judge Katherine Forrest sent out the jury and called a short break.


Asked to describe London during the late 1990s, Hamza invoked the name 
“Londonistan” more often used by conservative critics of what was seen as 
tolerance by the authorities of radical Islamist residents. “You had a lot of 
refugees coming from all over the world, you had a lot of militancy,” he said. 
“The law would allow a lot, a lot of things in London.”

Pointing to the freedom of speech given to Sinn Féin leader Gerry Adams and 
the IRA’s “killing of the Queen’s cousin”, Earl Mountbatten, who was in fact 
assassinated in 1979, Hamza said: “London was a very attractive place for any 
dissident or a person who has a fight with their regime, whether they are 
Muslim or non-Muslim”.


Hamza said his response to the terrorist attacks on the US on 11 September 
2001 was to tell people in Britain that they “should think before they allow 
their politicians to drag them into a bloody war”. He denied having anything to 
do with a flyer for a seminar on the first anniversary of the attacks in which 
he participated that described them as “a towering day in history”.

However, he said that when the Finsbury Park mosque was raided by police and 
shuttered amid concerns about his teachings in the weeks before the war in 
Iraq, he was about to hold a forum for fellow engineers on the topic on how: 
“the collapse of the towers was caused by explosives."


Afterwards, he said, “I resumed preaching in the street for 15 months, right 
outside the mosque, regardless of the weather.” Some 25 police were forced to 
watch over his sermons. “It was for me punishing the government for closing the 
mosque,” said Hamza.


Hamza repeated past claims that plans for the Sandhurst military academy that 
were discovered when his house was raided by police in 2004 were there because 
he had worked on the facility as an engineer. He had never shared them with 
anyone, he said. “That is a trust." He also dismissed the relevance of a copy 
of the Encyclopedia of Afghan jihad, describing it as akin to a dictionary or 
reference book on tanks or other elements of war.


The preacher claimed he had been asked to join al-Qaida on its formation in 
1989 but had disagreed with the terrorist group’s ideology. Asked who had later 
served as the representative in London of the group’s then leader, Osama bin 
Laden, Hamza said: “He is a very famous man - people loved him, including 
myself, but everybody would claim they were his representative."
 