
A US man says an Egyptian cleric on trial in federal court on terrorism 
charges is the "very angry" imam he met in London years ago.


David Smith identified Mustafa Kamel Mustafa, also known as Abu Hamza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/17/abu-hamza-cover-religion-terrorism-trial>
, as he testified for the government Friday in New York.

Smith said he converted from Christianity to Islam in the 1990s. He said he 
made a trip to the London mosque where Mustafa preached after seeing some of 
his videos in early 1999.

Prosecutors say Mustafa conspired to support al-Qaida before and after the 
2001 September 11 attacks. They say he tried to open a terrorist training camp 
in Oregon in 1999, a year after supporting kidnappers who took hostages in 
Yemen. Four hostages were killed.

Mustafa, 55, has pleaded not guilty and plans to testify.

The Finsbury Park Mosque in London attracted hundreds of young men, including 
September 11 conspirator Zacarias Moussaoui and failed shoe bomber Richard Reid.

Smith recalled Mustafa as "very angry, very fiery" in speeches that emphasized 
expelling non-Muslims from the Arabian Peninsula by force if necessary.

Smith said Mustafa, also known as Abu Hamza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza>, told his followers they would be 
filled with so much zeal on the battlefield that "it would make you want to 
throw your AK-47 and run up to the nonbeliever and bite him."

Smith testified he went to an Oregon ranch where the government said Mustafa 
wanted to build an al-Qaida training camp. He said he and others wanted to 
"have a chance to practice our religion and not feel like we were being 
surrounded by non-Muslims."

The relaxed atmosphere dissatisfied men sent by Mustafa to Oregon, he said, 
with one telling him he was "very, very unhappy" because "he came to do 
something and nothing was going on."

"He was displeased with Abu Hamza's decision to send him there," said Smith, 
who is cooperating with the government. The testimony came a day after opening 
statements in the trial of the cleric extradited in 2012 from England.
 