
A New York jury heard that a document on how to make improvised explosive 
devices was found in the prison cell ofAbu Hamza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza> al-Masri, the Islamist cleric and 
former imam of Finsbury Park mosque, while he was serving at Belmarsh high 
security prison in Britain in 2011.

In a day of testy exchanges at his US terror trial, which was punctuated by 
warnings from the judge about how to behave in court, Hamza denied all 
knowledge of the document.

During cross-examination, John Cronan, prosecuting, said: "Three years ago you 
violated UK rules and were found with a document in your prison cell about how 
to manufacture IEDs. You were in Belmarsh."

Hamza replied: “I've never heard of the document. I've never testified about 
the document”


Hamza asked to see it. Then he held up his arms, to show he did not have any 
hands. “How am I going to make an IED in prison when they can't allow staples 
and I wasn't allowed a tin opener?”

Hamza, who was extradited from Britain to the US in 2012 on terror charges, 
was testifying for a fourth day at the US district court in New York.


He accused the British authorities of having a political motivation for 
convicting him, in 2006, for inciting murder and racial hatred. “It's a 
political thing,” he told the court. “They said: they don't want him to come to 
the US with a clean record, so throw something at him”.

After several rambling answers to questions, Hamza was told by judge Katherine 
Forrest to “stop making speeches”.

Hamza was asked about speeches and sermons he had given in London, including 
one where he said "everybody was happy" after the 9/11 terror attacks.

The jury heard about another speech in which Hamza said: “If a Muslim cannot 
sell the kafir [non-Muslim] on the market, then just kill him.” Hamza said that 
he had been taken out of context, that there was a historical background to 
what he was saying.

At one point, Hamza, referring to his jail sentence in the UK, said: “Do you 
want to give me another seven years?"

The jury was shown a photograph of Hamza, next to the words: “Allah happy when 
kafir get killed.”

He said he was often misinterpreted because his first language is Arabic and 
that he was just an engineer, who had shifted to preaching after the injury in 
which he lost his hands and an eye. “I'm not eloquent in English. I'm just an 
engineer. I'm not linguistically equipped for this.”

During a line of questioning about Zein Al-Abidine al-Mihdar, known as Abu 
Hassan, who masterminded the 1998 kidnapping of 16 tourists inYemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> that left four people dead, Hamza 
turned the tables and began questioning Cronan.

“Can you tell me what day of the week the kidnapping took place?” said Hamza.

“Sir, I'll be asking the questions,” Cronan said.

Hamza repeatedly asked “What day of the week?” until the judge intervened.

“Let him [Cronan] ask the question,” she said, telling Hamza he must abide by 
the rules of the court.

After the prosecution detailed Hamza's previous convictions, a move the judge 
had agreed to, Josh Dratel, Hamza's defence lawyer objected.

During a break in the trial, when the jury were not present, Dratel called for 
a mistrial, on the basis of the previous charges. The judge denied it. “Save 
that for the appeal court,” she said.

Hamza was scathing about the prosecution's case. He referred to witnesses who 
had given evidence against him and others as “four hallucinations” who should 
be put in a “rubbish bin”.

He described Saajit Badat, the prosecution's key witness, as a “pay-as-you-go 
witness”.

Hamza, who said he was a mouthpiece for the rebels in Yemen responsible for 
the hostage-taking in 1998, also claimed he had done more for the hostages in 
Yemen than the US government.

“Where were the security forces in Yemen? The British government were there 
within hours of the kidnapping.”

Hamza, whose real name is Mustafa Kamel Mustafa, is charged with 11 criminal 
terror counts, including securing a satellite phone for the Yemeni 
hostage-takers, conspiring to set up training camps in Bly, Oregon, 15 years 
ago, and advocating jihad in Afghanistan. He denies all the charges but faces 
life in prison if convicted.

The case continues.
 