
Abu Hamza <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza> left Egypt for London 
in 1979, aged 21, putting his civil engineering studies on hold to work as a 
nightclub bouncer in the capital. He rose to prominence as Britain's most 
radical preacher, delivering extremist sermons from his Finsbury Park mosque in 
London. His fiery rhetoric, missing eye and prosthetic hooked hand made him a 
striking bogeyman for the security services and the media.

Born Mustafa Kamel Mustafa in Alexandria, Egypt, on 15 April 1958, he is the 
son of a naval officer and a primary school headmistress. He acquired British 
citizenship through his marriage to an Englishwoman, Valerie Fleming. The 
marriage did not last, but Abu Hamza was settled in Britain. He gained a civil 
engineering degree from Brighton Polytechnic and one of his first major 
contracts took him to the Royal Military Training Academy at Sandhurst, where 
the Duke of Cambridge and Prince Harry would later train.

For Abu Hamza as many others, the Iranian revolution and the mujahideen 
campaign against the Soviet Union in Afghanistan marked a turning point. In 
1987, he travelled to meet the founder of the Afghan mujahideen, Abdullah 
Azzam. He claimed to have been asked to join al-Qaida on its formation in 1989, 
but told his trial that he disagreed with the terrorist group's ideology.

Four years later, according to Hamza, he suffered the injuries that forced him 
to use a prosthetic hooked hand and a glass eye – though accounts of when, how 
and where the incident took place have varied. He claimed the injuries were 
inflicted in Lahore in 1993 when an experiment involving liquid explosives – 
which he was carrying out as part of a mysterious roads project for the 
Pakistani military – went badly wrong.

He claimed to have been holding a bottle containing nitro-benzine for use in a 
device when it was detonated accidentally. "I see it getting hot, I went to 
throw it in the bathroom, but somebody was standing by the sink," Hamza told 
his trial at the federal court in lower Manhattan this month. "I didn't know 
how much time I had. I didn't know how dangerous it was. I just wanted to get 
rid of it. And it just went off." He was in and out of a coma for a time and 
returned to London for treatment.

In 1997, he arrived at Finsbury Park mosque in north London. The failed shoe 
bomber, Richard Reid, and Zacarias Moussaoui, the only person charged in the US 
over the 9/11 attacks, both attended his preaching, which would attract the 
attention of MI5.

In 1998, Abu Hamza was linked to the violent kidnapping of 16 western tourists 
by jihadists in Yemen. He was questioned by Scotland Yard on suspicion of 
alleged bomb plots in Yemen, whose secular government accused him of recruiting 
Islamist warriors to the fundamentalist cause.

An attempt to extradite him failed and he was able to tighten his grip on the 
Finsbury Park mosque. He described the invasion of Iraq as a "war against 
Islam", claimed 9/11 was a Jewish plot, and called the Columbia space shuttle 
disaster a "punishment from Allah" because Christian, Jewish and Hindu 
astronauts were aboard. On the first anniversary of 9/11, he co-organised a 
meeting at the mosque praising the hijackers.

When anti-terror police raided the building in 2003, Abu Hamza led prayers on 
the streets outside. In February 2006, he was jailed for seven years for 
soliciting murder and inciting racial hatred. After a nine-year legal fight 
that reached the European court of human rights, he was extradited to the US in 
2012.

On Monday, he was convicted of terrorism offences following a five-week trial 
held less than a mile from Ground Zero. He now faces a life term in prison when 
he is sentenced on 9 September.
 