
Radical Islamic cleric Abu Hamza <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza> 
used the cover of religion to recruit and indoctrinate men, and to export 
violence and terror around the world, a New York jury heard on Thursday.


In his opening statement, assistant US attorney Edward Kim told a federal 
court in Manhattan that the former imam of the Finsbury Park mosque in north 
London used the place of worship as a base to send his “global export of 
violence and terror”.

It was here, the jury heard, that Hamza recruited his followers. “He used the 
cover of religion so that he could hide in plain sight,” Kim said. “He was not 
just a preacher of religion – he was a trainer of terrorists.”

Hamza's speeches, which were available on the internet, told able-bodied 
Muslims they had a duty to wage war against non-Muslims, to fight and to kill, 
the court heard.

Prosecutors have accused him of praising Osama bin Laden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/osamabinladen>, the former leader of 
al-Qaida, in the aftermath of 9/11. Bin Laden was killed by US special forces 
in 2011. “But you will learn that Abu Hamza did not just talk the talk – he 
walked the walk,” Kim said.

Knives, gas masks, and other “tools of war” were later found stockpiled in the 
mosque, Kim said.

But his defence attorney, Joshua Dratel, gave a sharply different account, 
saying he had not done anything he was accused of. Hamza would give his own 
account later in the trial, he said. While Hamza's views were extreme, Dratel 
said, it was not illegal to hold them. At one point, he likened Hamza to Nelson 
Mandela, who was “once considered a terrorist. Now he's an icon”.

The Egyptian-born cleric, 56, whose birth name is Mustafa Kamel Mustafa, is 
charged with creating an al-Qaida training camp in Bly, Oregon, in late 1999 
and early 2000. He is also charged with helping kidnappers in a 1998 
hostage-taking in Yemen that left four people dead, and raising money to send 
militants to Afghanistan. Hamza denies all the charges.

The white-haired cleric, who is missing both arms and an eye, appeared in 
court wearing glasses, a blue T-shirt and grey sweatpants. He used a prosthetic 
device holding a pen to take notes.

Kim, the prosecutor, told the jury: “In the fall of 1999, two men were sent on 
a mission, directed to travel halfway round the world to another country. They 
were sent on that mission by their leader.”

That man, Kim said, was Hamza. They were sent, he said, to a remote compound 
set a mile back from the nearest road and given money to accomplish their 
mission.

Kim said its purpose was to establish a training camp for terrorism, “a place 
for men to fight and to kill”. The compound had nerve gas and explosives, and 
they learned how to shoot a gun and how to slit a throat, Kim said.

The prosecutor told the jury that the two men carried with them letters, one 
to Bin Laden and one thanking Hamza. He told the jury they would hear evidence 
showing how Hamza participated in the “terrifying” hostage-taking in Yemen, 
providing “crucial resources and guidance”.


Kim said the defendant had posted a message to westerners to “stay out of 
Yemen”, shortly before the hostage-taking. “Abu Hamza did not just post that 
warning about Yemen. He provided a satellite phone” and paid for additional 
minutes.

In 2001, when US soldiers were fighting al-Qaida in Afghanistan, Hamza sent 
two of his followers, including Feroz Abbasi, a British national who was 
detained at Guantánamo Bay, to fight.

He told the jury they would hear from an al-Qaida operative via video link 
about Abbasi in Afghanistan.

Kim said the jury would also hear from two women in Bly, into whose community 
Hamza sent two of his followers in the middle of the night. The two men, Kim 
said, carried money Hamza had given them to set up the camp, and a CD with 
instructions on how to make bombs. They dressed in black, carried knives, and 
one of them was so committed he brought over his wife and family.

Kim told them they would hear from two of the rescued hostages, including Mary 
Quinn, who managed to escape into the desert and who travelled to London two 
years later to interview Hamza at the mosque about the kidnapping. “Abu Hamza 
said it was justified.”

Dratel, Hamza's defence counsel, said his client did not participate in any of 
the crimes, “not in Yemen, not in Oregon, not in Afghanistan”. Dratel said he 
“he never set foot in the US” until he was extradited.

Hamza was extradited to the US from Britain after an eight-year battle in 
2012, following his conviction and imprisonment in the UK for inciting his 
followers to kill non-Muslims.

Dratel described his client as “his own man” and “an independent thinker” who 
was concerned about oppressed Muslim communities around the world. He said 
Hamza's controversial views, which he had a right to hold, were not a crime.

Dratel said that in the late 1980s and 1990s, his client spoke up for Muslim 
communities who were being oppressed in Afghanistan, Bosnia and Chechnya. 
Dratel said his client “needed to be outrageous” to keep the entire spectrum of 
appeal to his community.

 “There's a third way between Osama bin Laden on one extreme and George Bush 
on the other,” he said.

Dratel told the jury that Hamza was relied upon by British intelligence to try 
to keep the situation non-violent. He said he had raised the alarm on the 
hostage-taking in Yemen.

He said Hamza had not sent anyone to Afghanistan, but had provided money for 
schools, charities and computers there. "He is not a follower of Osama bin 
Laden. He is not a follower of anyone. He's his own man.”

Hamza became well known in the 1990s, as his Finsbury Park mosque in London 
became a training ground for extremist Islamists, including the 9/11 
conspirator Zacarias Moussaoui and attempted shoe bomber Richard Reid.


On Monday, district judge Katherine Forrest, who is trying the case, ruled 
that a key government witness, Saajid Badat, a former al-Qaida operative, can 
testify via CCTV from Britain because he would face arrest if he travelled to 
the US.

Badat pleaded guilty to plotting with Reid, a Briton, to blow up airplanes 
using shoe bombs in 2001, before backing out at the last minute. He agreed to 
work with the British authorities and is living under an assumed name after 
serving six years in prison.

The trial is expected to last four to five weeks.
 