
Abu Hamza <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza> and the other four 
terror suspects who failed in their bid to prevent extradition to the US are 
likely, if convicted in an American court, to spend time in solitary 
confinement at the Alcatraz of the Rockies – the federal "supermax" prison at 
Florence, Colorado.

Richard Reid, the "shoe bomber", is already among the al-Qaida members serving 
life sentences at a top security prison, which one former warden has described 
as "a clean version of hell <http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-18560_162-3357727.html>
."

The European court of human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/european-court-of-human-rights> landmark 
ruling in April that finally cleared the way for the five to be sent to the US 
to stand trial turned on whether or not serving sentences of up to 50 years in 
solitary confinement in this supermax prison would amount to torture or 
inhumane and degrading treatment. Abu Hamza, because he has no hands and has 
vision in only one eye, could expect to spend only a short time at Florence 
before being transferred elsewhere, but it is a highly likely long-term 
destination for the other four.

Lawyers for the five men did not dispute that its physical conditions – the 
size of the cells, the kind of lighting, the sanitary facilities – did not 
breach human rights. Instead they focused on its highly restrictive regime and 
the almost total lack of human contact.

The regime is designed to prevent all physical contact between an inmate and 
others and to minimise social interaction with staff. For those in solitary 
confinement, contact with staff could be as little as one minute a day.

On the basic regime inmates have only 10 hours a week of recreation time 
outside their cells. Indoor recreations were little more than cages with a 
single pull-up bar for exercise. All they can do in the outdoor cages is pace 
up and down. Even these "privileges" can be terminated. One inmate was denied 
outdoor exercise for 60 days for trying to feed crumbs to birds.

But in evidence to the Strasbourg court, Patricia Rangel, a unit manager at 
the supermax, told the judges that they could have five social visits a month 
with no limit on their correspondence with their families. Inmates have in-cell 
access to 50 television channels and seven radio stations, a copy of USA Today 
and can speak to inmates in the next cells using the ventilation system as a 
voice conduit.

The Strasbourg judges said although the inmates were confined to their cells 
for the vast majority of their time, the range of activities and services 
provided went far beyond what is provided in many European prisons. They 
concluded that as they can talk during recreation the isolation they experience 
is "partial and relative". Another major factor for the judges is the fact that 
solitary confinement in a supermax cannot be imposed indefinitely and that 
there is a real possibility even for convicted terrorists to gain entry to "the 
step down or special security unit programmes" where conditions are less harsh.
 