
Lawyers for Abu Hamza <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza> – the 
former imam of Finsbury Park mosque, convicted of terrorism charges in New York 
last year – have said he should serve his time in a prison medical facility.

His severe disabilities mean it would be wrong to send him to a high-security 
federal prison in Colorado, his attorneys argued before a judge.

They argue that by sending him to the prison, the US would be reneging on 
assurances given to judges in the UK to secure his 2012 extradition to America.

Federal prosecutors on Friday disputed the lawyers’ assertion.

Hamza, 56, was convicted in May of aiding terrorists who kidnapped tourists in 
Yemen in 1998 and others who plotted to open a terror training camp in Oregon. 
Federal sentencing guidelines call for a life sentence.

In court papers last week, Hamza’s attorneys said he would face 
unconstitutional cruel and unusual punishment if his amputated forearms, 
psoriasis, diabetes and high blood pressure were not taken into account at his 
9 January sentencing in Manhattan federal court. They recommended a prison term 
of less than life.

While acknowledging their client had been convicted of participating in 
“terrible crimes”, defence lawyers said Hamza’s failure to successfully 
challenge extradition to the US while incarcerated in England from 2004 to 2012 
was “directly attributable” to sworn statements, concessions and promises made 
by the US government during extradition proceedings.

Prosecutors responded in court papers on Friday that the government had never 
promised the UK that Hamza, who was tried as Mustafa Kamel Mustafa, would not 
be assigned to the jail.

Prosecutors also insisted life in prison was the only appropriate sentence, 
saying Hamza “waged a global war of jihad against those he considered infidels. 
He sent men to American soil to learn how to fight and kill in support of that 
war”.

They also submitted a letter on Friday from Jeffery D Allen, chief of health 
programs for the Federal Bureau of Prisons, who wrote that Hamza will be given 
a full medical evaluation at a medical centre and assessed by a prosthetic 
specialist after he is sentenced.

Allen said there are special cells for those with disabilities and if the 
prison did not address Hamza’s health needs, he would be moved to a prison 
medical care facility.

Defence lawyers told the judge Hamza that is unable to accomplish routine 
daily living tasks and is at risk of infection and further amputation.
 