
David Cameron has welcomed the US conviction of Abu Hamza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/19/abu-hamza-found-guilty-terrorism-charges>
 for supporting terrorism and made clear that he would reform Britain's 
relationship with the European court of human rights to prevent delays in the 
extradition of suspects in future.

The prime minister said it was important to look at the "avenue of appeals" to 
ensure that anyone who posed a threat to Britain could be deported quickly, 
avoiding a repeat of the decade-long delay in extraditing Hamza to the US.

"It is good that he has faced justice and justice has been done," Cameron told 
BBC Radio 4's Today programme. "We should reflect on whether we can extradite 
faster … Speeding up extradition and speeding up deportation – we need to look 
at the avenues of appeal that there are and make sure that those are gone 
through more quickly and we have made changes there.

"Obviously we also need to look at the European convention on human rights and 
the position we have got to get into where if someone threatens our country we 
should be able to deport them if they have no right to be here. That is 
absolutely essential that we restore that. We have taken some big steps but I 
plan to take more steps if I am elected as Conservative prime minister after 
the next election."

Cameron praised the home secretary, Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>, after she eventually secured 
the deportations of Hamza to the US and Abu Qatada to Jordan. He said: "Theresa 
May did a brilliant job [but] it took 10 years. But Abu Hamza off to America 
and Abu Qatada off to Jordan – we have progress in a way no government before 
us have. We have a good domestic record in terms of prosecuting and convicting 
people who are guilty of terrorist offences here in Britain."

May also welcomed Abu Hamza's conviction and said reforming extradition 
procedures would be a priority. She said: "I am pleased thatAbu Hamza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza> has finally faced justice. He 
used every opportunity, over many years, to frustrate and delay the extradition 
process. His conviction was facilitated by this government's tireless work to 
successfully remove him from the UK to face trial in October 2012."

Abu Hamza, 56, is facing life in a top-security US prison after being 
convicted of all 11 charges after a five-week terrorism trial in New York. He 
was accused of being a terrorist of global reach, and was charged with 
providing material support to terrorist organisations by enabling 
hostage-takers in Yemen to speak on a satellite phone, by sending men to 
establish an al-Qaida training camp in Bly, Oregon, and by sending at least one 
man to training camps in Afghanistan.
 