
Tonight I'm going no-frills at the seaside. B+B Weymouth is sister to B+B 
Belgravia <http://www.bb-belgravia.com/>, created in London in 2004 by an 
all-female consortium whose aim is to offer affordable alternatives to those 
humdrum three- and four-star hotel chains.

No idea why Dorset was picked for the next B+B (which opened in 2008), but I'm 
not complaining. What's not to love about a resort out of season – stiff 
breezes to egg you on along a deserted promenade, dog-walkers on the sand, 
chapped lips and hot chips.

I turn down a long hill and there's the sea, misty and pale on this wintry 
afternoon. I sling the car into a loading bay in downtown Weymouth, as per 
instructions, and race off to pick up a parking permit from reception.

Ooh, dead chuffed with the location. I'm climbing the steps of a townhouse, 
right on the seafront, facing a gaudy statue of King George III, who made 
Weymouth a fashionable resort when he first visited in 1789.

A nice chap (who turns out to be the manager) answers the doorbell and hands 
me a permit urgently – the wardens take no prisoners here. Now I can park along 
the Esplanade.

Breakfast, manager Michael tells me, when I return with my bag, starts at some 
ungodly hour (which I don't record), but continues past 10 o'clock (what a 
relief). He shows me a white breakfast room with open-plan kitchen and counter, 
tables and chairs – like a canteen – and I can help myself to bottled water 
from the fridge.

This being a Georgian house, the first-floor sitting room – which must be at 
least six metres in length – has windows which dominate the seaward side. Take 
That are temporarily invading our space from a giant TV. Wi-Fi is free – an oak 
table bears a computer for guests' use – and a coffee machine, sitting beside a 
magnificent bow window on the street-facing side, provides hot water (no 
kettles in rooms, instead mugs, tea and milk are in here). For all the other 
thoughtful touches – bulging information folder, maps, guidebooks – I can't 
help feeling sad that a few furnishings on porridge-coloured carpet are now the 
spartan fate of what must once have been a very grandiose salon.

On the other hand, when I get up to my room on the second floor (white walls, 
white linen, white blind, white bathroom, white cupboards), the starkness 
dramatises the seascape beyond my window. Fresh flowers, plenty of sockets, but 
I cannot find a hair dryer.

In the morning, when sunlight floods in, I almost imagine this is the Med, and 
that is surely the point. If you don't want to drag the tribe all the way to 
southern climes, here's an affordable alternative. The beach is right across 
the road, and breakfast – I have tasty slow-roasted tomatoes and scrambled eggs 
– is in the sort of wipe-clean environment which means less stress for parents.

This is a cross between a hostel and that other, successful, independent chain,
Big Sleep <http://www.thebigsleephotel.com/>, which has hotels in Cardiff, 
Cheltenham and Eastbourne. It does what it does in a considerably more 
attractive building than a Travelodge or Premier Inn, and a walk along the 
Esplanade reveals the sad, frilly truth of the alternatives. Leaving though, is 
a little like exiting the cinema after a Tarkovsky film . . . you appreciate 
the colour flooding back into your world.
Eco-centric Accessible by rail from London Waterloo. Member of Visit Britain's 
Cyclist 
<http://www.visitbritain.com/things-to-see-and-do/itineraries/cycle/index.aspx> 
and Walker-friendly schemes.

• 68 The Esplanade (01305 761190, bb-weymouth.com <http://www.bb-weymouth.com/>
). Seaview double from £85, family apartment (with kitchen) from £195. Visit 
website for current winter deals.

Prices updated 31 August 2012

sally.shalam@theguardian.com <mailto:sally.shalam@theguardian.com>
 