
Two banks that lent more than £750m to the confidence trickster Achilleas 
Kallakis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/jan/16/guilty-verdict-biggest-ever-mortgage-fraud>
 had been "careless and imprudent" and "do bear some degree of responsibility" 
for Britain's largest mortgage fraud, a judge has said. Bankers at Allied Irish 
Bank and Bank of Scotland had been falling over themselves to lend to Kallakis, 
carrying out only cursory checks that failed to reveal he was a serial conman, 
not the extravagant Mayfair property baron he was purporting to be.

Judge Andrew Goymer sentenced Kallakis and his henchman Alex Williams, a 
forgery expert, to seven years and five years imprisonment respectively for 
orchestrating the audacious scam.

At Southwark crown court yesterday, he said: "AIB and BoS have undoubtedly 
acted carelessly and imprudently by failing to make full inquiries before 
advancing the money. Indeed, the latter bank was given clear and precise 
warnings by its lawyers about the risks of accepting assurances in a letter 
from an alleged co-conspirator, a Swiss lawyer. It almost beggars belief senior 
management chose to disregard that warning and rushed to complete the deal at 
all costs. It is apparent … both the defendants took full advantage of the 
prevailing banking culture in which corners are cut, and checks on them 
superficial and cursory …"

He added: "While I do not equate the position of the banks with that of car 
owner or householder who forgets to secure his house or car and becomes the 
victim of theft, the banks do bear some degree of responsibility for what 
happened."

Kallakis and Williams were convicted of defrauding Bank of Scotland, now part 
of Lloyds, and AIB, but they also took in other lenders, borrowing millions of 
pounds from Bristol & West, part of Bank ofIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, GE Capital, and Barclays.

Between 2003 and 2008 Kallakis bought properties worth £120m, between 
Piccadilly and Pall Mall in St James's Square, which he planned to turn into 
the world's most expensive penthouse. He also had ambitious expansion plans for 
31 Brompton Square, one of the most sought-after properties in Kensington.

During the trial several bankers from AIB testified to the sophistication of 
Kallakis' bogus business claims, particularly financial guarantees he claimed 
to have secured on his property deals. The court also heard how the same 
bankers had enjoyed extensive hospitality: tickets for the 2006 World Cup 
final, a trip on Kallakis's yacht for the Monaco Grand Prix, and holidays in 
Mauritius.
 