
I'm delighted that the Hatchet Job of the Year Award exists, as well as glad 
to have won it in a state of innocence, witha piece written before it came into 
being 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jan/23/by-nightfall-michael-cunningham-review?intcmp=239>
. From now on, any energetically negative review is likely to be seen as 
playing to the jury of the award, just as people write wince-making bedroom 
encounters (or perhaps claim they did after the fact) with an eye to theBad Sex 
award <https://www.theguardian.com/books/badsexaward>. I'd be more comfortable 
with the phrase "scalpel job", since a review, however unflattering, should be 
closer to dissection than hackwork, but I have no illusions about it catching 
on.

A book review is a conversation that excludes the author of the book. It 
addresses the potential reader. A reviewer isn't paid to be right, just to make 
a case for or against, and to give pleasure either way. I didn't enjoyMargaret 
Atwood'sThe Blind Assassin, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/sep/17/fiction.bookerprize2000> which I 
thought structurally defective and basically novelettish. Its winning the 
Booker in 2000 didn't prove me wrong, any more than it would have proved me 
right if I had liked it.

Both my parents were lawyers, and you could hold that accident responsible for 
something forensic about my approach. I don't set out to put a book in the 
dock, but perhaps I do put it in the witness box and rake through its 
testimony. In the review of Michael Cunningham'sBy Nightfall which brought the 
Golden Hatchet my way I grilled the book fairly intensively, but I tried to 
play by the rules. It always seems a good idea to quote freely from a book, to 
back up points with solid evidence. The only "bad" review in my book is one 
whose writing is soggy, its formulas of praise or blame off the same stale 
shelf. A reviewer and a critic play different roles, though the same person can 
take them on at different times. A critic has some sort of authority, a claim 
to long experience or deep immersion, a marination in a certain class of 
literary product. A reviewer has no necessary knowledge, even of other books by 
the same author – there's no shame in flying blind. If a book isn't rewarding 
to read in isolation, then there's no point in invoking any larger perspective. 
Forget the hinterland! It's a mistake to imply that readers are being inducted 
into a mystery. They're being guided to pleasure or warned against 
disappointment.

I expect this principle can be taken too far, but I haven't reached the end of 
it yet. Irecently wrote an admiring book about a single film by the Japanese 
director Ozu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/08/noriko-smiling-mars-jones-review>
, without feeling the need to see all his other work. I'd rather be an 
attentive amateur than an expert. Expertise so often becomes a sort of 
impregnable fortress, inside which the passionate subjectivity that first made 
the choice of specialism wastes away.

I'd had fiction published, and had duly been reviewed, before I wrote my own 
first review. I suppose that means I was blooded, being on the receiving end of 
summary judgment before I dispensed it. I remember one reviewer saying that it 
was to be hoped this junior member of the McEwan/Amis school had exorcised his 
sillier fantasies.

It's a fact that writers remember the bad reviews they have had. Those 
outraged synapses stay bright, in MRI scans, even when the rest of the brain 
goes dark. It follows that a non-sycophantic reviewer will make enemies. 
Nothing could be more natural. I was very thrown when Gordon Burn came up to me 
with a smile afterI had reviewed his novel Fullalove for the London Review of 
Books <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v17/n18/adam-mars-jones/howl>, a piece with a 
fairly high wither factor. He explained that he'd been advised not to read it, 
that it might kill him, but he'd gone ahead anyway and thought I made my points 
very clearly. All I could think of, while he shook my hand and made these 
friendly noises, was that he had hired an assassin to take me out, and that 
this physical contact was how he was identifying me to his hitman as the mark.

I'd prefer not to to review books published by Faber, which puts out my own 
fiction, but if you have a retainer with a newspaper you don't get to choose. I 
certainly can't resort to preferential treatment. I do my best to think that 
this book has arrived not by my letter-box but through a portal from an 
alternative universe, so that everyone connected with publishing it is at least 
a wormhole away from the world I live in. This mental discipline finally frays 
to nothing when I attend Faber HQ, say to give a presentation on a forthcoming 
book of my own. At such times I'm tempted to carry a note in my pocket, in case 
I'm found multiply stabbed in the basement, saying "Let me save you some time 
here, Poirot – it's the Orient Express caper all over again."

My first reviews were for the Times Literary Supplement, which has always been 
a good place for beginners to cut their teeth. The day a piece of mine appeared 
there without all the jokes and idiosyncrasies removed I remember feeling quite 
light-headed. At one stage theTLS sent me a book for review (stories by 
Penelope Gilliatt) which I couldn't engage with at all. I could as easily have 
written a positive assessment as a negative one, and so I sent it back. At the 
time this seemed the only honourable course, but I'm sure the reaction in-house 
was bafflement. Wouldn't it be more professional to just grit your teeth, toss 
a coin and write away? I still don't think so.

I wish I wrote enthusiastic reviews more often, but that's just another way of 
saying I wish more books deserved a rave. As it happens, my last couple of 
pieces for theObserver were hatchet-free: I didn't like the way Roberto Bolaño's
The Third Reich  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/13/roberto-bolano-third-reich-review>
was packaged, as if it was new rather than an unpublished early work, but I 
tried to point readers towards a better book of his, andI gave a warm welcome 
with a few reservations to Chad Harbach'sThe Art of Fielding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/29/art-fielding-chad-harbach-review?INTCMP=SRCH>
. Even so, a personal mellowing is only on the cards if standards rise across 
the board. It seems unlikely.

I take it for granted that reviewing is a secondary activity – but one that 
needs to be primary while you're doing it. The prize awarded to the hatchet job 
winner is a year's supply of potted shrimps. I'm looking forward to seeing how 
they calculate normal dosage. I'd rather have won something for a book of my 
own, but there's no nicer consolation than a little pot of crustaceans in 
seasoned butter.
 