 Addison Cresswell, who has died aged 53. Photograph: Dan Wooller/WireImage 
Addison Cresswell <https://www.theguardian.com/media/addison-cresswell>, the 
comedy agent who represented many well known stars including Lee Evans, Jack 
Dee and Jonathan Ross, has died at the age of 53.

A spokesman said the agent and producer died in his sleep at home on Sunday 
night. The spokesman said he is survived by his beloved wife, Shelley, his dogs 
Bonnie and Nessie and many, many pet fish.

One of the most influential people in British comedy, Cresswell – unlike many 
agents – liked to leave the limelight to the scores of stars he represented.

He started his management company Off the Kerb 32 years ago, working from his 
kitchen table after a period as entertainments officer at Brighton Polytechnic, 
where he studied. Other clients included Jo Brand, Dara O Briain and Alan Carr.

Many of the comedians he worked with spoke of their shock and recalled the 
contribution he made to their careers, as well as his extrovert personality.

Jon Plowman, the producer of scores of BBC comedies including 2012 and Little 
Britain, said Cresswell had revolutionised British comedy and launched and 
supported countless careers. "He had boundless energy which was devoted to 
helping the careers of people he was enthusiastic about. Lots of comedians owe 
their exposure to him. It's impossible to imagine Lee Evans for example without 
Cresswell in the mix," he said."He was one of the people who decided that 
comedy was going to be the new rock and roll and he was determined to price it 
high to the TV channels and get big audiences."

Jenny Eclair tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/jennyeclair/status/415168276562317313>: "Stunned and 
shocked by news of Addison Cresswell's death, he was there at the beginning for 
so many of us, love to his family and friends."

Ash Atalla, who produced The Office, said: "The fact that you once threatened 
to hit me will only make me miss you more. RIP 
<https://twitter.com/AshAtalla/status/415172809930051584>'"

James Corden tweeted: "Such sad news about Addison Cresswell 
<https://twitter.com/JKCorden/status/415173739492671488>. An incredible man. An 
incredible talent. May he rest in peace x."

Omid Djalili tweeted: "Shocking news about Addison Cresswell. 52. Way too 
young. I miss the headlocks already RIP".

The spokesman said: "Addison will be fondly remembered by all whose lives he 
touched as a devoted mentor, a dear friend and an unforgettable character. He 
will be sorely missed.

"He leaves behind a proud legacy in his tireless charity work, initiating and 
organising the annual Channel 4Comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy> Gala in aid of Great Ormond Street 
hospital. It was his dearest wish to raise enough to fund the opening of a 
brand new wing of the hospital, a goal that is now in sight."

He was listed at number 68 in the Media Guardian 100 in 2010. He was described 
as: "Agent, producer and deal-maker extraordinaire, Cresswell was responsible 
for Ross's infamous three-year contract with the BBC worth almost £6m a year. 
Legend has it Cresswell was spotted celebrating the deal burning money at the 
bar of Edinburgh's Assembly Rooms."

Cresswell preferred his stars to be in the spotlight rather than himself 
although the BBC hoped he could rival Simon Cowell on a projected talent show.

Cresswell also produced shows through his company, Open Mike Productions, 
including a series starring Michael McIntyre, another of his clients.

Cresswell once said: "I don't see us as in any way different from the people 
who run the channels. They're complete bastards as well, but we all have to 
work with each other."

Cresswell set up his first production company, Wonderdog Productions, with 
Julian Clary and Paul Merton, and Clary's Channel 4 show Sticky Moments was one 
of his first big hits.
 