
Peter Fincham, ITV director of television, remembers Addison Cresswell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/addison-cresswell>, the agent and producer 
who died on Sunday, aged 53.

The world of entertainment is still struggling to come to terms with the 
sudden death of Addison Cresswell at the age of 53. 

Throughout yesterday phonecalls and texts were exchanged by an enormous range 
of people in the comedy  and television world – how did you hear? When did you 
last see him? And can we imagine life without him? The cruel timing of his 
death, three days before Christmas, mocked the business he was in – the 
business of entertainment, of making people laugh. Thoughts are with his wife 
Shelley who was with him, at home, when he passed away on Sunday evening.

I last saw him – and Shelley – on Friday afternoon. They'd bought me a 
Christmas present and he was determined to deliver it personally to the ITV 
offices. "You're going to love it!' he said. That was one of his favourite 
phrases.  He'd somehow got me a signed photo of a poster for a recent Bob Dylan 
concert. "I got one for you and one for Jack Dee," he exclaimed. "How on earth 
did you get it signed?' "Someone owed me a favour!'"

He lived in a world of favours, and loved to cultivate the persona of the 
rough-at-the-edges student promoter he once was, ducking and diving as he put 
together his latest deal. In Addison's world, disaster was never far away. 
"It's a nightmare!" he would shout down the phone. "I've had enough of this 
business! I'm getting out!" It was all play-acting – he loved every minute of 
it.

Behind the cartoon image, the tailored suits, the Estuary accent – "But you're 
a nice middle class boy from Sussex, Addison!" "Don't you start on about that 
again!" – lay the sharpest mind. He was the best agent I ever dealt with, 
shrewd and sophisticated, and utterly devoted to his clients.

He was a pioneer and one of the key figures responsible for turning comedy 
into the industry it is today. His list of A-grade performers – Michael 
McIntyre, Lee Evans, Jonathan Ross, Alan Carr and many others – speaks for 
itself. To the best of my knowledge, no client ever left him. 

A few weeks before he died I went round to his new office in Clerkenwell. He 
had installed some huge, high-tech fishtanks – "You're going to love them!" - 
and wanted to show them off to me. I was introduced to his staff – "They're 
like family!" – and shown round his gleaming new headquarters. Every wall of 
the building was lined with posters of every act he'd promoted, every programme 
he'd made.

His pride in everything he'd achieved was obvious. He had so many plans for 
the future, one of which was to fund a new wing of Great Ormond Street hospital 
through the charity shows he produced.

Such was the force of his personality that it was commonplace to say that "why 
isn't Addison famous himself?" but he shunned the limelight. It was all about 
his clients.  In the world he operated in, though, he was always famous, and 
those of us who dealt with him won't easily forget him.

"It's all kicking off!" was another one of his favourite phrases, exclaimed 
with a mixture of mischief and relish. I can't quite believe that it won't be 
kicking off again in the New Year with my friend Addison.

Kenton Allen, chief executive of independent producer Big Talk:


"To paraphrase Christopher Hitchens, Addison burnt the candle at both ends, 
and it often cast a lovely light.

"I've known him all my professional life and he never asked me for anything 
more than you'd want to give and always offered me everything he possibly could.

"Kind and clever. Funnier than most of his clients and a true hero of British 
comedy. Profoundly sad that he's gone too soon."
 