
The colourful comedy agent Addison Cresswell, who has died suddenly at the age 
of 53, changed the face of British entertainment by steering the stand-up 
"alternative" comedians who emerged on theEdinburgh festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/edinburghfestival> fringe in the 1980s 
into the heart of the radio and television schedules. Such was his success that 
he became the subject of some controversy – even notoriety – for negotiating an 
£18m three-year contract for his client Jonathan Ross with the BBC.

An ebullient "Jack the Lad" with a penchant for shiny satin suits and big 
cigars, he was the modern equivalent of such showbiz greats as Lew Grade or 
Bernard Delfont. His first star proteges were Lee Evans and Jack Dee, both 
remarkable talents in different ways, one physical and explosive, like an 
angrier Norman Wisdom, the other laconic and so laid back as to be virtually 
horizontal, with a slow burn technique comparable to Jack Benny's.

Although Ken Dodd once remarked that an alternative comedian was one who 
wasn't funny, Cresswell knew that this working-class comedy wave really was the 
new rock'n'roll, and he surfed and manipulated it while others nurtured the 
parallel emergent university wits such as Rowan Atkinson, Stephen Fry, Griff 
Rhys-Jones, Mel Smith and Emma Thompson.

In an interview with the Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/comedy/news/stewart-lee-is-not-amused-at-monopoly-control-of-tv-comedy-8477824.html>
 earlier this year, the comedian Stewart Lee excoriated what he saw as an 
overclose relationship between organisations such as Cresswell'sOff the Kerb 
<http://www.offthekerb.co.uk> company – and its television production wing, 
Open Mike Productions – and the major broadcasting channels, as when 
Cresswell's clients appeared regularly on Ross's BBC chat show. However, you 
could argue that this was a modern-day equivalent of how things have always 
worked in the real world, with theatres run by the same individuals, and indeed 
families, who managed the talent, and then moved into television.  

From early on, Cresswell was known as the Darth Vader of the fringe, a sure 
sign of his success. As his list grew to embrace such exceptional comedians as 
Jeremy Hardy, Alan Carr, Marcus Brigstocke and Rich Hall (he produced Jo 
Brand's live appearance work but did not represent her), so did his power: "I 
don't see us as in any way different from the people who run the channels," he 
once said; "they're complete bastards as well, but we all have to work with 
each other."

Things came to a head, though, with "Sachsgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sachsgate>" in October 2008, when Ross and 
Russell Brand left offensive messages on the voicemail of the actor Andrew 
Sachs during Brand's Radio 2 show; Ross left the BBC but Cresswell expertly 
guided him on to ITV, where his chat show, and his celebrity pre-eminence, 
continues unabated. All the same, in 2009, the BBC tightened their rules 
affecting presenters and their agents, though some would say that nothing has 
really changed.

In the event, the corporation turned to Cresswell for another suggestion, and 
he gave them Live at the Apollo hosted byMichael McIntyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/michael-mcintyre>, whose status as an 
arena-filler marked a whole new level of comedy operation; now almost everyone 
of note has gigs in large rock concert stadiums such as Wembley and the O2. 
This phenomenon, fed by the popularity of panel shows featuring comedians from 
Off the Kerb and its main rival, Avalon, run by Jon Thoday and Richard 
Allen-Turner, with clients including Frank Skinner, Jenny Eclair and Al Murray, 
has revolutionised tastes in comedy.

Cresswell, born in Brighton <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/brighton>, East 
Sussex, was the elder son of Peter Cresswell, a painter who was dean of arts at 
Goldsmith College, University of London, and his wife, Audrey. Following their 
separation, he was raised by Audrey and her partner, Chris Lowe. His younger 
brother, Luke, went on to become co-founder of the dance and percussion group 
Stomp.

Addison was educated at St Luke's primary school, Brighton, and Longhill high 
school, Rottingdean, before studying graphic design at Brighton Polytechnic, 
where, as the student entertainments officer, he developed his taste for 
wheeling and dealing; he was soon famous for the ferocity and brilliance of his 
bargaining methods. He always remained, though, the most engaging of companions 
to all but his enemies.

His first professional client, in 1981, was the performance poet and comedian 
John Hegley, and his office was his kitchen table. He founded his first 
production company, Wonderdog, with Julian Clary and Paul Merton. At the same 
time, his friend William Burdett-Coutts was launching the Assembly Rooms venue 
at the Edinburgh festival, and this became the professional route of 
alternative comedy: blitzing the fringe, making contacts in the Assembly Rooms 
bar, going on to the wider audiences of theBrighton Comedy festival 
<http://www.brightoncomedyfestival.com> (of which Cresswell and Burdett-Coutts 
were co-directors), the Comedy Store in London and, in Australia, the Melbourne 
Comedy festival, launched in 1987.

Around the time of the Ross £18m contract, Cresswell was reported to have been 
seen nonchalantly, and literally, burning money at the bar in the Assembly 
Rooms. But he never stood still, said the comedy critic Bruce Dessau, always 
looking for the next project to launch.

One of his latest initiatives, with Channel 4, was Stand Up for the Week, a 
late night show launched in 2010 – now in its fifth series – on which fairly 
well established comedians such as Jack Whitehall, Patrick Kielty and Kevin 
Bridges were succeeded by newer names including Sarah Pascoe and Paul Chowdhry.

There was nothing nine-to-five about Cresswell. He lived his life to the full 
with his acts, and his wife, Shelley, and their menagerie of animals. He is 
survived by Shelley, Luke, a sister, his parents and Lowe.

  

William Burdett-Coutts writes: I knew Addison from the early 80s, when he 
started presenting comedians in the Assembly Rooms as part of the Edinburgh 
fringe, and he became one of my dearest and closest friends.

Right from the start he was a star. He may not ever have been the one to go on 
stage, but life around him was always turned into a drama. Stories of his 
escapades and sayings abound: to sit in on a business meeting with him was to 
enjoy a full-on performance, when he could charm executives with his banter and 
bravado.

He could go on an outing for days, disappearing from ordinary life and then 
rebounding. I have a classic photograph of him in bed in an Edinburgh hotel 
room with a black eye. Asking what had occurred brought the reply from him: "No 
idea mate, nightmare, don't talk about it." For the highs, there were also the 
lows and the 7am phone call. He lived life to the full and around him grew a 
legend.

His achievement for the world of comedy has been unsurpassed. At the Brighton 
Comedy festival this year he presented an incredible lineup for a gala in aid 
of theSussex Beacon <http://www.sussexbeacon.org.uk/> care centre. Standing in 
the dressing room corridor with Michael McIntyre, Jack Dee, Alan Carr and Kevin 
Bridges, he drily quipped: "This is like millionaires' row."

There were always two sides to the Addison persona: the loud, sometimes brash, 
agent, and the private person of great sensitivity, generosity and kindness. We 
shall all miss him.

• Addison Cresswell <https://www.theguardian.com/media/addison-cresswell>, 
comedy agent, born 28 June 1960; died 22 December 2013
 