
We've known for a while that Andrew Adonis, Labour's shadow infrastructure 
minister, thinks London needs more bridges and tubes. Now we know some of his 
thoughts about buses. In aseries for the Independent 
<http://andrewadonis.com/2014/02/25/london-by-bus-a-week-on-the-buses/> he's 
succinctly documented a week's worth of travel on the capital's most 
widely-used transportation mode, riding everything from night buses tohoppas 
<mailto:http://www.flickr.com/photos/23875695@N06/5611040075/> and swiping his 
Oyster at all hours of the day.

It's a nice read. Adonis has noticed much that matters about the service, from 
its immense success, to its contrasting overcrowding and under-use, to its 
vital role delivering workers out to their jobs and revellers home to their 
beds. He recognises that buses, far more than Tube trains, are used by a broad 
cross-section of Londoners and are vital for those who live in more isolated 
areas and anyone on a low income. He also records that passengers on routes 
once served by articulated "bendies" rather miss them. Then there were the 
hold-ups:

The problem is that the buses too often get stuck. On the approach to 
Greenwich the 188 stalled in serious bottlenecks thanks in one case to road 
works and in another to a sudden road narrowing with no bus priority.

It was the same the night before, when the number 25 couldn't even get into 
the bus lane on Mile End Road because of a lorry blocking the approach to it 
from a junction; and it was to be same in Hackney on the 254 later, where the 
gridlock was so bad I got out and walked two stops to catch a different bus 
because the 254 couldn't get into a bus lane.

In all three cases, fellow passengers told me these bottlenecks were common 
yet they aren't sorted out. The advantages of red routes and bus lanes are 
scuppered by poorly designed junctions, unlocked bottlenecks and roadworks, 
which seem to overrun everywhere. Time for a bus bottleneck buster to get to 
work.

All of which underlines why road space management is so vital to the 
functioning of London, not only as an economic entity but as a place in which 
everyone, not only the more affluent, has a chance of being both socially and 
geographically mobile.

Unlike his predecessor, the present mayor has not made enlarging and improving 
the bus service a top priority. Should Adonis, a former government minister who 
is talked of as a future mayoral contender, get his hands on the steering wheel 
of power again, let's hope he remembers what his bus experience has taught him 
- and has the political will to use it to good effect.
 