
Adrian Chiles is to have an expanded BBC Radio 5 Live presenting role as part 
of the talk station’s biggest schedule shakeup for years, with Richard Bacon,
Victoria Derbyshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/victoria-derbyshire> and Shelagh 
Fogarty departing.

Former Sunday Sport editor Tony Livesey and Football Focus host Dan Walker 
have landed plum new roles in the new-look 5 Live schedule announced on Tuesday 
– but female presenters missed out in the changes.

ITV football presenter Chiles, who currently co-hosts 5 Live’s Friday edition 
of drivetime, will present a new three-hour morning show between 10am and 1pm 
on Mondays and Tuesdays. Peter Allen, another current drivetime presenter, will 
front the morning show for the rest of the week.

Allen will be replaced on drive by 5 Live’s weekend breakfast presenter, 
Livesey, who will co-host it with the incumbent, Anna Foster.

Walker, who presents BBC1’s Saturday lunchtime show Football Focus and is a 
regular voice on 5 Live Sport, presents a new weekday afternoon show, Afternoon 
Edition, between 1pm and 4pm from Mondays to Thursdays, with Sarah Brett fromBBC
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Northern Ireland.

The two new three-hour weekday programmes replace the two-hour shows currently 
presented by Derbyshire, Fogarty and Bacon, who are all leaving the station.

A familiar 5 Live voice, Eleanor Oldroyd, will present a new Friday afternoon 
show, The Friday Sports Panel, between 1pm and 2pm, followed by Mark Kermode 
and Simon Mayo’s film review show.

At a time when BBC director general Tony Hall has made a commitment to putting 
more female voices on air, the loss of Derbyshire and Fogarty, who presented 
their own shows on the station for several years, is likely to be keenly felt.

Although there is no shortage of female co-presenters on the station, 
Oldroyd’s one-hour Friday afternoon show is the only programme fronted solely 
by a woman.

“There’s a huge BBC story about the lack of lead females on 5 Live,” said one 
industry source. “5 Live must have missed the memo about female presenters,” 
said another.

The new schedule, in the station’s 20th anniversary year, come at a time when 
BBCRadio <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> is having to make further 
cuts as part of the BBC’s ongoing £700m package of Delivering Quality First 
cost-savings.

Radio 1 axed a number of presenters including Edith Bowman and Rob Da Bank 
earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jun/05/bbc-radio-1-axe-djs-edith-bowman-rob-da-bank-nihal>
, and Radio 2 announced changes to its overnight schedule, also as part of cost 
savings.

Three of BBC Radio’s highest profile presenters, Bacon, Derbyshire and 
Fogarty, are all said to have their own reasons for leaving the station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jul/01/bbc-radio-5-live-richard-bacon-leave-victoria-derbyshire-shelagh-fogarty>
.

Bacon will co-host BBC1’s search for an amateur artist with Una Stubbs, one of 
a number of projects, while Derbyshire, linked with a move to ITV News, said 
she had been offered an opportunity “too good to turn down”.

Fogarty flagged up to the station last autumn that she wanted to explore other 
opportunities, with projects on Radio 4 and the World Service, and has been 
heard recently on commercial talk station, LBC.

But none of the three presenters who are leaving moved full-time to Salford 
when the station relocated to BBC North from London three years ago.

5 Live management is keen that the station develop its roots in the 
north-west, and it is understood that new talent considering joining the 
station, going forward, has been told in no uncertain terms that commuting is 
out of the question.

Derbyshire, who has two children, often presented her show from London, flying 
from the capital to Manchester for her presenting duties in Salford.

Bacon also commuted (by train) while Fogarty briefly had a flat in Manchester 
and used her family home in Liverpool when not travelling from the capital, 
where she has made her home.

5 Live controller Jonathan Wall said: “This autumn feels the right time to 
refresh parts of our schedule as we follow on from what’s already proving to be 
a wonderful sporting summer.

“We have a great blend of established presenters and new signings to take 5 
Live forward in our home in Salford. It’s an exciting and creative team that I 
know will drive the station on to even greater heights.

“Victoria, Shelagh and Richard have all played such key roles 
delivering fantastic live radio and I wish them every success with their future 
projects.”

Replacing three shows with two will inevitably allow for cost savings, and Wall
talked about the need to make further cuts in an interview earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/mar/23/radio-5-live-jonathan-wall-bbc-20-years>
.

In other changes, Chris Warburton will replace Livesey on weekend breakfast 
and Mark Chapman take over from Walker on the 5 Live Sport show on Friday night.

Jonathan Overend will front 5 Live Sport on Sunday afternoons. John Murray 
replaces Mike Ingham as chief football correspondent, and Josh Widdicombe and 
Georgie Thompson join the rota of Fighting Talk presenters on Saturday morning.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.

 
 