
Afghan election authorities have accused two would-be presidents of stirring 
up ethnic tensions before the June polls, and warned the media against 
broadcasting divisive programmes or libellous attacks.

The first round of Afghanistan's high-stakes presidential vote has been civil. 
The main candidates, Ashraf Ghani andAbdullah Abdullah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah>, assembled multi-ethnic 
slates, avoided attacks on particular groups, and steered clear of focusing on 
the private life of the rival.

But with the race narrowed to a run-off, and both men searching for a gain in 
a poll that is likely to be very close, there is a harder edge.

In rallies, news conferences and advertisements the two teams have "stirred up 
… discriminatory issues, defamation and irreverence against each other", the 
Independent Election Commission said in a statement from its media commission 
this week.

The commisssion warned the candidates and their teams to "strictly avoid 
applying discriminatory languages and tribal, racial, linguistic, regional, and 
religious prejudices which cause … disunity among the Afghan people".

The media was not to broadcast programmes fomenting ethnic and other tensions, 
or ones that defamed or insulted the candidates running for office, the 
statement said.

Diplomats are watching closely for inflammatory language before the 
presidential election's second round, happening on 14 June.

The US ambassador, James Cunningham, said he had already warned each candidate 
against manipulating ethnic tensions.

"We're worried about the potential for that, and we are advising both the 
campaigns that they should not run a campaign that is either ethnically based 
or using ethnic elements to try and damage or undercut the other one," 
Cunningham told journalists at a briefing in Kabul. "The candidates themselves 
are both sensitive to this, and I hope we can do a good job of convincing 
people in the campaigns that this isn't a good thing for the future of the 
country."

Ghani, in second place behind Abdullah in the first round of the election, is 
from the Pashtun ethnic group that has ruledAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> for most of the last three 
centuries. Abdullah has a Pashtun father but a Tajik mother and he is 
identified with non-Pashtun northerns he fought beside during the civil war.

Many moderate Afghans are already fretting over the rise of partisan attacks. 
"Discouraging to see Facebook now a battle ground between young Afghans about 
elections. So many ethnic hijackers leading this divisive battle," Bilal 
Sarwary, a journalist, said on Twitter.

Saad Mohseni, whose influential Moby Media controls a string of popular TV and 
radio channels, said campaigning had got more hostile. "We are now reviewing 
every ad, every guest, weeding out anything provocative … we have a huge 
responsibility. Of course when you are doing live TV there is always a small 
risk, but by and large we have not allowed these debates to take control of the 
programmes."

He said he thought many Afghans were more interested now in forging a strong 
national identity, after the years of fighting. "There are a few individuals 
trying to stir things up but the Afghan people are not going to fall for this 
all over again, given the mistakes we have made over the last 30 years," he 
said.

Both campaigns denied using ethnic language in their campaigning, or making 
personal attacks.

"We fully agree with the statement," said Mujib Rahimi Rahimi, a spokesman for 
Abdullah. "As a team that represents national unity, we have people from all 
over the country and all ethnic groups."

An adviser to Ghani said their team would not stir up tension because their 
fundamental message was that "all Afghans should be treated equally".

Reporting contributer Mokhtar Amiri
 