
The two candidates in Afghanistan's disputed presidential election have 
reached a political agreement that would outline the terms of a power-sharing 
deal, both camps said on Friday.

"We are putting the past behind us. We are looking into the future," said 
Ghani Ashraf, one of the candidates.

The announcement followed the arrival of the US secretary of state, John 
Kerry, in Kabul on Thursday. Kerry flew into the Afghan capital in an attempt 
to salvage the faltering political and technical agreements that he had 
brokered between Ghani and his presidential rival,Abdullah Abdullah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah>.

Those agreements had been reached four weeks ago and were meant to produce a 
winner in Afghanistan's election. However, the deal soon fell apart, with 
fistfights breaking out in the auditing centre where disputed ballots are being 
assessed and that process being halted numerous times.

The two-day negotiation yielded an agreement which would, among other things, 
create the role of a chief executive officer for the runner-up in the election. 
It remains unclear, however, what this new role would entail and whether Ghani 
and Abdullah had agreed upon anything more specific beyond agreeing to agree. 
Work to hammer out the details would begin immediately, Ghani said on Friday.

"No matter who wins, we commit ourselves to working together for the sake of 
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>," Abdullah said, 
addressing the widespread concern that the results of the audit will not be 
accepted by his camp.

Kerry said the agreement on Friday was an "Afghan solution to an Afghan 
problem" and its clauses were in line with the country's constitution.

"It is critical for both candidates to do what they just said, which is to 
move beyond the campaign and move into the process of governing," he added.

Kerry expressed hopes that the new president and his unity partner would be 
able to attend a Nato summit in September, adding: "One of these men is going 
to be president. But both of these men are going to be critical to the future 
of Afghanistan."

Ghani took to the platform to deliver a nearly 20-minute speech in Dari, 
Pashto, and English. He said he and Abdullah were "completing each other's 
sentences in front of Secretary Kerry", and that he hoped this spirit of 
cooperation would continue, "like in the past, when he was the foreign minister 
and I was the finance minister".

Previously, Abdullah had wanted clarity on the political agreement and Ghani 
did not want to commit to it until the completion of the vote audit, which he 
hopes will declare him the winner. Ghani, a former World Bank technocrat, 
emerged from the runoff on 14 June in the lead but Abdullah, a former 
mujahideen doctor, claimed that 2m of the votes cast for his rival were 
fraudulent.

The seven-point political agreement outlines the steps to be taken after the 
results of the ongoing audit has identified a winner. According to negotiators 
who helped broker the deal, the agreement states that a president will take 
office immediately and hold aloya jirga (meeting of elders) to create a new 
prime minister position within the first two years.

The president will also create the position of opposition leader, to be 
appointed by the runner-up, and both the winner and the loser will select 
certain posts in national security and economic institutions.

The president alone will appoint ministers, the chief justice and other key 
provincial positions. With an eye on future elections, the agreement also calls 
on the two candidates to begin work on electoral reform to address some of the 
shortcomings of this year's ballot.

Both candidates expressed hopes that the audit would be complete by the end of 
the month, but shied from setting a date for inauguration. "We do not want to 
commit ourselves to a fixed date, because then this date will drive the 
process," Ghani said. A clean and thorough audit was integral to the imbuing 
the new administration with full legitimacy, he added.

Kerry urged election experts to help with the "largest audit that the United 
Nations has ever conducted in any country in history", so that the process 
would be complete by the hoped-for deadline.

Fabrizio Foschini, of the Afghanistan Analysts Network, said the visit by the 
US secretary of state was a sign of improving conditions. "It shows a high 
level of commitment from the international community," Foschini said. "It 
remains to be seen whether this risks becoming a pattern, however, where every 
time you have a crisis, it has to be solved with external involvement."
 