
The frontrunner after the preliminary round of Afghanistan's presidential 
election,Abdullah Abdullah <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah>
, has strengthened his position in advance of next month's runoff, with 
endorsements from two failed but influential candidates.

Zalmai Rassoul and Gul Agha Sherzai, who have lined up behind Abdullah, have 
strong support in southern Kandahar province, where Abdullah has struggled to 
win votes partly because of his background. Both said they were backing 
Abdullah for the sake of national and ethnic unity, although they are also 
likely to have secured verbal promises of powerful government posts for their 
teams.

The son of Pashtun and Tajik parents, Abdullah spent years during the Soviet 
occupation and civil war at the side of the mujahideen commander Ahmad Shah 
Massoud, whose base was in the northern Panjshir valley. Abdullah's strongest 
support base is still in the north and centre of the country.

Pashtuns, who dominate the south and east of Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, have for centuries provided 
most of the country's rulers, including incumbent Hamid Karzai, and many are 
wary of where Abdullah's loyalties lie. Nationwide he claimed nearly 45% of the 
vote, but came fourth in Kandahar.

Rassoul, who announced his backing for Abdullah on Sunday, won Kandahar 
province, which is generally regarded as the Taliban's birthplace. Related to 
Afghanistan's deposed royal family, he was believed to have had Karzai's tacit 
backing in the first round.

Some key members of Rassoul's team were conspicuous by their absence when the 
alliance was announced, among them Karzai's two brothers Mahmoud and Qayoum, 
raising the possibility that Abdullah's rival in the runoff, Ashraf Ghani, may 
still woo them to his team for June's showdown.

Despite high turnout from determined voters, polling day also brought 
bloodshed and fraud, and there have been calls for the two candidates to broker 
a deal to avoid more violence. Both have so far insisted they are determined to 
see the next leader chosen at the ballot box.

Rassoul campaigned with a message of continuity and said he was backing 
Abdullah for the same reasons, along with Habiba Sarabi, the only female 
vice-presidential candidate in the race. "The main reason we have joined Dr 
Abdullah's team is to protect Afghan politics from ethnic divisions. We need 
national politics," said spokesman Javid Faisal.

He took to the stage in Kabul's plush Intercontinental hotel with Abdullah and 
fellow contender Gul Agha Sherzai, once the governor of Kandahar, who came in 
second in the province. Pictures of the trio linking hands in a purposeful show 
of ethnic unity raced round Facebook and Twitter within minutes of the news 
conference starting.

"There has been a lot of talk about the north and south dividing, a step like 
this will put an end to this gossip," said Sherzai's spokesman, Ahmad Zia 
Abdulzai.

Ghani has also won endorsements from important political players, but no one 
as high-profile as Rassoul. He is also lagging over 10 percentage points behind 
Abdullah in the first round, so if southern leaders are gathering behind a man 
once seen as the northern candidate, he may have a harder fight in June.
 