
Afghanistan's election commission announced on Sunday it has completed the 
audit that will determine the country's next president. The contested 
presidential election has seen both presidential hopefuls, Ashraf Ghani and
Abdullah Abdullah <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah>, 
accusing each other of industrial-scale fraud, fomenting revolt, and endorsing 
violence.

As of Monday, the ballots have been sent to the electoral complaints 
commission, who will grant Ghani and Abdullah 24 hours to log any complaints 
they may have. The complaints commission will then have 48 hours to address 
their complaints and submit the final result to the electoral commission for 
review. The electoral commission is expected to announce the final results by 
the end of the week. If similar announcements in the past are any guide, 
however, this will likely be delayed.

The first round of votes on 5 April was noticeable for its relative absence of 
violence, and the country underwent a brief spell of optimism. The second round 
of election on 14 June was a departure from this original feeling of euphoria, 
and was marred by claims and counter claims of fraud between the two candidates.

The UN-sponsored audit was completed on 4 September, but announcements had 
been delayed to buy more time for the candidates to reach a political deal. Now 
that the audit is complete, attention has turned again to the possibility of a 
negotiated agreement. Both candidates have stated that a deal is near – in a 
matter of days – but previous attempts have failed due to their inability to 
compromise.

Tensions deepened on Monday when a prominent Ghani supporter issued a 
statement that called for his candidate to "reject the idea of equal power 
sharing".

"We want to clarify that we are not pro-crisis," the statement from Juma Khan 
Hamdard read. "But if some people intend not to accept the final results and 
attempt to pushAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> 
towards crisis, we are ready to defend our votes at any cost," it said.

Hamdard was referring to Atta Mohammad Noor, a staunch Abdullah supporter who 
has been in the news for his radical views. In the past few months, Noor has 
publicly stated that Abdullah should boycott the audit, and that his candidate 
should be declared the winner. His latest criticism of the UN has rattled the 
institution enough that they have announced plans to relocate staff should the 
harsh rhetoric continue.

While the candidates continue to fight, the country has remained in a state of 
uncertainty: millions of dollars in financial assistance remain in limbo as 
donors await the inauguration of a new president. Insurgents have take 
advantage of Kabul's distracted state, launching some of the large offensives 
around the country to test the mettle of the fledgling security force.
 