
Delegates at Afghanistan's peace jirga brought the three-day gathering to a 
close today with calls for ceasefires and prisoner releases, and for the Afghan 
government and insurgents to start talking to each other.

Other suggestions, made by 26 working groups representing 1,600 delegates from 
around the country, included a ban on "un-Islamic" television programmes, the 
removal of senior insurgents from "blacklists" kept by the US and the United 
Nations, and the demand that theTaliban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> cut ties with al-Qaida.

But with the recommendations carrying no legal weight, Hamid Karzai's 
government will be able to decide which ones will be enacted. The final 
resolution merely said that the government would "establish a framework for 
negotiations with those who are dissatisfied with the government".

Despite the wide range of suggestions, Karzai told delegates that there was 
now a clear direction for peace talks.

"Now the path is clear, the path that has been shown and chosen by you, we 
will go on that step by step and this path will, God willing, take us to our 
destination," he said.

The working groups spent much of the day announcing their proposals.

The majority of them said talks between the Taliban and the government sides 
were essential. Others said that insurgents who come over to the side of the 
government should be given legal amnesty.

Karzai's hopes that the meeting would give him a national mandate to start a 
peace process were dented by the fact that most of Afghanistan's legal 
opposition chose to stay away.

Abdullah Abdullah <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah>, the 
politician who polled second in the first round of last year's presidential 
election, said he would not attend because the delegates had been handpicked by 
the government and were not representative of the country.

Abdul Rashid Dostum, the powerful Uzbek warlord from northern Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, also stayed away, as did Haji 
Mohammad Mohaqeq, a leader of the Hazara community. All three men were 
associated with groups that fought against the Taliban in the 1990s.

There was also anger that organisers broke a promise for delegates to elect a 
chairman and instead simply appointed Burhanuddin Rabbani, a Tajik leader and 
former president.

Observers said that while some working groups engaged in lively debates about 
the issues, others drifted away on the second day or simply stayed in their 
rooms.

Active insurgents were not invited, and the Taliban made clear its disdain for 
the gathering both in published statements and also by attacking the jirga on 
its opening day with rocket propelled grenades and militants wearing suicide 
bomb vests.
 