
Afghans face a dangerous trip to the polls in June for a second round of 
voting in their presidential election after no candidate claimed a clear 
majority in the first round.

The contest between two former ministers will be decided at the height of the 
summer fighting season, whenTaliban <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> 
fighters who oppose the election are at full strength around the country, 
raising the risks for anyone casting a ballot.

The delay also means weeks more damaging uncertainty about the fate of foreign 
troops, whose combat mission ends this year.

Washington wants to leave a small force to fight international militants and 
train Afghan soldiers but the outgoing president,Hamid Karzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamid-karzai>, has ruled out signing a 
long-term strategic pact to allow this, saying his successor must decide.

"No one got 51% of the vote, so there will be a second round," Yusuf 
Nuristani, the chair of the Independent Election Commission, said on Wednesday. 
He said there would be three weeks of campaigning before a poll on 14 June, 
with final results only announced in mid-July.

The two men now competing to rule Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> both served under Karzai but 
promise change after more than a decade of his presidency.

They both ran failed campaigns against him in 2009, and spent much of the 
intervening years building up the political networks that made them serious 
contenders this year.

Abdullah Abdullah <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah>, a 
doctor and confidant of the assassinated anti-Taliban commander Ahmad Shah 
Massoud, is the clear frontrunner with 45% of the vote.

He has hinted that the scale of his lead and endorsements from two other 
failed but influential candidates mean his opponent should concede to prevent 
bloodshed, as Abdullah himself did in the 2009 runoff.

His rival, Ashraf Ghani <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani>, a 
former World Bank technocrat and candidate for head of the UN, says he will not 
cut a deal because Afghans have a right to choose their leader.

His share of the vote was only 32% but he argues it was whittled down by 
fraud. Better monitoring in the runoff means victory is still within reach, he 
told the Guardian at his Kabul base.

The first round of voting on 5 April was hailed as an unexpected success after 
millions of people defied concerns about fraud and attacks, queueing for hours 
in the rain and even waiting into the night for new ballot papers when polling 
stations ran out.

It has taken more than a month to come up with the final tally, after a 
laborious process of collecting votes from far-flung areas reachable only by 
plane or donkey, counting millions of ballot papers and sifting through 
hundreds of fraud allegations.

As the ballot boxes trickled into Kabul, so did reports of attacks and deaths 
that had gone unreported on polling day itself, and of widespread cheating in 
volatile areas that officials and monitors had struggled to reach.

Though most Afghans still consider the day a huge success, growing awareness 
of problems in the first round has put pressure on organisers.

"The election commission is working to ensure that problems with the April 
election will not be repeated for the second round," Nuristani said. His team 
have promised to sack corrupt officials and increase transparency.

Diplomats also urged Ghani and Abdullah to run clean campaigns. "Candidates 
have a responsibility to call on their supporters to refrain from inflammatory 
rhetoric, intimidation and threats," said Ján Kubiš, the top UN envoy in 
Afghanistan, in a statement welcoming the results.

"Candidates must also instruct their supporters not to commit fraud on their 
behalf as that ultimately discredits them and the standing of the next 
president and government."

• Mokhtar Amiri contributed reporting
 