
A three-day meeting of Afghanistan's tribal leaders hailed by western leaders 
as a critical first step to peace was dismissed today as a "PR exercise" by the 
leader of the country's opposition, who said he would not attend the event.

The decision by Abdullah Abdullah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah> – who won millions of 
votes and came second in last year's presidential elections – is a setback for 
the so-called "peace jirga" which begins tomorrow with the intention of forging 
a national consensus on the ground rules for negotiations with the Taliban.

Abdullah said the way delegates had been selected by government officials 
meant they did not represent all Afghan opinion: "Had it been a national jirga 
and a national effort we would have supported that effort."

He said the event "seemed like a PR exercise to show that we are making an 
effort to reach peace in this country".

Huge amounts of effort has gone into organising the three-day conference that 
will be held in the same cavernous marquee that was used for the 2002 Loya 
Jirga that agreed Afghanistan's post-Taliban constitution.

Security in a capital city already teaming with police has been further 
stepped up after a cache of hundreds of 122mm rockets were found last month 
which officials claimed were going to be used for an attack during the 
conference.

The Taliban <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban>, who have not been 
invited, said in a statement on their website that the event was a "phony 
jirga" convened on the orders of foreigners.

The National Consultative Peace Jirga will be asked to consider an ambitious 
government proposal to offer jobs and other economic incentives to Taliban foot 
soldiers who agree to stop fighting.

Such schemes are unlikely to be too controversial. Far more divisive, however, 
will be how future negotiations with the Taliban should be handled and what, if 
anything, should be offered to insurgent leaders in return for peace.

Foreign officials say a broad national consensus is essential to avoid the 
perception that any peace deal is, in the words of one western diplomat, a 
"Pashtun to Pashtun stitch up".

The Pashtuns are Afghanistan's largest ethnic group that have traditionally 
held the most sway inAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>
 and from which the Taliban draws much of its support.

Karzai will need to be supported by other ethnic groups in peace talks, 
particularly those that fought with the Northern Alliance against the Taliban 
in the 1990s and which represents much of Abdullah's base.

On the eve of the meeting, the government had still not published the full 
list of delegates, fuelling suspicions that many of them had been selected for 
their pro-Karzai credentials.

Haroun Mir, a political analyst with close links to the Northern Alliance, 
said he feared Pashtuns would be over represented compared to other ethnic 
groups.

The 1,600 delegates include some 550 women, the number of which were increased 
after Hillary Clinton expressed concerns to Karzai that women risked being 
overlooked.

The discussion about peace talks has been pre-empted by the Karzai government 
and the major western powers who have set clear limits to insurgent chiefs, who 
demand foreign troops leave before any peace talks can begin.

Mohammad Masoom Stanekzai, who drew up the government plan to "reintegrate" 
low-level fighters, said it was very unlikely Mullah Omar, the Taliban supreme 
leader, would ever be welcomed back into the fold.

Today the US embassy said it supported a process that "seeks to bring back 
into society those who cease violence, break ties with al-Qaida … and live 
under the Afghan constitution."

But fears have been expressed, particularly by women activists, that jirga 
organisers will be unable to stop delegates from straying beyond their limits 
and from passing controversial motions, such as a general amnesty for any 
crimes committed by fighters who reconcile.

"There's a risk that unexpected issues could be raised and that there will be 
compromises on basic human rights or a vote for foreign troops to leave," said 
Fauzia Kufi, a female MP from northern Afghanistan.

It is a view shared by a senior adviser to Karzai, who said the whole meeting 
risked being "hijacked" by religious leaders and delegates from southern 
Afghanistan.

"It has no abiding value, it will be best if it just passes as a non-event. 
But the risk is that an Afghan gathering just can't be stage managed."

A popular vote calling for a unilateral cease fire would be of particular 
concern to the US, which is committed to a strategy where negotiations only 
take place after the Taliban have been seriously weakened by the ongoing surge 
of 30,000 US troops.
 