
Afghanistan's tenuous deal to resolve its presidential election crisis fell 
into jeopardy over the weekend when an ambitious audit was halted just days 
after it began.

Election workers began looking for irregularities before agreeing rules about 
which ballots should be thrown out, but a dispute over invalidation led one 
audit team to walk out of the recount on Saturday afternoon, Afghan and foreign 
sources said.

The team agreed to go back to work nearly 24 hours later, but still do not 
have a deal on what constitutes fraud. Progress has been slow for a country 
that has been in a dangerous political limbo for months.

After three days of counting, the audit teams of election workers, 
international and Afghan observers and agents for the two presidential 
candidates, Ashraf Ghani andAbdullah Abdullah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah>, had only made their way 
through 435 boxes of ballot papers.

With more than 22,000 boxes to be checked in the unprecedented recount of all 
votes cast, the teams must speed up dramatically orAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> will not have a new president 
until 2015.

The economy has been left on hold by months of election wrangling, and foreign 
security support vital to holding off the Taliban will only be available if 
there is a new leader by the autumn.

Hamid Karzai, the outgoing president, has refused to sign a long-term security 
deal with the US, despite widespread backing from senior Afghans and 
Washington's clear warning that without it all forces will leave by the end of 
this year.

The two candidates are feuding over how many votes to throw out. Ghani, a 
former World Bank technocrat who is leading in preliminary results, wants a 
cautious approach to elimination, arguing that the young democracy cannot 
afford to disenfranchise voters.

Abdullah, a former mujahideen doctor, has called for more aggressive rules to 
root out what he says are 2m fraudulent ballots cast for his rival.

The debate is complicated by a lack of reliable demographic data and 
registration rules that allow any Afghan to vote in any polling station.

This makes it hard to assess if some dramatic leaps in turnout during the 
second round of voting were a realistic reflection of greater enthusiasm or a 
warning sign of fraud.

Also, the country's voting patterns are driven in many rural areas by tribal, 
ethnic or other group loyalties that can make it harder to spot or isolate 
fraud.

So while in most elections observers would be highly suspicious of a ballot 
box with perhaps 95% of votes cast for one candidate and just 5% for the other, 
in many areas of Afghanistan this could be a legitimate reflection of local 
sentiment.

Mokhtar Amiri contributed reporting
 