
There was growing international concern yesterday over the future of 
Afghanistan after the trailing candidate in the country's presidential election 
toyed publicly with setting up a parallel government, thelatest crisis to hit a 
poll that had been hailed as a showcase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/08/afghanistan-poll-crisis-abdullah-claims-victiory-ghani-election>
 of the country's transformation.

Former mujahideen doctor Abdullah Abdullah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah> declared himself winner 
of the vote the day after election officials released preliminary results 
suggesting the opposite. The million-ballot lead of rivalAshraf Ghani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/07/ashraf-ghani-afghanistan-presidential-vote-lead>
 was a surprise to no one in either camp, but Abdullah's team said it had been 
accomplished by fraud and fiercely resisted publication of numbers they say 
give a false picture.

Abdullah swore to a crowd of thousands in Kabul that he would put his life on 
the line to stop a "fake government" taking power, and hinted that he was 
considering forming a cabinet of his own, although he asked for more time to 
unravel the crisis.

"There is no doubt we are the winners of this election," he told supporters 
who had earlier torn down and ripped up a vast portrait of the outgoing 
president, Hamid Karzai, who Abdullah has accused of colluding in fraud. "The 
people are waiting for the announcement of our government," he added.

Overnight discussions with the US president, Barack Obama, and secretary of 
state, John Kerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/08/us-afghanistan-election-fraud-turning-point>
, may have persuaded Abdullah to put some distance between him and the 
supporters who called for a "parallel government" and "civil unrest" within 
hours of results coming out.

Kerry issued a stern public warning that any attempt to abandon the messy 
democratic process would mean an end to US aid. "I have noted reports of 
protests inAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> and of 
suggestions of a 'parallel government' with the gravest concern," he said in a 
statement that also called on Afghan security forces to remain neutral.

"There is no justifiable recourse to violence or threats of violence … Any 
action to take power by extra-legal means will cost Afghanistan the financial 
and security support of the United States and the international community."

The preliminary results gave Ghani 56% of the vote, although poll organisers 
warned that there was no winner yet and that the outcome could change after 
extensive fraud complaints were investigated.

Abdullah says 2 million of Ghani's votes from the 14 June run-off poll are 
fake, pointing to dramatic leaps in turnout from the first round in April. In 
one province, support for him rose tenfold and it doubled, tripled or 
quadrupled in other areas.

Ghani's team say transport for voters, televised townhall-style discussions, 
and unprecedented agreements to let women vote in his conservative rural 
strongholds helped him pick up more than 2m extra votes.

Both candidates have agreed to audits of around 3m ballots from polling 
stations that triggered fraud concerns, including those with unusually high 
ratios of female voters, or where almost all available voting papers were used 
up.

Abdullah had pushed for those checks to be carried out before any results were 
released. Instead, a narrower fraud survey was done on around 1m votes. Under 
12,000 ballots were thrown out by the end, figures that Ghani highlighted on 
Tuesday as a sign that the poll was largely clean.

Ghani dismissed concerns that Afghanistan's stability was at risk, saying he 
respected his rival as a "national figure" committed to unity.

"Talk of parallel governments will remain at the level of talk, because of the 
historic responsibility that his excellency Dr Abdullah and I … have to ensure 
the stability of this country," Ghani told reporters, after confirming that he 
fully backed a wider audit of the results. Ghani also said he was open to talks 
with his rival, in an apparent softening of his position on a possible 
coalition government.

He had previously insisted that were he to be declared winner, Abdullah would 
have to concede defeat before any discussion of jobs could begin.

"We do not have preconditions for political discussions because we must engage 
in finding solutions … to ensure the legitimacy of the process, its fairness 
and the acceptance of its results."

Afghanistan's new president should be inaugurated on 2 August, in the 
country's first democratic transfer of power. Voting was initially hailed as a 
qualified success after the police and army held off the majority ofTaliban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> attacks and Afghans turned out in 
unexpectedly high numbers.

But the process has since lurched into dangerous political theatre, which a 
country already hobbled by a feeble economy and struggling against a tenacious 
insurgency can ill afford. British foreign secretaryWilliam Hague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/williamhague> called on Afghan leaders on 
Tuesday to resolve the crisis in an "orderly and legitimate way", summoning up 
the spectre of Iraq's rapid splintering.

"It's very important for Afghan leaders to learn from what is happening in 
Iraq [though] it is a different situation," he told journalists in India. "It 
is important that Afghanistan's leaders work together and do not allow the 
fragmentation of the political process … Iraq has suffered from a failure to 
have an inclusive government in recent years."

A speedy transition is particularly crucial to Afghanistan's security because 
Karzai, who was barred by the constitution from standing again, has refused to 
sign a long-term security deal with the US, saying that it is a decision for 
his successor.

Without the bilateral security agreement in place, all Nato and US forces will 
leave by the end of this year, leaving the still-fragile Afghan army and police 
to face theTaliban <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> without the 
backing of foreign air power, intelligence, training, or logistics.

The United Nations, which has been playing a key role mediating between the 
candidates, joined international calls for calm and warned candidates to stop 
supporters "making any irresponsible statements and from taking steps that 
could lead to civil disorder and instability." It also urged election officials 
to press on with a fast and rigorous audit.

Mokhtar Amiri contributed reporting 
 