
Ashraf Ghani, a former World Bank economist, has been officially declared the 
new president ofAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, 
after three months of political deadlock was resolved through a new, untested 
power-sharing arrangement with his arch rival.

Ghani signed the agreement with Abdullah Abdullah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah>, his adversary in 
presidential elections in June that left the country suspended in acrimony, 
fraud allegations and political paralysis. Under the deal, Ghani will run the 
cabinet and be in charge of strategic functions, while Abdullah will be able to 
appoint a "chief executive" who will be in charge of daily duties.

Neither man appeared overjoyed as they signed the deal. When the election 
results were finally declared, the ranking official did not use the words 
"winner" or "loser", nor did he announce the final voting figures.

"The independent election commission declares Dr Ashraf Ghani as the 
president, and thus announces the end of election process," the electoral 
commission chief, Ahmad Yousaf Nuristani, simply told reporters. "During the 
election process fraud was committed from all sides … that has concerned 
people."

The new leadership, under pressure to agree a new security deal with the US to 
pave the way for the removal of most foreign troops, has a formidable task 
ahead. It also has to rapidly pick up the business of day-to-day government, 
which has atrophied over the past six months through the bitterly contested 
electoral process.

"I'm happy that our brothers Dr Ashraf Ghani and Dr Abdullah struck an Afghani 
deal for the sake of goodness and prosperity of the country," the outgoing 
president,Hamid Karzai <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamid-karzai>, said 
in a short speech after the palace signing. "I hope with their efforts this 
country gets long-lasting peace."

Ghani, who campaigned on the platform of reform, was very popular among urban 
youth. After the first round in March, he sought to extend his appeal to the 
Pashtun heartland of the south and east, which ultimately contributed to his 
victory. But Abdullah interpreted the marked increase in turnout in Pashtun 
areas as proof of fraud, and demanded that the votes be disqualified.

To resolve the dispute, the UN supervised an "audit" of all 8m votes, but the 
results were kept under wraps for weeks until Sunday's agreement. A senior US 
official said details of the agreement and the audit results had not been 
immediately released due to fears they would spark protests. He said there were 
plans to announce them in due course.

Amid the general relief at the deal, which ends months of political inertia, 
there was also a note of resentment at the politicians who were perceived as 
having struck a deal to suit their personal interests instead of serving the 
people.

It also remains unclear how the power-sharing deal will work, and how the 
notion of an Afghan "CEO" will go down with the moreprovincial views of the 
country's hinterland.

Hamidullah Farooqi, a spokesman for Ghani's campaign, said the camp was happy 
that the electoral process had conferred legitimacy on the presidency and that 
the president would retain the role of commander in chief.

Another Ghani spokesman, Abbas Noyan, said of the Ghani clan: "In every family 
there are happy and unhappy members."

Happy or unhappy, the new government will have its work cut out once the new 
president has been inaugurated – a ceremony that could take place as early as 
next week.

Ghani's in-tray

1 Security

A security pact with the US that will allow for foreign troops to remain in 
Afghanistan beyond 2014 needs to be signed.

2 Government

The role of the new chief executive officer still needs to be ratified under 
law.

3 Economy

Revenue went down by 30% this year, and the business community needs assurance 
from the new government if they are to resume their operations. It will also 
need to address its own financial crisis that has seen many civil servants go 
unpaid for months.

4 Donor relations

Restoring trust with the donor community to ensure the aid flow the country 
depends on. The $5.1bn (£3.13bn) promised by the international community 
expires in 2015 and needs to be extended.

5 Taliban talks

The new administration represents an opportunity to open up talks with the 
Taliban-led insurgency, a necessary requisite for ending the ongoing civil war.
 