
Guardian writers’ predicted position: 16th (NB: this is not necessarily 
Geoff’s prediction, but the average of our writers’ tips)


Last season’s position: 17th

It’s a tough call with the Demons. There’s a strong impulse to look at 2014 
and feel optimism for the Grand Old Flag. You think they could be on the edge 
of turning it around. Then you remember that every season you’re optimistic and 
think they’re on the edge of turning it around. A few new recruits, high draft 
picks, some players show promise … then the season starts and the same grim 
script unfolds.


Melbourne have spent the past six years, and 10 of the past 15, at the wrong 
end of the comp. Three of those years have earned wooden spoons, and only the 
expansion sides have saved the Dees from a bigger cutlery collection. Turmoil 
and incompetence behind the scenes has spilled out front, and through all of 
this some poor buggers have had to keep showing up to play.

Still, hope comes with Melbourne’s best recruitment in years, new coach Paul 
Roos. This is the man who built the Sydney Swans from a novelty side to one of 
the most respected ever. The boon for Melbourne will be Roos’s calmness and 
ordered approach.

In every press conference he has stayed level-headed. He knows he’s taken on a 
multi-year job that will have plenty of bad days. He’s done so regardless of 
the effect on his coaching record, because he wants to sort out a basket-case 
club. It’s admirable, and we can only hope he is given the time and space to 
work without people teeth-gnashing over every loss.

Roos’s key offsider will be new co-captain Nathan Jones, a die-hard midfielder 
who would cop many more plaudits if he had the luxury of a good side. While not 
yet as skilled, Jones is reminiscent of Paul Chapman in both appearance and 
temperament.

Through the early years of the past decade, Chapman was a fanatical player in 
a sometimes bumbling or half-hearted Geelong side. Jones has shown a similar 
intensity during Melbourne’s desperate years, often finishing as their only 
player unbeaten. Chapman’s white-hot passion helped inspire the Cats to a new 
level. It’s an uphill task, but with a little support, Jones might eventually 
do the same for the Dees.

Jones has only seven teammates in the 100-game club – even co-captain Jack 
Grimes is only on 68 – but there’s still a lot to like on the Dees’ list. A few 
midfielders have been imported to support the young roster, with the Bulldogs 
200-gamer Daniel Cross, highly rated Crow Bernie Vince and promising young 
Docker Viv Michie all arriving over the summer, and Dom Barry being handballed 
after a nominal drafting by Greater Western Sydney. They will join last year’s 
recruit, former Geelong premiership player Shannon Byrnes, who may have 
recovered from the culture shock of his first season with the Demons.

Of Melbourne’s home-grown talent, Jack Watts is tipped to spend time in the 
midfield this year in a bid to boost his influence. At 196cm, the No1 draft 
pick naturally started out as a key-position player, but never really got going 
up forward nor in defence. He has very sharp disposal skills and elite fitness, 
so a body that size in the midfield could make quite a stir.

Jack Trengove will probably benefit from having the responsibility of 
captaincy lifted, while Matt Jones will hope to replicate his excellent debut 
season. Jack Viney, son of Melbourne champion Todd, is ferocious at the contest 
for a teenager, while Jordie McKenzie will trade tagging duties with Grimes. 
Ruckman Mark Jamar could help the group immensely if he can stay fit and give 
them first use of the ball.

Up front is where the Demons’ future is exciting. Jeremy Howe is one of the 
most-watched names in the league, for hisanti-gravity ability 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RXNf35VJ-nc> to throw in a weekly screamer 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v1NWLJ5V7_8> over an unsuspecting opponent 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mhtSVezTF9k>. His highlights reel from last 
season alone was obscene. Mitch Clark showed great fight for the club in a 
season hampered by injury, while Chris Dawes could be a focal point now that 
he’s more settled at Melbourne.

With those three as the key targets, 192cm Lynden Dunn can switch between 
defence and attack. Then there’s the massive frame of Jesse Hogan, the new teen 
sensation who hasn’t yet played a game, joining GWS’s Tom Boyd as the hyped 
full-forwards of the season. Add some drifting moves to the forward line for 
ruckmen Jack Fitzpatrick, at 200cm, and Max Gawn, at 208cm, and there’s more 
than enough to create headaches for opponents.

There are some good names down back as well, with key defenders James Frawley 
and Colin Garland both turning in impressive seasons last year despite 
Melbourne’s struggles. They will need to maintain that level. Dean Terlich 
showed plenty of good signs as a mature-age recruit last year. Now 24, he’s an 
intelligent footballer who can approach his work with a little more calm and 
accomplishment. Melbourne have done well with older recruits lately, finding 
the likes of Terlich and Matt Jones, and have gone again this season with 
former SANFL defender Alexis Georgiou. Grimes will help marshal the backline, 
with Dunn to drop back for support when required.

The Demons have a lot of talent at each end of the ground. Their main problem 
last year was getting smashed in the middle. No forward line can function 
without supply, and the best defence will falter under constant barrage. Roos 
has consistently said that his goal is to make the team more competitive for 
longer.

“We can dress it up any way we want to, but [the game is] relatively simple. 
You’ve got to win the ball inside and then you’ve got to beat your opponent on 
the outside”.

Coming from so far behind the field, there won’t be any miracle burst of speed 
by the Demons, but with another couple of years of sensible drafting and 
hard-won experience, there should come a pre-season when the traditional annual 
optimism won’t be misplaced.
 