
Guardian writers’ predicted position: 14th (NB: this is not necessarily 
Geoff’s prediction but the average of our writers’ tips)


Last season’s position: 14th

You can’t be everybody’s little brother for years. Since entering the AFL in 
2011, theGold Coast Suns <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gold-coast-suns> 
have been treated with a kind of genial condescension. Even after the younger 
and even less co-ordinated GWS Giants appeared, most of us have still 
slow-clapped Gold Coast for not being quite so bad, then patted them on the 
head and given them a cookie. It’s only to be expected: the Suns have to mature 
into a genuinely competitive team before they’ll get respect. Realistically, 
not much is likely to change this year.

That’s not to say the club hasn’t made any progress. They won eight of their 
22 matches last year, a tally that any relegation-zone English football club 
would seize with rapture. They’ve pushed any number of more fancied opponents 
close to the line. NAB Cup results don’t mean much, but running over Essendon 
by a point in the final second of a match will stand them in good stead for 
close finishes. The players are growing older, fitter and more experienced.

“We have stepped up preseason 10% or 15% this year, workload wise,” said 
captain Gary Ablett, “and the boys’ bodies have been able to handle it. We’re 
very happy with where we’re at.”


Ablett, Jarrad Harbrow, Michael Rischitelli, Nathan Bock and Matthew Warnock 
are their only players who’ve spent significant time at previous clubs, but the 
Suns now have 13 footballers on their list who’ve played more than 50AFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> games.

There’s plenty for them to look forward to this year. Jack Martin must be the 
most lauded player never to play a game – recruited from GSW in the mini-draft, 
then traded to Gold Coast as a rookie. Tipped by club captains to win the 
Rising Star, former players have led us to believe he’ll be a genetic cocktail 
of the Team of the Century in the shape of one skinny kid who’s only just old 
enough to drive himself to training.

The mini-draftee from the year before Martin, Jaeger O’Meara, did win the 
Rising Star last year, playing all 22 games and averaging 22 disposals. He’s 
added a lot of muscle and will be looking to impose himself. Harley Bennell has 
already shown himself to be a midfielder of high class who can kick bags of 
goals. David Swallow is uncompromising through the middle of the ground and at 
the contest, while Dion Prestia averaged more than 25 touches per game last 
season.

Code-swapper Karmichael Hunt could be forgiven for questioning that decision 
as he lined up for a NAB Challenge reserves practice match against the Aspley 
Hornets recently. (We don’t even have hornets in Australia. Or Giants. Or a 
whole lot of Dockers.) But Hunt has shown greater aptitude for the game than 
fellow rugby convert and de-convert Israel Folau, and can be a centre-square 
wrecking ball when someone is lined up for the hit.

Warnock and Bock offer experience and a mature physical presence in defence, 
Steven May has emerged as a young defensive leader, and there has been plenty 
of pre-season praise for newcomers Clay Cameron and Sean Lemmens. Danny Stanley 
averaged over 20 disposals to go with his zealous competitiveness in charging 
out of the backline last year. Jesse Lonergan is also being talked up for his 
job tagging Daniel Rich in the match against Brisbane.

The Suns’ forward line could be an impressive sight, with developing trio Tom 
Lynch, Sam Day and Charlie Dixon all pushing the two-metre mark and looking to 
stretch opposition defences. Brandon Matera, part of the famous Matera 
footballing clan from Perth, might also be ready to leave a stronger impression 
this season.

And all of that is before we get to Gary – the captain, the legend, the best 
player in the league by a Botanical Gardens time trial. Having passed his 250th 
game last year and approaching his 30th birthday in May, Ablett remains at his 
peak, averaging 31.2 possessions in his last season and kicking 28 goals. There 
have been more than enough superlatives expended on the little shiny-headed 
one. It’s just a shame to see one of the best of all time turning out for a 
team so far from premiership contention.

Nonetheless, the Suns are maturing and 2014 should see further consolidation. 
They’ll find it hard to rise much in ladder terms – this year’s competition 
looks especially strong and even, with only a couple of residents of 
Struggletown identifiable this early. Another couple of years, though, and the 
condescension market could be left entirely to GWS.
 