
Guardian writers’ predicted position: 5th (NB: this is not necessarily Geoff’s 
prediction but the average of our writers’ tips)

Last season’s position: 2nd

This will be the year that Geelong’s lauded systems are tested most fully 
since the club’s 2007 emergence as a great footballing power. Finishing towards 
the top of the ladder for so many years has given the Cats little access to 
high draft picks, but no one in the league has been better at spotting talent 
from unlikely sources, and developing mid-range players into top class.

With Joel Corey, Paul Chapman, James Podsiadly and Josh Hunt all departing 
Kardinia Park last year, the Cats are down to nine of the core players from 
their premiership era. The next generation should be preparing to replace their 
predecessors, but too many of Geelong’s classiest young players will be 
spending much of this season rehabilitating injuries.

Allen Christensen boasts pace and extremely clean disposal, and his commitment 
to the contest despite his youth and small frame have already inspiredGeelong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/geelong> revivals. He’s likely to miss half 
the season with a back injury. Nathan Vardy, slated to be Tom Hawkins’s 
forward-line offsider, will miss the year with a knee injury, while the 
star-crossed Daniel Menzel is only a vague chance to return from his. George 
Burbury’s broken jaw is a six-week job, but far more importantly the Cats will 
miss two of their best: captain Joel Selwood for a couple of games with a 
hamstring, and electrifying forward Steven Motlop for up to six weeks with a 
knee problem.

A fairly friendly start pits Geelong against Adelaide and West Coast in 
Geelong in their first four games, and they’ll be looking to their experienced 
players to get them to their round five marquee clash with Hawthorn with a 
reasonable win-loss record. Steve Johnson, Jimmy Bartel and Mathew Stokes will 
swing between the midfield and the forward line, while James Kelly will 
probably push through the middle from defence.

The backline will be solid: Harry Taylor remains one of the very best in the 
league, with Corey Enright the key rebound player alongside the perennially 
sub-radar Tom Lonergan. Young Cameron Guthrie showed a cool head last year, and 
the Cats will be hoping for more game time from Melbourne recruit Jared Rivers, 
which may in turn release Taylor to swing forward if required.

Up front, Hawkins is reported to have recovered from the back complaint that 
limited him last year, but with a lack of other experienced talls Geelong may 
soon wish they had held onto Podsiadly. Speedster Jordan Murdoch kicked some 
quality goals last year, and Billie Smedts was very sharp at times.

The old firm aside, Geelong will need some new players to step up. A couple of 
big games last year showed Mitch Duncan might be ready to do that. Duncan is 
tall, elegant and a beautiful striker of the ball – a sort ofAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> version of Mark Waugh. He has a few 
seasons under his belt since making his debut in 2010. Travis Varcoe returns 
from two injury-blighted years, adding speed by foot and class in disposal.

The ruck at least looks strong: ultra-fit Olympic track convert Mark Blicavs 
has proved he will give his all, while Hamish McIntosh may finally have put 
injury behind him, and the giant Dawson Simpson is talked up around the club.

To assemble such a strong second tier during Geelong’s sustained run of success
is testament to the skill of recruiter Stephen Wells and the club’s development 
staff. The rate of injury, though, will be a mighty handicap to overcome during 
the first half of the season. Geelong may have to regard 2014 as a development 
year, but their experienced senior players did forge one of the most tenacious 
teams of all time. Whatever the sick list says, you’d be a fool to write them 
off.
 