
Guardian writers’ predicted position: 18th (NB: this is not necessarily 
Geoff’s prediction, but the average of our writers’ tips)


Last season’s position: 18th

When it came to inventing brand new teams for the AFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl>, everyone involved had to expect 
initial embarrassment. Unlike football, there is no broad market of elite 
Australian Rules players to tap into. Teams have to be developed, necessitating 
a sustained period of struggle. Still, you can’t help feeling that GWS has done 
it harder than any other introduced team.

The league’s administrators didn’t help, saddling the club with an unwieldy 
name, the indignity of orange and an indistinct representative area divided 
across about a dozen “home” grounds. Even with AFL backing, GWS couldn’t 
attract an elite player in the Gary Ablett mould. They settled for overpaying 
mid-range or unproven talents such as Callan Ward, Phil Davis, Tom Scully and 
Rhys Palmer; luring back footballing pensioners such as Chad Cornes, Dean 
Brogan and Luke Power; and recycling discards such as Setanta Ó hAilpín. Even 
the Giants’ rugby league-poaching gimmick failed, while Gold Coast’s might 
actually have found them a player.
The Giants were poised to register a winless season last year but ran into a 
Melbourne side in the depths of their own misery. Over the year GWS conceded 
1,472 more points than the league’s best defence – nearly double Fremantle’s 
tally – while the best attacking side outscored them by 999.

At season’s end, Lance Franklin passed up their big-money offer in favour of 
the other Sydney, at which point chairman Tony Shepherd said GWS were relieved 
and didn’t want him anyway. This raises questions about whether Tony Shepherd 
is in the habit of offering $7.2m for things he doesn’t want, because I’ve got 
a bunch of broken lawn furniture he could look at.


This season, then, will be all about finding whatever positives the Giants 
can. Franklin aside, the club had their best summer yet for recruiting. Shane 
Mumford is one of the best mobile ruckmen and most imposing physical presences 
in the game, and will bring a level of authority that the Giants’ youngsters 
can’t. Heath Shaw is a fine rebounding defender who needed a change of scene 
after 173 games with Collingwood, and should still be in peak form. The hulking 
Josh Hunt was a familiar presence in Geelong’s premiership-era backline and has 
another year or two in him, while former Sydney Swan forward Jed Lamb is highly 
rated despite his handful of games.

The Giants’ key-position stocks are also looking good. Jeremy Cameron is the 
first of their home-grown players to fully flourish, nailing the All-Australian 
full forward spot, no less, with just 37 games to his name. Jonathon Patton 
will be back from injury this year and will likely play from the same goal 
square, while the much-hyped No1 draft pick Tom Boyd is of similar stature.

There are almost two teams within a team at GWS: the mature recruits and the 
original draftees. With their privileged access to drafts, GWS have a slew of 
the best young running players in the country. It’s just a matter of who among 
them will develop into top-line footballers. Toby Greene has attracted plenty 
of attention from opposing taggers, while Adam Treloar is highly rated. Last 
year the pair averaged 23 and 24 disposals respectively. Ward and Scully will 
continue to lead where they can, while Lachie Whitfield and Dylan Shiel are two 
more impressive customers.

Of course, their list is still largely young – the summer’s recruits aside, 
there are just five Giants who have played more than 50 games. This means they 
should come last, but the disaster that St Kilda has become might just lift 
them off the bottom of the table for the first time.

However bad GWS are this year, we can still get excited about their potential. 
It’s about seeing which players develop soonest. The club has had so many good 
draft picks that in another six to eight years, we are likely to see an 
absolute dynamite list. 2014 may at times be painful to watch, but if you want 
to own part of the true satisfaction of the rise, you have to get in on the 
ground floor.
 