
Guardian writers’ predicted position: 9th (nb: this is not necessarily Scott’s 
prediction but the average of our writers’ tips)

Last season’s position: 11th

What do Terence Trent D’Arby and Brenton Sanderson have in common? Besides 
gender, their second offerings were vastly inferior to their first. D’Arby’s 
follow-up to 1987’s Introducing The Hardline According To... was a spectacular 
failure, just as last year the dreaded Second Album Syndrome cursed Sanderson 
and a club that was expecting much better.

Sanderson’s debut 2012 season as Crows coach was stunning: not only did he 
transform a robotic, defensive – though fit and well-drilled – playing group 
inherited from Neil Craig into a team that attacked and used the ball with 
verve and confidence, he also got them to within a kick of the grand final. And 
all that from 14th place in 2011. Not bad.

Then came 2013. Still giddy from his freshman results, Sanderson dared to 
utter the ‘P’ word when addressing Crows members at a pre-season function. It 
would haunt the South Australian native as the Crows proceeded to lurch from 
bad to worse, both on and off the ground, before finishing the regular season 
in 11th place, having raised barely a whimper.

To be fair, Adelaide’s season was over before it began. Hindsight shows how 
deep the Kurt Tippett salary cap scandal cut through all factions of the club, 
not to mention bringing on the suspensions of chief executive Steven Trigg and 
football manager Phil Harper. Then came the 16-week suspension of “innovation 
coach” Dean Bailey for his role in Melbourne’s 2009 performance, or lack 
thereof.

Tippett’s acrimonious departure left a gaping hole on the forward line. The 
Crows started slowly with a defeat to Essendon before coughing up a big 
Showdown lead, then perhaps the worst thing that could have happened did 
happen: talismanic full-forward Taylor Walker suffered a season-ending knee 
injury in round five.

With other key players also spending enforced time on the sidelines, most 
notably Brent Reilly, the Crows were safely discounted as even a finals chance 
from an early stage.

Now 2014 brings with it a new set of pressures.

The Adelaide Football Club and its fans do not tolerate extended periods of 
failure, so where other clubs might expect, and be expected, to go through a 
rebuilding phase following a year of abject failure, the onus is onAdelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> to bounce back.

And there is genuine cause to suspect they will.

Assuming Walker returns to his marauding best, the forward line he marshals 
will have two new helpers: James Podsiadly and Eddie Betts. For a club renowned 
for its inactivity at trade time, the Crows exceeded themselves with these 
acquisitions.

As a former assistant at Geelong, Sanderson will know how to get a tune from 
J-Pod, while ex-Blue Betts is still in his prime and a remarkably productive 
small forward. Add to the mix Josh Jenkins, Tom Lynch and Jason Porplyzia, and 
there really should be goals in the Crows this year.

But the two words that could have the biggest influence on Adelaide’s fate 
this year are these: Patrick Dangerfield. There’s nothing the dual All 
Australian doesn’t do: he’s blisteringly fast, strong as an ox, kicks goals and 
has an array of skills that he puts to damagingly effective use. He’s already 
the complete package but approaching his mid-20s and with 100-plus games now 
under his belt, Dangerfield could well take his game to a new level this year. 
And that is a frightening contemplation.

Dangerfield leads a midfield that, on paper, is very good. With the likes of 
Scott Thompson, Rory Sloane, skipper Nathan van Berlo, Richard Douglas and, 
presumably, more from impressive greenhorn Brad Crouch, the Crows have 
hard-working mids with plenty of in-and-under grunt, albeit possibly light on 
outside polish.

As classy as he is, Bernie Vince’s defection to Melbourne may not be felt too 
greatly. What the group will be looking for is a return to the 2012 form of 
ruckman Sam Jacobs, who dipped markedly last year in hitouts (though still 
third in the AFL) and effectiveness around the ground. Nevertheless, look for 
the Crows to return to somewhere near the top of the tree for contested 
possessions in 2014.

The knock on Adelaide is its defence. Ben Rutten is not getting any younger 
(or faster) and while Andy Otten is serviceable and Daniel Talia is emerging as 
one of the best stoppers in the league, the structure is still gelling, with 
promising but raw youngsters Rory Laird and Luke Brown in situ.

Another imponderable is how the Crows will take to Adelaide Oval. AAMI Stadium 
was a reliable fortress (at least before last year) but it may be too much to 
expect the players to immediately establish the same sort of affinity with the 
club’s new home ground.

But back to Mr D’Arby. After the belly-flop of his second album, his third 
effort, Symphony Or Damn, returned the artist to No4 in the charts, and 
somewhere near his best. The Crows should aspire to something similar. All 
things considered, and with an even run of injuries, they’ll be challenging 
this year, if not for the flag then at least for a top-eight-finish.
 