
Guardian writers’ predicted position: 13th (NB: this is not necessarily 
Scott’s prediction but the average of our writers’ tips)


Last season’s position: 12th

If a week is a long time in football, then a decade is, well, 520 times 
longer. The point is, whatever happened way back then has no relevance to the 
here and now. But please humour me. This time 10 years ago, theBrisbane Lions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/brisbane-lions> were on a campaign to 
emulate the Collingwood side of 1930 by winning four straight VFL/AFL 
premierships. The Lions failed, only just, losing to Port Adelaide in the grand 
final, but succeeded, thankfully, in keeping the atrocious idiom “four-peat” 
out of the sporting lexicon.

Fast forward to the beginning of season 2014 and the theme since Brisbane’s 
salad days has been monotonous: continual failure. It’s churlish to suggest the 
Lions are still suffering a three-peat (ugh) hangover, but their supporters are 
surely growing tired of waiting for the rebuilding to end and the glory days to 
return.

The club has contested just one finals campaign since 2004, and last year’s 
12th placing was reassuringly Brisbane: 2009’s top-eight finish aside, the 
Lions have finished somewhere between 10th and 15th each season. But the effort 
was better than that, and possibly portentous in terms of future performance.

After winning the NAB Cup, the Lions were flogged – by the Bulldogs, of all 
teams – in round one and were goners by mid-year with a 3-8 record. But with 
the return of key men from injury and suspension, they came from 52 points down 
to beat Geelong in round 13 and held form to finish the year with 10 wins, 
which was just one shy of a finals appearance, but not enough to spare coach 
Michael Voss the axe.

More tumult would come in the off-season with Angus Johnson replaced by Bob 
Sharpless as chairman, and Leigh Matthews becoming a director.

At the forefront of the new-look Lions is freshman coach and favourite son 
Justin Leppitsch.

Leppitsch will be hoping to carry on the fine recent record of first-year 
coaches in theAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl>. He may not emulate 
the deeds of Chris Scott and lead his club to a flag in his first year in 
charge, as Leppitsch’s former premiership teammate did with Geelong in 2011. 
But he can look to the likes of Brenton Sanderson (Adelaide) and Ken Hinkley 
(Port Adelaide), who both led their new clubs to the finals from the lower 
reaches of the bottom eight the previous year.

Both Sanderson and Hinkley instantly stamped a personal touch on their teams, 
and Leppitsch has made no secret of the fact he’s changing the way Brisbane 
play. He has spent the pre-season drilling his troops to become better at 
stoppages and in contested footy: an area where assistant coach Shane Woewodin 
says the Lions have, in the past, had their “pants pulled down”.

Also look for the Lions this year to exert a great deal more defensive 
pressure and move the ball in a way that insures against errors. This indirect, 
hard-running style may help the Lions improve from their 2014 position of 
fourth-bottom for possessions, both contested and uncontested.

Brisbane also performed poorly last year for marks inside 50 (16th overall) 
and Leppitsch is on record as saying he wants more targets to compete for the 
ball in the air, and presumably keep the ball in the forward 50 once it’s 
there. To that end, the Lions spent the trade period recruiting Trent West from 
Geelong and Jackson Paine from Collingwood. They also acquired key forward Luke 
McGuane from Richmond, who had delisted the Queenslander.

Their task, in part, will be to alleviate the ever-heavy load on superstar 
Jonathan Brown. Brown has recovered from his foot injury but is unlikely to 
play a full season in 2014, hence the need for Brisbane’s forward line to be 
able to function in his absence. When the Lion king is there, and assuming he 
gets assistance from the team’s developing talls, exciting duo Dayne Zorko and 
Josh Green have the ability to wreak havoc across half-forward. Leppitsch will 
also look to midfielders Sam Mayes, Tom Rockliff and Daniel Rich to push 
forward in a vulture-type capacity.

Brisbane’s midfield will be tested by the retirement of decorated hero Simon 
Black, but in Rockliff, Rich and Irishman Pearce Hanley they are forming a 
nucleus to take the club forward. In Matthew Leuenberger, the Lions have one of 
the finest ruckmen in the league. Also keep an eye out for highly touted South 
Australian midfielder James Aish, who was picked up at No7 in last year’s 
national draft.

The Lions have one of the youngest rosters in the competition, even allowing 
for the fact five players under 21 left the club at the end of 2013, citing 
homesickness. That fact alone is enough to temper any genuine enthusiasm about 
their chances this year, but in any case Brisbane are light on finals quality. 
Unless Leppitsch can turn water into wine in his first season, the Lions look 
destined for another also-ran finish. The rebuild continues.
 