
Guardian writers’ predicted position: 11th (nb: this is not necessarily 
Scott’s prediction but the average of our writers’ tips)

Last season’s position: 8th

There can be few more dreaded, or cursed, terms in professional football as 
the premiership window. Get sucked in by the hyperbole that accompanies every 
wishful pre-season, and each year kicks off with as many as half a dozen 
genuine contenders for the flag. Whether all the hype is merited is immaterial 
come the pointy end of the season:as Christopher Lambert so stridently put it 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sqcLjcSloXs&app=desktop> in Highlander, there 
can be only one.


The Blues haven’t been “the one” since 1995, and haven’t even been to the Big 
Dance this century. There have been valid reasons for that, but the club is now 
over the crippling ramifications of the salary cap scandal more than a decade 
ago. Indeed, nothing disappoints so much as expectation;Carlton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/carlton> have no excuses now, and their 
loyal fans are painfully aware of the fact.

Adding to this pain was the supposition that last year was meant to be the 
season of the Blues. Mick Malthouse had come riding into Visy Park, as might a 
knight in shining armour, with the fanfare and ceremony befitting the 
three-time premiership coach. The underwhelming Brett Ratten years were a thing 
of the past and some astute judges, most notably Mike Sheahan, the doyen ofAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> writers, tipped Carlton for the 
Premiership.

How wrong they were. It’s hard to put the finger on precisely why, but Carlton 
never really got off the ground in 2013. Twelve wins and 12 defeats was their 
mediocre return – though seven of those defeats were by margins inside three 
goals – and any other year they would have missed the finals.

But with Essendon banished from September due to the Asada investigation, the 
Blues were subbed in and made it count, sort of, by at least winning their 
elimination final against Richmond. Tellingly, though, in all of 2013, Carlton 
beat just one other eventual top-eight side – Port Adelaide.

So how can Malthouse turn a nondescript year, one that started with such hope, 
into a positive and transform his men into players who believe they can win a 
premiership?

His first port of call was personnel. After an inactive trade period the year 
before, Carlton were much more mobile in 2013, bringing in A-grader Dale Thomas 
from Collingwood, as well as utility Andrejs Everitt from Sydney and 
20-year-old midfielder Sam Docherty from Brisbane.

The only key outs for Carlton were small forward Eddie Betts, a free-agency 
defector to Adelaide, and Shaun Hampson, traded to Richmond. Interestingly, 
Malthouse will renew his partnership with former Collingwood fitness specialist 
David Buttifant, perhaps brought in with an eye on last year’s concerning glut 
of narrow defeats.

The club’s newbies have joined a list abundant with players either on the 
verge of, or pretty much in, the twilight of their careers. Chris Judd, Jarrad 
Waite and best-and-fairest Kade Simpson are not getting any younger but are 
still capable of elite performance. Even first-choice defenders Andrew Walker 
and Michael Jamison, though in the prime of their careers, would have one eye 
on the calendar. Adding to Carlton’s urgency is this: at the end of the year, 
skipper Marc Murphy, 2006 No1 draft pick Bryce Gibbs, Simpson and Jamison will 
all be free agents.

Don’t expect Malthouse to try to reinvent the wheel in 2014 in terms of 
playing style. If anything, his ethos will be drummed in even deeper with the 
benefit of a year behind him.

The Blues will again look to attack from defence, but the onus is on the 
club’s mids, led by Murphy and Gibbs, to be more consistent and better serve a 
forward line that will need to bare its teeth more. In 2013, only West Coast 
and the Power were worse than Carlton for disposal efficiency, while they were 
bottom of the pile for uncontested possessions.

Winning the hard ball and bombing under pressure into the forward 50 won’t win 
anyone a premiership. Look for improvement in this area and for Carlton’s 
forwards to benefit. They’ll need to: Jeff Garlett was the leading goalkicker 
last year with 43, and with Betts now gone, Waite and Lachie Henderson will 
need to have big years if Carlton are to make an impression.

And that is one of the burning questions for season 2014: will Carlton make an 
impression? Was 2013 an aberration, or did it accurately reflect where this 
playing group is in the pecking order?

Perhaps observers underestimated how long it would take the players to adjust 
to Malthouse’s style; indeed, speak to anyone who’s played under him and 
they’ll tell you he’s a great mentor, but an acquired taste. Either way, this 
is their last chance. If they blow it this year, Carlton’s supporters had 
better strap in for another long and bumpy ride waiting for that damn 
Premiership window to open again.
 