
Guardian writers’ predicted position: 4th (NB: this is not necessarily 
Russell’s prediction, but the average of our writers’ tips)


Last season’s position: 5th

In March, the sky is the limit. “Things around the place have certainly 
lifted. We’re training harder than we have because everyone wants to play under 
him,” gushed oneRichmond <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/richmond> player. 
“There’s a real positiveness around the place and it’s not just the players – 
it’s coming from everyone,” said another. It wasn’t Jack Riewoldt or Trent 
Cotchin who uttered those words; it was long-gone Tigers Chris Naish and Jeff 
Hogg in the lead-up to the 1992 season. But the Tigers flunked their test and 
finished third from the bottom of the ladder under coaching demi-god Allan 
Jeans.

There hasn’t been much joy for Richmond fans since, but finally they have a 
team and a coach worthy of that passionate supporter base and it’s hard for the 
faithful to keep a lid on expectations. Perhaps overawed by both the occasion 
and the deafening volume of a 95,000 strong crowd, the Tigers disappointingly 
bowed out in the first week of the 2013 finals. This year they should and most 
probably will do better.

One important factor in their favour is a more than accommodating draw. The 
Tigers face a single 2013 finalist in the first five weeks of the season and 
Sydney is the only top eight side from last year that they’ll encounter twice. 
Bar that final-round game at ANZ Stadium, the Tigers get to play all of the 
likely contenders at home with 16 of their games being played in Melbourne. 
That’s as helpful as they could have hoped for.

Last season’s finals result was unkind really; the Tigers won 15 games to 
finish in 5th place after the home and away season, beating both of the 
eventual grand finalists along the way. Those were stirring victories that gave 
Damien Hardwick’s side a sense of self-belief. Anything less than a preliminary 
final appearance will be a minor disappointment for a side with talent and 
depth.

It all begins in the middle, where silky-skilled captain Trent Cotchin, 
battering ram Dustin Martin and versatile star Brett Deledio offer pace and 
penetration when they’re given first use of the ball. The only knock on the 
trio at present is that Martin is the only regular scorer. All are capable of 
breaking games open but most importantly now have the support of a fleet of 
capable assistants.

Veteran Daniel Jackson’s performances seem to be almost propelled by the 
vitriol of the doubters and his CV now boasts a Tigers best and fairest award. 
Offering more polish but not yet the same levels of consistency, the 
development of Reece Conca and Nick Vlastuin this year will have a bearing on 
Richmond’s ability to climb new heights. So too will the capacity of old hands 
Chris Newman and Nathan Foley to stay free of injury and lend them an 
experienced hand.

Richmond’s first-choice defensive unit is built around Troy Chaplin and Alex 
Rance, the latter a puzzling exclusion from last year’s All-Australian side 
after a stoic season swatting away a variety of opponents. A healthy Dylan 
Grimes would lift the Tigers another notch in their defensive efforts and if 
Brandon Ellis can continue his sharp curve of improvement across half-back, the 
Tigers will be all the better for it.

Subject to a laughable “media ban” and perhaps the most unfairly maligned 
player in the league on account of perceptions that his head has outgrown the 
expanses of the MCG, Jack Riewoldt will be the focal point of a patchwork group 
of forwards. If Jake King stays out of trouble for long enough he’ll trap the 
ball inside 50 for the use of teammates, Tyrone Vickory will provide a decoy 
for Riewoldt and when picked, Aaron Edwards would hope to do the same. The 
Tigers will look to spread the scoring load but a hell of a lot rests on 
Riewoldt’s shoulders.

Perhaps Steve Morris is most symptomatic of the Richmond renaissance. A 
fearless, scrappy and highly effective small defender who more often than not 
beats his opponent, he’s exactly the type of player that the Tigers’ 
understaffed recruiting division might have missed in the dog days of the last 
decade. Hardwick must wish he had ten more of his ilk to send out there, 
because Morris adds a harder edge to the side.

Another revolution down at Punt Road has been the Tigers’ ability to finally 
produce something substantial through the addition of recycled players. Former 
Blue Shaun Grigg launches so many forward thrusts, Bachar Houli is a calm and 
calming presence across half-back with his precision kicking and work ethic and 
Chaplin slotted into the Tiger defence with aplomb last year. Whenever his name 
was called, Ricky Petterd’s kamikaze attack on the ball added something. So too 
did Chris Knights when he was able to get out there.

Of this year’s recruitment class, Shaun Hampson might help cover the 
early-season absence of number one ruckman Ivan Maric and otherwise provide a 
tall option in attack (a thought that may cause Carlton fans to scoff). Ex-Lion 
Todd Banfield could be a livewire out of the subs vest and Sam Lloyd might be 
another mature-age success story to emerge from the now-fertile breeding ground 
of Frankston’s VFL side. Picked up at number 12 in the national draft, Ben 
Lennon will need to add some weight to his teenage frame but could develop into 
an Andrew Walker-type leading forward.

The Tigers thrilled their long-suffering fans by merely taking part in finals 
action last season, but with holiday plans now pushed back beyond September, a 
far greater tilt at the flag is the minimum benchmark they should expect in 
2014.
 