
Guardian writers’ predicted position: 2nd (NB: this is not necessarily Geoff’s 
prediction but the average of our writers’ tips)

Last season’s position: 3rd

This is a danger year for Fremantle. Having finally made and lost their first 
grand final in 20 years of trying, the follow-up hangover is always a 
possibility. Even if they maintain their standard, teams who have endured a 
long wait for a premiership often need a few attempts to seal the deal. Just 
look at Port Adelaide’s ladder-topping years before their 2004 flag, or St 
Kilda’s three grand finals in two years without a win.

Last season was Fremantle’s first as a genuine contender. Under former coach 
Mark Harvey they became a very good side at home but an ordinary one away. Club 
management opted for ruthlessness when they sacked the popular Harvey in favour 
of Ross Lyon, then Lyon instilled ruthlessness into his team.

Beating Geelong in a 2012 final at the MCG was big for the Dockers, but 
beating Geelong in a final at Kardinia Park a year later was massive. Visiting 
sides are not supposed to win on the Cats’ home ground, but Fremantle choked 
the champion team’s scoring just as they had done to sides all year.

Fremantle proved they have the quality to take down the best, and if they had 
kicked straight on grand final day they could have disposed of Hawthorn as 
well. But they don’t have time for uncertain forays into the deep end of 
upcoming finals series.

The purple team’s approach involves non-star players working in furious 
unison, but they still have two players who mean more. Matthew Pavlich and 
Aaron Sandilands are 32 and 31 years old respectively, with bodies that have 
taken a battering from their all-out style of football. They’re unlikely to 
produce at elite standard beyond this year, and Freo are unlikely to reach a 
flag without inspiration from their champions.

Those two aside, the rest of the team is as good and as limited as it was last 
year. The ageing Luke McPharlin and the flaky Zac Dawson are not a convincing 
key defensive pairing, but the zealously contested team defence employed by 
every Docker ensured the side conceded the fewest points in the league last 
season. Michael Johnson will provide creativity and run from defence, with 
Clancee Pearce and Lee Spurr in support.

Nat Fyfe has emerged as the midfield’s great talent, winning the club 
best-and-fairest last year in a season when he averaged nearly 26 disposals and 
one goal a game. Michael Barlow and David Mundy were similarly prolific, while 
young Lachie Neale looked a great prospect. Nick Suban, Matt de Boer and 
Garrick Ibbotson will give staunch support, while Stephen Hill adds flair. Ryan 
Crowley is famed across the league as a shut-down specialist, and will again be 
valuable if he can reach his irritating best.

The ruck doesn’t look bad, either, as Zac Clarke showed his promise last 
season as a successor to Sandilands, while Jonathon Griffin will hope to return 
after a long-term knee injury. It’s Freo’s forward line that is less convincing.

If Pavlich is missing, Fremantle lack a focal point. Their attempted 
replacement, former Essendon forward Scott Gumbleton, has destroyed his 
hamstring with a tear so bad it will cost half the season. Chris Mayne is 
improving but needs composure. Michael Walters has silky skills but needs 
bigger forwards to give him space to work. Hayden Ballantyne is an important 
opportunist but was jaded during last year’s finals.

Another recruit in Colin Sylvia will be interesting, having looked on the 
verge of brilliance for so long with Melbourne, but lacking an environment 
conducive to bringing that out. He needs to show class through the midfield and 
up forward.

With so much of their grand final team intact, there’s no reason the Dockers 
can’t excel this year as well. There is no gimmick to their game plan that can 
be countered by opposition coaches. It’s just a matter of whether Freo’s 
personnel are willing to dedicate themselves as fanatically to that plan as 
they did last year.

Any slight drop-off in application and their pressure game will unravel. 
Channel the same intensity, throw in the odd moment of magic from their stars, 
and the Dockers might get their second twirl at Australian football’s big dance.
 