
Guardian writers’ predicted position: 7th (NB: this is not necessarily 
Russell’s prediction but the average of our writers’ tips)


Last season’s position: 10th

Just as the recalcitrant film star must hit the promotional circuit and heap 
platitude after platitude upon even the worst of their films, AFL coaches must 
engage in the yearly rite of providing inoffensive and optimistic pre-season 
appraisals of their side’s chances. In that regardNorth Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/north-melbourne> coach Brad Scott is on a 
winner, because his talent-laden side could sleepwalk its way to a better 
result than last year’s 10th position.

North lost five games by four points or fewer in 2013, a recurring hurdle that 
made life more than a little maddening for their supporters. Despite boasting a 
highly capable playing list they finished out of finals contention with plenty 
of regrets. This year, there can be no excuses.

Among the best of all news is a favourable draw. Though they’ll face some 
premiership contenders in the first six weeks, the Roos travel interstate only 
twice in the first nine weeks of the season and will get two fixtures against 
likely strugglers Western Bulldogs, Brisbane and Melbourne. To ice that cake 
they’ll face flag contenders Sydney, Fremantle, Hawthorn and Richmond only once 
and finish the season with four very winnable games. In theory.

Though it might have also been said in the lead-in to 2013, there are no 
glaring deficiencies in North Melbourne’s playing list. Behind the scenes the 
highly-rated quartet of Geoff Walsh, Gavin Brown, Leigh Tudor and Cameron Ling 
have stepped into coaching and administrative roles, providing ample tactical 
back-up for coach Scott and a variety of voices to shepherd his side.

Scott Thompson is a defensive bulwark around whom Brad Scott must build a 
stingy backline. How much assistance Thompson receives from the tireless but 
tread-worn Michael Firrito will matter less if Lachie Hansen and Nathan Grima 
are always on hand to lend him support. Run and carry out of defence will come 
from Aaron Mullett, whose raking left boot often calls to mind former Sydney 
stalwart Mark Bayes.

In the forward 50, North’s scoring potency was second only to premiers 
Hawthorn last year. Drew Petrie’s oft-battered body continues to answer the 
most onerous of calls and his pre-season form has again been solid. If fit, he 
and Lindsay Thomas are the sure things in a versatile group of forwards. 
Man-child Aaron Black is actually 23 and may now move far beyond cult hero 
status. His 22 games so far have reaped 37 goals but his size and agility have 
North supporters understandably optimistic.

Though he may not like to hear it 
<http://www.theage.com.au/afl/afl-news/north-melbourne-may-start-brent-harvey-on-the-bench-in-some-matches-this-season-20140223-33ale.html>
, this will probably be the season Brent Harvey becomes a pinch-hitting 
goalsneak who as often as not emerges from the sub’s vest. It will be viewed as 
a bonus if North can get Robbie Tarrant’s body right. Though his shoulder has 
been reconstructed more times than a pile of Jenga, it’s stress fractures of 
the foot that now plague him. Former Tigers livewire Robin Nahas is a handy 
acquisition for the Roos and may often find himself in a similar position to 
Harvey, being used in short bursts.

The expectations placed on North’s capable but often flaky midfield are a 
microcosm of the club itself. Too often last year they disappeared. Former 
Saint Nick Dal Santo will add polish of the same ilk as that consistently 
offered by Daniel Wells, but Dal Santo may also spend some time in defence if 
Brad Scott’s recent comments 
<http://www.theage.com.au/afl/afl-news/nick-dal-santo-could-play-in-defence-for-north-melbourne-20140203-31x1c.html>
 are anything to go by. The key “in” will be captain Andrew Swallow, who is 
expected to figure in the first month of the season after progressing ahead of 
expectations in his recovery from last year’s devastating achilles injury.

Physically strong and increasingly capable in dominating the centre 
clearances, the time has come for North’s younger brigade to stand up and be 
counted. Ryan Bastinac (79 games), Liam Anthony (54), Jack Ziebell (80), Ben 
Cunnington (74), Shaun Atley (61) and Levi Greenwood (52) are all now hardened 
to the demands ofAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> football but must 
collectively improve to drive North’s campaign from the engine room.

To them you can add Sam Gibson, the tenacious Leigh Adams and exciting 
father-son recruit Luke McDonald, who has impressed in pre-season fixtures and 
looks to be going places in a hurry. The unsung hero amid all of this is Roos 
ruckman Todd Goldstein, who now ranks among the best in the league.

Since their shock rise to a preliminary final in 2007, North Melbourne slid 
into mediocrity and even anonymity as a club. Even their best players remain 
resolutely unfashionable. The most noticeable corollary of the club’s 
meandering fate in that time has been their anaemic crowd figures for home 
games, a situation rather glossed over amid the AFL’s expansion into new 
frontiers.

The closest thing to a household name North have is 35-year-old Boomer Harvey 
and the breathless, fetishistic media coverage of Majak Daw says more about the 
shallow, monocultural and inward-looking nature of AFL media than it does about 
him or his club, who have mostly done their best to shelter Daw from such 
lowbrow examination. Just as with any of Daw’s team-mates, Brad Scott wants 
results to speak for themselves.

Until now anonymity has worked in North Melbourne’s favour because the bar has 
been set low, but if Scott and his side are truly on the right path then that 
won’t be the case for long. The loyal among North’s 30,000 members expect and 
deserve a little extra in 2014.
 