
Guardian writers’ predicted position: 17th (NB: this is not necessarily 
Russell’s prediction, but the average of our writers’ tips)


Last season’s position: 16th

Someone recently said that supporting St Kilda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/st-kilda> was a bit like being a fan of 
Harper Lee novels. But Lee’s contemporary Truman Capote might provide a better 
analogy for the club’s prospects in 2014 because every indication is that 
they’ll be murdered in cold blood.

It would be hard for Saints fans to find many positives from a chaotic 
off-season. The club went 157 days before installing former players association 
boss Matt Finnis as its chief executive to replace the departed Michael 
Nettlefold; it prematurely sacked Scott Watters and installed Alan Richardson 
as coach; it had one of its playersset fire to a dwarf entertainer during “Mad 
Monday” celebrations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/03/afl-st-kilda-dwarf-fire-mad-monday>
; it cut Ahmed Saad loose as the goalsneak was banned for two years for taking 
a banned substance; and finally traded away both a future captain in Ben McEvoy 
and a beloved veteran in Nick Dal Santo.

Richardson got the coaching job on account of his work assisting Ken Hinkley 
in turning around the fortunes of Port Adelaide, where they were able to 
harness a blend of youth and experience. St Kilda will be a stiffer test. Gone 
are mainstays Stephen Milne, Justin Koschitzke and Jason Blake. The mantra has 
been “short-term pain for long-term gain” but the season ahead will be rocky 
for an undermanned side trying to forge a new identity.

Boasting three first-round picks in the national draft, St Kilda welcomed 
midfield prospect Jack Billings, mature-bodied Luke Dunstan and Blake Acres. 
All will take time to find their feet so Richardson will be hoping for more 
immediate returns from defensive recruit Luke Delaney, ex-Lions ruckman Billy 
Longer and former Giants tall Josh Bruce.

As Rome crumbled and their new captain holidayed in the US, the sight of the 
latter pair being left to deflect questions about the shambolic state of the 
club seemed the definitive baptism of fire. If nothing else it showed that both 
have the capacity to cope with a rising flood, and such resourcefulness might 
be necessary on-field in 2014.

Captain Nick Riewoldt remains committed to the St Kilda cause and has even 
spoken of his wish for the Saints to return to the top while he’s still around, 
though his players would mainly want to focus on following his on-field 
example. Riewoldt has often lamented his 40-minute drive against traffic from 
South Melbourne to St Kilda’s Seaford training base, but this year Saints fans 
themselves might start to view the weekend voyage to Etihad Stadium just as 
wearily.

The Saints midfield has been built around the nuggety and bustling Jack Steven 
over the past two seasons and his loss for the first half of 2014 is a 
devastating blow that will deplete the on-ball stocks to quite depressing 
levels. Evergreen veteran Lenny Hayes will dig in and do his best, but all of 
Seb Ross, Tom Curren and Josh Saunders will need to step up considerably if the 
Saints are to avoid being smashed in the centre square.

Sean Dempster remains an unsung foot soldier and the increasingly useful 
Farren Ray can also expect plenty of game time but players like Clinton Jones 
will also be near-automatic selections. That does not bode well.

Ex-Hawk Shane Savage carries the unenviable weight of being the most 
publicised gain from the McEvoy trade but can’t be asked to provide anything 
other than steady service in the middle. David Armitage is an honest battler 
who’ll do a lot of the grunt work and Leigh Montagna will offer sorely needed 
kicking precision and the odd goal or two.

Up forward, Riewoldt has the combative Beau Maister as his most viable ally 
along with mature-age recruit Tom Lee, but Arryn Siposs needs to prove he’s 
more than a tantalising pipedream. Saints fans would be forgiven for wondering 
whether highly-fancied key position prospect Daniel Markworth actually exists, 
while none of Adam Schneider, Trent Dennis-Lane and Terry Milera have had much 
impact in the last 12 months owing to various issues of fitness and form. Rhys 
Stanley remains a myth wrapped in a spindly-framed enigma, so anything he 
produces will be viewed as a bonus.

In defence the Saints will struggle to keep the real monster forwards at bay 
because backline fixtures Dylan Roberton, Tom Simpkin, Sam Gilbert and James 
Gwilt aren’t physically equipped to take them down. Richardson will hope that 
Josh Bruce can step into that void. Run and carry will come from the unheralded 
but effective Jarryn Geary and Nathan Wright, but Sam Fisher is on the wrong 
side of 30 and may not even feature in the nine games required to make him a 
200-game player.

For fans of a side suffering St Kilda’s plight, small mercies will be the 
order of the day and there are bound to be some bright spots along the way. The 
return of the exciting Wright will be one, along with the continued development 
of utility Jack Newnes and running defender Jimmy Webster. American project 
player Jason Holmes boasts an imposing frame but is understandably raw, so the 
biggest surprise packet may be Spencer White, whose similarities to Lance 
Franklin don’t end at his guernsey number. Fans will be hoping he can reproduce
some of the form he showed last year for Sandringham 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ix5haICa0uk> at AFL level. 

Still, the short-term outlook for St Kilda is bleak. They’ll get game time 
into the kids and hope to avoid further personnel losses as painful as midfield 
star Steven’s, but severe punishment is likely to be frequent. Trips away 
against Port, Geelong, Adelaide and West Coast may be bloodbaths but thankfully 
the only flag contenders they face twice are Richmond.

New coach Richardson will hope to start the season with a win over Melbourne, 
but a defeat may set the tone for a year of unyielding hardship.
 