
Guardian writers’ predicted position: 12th (NB: this is not necessarily 
Russell’s prediction, but the average of our writers’ tips)


Last season’s position: 15th

For Bulldogs supporters, the real pain is in not knowing. Any of them under 
the age of 65 don’t know the feeling of the ultimate glory and probably none of 
them know what they should truly expect of their side in 2014. Their side is 
building slowly, no doubt, but even the most staunchly loyal fan would admit 
they’re still a little off the pace.

Last season the Dogs finished 15th, an accurate reflection of their dismal 
early-season slump but perhaps a little unkind to their thrilling run home, 
during which they were one of the more exciting sides of the competition, 
stoking the fires of expectation for 2014. In the third season of Brendan 
McCartney’s coaching reign, they’re finally getting there.

On the topic of rebirth, no personal renaissance has prompted as many smiles 
of admiration as Adam Cooney’s; back from the brink when knee injuries looked 
like curtailing a Brownlow medal-winning career. Otherwise the name of the game 
is depth.

Ryan Griffen is the one genuine superstar for now and both Mitch Wallis and 
Tom Liberatore are developing, the latter well ahead of schedule. When might we 
entertain the possibility of a father-son Brownlow medal win for Liberatore? 
Matthew Boyd is likely to be reinvented as a close-checking tagger. He and his 
colleagues undoubtedly benefit from Will Minson’s superior tap work and 
relentless physicality.

Outside that group, the pacey Luke Dalhaus is consistently productive, Jack 
McCrae is building steam and Kobe Stevens has impressed in pre-season hit-outs. 
McCartney may also find it hard to resist the temptation of giving No 4 draft 
pick Marcus Bontempelli some game time in his debut season.

The Dogs would be rapt with further improvement from lighting fast 
midfielder-forward Jason Tutt and father-son prospect Lachie Hunter, who both 
impressed in the Dogs’ impressive finish to 2013. Liam Picken will remain a 
tenacious and admirable tagger, blanketing opponents and burrowing even further 
into the hearts of Bulldogs supporters.

At either end of the ground is where the problems emerge. Glaringly so in the 
case of the Bulldogs’ leaky defence, which was the third worst in the league 
last year for points conceded, a consequence of both key-position deficiency 
and an early-season inability to prevent forward entries.

Dale Morris may again prove the most sturdy ballast deep in the defensive arc 
but he will need more support even than that offered by popular veteran Robert 
Murphy. The most likely candidates are the imposing but austere Jordan 
Roughead, promising tall Michael Talia and the injury-cursed Tom Williams. At 
the feet of that tall timber, rebound will come from Murphy, Easton Wood and 
modest mature-age success story Brett Goodes.

Up forward, scoring goals has been equally problematic for the Dogs, so the 
addition of ex-Bomber Stewart Crameri is handy. Crameri can’t be expected to 
provide the 60 goals or more the Dogs would require of him in order to be a 
legitimate finals threat, so Liam Jones, Jarrod Grant and Tom Campbell will 
need to step into the breach.

That’s where things get a little scary for Dogs fans, especially in the case 
of the first two. Grant revived his career with a late-season surge in 2013 but 
with the ink yet to dry on his two-year contract extension he’s been back on 
the injury list. The difference between his best and worse also remains a 
concern.

Owing to those question marks, we’re again likely to see Daniel Giansiracusa 
used as an impact player off the subs bench, a role he perfected last year with 
36 goals. This season he’ll combine that role with coaching duties, an 
innovative move by McCartney that would appear to benefit all parties. Mature 
of body and mind, Tory Dickson will provide a marking and goal-scoring option 
and optimism is high that Jake Stringer could be a talismanic figure in the 
Dogs’ forward 50.

Still, there are so many “what ifs” with this Bulldogs squad. They thrilled us 
all in the latter stages of 2013 with their boundless enthusiasm and attacking 
vigour, but doubt hovers over so many prospects. Shaun Higgins and Williams are 
perpetually hobbled, Ayce Cordy has come along at a glacial rate, Lin Jong 
teased and then disappeared, Christian Howard was a high draft pick who has 
done little to excite and Jones is the type of key forward who has perfectly 
sane supporters threatening to cut up their membership cards.

More than likely the Bulldogs will continue to delight and disappoint in equal 
measure and thus probably miss out on September action. They’ll sit comfortably 
above the cellar-dwellers and spring a surprise or two on the top sides, but 
ultimately they lack the key-position firepower to consistently compete with 
the best.

For a fan base likely to miss out on the business end of proceedings, Dogs 
fans can at least take solace that the curve is trending upwards and it’s going 
to be a hell of a ride along the way.
 