
Guardian writers’ predicted position: 6th (NB: this is not necessarily Scott’s 
prediction, but the average of our writers’ tips)


Last season’s position: 7th

Watching Port Adelaide’s resurgence in 2013 was akin to being hit by a bus: 
you’ve no idea where it came from, the impact was thunderous and you’re left 
wondering what on earth just happened.

With an honourable mention to Richmond, the Power’s rise to the top eight was 
the definitive club story of last year.

It was such a surprise because, frankly, Port had to pick themselves up from a 
mire so deep it smelled of something other than just mud. The Power followed up 
season 2011’s 16th worst ever in the AFL with one almost as bad in 2012. Off 
the field, the club’s finances were so bad that the AFL had to bail it out, 
home crowds at AAMI Stadium were dwindling, and, to compound Port’s misery, 
John McCarthy tragically died on a post-season trip to Las Vegas.

With the club on its knees both on and off the field, it’s no exaggeration to 
sayPort Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/port-adelaide> had become 
the laughing stock of the league. Ollie Wines, one of the most promising 
youngsters in the competition, recently recounted his feelings after being 
drafted by Port in 2012: “In the first few hours, I was definitely thinking I’d 
wait for my two years to be up and I’d then head home to Victoria.” Port had 
already lost several key players, and even the new ones didn’t want to be there.

But they started 2013 with fresh hope, not least because of changes to the top 
brass. Television personality and die-hard Power fan David Koch became 
chairman, and former Gold Coast and Geelong assistant Ken Hinkley was anointed 
head coach after the mercy sacking of the out-of-depth Matthew Primus.

Hinkley was the first man in over 60 years to get the top job without a prior 
association with the proud club, bringing with him new support staff and a 
fairly significant overhaul to the playing list.

It worked a treat. Players visibly rediscovered their hunger – witness the 
rousing comeback win in round three over the Crows – and were playing an 
accountable, disciplined brand of footy that the Power had seemingly forgotten. 
Making the finals from 14th place in 2012 was one thing, beating Collingwood at 
the MCG before narrowly going down to Geelong was quite another. Port Adelaide 
were reborn.

If 2013 was about regaining respect, not to mention sorely needed self-belief, 
2014 is about proving it was no fluke. In this game, one swallow a winter doth 
not make.

Port could do worse than look to cross-city rivals Adelaide for lessons 
learned. The parallels are obvious. A year prior, the Crows were in the same 
position as the Power find themselves today – coming off a surprise, 
breakthrough season and with a coach in his sophomore year at the club. In 
Adelaide’s defence there were extraneous factors at work, but largely the 
players failed to deliver on increased expectation, and possibly started to 
believe their own press. The bounce factor is something Port will have to be 
mindful of; they must realise they are no longer the hunters, rather the hunted.

Call it a hunch, but there is something about this revitalised Port Adelaide 
that makes one suspect they’ll cash in on the gains made in 2013.

The Power’s new style, should players stay true to it, is tailor made to hold 
up to the added pressure they’ll face in 2014. With defence and force on the 
ball-carrier the cornerstones, Port were top-three for tackles last year and, 
crucially, top-five for disposals inside their attacking 50.

Best of all, they have the players to make it work. In captain Travis Boak and 
Chad Wingard, Port have All-Australians and two of the finest midfielders in 
the game, while it seems just a matter of time before Wines, still in his 
teens, is mentioned in the same capacity. Brad Ebert is a key pillar for Port 
and will look to continue his upward spiral since joining from West Coast in 
2012.

While the Power didn’t want for inside muscle in 2013, they were at times 
found wanting for outside speed and carry. The club seems to have addressed 
that with the trade period acquisitions of Matthew White (Richmond) and Jared 
Polac (Brisbane). Port, also, are being repaid for their patience with Matthew 
Lobbe, a ruckman whose progression may see him become one of the AFL’s leading 
talls in 2014.

While, the Power’s defensive set-up looks very good, they’ll want more of a 
return from their forwards to capitalise on the hard work done up the ground. 
Justin Westhoff finally found consistency in 2014 and will hope to carry the 
goalkicking load with the admirable Jay Schulz, as will Robbie Gray and 
ex-Bomber Angus Monfries, whose first season for Port in 2013 was a microcosm 
of the club itself: hungry, methodical, desperate.

Whichever way you cut it, 2014 shapes up as a fascinating, momentous year for 
Port Adelaide.

Precedence is warning the Power could slip back to the pack if they take their 
foot off the pedal; conversely, keep going in the same direction and they’ll 
banish deeper into the memory’s recesses the pain of prior years. With Hinkley 
at the wheel, it’s likely the bus will stay on course. Anything less than the 
top-eight will be a wreck.
 