
Guardian writers’ predicted position: 10th (nb: this is not necessarily 
Russell’s prediction but the average of our writers’ tips)


Last season: 6th

It hardly needs saying these days but the name of the game is defence. Even in 
attack, the bestAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> sides are 
defending. Unfortunately, that is where the cracks might emerge in the 
Collingwood’s 2014 blueprint.

Coach Nathan Buckley says they’re contending for a premiership, though with 
68,548 rabid members (and counting) breathing down his neck he would say that, 
wouldn’t he? Maybe the club actually believes it but most outsiders don’t. 
Football is a results business and though they could count on the Magpie Army 
no matter what, there is a sense of downward trajectory about the Pies at the 
moment.

With Heath Shaw, Dale Thomas, Alan Didak and Darren Jolly all either traded or 
delisted, the side continues to take shape in Buckley’s image, a departure from 
what he probably saw as the more troublesome remnants of the Malthouse era. 
Plenty of players remain from the latter’s 2010 Premiership side but this is 
now very much Buckley’s operation.

What you can see above the surface is a particularly strong midfield led by 
new skipper Scott Pendlebury, who can rely on bona fide stars Dane Swan, Luke 
Ball, Steele Sidebottom and impressive GWS recruit Taylor Adams for support. 
You can take it as a given that they will consistently match it with the best 
midfields in the competition but elsewhere things start to look troublesome.

Put plainly, Collingwood <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/collingwood> will 
struggle to beat the best sides in the competition. Buckley is yet to defeat 
Hawthorn in five attempts at the helm and it might be the same story this year 
and the likes of Fremantle, Sydney and Richmond. That either places them in the 
bottom half of the eight or more likely, battling to even make the finals.

The problems are at either end of the ground and the patchwork quality of 
Collingwood’s defence doesn’t inspire a great deal of confidence. Unless Ben 
Reid can play at both ends simultaneously, you have to question which Pies will 
take on the monster forwards of the competition. Nathan Brown and Lachlan Keefe 
will have first dibs but might find the going tough. The demotion of Nick 
Maxwell from the captaincy might also signal the end of his days as an 
automatic selection and therefore the Pies will be sweating on the ability of 
Reid, Alan Toovey and Ben Sinclair to stay on the park.

Reid will start the season in attack but how long that policy lasts will 
probably tell a story of its own. The loss of Shaw will be felt less if his 
understudy’s can stand up, but with Heritier Lumumba moving into the midfield, 
Pies fans will soon notice their lack of consistent rebound from defence. Early 
signs suggest they’ll mitigate that problem by handballing at every opportunity 
<http://www.theage.com.au/afl/afl-news/stats-show-collingwoods-malthousetobuckley-transition-complete-20140227-33mij.html>
.

Things are a little rosier up forward than some pundits will have you believe. 
Early signs are that the hulking pairing of Travis Cloke and discarded Swan 
Jesse White could be fruitful. Still, so much will hinge on the wayward boot of 
Cloke. White will fare better than last year’s model Quinten Lynch, who managed 
only 9 goals from 18 games in 2013. In truth Lynch was called upon as a Mr 
Fix-It to relieve Brodie Grundy in the ruck, where White will mainly roam the 
forward 50. White’s 5-goal pre-season effort against Geelong highlighted his 
untapped potential.

Goals are also likely to come from the next tier down, with Collingwood 
boasting a fleet of dynamic, versatile youngsters such as Jamie Elliott, Sam 
Dwyer and Alex Fasolo. The return of Fasolo and Dayne Beams from long-term 
injuries is a fillip for their side, which will benefit from their canny goal 
sense. Agiain the Pies will require their midfielders to hit the scoreboard 
regularly. Last year Pendlebury (18 goals), Swan (21) and Sidebottom (19) were 
all able to do so.

Within that midfield brigade, much responsibility will rest on the shoulders 
of young ruckman Brodie Grundy, who was genuinely excellent last season but can 
no longer call upon Darren Jolly for back-up, with grizzled veteran Quinten 
Lynch and Jarrod Witts his most viable cover.

Being turfed out of the 2013 finals by a youthful Port Adelaide side stung the 
Pies faithful. Only a year earlier they had reached a preliminary final and 
it’s hard to conclude that the downward trajectory will stop this year. Buckley 
admitted he didn’t see the Port Adelaide loss coming and added, “anyone who 
finishes the season without doing a lap of this ground is disappointed in some 
shape or form and we’ve clearly got a lot of work to do still”. An improvement 
on that 8th place finish will be contingent on their ability to limit 
scoreboard damage. It’s a big ‘if’.

Collingwood’s pre-season form, though never a fail-safe indicator of what’s to 
come, has been far from spectacular. A narrow loss to Geelong was followed by a 
belting at the hands of Richmond. Annihilated in the first half of their clash 
with Gold Coast, the Pies eventually prevailed by 14 points thanks to 6 goals 
from Cloke. After that near-miss, Buckley asked his players 
<http://www.theage.com.au/afl/afl-news/magpie-coach-nathan-buckley-disappointed-despite-victory-over-gold-coast-20140302-33u2g.html>
, “’'How do you want to go about it? What do you want to be seen as? What’s 
your brand of footy?’' It’s not the talk of a contender.
 