
Guardian writers’ predicted position: 3rd (NB: this is not necessarily Scott’s 
prediction but the average of our writers’ tips)


Last season: 1st

There’s an elephant in the clubroom at Waverley Park. Its name is Lance 
Franklin <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lance-franklin>, and, rightly or 
not, Hawthorn’s ability to cope without the superstar forward this year will be 
seen as pivotal in their bid for back-to-back premierships. It’s incongruous, 
really, that the fate of any team – least of all the classy, dominant Hawks – 
might be reduced to one man.


But that’s the aura of Franklin. He takes to Sydney with him a formidable 
reputation as the game’s most damaging and electric key forward, and leaves 
behind a massive hole in the Hawks forward line.

But a one-man team Hawthorn <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hawthorn> 
ain’t, and, regardless, Franklin was less of a focal point in 2013. Perhaps 
with a nod to the future, coach Alastair Clarkson tinkered with his forward 
set-up, most notably the use of Jarryd Roughead as the team’s No1 key forward.

Relieved of his ruck duties, Roughead repaid his coach with interest, booting 
72 goals to win the Coleman Medal, gaining All-Australian selection and 
finishing second in the best-and-fairest award. Roughead was occasionally given 
ruck-rover duties and demonstrated his versatility with 61 clearances for the 
season. In his natural habitat, however, Roughead was every bit the complete 
full-forward: strong overhead, mobile on the ground and (mostly) accurate in 
front of goal.

With Franklin gone, Roughead will always get the opposition’s best defender in 
2014, sometimes even a couple, and how he handles the increased attention will 
be fascinating.

Hawthorn won’t be relying exclusively on Roughead for goals, however. The 
development of Jack Gunston has been a pleasure to watch and the Hawks will be 
looking for the former Crow to step up again this year. The mercurial Gunston’s 
2013 finals campaign was stunning, and if he picks up where he left off he’s in 
for an exciting year. In Luke Bruest Hawthorn have one of the most damaging and 
prolific small forwards in the game, while Cyril Rioli will hope to return to 
his best after a 2013 restricted by injury to 15 games and just 19 goals.

How Hawthorn’s forward set-up copes with the departure of Franklin is crucial, 
of course, but it’s nonsense to suggest this is the only noteworthy factor when 
considering Hawthorn’s bid for another premiership. Indeed, the majority view 
at the recentAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> captains day was that 
Hawthorn would be a better team this year without the absurdly talented 
monolith. And on the limited evidence of last year, this is a possibility that 
should be entertained.

Following Franklin out of the exit after 2013 was veteran defender Brent 
Guerra, but Hawthorn look capable of countering his departure. The return of 
rebounding backman Matthew Suckling will be a great boon across half-back, 
while another player whose 2013 was cruelled by a knee injury, the 
much-maligned Ryan Schoenmakers, will also bolster the defence when he returns. 
Indeed, with Brian Lake to be even more at home this year marshalling the 
Hawthorn backline, defence is the least of Hawthorn’s worries.

Ben McEvoy, the ruckman traded from St Kilda to cover the retirement of Max 
Bailey, looks a good acquisition, and senior players have already spoken of the 
leadership qualities he’s displayed in his short time at the club.

Then there is the ever-important midfield that McEvoy and David Hale will 
support. Hawthorn’s engine room has arguably been without peer for a couple of 
years now, with in-and-under grunt complementing the class of their outside 
colleagues. The stats back this up: in 2013, Hawthorn were top-two for 
possessions (both contested and uncontested), No2 for disposal efficiency, No1 
for fewest disposals per goal … and No1 for touches inside the forward 50. Phew.


Importantly, no club in the competition effected more one-percenters than 
Hawthorn. A lethal mix of grit and panache; no wonder they won the flag. But 
time waits for no man, and in Sam Mitchell, Luke Hodge, Shaun Burgoyne and Brad 
Sewell, Hawthorn have an elite midfield that is nevertheless ageing. Hawthorn 
won’t get full seasons out of all of them, so how they bring on their 
developing mids will make for compelling viewing. Look also for Jordan Lewis to 
spend more time on the ball.

One factor you cannot measure is hunger, or even complacency. You won’t hear 
either word uttered in negative terms at Hawthorn this year. But it’s here that 
Clarkson possibly faces his toughest challenge. No one in brown and gold will 
forget the pain of the 2009 season, when the Hawks’ premiership defence, if you 
could call it that, amounted to a failure to make the eight. Only one Hawthorn 
team has gone back-to-back, the superstars of 1988-89, and it hasn’t happened 
at all since Brisbane won three in a row more than a decade ago.

Heck, even the great Geelong team of recent years couldn’t do it. This 
Hawthorn unit has pretensions to being mentioned in the same breath as that 
Cats team started by Mark Thompson.

But they’re not there yet. Where Geelong’s prolonged success – three flags and 
only one missed grand final in five years from 2007-11 – can be spoken of in 
dynastic terms, this Hawthorn vintage remains just very good, maybe even great. 
But there is only one way to elevate themselves: more premiership success.

The Hawks, with sincere apologies to Sydney, are already the pre-eminent AFL 
club in the post-Geelong era and there is no doubt they are the team to beat in 
2014. But should they go on to become repeat winners of the competition they’ll 
have a dynasty of their own to talk about. And the word Buddy can again simply 
mean friend, rather than the elephant doubters said Hawthorn couldn’t live 
without.
 