
Guardian writers’ predicted position: 1st (NB: this is not necessarily Geoff’s 
prediction, but the average of our writers’ tips)


Last season’s position: 4th

This is the year when we find out whether the Sydney Swans have jumped the 
shark. Over the past decade they have earned the respect of the league for 
being a tough, accountable and honest team, winning two flags by turning good 
players into a great unit. Then they went and threw buckets of cash at two of 
the biggest star forwards in the league, signing Kurt Tippett andLance Franklin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lance-franklin> in the space of 12 months.

It’s out of character, and grating for the 16 clubs who don’t enjoy 10% extra 
salary cap space thanks to a Sydney-specific “cost of living allowance”. At 
Hawthorn, Franklin played like Kevin Pietersen – a brilliant individual who 
could win games on his own, but whose ego could overtake him to the detriment 
of the team.

Tippett is lower wattage but also has a pretty healthy on-field self-regard. 
That’s not how Sydney play. Either these two will provide the forward firepower 
to make Sydney unstoppable, or they’ll undermine the team ethic that has made 
Sydney so good.

Whatever happens, the quality of Sydney’s playing list means they will be a 
top team to watch this year. Surely Franklin was drafted as a successor to Adam 
Goodes – a tall, mobile and highly athletic player with the skills to play 
midfield, the size to play ruck and the aerial skills and finishing to threaten 
forward.

While the two are physically similar, Goodes is humble, self-effacing, 
thoughtful, intelligent and engaged with the world outside football. At 34 he 
doesn’t have much time left in the game, but there’s no better role model, and 
Franklin would do well to learn from Goodes while he can.

Even with veteran Jude Bolton retired, the Swans have a powerful midfield. 
Kieren Jack, Josh Kennedy and Daniel Hannebery all averaged over 25 disposals a 
game last year, and booted 55 goals between them. Jack led the league in 
inside-50s, Kennedy averaged the most contested possessions per game, and 
Hannebery is the toughest player in the league – time and again he’s staggered 
up after the heaviest hits but found a way to play on.

Lewis Jetta adds pace outside the contest, while young Luke Parker had a huge 
2013, and increasingly looks like the Swans got him for a song with draft pick 
No 40.

There is similar hard-contest intensity at either end of Sydney’s game-day 
field. Up forward, the likes of Craig Bird and Ben McGlynn will be fierce in 
locking the ball in or using it to score when the big forwards spill it. At 
half back they’ll have Nick Malceski and Jarrad McVeigh, the Baldy Beardy 
Brothers having proved their ability to repel attacks and rebound. Rhyce Shaw 
can provide similar run if he can recapture his best form after injury 
troubles, while his brother Heath has signed on for the same role across town 
at the Giants.

The Swans’ key positions are now well taken care of. Sam Reid will probably 
start the season forward, with Goodes and Tippett both likely to be delayed by 
minor injuries, then will head back to defence once they return. Heath Grundy 
has the distinction of becoming a rhyming slang term, so good was his 2013 
season in which he played every match.

Dane Rampe also has a great name and a great 2013 season behind him, having 
been bumped up from the rookie list last year. Alex Johnson and Jeremy Laidler 
will be hoping their fortunes have changed, Johnson returning from a knee 
reconstruction, and Laidler on to his third club, having been cold-shouldered 
by Mick Malthouse at Carlton after leaving Geelong as a highly rated prospect.

The ruck is Sydney’s only real area of concern, after the Franklin deal forced 
them to trade Shane Mumford. Geelong had been bitterly disappointed to lose 
Mumford to Sydney in 2010, where their project player blossomed into one of the 
best mobile ruckmen in the league. His departure to Greater Western Sydney will 
leave the Swans reliant on Canadian rugby import Mike Pyke, who has developed 
into a good player but now faces much more pressure.

Whatever attention Sydney gets this season will be focused on Franklin, whose 
every bad game or stupid move will be joyfully costed against a contract worth 
more than $3,000 a day. It’s unfortunate, with such a quality contested-ball 
team across the ground, and an Australian of the Year leading the line, but the 
club can hardly complain.

Whatever comes of their experiment, expect to see the Swans in serious 
contention once again this year. While Franklin may ice a few cakes for them, 
it’ll be their established core doing the hard prep in the kitchen.
 