
An hour from Las Vegas, we turn off the highway and start speeding along an 
empty desert road. The central yellow line shimmers in the 40C July heat; the 
tarmac is cracked, and soon there's not a trace of human life. For as far as 
the eye can see there's nothing but rocks and cacti stretching away to the dry, 
brown mountains in the far distance. An occasional sign warns of rattlesnakes. 
We start to lose the radio signal. Then suddenly a car is coming the other way, 
and it's towing a speedboat.

Of all the destinations for a boating holiday, the Arizona desert has to be 
the weirdest. But when we finally crest a small rise in the desert floor and 
catch a glimpse of Lake Mead, it is breathtaking - a vast expanse of sparkling 
blue water in the middle of the desolation, like a thousand mirages melted 
together and all the more bizarre because it's actually real. Created when the 
Hoover Dam blocked the Colorado River in 1935, Mead is 110 miles long, 
America's biggest reservoir. It stores 9 trillion gallons of water that has 
flowed down from the snowy Rockies, and will go on to provide drinking water 
for LA, Las Vegas, Phoenix and much of the Southwest. But for now it's just 
sitting there like a millpond waiting for me to leap in, the very second I get 
out of this boiling car.

The road ends at Temple Bar Marina, a sleepy hamlet with a fuel pump for boats 
on the lake and a few trailers baking in the sun, mostly home to retired 
fishing enthusiasts who've come to escape the cities and mess around afloat. We 
pull up at the water's edge and catch the first glimpse of the boat my 
girlfriend and I are going to spend the next couple of nights on. Or should 
that be ship?

The last time I went on a boating holiday was a hellish week with Scouts on 
the Norfolk Broads. Four teenage boys slept under a tarpaulin strung over the 
boom of our 16ft sailing dinghy. Suppers were Vesta curries cooked on the bank, 
usually under an umbrella. I can't recall washing. But one look at our 'Deluxe 
XT' and it's clear boating US-style is going to be very different indeed.

For a start there's a bed. Well, four bedrooms actually, plus two bathrooms. 
There's a huge living room, a fully equipped kitchen, a stereo, a DVD, a 
television getting several hundred channels, a fridge, a microwave, sofas, 
dining room table, air conditioning, and patios front and rear. Upstairs is a 
vast sun terrace, complete with loungers, wet bar, another fridge, ice-cube 
maker, sound system, a phone to call downstairs for more nibbles, and a 
waterslide.

It's 60ft long for heaven sake, 25 tonnes and worth at least $300,000. Then 
there's the 150hp speedboat that tows along behind. Unbelievably, sign a few - 
well, quite a lot - of forms and disclaimers, leave a few credit card slips, 
and they let pretty much anyone have one of these things.

'So have you done much sailing before?' asks Bump (real name) who is showing 
us round the boat and drawing my attention to the steering wheel, levers and 
scores of knobs and switches on the control panel. I explain my last command 
had two ropes and a rudder, and even then we ended up aground and stuck in the 
reeds as the rain lashed down on Hickling Broad. Bump looks bemused, but 
suggests he should drive.

Actually, he assures me, this is quite common. Driving the boats isn't hard, 
but beaching them where you're going to stay the night can be tricky. People on 
short breaks tend to let someone from the marina come and beach them in an 
isolated spot, then use the speedboat to scoot about the lake. Bump drives us 
half an hour from the marina and starts exploring down a little inlet, until we 
find a nice shallow sandy beach, which we proceed to ram. Then I'm dispatched 
ashore to drive two 6ft nails into the ground for the mooring ropes, the sledge 
hammer slipping in my hands in the boiling heat. Finally there's a quick 
tutorial on the speedboat - 'she's sure got some poke that one' - and then 
we're alone. Free to strip off and dive in.

The water is perfect - clean, clear and just cool enough to be refreshing 
after the baking Arizona sun.

There's absolutely nothing to do of course. The boats, with the waterslides, 
music systems, wet bars and barbecues, are designed for big family parties who 
want to splash about all day, but with two of us on board the whole thing takes 
on a more contemplative pace. The first night, we take the speedboat and zoom 
out to the middle of the lake to watch the sunset. It's glassy smooth, and the 
rough rocky peaks all around, cracked and broken by a million dried-up 
watercourses, are reflected perfectly. In the centre, though we're at least a 
mile from shore, it's so calm that we can turn off the engine and just drift. I 
jump out for the day's final dip, then we open a bottle of wine and watch as 
everything bathes in a warm, cine-film light, and the jagged peaks turn gold, 
then red, then purple.

And though there's nothing to do, we seem to be really quite busy. We explore 
the lake by speedboat - nosing up creeks to spot the big horn sheep, visiting 
another torpid marina on the northerly, Nevada side to buy an ice cream, and 
stopping for swims at countless deserted, nameless beaches along the way. 
Occasionally we see another boat, but the lake has 550 miles of shoreline, so 
you never need share a swimming spot.

In places it narrows into gorges just 300ft wide. It's cooler here, and 
faintly eerie. Our voices echo off the sheer rock walls which draw our gaze 
upwards.

But perhaps the strangest sight is the 'bathtub ring', a sign that all is not 
well on Mead. After sustained years of drought and growing demand, the water is 
dropping alarmingly - it is now 85ft below its full level - exposing a white 
rock band all around the shore that was formerly underwater. Earlier this month 
the floating marina at Overton, on a far northern arm of the lake, had to be 
moved before it was left high and dry. Environmentalists' concerned voices are 
now even being heard above the musicals and ringing slots of America's fastest 
growing city. Vegas depends entirely on Mead for its water supply.

For now though, as we potter back from our explorations, utterly alone under 
the endless desert sky, it could scarcely be more blissful.

Essentials

Four nights in a two-bedroom houseboat from Temple Bar marina costs from £510 
withForever Resorts <http://www.foreverresorts.com> (00 1 800 255 5561) which 
has luxury boats for hire around the US.

British Airways <http://www.ba.com> flies direct to Phoenix from £359. A 
week's car rental withDollar <http://www.dollar.co.uk> (0808 234 7524) costs 
from £115.

For more information, call the Arizona Office of Tourism brochure line on 020 
8741 7256 or visitwww.arizonaguide.com <http://www.arizonaguide.com>.
 