
Given the seeding pots, the potential for an atrociously difficult group at 
next month’s Africa Cup of Nations was always there. The draw delivered, 
spectacularly and brutally. Algeria, the top-ranked team in Africa,the only one 
of the Cup of Nations qualifiers to reach the last 16 of the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/30/germany-algeria-world-cup-last-16-match-report>
, were the danger lurking in Pot 2 and Ghana the unlucky seeds. But worse than 
that, Ghana had already been grouped with Senegal – by some distance the best 
team in Pot 4 – and, from Pot 3, the side that eliminated the champions Nigeria 
in qualifying, South Africa, resurgent under Shakes Mashaba.

If one of the aims of this tournament was to direct the attention to Mongomo, 
the home town of the Equatoguinean president, Obiang Nguema, the draw could 
hardly have worked out better. There have been clear efforts over the past few 
years to raise the profile of the town onEquatorial Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/nov/20/africa-cup-of-nations-nigeria-equatorial-guinea>
’s eastern border with Gabon. In 2009, for instance, a huge basilica, 200m 
long, was built, while there is a modern five-star hotel that, until now, had 
been in search of a purpose. It will presumably host all four of the teams in 
Group C.

For Avram Grant, confirmed as Ghana’s coach on Wednesday, this is a major 
test. He is already without Kwadwoh Asamoah because of injury and, given 
Ghana’s recent habit of sleep-walking through Cups of Nations, there is a major 
danger they will fail to reach the last 16.

Algeria lost Vahid Halilhodzic after the World Cup, but they have maintained 
their momentum under Christian Gourcuff. The winger Yacine Brahimi, of Porto, 
was named theAfrican Player of the Year 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/0/football/29851261> this week and they won five 
out of five in qualifying before going down to Mali in their final game. In 
terms of Premier League interest, Tottenham’s Nabil Bentaleb is almost certain 
to be in the squad, while Newcastle’s Mehdi Abeid could also be called up. Had 
the tournament been in Morocco as was originally intended, Algeria would almost 
certainly have been favourites; as it is, the only doubts arise from the fact 
that Egypt are the only north-African side ever to have won the tournament 
outside of north Africa.

For South Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southafrica>, too, this 
is a major test. Under Mashaba they had at last started to look as though they 
could return to somewhere near the top of the African game and they fully 
deserved to top their qualifying group. The murder of the goalkeeper Senzo 
Meyiwa, though, has overshadowed all else.

Senegal, meanwhile, have as fine a crop of forwards as anybody: their issue is 
how to fit as many as possible into the squad while retaining some kind of 
balance. As well as Moussa Sow and Dame N’Doye, there is the Premier League 
quartet of Papiss Cissé, Mame Biram Diouf, Sadio Mané and Diafra Sakho. West 
Ham will have particular reason to hopeSenegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/senegal> are knocked out early, with 
Cheikhou Koyaté also in the squad, along with Hull’s former West Ham midfielder 
Mohamed Diamé.

In an extremely lop-sided tournament, qualification from Group C will mean a 
quarter-final against a side form Group D, the second strongest group.Ivory 
Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ivorycoast> are past their best but 
are still good enough to win the tournament. With Didier Drogba retired – 
although Hervé Renard has made clear he would welcome him back, Yaya Touré 
becomes the undisputed central figure. His brother, Kolo, is the only other 
Premier League player guaranteed to be in the squad, although Cheik Tioté may 
be called up.

Mali, still led by Seydou Keita, will be doughty as ever; Cameroon, seemingly 
relieved to be rid of the turbulent presence of Samuel Eto’o, breezed through 
qualifying after an awful World Cup, while Guinea are the romantic hope, having 
qualified despite having to play their home games in Casablanca because of the 
Ebola crisis.

The other two groups are far simpler. The tournament will begin in Bata on 17 
January with the meeting ofEquatorial Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/equitorial-guinea> and Congo; the latter 
under the management of Claude Le Roy, at his eighth Cup of Nations with his 
fifth different team. With Gabon heavily reliant on Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, 
that leaves Burkina Faso, finalists two years ago, as the favourite to top 
Group A. Jonathan Pitroipa has been in fine form recently, but their great 
strength is the defensive resolve instilled by the controversial Belgian coach 
Paul Put.

Zambia, riding high in the rankings thanks to their success in Libreville 
three years ago, are the seeds in Group B, but Emmanuel Mayuka could face an 
early return to Southampton from a group that is intriguing if not of top 
quality. Crystal Palace’s Yannick Bolasie, of the Democratic Republic of Congo, 
is the other main Premier League interest. Congo qualified as the best 
third-placed side and, while the draw could have been much tougher, they are 
likely to be eliminated. Tunisia are solid and effective, while Cape Verde, 
having come so close to World Cup qualification, could reach the quarter-finals 
for the second tournament running.

In the first round, though, most of the focus – particularly that of Premier 
League fans wanting their players home early – will be on Mongomo and Group C.
 