
Gideon Levy doesn't want to meet in a coffee bar in Tel Aviv. He is fed up 
with being hassled in public and spat at, with people not willing to share the 
table next to him in restaurants. And now he is fed up with the constant 
presence of his bodyguards, not least because they too have started giving him 
a hard time about his political views. So he doesn't go out much any more and 
we sit in the calm of his living room, a few hundred yards from the Yitzhak 
Rabin Centre. Rabin's assassination by a rightwing Orthodox Jew in 1995 is 
itself a sobering reminder of the personal cost of peacemaking inIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>.

In his column in Haaretz, Levy has long since banged the drum for greater 
Israeli empathy towards the suffering of the Palestinians. He is a well-known 
commentator on the left, and one of the few prepared to stick his head above 
the parapet. Consequently, he is no stranger to opposition from the right. But 
this time it is different. Yariv Levin, coalition chairman of the Likud-Beytenu 
faction in the Knesset, recently called for him to be put on trial for treason 
– a crime which, during wartime, is punishable by death.

"It is time we stop regarding despicable phenomena like this with tolerance," 
Levin said of Levy. Soon after that interview, Eldad Yaniv, a former political 
adviser to ex-prime minister Ehud Barack, wrote on his Facebook page: "The late 
Gideon Levy. Get used to it."

Levy's unpardonable crime is vocal opposition to the war and to the bombing of 
Gaza. According to recent polls, support for the military operation inGaza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gaza> among the Jewish Israeli public stands 
somewhere between 87% (Channel 10 News) and 95% (Israel Democracy Institute). 
Even those who are secretly against the war are cautious about voicing their 
opinion openly.
 Gideon Levy. Photograph: Murdo Macleod 
Thus public opinion went ballistic when Levy attacked those who were bombing 
Gaza by inverting the well-known Hebrew phrase "Hatovim La tayyis" – which 
means: the best ones go to the air force – by writing "Haraim La tayyis": the 
worst ones go to the air force. Even in a time of peace this would be seen as a 
provocative statement, a heresy against what Levy sees as Israel's real 
religion: military security. But in its current mood, this is not the sort of 
thing that you can easily say out loud.

Even Peace Now, the backbone of the Israeli peace movement, has been 
remarkably guarded, carefully avoiding official participation in public 
demonstrations. Peace Now was founded in 1978 by former members of the military 
who came out strongly in favour of peace with Egypt. It helped mobilise 10% of 
the Israeli public – some 400,000 people – to turn out against the 1982 war in 
Lebanon. But this time it is a shadow of its former self.

"What is different this time is the anti-democratic spirit. Zero tolerance of 
any kind of criticism, opposition to any kind of sympathy with the 
Palestinians," says Levy. "You shouldn't be surprised that the 95% [are in 
favour of the war], you should be surprised at the 5%. This is almost a 
miracle. The media has an enormous role. Given the decades of demonisation of 
the Palestinians, the incitement and hatred, don't be surprised the Israeli 
people are where they are."

"So what's the point of a peace movement if it refuses to condemn a war like 
this?" I ask Mossi Raz, former general secretary of Peace Now. Some people have 
demonstrated, he assures me; 6,000 came out on the streets the Saturday before 
last (and were taunted as "dirty Israelis" by the rightwing counter 
demonstration). And in the circumstances, 6,000 feels like quite an 
achievement. But he admits that the mainstream protest movements and parties of 
the left all fall pretty silent when the sirens start to wail.

"People tend to demonstrate only after the war is over," Raz explains. And he 
expects the same to happen again this time. During the early part of the 1982 
war, before the large turnouts, polls gave military action 86% support. But 
during a time of war, opposition is seen as disloyalty, as siding with the 
enemy. People will protest at the government, but not the military. I raise an 
eyebrow about the idea of protesting against a war only when it is over. He 
nods with a certain exasperation and asks me, as a joke: "So, shall we go out 
now and protest the Falklands war?"

Amos Oz, Israel's great literary conscience, explains to me that the peace 
movement was dealt a harsh blow eight years ago when Ariel Sharon pulled the 
army and the settlers out of Gaza only for the situation to get worse. "Since 
then there have been 10,000 rockets fired from the Gaza strip." 
Middle-of-the-road Israelis have lost faith in the idea that you could swap 
land for peace. For him, the current military operation is "excessive but 
justified" and he is scornful of the high-minded European reaction. "That's the 
problem with Europeans. They launch a petition and then go and sleep and feel 
good about themselves" – something he explains with reference to European 
history. I feel he is having a go at me. And I know he is laid up in bed with a 
bad knee. So I don't rise to the bait.

He continues: "The history of warfare in the 20th century has made Europeans 
see things in black and white, like a Hollywood movie, with good guys and bad 
guys. But it's more complicated than that." Yes, he condemns the Netanyahu 
government and the catalogue of inaction and missed opportunities. Yes, the 
operation in Gaza has been disproportionate. "From one perspective it looks 
like a David and Goliath story, with Israel being the ruthless Goliath and the 
Palestinians being the poor little David. But if you see the conflict as 
between Israel and the whole of the rest of the Arab world, who then is David 
and who is Goliath?"

I attempt to shift Oz off this well-trodden ground by talking about Israeli 
poetry, trying to come at things sideways. I tell him I have always loved the 
Yehuda Amichai poem "From the place where we are right, flowers will not grow 
in the spring." He agrees. It's a wonderful poem. "All married couples should 
have that poem above their bed," he says. And then he says something that feels 
to me like a real shift in his position. Previously he has described the 
Israeli/Palestinian conflict as a Sophoclean tragedy over land in which both 
sides have a claim to right on their side; as a battle, as he put it of "right 
versus right". But now, he says, this is a battle of "wrong versus wrong". No 
one is in the right any more. It is a very statesmanlike form of opposition. 
But it is hardly emphatic.

"Amos Oz is not yet in a position to admit entire Israeli guilt," Levy 
explains. "He is a real man of peace, but he grew up in a different generation, 
the generation before me. He grew up in this weak state, struggling to survive, 
created out of nothing. This is his background."

This sort of self-critical vigilance is rare but understandable given the sort 
of reporting that goes on in themainstream media in Israel. Most newspapers and 
TV channels are simply cheerleaders for the government line, offering a 
constant diet of fear and fallen heroes, with little evidence of any of the 
atrocities going on in Gaza. The problem is, ordinary Israelis have little idea 
what has been going on. I know so much more about what is happening in Gaza 
when I'm sitting in London than I do in Tel Aviv. Under this level of 
information manipulation, how can ordinary Israelis be expected to be critical?

Later I go for a drink at a friend's flat in Tel Aviv with a group of broadly 
leftwing activists in their late 20s and early 30s, NGO types that I was 
expecting would share my exasperation. And I make a mistake, assuming too much 
common ground. I ask whether their fear of rockets is properly calibrated to 
reality, given that people are so much more likely to die in a car accident in 
Israel than at the hands of Hamas. And there is an awkward reaction. The 
question was insensitive. They have loved ones in uniform in Gaza. And I really 
do understand that. But suddenly I feel like an outsider. I haven't appreciated 
that this threat is existential, they say. "People leave their liberalism at 
the green line [the 1967 border]," Levy had warned me earlier. "The young 
people are the worst. More ignorant. More brainwashed. They have never met a 
Palestinian in their lives."

That is emphatically not true of this group. But even here, the mood for 
social justice does not seem to connect poverty in Israel with the vast 
financial cost of occupation, let alone allow empathy with the Palestinian 
predicament. If I'm not with them, I'm against them. I am made to feel a little 
like an apologist for Hamas. A thought dawns in my head: perhaps I too ought to 
shut up and keep the evening sweet. Of all the things seen on my trip, this was 
the most depressing conversation of them all.
 