
Portsmouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth> have been fined 
£15,000 and agent Willie McKay given a suspended ban after being found guilty 
of breaching Football Association rules during the transfer of Benjani 
Mwaruwari to and from the club.

The club and agent were found guilty at an independent regulatory commission 
hearing today.

Agents are not allowed to act for two different clubs in two consecutive 
transactions involving the same player. The commission found that McKay acted 
on behalf of Auxerre when Benjani moved to Portsmouth in January 2006. He then 
acted for Portsmouth when the Zimbabwe striker moved toManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> in January this year.

"I think it's a witch-hunt and I'm not going to deviate from that," McKay told 
the Guardian today. "I should have asked them for special dispensation to do 
that deal and I didn't. If I'd have known I would have asked them. Portsmouth 
only asked me to do the deal because I knew the French market. Really he was 
meant to go to Marseilles or Lyon or Paris St Germain, and Manchester City came 
in and got him. That's what happened.

"I think it's difficult for [the FA] to understand but I still thought I would 
have got a warning. I can appeal it if I want, but it's a month's ban, a 
two-year suspended sentence. At the end of the day I don't want to continue my 
life fighting the FA. I'm business as usual. I'd just like to thank the FA for 
all the publicity they gave me."

McKay was given a suspended ban — if he is found guilty of any further 
breaches of FA regulations in the next two years, he will be suspended from 
taking part in any transactions involving English clubs for the duration of one 
transfer window. Portsmouth will face a further £15,000 fine if they breach any 
rules during the next two years.

The south coast club said they were "astounded" at the commission's decision. 
"We had no idea that the agent Willie McKay received a fee when the player 
joined us fromAuxerre <https://www.theguardian.com/football/auxerre> in January 
2006, and both the agent and club confirmed this to the FA — evidence they have 
clearly ignored," a club spokesman said. "Portsmouth FC is astounded that the 
FA have fined the club in respect of Benjani Mwaruwari's transfers."

"The Football Agents Regulations were introduced as an important method of 
addressing unacceptable practices in professional football, particularly in the 
transfer market," commission chairman Paul Gilroy QC said. "Both parties were 
fully aware of the new regulations at the time the offences were committed. The 
commission considered that the justice of the case was met by imposing 
penalties which to a large degree will act as an incentive to both parties to 
avoid any future transgressions."
 