
It may have been stormy outside, but the stock market seems to be having a 
fairly calm morning.

The combined effects of travel disruption and the half term break meant many 
dealers were not at their desks, and volumes were thin. This was reflected in a 
1.10 point dip in theFTSE 100 to 6720.24. More broadly traders are sitting on 
their hands ahead of this week's US Federal Reserve meeting, with the central 
bank widely expected to maintain its $85bn a month bond buying programme. The 
statement will be scoured for any hints as to when the Fed might begin 
tapering, although economists do not expect this to happen before next year 
given the recent government shutdown and fairly inconclusive data.

Aggreko is leading the FTSE 100 risers, up 49p to £15.66 after the temporary 
power supply group said three month trading had been in line with expectations. 
Its local business should see revenues and margins ahead of the previous year, 
but power projects slightly lower. Traders said short sellers were being 
squeezed by the positive statement. In a hold note, Jefferies said:
 Overall trading is in line with expectations but management were slightly 
"less pessimistic" on the [conference] call due to an improving quotation rate 
and the initial success of the heavy fuel oil product. The one positive of 
lower demand is greater free cash flow and shareholder returns are possible if 
activity does not pick up into 2014. We expect 2014 earnings per share to drift 
by mid-single digits and we are happy to be 3% below consensus.

Security group G4S is up 2.6p at 261.1p after it rejected a £1.55bn bid from 
private equity group Charterhouse for its cash solutions business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/oct/28/g4s-rejects-charterhouse-offer-cash-transportation-arm>
.

Insurers - so far - seem relatively unfazed by the overnight storms, with RSA 
Insurance down just 0.4p at 126.4p, Legal and General losing 0.5p to 212.4p and 
Aviva off 6p at 432.6p. Hari Sivakumaran at Oriel Securities said:
 It very early to say what the financial impact of the storm will be for UK 
insurers. We would note that the storm had been forecast well in advance and 
that preparations had been made prior to its arrival, which we expect will 
limit the potential damage it inflicts.
We would be surprised if the storm added more than 1-2pts to combined 
operating ratios. If significant flooding were to arise then we would expect 
the cost to become greater.
Year to date the UK weather losses have been benign and we expect will be 
contained within adverse weather budgets.
UK insurers likely to be impacted are Aviva, Direct Line, esure, Legal & 
General and RSA.

InterContinental Hotels has fallen 52p to £18.13 after a September slowdown in 
US rates. At an annual conference for American hotel owners, InterContinental 
said third quarter US revenue per available room rose 3.5% but the September 
figure was 1.6%, due to the timing of certain holidays. It said current trading 
gave it confidence for the rest of the year. Panmure Gordon said:
 Third quarter trading is a bit below expectations with Americas revenue per 
available room up 3.7% and within that US 3.5%. However September was weak at 
2.1% in Americas and within that the US 1.6%. The culprit was Holiday Inn which 
was down 0.9% reflecting slower group business. Current trading trends give the 
group confidence for the rest of the year but we think revenue expectations may 
edge back a bit for the fourth quarter in both Americas and Greater China. 
Consensus forecasts are for $660m earnings before interest and tax and we think 
these may edge back. We reiterate our hold recommendation.
 