
Look closely at what many journalists write about artificial intelligence – 
from AlphaGo’s triumph at the ancient Chinese board game Go to Microsoft’s 
accidentally racist Twitter bot – and you might detect some smugness. Research 
by Oxford University has predicted that journalism is among the jobs least 
likely to be replaced by a machine in the near future. And yet, as Columbia 
University prepares to celebrate 100 years of the Pulitzer prize, intelligent 
robots will publish financial reports, sports commentaries, clickbait and 
myriad other articles formerly the preserve of trained journalists.

“A machine will win a Pulitzer one day,” predicts Kris Hammond from Narrative 
Science, a company that specialises in “natural language generation”. “We can 
tell the stories hidden in data.”

Recent advances mean that AI can now write readable, flowing copy, and churn 
out repetitive articles faster than the most caffeinated hack.

“With automation, we now follow and produce quarterly earnings reports for 
4,000 companies,” says Justin Myers fromAssociated Press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/associated-press>, the world’s first and 
thus far only automation editor. “Previously we covered 400.”

He insists that having robots handle the drudge work frees up journalists for 
higher-minded pursuits. “You can take a step back and tell me instead what you 
noticed, what was interesting, something personal.”

The wire service plans to launch football recaps later this year, joining the 
likes of Yahoo who report on Fantasy Football leagues using the same tech. 
Powering the coverage is Wordsmith, a program able to churn out thousands of 
reports almost instantly. Elsewhere the software has been applied to everything 
from obituaries to Game of Thrones: “It’s the year 299,” begins one report, 
“and we catch up with our dastardly group along the rippling waters of the 
Riverlands.” Automated Insights, the company behind it, “wrote” 1.5bn articles 
last year. With only 50 employees, it claims to be the largest producer of 
content in the world.

Wordsmith consults the data and makes the same decisions every journalist 
faces when filing copy, such as when has a team suffered a “thrashing” and not 
just a “loss”? In fact, Wordsmith is so good at instant punditry it’s moving 
into the hyperbolic world of politics. “One outlet wants us to report on polls 
as they come in, to give it a persona and see if people think it is a person or 
not,” says founder Robbie Allen.

Thomson Reuters also publishes machine-written articles, using its own 
in-house technology. One experimental next-gen engine was so impressive that, 
“in a blind taste test, the machines actually came out as more readable than 
the humans”, according to Reg Chua, who oversees innovation at the company.

Automated journalism isn’t just about volume, but also targeting. “If one of 
our customers is a paper in a small to medium-sized city, and they want reports 
on a major employer in their town, we now have something for them,” says Myers. 
Chua goes further: “For 150 or more years, news has focused on stories of the 
most interest to the most people. But now a financial report could include a 
paragraph telling you how your own portfolio is doing: ‘the market is up, but 
you are down, and if you hadn’t sold your IBM stocks last week you would be so 
much higher right now’.”

A different strain of hypertargetting can be seen in ultraspecific “clickbait” 
articles like “27 secrets only a chiropractor will know”, or “The 10 most Jeff 
moments in every Jeff’s life”. “You could replace the name Jeff with any name 
procedurally and it would still work,” says Lars Eidnes, a 29-year-old 
developer from Norway. “Clickbait is pretty formulaic.”

Eidnes’ Click-o-Tron website analysed 2m articles from the likes of BuzzFeed, 
Gawker and the Huffington Post, and now “guesses” new clickbait articles into 
existence. It’s a silly joke prone to gibberish, but the best examples have a 
nightmarish logic. “New President Is Hours Away From Royal Pregnancy”, says one 
headline. “Kim Kardashian’s Child is a Bear”, claims another. “I wanted to 
destroy clickbait,” Eidnes laughs.

Researchers are also trying to find ways to use AI to find stories that humans 
couldn’t. “Most natural language systems simply describe an event. But most 
journalism is not descriptive, it’s event-driven,” says David Caswell, a fellow 
at the Donald W Reynolds Journalism Institute at the University of Missouri. 
“Things happen to people in different locations, and the core narrative 
structure is the cause and effect between those events.” To put it in old 
journalistic terms: who, what, where and when?

In Caswell’s system, Structured Stories, the “story” is not a story at all, 
but a network of information that can be assembled and read as copy, 
infographics or any other format, almost like musical notes. Any bank of 
information – from court reports to the weather – could eventually be plugged 
into a database of this kind. The potential for such systems is enormous.

“It’s complete speculation,” he says, “but if no one had detected the break-in 
at the Watergate Hotel, and in the election the committee to re-elect the 
president had used information they’d gleaned, an algorithm could look at the 
series of events and say ‘these people had secret knowledge somehow’.”

But what about Hammond’s prediction that a robot would someday win a Pulitzer? 
Myers “absolutely believes” a machine will win, “because it already did”. Bill 
Dedman won a Pulitzer for his investigation into racist mortgage lending – a 
computer-assisted story - way back in 1988.

Chua calls robo-Woodward and auto-Bernstein “a stretch” but does see 
potential. “I think it may well be that in the future a machine will win not so 
much for its written text, but by covering an important topic with five high 
quality articles and also 500,000 versions for different people.”

Imagine an article telling someone how local council cuts will affect their 
family, specifically, or how they personally are affected by a war happening in 
a different country. “I think the results might show up in the next couple of 
years,” Caswell agrees. “It’s something that could not be done by a human 
writer.”
 