
 What are you driving? 

A Mercedes Estate E240; I've barely had it a year now. It's black, with grey 
leather.

 That's quite a hostile colour, isn't it? 

When my friends see me coming down the road, they say "oh look, here comes 
Ainsley in his hearse". It's slightly more stylish than that there are even 
some lovely lines on it. I followed the family template my father's driven a 
Mercedes practically all his life. This model is very accommodating; I have 
kids and a dog. It's nice to have that additional space to be able to see your 
doggy when you're driving, and have little chats with him.

 Absolutely. What do you think it says about you then? 

Probably that I'm a family man with a dog. When you have all the 
power-steering and stuff, you don't really notice the size. Sometimes you walk 
up to it and think, "that's big and long".

 How would you describe your driving? 

I've changed. I used to quite like the idea of zooming in and out of traffic 
quite quickly, but when you get a decent car and kids in the back, you become 
more courteous. But that's age isn't it? When you're younger you like hearing 
the roar of the engine, but now I'm 42 and just want the comfort. The kids 
quite like my driving. We like those moments when we go out, turn up the music 
and...

...break the law? 

No. I think the fun's gone out of driving. There are all these cameras around, 
flashing at you. Boring, really isn't it?

 Do you get recognised? 

Oh, yeah. I haven't got tinted windows. I get the odd "Oi, Ains" and "What's 
he like", or "I do enjoy your programmes", depending on where you are. That's 
quite nice.

 Gary Rhodes has a few tickets to his name. Is there a way that chefs drive? 

No. We're all individuals. Perhaps a tough day in the kitchen makes you a 
little hastier, but it doesn't seem to bother me.

 I take no pleasure in asking this question. Have you ever had sex in a car? 

Not recently, in the Merc. I probably had it in my first car, a Hillman Imp, 
when I was 19. That was fun. The old Singer Imp had an aluminium engine and was 
quite a quick little thing, but you had to open the boot to give your legs 
room. A quiet country lane, me and the wife in the mood, who's to say I 
wouldn't do it now? Kids and the dog permitting.
 