
With Aki Kaurismäki's movies, as with Yasujirô Ozu's, familiarity breeds 
contentment. Taken cumulatively, they extol and embody the pleasures of 
repetition – the comforts of familiarity – without ever seeming repetitious or 
familiar themselves, even though Kaurismäki basically tells the same stories 
over and over again.

Returning to the Finn's work after 20 years of not seeing it (he was poorly 
distributed here in the US for much of that time), my first impression was of 
an old, reliable and rewarding vibe-cum-sensibility still chugging along 
productively, the work perhaps wiser and kinder now, always evolving in tiny 
ways here and there, but always offering the same combination of deadpan 
fatalism (1988's Ariel has the funniest suicide in the history of cinema) amid 
a rigorously controlled mise-en-scène redolent of Poverty Row dressed by 
Douglas Sirk. It's nice to know he's always been there, and nicer to learn that 
his work has hardly changed, except to get richer and denser even as it gets 
leaner and sparer.

Take Le Havre, his latest. All my old friends from 20 years ago are still 
here, including La Vie De Bohème's André Wilms, reprising the same role, and 
Katie Outinen, The Match Factory Girl, a little jowlier now but still 
magnificently beaky and chinless, as his ailing wife. Around them are the usual 
cast of minor characters as rumpled and battered as the human ruins in Béla 
Tarr's work, or early, bare-bones Fassbinder movies, declaiming their hangdog, 
deadpan, boilerplate dialogue with the rote intonation of Bresson's "models". 
But in a pinch they're as capable of rock-solid working-class social solidarity 
as any Jean Renoir ensemble from the 1930s.

This time, an illegal immigrant teenager, who tells Wilms he is trying to get 
to England, offers the pathway to redemption. This is always plainly marked in 
Kaurismäki's universe, which, despite seeming godless and cruel, is capable of 
out-of-left-field quasi-religious miracles as startling as anything in Carl 
Dreyer's Ordet. And amid the poverty and joyless settings, there is room for 
secular blessings too, as in the bar-room reunion of two separated lovers: they 
meet, a spotlight brightens artificially above their heads, the Sirkian 
orchestration surges, and we chuckle even as the tears prickle in our eyes.

Little moments and small feelings like these were what Ozu sought in his 
movies, which strove to provoke, over and over again, "a little sadness", 
usually about 15 minutes before each movie's ending, followed by a warm feeling 
of acceptance and consolation. Kaurismäki once said he's searched all his life 
for "the perfect red kettle", Ozu's signature prop, and in his movies he is 
doing something similar. He is not Ozu's copycat, he is his apprentice, and he 
has absorbed his mentor's lessons with discernment and taste. But he will seek 
his own mastery, on his own terms.
 