
World leaders must show their commitment to tackling global warming by signing 
theParis climate agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/paris-climate-agreement> at a ceremony 
in April at the United Nations, climate change activist and former US vice 
president Al Gore said.


 Gore said there was a “tremendous push” for heads of government to formally 
ink the accord, to keep up momentum forthe deal struck by nearly 200 countries 
in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-200-nations-sign-finish-fossil-fuel-era>
 and to avert the worst impacts of climate change on vulnerable nations.

 “There is an overwhelming amount of hope that the Paris climate agreement 
could be a turning point towards a more resilient, low-carbon future,” Gore 
told the Thomson Reuters Foundation in an interview. “While the deal is not 
enough by itself, it is a major step forward.”

Paris climate deal: key points at a glance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-key-points>
 At the Paris climate talks, governments agreed to limit global temperature 
rise to “well below” 2C above pre-industrial times and pursue efforts to keep 
it to 1.5C.

 Ségolène Royal, France’s environment minister who recently took over as chair 
of the UN-led climate negotiations, has said that between 80 and 100 countries 
are expected tosign the agreement in New York on 22 April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/22/france-calls-world-leaders-paris-climate-deal-new-push-cop-21-international-law>
.

 The agreement is due to take effect in 2020, but requires at least 55 
countries representing at least 55% of global emissions to ratify it first.

 Gore, who was in Manila to lead training for more than 700 local advocates 
for climate action under an international programme he launched in 2006, 
praised the efforts of countries at high risk of climate impacts that had 
pressed for the lower 1.5C cap in Paris, led by the Philippines.

 “I certainly hope that we can meet that 1.5C goal, and I am very grateful to 
the Philippines for helping to include that goal in the Paris agreement,” Gore 
said.

 “Conventional economic analysis has convinced many people that it’s not a 
realistic goal,” he added.

 But “non-conventional analysis that takes into account the unconventional 
dramatic change in renewable energy competitiveness has convinced others that 
actually we may have a chance to meet that goal,” he said.

 The key is for countries to switch to renewable energy, Gore said. “With the 
Paris agreement, we send a signal to the business community that the way to a 
low-carbon future is going solar or wind or geothermal,” he said.

 As more and more people become aware of the challenges posed by the “climate 
crisis”, more legal changes can be expected that support action, he noted, 
citing moves by China to adopt a national carbon emissions trading scheme next 
year.

 “If you and I had been told three or four years ago that China would have a 
nationwide cap-and-trade programme, it would have been hard to believe - but 
they will, and many other countries are moving in the same direction.“

Philippine climate change commission secretary Emmanuel de Guzman told the 
Thomson Reuters Foundation his country would sign the Paris agreement in April.


 The Philippines has pledged to cut its carbon emissions by 70% from business 
as usual by 2030, conditional on international financial support, as part of 
the Paris deal.

 “The agreement tells the world that human rights will be upheld, that the big 
and powerful have stood up for the small, poor and vulnerable, and that the 
world is determined to rise to this great challenge,” de Guzman said.

 The Paris accord promises $100bn per year from 2020 to fund projects enabling 
vulnerable countries to adopt clean energy and adjust to the impacts of climate 
change such as rising seas and fiercer droughts, floods and storms.

 Gore said rich nations “must do more in helping poor nations to adapt to the 
changing climate”.

 The Green Climate Fund (GCF), which was set up under the UN talks to support 
climate action in the developing world, “still needs to be completely funded 
and I will be among those working to make sure that it is”, Gore added.

 The Nobel Peace Prize winner, who gave an hour-long presentation on climate 
disruption and its solutions in Manila this week, said there was “basis for 
genuine hope” that the world can curb climate change.

 “It matters a lot how long it takes to prevail, because we are programming 
into the Earth’s system a lot of distractive changes every day, so the sooner 
we make the transition, the less damage we will do,” he said. “But I am filled 
with hope that we actually will win this struggle.”

• This article was amended on 18 March 2016 to amend the byline from Reuters 
to Thomson Reuters Foundation.

 