
After a while, there is no typical day. There are very few days even close 
to being typical or useful. The busyness and business of being a writer fight 
for space with anything like writing. And then there is the resting and 
recharging, which are necessary and which I only remember when I get ill and am 
reminded – again – that I have to take a break. But let’s take one day last 
week as an example – as it turned out, the hottest day this year so far.

I wake in my new house, which is still in new house chaos. Planning 
non‑emergency building works cuts into time for writing. I look out of the 
window at the little river, which is winking bluely and suggesting I should sod 
everything and walk along it. In fact, I get myself suited, booted and packed. 
I then make a Lemsip and coffee combo in a kitchen that currently has a 
water-collapsed ceiling and is dominated by a vast dehumidifier. The 
dehumidifier means I could bake bread in there without an oven. Which is handy, 
because I can’t use the oven.

AL Kennedy: ‘Being out of London is the new being in London’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/03/al-kennedy-interview-london-scottish-writer-pollution-wivenhoe>
I drink. There is some bread. Then a railway station.

I spend much of my life on railway stations and in trains. Readings, 
festivals, conferences – travel sells books. As payment for everything 
plummets, I find I am back on the road as much as I was when I started out. The 
percentage of my income that comes from UK book publication is now the same as 
it was when I started out. But things could be worse. Like many UK authors, I 
am supported by income from abroad, especially Germany.

My first train can’t even reach London. It gets as far as Colchester – two 
stops – and despairs. But train two arrives in London only slightly late. Being 
only slightly late is always an achievement. I emerge at Liverpool Street into 
the super-heated greeny‑brown air of the capital. A quiet cab driver (either 
too hot to curse remainers, or too hot to curse Boris) batters manfully through 
the gridlock and I’m at King's Cross with enough time to eat cheap warm sushi 
out of a bag. It’s the healthy option. If you mainly eat at railway stations 
you try to aim for the healthy option.

Train three grumbles out of King's Cross and I start reading. Today is 
a reading day – three translated novels, two French, one German. It is 
fantastically easy to write on trains if you can get a first class ticket – 
power, quiet, tea, air-con, perfect – but I’m in steerage this time and close 
to tennis elbow again from too much typing, so today it’s sleazy, philosophical 
French murders and gritty city German prostitutes with added ironic 
deconstructions of capitalism.

Serious Sweet by AL Kennedy review – a day in the life of London’s lonely 
hearts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/07/serious-sweet-by-al-kennedy-review>
The French body count distracts slightly from the complete failure of the 
carriage’s air conditioning. Free water is issued, an unscheduled stop does not 
result in access to a technician who is battling with other mishaps elsewhere. 
Paintwork threatens to bubble. We simmer on to Edinburgh, 40 minutes late, 
and I get to eat out of a bag on Waverley station, this time with two and half 
hours to idle away. I’ve missed my connection. I drink a lot of fruit juices – 
healthy option. I ponder the German prostitutes and capitalism as the pimp of 
us all – it seems a useful metaphor.

I trundle myself on to train five, which is the slow train, but which will get 
me to Nairn instead of rushing me straight to Inverness, where I’ll have to be 
uplifted and taken back to Nairn. I am grateful for mobile phones, internet 
access and wheeled bags. They make today much easier than it would have been 20 
years ago.

I finish the last, trippy, deathy French roman policier and reach sunset as we 
curve round the bay at Montrose. I text my gentleman of choice, attaching a 
photo of the sunset. We exchange good nights from our endless roads. It is 
cool, finally. And at 00.30, or so, I am being hugged by people I love and 
given tea and food and we are talking, talking. Writing tomorrow, but now the 
comfort of kind voices. It’s what they call inspiration.

• AL Kennedy's latest book Serious Sweet 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/serious-sweet.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 (Jonathan Cape) has been longlisted for the Man Booker prize.
 