
My first book was an anthology of short stories called Night Geometry and the 
Garscadden Trains 
<http://www.a-l-kennedy.co.uk/index.php/books/60-night-geometry-a-the-garscadden-trains>
 – which is the first problem. The title's hideous, barely scans and says 
almost nothing about the work. It also meant the first cover – there have been 
a few – involved stars and a railway. Not good. I wrote some of this material 
more than two decades ago, but I'm afraid some pieces haven't stayed with me 
because they're simply not memorable. I do recall the unwise excursion into 
magic realism. And there's one story that pokes around at the edge of 
Scottishness. I suppose I've gone on to deal with fictional fiction and 
Scottishness since. Broadly, I think I was trying to make unhappy or perhaps 
unglamorous lives eloquent and that's not a bad aim. I hope I've managed better 
since. As far as I can bear to look, the one constant is the tangible sense of 
anxiety here. I was, when I wrote these stories, just desperately afraid that I 
was no use and horrified by how hard the process was. Sometimes there is a good 
flow running through a whole paragraph, but there isn't really a whole piece 
that's playing the same tune throughout in a happy way. There are three stories 
I value, I think. Didacus is the first piece I wrote and really committed to. I 
decided to try my hardest. If it hadn't done well, that would have been that. 
In fact, it got me a fair amount of attention and it does seem to have a good 
heart and a sort of social concern – if hardly any plot and the distinct 
feeling the whole thing is holding its breath in case it implodes. The title 
story I wrote knowing I would have to read it out to an audience and that 
focused my mind rather forcefully. I feel it's the strongest piece here. It 
taught me I should consider the reader/listener more, which is no bad thing. 
Genteel Potatoes is really an essay, not a story, about my grandmother. It was 
published just before she died. I saw my grandfather showing it to the vicar at 
her funeral and finding some kind of comfort in that, which would make it 
probably the most useful thing I've ever written.
 