
Al-Qaida's new leader has praised Syrian protesters trying to topple Bashar 
al-Assad while portraying the uprising as an Islamic battle against US and 
Israeli interests.

A video message posted on extremist websites is Ayman al-Zawahri's first since 
al-Qaida named him its new leader in June following thedeath of Osama bin Laden 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/may/02/osama-bin-laden-dead-pakistan>.

The Egyptian-born Zawahri, who long served as Bin Laden's top deputy, directly 
addressed the Syrian protesters who have risen up against Assad's rule despite 
a bloody government crackdown. The message appeared to be an attempt to place 
al-Qaida firmly on the side of the anti-government demonstrators.

"You are an example, explaining lessons to your Arab and Muslim nation in 
sacrifice, steadfastness and the struggle against oppression," Zawahri said. 
"How could you not? You are the sons of the Levant, the front for jihad and 
martyrdom."

In the past, al-Qaida leaders, including Bin Laden himself in a video released 
after his death, have sought to associate themselves with the uprisings 
sweeping the Arab world this year, offering guidance on how the protests should 
be led to serve al-Qaida's extremist version of Islam.

Many experts, however, think the uprisings have shown how out of touch the 
terror group has become with the aspirations of Arab youth who have been the 
uprising's main activists. Most seek greater freedom from dictatorial regimes, 
not the Islamic rule that al-Qaida advocates.

And in Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> activists have said 
religion has played little role in their uprising.

In the video Zawahri – dressed in a white robe and a turban, wearing large 
glasses and with an assault rifle at his side – warned the Syrian protesters 
not to believe that Barack Obama and the United States stood with them.

"Tell America and Obama ... we are waging a battle of freedom and liberation, 
freedom from corrupt tyrants and the liberation of the religion of the 
Muslims," Zawahri said.

Zawahri claimed that Washington wanted to replace Assad with "a new ruler who 
follows America, protects Israel's interests and grants the [Muslim] nation a 
few freedoms."

The US administration has toughened its rhetoric toward Assad's regime, 
declaring recently that the Syrian leader has lost all legitimacy as a leader.

Zawahri attacked Assad, calling him "the leader of the criminal gang, 
descendant of the traitors, biggest of those who spread corruption, head of the 
executioners, America's partner in the war on Islam in the name of terrorism, 
and border guard for Israel".
 