
Two of al-Qaida’s most important spiritual leaders have told the Guardian that 
the terror group is no longer a functioning organisation after being ripped 
apart by Isis. In a wide-ranging interview,Abu Qatada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-qatada>, a Jordanian preacher who was 
based in London before being deported in 2013, andAbu Muhammad al-Maqdisi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/05/jordan-release-jihadi-cleric-al-maqdisi-isis-killing-pilot-al-kasasbeh>
, regarded as the most influential jihadi scholar alive, say the al-Qaida 
leader, Ayman al-Zawahiri, is cut off from his commanders and keeping the group 
afloat through little more than appeals to loyalty.

How Isis crippled al-Qaida | Shiv Malik, Ali Younes, Spencer Ackerman, Mustafa 
Khalili
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/10/how-isis-crippled-al-qaida> 
Senior insiders in Jordan add that al-Qaida around the Middle East has been 
drained of recruits and money after losing territory and prestige to its former 
subordinate division. The ongoing war between al-Qaida and Isis has left the US 
struggling to catch up with the tectonic shifts within the global jihadi 
movement, intelligence insiders told the Guardian.

Maqdisi, who Zawahiri counts as a close friend, is frank about the 63-year-old 
Egyptian’s situation. “He operates solely based on the allegiance. There is no 
organisational structure. There is only communication channels and loyalty,” 
Maqdisi said.

Qatada, who was born Omar Mahmoud Othman and has been described by the British 
government as a “truly dangerous individual”, also says Zawahiri is “isolated” 
and admits that Isis have been winning the propaganda and ground war against 
al-Qaida.

Qatada was deported from the UK to Jordan to face terror charges after a court 
battle lasting nearly 10 years with a series of British home secretaries. Last 
summer he was released from custody after beingacquitted of all charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/24/abu-qatada-cleared-terror-charges-jordan-court>
. Since his release, he has become an increasingly vocal critic of Isis. He 
told the Guardian its members were extremists and a “cancer” growing within the 
jihadi movement following their assault on al-Qaida over the last two years. 
“[Isis] don’t respect anyone,” he said.

Isis was al-Qaida’s branch in the heart of the Middle East until the group was 
excommunicated from the network in 2014 after disobeying commands from Zawahiri 
and starting an internecine war with fellow jihadists in Syria which left 
thousands dead on both sides. Today that fight continues and has expanded 
across Eurasia and the Mediterranean. Since declaring the establishment of its 
so-calledIslamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> a year ago, 
Isis has gone on to build a global network of affiliates and branches that now 
stretches from Afghanistan to west Africa and competes with al-Qaida in its 
scale.

Isis leaders, who described al-Qaida as a “drowned entity” in issue six of 
their official English-language publication, Dabiq, have declared that they 
will not tolerate any other jihadi group in territory where they are operating. 
They have readily delivered on that statement. Last week, Isis fighters in 
Afghanistan werereported to have beheaded 10 members 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/05/world/asia/afghanistan-taliban-face-insurgent-threat-from-isis.html>
 of the Taliban, and on Wednesday al-Qaida in Libya vowed retaliation after 
blaming Isis for the death of one of its leaders.

But the US has been slow to grasp the implications of al-Qaida’s decline and 
possible collapse despite extensive study of Isis, according to intelligence 
community insiders. “There’s such a cadre of people so closely tied to the 
al-Qaida brand within the IC [intelligence community] that I think they don’t 
see what else is going on outside the organisation,” said Derek Harvey, a 
former intelligence analyst who predicted how resilient the Iraq insurgency 
would be.

Over the past year, a group of junior and mid-level analysts have concluded 
that Isis advances have pushed al-Qaida to the margins of global jihad. A 
former senior intelligence official who did not want to speak on the record 
said they had been tracking the split between the two groups with great 
attention. Against them is what Harvey described as “the overwhelming majority 
of senior intelligence officials looking at this” who he said considered the 
enmity between Isis and al-Qaida as little more than “a squabble within”.

That prevailing view has found expression in repeated public statements by 
Barack Obama and his senior advisers conflating Isis and al-Qaida or denying 
that any split between the two organisations is meaningful. That raises 
questions about whether a US counter-terrorism bureaucracy long focused on 
al-Qaida as a prime threat can grapple with the group’s decline and a different 
one’s ascent.

In a typical comment, Barack Obama in March told Vice that Isis “is the direct 
outgrowth of al-Qaida in Iraq”. Although factually correct, this is 
substantively misleading: al-Qaida in Iraq was for 10 years al-Qaida’s most 
fractious and disloyal franchise, even before it began waging its violent 
campaign against the old guard.

The US secretary of state, John Kerry, has depicted the rivalry between the 
two jihadi groups as cosmetic, and his top Iraq policy official, Brett McGurk, 
has repeatedly stated: “Isis is al-Qaida.” Kerry’s new spokesman, John Kirby, 
said in his old job at the Pentagon that Isis, al-Qaida and al-Qaida’s Syrian 
proxy the Nusra Front “in our minds, from our military perspective, are very 
much one and the same”.

“We’ve got counter-terrorist guys who are focused on counter-terrorism and 
they grew up fighting the al-Qaida networks, but Isis is a different kind of 
network,” Harvey said. “It’s basing itself on skills and organisational 
capabilities and objectives that are much more accelerated and capable than 
what al-Qaida’s ever had.”

However misleading, the conflation of the two groups has political and legal 
benefits for Obama. He launched military action against Isis without 
congressional approval 10 months ago and a push for retroactive legislative 
blessing is all but dead in Washington. Portraying al-Qaida and Isis as the 
same thing has allowed the president to claim that the 2001 and 2002 
congressional authorisations for attacks on al-Qaida and Saddam Hussein provide 
the legal foundations for the current campaign.

Meanwhile, the US continues to target al-Qaida. So far this year, according to 
the Bureau of Investigative Journalism 
<https://www.thebureauinvestigates.com/category/projects/drones/>, the 
Americans have launched 11 drone strikes in Yemen – the most recent came 
Tuesday night – and 11 more in Pakistan, killing between 82 and 122 people.

US officials have warned that al-Qaida’s presence in Yemen, which al-Qaida’s 
scholars consider to be its most loyal branch, has benefited from the January 
coup that displaced the US client government and the Saudi-led war to roll it 
back.

 