
Ayman al-Zawahiri <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayman-al-zawahiri>, the 
leader of al-Qaida, has announced the formation of an Indian branch of the 
extremist organisation, calling on Muslims across the subcontinent to join the 
"caravan of jihad".

In a 56-minute video posted online on Wednesday, Zawahiri also renewed a 
longstanding vow of loyalty to Mullah Omar, the leader of the Afghan Taliban, 
and sniped at Islamic State (Isis), the Syria- and Iraq-based group, which has 
challenged al-Qaida's increasingly shaky leadership of transnational Islamic 
militancy in recent months.

Zawahiri, who has led al-Qaida since the death of Osama bin Laden in 2011, 
said the new "al-Qaida in the Indian Subcontinent" would be "the standard 
bearer" of Bin Laden's "global message, which aimed to unite the [world's 
Muslims] in jihad against [the] enemy, liberate occupied lands and establish 
the caliphate".

It would fight on behalf of Muslims suffering "injustice and oppression … in 
Burma, Bangladesh, Assam, Gujarat, Ahmedabad and Kashmir", Zawahiri said.

Al-Qaida <https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-qaida> has struggled to respond 
to the challenge to its authority posed by Isis, which has seized huge areas of 
strategically vital territory in the centre of the Middle East, including 
cities, weapons dumps and oilfields.

One al-Qaida strategy to counter its decline appears to be an effort to build 
support among the nearly half a billion Muslims who live in Pakistan,India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> and Bangladesh.

The video calls for the establishment of an "Islamic state in the Indian 
subcontinent" and emphasises al-Qaida's traditional role of unifying disparate 
militant groups. The reference to the caliphate, in an edited speech by Bin 
Laden, also appears in part directed at the group's new rivals.

"This new group has not come into formation in a single day, but attempts to 
unite the jihadi groups of subcontinent were going on for nearly past two 
years. This group will work under the central al-Qaida, which is an army among 
the armies … led by Mullah Omar," it says.

The renewed pledge of allegiance to Omar, the Taliban leader, is a further 
sign that "al-Qaida central" as it is known to specialists, remains focused on 
south and west Asia.

Since the mid-1990s, Zawahiri, who is believed to be based somewhere along the 
Afghanistan-Pakistan border, has repeatedly sworn bayat, or oaths of loyalty, 
to Omar in return for the safe haven the Taliban leader granted their followers 
and to further bind the Afghan Islamic militia into a global "jihadist" agenda.

Suggestions 
<http://www.thedailystar.net/al-qaeda-launches-south-asian-branch-40166> that 
the renewed pledge is a snub to Isis and its leadership are misplaced, experts 
say. A bayat is an affirmation of lifelong and exclusive personal loyalty. Even 
if Zawahiri was prepared to place himself under the authority of another 
extremist leader, which is extremely unlikely, to break a previous oath is 
almost inconceivable.

Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of Isis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/12/baghdadi-abu-bakr-iraq-isis-mosul-jihad>
, called himself a "caliph" or head of a global Islamic state in June and has 
demanded the loyalty of all Muslims. Last year he broke away from al-Qaida when 
ordered by Zawahiri, 63, to withdraw from Syria.

In Wednesday's statement Zawahiri obliquely criticised his challenger's 
efforts to administer areas Isis has seized in Iraq and Syria.

Al-Qaida's leaders have explicitly shunned state-building as a strategy, 
preferring a campaign of spectacular violence including complex attacks on 
targets in the west, which are designed to radicalise and mobilise Muslims 
around the world.

"If you say that by your jihad you do not want but the pleasure of Allah, then 
you must not race for governance and leadership at the first opportunity," 
Zawahiri said in the new video, released in Arabic and Urdu, the language used 
by many south Asian Muslims.

The veteran Egypt-born militant leader has muted his criticism of Isis, which 
is in open conflict with the official al-Qaida affiliate in Syria, perhaps 
aware of enthusiasm for the group in militant circles and among younger 
volunteers.

"Discord is a curse and torment, and disgrace for the believers and glory for 
the disbelievers," he said.

The statement also warned al-Qaida's new wing against harsh measures against 
local populations – another complaint levelled against Isis by critics in Iraq 
and Syria.

"If you said that you are doing jihad to defend the sanctities of the Muslims, 
then you must not transgress against them or their money or honour, and not 
even transgress your mujahideen brothers by word and action," he said.

Though there are some signs of increasing radicalisation in India, recruitment 
to extremist networks there is negligible. However, a handful of Indian Muslims 
appear to have travelled to Iraq to join Isis.

Muslims account for 15% of Indians, numbering an estimated 175 million, giving 
India the third-largest Muslim population in the world.

The last section of this most recent video is the audio statement of Maulana 
Asim Umar, the apparent leader of the new al-Qaida in India organisation.

Umar, about whom little is known, has featured in two previous statements, one 
aimed at Indian Muslims in which he incited them to join the global jihadi 
movement and asecond focused on Kashmir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/14/al-qaida-video-muslims-kashmir-jihad-india>
, the disputed Muslim-majority Himalayan region.

Allegations that the new Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/19/narendra-modi-bjp-rahul-gandhi-india-elections>
, allowed, or even encouraged violence in which 1,000 predominantly Muslim 
people died in Gujarat in 2002 have made him a target for Islamic extremists.

A video issued by Ansar-ut-Tawheed fi Bilaad Hind (Brotherhood for Monotheism 
in the Land of Hind) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/20/islamic-militants-anti-india-attacks-narendra-modi>
 immediately after Modi's win referred repeatedly to the events in 2002.

India has suffered repeatedly from domestic and international terrorist 
attacks. One of the most spectacular was in 2008 when militants from 
Lashkar-e-Taiba, a Pakistan-based organisation with links to the country's 
security establishment, launched a bloody assault on Mumbai.
 