
The leader of al-Qaida has called for holy war against the United States and 
Israel over an anti-Islamic video which triggered mayhem in the Muslim world.

Ayman al-Zawahiri <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayman-al-zawahiri> 
praised as demonstrators who breached the US embassy in Cairo and the attackers 
who stormed the US consulate in Benghazi last month in violence linked to the 
film as "honest and zealous".

The Benghazi attack on 11 September, in which the US ambassador to Libya, 
Chris Stevens, and three others were killed, is now believed to have been 
carried out by al-Qaida-linked militants.

The trailer for the film produced by Nakoula Basseley Nakoula, a 
California-based Egyptian-American angry at the treatment of Christians in his 
homeland, triggered mayhem across the Muslim world after it was uploaded to
YouTube <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube>, with at least 17 
people killed in violent protests.

In an audio message released by al-Qaida's media arm As-Sahab and posted on 
militant websites on Saturday, al-Zawahiri claimed Washington had allowed the 
film's production under the pretext of freedom of expression, "but this freedom 
did not prevent them from torturing Muslim prisoners".

Nakoula, 55, had been previously convicted of bank fraud before he embarked on 
making a film under the assumed name of Sam Bacile. The Innocence of Muslims 
depicts the prophet Muhammad in an extremely negative light, which inflamed 
many Muslims around the world and gave others the pretext for violence.

There are unconfirmed reports the film was screened once earlier this year to 
a largely empty cinema in Hollywood. Not in question is the fact that in July a 
13-minute video in English purporting to be a trailer for a full-length film 
was posted on YouTube under the pseudonym Sam Bacile.

It was subsequently promoted by a Washington DC-based radical Coptic activist, 
Morris Sadik, and the Qur'an-burning Florida pastor Terry Jones. An 
Arabic-language version was posted on YouTube on 4 September. Five days later 
it was denounced by media and Muslim clerics in Egypt, prompting the assaults 
on US diplomatic missions.
 