
Ayman al-Zawahiri's grumpy clarification 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/03/al-qaida-denies-links-isil-syria>
 that the group calling itself the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Isil) 
is not part of al-Qaida is the latest in a long series of efforts by the terror 
group's leader to direct, channel and focus the myriad strands of Sunni Muslim 
extremism.

In the late 1980s Zawahiri and Osama bin Laden founded al-Qaida specifically 
to combat thefitna, or division, among the various militant factions involved 
in the war against the Soviets in Afghanistan. They and other ideologues in the 
extremist movement saw this lack of unity – rather than the US, "hypocrite, 
apostate" regimes in the Middle East or the supposed lack of faith of other 
Muslims – as their biggest problem, at least in the short term.

A couple of decades on, Zawahiri is still committed to fighting the same fight 
– one that would be familiar to any number of revolutionary leaders in right or 
leftwing violent secular organisations.

Over the years the 62-year-old Egyptian has learned many lessons. Spectacular 
operations such as the 9/11 attacks were aimed at radicalising millions of 
people around the world, or prompting a response from the west that would lead 
to that mobilisation. A key advantage of such strikes was that they allowed 
militants a long way from the Middle East to depose dictators, redraw 
boundaries and advance towards the realisation of a utopian visionwithout 
risking years of dangerous and gruelling activism on the ground in target 
countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/29/terror-middle-east-al-qaida-shabaab>
.

When such attacks became more difficult to pull off, al-Qaida developed 
another strategy: expansion via local affiliates who seize territory and win 
over populations. For this to work, its leaders had to be able to at least 
influence the behaviour and tactics of the militant operators on the ground.

This has proved difficult, as demonstrated by the repeated refusal of Abu 
Musab al-Zarqawi, the earliest leader of the group that eventually morphed into 
Isil, and his successors to follow the al-Qaida playbook.

It was local militants' excesses that helped to turn the tremendous 
opportunity presented to al-Qaida by the US invasion of Iraq in 2003 into a 
major strategic defeat. Their failure to keep the goodwill of the tribes in the 
west of Iraq, the brutal spillover of jihadi violence into Jordan – with 
resultant civilian casualties – and the horrors of the civil war led to a 
popular reaction against al-Qaida, as a group and an ideology.

That experience has clearly influenced Zawahiri's approach to the chaotic and 
bloody Syrian conflict. In his recent statement, along with the clear denial of 
links to Isil, he demands that all militants follow the "general instructions" 
he issued last year. These call for effortsto win "hearts and minds" 
<http://blogs.reuters.com/faithworld/2013/09/17/al-qaeda-leader-al-zawahri-urges-restraint-in-first-guidelines-for-jihad/>
, in that hackneyed phrase.

Zawahiri also implicitly backs the decision of al-Nusra Front, the principal 
jihadi extremist faction fighting in Syria and a recognised al-Qaida affiliate, 
to maintain links with other opposition groups. He intervened last year, 
telling Isil to keep to Iraq and ticking off al-Nusra Front for declaring 
allegiance to al-Qaida without prior consultation. Now, perhaps to set an 
example, he has cut out the ill-disciplined and expansionist Isil altogether.

The turmoil across the Middle East has opened a vast range of opportunities 
for al-Qaida, but expansion poses huge challenges, too. In some areas, such as 
Yemen, Zawahiri has managed to keep a handle on local operators. In many 
others, however, there is a free-for-all as new factions, cells, leaders and 
groups form, dissolve, compete, disagree – and of course kill, often 
indiscriminately.

Though al-Qaida can claim some successes over its 26-year existence, the 
battle againstfitna continues. The messy reality of modern jihadi activity is a 
headache for western and local security services. But it is a problem for 
al-Qaida, too.
 