
Alan McGee <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alan-mcgee> founded Creation 
Records 10 years ago. Now this former British Rail clerk's labour of love is a 
floatable proposition, with nearly half of its shares owned by Sony. McGee 
surprised many when he got into bed with the company, not least because he was 
supposedly no fan of corporate structures. But that may simply be a sentimental 
view, judging by the candid assessment he gives over coffee at the Dome, Regent 
Street.

"In September 1992, I got fed up with selling 200,000 Primal Scream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/primal-scream> records in England and 18,000 
in Germany," says McGee. "I got tired of selling only 3,000 Bandwagonesques 
there. It's all about distribution. If you're signed to some shit fuckin' 
indie, no matter what it does for your credibility, it does nothing to promote 
your group. Sony help us get worldwide distribution. At the moment, we're still 
getting some crap sales, but the potential is there. I've sold Sony 49%, which 
makes them feel good, but I'm very loyal to our bands. I've got their best 
interests at heart.

"The truth is that, without financial backing, it is now very hard to exist in 
England, but when I've gone in to Sony and said: 'Look, you need to help us 
with so-and-so,' they've always done it. And they don't talk to me about the 
music we put out, ever."

In 1984, McGee was looking after a young and irascible Jesus and Mary Chain. 
Like his proteges, McGee's clothes may be sharper 10 years on, but he hasn't 
really changed that much, and he remains a patron to like-minded fanatics such 
as Bobby Gillespie, the Jazz Butcher, Bill "the Man" Drummond and Lawrence from 
Felt/Denim.

In celebration of Creation's first decade, McGee has gathered together his 10 
most personal mementoes. It comes as no surprise that what feature most among 
his choices are items that spark off memories of liaisons with some of rock's 
greatest mavericks.

Jim Reid's letter

"I found this letter about a year ago in a box of old tapes. It's a nice 
letter, not embarrassing. Bobby Gillespie had this tape that a guy called Nick 
Lowe (not the same one) had given him with some Syd Barrett demos on one side. 
Bobby played the other side, which was this band who sounded like Billy Idol 
meets the Ramones. He said to me: 'You've got to get them to yer club, McGee.'

"So I phoned them and I spoke to Douglas Hart and then Jim Reid – they were 
perfectly nice. The thing was they hadn't left their bedroom for about five 
years. They used to be called the Daisy Chain and they'd been speaking about 
this Jesus and Mary Chain idea for ages. I thought the songs were good, but the 
guitars were too safe.

"There was no feedback then. That all happened by default at my club, the 
Living Room, which was this place above the Roebuck pub on Tottenham Court 
Road. We had a vocal PA that all the other bands coped with by turning their 
guitars down. Not the Mary Chain. They played the guitars so loud they all fed 
back. It was incredibly violent. At the soundcheck, they did Upside Down, Never 
Understand, In a Hole, Vegetable Man and the best version of Jefferson 
Airplane's Somebody to Love I've ever heard.

"The Mary Chain summed up what me, Joe Foster and Bobby were into, namely 
garage psychedelia. This was May 1984 and I signed them at the soundcheck."

Rodney Bingenheimer and Ride lads

"Rodney's an LA legend. Me and Jim Reid were sitting in Denny's on Sunset 
Strip in December 1985, and Jim says to me: 'There's that little weirdo who was 
in the Phil Spector documentary.' So we went and talked to him and became pals.

"Rodney played a big part in the fact that if Creation bands are big anywhere 
outside Britain, it's on the west coast of America. He played our groups on 
KROQ, which is the No 1 radio station in LA. He is beyond John Peel. He started 
Rodney Bingenheimer's Glam Rock Disco, which was the most famous rock'n'roll 
club ever in the 70s. When Bowie was No 1 in Britain with Rebel Rebel, before 
it was released in America, he was in Rodney's club one night and gave Rodney 
the single to play. Then Bowie got on the floor and mimed Rebel Rebel all the 
way through. OK, so Bowie was off his nut on drugs, but what a great story.

"What else has Rodney done? He single-handedly broke punk rock on the west 
coast in 1977 and 1978. To this day – he's 47 – he's still got a radio show. 
Ironically, most of the music-business people in LA are so antiseptic they 
think he's like an old-age pensioner, but people who observe from afar know how 
important he is. MGM are making a film about his disco.

"In this picture, taken in the KROQ studios with Ride, the T-shirt he's 
wearing has a photo of himself walking across Abbey Road. That's how off his 
nut he is."

Joe Foster

"Ah, Mr Foster. I met Joe when he was in TV Personalities. The three people 
who shaped Creation apart from me were Dan Tracey, Joe and Ed Ball, but Joe had 
the best music taste of any person I know. He got me into the Stooges, Dylan 
and the Velvets. At his flat, he had all the classic books, all the classic 
records, all the classic photos just strewn all over the floor. He was the 
untidiest person in the world. Everything was collectable.

"He's beyond a character. I remember when I was renegotiating our Rough Trade 
distribution deal, Joe went to a party and while he was there, he actually 
punched the head of the distribution company. He's always been an utter 
liability, but even in the mid-80s when people couldn't deal with him, he was 
producing great contemporary records."

Arthur Lee

"The Primals were in Los Angeles doing the 'Memphis Sessions' with George 
Drakoulias, and while we were there, Rodney Bingenheimer took me and Bobby and 
Andrew Innes to meet Arthur Lee. Bobby asked him to sing on some stuff he was 
doing.

"The thing about Arthur Lee, right, is he isn't out of his mind like Sky Saxon 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sky_Saxon>. Arthur kept the money, d'ya know what 
I mean? He showed up at the studio with a driver, and he walked in with a 
cocktail in one hand.

"We got on brilliantly and there was a party later at the Chateau Marmont. 
Evan Dando <http://www.thelemonheads.net/> turned up and the Ride boys were 
there and Arthur showed up, eventually. It was a big drug festival. I remember 
sitting round the swimming pool and Arthur was singing Love songs for Bobby. It 
ended up with them in a room jamming. That was a rock'n'roll moment. Not 
something you can buy. Fucking great. I mean, Arthur Lee and Bobby Gillespie. 
What more can you say?"

Screamadelica gold disc

"This is a vindication of what we always spoke about at Creation: artistic 
development. It took six and a half years for the Primals to have a hit. They 
were signed to Elevation – a Warners-financed offshoot – and they didn't sell, 
so Elevation just dropped them.

"I thought I'm Losing More Than I'll Ever Have was the first great Primal 
Scream record. Then they made Loaded and suddenly they became more confident. 
Higher Than the Sun started a classic run of singles, and Screamadelica is a 
masterwork that also happens to have sold incredibly well; half a million 
copies so far. I know if you want to be cynical gold records don't mean 
anything – I give them to my dad – but in the context of working with someone 
for so long, this one means a lot to me."

Copper blue brass sleeve (Rykodisc)

"An artefact and a beautiful package that allows me to talk about Bob Mould 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/may/15/husker-du-classic-interview-rocks-backpages>
, who did the best cover ever – Hüsker Dü's version of Eight Miles High. Oddly 
enough, I never expected Sugar to be successful. Bob signed to us for next to 
nothing and I thought we might do moderately well. We ended up with an album of 
the year.

"I respect him a lot. He's been through the drink and drugs thing and come out 
the other side. He manages himself, he brings his records in on time and on 
budget. He sells tons and he plays live. He's the ideal artist."

Biff Bang Pow! L'Amour, Demure, Stenhousemuir: A compilation 1984-1991

"Some of the happiest times I ever had were in 1985 and 1986, being in a band 
and touring Europe. It's a great life in a band; it's like being a pirate in a 
van doing all the obligatory rock'n'roll things – drinking and, er, the whole 
business.

"It's also important if you own a record company (like we all do) because it 
helps you understand the bullshit you go through as an artist and what you have 
to endure. It's a humbling experience, getting treated like shit by promoters 
and playing to 80 people a night and even they are only along for a drink.

"The thing I enjoyed most of all about this album was managing to get the word 
Stenhousemuir in the title."

Teenage Fannies and Big Star

"This makes me think of Bobby Gillespie. He got me into Love and Alex Chilton. 
We were on a US Mary Chain tour, doing a PA – a Spinal Tap thing in Tower 
Records in LA – and Bobby pulled the third Big Star album, Sisters Lovers, out 
of the racks and said: 'McGee, you gotta buy this.' I did, and it literally 
shook my world.

"Now we're an internationally famous label, a lot of my heroes have come into 
range, but back in about 1991, I tried to sign Alex. I couldn't do it because 
of some asshole lawyer thing. This was when the Bandwagonesque/Big Star 
comparison was about to happen. In Detroit, Alex got on stage with the Fanclub 
and he didn't say 'Oh Norman Blake, you've ripped me off' or whatever. 
Actually, Alex told me that when he sang Alcoholiday, he cried. He just thinks 
it's an incredible song. It's the media who have invented all the cynicism 
about the Fanclub."

Boo Radleys

"This sounds like another tout for business, but the Boo Radleys' success is 
further proof that we do have artistic development at Creation. This is the 
second Boo Radleys album I put out, and I said to them – and they love this now 
– you won't break with this record. I didn't think we'd put this one away. Then 
it came out and went straight in the Top 20 and I'm, like, eating humble pie. 
In the past three weeks, it's sold 10,000 copies – half what it sold before 
Christmas. Winning the polls was an enormous help, but it's not bad for a 
depressed market.

"The difference between independents and majors and us is that we stick with 
our bands and don't try to change them. When House of Love went from us to 
Phonogram, it tried to turn them into a stadium rock group like U2; which was 
funny because around that time, U2 started trying to become a cross between 
Happy Mondays and Primal Scream.

"Looking at this album reminds me that even if we put out some awful records 
and some amazing ones, I don't try to change the way the bands sound unless 
they've gone massively wrong. Anyway, this is one of our most amazing records."

Oasis

"This group, Oasis, are the one recent thing that made me go: 'Fuckin' hell, I 
still believe in rock'n'roll.' I saw them last year and it was a complete 
fluke. I was at an 18 Wheeler show in Glasgow at King Tut's Wah-Wah Hut. Third 
on the bill were a band from Manchester. They were friends of Oasis and they'd 
told the band they could play fourth on the bill. SoOasis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/oasis> hired a van and drove up from 
Manchester with their mates and when they arrived the promoter says: 'No. Fuck 
off.' And they're saying: 'Look, it's cost us £200 to hire the van and 
equipment and get here. If you don't let us play, we'll smash your club up. 
There's 10 of us and only two security …'

"So the promoter lets them play. Now, I wouldn't have got to see them 
normally, because when a band of mine's playing I usually get in five minutes 
before they come on stage. However, because I'd gone with my sister Susan, who 
doesn't happen to own a watch, I got there two hours early. I witnessed all the 
shenanigans, so I wanted to see what they were like.

"The first song was really good. Then the second was incredible. By the time 
they did this fantastic version of I Am the Walrus, I'd decided I've got to 
sign this group, now. I said: 'Do you have a record deal? Do you want one? I 
wanna do it.' Eventually they had 20 record companies offering them deals and 
at the last minute Mother Records, owned by U2, phoned and said: 'We'll offer 
double what McGee is offering.'

"The music is a cross between the Kinks, Stone Roses and the Who, and the 
cover of this tape, which is incredibly rare, only 10 ever made, is important 
because it's a Union Jack going down the toilet. That sums up our country at 
the moment. I don't want to herald them too much, but they're already one of my 
favourite groups. Seeing them is what seeing the Stones must have been like in 
the early days. Brutal, exciting, arrogant."
 