
Like many a writer who elbowed his way into public notice in the 1950s, Alan 
Sillitoe <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alan-sillitoe> will probably be 
remembered for only a tiny fraction of his considerable output. Just as 
Kingsley Amis's reputation, one suspects, will ultimately stand or fall onLucky 
Jim (1954), so posterity will almost certainly end up judging Sillitoe's long 
and combative career on the basis of its two opening salvoes – the novel
Saturday Night and Sunday Morning (1958) and the high-octane short story 
collectionThe Loneliness of the Long-Distance Runner (1959). The fault is not 
Sillitoe's, who wrote at least half a dozen novels ripe to be compared with his 
groundbreaking debut. Rather, it lies in the nature of the literary stage – a 
stage where TS Eliot featured as a grand panjandrum and Iris Murdoch as a 
promising ingénue – on which he took his bow.

The 1950s, lest we forget, was an age of literary sensation, a time when books 
were "news" and yet – as nearly always happens when books are news – the 
newsworthiness had very little to do with the literature itself. It was the era 
of the Angry Young Man (Osborne, Amis, Wain), of more or less radical literary 
politicking (seeDeclaration, the 1957 collection of art manifestos edited by 
the young Tom Maschler), of that notoriously problematic entity "the 
working-class writer", of aesthetic compacts forged between novelists and 
grittily realist film-makers, of a fascination – at any rate at its upper level 
– with the fast-dissolving popular culture described in Richard Hoggart'sThe 
Uses of Literacy (1957).

Sillitoe operated on the inner flank of each of these movements – he was as 
angry, if not angrier, than John Osborne; his first two books were filmed, 
respectively, by Karel Reisz and Tony Richardson; the pre-war Nottingham 
backyards he wrote about bear natural resemblances to Richard Hoggart's Hunslet 
– while always remaining, sometimes to the point of defiance, his own man. On 
the other hand, while his starring role in the new literary vanguard brought 
substantial rewards –Saturday Night was one of the first million-selling Pan 
paperbacks – his originality wasn't always noticed by the critics, and the 
pigeonholing that characterised the early part of his career often got in the 
way of later attempts to extend his range.

Nowhere was this typecasting more flagrant than in Sillitoe's instant 
classification as a "working-class writer". Metropolitan journalists, summoned 
to pronounce on the new wave of northern novelists, many of them from 
comparatively humble backgrounds, tended to assume not only that they 
themselves were socially homogenous, but that their books reflected the same 
kind of backgrounds, anxieties and outlooks on life. In fact, there are at 
least half a dozen varieties of the 50s working-class, including the 
aspirational "lace-curtain working class" (Stan Barstow's phrase) rising from 
foundry or production line to the solicitor's office or the draughtsman's shop; 
the provincial bohemians of Philip Callow's Lawrence-inflectedCommon People 
(1958); the thrusting meritocrats of John Braine'sRoom at the Top (1957).

As for the working-class novelist, broadly speaking the paladins of the 50s 
northern horde belonged to a distinctive social sub-group: first-generation 
grammar school boys, respectful of their origins but keen to explore the world 
beyond the horizon. One of the most characteristic scenes in an English novel 
written during the period 1954-64 is the spectacle of its hero standing proudly 
on the station platform as he waits for the next train to London.

Set against this upwardly mobile, meritocratic tide, Sillitoe was the outsider 
to end all outsiders, dyed-in-the-wool Midlands underclass, large parts of 
whose childhood were spent pushing a handcart containing his family's 
possessions from one set of flyblown digs to another, whose earliest memories 
were of his mother yelling "Not on his head" as his illiterate father set about 
him with his fists, educated not at a grammar school but a secondary modern 
which disgorged its alumni at 14 to the Raleigh bicycle factory. Ted Hughes 
(with whom Sillitoe was friendly) once wrote in a letter to Christopher Reid 
that among the newcomers of the "Angry Decade", he "had the best barbarian 
credentials, except for maybe Alan Sillitoe".

All this gave Arthur Seaton, the moody, antinomian hero of Saturday Night and 
Sunday Morning, a distinctive status among the fictional protagonists of the 
Macmillan era. Unlike the "good" working-class characters of an earlier age, 
Arthur is an ambiguous figure: generous (when he has the money), affectionate 
towards women and incubating warm feelings towards the male friend he is 
quietly cuckolding, but untroubled by the moral implications of detaching a 
drunk from his wallet or plugging an air-rifle pellet into the cheek of a 
muck-raking neighbour.

The same ambiguity extends to the milieu in which Sillitoe frames him – the 
close, tightly knit badlands of back-street Nottingham, with its simmering 
resentments and neighbourhood quarrels that are always liable to end up in a 
mass brawl and a night in the cells. If nothing else,Saturday Night is a 
terrific antidote to the sentimentalising of working-class life, with its 
roaring fires and benignly shirt-sleeved patresfamilias, promoted by Orwell and 
the eternal decencies of the proletarian hearth observed by Hoggart.The Uses of 
Literacy, for example, insists that pre-war Hunslet offered "a good and comely 
life", characterised by its "sacrifice, cooperation and neighbourliness". 
Sillitoe thought differently. The Seatons either desert from military service 
or feign bad eyesight to get out of it, and sit through Churchill's patriotic 
radio broadcasts with stoical indifference. There is a solidarity about them, 
but it is the solidarity of a rebel army, born not out of any generosity of 
spirit but from hate and fear.

To the middle-class critic – and the middle-class reader – Arthur's surly 
self-centredness was a problem. Joe Lampton, the go-getting arriviste of 
Braine'sRoom at the Top, may not have been a particularly pleasant character, 
but at least he had ambition. Sillitoe's early work, it soon became clear, was 
about getting by and staying put, fighting against drift, bringing a compound 
of highly combustible inner resources to bear on the horrors of routine, taking 
refuge in daydreams: living till 90, as Arthur puts it, with a fresh piece of 
skirt every day. His "vitality" was his saving grace, but even this could 
sometimes seem horribly compromised. In John Fowles's first novel,The Collector 
(1964), in which a jackpot-winning municipal clerk kidnaps an art student and 
keeps her prisoner in his cellar, Arthur features as a talismanic symbol of the 
contemporary class war. Left-leaning, CND-fancying Miranda ought theoretically 
to sympathise with this signifier of oppression and neglect. On the contrary, 
she detests him. "I thinkSaturday Night and Sunday Morning is disgusting," she 
declares. "I think Arthur Seaton is disgusting, and I think the most disgusting 
thing of all is that Alan Sillitoe doesn't show that he is disgusted by his 
young man."

To Miranda, Arthur's most blatant offence is his solipsism – "he doesn't care 
about anything outside his own little life". Worse, "because he is cheeky, 
hates his work and is successful with women, he is supposed to be vital". If 
one of the era's critical orthodoxies was that a writer ought not to keep his 
moral cards quite so close to his chest, then another was that the chief merit 
of Sillitoe's early books lay in their documentary quality. At their heart, it 
was assumed, lurked a conventional social realism that was the literary 
equivalent of cinéma-vérité. All this is profoundly to underestimate the degree 
of sophistication that Sillitoe brought to his work and his determination to go 
beyond dramatised sociology into a world where the novelist of "ordinary life" 
had rarely set foot.

"The Match", for example, perhaps the finest of the stories in The Loneliness 
of the Long-Distance Runner, is usually read as a straightforward piece of 
reportage, in which an embittered middle-aged man stamps home from a football 
game his side have lost, takes his disappointment out on his long-suffering 
wife and picks a quarrel that will end his marriage. Its abiding feature, 
though, is less its "realism" – although there is plenty of that – than the 
stealthiness of its psychology, the ominous prefigurations, a well-nigh 
determinist sense of individual destiny hanging in the air, and at the end a 
rather chilling attempt to weave Lennox's fate into a wider pattern of ordinary 
lives ruined by bad temper and a failure to communicate. British readers 
admired "The Match", (mostly) assuming that it was another utensil from the 
late 50s kitchen sink. Sillitoe's French translators, on the other hand, marked 
him down as the heir to Camus.

In a memorable Desert Island Discs interview recorded a year or so ago, 
Sillitoe advanced the modest claim that all he had ever really wanted to do was 
to achieve enough success to enable him to, as he put it, "plod away", writing 
a book a year and pleasing himself. This is exactly what he contrived to do: 
the bibliography of his post-1960s output runs to more than 60 items, including 
poetry, a shrewd and revealing autobiography (Life Without Armour, 1995) and 
the recent cold war travelogue,Gadfly in Russia. The novels of his maturity are 
a mixed bunch, differing wildly in subject-matter and approach and often 
bewildering fans of his early work. To his biographer Richard Bradford this is 
evidence of a wholesale dereliction of critical duty, in which reviewers who 
had misunderstood his first books either underrated his achievement or simply 
failed to comprehend what he was trying to do.

Certainly a trawl through some of his later fiction tends to support this view.
A Start in Life (1970) retains some of the old Nottingham background while soon 
developing into a picaresque (Sillitoe maintained that his mentors were the 
Spanish novelists Diego Hurtado de Mendoza, Mateo Alemán and Francisco de 
Quevedo). It takes its hero, Michael Cullen, from the Midlands to a hustler's 
life in Soho and concludes, amid a hail of bullets, as a skit on the idea of 
the existential hero.The Broken Chariot (1998), is another kind of skit, in 
which Sillitoe cunningly inverts the trajectory of his own early career, has an 
upper-class boy named Thurgarton-Strang break out of his West Country 
boarding-school and re-invent himself as the Seatonesque "Bert Gedling", a 
boozy tail-chaser employed by the Nottingham Royal Ordnance factory and 
aspiring proletarian writer. Neither novel achieved the success it deserved.

Sillitoe was phlegmatic about this neglect, an attitude he brought to most 
aspects of his long and industrious career. He fitted into no niche, peddled no 
theories about the nature of his craft ("One either judges, or one writes, and 
I only care to do the latter," he tersely informed a magazine symposium in 
1978), succumbed to perilously few of the blandishments on offer to the 
successful modern practitioner (creative writing professorships, newspaper 
columns), and it is difficult not to believe that, with his death, a particular 
strand of late 20th-century English literature has ceased to exist.

In the 50 and a bit years since Saturday Night and Sunday Morning crash-landed 
on the weekend books pages, there have been plenty of novelists capable of 
seeing working-class life from the inside, but none of them was forged in quite 
the same kind of crucible as Sillitoe. Above all, there is the terrific air of 
individuation and quiddity brought to a part of the demographic that, with a 
few honourable exceptions, the pre-1950s novel had routinely ignored. "We all 
need to remember," Hoggart once remarked, "every day and more and more, that in 
the last resort there is no such person as 'the common man'." The same can be 
said of the working-class novelist. Perhaps the greatest compliment one can pay 
Alan Sillitoe is to say that, in an age of movements and alliances, shared 
assumptions and mass thought – all the collectivist baggage that hangs around 
the writer's neck like so many millstones – he represented no one but himself.
 