
He’s won an Olivier award and a Tony, he’s published a novel and a 
best-selling memoir, and he’s an OBE recipient. He’s Emmy- and Golden 
Globe-nominated, he’s a lion of the British stage and he’s even been an X-Man. 
ButAlan Cumming <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alan-cumming> is in 
Australia this week because he wants to sing you “Sappy Songs”.

 I find his show title so incredible in that list of career achievements that, 
even though I’ve stared at it a hundred times, I begin the interview by getting 
the name wrong: “You’re singing some snappy songs...?”

 “Sappy - SAPPY!” Cumming admonishes me. It’s a fierce beginning to what 
becomes the fastest-spoken interview of my career.

Alan Cumming Sings Sappy Songs – an intimate evening with dirty jokes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jun/03/alan-cumming-sings-sappy-songs-review>
 It’s unsurprising that he speaks so quickly; with demands on his time ranging 
from Hollywood blockbusters to his much-lauded role in TV’s The Good Wife, 
along with Shakespeare, literary projects, Broadway seasons, and now the Sappy 
Songs cabaret tour he’s clearly mastered the elusive secret of total 
efficiency. Another Australian journalist once interviewed him as he dashed 
down the street between tasks.

As for that show title? “I wanted ... to tell the audience that we were going 
to go to quite an emotional place,” he says. The touring cabaret - full-title 
Alan Cumming Sings Sappy Songs! - is running for three nights in Melbourne, 
before headlining the Sydney Festival.

Cumming, who made his reputation in America for his star turn in Kander and 
Ebb’sCabaret <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/cabaret> on Broadway, is 
returning to the cabaret genre as it allows him to connect more directly with 
his audience than he can as a character actor. “You don’t have the veil of a 
character standing between you and the audience,” he says, of cabaret’s 
challenge and allure.

The show consists of a personal selection of other people’s songs, a couple of 
his own and spoken anecdotes about his life. “It’s a very vulnerable thing, and 
to make it work properly you have to be authentic and truthful as a performer … 
[But] when you feel people are connecting with you as a person, you feel really 
understood.”

 It’s not the first time Cumming has exposed personal vulnerability. Not My 
Father’s Son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/26/not-my-fathers-son-alan-cumming-review-actor-difficult-childhood>
, the autobiography he released in 2014, details the brutality that his abusive 
father inflicted upon his family, and informs much of the spoken content of his 
cabaret show. The effect on Cumming as a boy was, understandably, profound; he 
has discussed before how a need to suppress his own feelings and emotions about 
his father as a small child informed his ability to act.

 He tells me that “the actual experience of the book was surprising, rewarding 
– a very positive thing to do for myself and my family”, who supported and 
encouraged his writing of it. “So many people wrote to me to say that it had 
helped them, and was healing.”

 His writing of the book and its reception is discussed between the “sappy” 
songs of the show. “I talk about my life, and being back in cabaret: The Good 
Wife, the book... a lot of the things I’ve done in my career,” he says. “I’m 
coming to the point where being more vulnerable, honest and authentic is part 
of my journey.”

Cabaret review – Alan Cumming is saucy and menacing in a sly revival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/25/cabaret-review-alan-cumming-sam-mendes-revival>
The varied nature of that journey can be explained by the differing objectives 
that inform his career choices: sometimes a pursuit of authenticity, sometimes 
a desire to work with certain artists, sometimes a simple need to “make the 
cash” to fund something else. At other times, he’ll do something just “for a 
laugh” – which is why his career encompasses both rave reviews for Hamlet and 
an appearance in a Flintstones film.

He brings this mercurial spirit to Sappy Songs, which – like the title itself 
– blends emotion with humour. “Let’s get this out of the way,” he says. “It’s 
going to be funny, because I’m going to tell you funny stories between the 
songs.”

 In cabaret, he says, “there’s only one person to get embroiled with and 
that’s me” - but how the range of emotion affects his audience is as varied as 
they are. “It’s like a party,” he says. “It depends who’s there.” He can 
provoke, but not predict.

 He does offer one anecdote about his last tour, and his pace slows for a 
moment. “I sang this song about my dad,” he says, “and this kid just lost it.”

 * Alan Cumming Sings Sappy Songs! runs at Arts Centre Melbourne from January 
5, 6 and 7, before arriving at Sydney Festival’s Spiegeltent on January 8 and 9. 