
The shocking image of three-year-old Alan Kurdi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alan-kurdi> lying dead on a Turkish beach 
transformed the language of the European migration debate as it appeared on 20m 
screens around the world in just 12 hours, according to new social media 
analysis.


Researchers at Sheffield University have analysed nearly 3m posts which 
appeared in the wake of the first publication of the photograph in September.

The team said initial postings by a handful of journalists soon went viral 
with 53,000 tweets per hour – a social media storm which saw a transformation 
of the language around what was happening in Europe, with use of the word 
“refugee” outstripping “migrant”.

Farida Vis, director of Sheffield University’s visual social media lab, said: 
“As soon as we saw the image and the response, we felt that something 
extraordinary was happening.

“We wanted to measure the impact these images have had on the wider public 
debate about the status of migrants and refugees. Our analysis clearly shows 
that this story not only engaged a global audience, but that it changed the way 
social media users talked about the issue of immigration.”

Vis said: “We show how a handful of tweets by journalists on the ground grew 
into a staggering 53,000 tweets per hour as interest in the story went viral.”

Vis and her team used data provided and analysed by the lab’s private sector 
partner, Pulsar.

Francesco D’Orazio, vice-president of product and research at Pulsar, said: 
“For most of 2015, the use of the words migrants and refugees was head to head 
in public conversation, accounting for pretty much the same volume over nine 
months – 5.2m tweets versus 5.3m tweets.

“From 2 September onward, this radically flipped. The numbers swing 
dramatically towards a clear focus on refugees – 2.9m tweets and 6.5m tweets.”

D’Orazio added: “Twitter’s ability to act as a catalyst has connected emerging 
stories and relevant people, helping to develop and connect those audiences on 
a global scale and make a story go mainstream before the international press 
has even started to officially cover it.

“But we shouldn’t forget that it was the journalists on the ground that broke 
the story onTwitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> and 
through the social platform put it in front of the right audience.”

Google’s News Lab data journalism team in California analysed millions of 
searches around the death of Alan to show how, when and where the world started 
searching and what they were looking for.

Simon Rogers, data editor at Google’s News Lab, said the earliest identifiable 
search interest in Alan’s case actually came before the significant volume of 
tweets, as people started to search for background on the case. Immediately 
afterwards, it spread across the globe.

Claire Wardle, research director at the Tow Centre for Digital Journalism at 
Columbia University and one of the report’s authors, said: “2015 was the year 
the Syrian refugee crisis hit the European consciousness, but it’s easy to 
forget that this was not the case before the Alan Kurdi image.

“In April, over 700 refugees and migrants lost their lives when their boat 
capsized off Lampedusa. After one day of coverage, the story disappeared, 
despite the tragic loss of life.

“The photo of Alan Kurdi galvanised the public in a way that hours of 
broadcasts and thousands of column inches weren’t able to do. It has created a 
frame through which subsequent coverage has been positioned and compared.”
 