
Two of Britain's greatest living stage actors, Michael Gambon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/michael-gambon> and Alex Jennings, will take 
the lead roles this autumn in Alan Bennett's new play The Habit of Art, the 
National Theatre announced today.

Gambon returns to the National for the first time in four years and will play 
the poet WH Auden in an imagined meeting with his former artistic collaborator 
Benjamin Britten, to be played by Jennings.

The words "much-anticipated" are artistic cliches, but in Bennett's case they 
ring true. There is genuine excitement about his new play – his first since The 
History Boys became such a global success, on stage and screen, in 2004.

The National today said The Habit of Art would be "as much about the theatre 
as it is about poetry or music", and that it will look at "the unsettling 
desires of two difficult men, and at the ethics of biography". Directed by 
Nicholas Hytner will be a cast including Frances de la Tour, Adrian 
Scarborough, John Heffernan, Stephen Wight and Elliot Levey.

One of the UK's most original and distinctive directors, Katie Mitchell will 
direct two plays in the National's winter season – and they could not be more 
different. The first of the two will be Ferdinand Bruckner's rampantly sexual 
Pains of Youth, in a new version by Martin Crimp. Set in Vienna, 1923, with six 
disgruntled and promiscuous medical students living it up with sex, drinking 
and spying, the play previews from 21 October 2009.

Then, over Christmas, Mitchell will adapt Dr Seuss's children's classic The 
Cat in the Hat. Aimed at children between three and six, it will be performed 
in the Cottesloe space in the morning and afternoon, before transferring to 
London's Young Vic on 28 January 2010.

Following the successful screening of Phèdre, with Helen Mirren, at cinemas 
across the world, the National is to continue itsNT Live initiative 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/ntlive>. Marianne Elliott's critically 
acclaimed production of All's Well that Ends Well will be screened on 1 October 
2009, and Mark Ravenhill's adaptation of Terry Pratchett's novel Nation will be 
beamed to some 200 venues on 30 January 2010.

Other highlights from the winter programme include the National Theatre debut 
of the award-winning US actor John Lithgow, probably still best-known for his 
role in TV sitcom3rd Rock from the Sun <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0115082/>. 
Lithgow will perform a double bill of stories: Uncle Fred Flits by PG Wodehouse 
and Haircut by Ring Lardner, at the Lyttelton on 19 and 26 October 2009.
 