
Alastair Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> has soaked up 
some tough days during his record 57 Tests as England captain but Monday in 
Mohali – which ended with him out for 12, his opening partner unable to bat, 
his side four down and 56 runs adrift with hopes of a series win close to blown 
– was quite some challenge to his fortitude.

The day had begun with an air of optimism, too. At the start of play England 
were still 12 runs ahead in the match and while Ravi Ashwin and Ravi Jadeja 
were set from the night before, four quick strikes could have turned their 
first-innings sow’s ear into, if not a silk purse, then at least something in 
which to stash some lesser-spotted Indian rupees.

Cliched talk of a big first hour was not limited to the tourists, however, 
with India too knowing that the initial exchanges could demoralise their 
opponents. Within the space of one ball, when Ashwin easily clipped a juicy 
leg-stump half-volley from Chris Woakes to the midwicket fence, it felt like a 
pressure valve had been instantly released. The home side did not look back 
thereafter.

Haseeb Hameed in danger of missing rest of India tour with broken finger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/28/haseeb-hameed-danger-missing-india-cricket-tour-broken-finger>
The all-round abilities of Ashwin and Jadeja were well known to England before 
the series and while the former was eventually nipped out by the impressive Ben 
Stokes for 76, his spin twin Jadeja – one of just nine cricketers in history 
with three or more first‑class triple hundreds – ploughed on mercilessy for a 
Test-best 90 in which his biggest threat was self-harm during a twirling Rajput 
sword dance when celebrating his fifty.

England would have been less au fait with Jayant Yadav, who made his debut the 
week before in Visakhapatnam. They had plenty of time to familiarise themselves 
with him, however, as the right-hander proved his handiness with the bat with 
55 over 141 balls of madness in which India’s seven, eight and nine all 
recorded half-centuries for the first time to take a 134-run lead.

It left the tourists staring at a slice of history, too. Never before have 
they won in India from behind at the halfway stage, while only twice in Asia 
has such a turnaround been achieved. On those two occasions – Lahore in 1961 
and Karachi in 2000 – the difference was just seven and 17 runs respectively.

If the wheels did not entirely fall off in the field – at least not until the 
very end when Cook and Jonny Bairstow both fluffed catches – then the attack’s 
inability to create chances amid a negative plan to restrict the Indian lower 
order will have seriously vexed the captain.

Tea was not a time to be pondering this, with pads to be strapped on before 
striding out with one of his previous opening partners, Joe Root, instead of 
Haseeb Hameed. The 19-year-old, who awaits scans on a suspected broken little 
finger, was still in too much pain to join him. While his tour has shown 
promise, it could now end, which will give Cook and the management another 
headache.

Any hope from a pitch that had appeared benign all day quickly evaporated when 
Ashwin and Jadeja started twirling away and what followed from the England 
captain was not pretty. Whilea century in Rajkot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/alastair-cook-england-india-first-test>
 was delivered in typical fashion, Cook – in contrast to his summer – has 
struggled early on here and during 50 minutes at the crease this time around it 
felt a case of when, not if, he would be trudging back.

Disastrous day for England hands India the series initiative in third Test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/28/england-india-day-three-third-test-match-report>
Two reviews in successive deliveries from Jadeja and Ashwin – both survived 
but demonstrating his unease – prompted Root to stand closer to the stumps at 
the non-striker’s end. A well‑intentioned move from the vice-captain to assist 
further consultations it may have been, but one that one also summed up the 
pressure his partner was under.

And then finally it told, with Ashwin sliding one between bat and pad to 
rattle the stumps to get the better of the left-hander for the seventh time. 
Cook’s grim day would then be spent watching on as his opposite number, Virat 
Kolhi, led the frenetic celebrations following three further dismissals.

This has been a personally challenging subcontinental winter for Cook, who 
spent just 18 hours with his newborn baby before flying out for the series with 
Bangladesh and at times it is fair to say he has looked exhausted. Pre‑series 
talk of this being his last in charge was played down, however, while his boss, 
Andrew Strauss, has insisted the job takes less out of him than it used to.

But too many more days like this one on tour and, given Cook’s open desire to 
one day enjoy the freedom of simply being a player again, the pair’s next 
meeting to discuss his continuation may last longer than the box-ticking 
exercises held previously.
 