
Alastair Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> has been named 
captain of the International Cricket Council Test team of the year despite 
leading England to victory in just one of their last eight matches.

England have four representatives in the team – more than any other nation – 
with three Australians and one player apiece from New Zealand, India, Sri Lanka 
and South Africa in a side picked by former Test greats Rahul Dravid, Gary 
Kirsten and Kumar Sangakkara for the sport’s world governing body.

We do not know if Joe Root is the right man to lead England, says Farbrace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/21/joe-root-england-cricket-captain-paul-farbrace-alastair-cook>
The trio based their decisions on player performances between 14 September, 
2015 and 20 September, 2016, which means England’s recent troubles on the 
subcontinent in Bangladesh and India are not covered.

The 12-month qualifying period did not begin well for Cook as England lost a 
three-Test series 2-0 to Pakistan in October 2015. Overall in the period he led 
England in 14 matches, with six wins, three draws and five losses.

Cook, who is considering his position as England captain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/alastair-cook-refuses-discuss-future-england-captain-fifth-test-india>
, has been picked alongside Joe Root, wicketkeeper Jonny Bairstow and Ben 
Stokes.

Root has become the focal point of the batting order in recent years and 
averages 52.80 in his Test career while his Yorkshire team-mate Bairstow broke 
a 16-year record for the most Test runs in a calendar year by a wicketkeeper in 
2016. Stokes’s performances with bat and ball have helped him to establish 
himself as England’s first-choice all-rounder.

There was no place in the XI for India captain Virat Kohli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/virat-kohli>, who sits second in the ICC 
Test batting rankings, while No1 batsman in the world and Australia captain 
Steve Smith is the 12th man in the squad.

David Warner, Adam Voges and Mitchell Starc are the three Australians chosen 
by the committee, with Kane Williamson picked from New Zealand.

Spinner Ravi Ashwin, who helped India to a 4-0 victory over England, is 
India’s sole representative while Sri Lankan left-arm spinner Rangana Herath 
and seamer Dale Steyn of South Africa complete the lineup.

The ICC also announced that Ashwin had been voted as its Cricketer of the Year 
for 2016.

Jos Buttler was the one England player in the ODI team of the year, while 
Heather Knight and Anya Shrubsole were the English representatives in the 
women’s team of the year.

ICC Test Team of the Year 2016

David Warner (Aus); Alastair Cook (Eng, capt); Kane Williamson (NZ); Joe Root 
(Eng); Adam Voges (Aus); Jonny Bairstow (Eng) (wicketkeeper); Ben Stokes (Eng); 
R. Ashwin (Ind); Rangana Herath (SL); Mitchell Starc (Aus); Dale Steyn (SA). 
12th man: Steve Smith (Aus).

ICC ODI Team of the Year 2016

David Warner (Aus), Quinton de Kock (SA, wk), Rohit Sharma (Ind), Virat Kohli 
(Ind, capt), AB de Villiers (SA), Jos Buttler (Eng), Mitchell Marsh (Aus), 
Ravindra Jadeja (Ind), Mitchell Starc (Aus), Kagiso Rabada (SA), Sunil Narine 
(WI). 12th man: Imran Tahir (SA).

ICC Women’s Team of the Year

Suzie Bates (NZ), Rachel Priest (NZ, wk), Smriti Mandhana (Ind), Stafanie 
Taylor (WI, capt), Meg Lanning (Aus), Ellyse Perry (Aus), Heather Knight (Eng), 
Deandra Dottin (WI), Sune Luus (SA), Anya Shrubsole (Eng), Leigh Kasperek (NZ). 
12th woman: Kim Garth (Ireland).
 