
A deflated Alastair Cook said he will take time to decide whether he is still 
the right man to lead England in Test cricket, away from the emotion of his 
side’s harrowing batting collapse in the fifth Test asIndia wrapped up a 4-0 
victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/england-india-cricket-test-series-defeat>
.

Bowled out for 207 in 88 overs on a pitch that had produced only 17 wickets in 
the previous four days, England suffered their second successive innings defeat 
at the hands of Virat Kohli’s world No1 team after scoring 477 in the first 
innings and having been 103 for no loss after lunch. The cascade of dismissals, 
with Ravindra Jadeja taking seven for 48, made for grim viewing.

England end series on sorry note as fifth Test collapse gives India 4-0 win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/england-india-cricket-test-series-defeat>
“I’ve got to go away and do some thinking,” said Cook, after his 58th Test as 
captain. “This is not the right time to make decisions as big as that. I need 
to go home first, enjoy Christmas as much as I can do and then come back in 
January and look to plan with Andrew Strauss and see what’s the right decision 
for English cricket.

“The energy is low and you can make foolish decisions at those times. It’s 
tough, it’s been a tough tour. When you lose it becomes very hard and it can be 
quite a lonely place. We knew it would be a pressured day and at some stage 
we’d lose a couple of wickets in clusters. We weren’t good enough or skilful 
enough to stop that momentum.”

Cook, whose removal on 49 by Jadeja for the sixth time in the series began a 
collapse in which the final six wickets fell for 15 runs, is expected to meet 
Strauss, the director of England cricket, in the second week of January. They 
will decide whether he or his expected successor, Joe Root, should lead the 
team into the Ashes series next winter.

The year began with England winning in South Africa to go fifth in the world 
rankings and despite a brief flirtation with top spot in the summer, it is 
where they will finish. Their eight defeats matches their worst calendar years 
of 1984, 1986 and 1993, albeit having played two Tests more than the first two 
of those. There is a growing sense of stagnation, and Cook, when asked about 
this, replied: “That’s a fair shout.

“We have played some good cricket at times and played some pretty average 
cricket. We haven’t been very good when we’ve been behind in games, by finding 
a way to survive in tricky situations. When we’ve been in front we’ve 
dominated. It’s been a frustrating year and to lose that many times with the 
players we’ve got is disappointing.”

Cook said he would like to captain Jadeja and Ravi Ashwin, the world’s No1 
spinner, following their 26 and 28 wickets in the series respectively. “Without 
being disrespectful [to Moeen Ali and Adil Rashid], without two world-class 
spinners, winning in these conditions is going to be hard. This is as hard as 
it gets for this side at the moment,” he said.

Kohli, Cook’s opposite number who was named man of the series for his 655 
runs, was able to reflect on India setting a record unbeaten run of 18 Tests 
and described the 4-0 victory as the complete performance. “From when we were 
put under pressure in the first game in Rajkot, then coming back and winning 
the next four, with three tosses going against us and four including the first 
match, as a captain that is satisfying,” he said.

“It’s been a memorable 2016 for the India cricket team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/indiacricketteam> and one I am very proud 
of, especially with a team in transition. But this is just the foundation that 
has been laid to carry on for many years.”
 