
In a pop world obsessed with the new, "Band makes amazing music on fourth LP" 
isn't a headline to excite tastemakers. Hot Chip were far more celebrated when 
sampling Todd Rundgren and singing self-mockingly about cruising around Putney. 
Yet One Life Stand is the London five-piece's best album by a mile, containing 
10 tracks on whichHot Chip <https://www.theguardian.com/music/hot-chip> stopped 
smirking and opened their hearts.

Love suffused every song: romantic on I Feel Better, sexual on Thieves in the 
Night, fraternal on Brothers, a touching anthem to male friendship ("I will 
drink my fill with my brothers/ And if one of us is ill then my brothers/ Will 
watch over me"). Then there was the title track: a five-minute, 
steel-drum-embellished marriage proposal in which singer Alexis Taylor 
ecstatically dedicated himself to being a one-woman guy.

Musically, One Life Stand fell into two halves, old-school vinyl style. The 
first side was an onslaught of pounding, chorus-heavy pop; acoustic pianos, 
squiggly synths and hands-in-the-air breakdowns decorated Hot Chips's strongest 
and most direct songs yet. The second half was more subtle, marked by a couple 
of showstopping ballads; Slush, whose "homana homana homana homana" backing 
vocals brought together the folk club and the rave-up, and Keep Quiet, a 
perfect evocation of wide-eyed, wee-small-hours pondering.

Taylor's vocals were more English, fragile and fey than ever, but the contrast 
between them and co-singer Joe Goddard's deeper tones was never played for 
laughs, as in the past. Instead they produced harmonies that were both yearning 
and euphoric, particularly when cooing "My heart has flown to you just like a 
dove" in the impeccable final song, Take It In, which started off with 
squelchy, dissonant synths and ended in elegant piano.

On One Life Stand Hot Chip alchemised influences ranging from UK garage and 
Arthur Russell to The Blue Nile and Behaviour-era Pet Shop Boys. Tracks such as 
I Feel Better – half Inner City, half Robert Wyatt – demonstrate that they can 
take their place in the pantheon of great British songwriters. Its emotional 
intelligence and melodic sophistication meant One Life Stand was a mature 
record, but never a boring one. After all, its ultimate message was to make the 
most of the one life that you've got.
Free music - One Life Stand 
<http://www.we7.com/album/One-Life-Stand?albumId=429911>  