
Some years the most celebrated albums are perfect jewels whose brilliance 
derives from focus and consistency. Guardian critics' two favourite albums of 
2010, however, are more like treasure chests, where the whole point is 
abundance and some stones may be more precious than others. Yet they point in 
opposite directions: Kanye West's towards the celebrity self and Janelle 
Monáe's towards the wider world — Me v Us, as Neil Tennant recently put it when 
talking about modern pop.

At just 25, Monáe is absurdly, vertiginously talented. Although 2007's 
Metropolis: The Chase Suite had a cult following, a lot of people's first 
exposure to her was aYouTubed appearance on Letterman 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vMyc148Do_Q> in May, performing Tightrope. Tiny 
in her tuxedo, she had that rare and compelling combination of razzle-dazzle 
exhibitionism with a sense of something mysterious and withheld. It was, in the 
words of the James Brown routine she unapologetically homaged, Star Time.

Nina Simone used to complain that though she moved between styles people 
always labeled her jazz because she was black. The same goes for Monáe and R&B. 
It's part of the mix on The ArchAndroid but it's uselessly reductive as a 
general description. You could extrapolate whole albums from single tracks 
here: a tough, cerebral hip-hop record from Dance Or Die, an updated 
Innervisions from Locked Inside, a freaked-out funk opus from Mushrooms & 
Roses, and so on. She belongs to the tradition of OutKast, Prince, David Bowie 
and Funkadelic – artists who command so many genres that they become one 
themselves.

The ArchAndroid is proudly OTT, as any record that purports to tell the story 
of a time-travelling android freedom-fighter from the year 2719 is bound to be, 
but its excess comes off as generosity rather than bombast. On first exposure 
the collision of oddball aspiration with old-fashioned showbusiness 
determination to entertain is dynamite, but it reveals its richness over time. 
It's an album big and spacious enough for you to wander around in, noticing 
fresh marvels (like the hymnal folk of 57821 or the Bowiesque Of Montreal 
collaboration Make the Bus) with each circuit. And though the Broadway-trained 
Monáe might, with less control, be a mere showboater, shifting roles with 
look-what-can-I-do alacrity, her performances are oddly egoless. Each change of 
tone – cutesy to spooky, playful to histrionic, joyous to dazed – is calibrated 
to serve the song rather than the singer.

Instead of trumpeting solitary genius, The ArchAndroid celebrates history and 
community. In interviews Monáe is quick to position herself as a member of a 
collective, the Atlanta-based Wondaland Arts Society (along with her co-writers 
and producers, Chuck Lightning and Nate Wonder), the product of a good 
education (she thanks her old school teachers in the sleevenotes) and the 
beneficiary of a torrent of stimuli, from Fritz Lang to Rodgers and 
Hammerstein, the Harlem Renaissance to Afro-futurism, Salvador Dali to Philip K 
Dick. Yet the influences never overwhelm her because the current that crackles 
through them is fresh and unpredictable and true.

No other album this year seems so alive with possibility. Monáe is young and 
fearless enough to try anything, gifted enough to pull almost all of it off, 
and large-hearted enough to make it feel like a communal experience: Us rather 
than Me. She may yet surpass it – let's hope so – but for now, this is one hell 
of a show.
 