
"Frames of colour flicker between ancient and brand new," Jack Barnett murmurs 
on White Chords, creating an image that sums up These New Puritans' second 
album, Hidden. The anxious multiple personalities of the Southend band's 
underrated debut, Beat Pyramid, are now better framed, but they still flicker 
with fractious energy. Meanwhile, it's the dynamic between the ancient and 
brand new that makes Hidden so rich and rewarding, as on Attack Music, where a 
children's choir is matched with the cheapest-sounding choral synth preset 
imaginable.

The references to pre-Socratics on Beat Pyramid are here joined by Galahad, 
Memnon, and Osiris. And added to their debut's fascination with colours, metals 
and numbers are other elements, in every sense of the word: the water worlds of 
Elgar's Sea Pictures are invoked on Drum Courts–Where Corals Lie, and earth and 
fire on the martial tracks like We Want War.

Some of the most exciting "alternative" bands of the last few years – Dirty 
Projectors, Vampire Weekend, Salem – are ones who bask in the global musical 
cosmopolitanism allowed by the internet, avoiding pastiche to forge something 
fresh, specific and sophisticated.These New Puritans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/these-new-puritans> are equally cosmopolitan 
– dancehall syncopation runs through the album, keeping We Want War's breakdown 
sections buoyant, and giving the playful, romantic Hologram the glint in its 
eye.

Pretension is an accusation often thrown at this band, who are too cool for 
the avant garde, too serious for the mainstream, and whose instruments 
admittedly include cracker-covered melons smashed with hammers. But their 
talent matches their lofty reference points. Hidden pulls off the double trick 
of feeling both contemporary and timeless; both global and set in a conflicted 
but potentially Edenic England. It's something few other British bands seem 
capable of: an engagement with true mystery, a sonic inquiry into history and 
existence. "I don't think the stars are symbols," Barnett sings, "but let's 
find out."
 