
What times we live in: strange and mutable, packed with incident. But every so 
often, something occurs that makes the very ground shake beneath us, an event 
of such importance that those who witness it feel the world stop for a moment, 
before continuing: but different now, changed for ever. We take these events 
with us to the grave, remembering not only their details, but the details of 
our own lives at the moment they occurred. In years to come, we feel driven to 
recall both, wryly contrasting the mundanity of the latter with the magnitude 
of the former.

Lost in Showbiz feels confident that, at some distant point in the future, 
children too young to remember Tuesday 30 October 2012 firsthand will look to 
those who bore witness and plaintively ask us: "What were you doing when former 
Celebrity Big Brother contestant Chantelle Houghton revealed that her 
ex-partner, cross-dressing cage fighter Alex 'The Reidinator' Reid, had 'turned 
my house into a sex dungeon'? 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/lostinshowbiz/2012/oct/30/chantelle-houghton-sex-dungeon-twitter>
"

For a mercy, there isn't space here to go into the full chain of events that 
led up to Houghton's Twitter explosion: the marriage proposal on live TV, the 
breakup, Reid's demand that Houghton stop airing their grievances in public – 
a demand fairly mind-bogglingly made in a video shot by Now! magazine during an 
interview with showbiz reporter Dan Wootton.

But even before his former partner took to the microblogging site, it was 
shaping up to be a bad week even by the standards of The Reidinator, a man who 
earlier this year had to contend with his ex-wife Katie Price enlivening a 
press conference to promote her new novel by informing the assembled 
journalists that she had once stuck a vodka bottle up his bum. There wasan 
appearance on Celebrity Come Dine With Me 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2012/oct/31/review-come-dine-with-me-halloween>
, during which Reid's cage-fighting tough-guy image took a bit of a knock when 
he was relentlessly bullied by, of all people, TV medium "Psychic" Sally 
Morgan, his woes compounded by glamour model Nicola McLean offering her frank 
appraisal of his personality: "I think he's a bit of a twat." Worse, the 
resulting programme wasoutranked in the ratings by both Autumnwatch and Watchdog
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/nov/01/alex-reid-come-dine-with-me>. But 
such things paled into insignificance following Houghton's online tirade, in 
which she also accused him of texting prostitutes about orgies, arranging to 
meet a man "for sex" while dressed as his alter-ego Roxanne, and trying to get 
his hands on money placed in a trust fund for their daughter.

And yet, at the sex dungeon revelation, Lost in Showbiz found itself swelling 
with a certain admiration for Price's hapless former paramour. For one thing, 
there was Houghton's insistence that he had thus transformed her home when she 
was eight months pregnant with their child. Lost in Showbiz doesn't know how 
much experience its readers have of heavily pregnant women, but it can remember 
only too vividly the tsunami of wildly unpredictable hormonally driven emotions 
that constituted the latter months of its own wife's pregnancy, a period of its 
life that Lost in Showbiz spent in a permanent state of bafflement and fear, 
having quickly realised the most innocuous of queries, suggestions or actions 
could provoke a tearful screaming fit. It recalls with a shudder the evening 
that the question "this gravy's nice, what's in it?" was inexplicably answered 
with a lengthy and expletive-laden monologue, delivered at enormous volume 
centimetres away from Lost in Showbiz's face, in which its multitude of 
failings as a husband and indeed human being were expounded on in wounding 
detail. Frankly, by the time its wife was eight months gone, Lost in Showbiz 
was so terrified of her that it wouldn't turn over the TV without getting 
written permission first. Given that, at the same period in his partner's 
pregnancy, The Reidinator apparently took it on himself to turn her house into 
a sex dungeon without telling her, Lost in Showbiz can only boggle at his 
fearlessness. This man doesn't deserve our opprobrium, he deserves a medal for 
bravery. What a pity this year's Pride of Britain awards have already come and 
gone.

Second, who can fail to be impressed by the sheer scale of the enterprise? 
After a thought-provoking afternoon's Googling, Lost in Showbiz can report that 
the internet abounds with websites offering helpful information on the 
construction of a DIY sex dungeon: presumably you don't just ring up your local 
builders and ask them to give you a quote for one ("Are you Check-A-Trade 
registered? I'm looking for someone to make me a sex dungeon"). Their advice 
ranges from the practical ("a cheap Ikea overdoor shoebag makes ideal storage 
for sex toys and nipple clamps") to the eye-watering ("construct a testicular 
vice out of perspex so the victim's crushed flesh can be seen") to sad tales of 
BDSM "bloopers" ("unfortunately the load-bearing studs were not conveniently 
located for a fucking sling"). But they all have one thing in common: they're 
about converting a single room. By Houghton's account, Reid converted her 
entire house. The remodelling works were so extensive she had to move out and 
"sleep on my flat floor".

Without wishing to condone turfing a heavily pregnant woman out of her own 
home in order to create a more pleasing environment in which to slake your fell 
desires, Lost in Showbiz once again feels impelled to take its hat off to the 
Reidinator. A whole house! This is a man with vision!Come Dine With Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/come-dine-with-me>? He should have 
been on Grand Designs. What an episode that would be: Kevin McCloud sadly 
shaking his head as a supporting wall is inadvertently removed to make way for 
a mock gynaecological examination table, and earnestly asking: "Did you not 
consider having this so-called 'rim chair' made out ofsustainable materials?" 
Lost in Showbiz doesn't want to tell Channel 4 its business, but it is fairly 
certain more people would tune into that than Autumnwatch.
 