
The US government says the New York Yankees star Alex Rodriguez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-rodriguez> gave his cousin nearly $1m 
last year to keep secret Rodriguez’s use of performance enhancing drugs.

In court documents filed last week in Miami, federal prosecutors said 
Rodriguez made four wire payments totalling $900,000 between June 2013 and 
September 2013 to settle a threatened lawsuit by Yuri Sucart, who had worked as 
Rodriguez’s personal assistant. The total value of that settlement could be 
nearly $2m, when factoring in other elements of the deal such as a home, a car 
and insurance.

Sucart, in a letter from his lawyer, threatened to expose Rodriquez’s PED use 
if he was not given $5m and a home.

“Unfortunately for you, litigation with you over his employment agreement will 
reveal all of the duties you instructed Yuri to perform, so he can prove in 
court what he earned, what you owe him for services rendered and what you 
promised,” Sucart’s attorney Jeffrey Sonn wrote in a proposed settlement letter 
to Rodriguez dated 18 December 2012.

A spokesman for Rodriguez did not immediately return a request for comment on 
Tuesday.

The payments from Rodriguez to Sucart were revealed after the government said 
Sucart did not fully disclose his personal financial situation during the 
process that would determine if he should pay some portion of the costs related 
to having a federal public defender. The government said Rodriguez also paid 
Sucart about $500,000 in salary from 2008 through 2013.

Sucart, according to the documents, told the court he does not own a house or 
a car, but the government alleges that he does “pursuant to the settlement with 
Rodriguez”.

Sucart, in that proposed settlement that stemmed from what he said was a 
wrongful termination by Rodriguez, asked for $5m and a life estate for him and 
his wife.

In return, Sucart offered continued silence and even a willingness to remain 
Rodriguez’s personal assistant if so desired.

As part of the settlement, court records show Rodriguez is also spending up to 
$300,000 to provide medical insurance for Sucart and his family for five years. 
He also provided Sucart with a 2009 Chevrolet Suburban and the right to stay in 
a home he owns for five years – with the promise that the house, which lists 
Alexander E Rodriguez as its owner, would be deeded to Sucart if the terms of 
the deal including “preservation of confidential information” were all 
satisfied.

The Daily News of New York first reported the contents of the new suit and 
related filings.

Sucart was charged in August with conspiring to distribute testosterone and 
human growth hormone. He has pleaded not guilty and is scheduled for trial in 
February.

The charges are related to work prosecutors said Sucart did with Biogenesis of 
America. That now-closed anti-ageing clinic’s owner, Anthony Bosch, has already 
pleaded guilty and is cooperating with investigators.

Sucart is among a group accused of acting as recruiters who set up meetings 
between athletes and Bosch, authorities said. Professional athletes paid up to 
$12,000 a month for the drugs provided by Biogenesis, while high schoolers paid 
up to $600 a month. All the clients were promised that the substances would not 
be found through drug testing, prosecutors said.

Bosch, who met Rodriguez through Sucart in July 2010, provided evidence that 
weighed heavily in the decision to suspend the three-time AL MVP for the entire 
2014 season.

Rodriguez admitted six years ago he used performance-enhancing substances 
while with Texas from 2001-03, and has denied usage since.

Rodriguez played in just 44 games in the 2013 season, hitting seven home runs 
to increase his career total to 654, fifth-most in baseball history.

He is still owed $61m on the final three years of his contract with the 
Yankees and will turn 40 next July. He could receive an additional $6m each for 
five milestones that the team designates as historic achievements, the next of 
those believed to be tying Willie Mays’s 660 home runs for No4 on the all-time 
list.
 