
Independent proprietor Alexander Lebedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alexander-lebedev> has said it was up to his 
editors to decide which political parties to back in May’s general election, 
but added that he supported Labour’s plan for a mansion tax so long as the 
money raised was “properly spent”.

In an interview with the Guardian on Tuesday, the Russian businessman said 
that he wouldn’t interfere in the editorial or political decisions of his four 
UK newspapers, theLondon Evening Standard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/london-evening-standard>, Independent, 
Independent on Sunday and the i.

The Standard has consistently favoured the Conservative party, with Lebedev’s 
son Evgeny – who owns the titles with him and runs them on his behalf from 
London –interviewing David Cameron last week 
<https://instagram.com/p/zX57avojy-/?modal=true>. 
 Evgeny Lebedev interviews David Cameron 
The Standard has vociferously opposed the mansion tax, which Labour says will 
apply to properties worth more than £2m, most of them in London, with the 
​estimated £1.2b​n raised to be spent on the NHS.

Asked if he thought the plan was a good idea, Lebedev said: “If the government 
is in a position to spend the money properly, then yes.” He added: “It would 
affect a very limited number of people in this country ​… non-domiciled 
foreigners buying from offshore with dirty money; they’ve invested a lot in 
property in this country and not given anything [back] but are depriving 
ordinary Londoners.”

Lebedev insisted ​he still had enough money to sustain his British media 
empire, despite his financial problems in Russia, and losses of “three of four 
million” from his struggling local TV stationLondon Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/london-live>.

He predicted that the newspapers would break even later this year – something 
the Independent titles have never achieved – but admitted that ​mistakes​ had 
been made in launching the station for the capital. “They thought [the] 
audience would grow rather faster, miscalculated the budget,” Lebedev said of 
London Live, which launched in March 2014.

Asked what the channel’s future was, he said he would “wait and see” whether 
things had improved by May, when the channel would be just over a year old.

He admitted he was no longer a billionaire. “I’ve fallen off the Forbes list,” 
he said, adding he was “glad as people look at me like an ordinary person”. His 
assets have shrunk after attacks on his Moscow National Reserve Bank. Lebedev 
said he had shut its operations, returning $1bn (£645m) to customers.

Lebedev – who co-owns the liberal Moscow newspaper Novaya Gazeta – has been a 
vigorous critic of Russia’s ​leadership and bureaucracy, though he has been 
careful not to criticise President Vladimir Putin directly.

‘Don’t call Putin a thug’

In recent months, he has publicly supported Russia’s president. “Don’t call 
Putin a thug. Don’t compare him to Hitler or Saddam Hussein. It doesn’t help at 
all,” Lebedev said.


London Live local television station to cut third of staff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/27/london-live-local-television-station-to-cut-third-of-staff>
He acknowledged that Russia was “involved’ in eastern Ukraine, where 
separatists backed by Russian weapons are trying to carve out a pro-Moscow 
mini-state. But he added: ​“About 95% of those who have taken up arms are 
locals.”

Lebedev said there was “no simple solution” to the war in Ukraine, but said 
that it might be possible to resolve the question of Crimea – annexed by 
​Russia last year – when Ukraine eventually joins the EU.

The two sides were so far apart on Ukraine, they couldn’t agree what was 
actually happening there, Lebedev suggested. “If you are outside Russia, you 
see one point of view. If you are inside, the opposite. There is a huge 
cultural barrier between Russia and Europe. It’s such a pity.”

Lebedev said he hoped Putin would go back to the modernising policies of 
2000-2004 ​– his first presidential term –​ and not cling to power forever and 
end up “like Mugabe”.

When questioned about the latest allegations involving the Telegraph Media 
Group allowing commercial interests to dictate editorial policy, Lebedev said: 
“I don’t think this country needs anything additional, there are quite enough 
independent journalists. If you compare this to what we have back in Russia ...

​“I’ve never interfered [in editorial] or been approached by those wanting to 
do so. ​Probably because my face shows what I would do.”

The Independent’s decision not to join Ipso, the new press regulator, was up 
to its editor Amol Rajan, he said.
 Former president of the Soviet Union Mikhail Gorbachev and Alexander Lebedev 
in 2007. Photograph: Richard Young/Rex Features 
Lebedev is a former high-flying KGB spy. In the 1980s, he worked at the Soviet 
embassy in Kensington in London. He denied that Russia had gone back to the 
Cold War, and said western sanctions against Moscow over Ukraine had been 
ridiculous and ineffective. One of those sanctioned by the EU last week was 
Joseph Kobzon, a popular Soviet-era singer. Others have been minor separatist 
officials.

“Kobzon is not the kind of person [who should be on the list],” Lebedev said. 
Instead of imposing “sectoral sanctions” which punished ordinary Russians, the 
west should consider targeting oligarchs, many of them with assets in London, 
and westernised Kremlin officials. Lebedev said that some top figures in 
Russian politics made millions, fled to the UK, and then passed themselves off 
as “dissidents who were always against Putin”.

In 2003, Lebedev stood unsuccessfully in Moscow’s mayoral elections. He has 
now given up attempts to enter Russian politics, scrapping plans to form a 
moderate opposition party with Mikhail Gorbachev, the former Soviet president. 
The two remain friends.

Gorbachev was physically frail but mentally sharp, Lebedev said, adding: “My 
wife and I recently visited him with our kids. We drank vodka together.”
 