
Brigitte Bardot, Cary Grant, Elizabeth Taylor, Gary Cooper, Grace Kelly, Alex 
Reid <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alex-reid>. Yes, to the roll-call of 
stars who have glittered in the Cannes firmament, you may add another: the 
former Mr Katie Price, who has been working the film festival this week in a 
performance critics are already calling his finest since he was lured back to 
Jordan's gingerbread house and ordered to clean the oven.

Since docking at the festival, Alex has indulged in such a hectic round of 
yachting, star-bothering, upbeat tweeting and cocktail-sipping that he is this 
year's standout contender for the Smarm d'Or award. Maybe you didn't hear the 
news, squares, but Alex is getting out of the business of losing cagefights, 
and into the business of losing movie roles. And we shall come to his Cannes 
presence – and an awkward-sounding encounter with Robert De Niro – in 
due course.

But first, a recap of events in our picaresque hero's life, because there may 
be those of you unaware that Alex was still a celebrity in the absolute 
technical sense. Don't feel foolish. Many assumed Alex depended on his 
erstwhile host organism for survival, and that following his forcible 
detachment from Jordan, he would be starved of showbiz nutrients and would thus 
wither and perish. Intriguingly, though, it appears the genus is adaptable – a 
survival story that contrives to be simultaneously Darwinian and a powerful 
argument against human evolution.

Remember, it was Alex who intoned shortly before his Vegas wedding to madam: 
"I just hope the public learns something from this." (Mm. I think they've been 
brought up to speed.) And following the union's sensationally unpredictable 
dissolution, it was Alex who barricaded himself into a cupboard in Jordan's 
pink mansion (I paraphrase slightly) and refused to leave, communicating only 
via celebrity magazine interviews that confirmed his status as earth's most 
suggestible human.

Eventually, he conceded defeat. The 35-year-old returned to the only other 
place he has ever lived – his parents' house – where mum Carol and dad Bob set 
about rebuilding the Reidernator. Consider that process complete.

"My mum was really not wanting me to leave, which was lovely," Alex tweeted as 
he moved into an expensive rental house last week, "but I got stuff 2 do, 
places 2 go, goals 2 accomplish!"

2 Cannes, then, and conflicting hints as to how Alex plans to follow his role 
in last year's critically misunderstood gangster movie Killer Bitch. (Did 
anyone see it? I don't think it was "in competition", as they say.) On the one 
hand, we've got his claim to be up for the lead in two Brit flicks. On the 
other, we have a newspaper report recounting what happened when Alex spotted 
Robert De Niro having a drink with Sean Penn and Kirsten Dunst at the Hotel Du 
Cap. Not wishing to intrude on private grief, we will cut to the punchline – 
"Hotel staff asked him to leave the actors alone" – and say how nice it was to 
see a pastel-suited Alex bounce back for some photos on a yacht, then tweet: 
"Having dinner with Bruno Copplor [Coppola], being all movie star like." Indeed 
he is – looking for all the world as though pale blue linen is his birthstone 
and he has just lined up a meeting with Dreemwerks.

Not that it would be first time the studio has worked with Alex. He once 
claimed to have been Tom Hanks's stunt double in Saving Private Ryan, though 
that has since been commuted to being one of those stand-ins crews use to block 
a scene while the talent is in its trailer/Los Angeles. And it was only for the 
beach landing scenes. Still, the Reidernator's verdict on the director? 
"Professional and economic; things get done. Steven doesn't have to get riled 
if something isn't working – everyone around him does the huffing and puffing." 
Ouch! That siren you just heard is the Hollywood faux-pas alert, which goes off 
if anyone is so gauche as to refer to Mr Spielberg as Steven.

Still, Lost in Showbiz will have no truck with those naifs who suggest that 
Alex's presence in Cannes cheapens the festival. At an elemental level, Cannes 
has always been about a shameless sort of attention-seeking, from Bardot 
engineering her own upskirt shots in the 50s, to miscast Sloane Liz Hurley 
getting caught sunbathing topless on the same hotel balcony year after year. In 
the shade. And don't forget Alex's family have always been steeped in cinema – 
his mother, Carol Reid, directed The Third Man, which of course took the Grand 
Prix in 1949.

We may as well just accept that "cinema's Alex Reid" is an epithet that has 
been brewing for some years. As he once reflected on his resignation from the 
Territorial Army: "To sum up, other things in my life became more important. My 
mission on earth became clearer. Change this world we live in to a better place 
through educating rather than killing, or telling stories through acting."

So let the magic commence. As Alex has remarked of his critics: "It's like 
their own self-limiting belief structure. They can't grasp the reality I'm 
creating because there is no textbook way to go about what I'm doing."
 