
It is easy to sneer at Alex Turner’s latest publicity shot. To promote new 
material and a tour for the Last Shadows Puppets, here he is, with co-frontman 
Miles Kane, sitting on the wrong bit of a sofa for sitting on, in a baby-blue 
tracksuit.

In truth, the only part that merits sneering is the mirror on the wall 
because, as Turner knows, tracksuits are on-point but off-brand, so make the 
perfect comeback look. Let’s start with the colour – baby blue – which is big 
for 2016, according to Pantone, and injects a little softness into the 
aesthetic. Then there are the cream driving loafers with no socks (see: 
Givenchy SS16) and the hair wings – not yet greying, but en route to. And 
finally the expression, proudly dour since 2004. Kane, meanwhile, has gone for 
emerald green and what appears to be a Casio watch. As an ensemble, it is soft 
on the eye and the colour palette – a bit Gucci – which shouldn’t work, but 
does.

The tracksuit is, of course, the darling of current season menswear, be it 
high-end Gosha Rubchinskiy, tech-jersey atGucci 
<http://www.mrporter.com/en-gb/mens/gucci/striped-tech-jersey-sweatpants/648940?ppv=2>
 or Adidas, so the styling figures. The tight cut and simplicity of theirs 
references Bruce Lee in Game of Death; the matchy-matchyness, Christopher 
Moltisanti from The Sopranos. They are around in music (see Madonna’s dancers 
in Adidas Originals by Jeremy Scott, Chris Brown in Dsquared2 and most of One 
Direction in lots of jersey), but have yet to make an appearance on the indie 
scene.

Turner knows the power of aesthetic in music and has telescoped through about 
five or six style decades with enviable ease since starting out almost 15 years 
ago. There was slicked-back 1950s James Dean hair, leather jackets with white 
T-shirts Turner; 1970s school parka-wearing, Chung-dating Turner; and, more 
latterly, expensive-looking 1940s morning-suit Turner. The high-fashion 
references may well be lost on the music crowd, but Turner rarely gets it 
wrong, so expect the Brit awards to be awash with Adidas for the first time 
since the great mid-1990s Oasis/Blur feud. Finally.
 