
Alexander McQueen: Savage Beauty, London

Although a maestro of traditional tailoring, Alexander McQueen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexander-mcqueen> dedicated his life to 
challenging the fashion norm. The designer’s career survey, Savage Beauty – one 
of New York’s Metropolitan Museum Of Art’s most-visited shows ever, now getting 
an eagerly awaited five-month run in London – demonstrates his refusal to sit 
still. Collections veer from the Widows Of Culloden, with its gown of pheasant 
feathers and lace-sheathed antler headdress inspired by the 1745 Jacobite 
risings, to The Girl Who Lived In The Tree, a red silk fantasy influenced by 
the British empire. To tie it all together, the curators present McQueen as a 
Romantic artist in the 18th-century mould, in love with natural forms and dark, 
emotional excess.

V&A, SW7, Sat to 2 Aug

SS

Superior Goods And Household Gods, Manchester

Staged as part of Manchester’s Wonder Women feminist festival, six artists 
tempt us with sensuous images into distinctly unsettling encounters. Margaret 
Harrison sets the scene with a reproduction of her infamous drawing He’s Only A 
Bunny Boy But He’s Quite Nice Really. The original, depicting Playboy founder 
Hugh Hefner in a bunny-girl basque, was stolen from Harrison’s 1971 London 
exhibition before the police promptly closed the show down. Meanwhile, in 
Suzanne Posthumus’s Butter Wouldn’t Melt, an almost subliminal sequence of 
retro porn flashes before our eyes as the soundtrack builds to a climax.

Castlefield Gallery, to 19 Apr

RC

Format 15, Derby

This year, evidence is the theme of Derby’s international photography 
festival, Format, which seems timely considering that the increasingly 
digitally manipulated medium is beset with truth or fiction issues. There are 
mugshots, war records and landscapes of unreal beauty. At QUAD (until 7 Jun), 
Larry Sultan and Mike Mandel’s 1970s series, itself titled Evidence, marks the 
moment when documentary images, presented out of context, started to accrue an 
unreal aura. One of the highlights will be Ed Watts’s architectural 
reconstruction of a photographic classic: William Eggleston’s Greenwood, 
Mississippi, 1973, a deceptively crude image of a corner of a red room 
featuring only a light bulb and a sexual positions poster. Visitors will be 
invited to re-snap the room on their mobiles, capturing a sculptural remake of 
a photo of next to nothing.

Various venues, to 12 Apr

RC

Carla Zaccagnini/The Parliament Of Things, Colchester

Looking back to when the suffragettes took a violent turn, attacking museum 
art and artefacts with “choppers”, Carla Zaccagnini has amassed a fascinating 
archive of news clippings and created sculptures inspired by the weapons these 
early female freedom fighters used. Complementing this is The Parliament Of 
Things, a group show exploring our present-day relationship to objects. 
Highlights include Melvin Moti’s 35mm film The Inner Self In Outer Space and 
Lucy Skaer’s American Images, raw hunks of stone salvaged from Lithograph City, 
an Iowan ghost town.

Firstsite, Sat to 31 May

SS

Idiot Box, London

Iain Forsyth and Jane Pollard’s first London exhibition since their Nick Cave 
documentary 20,000 Days On Earth saw them blossom into award-winning movie 
directors is a wall of old school TV sets, which show short films by the duo 
and by kindred spirits in the art world. It includes one of their very first 
creative forays, Chain Smoker, Tap Dancer (work pictured), created for their BA 
back in 1995, where Forsyth’s chain-smoking head appears on one monitor and 
Pollard’s silver shoe-clad tap-dancing feet on another below it, in a 
deliciously wrong mash-up of rebel cool and end-of-pier entertainment. Other 
films that are ripe with wry wit and illusion include John Smith’s Gargantuan, 
a kooky joke on deceptive camera framing that stars a “huge”, “strapping” beast 
that fills the frame, Godzilla-style, before being revealed to be a teeny 
lizard. Art’s arch comedian David Shrigley, meanwhile, sends up the male ego in 
his blackly comic animation The Artist.

Kate MacGarry, E2, to 18 Apr

SS

Pre-Pop To Post-Human, Blackpool

Taking Eduardo Paolozzi’s 1952 lecture Bunk as its inspiration, this 
exhibition of prints by 15 contemporary artists revisits the collage tradition 
in our age of digital samplings. These days, surreal juxtapositions have become 
mass-media cliches more commonly used in advertising than art; what has been 
lost is the initial frisson of dislocation, the visual affront of irrationally 
combined disparate images. Many of the artists here attempt to revive the 
thrill of disorientation through an almost perverse cut-and-paste awkwardness. 
Gabriele Beveridge, for example, strains to let the psychological fracture 
show, severing a facial profile with a rectangular void.

Grundy Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Gallery, to 11 Apr

RC

Extra(ordinary), Sunderland

Jan Williams and Chris Teasdale’s mustard-coloured Caravan Gallery arrives in 
Sunderland to celebrate the more wayward of backwater goings-on. In the mobile 
caravan itself, as well as in the Northern Gallery For Contemporary Art, they 
exhibit their photo-documentary of that which is just below the surface of the 
ordinary. Here’s a bloke with his head stuck in a bale of hay, here elderly 
locals sunbathe in the shade of a sewage building. A shop front bears the sign 
We Buy Rubbish (Crap) We Sell Antiques, while a desert landscape warns the 
public to “KEEP OFF THE GRASS”.

Various venues, to 1 May

RC
 