
Two years ago, Alexei Ratmansky was 40 years old – and already one of the most 
sought after choreographers in ballet, his inventive, versatile intelligence as 
alive in his staging of 19th-century classics as it was in the creation of new 
abstract work. So when he accepted the post of artist-in-residence atAmerican 
Ballet Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/american-ballet-theatre>, the 
company rightly felt they had scored a coup.

Today, Ratmansky and ABT still seem delighted with each other. When I meet the 
choreographer at ABT's New York base, he's just mounted a new Nutcracker. It 
has proved a triumph – justifying its eye-watering $5m (£3.2m) budget. He's 
also received near universal acclaim for his Seven Sonatas, inspired by the 
Italian composer Scarlatti, which will headline ABT's London season at Sadler's 
Wells next month. A work of airy and inward intensity, in which six dancers 
seem to generate Scarlatti's music rather than simply respond to it, the piece 
has been hailed as "spellbinding" and "miraculous".

Yet Ratmansky is showing signs of fatigue: his eyes are rimmed with red and 
his fingers keep massaging his temples. He's been working at full stretch, 
having created eight new works in two years. While he loves New York, he admits 
to feeling slightly in transit. Before coming to the job, he'd been 
choreographer and director with the Bolshoi, a company whose 230-odd years of 
history gave it a different dynamic from the buzzy, commercially savvy ABT. "I 
feel," Ratmansky smiles, "as though I'm caught between two worlds. It feels 
wrong for me to be too western or edgy. I love the work of people like Wayne 
[McGregor] or Akram [Khan]. But when I see it, my own choreography feels not 
old-fashioned, but very different. They are pushing it, while I'm just trying 
to accumulate everything I know."

Although he spent his first 24 years in Russia – born in St Petersburg, 
trained in Moscow, danced with the Kiev – Ratmansky has become an artist 
defined not just by his experience, but by his capacity to take risks. In 1992, 
he was among the first wave of Russian dancers to emigrate, going first to the 
Royal Winnipeg Ballet and, in 1997, to the Royal DanishBallet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ballet>. "If you were an ambitious dancer," 
he says, "there was nowhere in Russia for you to go."

In 2004, he was invited to return to Russia as director of the Bolshoi, at the 
time one of the most cumbersome and treacherous troupes in the world; between 
1995 and 2004, no fewer than three directors had been chewed up and spat out by 
the company's factional politics. Ratmansky admits he felt "quite sick" at 
first. "It was psychologically difficult to go back. I didn't know if I was up 
to the job. I knew this was a huge honour, the opportunity of my life, but I 
also thought it could be the most difficult thing of my career."

To outsiders, the years Ratmansky spent at the Bolshoi appeared to be a golden 
era. He revitalised its repertory, with new works by himself and others; he 
encouraged a brilliant generation of dancers. Awards flooded in. Yet, while he 
had full support from the top, there was opposition from certain dancers. 
Nostalgic for the big, broad aesthetic that had been the company's trademark, 
these refuseniks thwarted all attempts to get them to move in the ways 
Ratmansky's new repertory required. "The weight of habit and tradition was 
overwhelming." he recalls.

When Ratmansky first brought his proteges Natalia Osipova and Ivan Vasiliev – 
a virtuosic partnership – into the company, he met with resistance; their 
styles and physiques did not conform to company type. Today, these dancers 
generate standing ovations and five-star reviews. "People said there was no 
place for them," he grins. "It feels good to see how wrong they are."

Fighting daily battles became exhausting, however, and Ratmansky began to feel 
his life and career were slipping away. "It just killed so much time." By early 
2008, he and his wife Tatiana, a former dancer, were eager to leave Moscow, 
feeling it was no place to bring up their son. "The city is hard to live in. 
Every apartment has two locked doors between it and the corridor: people feel a 
need to protect themselves. They stay inside." He mimes a timid huddle. "They 
don't take an interest in what's outside."

When the ABT offer came, Ratmansky was delighted, not least because it 
gave him the freedom to accept other commissions. "It's an unbelievable 
experience: I don't have to just wait for opportunities." Since 2009, he's 
worked with the Mariinsky Ballet, Dutch National Ballet, Australian Ballet and 
the Metropolitan Opera in New York. Next year, he plans to go back to the 
Bolshoi, temporarily, to create a new work based on Balzac's novel Lost 
Illusions.

This freedom matters. Music is his first inspiration: since childhood, he has 
found that he automatically sees movements, and stages scenes when he listens 
to a score; but his second is the dancers with whom he works, and he feels that 
the greater their variety, the richer his choreography. "What I admire about 
New York City Ballet dancers is their rhythmic complexity. You can see all 
shades of rhythm in their bodies. With Russians, what you see is a melodic 
thread in their dancing, an upper-body expressiveness that brings out another 
side of the work. In ABT, the dancers have a bit of both. It's good. I can play 
with that."

Ratmansky has another freedom: he can now spend his time in the studio rather 
than in a director's office. "I don't miss directing. It's too painful when you 
have to tell dancers they haven't got parts. I hated making people unhappy. 
When I'm choreographing, I'm still telling people what to do, giving them 
criticisms, but it's a positive relationship."

Certainly, watching Ratmansky rehearsing, he seems joyfully alive in his work. 
All trace of fatigue drops away as he sits forward in his seat, his body moving 
in accord with the dancers. He jumps up, mimes a gesture, tweaks a move, jokes 
and concentrates, never raising his voice. "This must almost be my ideal job," 
he says.

American Ballet Theatre is at Sadler's Wells, London EC1, 1-6 February. Box 
office: 0844 871 0090.sadlerswells.com <http://www.sadlerswells.com/>
 