
Newspapers The Guardian and Mail every day. The Times on Saturday, I like 
their magazine – and the Guardian's Review. On Sunday the Observer.

Magazines I read all of the fashion magazines – or rather, I look at them – 
and for pleasure New York magazine and World of Interiors. I see French Vogue 
and am interested in the Indian and Chinese editions. Grazia? No, although I'm 
sure there are some in the office who do get it.

Television I don't watch TV. I've never liked it and I'm liable to fall asleep.

Radio I love Radio 4 – it is very soothing, like a dummy. I listen to the 
Today programme, Any Questions, sometimes Book of the Week although its slot is 
too late for me – I've been known to sit in the car outside the office while it 
finishes.

Online I'm a great believer in paid-for content, and it's insane to think 
journalism will survive if it's not paid for; so I will sign up for the Times 
site. I also read the BBC and Guardian sites and, for blogs, all the ones on 
vogue.com. I hate shopping online, as they tend to get your order wrong.

Books The Orange prize has been a massive read, and I've been stacking up male 
writers for when it's over - a proof of Piers Paul Read's new novel The 
Misogynist, and Orhan Pamuk's The Museum of Innocence. Recently I liked the new 
Stieg Larsson, and I'm glad we've got a crime novel [by Attica Locke] on the 
Orange shortlist.

Music I really like contemporary music and that's what I do instead of 
watching TV. A real mixture, from indie, to Jay-Z's version of Forever Young, 
to the band Polar Bear. You can put Polar Bear, for example, into iTunes and 
see where the trail takes you: that's what I do while I'm cooking. No classical 
music, though – I'm unable to deal with opera.

Film I'm resistant to sitting still, so it doesn't really suit me, but I did 
recently see The Ghost and the very undervalued Boogie Woogie.

Advertising I look at advertising online to see what people are doing. You 
notice the difference across a fashion season, really beautiful ads at the 
start but by the end you get adverts for kettles.

Alexandra Shulman edits Vogue and is a judge for the Orange prize 
<http://www.orangeprize.co.uk/2010-Prize> – the winner will be announced on 
Wednesday
 