
Alex Rodriguez <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-rodriguez> received a 
loud ovation and a rare shout-out from the Bleacher Creatures at Yankee Stadium 
before walking and singling in the first plate appearances of his return to the 
major leagues after a season-long drug suspension.

Rodriguez was New York’s designated hitter and batted seventh against Toronto 
on Monday, his first time that low in the order at the start of a 
regular-season game since May 1996. This time around he went 1 for 2 in the 
Yankees’ 6-1 loss.

New York trailed 5-0 when he came to the plate leading off the third inning. 
Rodriguez worked the count full against Drew Hutchison, who was three when 
A-Rod made his big league debut in 1994. On the eighth pitch of the plate 
appearance, Rodriguez took a 91 mph fastball and became New York’s first 
baserunner. He singled to right-center on another full-count fastball leading 
off the fifth and flied out in the seventh against reliever Aaron Loup.

Rodriguez was greeted with mostly cheers and some boos when introduced before 
the game as players lined up on the field.

The Bleacher Creatures loudly chanted “A-Rod!” several times from their 
right-field seats during their first-inning roll call, even though they don’t 
normally include the DH. “It’s not typical,” Creatures leader “Bald Vinny” 
Milano wrote in an email. “Just figured he could use a bit of support. It’s 
always good to know someone is in your corner.”

Watching from the dugout, Rodriguez waved his cap twice and nodded his head.

The 39-year-old Rodriguez had not come to the plate since he struck out 
against Tampa Bay’s David Price on 25 September 2013. He missed 2014 while 
serving a suspension for violations of baseball’s drug agreement and labor 
contract. He sued Major LeagueBaseball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baseball>, the players’ union and the 
Yankees’ team physician, heightening acrimony between himself and the team, 
then dropped the litigation and served the penalty.

Rodriguez hit .286 in spring training with three home runs. He has 654 career 
homers.
 