 Blazer, trousers, matching waistcoat and shirt all Vivienne Westwood Man 
<http://www.viviennewestwood.co.uk> 
Walking stick Swaine Adeney Brigg <http://www.swaineadeney.co.uk/> 
Grooming Gary Cockerill Photograph: Jake Walters 
Alex Reid – aka The Reidinator, the cage-fighting, lightly transvestite, 
Celebrity Big Brother-winning husband of glamour-model-turned-cultural-event 
Katie Price <https://www.theguardian.com/media/katieprice> – walks into a room 
and all you can see is tan. Except that "tan" doesn't come close to 
encapsulating the intense, nuanced hues of Reid's flesh. Reid is profoundly 
brown, shiny brown – tanned to the point of being polished. I gaze into the 
hyper-pigmented depths of the skin on Reid's arms and I see shades of purple. I 
see maroons, bluey reds, rose-tinted mahoganies swirling round his monster 
biceps, across his deeply muscled chest and up his sinewed throat. Alex Reid's 
tan is as shaded, deep and enthralling as the night.

The man and his tan stand centre left in a photographic studio in south 
London. The entire complex has been hired for a day to accommodate Reid, who is 
promotingAlex Reid: The Fight of His Life, his new television programme. There 
are people everywhere. Reid's assorted reps whisper, grimace and dispense heavy 
wads of press release at every opportunity. Huddles of TV hacks test their 
digital voice recorders in darkened recesses. Hair and make-up people drink 
Diet Cokes and scroll listlessly through BlackBerry screens. In the studio 
space next door, a red and gold Roman chariot is hauled into position; sand is 
spread around the floor, assistants erect tripods and unfurl reflector panels. 
Gladiator girls in bikinis and swirling red capes with thong sandals laced 
halfway up their calves wander around, looking for the loos.

Reid is introduced to me by one of his three – maybe even four – press 
representatives. He shakes my hand, smiles (a little tightly), and says, 
"Hello." His accent is semi-affluent estuary, his manner is breezy and blokey 
and a little wary. I am, after all, a journalist.

It's something of an effort to deal with Alex Reid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alex-reid> as a 34-year-old human being and 
not as a two-dimensional tabloid construct. Ten months ago, no one had heard of 
him – well, no one who wasn't a particularly rabid fan of teen soap opera
Hollyoaks (Reid played the England footballing fiancé of long-running character 
Jude Cunningham for a handful of episodes in 2001); or of the mixed martial 
arts scene, which is how Reid officially earns a living.

He first entered the wider public consciousness in the midsummer of 2009, when 
he became the latest romantic interest of Katie Price, the woman formerly known 
as Jordan. Price had enjoyed a brief respite from public censure after marrying 
and bearing two children by pop star Peter Andre, who she met during a stint on
I'm aCelebrity <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/celebrity>, Get Me Out 
of Here. Andre is an engaging puppy dog of a man-boy, the public liked him and 
so began liking Price more, by extension. But Andre and Price separated in 
March 2009 after four years of marriage, amid rumours that she had had affairs. 
Public and tabloid feeling turned against her once more.

Price responded to her re-vilification with defiance. First, she took a 
well-documented, hedonistic tour of Ibiza, and then she took up with Reid, who 
she introduced to the world via the medium of her reality TV show,What Katie 
Did Next. Initially, Reid seemed like the perfect accoutrement to this latest, 
baddest incarnation of Price – an over-muscled, presumably aggressive, cipher 
of a man. His public profile evolved shakily in the months that followed. He 
was a gift to the tabloids. In August, he was criticised for glamorising rape 
via a role in a gangster film entitledKiller Bitch, and accused of hiding a 
cocaine habit ("Alex's Snorty Secret"). In October, he was exposed (by Price, 
somewhat spuriously) as a crossdresser who liked to be called Roxanne 
("Roxanne: I Don't Have To Put On No Red Tights"). In November, he and Price 
separated very publicly when Reid flew to Australia to propose to her, hot off 
the set of her second foray into theI'm a Celebrity jungle. They reconciled 
shortly afterwards.

So far, so predictable… and then, in January this year, Reid was announced as 
a contestant in the last-ever series of Channel 4'sCelebrity Big Brother. The 
public and the press prepared itself for a bloodbath. Reid entered the house to 
a chorus of jeers from the lurking crowd. The expectation was that he'd be 
booted off the show at the first opportunity.

We definitely hated Alex Reid. Until, of course, we didn't. Until we loved him.

It took a show or three for the viewing public to realise that Reid was 
adorable. Charming, hapless, silly. Soft to the point of being placid, even. He 
wore a lurid pink mankini with panache. He made the other housemates tea. And 
the moments in which he appeared to have found God with the help of 
evangelising Hollywood actor Stephen Baldwin were among the most delicious in 
the show's history. Three and a half weeks after he entered the house, Alex 
Reid emerged as the show's winner, having beaten bookies' favourite Vinnie 
Jones. The crowd that jeered him on the way in cheered him rapturously on the 
way out. "I thought it was a joke. I thought someone had paid them," Reid tells 
me later. He celebrated his win by accompanying Price on a trip to Las Vegas, 
where they got married.

Newly, truly famous and unexpectedly popular, Reid began work on a TV project 
– a six-parter for Bravo which will follow him as he trains to fight the UK's 
reigning middleweight Ultimate Challenge champion, Tom "Kong" Watson in 
mid-May; a contest that will be screened "as live" as the finale to the series.

Which is why he and I have sat down for this interview, at a table situated up 
some stairs, away from the kerfuffle and the wandering gladiator girls.

Reid is hulking. Not especially tall but preposterously, hilariously muscular; 
even fully dressed (in lime-green tracksuit bottoms, a faux-vintageStar Wars 
T-shirt, green flip-flops) it's clear he is built to a cartoonish approximation 
of buff perfection. And he's handsome in the same overblown, cartoonish way. A 
too-delicate lady-nose perches incongruously in the midst of his butch, 
chunkily cheekboned face. He had the nose remodelled, he says, because his 
original nose got mashed up in fights and it was getting difficult to breathe. 
"Which is also why I keep doing this!" he says, spreading the fingers on his 
left hand wide and pushing the end of his new nose up into an ugly snout. 
"Sorry! It's not very nice, I know. It's just that I still can't really 
breathe." His teeth are predictably white. Only his ears are imperfect – large 
and ungainly. "I might have them done," says Reid, thoughtfully. "And Botox is 
good for scarring. Quite a lot of fighters have Botox for the scarring."

OK, I say. The first thing I'll need is some biographical information, because 
despite the huge amount of column inches you've accumulated in the tabloid 
press over the past 10 months, there's not much in the way of hard facts out 
there.

"How do you mean, biographical?" he asks.

Alexander Aristides Reid was born, 34 years ago, in Aldershot ("Home of the 
British army!") to a paratrooper father and a homemaker mother. He is the 
youngest of six, of three boys and three girls, and he would have been spoilt 
if it hadn't been for Rupert, his elder brother. "He's older by four years, and 
he was the baby. I come along, he didn't like it, so everyone spoilt him to 
make up for it." They were competitive, Rupert and Alex, they were rivals. 
Rupert always triumphed. "He's a natural athlete, captain of the football team, 
really clever at school. Got a scholarship to Oxford…"

He went to Oxford University?

"He didn't, actually. He went to another university, because he didn't 
actually want to go to Oxford, he wanted to go somewhere else. I can't actually 
remember where…"

Reid had a blissful, boyish childhood. "I'd go out and play in mud and dirt 
and… adventurous. Kids don't do that these days. Because we know… I don't 
believe anything's changed over the years, but now weknow about paedophiles and 
nasty people. Parents don't want to let their kids go out. I used to go out and 
do all sorts of crazy things. Kids don't do it now."

Does that bother you? "Nah! Since the dawn of time, there's been perversions 
in people's minds."

I meant, does it bother you that as a society we've become incredibly 
protective of our children? Over-protective, perhaps?

"Oh, I don't know about that. The fact is, this is a nasty world! And that's 
why I do martial arts."

You think ours is a nasty world? "Yes! And also a wonderful world and that's 
why I say, 'Para bellum.' They're Latin words, which I can't remember exactly, 
but they mean: 'For peace, prepare for war.' [Si vis pacem, para bellum.] 
That's kind of my motto. I mean, I wish I could be more like Gandhi or Jesus. 
Turn the other cheek. Because whenhe came across confrontation, he just let 
them strike him down! But for me,no! I mean, I left the army because I didn't 
want to kill people, but I believe we do need soldiers. There are evil people. 
Like Adolf Hitler. Those sort of things are going off all the time in the 
world."

Absolutely, I say. Now if we could just go back to the biographical details…

Reid was "both really good and really naughty, complete yin and yang" at 
school. "Not mega-clever. More creative. Art. Drama. Not so much the more 
standard subjects. Not so much English. Not so much maths."

Did he want to be famous? "Yes!"

As what? Presumably not as the adjunct to a glamour model super brand? "An 
actor. I wanted to be a ninja. A superhero. An astronaut. A soldier. I've done 
all that."

Really? "Not an astronaut. Not yet."

At 13, he got chubby. "Then I watched the Rocky film, and said to my mum: 'How 
does he get to look like that?' And she said: 'Well, he works out. He trains.' 
So I started training. I wanted to be like Rocky."

At 15, he began practising martial arts, having decided he also "wanted to be 
like Bruce Lee, like Van Damme". He started competing in karate and kung-fu 
tournaments, moved on to kick boxing, judo and jujitsu.

At what point did he join the army?

"Well, I left school and I went in the TA, which is not quite the army. Well, 
it was the army! It was! Do you know TA? Slightly different. Territorial Army. 
And I was at the same time doing modelling, which was quite funny."

In 1996 ("Or '95 or something like that,") Reid entered himself into Storm 
Model Management's annual competition to uncover modelling talent, and won. He 
was booked for a few photo shoots, a bit of catwalk. Did he enjoy it? "Not 
really. I felt like a piece of meat." Disillusioned by modelling, Reid switched 
to working as an extra on films. "I was Tom Hanks's body double in… in… the 
year Diana died, whenever that was." It was 1997, and the film wasSaving 
Private Ryan. "And I remember talking to one of the actors on set – I think it 
was Van Damme [I suspect it was actually Vin Diesel, Van Damme isn't inSaving 
Private Ryan] – how do you do this? And he said: 'If you're really serious, go 
to acting school.'"

So in 1999, Reid left the TA and allowed his mother to fund him through a year 
at Guildford School of Acting. "I could have done with more. Acting's like… 
non-stop." He paid his mum back within a year of graduating thanks, mainly, to 
the gig inHollyoaks. After landing that, he says, he thought he'd arrived. "I 
thought: 'I got my break! I'm going to be famous! A superstar!'"

Things didn't pan out quite like that. "Nothing. Nothing at all. And that was 
humbling. Fighting was paying more bills than acting. So, I didn't turn my back 
on acting, I just put it to one side. I thought: 'Concentrate on the fighting.' 
Which is a bit like acting, anyway. It's a performance. It's a competition. And 
you're entertaining. Like Russell Crowe said inGladiator: 'Are you 
entertained?' You know. And competing in an arena, itis a show, and it can be 
like going on stage. It's just that it's painful if it goes wrong."
And, oh dear, there it IS – the inconvenient truth about Alex Reid. As well as 
being a tabloid sensation, the husband of a notable, the unexpectedly sweet, 
naïve, freaky product of an endlessly, inventively celeb-obsessed culture – 
Alex Reid is also a fighter. He makes money by battering, or by attempting to 
batter, other humans, and the specific fighting scene he's involved in – mixed 
martial arts, cage fighting – is an especially violent one.

Alex Reid has a troublesome record as a competitor. He's lost as many fights 
as he's won, and it's not clear if he's any good. He has a reputation for 
playing up, for a provoking and arrogant manner, and he wasn't popular among 
fans of mixed martial arts even before he began the relationship with Katie 
Price, which, I understand, has made him even less popular. Still, he seems to 
like it.

I wonder how someone starts cage fighting in the first place. Are you a 
naturally aggressive person? I ask. "No! Not at all!" he says, his tone 
scoffing.

So what makes you want to fight? "Proving yourself. Competing. Facing your 
fears."

What does it feel like, to fight someone? "For me, it's about being in the 
moment. Maybe it's not a fight. Maybe I'm playing tennis. Or making sushi. I'm 
so into it. Making the perfect sushi. Doing the perfect… whatever it is. 
Business deal. Whatever. That's the secret. I'm performing the perfect 
technique."

So fighting is about doing something you've trained to do and doing it well, 
rather than battering someone's head in? "Yes. Mmmm! Yup! That isbeautiful to 
watch. That isexquisite."

He says he expects to win the fight against Tom "Kong" Watson, the fight that 
will mark the climax of the TV show, but: "win, lose or draw, it's about 
inspiring. Fighting – it's not all about: 'I wanna be a tough guy!' It's not: 
'I wanna be a big, tough guy!'"

Did he ever just want to be a big, tough guy? "I did, at that. I did. But, 
more, I just wanted to defend myself."

Defend yourself against what, though? These days, Reid shares Price's 
splendid, high-security glitter palace in Surrey, but even before he led the 
privileged life of a 21st-century celebrity, I can't imagine he felt especially 
threatened, or especially vulnerable.

"I think this world is a fantastic place. But I think it's responsible to know 
about the possibilities, the dangers… If you're going into the jungle, you want 
to take a big machete with you, just in case a snake catches you. Or you want 
to have your anti-snake venom, if you're going into a snake pit."

Is that how life feels to you, Alex Reid? Like you need metaphorical 
anti-snake venom on hand at all times? "Er, not really. I'm just being 
responsible. It's there if I need it."

Reid is not anxious to talk about his marriage to Katie Price. The official 
line is that unlike Price's marriage to Peter Andre, a union that formed the 
basis ofKatie & Peter, a reality TV show franchise, Price's relationship with 
Reid is a private affair. But clearly, it needs to be addressed. You've married 
a very strong woman, I say. "Fantastic!" Reid says. "Love it!" He pauses. 
"Balance!" he adds, opaquely.

Are you attracted to strong women generally? "Yeah! Absolutely! Yeah! It's 
sexy! You think: 'Ah!You're not going to take any shit.'"

Are you inclined to give shit? Do you need to be kept in line? "No. I don't 
need to be kept in line at all."

When did you know that you were in love with Katie?

"Two weeks. Yeah. It was: 'Hold on a minute! What's going on here? Boing! 
Love! OK. Get on with it. This feels right. Oh! This feelsreally right.'"

I notice that he doesn't say Katie Price's name out loud, that he speaks in 
careful, truncated sentences.

Were you nervous of the intensity of your feelings? "Little bit! Course! I'm 
older. I'm older… Little bit more cynical. And it was: 'This doesn't happen 
like this!' Comeon!"

Were you concerned about beginning a relationship with such a public figure?

"I didn't know what I was letting myself in for, I had no idea. Of course, I 
knew who shewas. You can't live in this country and not. But I didn't 
understand all the fuss. And now, I'm married to her."

Is that a bit surreal?

He nods, extends the ring finger of his left hand towards me wordlessly, and 
waggles a heavy platinum wedding band under my nose. Diamonds are embedded 
along it.

Nice, I say. "Mad," he whispers.

Later, I'll ask him if he has any weaknesses. He'll pause for a long time, and 
then say, softly: "Katie Reid," and I don't think he's doing it for effect. He 
is, I think, besotted.

We chat some more. Reid tells me that he likes being a stepfather to Price's 
three children (eight-year-old Harvey, whose father is the footballer Dwight 
Yorke; five-year-old Junior and three-year-old Princess, her son and daughter 
by Peter Andre): "Nice. Really nice. Come back from LA on Sunday, first thing: 
Junior's come in, punching and kick- boxing me! Jumping on me and beating me 
up! Princess wants to join in. Real love! It's like: 'This is my family!' Mad!'"

Price has been vocal about how keen she is to have children with Reid. "I 
can't wait to get Reidinated! I can't wait to get preggy!" she's said, adding 
that it would be especially nice if she could announce that she is in fact 
preggy by "the end of this series [ofWhat Katie Did Next]". Reid tells me he 
had a dream in which he was holding a baby. Are you broody, I ask. "Hell, 
yeah!" he says.

I wonder what's next for him, what will happen after the fight with Tom "Kong" 
Watson airs, and his new show winds up. Reid says he's auditioning for various 
TV dramas, that he hopes to reignite his acting career. He also says that fame 
is no longer important to him.

What is, then? "What I want to be is known for something amazing. So people 
might not even know my name, but… for example, who was the guy who invented the 
Eiffel Tower? Was it Mr Eiffel?"

Monsieur Eiffel, I believe.

"Or the pyramids! Something that will stay for ever! You know! You make 
something, and it's just there! It's your mark!"

You want immortality?

"Exactly! For ever! We're all immortal, because we have children, and, that's 
you. And I believe, not to go all spiritual, but you could go that way, with 
spirits and what have you."

You believe in life after death? "All day long! But, to create something…"

You want to create a great work? "Yes! A great work! A masterpiece!"

There's a clattering on the stairway that leads up to the space Reid and I 
occupy. Katie Price appears. She is resplendent in royal blue and tailed by 
Gary Cockerill, her friend and make-up artist, and another regular feature on 
her reality show.

"Hello! Hello beautiful!" says Reid. "Oh, the boss is here, now! She's going 
to be cracking the whip! Pshaw! Pshaw!"

"I'm not going to say anything," says Price, and she lowers her mega-tanned 
Pippa doll frame into a chair.

"I like your hair!" says Reid.

"Do you?" she says, vaguely.

"Help yourself to some of that," Reid says, and pushes a plastic Bento box of 
sushi in her direction, the remnants of his lunch.

"You full?" asks Price.

"Not really," says Reid. "But I've had some of that already… I spilled soy 
sauce on my trousers." Then: "Oh! You look beautiful."

Price laughs. "What are you after?"

"No. You really are stunning."

"Thanks, Alex," says Cockerill.

I'm allowed one more question.

Are you vain, I ask.

"Who isn't? We all want to look good. People see it as a negative quality. 
It's not! Yes, I'm very vain. I want to look good. I don't want to be called 
'Mr Potato Head'. Or 'Craggy Builder'. Or 'Monkey Boy'. Which is what I am 
called in the press."

He looks woeful. I giggle.

"Exactly! You're laughing! I laugh. It is hilarious. There was a picture of me 
[in theSun] as Mr Potato Head. But the only thing is, I can't go out of the 
house without looking half-decent. That's one of the things about this fame 
that I don't like." He shrugs.

I wrap up, say bye bye and leave Reid, Price and Cockerill to it. As I go, I 
overhear Cockerill refusing more sushi on the grounds that he isn't doing carbs.

That evening, I catch 10 minutes of What Katie Did Next on ITV2. It's the 
episode in which she and Reid get married. Katie Price holds Alex Reid's big, 
tanned head in her hands, and says: "Youare handsome. I don't care what anyone 
says." Reid looks befuddled and pleased in equal measure.

I find myself feeling exactly the way I did three or four episodes into Reid's 
stint onCelebrity Big Brother – suddenly, unexpectedly fond. You can try to 
disapprove of Alex Reid. You can try to hate what he represents – the 
worst-case scenario of modern celebrity, or brutish thuggery. You can pity him 
because you suspect he's a pawn in Katie Price's unknowable endgame. You can 
even dismiss him as stupid. But ultimately, all Reid is – all Reid will ever be 
– is a nice bloke, with a daft tan.

Alex Reid: The Fight Of His Life is on Bravo, Monday nights at 9pm
 