
Alexandra Shulman <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alexandra-shulman> begins 
by telling a story against herself. Some years ago she went to Paris to 
interview Naomi Campbell, and on the Eurostar back plugged headphones into her 
tape recorder and began to transcribe. An interview with Shulman herself had 
just been published in the Evening Standard, "and the people opposite me had 
the Standard. They kept on pointing at me, so I was sort of embarrassed, but I 
thought, 'Oh well, it's obvious that they can see ...' Not at all. What was 
happening was that the Campbell interview was being broadcast across the whole 
of the Eurostar carriage. I'd plugged it into the wrong bit, and they were 
trying to tell me. It was mortifying."

The story achieves many things quite neatly: its self-deprecation puts her 
visitor at ease; it establishes her as a journalist not too grand to do her own 
transcribing; it punctures, efficiently, any misguided expectation that the 
editor of Vogue, the glossiest magazine of them all, might herself be an image 
of perfection; establishes her as, in fact, quite normal – except, of course, 
most jobbing journalists aren't the subjects of profiles in the evening papers, 
or find themselves causing national news stories when they tick clothes 
designers off for shrinking sample sizes (as she did in June), or suggest that 
women might be making themselves hard to employ by taking a year's maternity 
leave for each child and then requiring flexible hours, asshe did last month in 
the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-1226157/Vogue-editor-Alexandra-Shulman-asks-boss-hire-woman.html>
.

Her fifth-floor office, at the end of a dark, narrow hallway lined with 
clothes rails, is modest in size, but bright. The windows look out onto the 
trees of Hanover Square, just off Regent Street and Oxford Circus, and inside 
it's shiny and white: white meeting-table, white chairs, white orchids, all 
setting off a big clear bowl of red tulips. Cards and sketches are lined neatly 
above her desk – a John Galliano dress for her to wear to the Golden Age of 
Couture gala in 2007; a birthday card from her stepdaughter. The card is a 
mock-up of a cinema poster for "The November Issue": scenes include Shulman 
with US Vogue editor-in-chief Anna Wintour; Shulman's son; and one of her 
plonked unceremoniously on a kerb, immersed in a book. Shulman famously reads 
her way through the longueurs between shows; she is a judge for next year's 
Orange fiction prize and is currently bracing herself for the workload by 
getting what will no doubt be the longest book, Hilary Mantel's Wolf Hall, out 
of the way first.

In an age that fetishises fashion and the arbiters of fashion, in which people 
flock to see The Devil Wears Prada and The September Issue, and tune in every 
week to Ugly Betty, Shulman can easily create a slight frisson by saying, 
baldly, that "Vogue is not my personal taste, really. I think of it more as a 
kind of newspaper. It's reporting on what's out there, to some extent, with me 
editing." This is in fact an entirely sensible approach, because it plays to 
her strengths (she doesn't come from a pure fashion background, having worked 
for a record company, for the Sunday Telegraph and as editor of GQ), but 
compared with editors such as French Vogue's Carine Roitfeld, who has moulded 
that magazine to her personal taste and confessed to using tranquillisers daily 
to control the stress, Shulman stands out.

"I haven't ever tried to be a sort of perfect, cool character who doesn't have 
the problems that everyone else has," she says. "I guess I've done it by being 
determinedly – 'Alex, she's so real,' you know?" She has a deliberate voice, 
warm eyes, and a good laugh. She answers all questions, even personal ones 
thoughtfully and evenly – but with little eye contact. Instead she addresses 
the far corner of her office, the table, Hanover Square; she hugs herself 
protectively, or hides her head in her hands or behind her hair.

"Though," she adds, with a sudden laugh, "there was a newspaper piece which 
was kind of a round-up of all the editors of Vogue, and it was like the Russian 
one and the Italian one – and the description of me was 'chain-smoking 
50-year-old Toyota-driving divorcee' and I thought, 'Hmm,bit too much reality, 
actually.' I could have done with a bit more 'cool ice‑maiden'."

Shulman grew up in London, the daughter of Milton Shulman, a Canadian who 
arrived in London during the war and became the Evening Standard's theatre 
critic, and Drusilla Beyfus, a journalist who herself worked at Vogue and has 
written a book on modern etiquette. (Her sister Nicola is a literary critic who 
is writing a biography of Thomas Wyatt, and is married to the marquess of 
Normanby; brother Jason is an artist.) They lived in Belgravia and she went to 
St Paul's Girls' school, where, one lunchtime, the headmistress announced to 
the whole school that "Alexandra Shulman's mother has said she is not to have 
potatoes". It was actually Shulman's father, prone to chunkiness himself, who 
was most worried, specifically that if she was too overweight she'd never find 
a husband. She tells a story about going to visit him when he was seriously 
ill. "I was going to the intensive ward, and I came down the corridor, and this 
very robust voice greeted me, 'God, Alexandra, you've put on weight." And 
I thought, 'OK, he isn't going to die yet.'"

Where some might make this the basis of a misery memoir, it seems to have made 
her robust in turn: "I'm about 10 pounds larger than I want to be at the 
moment. I've always been, 'Why can't I be thinner?', but I obviously don'treally
 care about it, otherwise I would be, you know." She also has a bracingly 
realistic attitude to ageing. "It is a huge help to have been nice-looking but 
never very beautiful," she wrote in Vogue when she turned 50. "For those whose 
identities are completely bound up in their good looks, the diminution 
is terrifying."

Size, and the exigencies of size, are of course a huge issue in the fashion 
industry, and she is increasingly concerned by it. It is now unusual to be able 
to get a film star, for instance, into a piece of couture. Models who can do so 
are airbrushed to make them look bigger and healthier. Carefully planned looks 
and expensive shoots have to be rearranged at the drop of a (Philip Treacy) 
hat. Can't you just ask for something bigger, I suggest. She laughs. "No. You 
do not ring up Miuccia Prada and say, 'Hey, we need another one, right now, 
three inches bigger.'"

In the event, she did write a letter to leading designers, asking them to 
increase sample sizes. Did she get any replies? "Everyone said that they 
understood the issue, but most people thought that really it didn't apply to 
them. I do think there has been a very slow creeping movement to adjust things. 
But I don't mind saying I am disappointed in the industry's reaction to this 
particular issue, because I think it's out of keeping with what most people 
feel. I think it's one thing taking a point of view because you are the 
creatives and you can't create by popular demand – no artist does that – but I 
think when you've got society as a whole not really admiring something I think 
it would behove people to pay a bit more attention to it. But frankly, one 
magazine alone – I can't start just using size 12 models. It's not going to 
happen."

Shulman studied social anthropology at Sussex University, arriving just when 
its radical heyday was beginning to curdle. "There were a lot of long-haired 
trolls having kind of,occupations, with a lot of stereotyped feminists 
literally in dungarees and cropped hair and – it just seemed very knee-jerk to 
me. The time was changing so much at that point, and nobody seemed to say 
anything very intelligent. Obviously I am a feminist.Obviously. Because you 
know, I reap the benefits of everything that's been done, and I work, and 
operate in a way that I'm very grateful to be able to. But I've obviously also 
got a kind of intolerance of various aspects, I suppose. My mum was – still is 
– a journalist, and had three of us and worked all the time and everything, and 
yet never banged on about women's rights and all of that kind of thing. She 
just did it. And so I think I just always felt, 'Oh get on with it. Get a 
life.'"

Her article about maternity leave came from that experience, she says, as well 
as from having been a single mother herself, who kept a big job even though 
when she took it, at 34, in 1992, she wondered if it meant ruling out 
motherhood and marriage forever. It wasn't just the sheer size of the job, it 
was "partially because I knew I'd be working in a place that was so 
women-centric, and I didn't think I was going to … be flooded with men I might 
marry." She turns her head to the window, dips under her hair, and laughs in 
embarrassment. "Oh, it sounds really dumb. But it was a thought I had. It 
wasn't as much a thought as how would I ever manage to get on an aeroplane, 
though. That was far more worrying to me."

She had her son Sam when she was 37, and separated from writer Paul Spike when 
she was 40, acquiring a stepdaughter to raise on the way. She has known her 
current partner, journalist David Jenkins, since she was 17 and he an 
"impossibly cool" 27; they got together on a weekend, some months after her 
father died. "It was so strange, because I had literally known him [Jenkins] 
all my life. Anyway, it's very, very nice."

As a single mother she got a nanny and worked full-time and at one point was 
so desperately worn out she considered quitting (it was in facta piece by Gaby 
Hinsliff, in the Observer, about actually quitting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/nov/01/gaby-hinsliff-quits-working-motherhood>
, which prompted her to write the Mail article). She thinks a year's leave is 
too long – for the mother, for the office, for the replacement, for everybody, 
because by then they will have established patterns that are hard to break. She 
knows she is unusual in being able to afford a nanny, but insists she was 
mainly addressing other women like her, who can afford these things but choose 
not to, putting the onus on their workplaces instead. "What I don't really 
understand is people having big families and thinking that their office can 
make it all right for them."

I suggest that she is, in effect, upholding a status quo – the assumption that 
presenteeism is all, that the current model should not be tinkered with – to 
make it truly family-friendly, for example, instead of women-friendly, which in 
effect entrenches inequalities of childcare. "I'm not a polemicist, and it's 
quite possible that had my experience been different then maybe I would have 
viewed it all completely differently. Maybe if there had been the option of 
another person being there half the time, paying half the money, all of that, I 
would have thought, 'We can juggle'. But that wasn't my experience."

Her remarkably sane separation of work and personal life – she once confessed 
that no famous designers had become personal friends; she says she is 
completely focused when she's at work, and immediately switches off when she 
leaves; she's chic, but refuses to dress as though she's providing any kind of 
fashion leadership – is also the result of experience. Partly, she says, it is 
because "I'm quite competitive. I'm not going to compete on a level I can't 
win." But it isn't just that. In her second year at Sussex she fell ill with 
glandular fever and had to go home. "I also had a kind of a nervous breakdown 
there, which the glandular fever was probably a symptom of. I got terrible 
panic attacks. I couldn't be on my own, I couldn't go outside, I couldn't 
travel anywhere." It happened again in her early 30s. "Essentially, you think 
you're going to die. Nobody can convince you that you are not about to die. And 
that's really terrifying. Even to walk out of here and to the bank over the 
road would have just seemed an inconceivable thing, that one would not collapse 
in the street.

"I came out of it by being treated, through therapy and medication, for quite 
a long time. I always sort of slightly worry that it might happen again. [One] 
thing I gleaned from it was possibly that I felt trapped both times – different 
things were trapping me. That's quite important to me, to not feel trapped. So 
I think maybe that did inform a decision to not try to be something that I felt 
was going to be a strain on me. I think, particularly in this industry, where 
image is so important – if you try and be something that isn't what you really 
are, it can be terribly damaging."

• This article was amended on 8 December 2009. The original said that 
Alexandra Shulman divorced writer Paul Spike when she was 40, and got together 
with her current partner David Jenkins "the weekend after" her father died. 
This has been corrected.
 