
Alfred McAlpine <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alfredmcalpine>, the 
support services company that maintains all Sainsbury's stores, today agreed a 
reduced £572m takeover offer from Carillion - one month after accepting a 
higher bid.

Sources close to the takeover discussions said the 558p per share proposal was 
a "good offer" but admitted that the lower price - after agreeing 585p per 
share in November- was a "pragmatic recognition" of stockmarket uncertainty.
Carillion <https://www.theguardian.com/business/carillion> chief executive John 
McDonough headed off concerns that the company had encountered internal 
problems at its target, stating that due diligence had not unearthed glitches 
in McAlpine's books.

"We are confident this transaction can deliver significant value for the 
shareholders of the enlarged group," he said. Carillion sweetened the reduced 
offer by increasing the cash element of a cash and shares proposal. Under the 
revised terms, the cash portion will rise from 25% to 30% with the remainder 
paid in new Carillion shares.

Analysts at Panmure Gordon said: "A recommended offer at a lower price is a 
good move plus a greater cash element should help persuade McAlpine holders."

Roger Urwin, McAlpine chairman, said the agreed bid was an "excellent 
strategic fit" and was good value for shareholders.

McAlpine, which also turned down a 570p per share bid from Carillion in 
October, has seen its shares fall from a year high of 615p to less than 550p. 
Shares in the group fell 19.25p to 529.5p this afternoon. Carillion stock fell 
12.5p to 350.75p.

Investors have backed consolidation in the support services and construction 
sectors, believing that major infrastructure work such as the £16bn Crossrail 
scheme will award the most important contracts to companies capable of handling 
large projects. The same argument is also thought to apply to support services. 
Carillion maintains all BT property, while McAlpine's clients include Bank of 
Scotland and Sainsbury's.

Carillion is also an important player in the PFI market and its construction 
contracts include nine schools in Renfrewshire and the Harplands psychiatric 
hospital in Staffordshire. McAlpine recently sold its portfolio of PFI projects 
in a £52m deal. The combined business will generate turnover of around £5.3bn 
and Carillion expects cost savings of £30m from the takeover. The acquirer 
added that it expected job losses from headquarters and back office staff.
 