
Algeria came from behind to begin their Africa Cup of Nations campaign with 
victory over South Africa. After a goalless first half Thuso Phala gave South 
Africa the lead but his team-mate Tokelo Rantie missed a penalty and Thulani 
Hlatshwayo’s own-goal levelled the scores. Faouzi Ghoulam and Islam Slimani 
then took their side to victory, leaving them level withSenegal – who beat 
Ghana 2-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/19/ghana-senegal-africa-cup-nations-match-report>
 – at the top of Group C.

The first half was a quiet and goalless affair, though Sofiane Feghouli’s 
header tested theSouth Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southafrica>
 keeper, Darren Keet. At the other end Rantie’s pace twice got him in behind 
the Algeria defence but he was unable to take advantage. Dean Furman went 
closest before the break, his 25-yard blast tipped on to the crossbar by the 
Algerian goalkeeper, Rais M’Bolhi.

M’Bolhi again had to be sharp to thwart Sibusiso Vilakazi and Thabo Matlaba in 
a two-on-one chance and then parry Andile Jali’s near-post effort.

The game burst into life in the second half, with South Africa going close 
when Vilakazi headed Phala’s corner powerfully wide and soon taking the lead.

The Tottenham Hotspur midfielder Nabil Bentaleb lost possession and Vilakazi 
played a neat one-two with Rantie, who backheeled the ball into the path of his 
team-mate. The striker then squared to Phala who struck home from six yards.

Moments later South Africa had the chance to make it 2-0 as Aissa Mandi 
brought down Vilakazi in the area amid calls for a red card. The referee 
produced just a yellow, however, and Rantie hammered the spot-kick against the 
crossbar.

Algeria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/algeria> came close to an 
equaliser but Keet kept them at bay with a spectacular double save from 
Slimani’s backheel and follow-up header.

But they were soon level through the unfortunate source of South Africa’s 
Hlatshwayo. Yacine Brahimi crossed from the left and Hlatshwayo could only send 
his header looping over Keet and into the net.

South Africa were almost ahead again straight from the kick-off as Vilakazi 
found himself one-on-one with M’Bolhi and the goalkeeper made a smart save with 
his feet. And it was Algeria who instead took the lead thanks to a great solo 
effort from Ghoulam who cut in from the left, shook off his man and slammed a 
shot inside the near post.

Keet was then culpable as Slimani ran on to Saphir Taider’s neat through-ball 
and his finish squirmed straight through the keeper’s hands – Algeria’s third 
goal in 16 minutes. Slimani then wasted the chance for another with a poor 
touch but his side had done enough.
 