
The Algeria coach Vahid Halilhodzic has resigned following the side’s 
successful World Cup campaign. The Bosnian saw Algeria into the knockout stages 
for the first time in their history in Brazil before anextra-time defeat to 
Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/30/germany-algeria-world-cup-last-16-match-report>
 in the last 16.

He announced his departure in a statement on the official website of the 
Algerian Football Federation, taking a swipe at the press as he went by saying 
he would “never forget nor forgive” their treatment of him.

“The only sour note, which I want to confront, is the behaviour of certain – 
though thankfully not all – members of the press, who never ceased to 
stigmatise not only my work but also me and my family,” he said. “I will never 
forget nor forgive that.”

The rest of the statement, however, was more positive. “I am proud of my 
record after serving out my contract with the FAF,” he said. “Having lived for 
three years inAlgeria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/algeria>, my family 
obligations and the attraction of new sporting challenges weighed heavily on my 
decision.”

Speculation in the media has linked Halilhodzic with the Turkish Super Lig 
side Trabzonspor. Algeria’s World Cup exploits won them many admirers, not 
least in their buccaneering 4-2 win over South Korea in Group H. They also drew 
with Russia and took the lead against much-fancied Belgium en route to second 
place in the group behind Marc Wilmots’ side, before pushing Joachim Löw’s 
Germany all the way. That led to calls for 61-year-old Halilhodzic to stay on, 
including from the country’s president.

Halilhodzic added: “I want to thank, first of all, his excellency president 
Abdelaziz Bouteflika, whose warm words profoundly touched me. I also want to 
thank prime minister Abdelmalek Sellal for his encouragement and kind wishes, 
and the president of the FAF, Mohamed Raouraoua, with whom we have worked for 
three years to realise our objectives and who put at my disposal a squad with 
all the necessary means to achieve this difficult mission.

“I wish to pay tribute to the players and the technical, medical and 
administrative staff who gave me every assistance throughout this mission.

“The wonderful Algerian public wished me well since the day I first arrived 
and have remained loyal to me. I will always keep the fond memory of the 
extraordinary welcome they gave us on our return from the World Cup.”
 