
As an anatomist – as anybody – looking at the pages of Leonardo da Vinci's 
notebookson display in the Queen's Gallery 
<http://www.royalcollection.org.uk/exhibitions/leonardo-da-vinci-anatomist>, 
Buckingham Palace, is a humbling and mind-bending experience. But my first 
reaction to the beautifully displayed pages, each sandwiched between two sheets 
of glass so that you can view both sides, was the smallness of his notebook. 
Smaller than the trusty Moleskines that contain all my scrawls: not much larger 
than A5, in fact. But Leonardo certainly crammed a lot into that space. Each 
page is covered in minutely observed details of anatomy, framed by copious 
notes in his tiny, spidery mirror-writing (because it was easier for a left 
hander, or perhaps – I like to think, anyway – because it would make it 
difficult for anyone else to read and steal his ideas).

I've seen these images so many times before: the two skulls, sectioned to show 
the cavities within; a man and woman doing it, fused in coitus; the muscles of 
the back, the arm, the leg; the extraordinaryrust-tinted foetus 
<http://www.royalcollection.org.uk/collection/919102> curled up inside its 
cut-open womb, like a kernel inside a strange fruit. But previously, I'd only 
seen photos, reproductions. Here I was gripped by their originality, their 
freshness, their immediacy: marks made on paper, in metalpoint and pen and ink, 
by a human hand 500 years ago. What they reveal is the understanding achieved 
through the observation of nature, completely undiminished by the passing of 
centuries and the accumulation of theory.

His mind is open to the facts as revealed to him, not through the writings of 
wise men but through direct observation. He looked into the body of a human and 
saw it for what it was: a complex, beautiful, and strange piece of machinery. 
He may not have understood how it all worked but he knew that the answers lay 
in such observation. And his notebooks are wonderful because you see him 
striving for this understanding, as he draws what he sees, what he has 
dissected.

Are we trapped by our own theory when we look at his work today? I think so. 
Scholars writing about his work have been effusive about his masterly knowledge 
of anatomy, but at the same time seem to relish spotting errors, as though this 
underlines the idea of scientific progress: Leo was good, but of course he's 
not as good as us, today.

So I looked round this new exhibition, and found that there was a little 
smugness in the identification of errors. Leonardo was human! He thought the 
uterus was connected to the nipple! He thought the spinal cord was connected to 
the penis!

Well, I'd caution those authors to be less ready to pounce on errors. Perhaps 
some of these "errors" originate in the eye of the beholder. Might a drawn 
connection between a uterus and a breast represents something else – a 
different type of communication? Without knowing about the "love hormone" 
oxytocin, perhaps he's suggesting a more subtle connection between uterus and 
breast. And there are splanchnic nerves leaving the sacral part of the spinal 
cord and carrying nerve impulses to the penis.

There's an extraordinary page of legs: well-muscled legs, the bones of the 
pelvis and legs – apparently human in proportion but a bit horse-like in their 
shape. Perhaps Leonardo had mis-drawn a human pelvis, being more familiar with 
equine anatomy. But what if he was deliberately playing with the anatomy – to 
see if the elements of a horse's leg could be rearranged to stand like a human?

In a drawing of an old man's abdomen, the modern note suggests that Leonardo 
is wrong in showing paired vessels stretching up to the umbilicus: there should 
only be one umbilical artery on each side. But we know from other drawings that 
this man's liver was cirrhotic; we'd therefore expect that veins around the 
umbilicus – usually insignificant – had enlarged to provide a bypass for blood 
around the hardened liver.

Perhaps I'm an apologist. But I'm also inclined to believe observation. I was 
in the dissection room teaching anaesthetists a couple of weeks ago, when one 
of them complained that the cadaver "erroneously" showed a nerve in the wrong 
layer. Well, this was a real body he was arguing with.

For me, Leonardo's notebooks represent a triumph and a tragedy. How wonderful 
that we can see the workings of this man's mind, 500 years on. But how tragic 
that his own generation did not benefit from his discoveries. His notebooks lay 
unpublished for centuries. A few pages were copied and published as etchings at 
the end of the 18th century but it took until 1916 for all of Leonardo's 
anatomical papers to be published. They remain, to a modern anatomist's eye, 
utterly extraordinary and breathtaking in their scope and accuracy.

In science perhaps more than any other discipline, we stand on the shoulders 
of giants. Knowledge accumulates: a ratchet effect is produced. But that 
depends on the knowledge gained by each generation not being locked away.

As much as we may mourn the non-publication of Leonardo's notebooks, what 
about the limits on dissemination of knowledge today? Scientific advances are 
often bound up in obscure journals, accessible only to the cognoscenti in 
universities, inaccessible to the public unless they wish to pay through the 
nose. How fantastic, then, to learn that the government is getting on with the 
process off opening up our cache of publicly funded academic research to the 
public, even seeking the advice of the founder of Wikipedia, Jimmy Wales.

Five hundred years on, we are only just realising the power of free knowledge. 
The internet should make it easy, but it's not a new idea. Go and look at 
Leonardo's notebooks and you'll understand that power. We need to throw open 
the doors of our libraries.

Alice Roberts is professor of public engagement in science at the University 
of Birmingham
 