
Super-indie All3Media has finalised the £40m acquisition of Optomen, the 
production company behind shows including The F Word, in a deal that will net
Gordon Ramsay <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gordonramsay> millions.

All3Media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media>, which owns a group of 
independent producers responsible for shows including Midsomer Murders and 
Skins, has acquired Optomen and One Potato Two Potato, which was set up as a 
joint venture with Gordon Ramsay in 2008.

Ramsay is set to make millions from the deal, as reported last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/aug/06/gordon-ramsay-all3media-optomen>
, from his 50% stake in One Potato Two Potato as the company is responsible for 
making all of his hits, including The F Word and the US versions of Ramsay's 
Kitchen Nightmares, Hell's Kitchen and MasterChef, a co-production with 
Elisabeth Murdoch's Shine.

"I'm very happy to be joining All3Media and look forward to growing One Potato 
Two Potato in the UK and in America," said Ramsay. "Twenty years of working in 
kitchens has taught me that success is always a team effort, and with the help 
of the team at All3Media I'm confident we can take things to the next level and 
soon reach three potato, four potato and more."

Optomen is also responsible for Heston's Feast with Heston Blumenthal and 
Police, Camera Action!.

The deal also includes New York-based Optomen Productions, which has produced 
programming including Worst Cooks in America and Monsters Inside Me for US 
networks.

A key rationale for Optomen doing the deal was to attempt to grow the company 
internationally, a particular focus being on Ramsay and One Potato Two Potato.

"The television landscape has changed dramatically and now feels like the 
right time to benefit from the scale and experience of All3Media," said Pat 
Llewellyn, managing director of Optomen. "The support they will give us on the 
business side will allow us to spend more time doing what we love most, working 
with the best talent to make fantastic programmes that people want to watch."

The terms of the deal were not disclosed but it is understood to be 
potentially worth about £40m. The payment will involve an upfront fee and a 
long earn-out period for Ramsay, Llewellyn and other key staff, with 
significant performance targets attached for them to hit the £40m.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 