
The UK independent production firm All3Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media> has bought Illumina Digital to 
expand its multimedia division, it has been announced today.

In its 10-year-old history, multimedia production firm Illumina's credits 
include websites for Who Do You Think You Are and teen soap Wannabes for the 
BBC as well as for the Breaking the News behind-the-scenes project for Channel 
4.

All3Media did not disclose how much the deal cost it, but digital media 
director Andy Taylor - formerly managing director at Channel 4 New Media - said 
Illumina would sit alongside its existing digital specialists North One, 
Maverick, Lion and Conker Media.

"The acquisition of Illumina Digital positions All3Media as the UK's leading 
producer of digital content and makes it very well placed to benefit from the 
rise of the internet as an entertainment platform," he said.

The Illumina managing director, Andrew Chitty, said the deal would allow the 
firm to "turbo-charge" its relationships with commissioners and producers.

"We all know the digital future is one where the audience will want to 
experience content across TV, the internet and mobile," he said.

"Broadcasters and brands are beginning to realise that audiences have already 
shifted their behaviour and their businesses depend on finding people who can 
create these compelling experiences."

The All3Media chief executive, Steve Morrison, predicted the group would see 
digital increase from 5% of its total revenue to 40% within three years.

On Monday, All3Media announced a deal with web TV site BlinkBox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/sep/15/independentproductioncompanies.digitalmedia>
 that will see more than 150 episodes of shows including Shameless and Peep 
Show available on the site for free.

· To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 