
This week MediaGuardian 25, our survey of Britain's most important media 
companies, covering TV, radio, newspapers, magazines, music and digital, looks 
atAll3Media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media>.

While All3Media-owned Company Pictures was making The White Queen last year, 
All3Media was itself pondering the issue of succession that drives the plot of 
the Wars of the Roses drama.

It surprised some when one of the most powerful women in advertising, Farah 
Ramzan Golant, was named as the successor 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/jul/26/all3media-appoints-ad-boss-new-ceo>
as chief executive officer to All3Media co-founder Steve Morrison.

Yet her appointment points to where majority shareholder Permira wants to take 
the "super-indie" which is on track to turn over £515m of revenue this year, up 
from £473m in 2012.

All3Media was formed in 2003 by Morrison and his former ITV colleagues, David 
Liddiment and Jules Burns, after they bought Chrysalis's TV business for £45m. 
The group, organised in a much-prized federal system, has grown to encompass 18 
companies.

They include Company (producers of The Village and Inspector George Gently); 
Objective (Peep Show, The Cube and Fresh Meat); Lime Pictures (The Only Way Is 
Essex); Bentley (Midsomer Murders) and One Potato, Two Potato – the company set 
up by Gordon Ramsay and Kitchen Nightmares producer Optomen, itself owned by 
All3Media.

Non-UK subsidiaries include leading German company MME Moviement and New 
Zealand's South Pacific Pictures.

Aside from the traditional content-makers, the All3Media group also includes 
the brand content agency Kameleon, distributor All3Media International and 
Little Dot Studios, set up in March 2013 to "bridge the gap between television 
and YouTube" by helping "YouTube creators grow their channels and brands, 
enhance their creativity and (should they wish) make the transition to 
television".

Unsurprisingly, given the group's size, Ramzan Golant(who describes switching 
from adland to television as "exhilarating and scary"), says she is not on the 
acquisitions trail. Instead she is focused on "creating value for the company 
and building its value". She has shown All3Media's shareholders – which include 
the private equity firmPermira  <http://www.permira.com/>– a three-year 
strategy which she says was received well. This seems to indicate that the 
group will not revisit the option of a sale for another few years.

In 2011 All3Media was up for sale for around £750m, but Permira quickly 
stopped the auction when bids failed to match expectations, and rebuffed offers 
from buyers wanting to cherry-pick from the group.

It was not the first time it has flirted with a sale, having previously hired 
investment bank UBS to look at a possible £300m sale or float that was forecast 
to earn the co-founders up to £60m each.

Recognising how the private equity model works and all it entails, Ramzan 
Golant says a sale is "their call, not mine. But they can see where they are 
now. We are already showing returns on our US investment."

There is encouraging news for All3Media as, despite pouring millions into the 
launch of All3Media America in January, revenues for the year to end of August 
2013 are on track to grow to £515m, with EBITA (earnings before interest, taxes 
and amortisation) remaining stable. Last year it was £65.1m.

US revenues are forecast to have grown by 25%, indicating initial success for 
All3Media America. It was launched as what the company called "the group's Los 
Angeles-based production centre" and gives all the companies a US 
infrastructure to funnel their formats through. Chaired by Stephen Lambert – 
whose company Studio Lambert is owned by All3Media – it has been charged with 
producing US versions of All3Media's formats and coming up with new ideas for 
that market.

Tim Westcott, principal analyst for television at analysts IHS Electronics and 
Media, says: "They are still predominantly a UK-based company. I think the 
unknown quantity is the US market. They've got a couple of ongoing commissions 
from network television. Undercover Boss is a mid-season show for CBS and they 
are in a good position with that particular format. And Kitchen Nightmares does 
well still on Fox and has had some success in other territories such as France."

New All3Media shows coming up include Objective's BBC gameshow The Reflex 
<http://www.broadcastnow.co.uk/news/indies/objective-tests-reactions-of-bbc1-gameshow-rejected-by-c4/5044291.article>
 andMillion Second Quiz on NBC 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2314477/New-NBC-reality-The-Million-Second-Quiz-feature-contestants-competing-round-clock-12-days-straight-viewers-able-join-too.html>
, in which contestants compete against each other for 12 days, 24 hours a day.

It also has high hopes for The White Queen, which starts next weekend. "With 
the format market looking a bit frayed," Westcott notes, "the market is looking 
strong for historical drama, things like The Borgias, with channels like HBO 
and on-demand services like Netflix and LoveFilm".

Interestingly Ramzan Golant says that she is talking to White Queen 
co-producer Starz about another project and to Netflix about future "strategic 
alliances", as she explores how the company could be brought into big 
international collaborations and co-productions.

Key to her approach, she says, is supporting the "super programme-makers. The 
holding company can often be quite distant from its super-sellers. For me the 
relationships are everything – asking them 'what are the barriers to you 
developing?'

"We are not a machine. We won't have divisions. We have got multiple creative 
labels."

Her aim is "not to be an interventionist CEO but understand where the 
priorities are". She is looking to host new talent in a start-up under one of 
the group's existing companies.

One industry source says the question to ask about All3Media is "are you 
buying 17 earnouts waiting to happen?".

There have been suggestions that Morrison has remained rather hands-on, 
despite becoming chairman, since Ramzan Golant's arrival. She says, though, 
that it was intended that "he would be an executive chairman, someone to go to, 
a sounding board for the first six months. He's very clear I'm the CEO, 
therefore accountable for the company's performance."

Currently 50% of All3Media's revenues come from the UK and the remainder from 
the rest of the world. In this new chapter in the group's history that ratio 
will be a key indicator of the success of its expansion plans at the end of her 
three-year plan, and help determine if All3Media ends up for sale again.
 