
Wayne Garvie, the head of international production at All3Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media> – the super indie behind shows 
including Shameless, Skins and Ramsay's Kitchen Nightmares – is leaving after 
less than two years to join Sony Pictures Television.

Garvie, who worked at BBC Worldwide's international production business, 
joined All3Media in September 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/sep/09/wayne-garvie-all3media?INTCMP=SRCH>
 to exploit its stable of shows including Skins, Hollyoaks, Midsomer Murders 
and Ramsay's Kitchen Nightmares internationally.

He joins Sony Pictures Television in the role of chief creative officer for 
international production, responsible for the company's network of joint 
ventures and studios outside of Los Angeles.

SPT has majority stakes in UK independent producers including Silver River, 
Gogglebox Entertainment and Victory Television and makes shows including Who 
Wants to be a Millionaire, the Beyoncé and Will Young specials for ITV and 
Breakaway for BBC2.

The company recently announced it is to produce a version of The Voice for 
Middle Eastern broadcaster MBC and 60 further episodes of Everybody Loves 
Raymond for the Russian market.

"Wayne's creative leadership across international businesses and his pedigree 
in entertainment production need little introduction," said Andrea Wong, 
president of international production at SPT.

Garvie, who will take up his new role in June, first met Wong when he worked 
at BBC Worldwide and was pitching Strictly Come Dancing in the US. Wong was 
working at ABC and picked up the idea, turning it into Dancing with the Stars 
for the US market.

"Working with Andrea, the great individuals and companies within the group and 
the ambition and size of Sony, all combine to offer a unique opportunity to 
create new global brands that entertain and inspire the world," he said.

Garvie worked at the BBC for more than a decade, leaving Granada in 1998 to 
join the corporation as head of entertainment and features at BBC Manchester. 
He later became head of the BBC's London-based entertainment production 
department before moving to BBC Worldwide, the corporation's commercial arm.

At All3Media he has been responsible for driving the growth of the company in 
the US.

Last year All3Media unsuccessfully attempted to find a buyer after setting a 
sky-high price tag of £750m with early suitors including Garvie's new employer 
SPT.

"I wish to thank Wayne for his all round contribution to All3Media during his 
time with us, particularly his help in launching more of our companies into the 
US," said Steve Morrison, chairman and chief executive of All3Media. "We all 
wish him every success in his new role."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 