
To: David Cameron <camerond@parliament.uk> Subject: Re: So good to see you Mr 
President!!

 Uh, yeah, great to see you too, David. Look, though, there's something I've 
been meaning to say. Loved the painting you gave us, the one by the "street 
artist", and if it's part of your PR push at the moment to come off as "edgy" 
and "urban", well, I wouldn't dream of interfering. But what the hell was that 
handshake you were trying to give me in private when you arrived? Seriously – 
don't try it. You can't do it. Barack



To: VPOTUS <joe.biden@whitehousegov> Subject: Re: Cameron – a cold guy, I 
thought

 Yes, well, that was probably because you kept asking him for inside info on 
the making of Avatar. Like I already said, wrong Cameron. The guy in town this 
week was the British PM, not the famous one. BHO



To: Tom Vilsack, Agriculture Secretary <secretary@usda.gov> Subject: Re: 
Firing of Shirley Sherrod over out-of-context "racist" quote in edited video

 You screwed up in firing her. But it's not just you. It's an endemic 
Democratic problem. We're so congenitally cautious that every time the 
rightwing noise machine concocts some new lie, we let ourselves get played like 
violins. We decide we have to "pick our battles" and "conserve our capital", so 
we respond by cutting people loose, but it only serves to lend credibility to 
the liars. Eventually you get so used to conserving your capital you never 
spend it. You pick fewer and fewer battles to actually fight. It's depressing. 
Glumly, Barack PS. …*and* then Glenn Beck gets to seem like a "reasonable man" 
by pointedly not piling in. Jesus. Will we never learn?



To: Rahm Emanuel <rahm.emanuel3@gmail.com> Subject: Tom Vilsack

 R – Bit worried about this video that's been posted at 
FabricatedRightwingBullshit.com, showing Vilsack giving a speech. No sound, but 
according to the subtitles, he's saying, "Murdering cute little puppies is my 
favourite hobby, I like to do it every day." Looks pretty bad, no? We need to 
get out in front of this one. Let him go. Pick our battles and all that. Can 
you give him the bad news? Barack
 