
To: Michelle Obama <firstlady@whitehouse.gov> Subject: Re: Why were you acting 
so weird at breakfast?

 Sweetie, I'm THRILLED that Sasha won a descriptive writing prize for her 
essay on "A Day In My Life". But did you read it? "My Daddy spends a lot of 
time pacing around distractedly with a haunted look in his eyes"? "We'll be 
talking, then he'll suddenly trail off into silence, clench his fists, and 
wander off muttering about Sarah Palin and Christine O'Donnell"? "His emails 
just break off midstream"? Look, I agree the vocabulary's astonishing. It's 
just that . . . oh never mind.



To: Pete Rouse, Chief of Staff <peter.rouse@whitehouse.gov> Subject: Re: 
October Surprise ideas

 No, see, this is my point about Democrats. An October Surprise is meant to be 
a game-changer. An earthquake. "Announce a new taskforce to help America's 
hardest-working families" doesn't cut it. "Send the First Lady on a tour of 
military towns to salute American heroes": tiny bit closer, but still BS. Why 
do we always let the other side own the concept of patriotism – hell, the whole 
idea of America? I've ruined three Oval Office stress balls in the last week. 
Frustratedly, Barack PS. Nancy P emailed to say she's worried the WH top team 
is "too insular". I told her I'd check with you because you're like a brother 
to me, so you'd be the first to say if you thought we were too insular. We're 
not insular, right? Axelrod doesn't think so. Maybe the three of us should get 
together and discuss?



To: VPOTUS <joe.biden@whitehouse.gov> Subject: Re: October Surprise ideas

 Joe – Ha, well, at least you made me smile. You're dead right that concocting 
a fake story connecting the Tea Party to Mahmoud Ahmadinejad would swing things 
in our direction! But that's part of what makes us Democrats, isn't it? That we 
don't resort to such Cheneyesque tactics? We'll never get that desperate. (That 
said, I'm pretty sure Cheney's sufficiently amoral that he'd do consultancy 
even for me, if we paid him enough!) Thanks for trying, BHO



To: Dick Cheney <dc@keepamericasafe.com> Subject: Uh...

 OK, I know this is going to sound really weird, but – quick call?
 