
To: Malia Obama <hypoallergenic_puppies_are_cute@yahoo.com> Subject: Re: You 
didn't tell the whole story!

Honey, it was a press conference. I was trying to show I was completely 
focused on stopping the oil spill, so I mentioned you'd put your head round the 
bathroom door while I was shaving and asked "Daddy, did you plug the hole yet?" 
It was a cute anecdote – the media loved it! It wouldn't have had the same 
effect if I'd told them I'd also yelled "Oh, Christ, you're blaming me too now? 
Why don't you go and join the Republican party? And can't you see I'm shaving?" 
Like I said, I'm sorry I shouted at you. It's a frustrating time now.

And yes, you're right, I didn't mention my team of four Presidential Shaving 
Assistants, nor the Presidential Towel-Holding Assistant. We never mention 
them. It looks elitist. xDad

To: Rahm Emanuel <rahm.emanuel3 @gmail.com> Subject: Re: Never let a crisis go 
to waste, that's what I always say!

Yes, I know you always say that. Actually, you always go around saying you 
always say that, too. But OK: let's do it. I estimate we've got two or three 
more weeks before the US population stops thinking of the oil industry as a bad 
thing, so now's our chance to rush legislation through on renewables. I'm 
thinking giant solar panels covering Alabama, Utah and maybe a couple more 
states that never vote Democratic? And a wind farm in Palin's back yard. OK, 
get moving.

Barack

To: George Bush <george@georgewbushlibrary.gov>, Bill Clinton 
<bill@clintonfoundation.org>, George HW Bush <ghwb@bushlibrary.tamu.edu> 
Subject: Re: Politico.com — Obama on oil spill: "I was wrong"

 Thanks for your emails, guys — it was like you were competing with each other 
to be most astonished! But you know what, it was weird: I said the words, and 
then I waited for a fatal rupture in the time-space continuum, or at least for 
the foundations of the White House to shudder . . . but nothing. Turns out you 
CAN say it! I did see a large raven croaking on the South Lawn, but I don't 
think that was a bad omen. I think that was just from the aviary Joe's set up 
in his office.

Warmly, Barack
 