
To: David Axelrod <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/david-axelrod> 
<davidaxelrod@barackobama.com>, Alyssa Mastromonaco, director of scheduling and 
advance <alyssa@ whitehouse.gov> Subject: Re: Revised schedule for 
Martha's Vineyard this week

 Look, I realise the priority here is to make it clear that I'm working 
really, really hard for the American people despite being nominally on 
vacation, but is it strictly necessary for me to take my counterterrorism team 
with me for ice-cream in Oak Bluffs AND make a speech on job creation from the 
top of a lighthouse, all on the same day? And why is it always lighthouses? 
Surely there's something to do in Martha's Vineyard apart from visit 
lighthouses, hang out on the beach eating ice-cream, then visit more 
lighthouses? Barack PS. "Go on a relaxing stroll from the beach to a 
lighthouse, or vice versa" doesn't count.

 To: David Axelrod <davidaxelrod@barackobama.com> Subject: Re: Time magazine 
poll: 46% of Republicans think Obama is a Muslim

 You know, I've been desperately struggling for ways to interpret this poll so 
that I don't need to conclude that this country is spiralling irretrievably 
into a vortex of wilful ignorance, crazed bigotry, and eternal darkness. I 
think I came up with one: what if I AM a Muslim, without realising it? It's 
possible, right? Maybe? Anyway, this means I definitely can't do that speech 
from the top of the lighthouse: it'd look totally Muslim. I mean, can you say 
"minaret"? To be on the safe side, perhaps we'd better skip all 
lighthouse-related appearances. It'll be a sacrifice, but I think I'll cope. 
Barack

 To: Reggie Love <bodyman@barackobama.com> Subject: Beach equipment

 So, following our earlier discussions, this is what you'll need to bring for 
me for this afternoon at the beach: towels, tennis rackets and balls, bottled 
water, recliners, frisbee, food for Bo, and a copy of the Bible that says "THE 
BIBLE" in clearly legible letters on the cover. It needs to be big enough to 
hide my paperback of The God Delusion, which I haven't quite finished yet. Thx, 
BHO
 