
To: Michelle Obama <firstlady@whitehouse.gov>, Katie McCormick Lelyveld, Press 
Secretary to the First Lady <katie@whitehouse.gov> Subject: Re: Pushback 
strategies on FLOTUS/Carla Bruni "hell" story

 Believe me, though, just denying that you said being first lady was "hell" 
won't be good enough. Remember — the people who'll run with this think I'm a 
Kenyan-born communo-muslimist who forged his birth certificate. No, we'll have 
to release some video footage of the PRECISE MOMENT at which you didn't say it. 
Also, you should do some kind of public appearance where you don't say it again 
— repeatedly, if possible. Yes,I understand that this is philosophically 
incoherent. So do you. Butthey just elected a Senate candidate in Delaware who 
thinks Joe Biden taps her phone, and that Arwen the Elf Princess is a role 
model for American women. We mustn't forget who we're dealing with. BHO


To: Tina Fey <tf@tinafey.com> Subject: Your secret's safe with me

 Oh, my God, I just worked it out! You've been rumbled! Such an audacious idea 
for a mockumentary — actually running in a primary as a record-breakingly 
eccentric candidate who's obsessed with masturbation and JRR Tolkien! Perfect 
characterisation as ever. You sure had me worried! Not sure what the Federal 
Election Commission will have to say about the deception part, but credit where 
credit's due. You've totally got me wondering whether "Joe Biden" might just be 
an elaborate multi-year exercise in comedy method acting by Tom Wilkinson. 
Anyway, can't wait for the new season of 30 Rock, Barack


To: Pope Benedict XVI <joeratzinger@vatican.va> Subject: Fwd: Thousands Crowd 
British Streets For Papal Visit << HA!

 Thanks for this, though I've got to say I find your fixation on our 
comparative crowd sizes a bit tiresome. It's not a competition! I realise you 
got a bit jumpy after my inauguration ceremony, and started making anonymous 
edits to the Wikipedia page on the largest gatherings of people in modern 
history, but I'm just not interested in the rivalry, I'm afraid. Warmly, Barack 
PS. See attached BBC story saying your crowds were far lower than expected. 
PPS. The Hajj pilgrimage always comes out number one in those crowd-size lists 
anyway. 