
To: All White House Staff Subject: A humbling moment

All: in light of this week's results, I wanted to say a few words before 
speaking to the nation. As Jon F wrote in the speech I'm about to give, we took 
a shellacking, and I'm humbled. Humbled that we lost sight of the fact that 
leadership isn't just about passing sweeping, long-overdue legislation. Humbled 
that we couldn't communicate that extending healthcare to 95% of the American 
population was an indisputable moral imperative that the Republicans, by the 
way, are never going to manage to repeal. And humbled that we didn't find a way 
to unite not only the majority of people who support reform, but also the 
billionaire backers of the Tea Party, Glenn Beck, Rupert Murdoch, the millions 
who'd never vote Democratic anyway, and the delusional clowns who think I'm a 
Kenyan-born Sikh fundamentalist Catalan separatist. And by "we", I mean Nancy 
Pelosi. Point is, I didn't fight so hard to win office just to stay popular and 
keep winning office, but to do what's right, which we're doing. So let's move 
forward in a spirit of bipartisanship, extending the hand of friendship and 
collegiality to those on the other side who are, let's face it, totally wrong. 
Humbly, Barack

To: John Boehner <john.boehner@mail.house.gov> Subject: Re: Re: Invitation

Glad you're pleased to be invited to my bipartisan summit at Camp David, 
though a little alarmed to hear it moved you to tears. We're going to give the 
opening session over to you. The provisional title is: "John Boehner: The 
specifics of my plan to reform America that I've been vaguely talking about for 
months, including how I plan to maintain the support of moderate Republicans 
and independents while staving off the Tea Partiers who've got me over a 
barrel." Sound good? Kleenex will be provided, by the way. Barack

To: Hillary Clinton <secretary@state.gov> Subject: Re: OMG it is EXACTLY like 
Lord of the Rings over here

You know, a little focus wouldn't hurt right now. Glad you're having such a 
fun time, and I'm mildly amused by your daily emailing of Flight of the 
Conchords jokes, but it's pretty tough back here. As for "shellacking", though 
– nope, no idea either. I think the speechwriters' room just got a new 
thesaurus. BHO
 