
To: Hillary Clinton <secretary@state.gov>
Subject: Re: William Hague visit to DC

You're instant-messaging with David Miliband on your iPhone WHILE HAGUE'S IN 
THE ROOM? Jeez. I'd condemn you for your unprofessionalism, if it was a country 
I actually cared about, like China or Russia.

BHO

PS Clever idea to give him a Yankees baseball cap as an official gift. 
Thoughtful and sarcastic at the same time.

To: David Cameron <dcameron@parliament.uk>
Subject: Re: Quick chat?

Yes, I did get your messages – all of them. But, see, I think you may have 
misunderstood. When I called on Tuesday, I meant everything I said about 
wishing you luck, but also, it's protocol for the president to call the new PM. 
We can't just have "a bit of a natter" (?) whenever you feel like it. Hillary's 
people will be in touch about organising your visit here: the plan's for July, 
right? You sure your government can stay in power till then?

Warmly, Barack

PS You know Clegg's been calling too – about the idea of him doing an official 
visit himself, maybe in June? You do know about that?

To: David Axelrod <davidaxelrod@barackobama.com>
Subject: Re: Elena Kagan gay rumours 

Wait, wait, what? They're saying she must be a lesbian because she plays 
softball? Is that a thing? Who even knew that was a thing? I didn't know it was 
a thing. Not that it should have any bearing on her acceptability for the 
supreme court. But can we organise some photo-ops ASAP that'll placate 
Republican senators? It's the National Rifle Association's annual meeting this 
weekend. Maybe we could get footage of her baking them some cakes? Cakes with 
guns and Bibles on them.

Barack

To: Nigel Sheinwald, UK Ambassador to the US <n.sheinwald@ukinusa.fco.gov.uk>
Subject: Hague

We found him in the street outside the bar at the Hay-Adams Hotel, and we've 
taken him to Georgetown University Hospital. Some kind of drinking contest with 
Joe Biden, apparently, but he couldn't take it. Not even American beer. You 
need to come and get him.

Thanks, Barack
 