
To: James Clapper <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/james-clapper>, 
Director of National Intelligence <james.clapper@dni.gov> Subject: Re: TOP 
SECRET: President's Daily Intelligence Briefing: STATUS: URGENT – NORTH KOREA 
EMERGENCY – POTUS PLEASE READ IMMEDIATELY

 Oops! Only just saw this. Was busy with something really important – I mean 
incredibly important, otherwise obviously I wouldn't get distracted from the 
threat of potential nuclear armageddon. In fact, what I was doing was so secret 
that I can't even tell you – my own director of intelligence! Imagine that! 
Anyway, we're back on the case here now with the Koreas, so, thanks. Barack PS. 
Don't turn on CNN. Also, if you do, that's not me pardoning a turkey.

 To: Thomas Donilon, National Security Adviser <thomas.donilon@whitehouse.gov> 
Subject: Fw: Kim Jong-Un would like to connect with you on LinkedIn

 See below. Good to see the younger generation embracing technology, and I 
realise this could prove a vital back-channel way to foster international 
dialogue, thus averting global catastrophe, but come on – LinkedIn? What the 
hell *is* that? I get these invites from people all the time, and it never 
explains what they are. I'm just going to delete it unless you advise 
otherwise. Barack

 To: Hillary Clinton <secretary@state.gov> Subject: Re: What to do about 
latest Pyongyang communication??

 Here's the thing, though. It's a completely anonymous fax, sent to the secure 
line. It says "the forces of peace and rightness will not hesitate to punish 
the puppet warmongers and provocateurs for their destructive stunts, and the 
leader of the United States would be well-advised to halt his reckless and 
aggressive operations". I know that's classic DPRK language. But then again, 
Sasha's been getting pretty militant with her vegetarianism recently – she 
won't shut up about getting a tofurkey this Thanksgiving. Also, let's cut to 
the chase: it's handwritten. And I'd know those little circles above her i's 
anywhere. BHO

 To: VPOTUS <joe.biden@whitehouse.gov> Subject: Re: 
ccsdscdsfxzzu80yh9g8ouj12esd

 Ah, the "rolling drunkenly on to your BlackBerry" stage of the evening. Guess 
you had a good Thanksgiving too, then. BHO
 