
To: Jon Stewart <jon.stewart @comedycentral.com>
Subject: Re: POTUS guest appearance – modes of address

 Come on, Jon: "Sir" is pretty stiff, I know, but it's the form these days. 
I'll let you have one "dude" (it's funny, because I'm president), but my 
protocol people aren't going to back down on "B", "Bromander-in-chief" or 
"dawg". It's the dignity of the office that's undermined, apparently. Barack.



To: Peter Rouse, chief of staff <peter.rouse@whitehouse.gov>
Subject: Re: Last-ditch strategies

 Thanks, Pete. I agree we need to remind people what we've actually achieved 
these last two years, but I don't think voters really grasp the economics of 
the Troubled Asset Relief Program, and "TARP funds largely repaid – net final 
cost to be less than originally expected" isn't much of a slogan. It won't even 
fit on a goddamn placard. I had this other idea, but then I forgot what it was. 
Not getting much sleep these days. Barack



To: Bill Clinton <bill@clintonfoundation.org>
Subject: Re: I was only trying to help

 Bill – remember that conversation we had during the last campaign? About how 
even though I really appreciate your help, it isn't actually helping? I think 
this thing in Florida sort of comes under that heading. It's not that I mind 
your backroom involvement in a tricky senatorial contest where our guy is 
running a poor third. Nor do I mind you secretly trying to convince our guy to 
drop out in order to prevent some Tea Party nut job taking the seat. What I 
mind is the part where everybody finds out about it. Can you please, for the 
country's sake, be more cool? BHO



To: Peter Rouse, chief of staff <peter.rouse@whitehouse.gov>
Subject: I remembered!

 OK, so you know that octopus, Paul or something, who predicted the World Cup 
final? Can we spread a story that his last prediction before he died was 
"Democrats to stage comeback in US midterm elections"? Sorry, that doesn't seem 
that brilliant now that I've written it down – with our luck he'll probably 
turn up alive on Monday to deny everything. Have a nice weekend, anyway. B
 