
Clickalong comrades! Do you ever have that feeling of being all dressed up 
with nowhere to go? As I'm sure you're all aware by now, there are technical 
problems afoot. Susi, Vicky and I have been gathered around the kitchen table 
with our appropriate equipment; but the troublesome tools mean that we're 
having to send the recipe to Guardian HQ at Kings Place. If you, like me, find 
this situation somewhat irksome, I encourage you to work out your frustration 
in the comments below and not on your fish. Allegra x
Fritto Misto di Mare with anchovy aioli, tomato and basil bruschetta … and a 
few leaves

Kit

Food processor/electric whisk
Griddle (nice but optional)
A wide, heavy bottomed saucepan
2 shallow trays
Sieve
Slotted spoon

Ingredients

1 squid, about 250g cleaned weight, cut into 2cm thick rings
8 tiger prawns, about 250g – heads off and peeled but tail on
250g salmon fillet –pin-boned and cut into four quarter chunks (up to you if 
you like deep fried salmon skin whether you want to keep it on)
450g white fish: haddock, cod, coley, whiting or anything quite dense, cut 
into eight pieces

For the aioli

4 anchovy fillets
2 egg yolks
Juice of a lemon
3 cloves garlic, finely chopped 
200ml light olive oil
50ml extra virgin olive oil
Salt and pepper

For the salad

A couple of handfuls of rocket
1-2 heads of chicory 
1 head of radicchio

For the bruschetta

4 slices of sourdough
3 large very ripe vine-ripened tomatoes
A small red onion, finely chopped
A handful of basil leaves, roughly torn/chopped
1 red chilli if you feel like it
A glug of extra virgin olive oil
A splash of red wine vinegar
1 clove garlic

For the batter

1 egg
50g plain flour
200ml cold sparkling water 
A squeeze of lemon juice

For the frying

A couple of handfuls of plain flour
1-1.5l ground nut, vegetable or sunflower oil
S&P

To finish

2 lemons, cut into wedges for serving

The recipe

Prep the fish first and get it good to go. For your squid, it should come in 
three pieces. Keep the wings whole, cut the main body into rough 2 cm rings (or 
whatever you think looks right) and the tentacles cut into whatever you feel 
like.

With a sharp knife make a shallow cut the down the length of each prawn's back 
and take out the digestive tract ie poo; freeze the shells for stock at a later 
date

Put the egg yolks, lemon juice, anchovy and chopped garlic in the food 
processor and spin.

Tipping your food processor onto one side (thus tipping the contents to one 
side) slowly drip in the oil down the chute, the light one first followed by 
the extra virgin.

Season with pepper and taste for salt, then scrape into a pretty little bowl 
Wash the bits for your salad, squeeze on the juice of half a lemon, give it a 
good glug of extra virgin olive oil (EVOO) and season.

Moving to the bruschetta, cut the spiggoty thing out of the tomatoes, and 
rough chop. If there is a lot of water coming out of them, move them into a 
sieve and drain for a couple of minutes (and have a shot of the juice with a 
splash of Tabasco and some pepper). Put the red onion, chilli (if you want) and 
basil in a bowl, give it a glug of EVOO and season.

Choose a wide saucepan, fill it to a depth of about 8cm with the frying oil 
and turn the heat up high.

I like to do my bruschetta on a griddle, but if you haven't got one then just 
whack it under the grill – gives a better result than the toaster.

Put a couple of handfuls of heavily seasoned plain flour in a bowl and chuck 
in all the fishy bits. Bounce them around in the bowl so they are all lightly 
covered on all surfaces.

Stick your slices of sourdough onto your griddle/under your grill. 

Have your slotted spoon to hand, then dip the white fish in the seasoned 
flour, then the batter, then back to the flour, and finally back through the 
batter.

Gently lower a single piece into the hot oil – never drop from a height – and 
check it's hot enough: it should bubble furiously around the piece of fish.

If you're happy that the oil is hot enough then follow suit with the rest of 
the fish.

Use a spoon to gently prise them off the bottom if they have stuck, which may 
happen if it wasn't quite hot enough.

Now do the same with the salmon pieces.

Don't forget about your sourdough: once it comes off the grill give each a 
quick rub with the cut side of a clove of garlic.

Have some kitchen roll at the ready on a baking tray next to the oil. 
After three minutes, lift out the fish with the slotted spoon on to the 
kitchen roll, and give the pieces a good season with salt.

Now get the prawns and squid going: the prawns get the same double dipping, 
but the squid only goes through the flour and batter once. They'll only take a 
couple of minutes, then lift them out too and rest on the kitchen roll.

Load up the bruschetta, taste the aioli for seasoning and serve up immediately 
on a big platter with lemon wedges and love.

Guys, I'm hoping your dish resembles this in some way. Once again, so so sorry 
for the mess around tonight and I hope that with Allegra in the comments and 
the somewhat sporadic posting up here by me, it's not been too much of a 
kitchen nightmare. Suse
 