
Yes! We're back in business and what a balmy evening it is - the weather is 
doing the barmy bit now, but give it an hour and it'll be our turn!

And as if we weren't all pleased enough at being reunited (did anyone notice 
we had to skip May?) the weather gods are firmly on side and have given us 
literally the perfect weather to accompany this summery fish stew (and if you 
haven't done so before, get that bottle of white well chilled man).

So it's the usual drill - get all the ingredients in front of you before the 
kick-off, have your chopping board out and best knife razor sharp. In addition 
to that, you also need to have your prawns peeled ahead of time - keep the 
shells and heads too; I like to leave the little fan tail on the prawns for 
prettiness.

Apart from that, we're all good to go, and I feel really pleased at sharing 
this recipe with you - a standard, classic dish that's a real crowd pleaser. 
Now, do we have a crowd???

Anyway, me and the girls are here, doing our limbering up exercises and 
watching Murray do his thing.

Make sure you have this basic kitchen equipment to hand 

 1 deep saucepan (ours is about 20cm across and 9cm deep, but a wider 
shallower one would also be fine)
 1 standard size saucepan
 A sieve
 Small mixing bowl

I've also added to the equipment list a whisk for the rouille or if you have 
one handy some kind of food processor. Don't worry it doesn't have to be a big 
flash one but could be an electric whisk, one of those little soup-stick things 
or even one of the old fashioned cog-driven ones.

The complete list of ingredients is as follows:

Serves four

 230g tiger or king prawns, raw and unpeeled
 250g salmon
 250g white fish fillet (haddock, pollack etc), boned and skinned
 1 whole sea bass, (around 300-350g) scaled and gutted
 500g mussels
 Olive oil for light frying
 6 cloves of garlic
 2 dried red chillis (optional, and you can use fresh or flakes instead)
 2 bay leaves
 1 large tomato, roughly chopped
 A good pinch of fennel seeds
 1 large red onion, or 2 regular, chopped
 2 sticks celery
 1 fennel bulb
 A good handful of thyme on the branch, washed and tightly tied together with 
string
 300g new potatoes, washed and scrubbed
 1 large glass of white wine
 1 tin of chopped tomatoes, or peeled plum tomatoes
 A pinch of saffron threads (optional)
 1 egg yolk
 Juice of half a lemon
 100ml olive oil
 100ml extra virgin olive oil
 1 white bread roll
 75g watercress

See you at 8 for supper at 9(ish)
A xxx

8.00pm: Right fish lovers of the world. Let's begin with one of the most 
lovely jobs in the kitchen. Finish prepping your prawns by making a shallow cut 
running down the back to reveal the digestive track and pull out the poo.

8.05pm: Give your hands a good wash and put a regular sized saucepan on a high 
heat (nb. you don't want this to be your final pot this is just a little prawn 
stock we are going to knock up on the side) and put the prawn shells in it.

Add to it a splosh of light olive oil, 2 whole cloves of garlic, the optional 
chilli, the bay leaves, chopped tomato, the fennel seeds and a couple of slices 
of onion.

8.07pm: Give it a good stir and let it fry away watching the prawn shells 
changing colour - take a second to enjoy the smell.

Hot crustacea yum!
 Chop your bass into cross sections 
8.10pm: Now prep your whole fish, chop the head and tail off and chuck these 
in with the prawn shells. Then chop the body of the fish into cross-sections. 
If your bass is around 350g chop it into four but if it is considerable then 
cut it into six.

8.13pm: By now your prawn shells should be well and truly pink and the 
tomatoes should have broken down a bit.
 Prawn shell stock 
Once it looks like this make sure the heat is up to full pelt and add 800ml of 
water. Chuck a lid on.

8.14pm: Peel and dice what is left of your onion. If you have got any 
substantial peelings as opposed to dry skin just chuck them in your stock.

8.17pm: By now your stock should be up to boil so take the lid off and turn 
the heat down to an active bubble but not as fierce as a rolling boil.

8.18pm: Put a deep saucepan on a high heat and add a couple of tablespoon of 
olive oil (not extra virgin). Chuck in the chopped onions. Top and tail your 
celery (pop the trimmings in your stock) then halve it lengthways and chop into 
cm segments. These go in with the onions. Give them a good stir, you don't want 
any colour you just want them to sweat down.

8.23pm: Lower the heat under the veg a bit as you tackle your fennel. 
 Chop your fennel 
Wash the fennel bulb then split it down the centre. Trim off any manky out 
leaves. Cut strips (not going through the root so it stays together) and chop 
down the length to yield a rough small dice. Add these to your pan with the 
onions and celery. The manky leaves and root can go in the stock.

8.24pm: Give the pan a good stir and splosh in a bit more oil if you think it 
is getting a bit dry and sticky. Put a lid on it - heat should be on a steady 
medium now.

Give your stock a prod too.

8.26pm: Roughly chop 3 cloves of garlic and stir them into the pan along with 
the thyme bundle. As you stir the garlic in check that the veg is nicely 
softening and not browning and adjust the heat accordingly.

Keep going back to the pan every now and then to give it a shuffle.

8.28pm: Take a moment gather your fish. Cut the salmon (I like to keep the 
skin on) into block-ish quarters (as opposed to 4 more delicate slices). The 
white fish gets sliced into smaller pieces, about 2 cm square. Fish-wise this 
gives everyone a large piece of salmon and bass each and smaller bits of white 
fish.

8.30pm: Slice the potatoes into thick disks and add to the pan with the onions 
et al. Give it a good stir and bring the heat up to high. Pour in the wine.

8.33pm: You want your wine to reduce down until there is practically no liquid 
left so whilst that is bubbling away lets get on and debeard the mussels.

Get them in one hand and grab the stringy bit with the other and draw it down 
to the pointy end. Tug sharply and it will come away in your hand. As you are 
doing them keep the good ones under cold running water (throw away any that are 
open or damaged) just for a minute.

8.38pm: My wine is pretty much down to where I want it to be now so it is time 
to add the tomatoes.
 Add your tin of tomatoes 
Then half-fill the can with water to get out all the residual goodness, then 
splosh this in the pan too.

8.40pm: Emma Sturgess it is time to say goodbye to your fish eye: your stock 
has now been on for about half an hour so pour this through a sieve into the 
pan. Give it a good push with the back of a spoon to really get all that you 
can out of it, then chuck the solids but transfer the bay leaves into the stew 
pan first.
 Add your stock through a sieve 
Keep it on full pelt as we need this baby to reduce now.
 Rouille ingredients 
8.42pm: Now to make the rouille. Put your saffron thread into a mug or 
espresso cup and cover them with a tablespoon of very hot water from the tap.

8.46pm: Cut 4 very thin slices off the roll (croutons to be) then scoop out 
the soft middle, tear it into little pieces and put it in a small bowl. Keep 
your bread husk aside for making breadcrumbs at a less stressful time i.e. not 
now.

8.48pm: Put the egg yolk, lemon and chopped garlic in a food processor, or a 
bowl if you have a hand whisk/blender.

8.49pm: Whizz it all up until pale yellow and a bit creamy in consistency.

If you are doing this in a food processor you find you get a better mix if you 
hold it at an angle.

8.51pm: Very slowly start drip feeding in the oil. Go with the light oil first 
(and sunflower/veg oil is ok for this part too).

8.51pm: It should take you a couple of minutes to incorporated the first 
100ml. Once that's all incorporated turn off your machine.

Then go back to your stew, give it a quick poke and turn down to medium.

8.55pm: Back to your rouille. Go onto the Extra Virgin. Depending on the 
strength of the oil, you may prefer to replace some of the extra virgin with 
light olive, or even veg oil.

Add half of it then slowly add the saffron and its water before adding the 
remaining oil.

8.58pm: Once all the oil and saffron water is incorporated tip your rouille on 
top of the torn bread and give it a good season. I like to add a few dried 
chilli flakes too at this stage.

Stir and set aside.

8.59pm: Have a quick check of your spud and see if they are done (you can poke 
a knife in). As long as they're somewhere near (which they should be) you can 
now add the pieces of white fish and stir and push them down into the pan: we 
want them to totally break down into background fishy flavour.

You can take this opportunity to give this a bit of a season.

9.00pm: Now add the seabass followed by the salmon. Gently push them under the 
liquid.

9.02pm: Now add the prawns and mussels. 
 Add the prawns and mussels 
Stick a lid on and bring the heat up to high.

9.02pm: Drop your crouton in the toaster. Give your watercress a quick wash 
and if you haven't already warmed your bowls it's too late now.

9.05pm: As soon as you see the mussels opening your fish stew is ready. If you 
want to serve it in a bowl then pick and chuck the thyme out first but from the 
pot is nice and rustic too.

9.05pm: Don't burn your croutons (like me).

9.08pm: Give it a quick taste for general yumminess and then serve up with a 
blob of rouille going onto each persons crouton and then float this on top of 
the stew.

The watercress on the side is a bit of light relief as it is a bit intense in 
there.

Good job folks. Enjoy. 
 The finished dish 
A xxx
 