
For those of you who played along last time, Susi (the keyboard connection our 
end) and the clever techie people at the Guardian have teamed up to bring you 
an all new click-a-cook-a-long that actually works! And just as they've got 
their stuff together, I made a judgement call to simplify the recipe.

So tonight's supper is suitably spring-like in it's quickness and lightness - 
perfect for a summer evening, which weirdly this feels like.

Final checklist of ingredients ...

2 pork escalopes, each weighing in at 150-200g, about 1.5cm thick
(NB: you can also do this with chicken - get a breast, peel off the fillet at 
the back, put it between 2 layers of clingfilm and beat it thin with the flat 
of a large knife)
320g sweet potato
Half a tin coconut milk
A few fennel seeds
A handful of peanuts, salted is fine but plain roasted better
Ground cumin & coriander
Bunch of coriander
2 red chillies
Couple of spring onions
Couple of cloves of garlic
A cucumber
Couple of limes
A few tbsp groundnut or plain oil (ie oil with not much flavour)

Quick hi to any veggies out there: I was asked to come up with a veg option, 
and as I ran the flavours round my head (didn't have the recipe in front of me 
at the time and was actually right in the middle of cooking a few other 
things), an egg and cashews came to mind, but I'd forgotten that I'd already 
got peanuts in there, so apologies as really, of course, you don't need two 
kinds ... that would be - er - nuts!
Anyway folks, gather your ingredients, wind up those droids and program your 
stove for warp-speed 10 at 20:00.
A x

7.55pm: Evening folks. So just for a steady ride here is the equipment you are 
going to need ...

2 frying pans, ideally thick-bottomed
roasting tray, if your peanuts are raw
chopping board
grater
knives
mixing bowl
masher
plate for the dry rub
tongs or flipper

8.01pm: Right everybody, showtime. And anticipate that if you are all primed 
we are going to get supper on the table in record time tonight (and that is 
nothing to do with my book deadline tomorrow!).

Preheat your oven to 180ºC

Scrub your sweet potato and trim off any gnarlies.

8.04pm: If you could only get hold of raw peanuts chuck them on a tray and 
give them a light roasting as the oven comes up to temperature. For any veggies 
(and we are just finding out if there are any) this applies to the cashews as 
well.

8.05pm: Put a frying pan on the heat now. If you only have one heavy-bottomed 
one I would use it for this.

Cut your sweet potatoes into rough 1 inch pieces, on the larger side rather 
than the smaller.

8.07pm: Put a splash of whatever oil you got into your frying pan and make 
sure the heat is good and high, so the oil is moving freely around the pan.

8.08pm: When the oil in your frying pan is smoking, put your sweet potato 
chunks in.

8.09pm: Slice one of your chillies into thin rings. Roughly chop all your 
garlic with some salt.

Do this as your sweet potatoes are sizzling away.

8.10pm: Turn your sweet potatoes a couple of times, but don't play with them 
too much, you want them to pick up a nice golden colour.

Give them a quick season with some salt and pepper.

8.12pm: When your sweet potatoes look like this add your chilli and garlic and 
stir for just a minute until they start to go golden, then add your coconut 
milk.

8.14pm: Give it a good stir and whack it in the oven which should now be 
pretty much up to temperature.

Whilst you are there give your peanuts a shake if you are roasting them.

8.17pm: Put half a tablespoon of fennel seeds onto your chopping board and 
alternate between using the flat of your knife and the blade so you get a rough 
chop/smashed effect.

8.18pm: On a plate make your dry rub - mix your fennel seeds with half a 
teaspoon of ground cumin, 1 teaspoon of ground coriander, half a teaspoon of 
salt and a lot of black pepper, about a dozen cracks.

8.19pm: For the raw nutters out there, your peanuts are probably roasted by 
now. You want a nice even golden brown ... it's all about the golden tonight.

8.21pm: Sprinkle the spice mix onto all four sides of your escalope and rub in 
for a bit … this feels good (except if you are sarahdotcom and this would 
probably be gross).

Once you have an even covering on all four sides pat up the excess with the 
escalopes for as much coverage as possible.

8.23pm: Avoid a cross contamination moment by cleaning or turning over your 
board - and do I need to tell you to wash your hands?

8.25pm: Your pork is now having what is known in the trade as an 
astro-marinade. Just let it sit there soaking up the flavours.

8.26pm: Although the recipe calls for one whole cucumber, when I wrote it I 
was using a nice farmer's market one and Vicky has just turned up with 
something that would scare a hardy porn star.

So depending on the size of your cucumber you may not want all of it, shoot 
for about 300g.

8.29pm: Pull your sweet potatoes out of the oven (and turn it off) and show it 
the masher a few times. Then give it a good stir so all the sweet potato has 
absorbed the goodness around it.

Then throw it back in the oven, even though it is off, to stay warm.

8.31pm: For those of you who aren't completely obsessed with the balding 
Bruce, grate your cucumber on the big holes and spread out on a plate.

Sprinkle over it a healthy pinch of salt.

8.33pm: Get your porky pan on a medium-high heat and sarahdotcom you are 
looking for a little egg frying pan which you also want to pre-warm.

8.35pm: Trim your spring onions (mine are quite fat). Halve one lengthways and 
set aside.

The other one, slice the white root in half and then thinly slice it down the 
length.

8.36pm: By now your porky or egg pan should be nice and hot. Add a splash of 
your oil of choice and gently lay the escalopes in. You almost want to do this 
with them flopping away from you so you don't get splashed with any hot oil.

Put your heat on max now.

8.37pm: sarahdotcom - you can fry your egg in light oil or in butter. I would 
stick to light oil for this dish ... more of the region.

8.38pm: You should be able to really smell those fennel seeds toasting on the 
underside. So have a peek at the underside and once it is good and golden, 
after about three minutes turn it over like this ...

8.39pm: Gather your cucumber into a ball and give it a good squeeze over the 
sink or over a bowl if you like drinking cucumber juice.

8.41pm: Quarter your remaining chilli lengthways and then slice. In a mixing 
bowl, add this to your cucumber and spring onions.

I would turn your pork off now and leave it to rest.

8.42pm: You need to finish your salad now. Chop your coriander (keep aside a 
quarter of it for serving) roughly and add to your cucumber salad.

Squeeze a lime into this. 

Gently squash your peanuts and put them in your salad and give it a good mix.

Taste and season.

8.46pm: Finish your sweet potato with a squeeze of lime too. 

Take your pork out the pan and leave to rest on a plate. Tip any juices into 
the sweet potato mix and put it back on the max heat. Then put your halved 
spring onion in to the pan cut side down. And if you've got any extra chillis 
knocking about chuck those in to.

8.50pm: Taste and season your sweet potato - it might need more salt or lime 
to reach it's taste zenith.

Watch you don't burn your spring onions, you only want to wilt them.

8.52pm: Now it's time to serve up. I'm doing mine like this with the wilted 
spring onions on top, a small pile of dried chilli flakes for those who like to 
be in charge of their fieriness, the rest of your fresh corry and a couple of 
wedges of lime.

8.54pm: sarahdotcom - here's a veggie picture just for you.

9.01pm: Once again guys you have been brilliant although I have to get used to 
you getting quieter once the cooking gets more intense.

Sadly I'm away for the whole of May filming, you can catch it on BBC2 in 
August, so I'll miss you in May but I hope you will all be joining me in June.

Much love and keep well. 

Thanks to Suse and the Guardian techie team for ironing out those gremlins. 

A xxx
 