
7.18pm: Evening All - Marrakesh calling - or rather Shepherd's Bush. Less than 
an hour to go until our first kitchen clickalong since the summer...my how 
times have changed: we've gone from a midsummer Nights Dream to the Tempest. 
Anyway, tonight's supper is one to warm the cockles - not a heavy eat but a 
satisfying and yumtious.
If you have time before the kick off, could you all please peel and roughly 
dice the squash - around inch-ish chunks (I'd say to chuck the seeds out but 
someone's bound to shoot me down for not planting them!)
Apart from that, I think we're good to go - back with you shortly.
A.McE x

A little recap on what you'll need...

A reminder of the ingredients


Serves 4

1 packet filo pastry
2 medium sized courgettes
1 white onion
1 small butternut squash
Big handful of coriander
Half a pat of butter
Couple of lemons
Handful of ground almonds
Handful of pinenuts
Handful of sultanas / raisins / dried chopped dates
200g lentils, brown or green
1-2 tbsp harissa paste (or some smoked paprika will do instead)
Little bit of honey
Few cumin seeds (or ground)
Few coriander seeds (or ground)
Glug of extra virgin olive oil
Salt and pepper

You may choose to serve with some yoghurt, preferably Greek.

A word on equipment

A baking tray around 30cm sq - a thick bottom (ie not one that's going to 
buckle with the heat) is preferable.

Everybody, rattle your grater and wave your pastry brush in the air now!

2 saucepans: one of the wide-ish and thicker-bottomed variety (more than 20cm 
across) , one very normal sized and can be cheapo: 15cm across and 8ish deep.

1 small pan, either frying or tiny saucepan (for seed toasting, butter melting 
etc) and a special flipper of some description.

Most important of all are your winged boots for swift kitchen manoeuvres, and 
a slightly increased heart rate to reflect your sense of anticipation.

To all the sultana-phobes, yes, apricots are a dandy substitute, and no you 
don't have to soak the lentils.

8.02pm: Right, are we all met? Let us begin.

I hope you are all squashed up (that means you got my prepping instructions) 
and if not get on with that right now - peel and roughly dice the squash - 
around inch-ish chunks.

8.05pm: Preheat your oven to 190. Whilst your oven is preheating put the 
handful of pinenuts onto a baking tray into the oven to gently toast as it 
comes up to temperature.

8.06pm: Take a quarter of your butter and put in a wide pan. When the butter 
has melted put in the squash chunks and gently fry them.

8.09pm: Just so you know my pan is 23cm across.

8.11pm: Once they have had a good roll in the butter put some salt on, give it 
a good stir, add about a cupful of water (200ml), keep it on top heat and put a 
lid on.

8.12pm: Chuck the lentils into a pan and cover them with cold water, about 
twice as much volume as the lentil and put this onto a high heat with a lid.

Have a look at your pinenuts and give them a shake.

8.14pm: Wash and then grate your courgettes on the big holes. Spread them out 
onto a wide plate and sprinkle on 3/4 of a tablespoon of salt, preferably sea 
salt.

8.16pm: NUTS ... ours have just come out.

8.17pm: Are you all done with your grating out there?

Now get a small frying pan stick it on a medium flame. Put in the coriander 
seeds and cumin seeds to dry toast.

8.19pm: Toss them gently in the pan for a minute until you can smell them and 
they start to just colour.

When your lentil are up to the boil turn them down to a simmer keeping the lid 
on.

8.20pm: Your seeds should be smelling like the spice souk and lob them in with 
the squash.

Melt the rest of the butter in the same pan as the seeds just came out of - no 
need to wash.

8.23pm: Check the squash, it should be beginning to break down a bit. Mine's 
looking a bit sticky so I'm going to dribble in a tablespoon or so of my melted 
butter - it depends how starchy your squash is, harlequin needs it butternut 
won't.

8.25pm: My squash is soft enough so run a masher over it a few times and taste 
for seasoning.

8.26pm: Peel and grate your onion on the large holes - this is not fun for the 
eyes - don't worry if there are a few larger pieces.

Squeeze it out over the sink and chuck it into the squash which should now be 
off the heat.

8.27pm: To finish it off add the ground almonds and honey (about a tablespoon 
and a half).

Give it a quick stir and taste.

8.29pm: Take the lid off your lentils and taste them. Mine are getting close 
and as soon as they are cooked drain them. If they are no where near turn the 
heat up so they are simmering faster.

8.32pm: Now squeeze out the water from your courgettes, you should make about 
3 balls. Mix it with your pinenuts, a squeeze of lemon and the sultana or 
raisins.

8.35pm: I'm draining my lentils now.

8.36pm: Brush a baking tray (about 30cm square) with melted butter. Unwrap 
your filo and lay it out on to your table. Brush the tray with butter then lay 
3 sheets of filo as in the picture brushing butter onto the filo between each 
layer.

8.38pm: Put all of your squash mix into the middle and spread it out into a 
circle . Lay another 3 sheets on top of the other sheets making sure you brush 
them each with butter.

Give your courgettes one last squeeze as one big ball and then spread out on 
top of the squash.

8.42pm: Then bring all the sticking out flaps up and collect them on top in a 
bustle. Shape the outside briefly with cupped hand to make sure it's nice and 
round. Then drizzle and brush the rest of the melted butter on top and round 
the sides too.Without seeming to be too generation game about it, your pie 
should now look like this...

Pop this in the oven.

8.49pm: Now for a kitchen clickalong first - have a 5 minute clear up, as you 
do here are some suggested points for discussion/private thought:

- if it had to be one forever and ever, would you choose rice or potatoes?
- Do you season you steak before or after cooking it?
- What is the finest British cheese of all time?

Answers nice and clear please.

8.56pm: Right now everyone - back in the room, as Derren would say:

Mix the lentil with the corry, EVOO (extra virgin for all newbies), harissa 
and some lemon juice. Taste and season with thought.

9.02pm: Hey, guys. It's 9.02, my pie is cooked and my lentils are scrum. 

Pie is cooked when it looks like this.

9.08pm: Yours shouldn't be more than a couple of minutes behind mine but I 
have got quite a fast oven, surprise surprise.

We are done tonight, sorry about Sara on the comments, she was a little slow 
as she'd been out for a boozy lunch!

Lots of love from us all and I hope you enjoy your supper, it's really nice 
with Greek yog.

A x

PS - the lentils like lots of EVOO - more than you think.
PPS - tune in next kitchen clickalong if you are interested in my answers to 
the questions posed.
 