
8.34pm: Put your ginger and garlic in with the aubs adding a splash more oil.

8.30pm: Your bulgar will be cooked by now. Take it off the heat and put a lid 
on it.

The aubergines will take a bit of time to get to where we want so you get on 
with prepping your peppers by cutting then into rough bite size pieces. Trim 
any gnarly bits off your ginger but don;'t peel – most of the fire and goodness 
in ginger is in the outer 3mm, so why waste it? Slice your ginger thinly then 
roughly pile up your slices then cut again so they go into matchsticks. Slice 
the rest of the garlic.

8.28pm: Put your veg pan on a high heat. Pour in 2 tablespoons of EVOO

Half the aubergine lengthways, then in half again lengthways then chop in to 
cherry tomato sized chunks. Put these into your now very hot pan. You may want 
to add a splash more oil as aubergines are notoriously spongy – the obo bits 
should be frying rather then sticking and looking unhappy.

8.18pm: Then pour 200ml onto the bulgar and turn the heat down, if you have 
rings of various sizes move this to the smallest.

8.13pm: Add your bulgar, roll and coat it in the garlicy oil.

Make up a third of a litre (roughly 350ml) of veg or chicken stock or just hot 
water will do if you don't have a cube.

8.10pm: If you have got a dried chilli of any description chuck it in whole 
now.

8.07pm: Get your small heavy bottomed pan of choice onto a medium heat and put 
2 tablespoons of EVOO into it.

Take two cloves of garlic and rough chop/smush them with a bit of salt and put 
them into your pan to fry until golden.

8.03pm: Right we are in and we are off.

Preheat your oven to 180°C

Depending on how fresh your salmon is (ie if it has been sitting in a plastic 
box from a supermarket and might have a slight whiff to it), give it a quick 
rinse in cold water and then sit it on some kitchen roll and pat dry.

Also put the kettle on so we can make stock.

It's all about fish chez McEvedy tonight - join her from 8pm.

Last minute ingredients checklist

Ingredients

2 pieces of salmon fillet (farmed or wild – up to you, but if going for wild 
check for MSC approval) about 150g each, and from middle to head half, not tail 
half if possible
100g bulgar, cracked wheat
A few tbsps of EVOO
Small handful of dill, roughly chopped
Big handful of parsley, roughly chopped
2-ish chillies, green are best for this if fresh (best balance is 1 red dried 
and 1 green fresh)
1 fat carrot
1 red & 1 yellow pepper
A small, firm aubergine
1 fat thumb ginger, trimmed but not peeled
120ml white wine vinegar
2 tbsp sweet chilli sauce (or have a pinch of sugar on hand)
4 cloves garlic
2 shallots
A touch of flour
Less than half litre veg oil (re-usable after)
Half a lemon and a lime
S & P

Serves 2
 