
There's a fair showing of chilli in this dish, but those who are less keen on 
heat can leave both lots out and will still have a yummy supper. Sounds 
obvious, I know, but didn't want to put anyone off.

Ingredients - supper for 2

2 pieces of salmon fillet (farmed or wild – up to you, but if going for wild 
check for MSC approval) about 150g each, and from middle to head half, not tail 
half if poss
100g bulgar, cracked wheat
a few tbsps of EVOO
small handful of dill, roughly chopped
big handful of parsley, roughly chopped
2-ish chillies, green best for this if fresh (best is 1 red dried and 1 green 
fresh)
1 fat carrot
1 red & 1 yellow pepper
1 small, firm aubergine
1 fat thumb ginger, trimmed but not peeled
120ml white wine vinegar
2 tbsp sweet chilli sce (or have a pinch of sugar on hand)
4 cloves garlic
2 shallots
a touch of flour
Less than half litre veg oil (re-usable after)
Half a lemon 
A lime
Salt & pepper

Method

Preheat your oven to 180°C

Depending on how fresh your salmon is (ie if it has been sitting in a plastic 
box from a supermarket and might have a slight whiff to it), give it a quick 
rinse in cold water and then sit it on some kitchen roll and pat dry.

Put the kettle on so we can make stock.

Get a small heavy bottomed pan onto a medium heat and put 2 tablespoons of 
EVOO.

Take two cloves of garlic and rough chop/smush them with a bit of salt and put 
them into your pan to fry until golden.

If you have got a dried chilli of any description chuck it in whole now. 
 Add your bulgar to your garlic and chilli oil. Photograph: Susi Smither 
Add your bulgar, roll and coat it in the garlicy oil

Make up a third of a litre (roughly 350ml) of veg or chicken stock and then 
pour 200ml onto the bulgar and turn the heat down. If you have rings of various 
sizes move this to the smallest.

Put your veg pan on a high heat. Pour in 2 tablespoons of EVOO.

Quarter the aubergine lengthways, then in half again lengthways then chop in 
to cherry tomato sized chunks. Put these into your now very hot pan. You may 
want to add a splash more oil as aubergines are notoriously spongy – the 
aubergine bits should be frying rather then sticking and looking unhappy.

Your bulgar will be cooked by now. Take it off the heat and put a lid on it.

The aubergines will take a bit of time to get to where we want so you get on 
with prepping your peppers by cutting then into rough bite size pieces. Trim 
any gnarly bits off your ginger but don't peel – most of the fire and goodness 
in ginger is in the outer 3mm, so why waste it? Slice your ginger thinly then 
roughly pile up your slices then cut again so they go into matchsticks. Slice 
the rest of the garlic.
 Chuck in your garlic and ginger. Photograph: Susi Smither 
Put your ginger and garlic in with the aubs adding a splash more oil.

Put your salmon frying pan on a high heat to warm up. 

Once you can really smell the ginger and garlic add the pepper pieces. You 
want a good sizzle going on before you add the white wine vinegar, followed a 
minute later by the rest of your veg stock (150ml). Leave it on a high heat to 
simmer.

Tip your bulgar into a bowl, give your pan a quick wipe out with a bit of 
kitchen roll or teatowel and put it back on a medium heat.

Now for your salmon. Season the fillets generously with S&P. Pour in a couple 
of tablespoons of EVOO to the salmon pan and it should instantly move around 
very freely and start to smoke.
 Crisp your salmon skin. Photograph: Susi Smither 
Gently lay the salmon pieces in skin side down, and give it a quick press with 
a flipper/palette knife to get the skin flat against the surface of the pan.

When you can see that the fish is just beginning to brown along the edge of 
the skin, chuck it in the oven for 8 minutes.

In the little ex-bulgar pan, pour in 300ml of veg oil.

Slice the shallots into rings a couple of mms thick. 

Quick noise check – salmon sizzling in the oven and veg bubbling on the hob.
 Flour your onion rings. Photograph: Susi Smither 
Break up the shallot rings, put them in a sieve and toss them in a little 
handful of flour.
 Check your oil is hot enough. Photograph: Susi Smither 
Check that your oil is hot enough by dropping in one ring; it should 
immediately sizzle and float to the top of the oil. Once this temperature has 
been reached then drop the rings in one by one but quickly, being carefully not 
to drop them from a great height so you don't get lots of splash.
 Peel off strips of carrot. Photograph: Susi Smither 
Slice off lengthways strips of carrot into your veg pan using a peeler. Then 
add your sweet chilli sauce some seasoning and give it a good stir poking your 
carrots down under the other veg so they get softened.

Give the shallots a bit of a move around.
 Add a squeeze of lemon to your bulgar. Photograph: Susi Smither 
Finish the bulgar with a tiny dice of green chilli, the chopped parsley, a 
squeeze of lemon and salt to taste.

With your shallots you are looking for an even, golden dark brown. Take them 
out with a slotted spoon and drain them on a couple of pieces of kitchen roll. 
Season with salt straight away.

Take your salmon out of the oven. 

Halve the bulgar between each plate in a pile in the middle and put the salmon 
on top of it.

Tip all the veg into the ex-salmon pan and watch it sizzle and reduce. Put 
your roughly chopped dill and squeeze of lemon in the veg.

Have a quick taste, you want it to be on the sharp side but you can balance it 
with a splash more sweet chilli if it's too sharp.
 The finished dish. Photograph: Susi Smither 
Veggies around the edge (and look! There's enough left for a snack tomorrow) 
and then finish it off with your crispy shallots and a piece of lime.
 