
Tonight sees the return of our live, interactive cookery class and for the 
first time we'll be making two courses in our allotted hour - a main course of 
lemon, sage and mascarpone chicken with Jerusalem extra virgin mash and robust 
greens, and tarte tatin to follow. Shortly before 8pm the assembled 
clickalongers will raise their wooden spoons aloft to salute the arrival of our 
head chef, and the fun will begin at 8 o'clock sharp.

Apparently there are some people out there who for various reasons can't join 
in and treat the clickalong as a spectator sport (these invisible people have 
even been referred to, unkindly, as 'lurkers' - we prefer 'silent partners'). 
Well, don't be shy, if you're logging on just for the fun of it feel free to 
offer words of encouragement from the sidelines, and do share with everyone 
what you're having for dinner yourself.

Don't forget that if you can't cook with us tonight, the live blog will be 
transformed into a step-by-step recipe with timings after the event (much like 
this one 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2009/nov/12/vegetarian-moroccan-filo-pie>
), so you'll be able to cook the menu when it suits you, albeit without the 
advantage of Allegra's help, advice and answers to your questions in real time.

Here's a reminder of what you'll need - there's still time for a last-minute 
dash round the shops! Be ready for an 8pm start and we'll see you back here 
later this evening.

Ingredients - main course (serves 2 - double it for 4!)

2 free-range chicken supremes (ie breast with wing attached) with skin on – 
the skin is essential but you don't necessarily need the little bone – mine 
weigh 250g each
2 lemons, zested
1 clove of garlic, peeled
A nugget of Parmesan, grated
A knob of butter
12 leaves of sage, chopped
3 tablespoons mascarpone
300g Jerusalem artichokes
300g waxy spuds, I'm using Cyprus
1 tablespoon normal olive oil
150g seasonal greens of your choice: purple sprouting broccoli, savoy, 
brussels sprouts / tops, cavalo nero, romanesco, Swiss chard, kale, spring 
greens etc.
A few good glugs (around 5 tablespoons) of best extra virgin olive oil
S&P

For the tarte tatin

Serves 4-6

200g caster sugar
100g butter, salted
4 to 5 apples (eating not cooking) about 700g - I'm using russets and braeburns
Flour for dusting the pastry
250g puff pastry
Dairy of your choice to accompany, ie cream or ice-cream

Equipment

Masher / moulis / ricer
2 x ovenproof frying pans (both roughly 25cm diameter, and hopefully not with 
paper-thin bottoms)
2 saucepans
Rolling pin
Peeler
Zester
Whisk

7.38pm: Hello and Welcome to what those folks at Guardian Towers have 
misguidedly called the Early Spring Cookalong. I'm all for the power of 
positive thinking, but as the snow flurries threaten and the wet winter winds 
whip all around us, there doesn't seem to be a whole lot Early Springish goin' 
down.
Except possibly this dish, in which summery lemon and wintery sage hold hands 
lovingly across a dish of early spring (!) veg and multi-seasonal bird.
I've enjoyed the clamouring that has been coming from your blogposts, and I 
wonder if next time for the good of all (except those vociferous veggies) we 
should start with a step by step butch-along, as in a Butchery 101 class.
And sorry to have thrown the knobbly curveball of Jerusalem artichokes at you, 
but they ARE rather special andnow is their time (but not in a world conquering 
way).
So it's time for your warm up exercises – the bar has shot up as this time 
we'll be doing 2 courses, and I at least still plan to be sitting down to my 
mains at 9 (ish). Gather your equipment, ingredients, wits and most importantly 
a glass of serenity…you'll need it!
See you in 20!
A xxxxx

8.00pm: Ok, I hope you've all got your knives sharpened and your hands washed. 
We need to hit the ground running so no time for niceties (but I'm really 
pleased you are all playing).

First zest your lemons. A microplaner is the new kid on the block for this job 
and does it best; a box grater is the old fashioned way and gets the good done; 
a hand zester sits between the two and does it fine but sometimes goes too deep.

Put half of the lemon zest in a little bowl and put the other half aside for 
later.

8.01pm: Chop then paste your garlic with a pinch of salt for abrasion using 
the blade and then the side of your knife. Mix this well with the half of your 
zest in the bowl along with a bit more salt and some pepper.

8.03pm: Split the mixture in two then gently peel back a bit of the skin on 
each breast from the flat side and rub the mixture directly onto the smooth 
flesh.
Pull the skin back over and across and put both supremes on a plate to one 
side.

8.04pm: Give anything that was touching the chicken a good wash.

8.06pm: Now for some peeling (apart from Brusselgastrogeeks who cheated in an 
hysterical way): the Jerusalem artichokes you can either peel with a peeler or 
a little knife - peelers are harder but there is less waste. Halve/quarter them 
depending if they're big'uns, and put them straight into a pan with cold water 
so they don't discolour.

Then peel the spuds, quarter them and chuck them in the pan too.

8.08pm: Here's some cheffy chat to occupy you whilst you peel. 

Because JAs can become quite water logged when you boil them it is hard to get 
a pert mash so the spuds are there to give it structure.

Jerusalem artichokes are tubers and not related to the globe artichoke but are 
actually from the same family as the sunflower. The Spanish for sunflower is 
girasol and Jerusalem was a misunderstanding in translation. This is why they 
are called Sun Chokes in America. The artichoke bit comes from the fact that 
they taste a bit like artichoke hearts (if you squint).

8.09pm: Right speedy peeler over here has got her pan going on a high heat now 
with a big pinch of salt and a lid on.

8.13pm: Now let's jump to the pud: first you need to get your caramel going. 

Out of the 2 ovenproof frying pans I asked you to have ready choose your 
better one for this job.

Cover the bottom of the pan evenly with the sugar, wet it with a couple of 
tablespoons of water and put it on a high heat.

8.14pm: Try not to get a lot of sugar up the side of the pan, and if you do 
give it a swish with a wet pastry brush.

8.14pm: Once you have put in your 2 to 3 tablespoons of water onto your sugar 
use your fingertips to mix it all up so all of the sugar is wet. Obviously do 
this before it goes onto the stove.

8.17pm: Don't fiddle with the pan and just leave it to caramelise, but keep an 
eye on it to see how quickly it is turning: it's going to go through all sorts 
of different stages, big bubbles, bigger bubbles, little bubbles, golden brown 
and then a kind of ruby colour which is where things are beginning to get 
interesting for us.

But most importantly as soon as your caramel is on attend to your apples, and 
get a wig on. It is essential that your apples are peeled, quartered and cored 
before you start seeing any ruby in your caramel pan, so turn it down if the 
caramel is turning faster than you are prepping the apples.

8.18pm: My mash water has now come to the boil so take the lid off but keep it 
on a medium boil.

8.19pm: When the caramel starts to darken in one spot, now is the time to give 
it a quick swirl around (no utensils please) to even up the colour throughout 
the pan.

Turn the heat down a touch.

8.20pm:

8.21pm: Also you need to cut the butter into rough cubes and have this near 
the pan because your caramel should be nearly there now.

8.22pm: Stand by your caramel. When you can see it beginning to smoke just a 
little bit and go dark ruby red. And the bubbles are sort of small and fizzy 
looking. Turn the heat right down for a minute to take the pressure off 
yourself.

This is a fine line. Your caramel must be dark for the tatin to taste right 
but too dark and it will burn and you are screwed. No pressure. Just remember 
you are in control of the heat.

8.24pm: Keep swirling as you add in the cubes of butter and keep it moving 
until the butter has melted.

You MUST have you apples ready by now. It should take you no longer than 2 
minutes to get the butter integrated. Again no spoons just swirling.

TIP: Don't drop the butter in from a big height, just gently drop it in.

8.25pm: Now add in your apples pieces: they don't have to be perfectly placed 
as you are only par-cooking them at this stage. After a couple of mins turn 
them over so they are coated in the caramel.

8.27pm: Don't worry if the fat looks a bit separated from the caramel. It will 
all come together.

Preheat your oven to 200ºC/400ºF.

8.27pm: Poke your spuds and JAs. They should be on a fast simmer at this point 
and beginning to soften.

8.29pm: Keep basting and turning the apples being careful not to break them. 
Dont' be too much of a pussy about the heat - mines on full pelt right now. The 
caramel should be on a fast bubble.

As the apples cook water will have come out of them so your caramel will 
become much looser, and so you keep it bubbling and reducing to compensate for 
that.

8.32pm: My tubers and roots are done now so I'm going to drain them and let 
them sit in a colander for a few minutes to steam dry.

8.33pm: My apples are now ready. You can tell when they are done if you poke a 
knife in and you meet a little resistance - you don't want to cook them fully.

Leave your caramel on the medium heat to reduce down but lift the apples out 
with a slotted spoon onto a plate.

8.36pm: Once your caramel has reduced to a dark golden/treacle tart colour and 
has a thick consistency and bubbles like Old Faithful, turn the heat off. It 
should be only a couple of minutes after you take your apples out.

8.38pm: In your other frying pan put a tablespoon of olive oil and get it on a 
high heat. Season the skin of the chicken and once the oil is just about 
smoking hot put the breasts in skin side down for 2 to 3 minutes to give them a 
good colour.

Give the flesh-side a season too, then put the pan in the oven.

8.40pm: Once the spuds and JAs have sat in the colander for a couple of 
minutes mash them in the pan they were cooked in or pass them through a ricer, 
letting the wormy bits fall into the saucepan.

8.43pm: Give the mash a good season with S&P. Stir in around 5 tablespoons of 
best EVOO (extra virgin olive oil for the newbies) and the grated parmesan. A 
less experienced chef would reach for the truffle oil at this point, which 
would be a mistake. Give it a taste. Yum.

8.44pm: Now place your apple quarters in a circle around the edge of the pan 
with the curved side down.

8.45pm: Whoops I forgot to say put a lid on your mash to keep it warm.

8.48pm: The tarte tatin we are making tonight is quite carameltastic but I 
think one of the joys of a tatin is oozing caramel on your plate at the end.

8.48pm: In your other saucepan put a couple of inches of water, chuck in some 
salt and put it on a high heat with a lid on. This is for your greens.

8.52pm: Quickly back to the pud: roll out your puff on a floured surface – 
you're aiming for a circle-ish shape to flop on top of your pan.

Lay the puff on top of the pan above the apples and run the rolling pin over 
it so that the excess drops off.

8.54pm: People who have small breasts (not yours - the chickens) and a fast 
oven may find that they're cooked, i.e. firm when you prod it.

If it is then take your chicken out of the pan and rest skin-side up on a 
plate. If not give it a few more minutes, you shouldn't be far behind.

8.55pm: Prep your greens. I'm using purple sprouting broccoli so I'm trimming 
the ends and splitting the thick stalks, but you go ahead with whatever kind of 
feb greenery you have, then these go into the boiling water.

8.56pm: My breast are cooked now and resting skin side up. 

Tip out any excess fat, throw in a knob of butter and gently fry the chopped 
sage for a minute over a medium heat.

Stir in the rest of the lemon zest, the mascarpone and a couple of tablespoon 
of water. Whisk it till smooth, turn off the heat; add a touch of salt and a 
squeeze of lemon then give it a taste.

8.59pm: Chuck a couple of plates in the oven guys. 

My PSB is good to go, drain your greens once they're cooked.

9.00pm: Oh my God, it's dot on 9pm and we are ready for the mains. 

Your tarte tatin will take about 15 mins to cook, plus a 10 minute rest so I'd 
bang it in the oven now (200ºC, top shelf) so it's working but it is really up 
to you.

9.02pm: And tonight Matthew, we are plating ours like this...

9.15pm: My tatin is now out and your can turn off your oven. I said give it 10 
minutes to sit but really you just want to wait until the caramel has stopped 
bubbling and the whole thing is looking less terrifying because that sugar is 
now HOT HOT HOT and just a little bit dangerous.

9.18pm: So whenever you feel like it approach this last bit with a modicum of 
caution.

Lay your chosen serving plate on top of the frying pan.

Put your hand on to support it and flip the whole thing over making sure you 
flip away from you just in case any caramel flies out, which it shouldn't.

Don't lift the frying pan straight away but leave it for a count of 10 so 
everything drops into place.

9.24pm: A bit of flipping.

9.26pm: Enjoy with a bit of dairy dearie.

9.28pm: Bloody good going guys whether you are in Brussels, Washington or 
Shepherds Bush.

The bar was raised, it's still on it's posts and your head chef is very very 
proud of you.

As you know we've gone quarterly now so keep an eye on the website for the 
next one which should be round about May-ish...I feel some asparagus coming on.

I'd love to see you photos on flickr, when you've had a chance to catch your 
breath.

Lots of love, 

Team SAS (Susi, Allegra and Sara). x
 