

It's another grim, grey day outside … and you're feeling strangely hungry. 
What you need is something to electrify your palate and warm your cockles. Yes, 
it's Wednesday and in just a few short hours it will be time for Allegra to 
dish up another potful-o-burnin' love: her own sweet potato, red lentil and 
broccoli curry with cardamom rice and coconut-coriander-garlic chutney.

Have you got the pots? Have you scraped an edge on to that knife? Is your mise 
in place? Do you haveTim Atkin's wine suggestions 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2009/feb/16/allegra-veg-curry-clickalong-wine>
 to accompany your dinner?And do you have a camera to capture your efforts and 
share <http://www.flickr.com/groups/wordofmouth/>? Because kickoff is at 8pm 
and tonight's going to be a treat. At this point, the uninitiated may be 
confused - find out how this works by looking at pastkitchen clickalongs here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/series/allegra-mcevedy-kitchen-clickalong>
.

Check the ingredient list after the jump and don't forget that lemon or lime 
we threw in as our now traditional last-minute addition.

As we type, Chef McEvedy is out there somewhere on the interwebs, limbering up 
in her kitchen. She'll be online just before 8pm to take you through the steps. 
Be there or be very, very hungry.


(Serves 4 - you can easily double the quantities and freeze or refrigerate 
some for lunches or a lazy supper.)

Last-minute addition: a lemon or lime

300g red lentils
300g basmati rice
1 large onion
1 big head garlic
1 average sized sweet potato (around 400g)
1 head broccoli
Big bunch of coriander
Fat thumb of ginger
As many green chillies as you can handle (don't forget, the smaller the 
hotter!)
Mug of frozen peas
A bit of as many of the following as you have: cumin seed, coriander seed, 
turmeric, cinnamon stick, cardamom pods (don't feel you have to go out and buy 
'em all)
4 tbsp ground almonds
1 tsp mustard seeds (brown or yellow)
Big handful flaked almonds
Half a tin of coconut milk
4 tbsp dessicated coconut
Some peanut / rapeseed / sunflower oil
Some butter
Salt and pepper

7.30pm: Hello and welcome to this 4th live kitchen clickalong session: 
tonight's dish was brought to you by those two culinary guardians of our times: 
value & leftovers.

Over here we're limbering up: Susi's opening gambit was a couple of killer G & 
T's, I'm going to do ten minutes stretching before going to pick up the third 
member of our team, Sara, who changed her flight back from NYC so she could be 
with us tonight ... yes, we enjoy it our end just as much as you seem to at 
yours (though we've yet to get through a whole one without some testy words 
flying round at some point!).

So the uber-keen (or slower cooks out there) may want to get ahead and peel 
that head of garlic, and the rest of you just make sure your knives and wits 
are both sharp and ready to go.

Apologies for the last minute citrus addition ... just want you to have the 
best supper possible, but for those that it was an ingredient too far for, a 
splash of any light vinegar will suffice ... but more on that later.

Thanks for joining us - I really can't believe how many of us play this 
together ... gets me all tingly thinking about it - and it's all true, staying 
in is the new going out!

And lastly I'd like to dedicate this potentially flu-blasting curry (depending 
on how much chilli, ginger & garlic you put in it) to my lovely online editor 
Suse (as opposed to wife Susi) who sounds today like the before in a before and 
after Beechams ad.

Good luck, Keep Calm and above all Hold Steady.
See you at 8,
A xxxxxxxx

8.00pm:Right everybody, stop your idle chitter chatter and lets get down to 
some serious (OK, not so serious) cooking. Sara's made us a round of Schlongs - 
a lethal new cocktail she brought back from NYC and now it is time for a recipe 
of a different nature.

So secure your tastebuds, take a deep breath and let's begin.

8.02pm: Start of by putting the desiccated coconut in a bowl. Shake the tin of 
coconut milk well, unless it is already opened in which case give it a good 
stir and count out 6 tbsp of it onto the dried coconut.

Stir thoroughly and set aside.

8.04pm: Choose your curry pan: mine is 30cm across with a nice thick bottom 
(also useful for long train journeys). Whack it on a high heat, dry-toast a 
teaspoon of mustard seeds until they start to pop, then tip into the coconut 
mix.

8.05pm: Dice your onion, slice one chilli lengthways (two long halves) and 
slice the other.

8.07pm: Chilli addicts can add a little more chilli to the curry but it is 
really in the chutney that one gets the chance to burn.

8.09pm: Pour in around 3 tbsp of the oil of your choice, then tip in the onion 
and both cuts of chillies - there should be a satisfying sizzle.

8.10pm: Make sure your heat is now on medium, give it a stir and stick a lid 
on it.

8.11pm: Roughly chop your garlic (using the salt trick I showed you last time) 
apart from 3 cloves that you need to set aside for the chutney. Wash and trim 
ginger. Don't peel it (most of the goodness is in the outer 3mm of this mighty 
rhizome) and just grate on the big holes.

8.15pm: Give your onions a quick stir.

8.15pm: Stir the ginger and garlic into the softened onions, keeping the heat 
medium.

8.22pm: Wash and trim ends of sweet potatoes, but again don't peel - good 
roughage - and cut into rough 1 inch chunks - I do this by cutting them into 
half lengthways and then each half in half lengthways and then just chop down 
in inch intervals.

Turn your heat up again to medium if you lowered it and chuck them in.

8.28pm: Now for your spices: this is what I did, but you can mix it up 
according to what you have. 1 and a half teaspoons coriander seeds, 1 teaspoon 
cumin seeds, 1 teaspoon turmeric, 1 stick cinnamon, then fry for a couple of 
mins until you smell their inner magic (and if it looks like they're sticking 
not frying you can add a splash more oil).

8.31pm: Here's how you should be looking ...

8.32pm: Whilst the spices are livening up your nostrils stick the kettle on, 
then back to the curry and add the ground almonds - I went for quite heaped 
teaspoons.

8.33pm: Now it's the lentils' turn to get the roll and coat action: in they go 
and follow with a brisk stir.

8.37pm: In terms of liquid you can either just go straight in with a litre of 
water, or go for veg stock which is what I did.

Anywhichway pour it in, turn heat up full, give it a good crank of the pepper 
pot but no salt yet.

Lid on again.

8.40pm: Choose your rice pan, another thick bottom is good. Chuck in a 
generous tbsp of butter (sorry, I forgot that in the ingredients list - go for 
the same oil as before if there is no butter in the house) and tip in the 
flaked almonds.

Fry over a medium heat until golden - just a few mins.

8.42pm: Have a look at your curry - it should be on a steady active simmer. 
Lid on essential!

8.43pm: Measure out 300g basmati rice, noting the volume, then pour into the 
almond butter.

8.45pm: Stir and roll and coat. Then add 2.5 times the volume of cold water as 
you had rice and add it to the pot, along with half a dozen cardamom pods.

Turn up the heat and put a lid on.

8.46pm: Cut broccoli and stalks into florets and chunks, and stir in along 
with the peas from the freezer.

8.49pm: By now your rice should be at a good boil, turn the heat down so that 
it's just simmering very gently - lid back on.

8.51pm: Now your curry should be on a medium to low heat. Really roll the raw 
broccoli around in all that cooked stuff and stick the lid back on.

8.52pm: Very finely chop the rest of the garlic and as much chilli as you dare 
- this lot's going to be raw so up to you. I used 2 medium sized green ones but 
I'm pretty butch when it comes to chilli - Sara looks scared!

8.54pm: Now everything is ticking along back to your chutney. Put these in 
with your coconut and mustard seeds.

8.56pm: Give your curry another roll and turn. 

Lastly roughly chop your corry and stir that in well too.

8.59pm: Season and if you have lime or lemon add a healthy squeeze, and if not 
just go for a splash of a light vinegar.

8.59pm: Have a prod of your veg - should be pretty much there, and you should 
be totally or nearly out of liquid.

Stir it gently with a turning over kind of stir. 

Turn your curry down to the lowest possible and you must keep that lid on - 
the broccoli is going to need all that extra heat.

9.02pm: Check your rice by tasting the grains on top. If it's ready there 
should be chimney-stacks of steam and little-to-no liquid left. Only stir and 
season it once it's cooked. Rice doesn't like being disturbed mid-session.

9.04pm: My broccoli has softened in colour and structure a little and I have 
turned it off. Give it a last stir with a splash of coconut milk and a fair 
amount of salt - sea salt has a much richer flavour.

9.06pm: Our supper looks like this and I hope yours will too in a couple of 
minutes.

9.08pm: Thank you all so much, our busiest session yet. I really wish you and 
your guests if you dared a happy supper.

In other news I am delighted to see that Iron Maiden just won. Here comes the 
Hoff!!

Lots of love to you all and see you next time. 

A xxx
 