
Here's a quick reminder of the ingredients and equipment you'll need to have 
assembled at 8 o'clock:

Ingredients for tart

300g new season's potatoes, Cornish or Jersey seem to be the best, washed
3 bulbs of new season's garlic (ie wet with stalks still on as in the picture 
above - if you've got some wild garlic in you can use some of the leaves too) 
or a shed load of regular garlic (like 10 cloves, but it won't taste quite as 
new and springy)
30g butter
300g asparagus spears (untrimmed weight)
4 free range eggs
150ml double cream
a bit of Parmesan to grate on the top (if you fancy it)
Salt and pepper

For the pastry

200g plain flour
100g cold butter, cubed into about 9ish pieces
2 free-range egg yolks
2 tbsp milk
Salt and pepper

For the salad

Whatever you want for the base (enough for 4), like baby gem, butter 
(otherwise known as round or English) lettuce/rocket/chicory etc, leaves 
separated then washed
3 large handfuls of mixed soft herbs made up of any or all of the following: 
mint, parsley, chervil, basil, chives – picked and washed
Few splashes of red wine vinegar
Healthy splash of extra virgin olive oil
Salt and pepper

For the lemon curd pud

115g butter
230g caster sugar, preferably fair trade
Juice and zest of 3 lemons
1 free-range egg yolk
3 free-range eggs
250ml double cream
A pinch of sugar
Some posh biscuits

Equipment

24cm fluted tart ring, 3cm deep
Food processor
Clingfilm
Rubber spatula
1 small pan
1 heavy based pan
A couple of mixing bowls
A whisk
A grater
A sieve
4 serving glasses for the pud - we're using champagne saucers

7.36pm: Evening All!

Welcome to our May cookalong, in which together we will produce a Springy 
quiche from scratch, including pastry, within the hour (or so!)...+ salad + pud!

Tonight, from our side, we have Susi on camera & technical support, Vicky on 
keyboards and myself as ever on stove. Vicky is expressly here to answer your 
worries and wonderings (or rather she shouts them out to me, and then types in 
my pearls) so for all those problematic pastry issues and curd-ish conundrums, 
ping Vicky a line and we'll see if we can collectively soothe your furrowed 
brow.

So you know the score: gather your ingredients about you like the loyal 
footsoldiers that they are, sharpen your knives and your wits; pour a large 
glass of something comforting and hunker down for blast-off!!!

PS did I mention that it's much better if the butter for the pastry is fridge 
cold...

23 minutes and counting........

8.00pm: Right, hold on to your hats people, here we go...

Put your oven on to 180°C.

First to the pastry: this is quickest done in a food processor but equally you 
can do it in a large bowl. Start the flour and some seasoning whizzing to get 
some air in it. Then drop the butter cubes quickly piece by piece down the 
funnel to make a fine sand. Alternatively you can achieve the same texture by 
tipping the flour & seasoning into a bowl and rubbing the butter in with your 
fingertips.

8.01pm: If you are doing this in a food processor it should take about a 
minute to the stage when all the butter is incorporated; if you are doing it in 
a bowl with your fingers it will take more like 3 or 4.

8.05pm: Drop in the egg yolks and mix for a moment, then, if you're in the 
food processor, transfer to a bowl. Hand pastry makers once you've reached that 
sandy texture stir your yolks in too. All together now clench it together 
lightly with the milk – you aren't looking for a smooth dough ball you are just 
bringing together the ingredients into a slightly sticky mass.

8.08pm: You can either grate the pastry on the big holes or if it's very soft 
(this depends on the temperature of the butter/your hands/kitchen) then just 
push it into your tart ring. Do the sides first and then the base until you get 
an even casing with no holes.

8.10pm: You should have a small ball of pastry over so you can make some 
repairs after you've blind baked it.

8.11pm: Once it is all even run your knife around the top edge to neaten it up 
and put it ideally into the freezer, but fridge will do.

8.12pm: Fill a small pan with cold water, season with salt and put your 
potatoes on a high heat, with a lid on, to bring to the boil.

8.14pm: Now for the tart filling. Depending on how new your new season's 
garlic is trim the ends and peel back any dry layers. Thinly slice along the 
length and around the root. Normal garlic should just be roughly chopped, and 
if you have leaves then roughly chop them too.

8.18pm: Put the butter into the heavy based pan on a medium heat and sweat the 
garlic in it - whatever kind you have. If you have leaves, you only want to 
give them the briefest of sauté, just a wilt in the butter really.

8.18pm: Give it some S&P and a stir.

8.20pm: For those who have green garlic take a minute to inhale that goodness.

8.21pm: Get the tart case out of the freezer (the pastry should be hard by 
now) and chuck it in the oven. No need for any beans, but if your sides are 
higher than mine (ie 3cm) or you have a nervy disposition or you're unlucky in 
the kitchen, you can always line with greaseproof/foil and fill with baking 
beans or any kind of dried pulse you have in the cupboard.

8.21pm: Take the lid off your spuds now but keep them on a rolling boil and go 
back to your garlic and give it a good stir: spuds on high, garlic on medium.

8.24pm: Snap off the woody ends of your asparagus, which can be as much as a 
third of the length (these can be kept to make a nice stock for a risotto or 
soup). Give them a wash then slice the stalks into 1 cm pieces (unless they are 
tree-trunk thick, which today's seem to be, in which case slice them thinner) 
but keep the tips whole.

8.26pm: Have a very quick squizz in the oven to check your pastry sides aren't 
collapsing. If anybody's is (which I find highly unlikely) send a comment to 
Vicky and we'll try and help but you need to catch this before the pastry is 
fully cooked in the downward flop position.

8.27pm: Check the spuds by poking a sharp knife in one and if you can get the 
knife easily into the centre they are ready. They don't need to be quite as 
cooked as if you were eating them now as they are going to get another bake in 
the oven.

Drain and refresh (run them under cold water for a minute).

8.28pm: Slice the spuds about 1-ish cm thick.

8.30pm: By now your garlic should be softened, slightly browning and smelling 
delicious.

Turn it off and add the stems of the asparagus (not the tips) to the garlic 
and season with S&P.

Give it a stir.

8.31pm: If your tart case is looking and smelling cooked (you don't want it to 
be browning really) take it out and put on a baking tray. Reduce the oven temp 
to 160°C or 170°C depending on how fast your oven is.

8.32pm: I haven't really got any cracks today but if you have now is the time 
to repair any cracks in your tart case with the left over pastry.

8.32pm: Closely pack the spud slices on the bottom of the tart case - don't 
double stack - then season.

Spoon on the garlic and asparagus from the pan, then lay on the tips in some 
fashion. If you've got fat tips you may want to slice them in half.

8.36pm: In a bowl beat together the 4 eggs and double cream. 

Season, then pour onto the tart and, using a fork if necessary, let it meander 
its way between all the veggies; the mark of a great quiche is that the eggy 
custard fills the case all the way to the very top but is not overflowing at 
all.

8.37pm: If you fancy it grate on a bit of Parmesan too, then put the tart on a 
baking tray in the oven.

8.38pm: Good job folks (assuming anyone is still with me). 

Now for the much easier job of the lemon curd: melt the butter, sugar, lemon 
juice and zest in a heavy based saucepan over a low heat until it is all smooth.

8.44pm: By the way don't worry too much about zest and pips as it's all going 
to get strained out later.

8.45pm: And what ever you do remember to clean\turn over your board and use a 
different knife then from all of your garlic preparation.

8.47pm: In a mixing bowl whisk the yolk with the 3 eggs and add this to the 
curd mixture, whisking all the time.

8.48pm: Keep the heat low until the eggs are all incorporated, then change 
tools to a spatula, turn the heat up a bit and keep stirring until the curd is 
thick and bubbling, making sure you keep scraping the bottom of the pan so it 
doesn't catch and make scrambled eggs.

8.49pm: When you are feeling calm and in control of your curd you can turn the 
heat up to as high as you like you just need to increase the speed of the 
movement of your spatula.

Once the curd is thick turn the heat off.

8.51pm: Let me just amend that, it's not so much that it goes thick but that 
it gets thick-er and as soon as it is bubbling turn it off.

8.52pm: Fill a large bowl with cold water (and some ice if you have it).

8.54pm: Get another clean bowl preferably wide & shallow that will sit nicely 
in the ice bath.

Scrape the curd into a sieve above it and using the spatula push it through. 

Once you've pushed as much as possible through, scrape the underside of the 
sieve to get all the hanging bits and then sit the curd-laden bowl in the ice 
bath to cool.

8.57pm: Stir the lemon curd regularly to cool it down quickly and evenly. 

And you might want to give your sieve an immediate rinse else it will be a 
nightmare to clean later.

8.57pm: Ok, lets have a quick peek at that tart. Mine's about 5 minutes away 
and I'm rotating it through 180° so it colours evenly.

8.59pm: To finish the pud pour the double cream into a mixing bowl and whisk 
with a sprinkling of sugar until it's just beginning to hold it's shape.

9.02pm: By now your curd should be blood temperature so fold it into the cream 
bit by bit, then load this into your 4 serving glasses and pop them in the 
fridge.

9.04pm: My tart is just about spot in now - going golden brown round the edges 
and just about set in the middle.

So take it out of the oven and let it rest for the five minutes it takes you 
to pull together the salad.

9.08pm: You've done well (or is it just me) it's 9.08 and we are just about to 
serve.

Whilst I appreciate that my sprint may leave some of you panting remember it's 
not a race it is just about getting everyone across the line safely with a warm 
tart to welcome them.

9.09pm: Finish the salad by seasoning and dressing lightly with oil and 
vinegar.

You don't need me to tell you how to slice your tart but by the time you're 
ready for pud the creamy curd should have set up nicely. Don't forget the posh 
bickies – I dusted mine with icing sugar for added ponce!

And, in the words of the late, great Julia Child, all that remains is for me 
and team Cookalong to wish you "Bon Appetit!"
 