
Alliance Trust <http://www.alliancetrust.co.uk/>, one of the largest and 
oldest investment trusts, is under attack from activist investor Laxey 
Partners, which wants it to introduce measures to reduce and control its 
discount – the amount a share price falls below the value of its underlying 
assets.

Alliance's discount has been as high as 18%, which meant its shareholders were 
getting just 82p of value from every 100p of assets in their fund. It has now 
fallen to 15.3% because of Laxey's attentions.

Katherine Garrett-Cox, Alliance's chief executive, rejected Laxey's proposals, 
saying improved performance is the key to cutting the discount.

So let's examine Alliance's record. In the year to January it beat its 
benchmark index in the UK and, just, in Asia, but lagged well behind in the US, 
Europe, emerging markets and its global portfolio, which is made up of a 
selection of investments from its regional portfolios.

Overall, its total shareholder return was 19.2% compared with an average for 
the global growth sector of 24.4%. According to figures from Trustnetit has 
lagged its sector in three of the past four 12-month periods 
<http://www.trustnet.co.uk> and, over the past five full years it came 24th out 
of 31 trusts in the sector.

Given this poor performance, Garrett-Cox and her board should be asking tough 
questions of the trust's manager who is, um, Garrett-Cox.

She has a team of eight sector and regional specialists to help her but, as 
chief investment officer since 2007, the underperformance buck must stop with 
her.

Alliance claims to be seeing improvement, saying it has now achieved median 
performance over three years. Leaving aside the fact that average really is not 
good enough, even that performance is achieved only by mixing its global growth 
sector with the global growth and income sector, which looks a bit like moving 
the goalposts.

Unfortunately, however, Laxey's proposals would also not in themselves improve 
the performance and could, in fact, be counterproductive. It wants Alliance to 
buy back shares whenever the discount goes above 10%. It has not been at that 
level in the past five years; getting and keeping it there could force the 
trust to buy back aggressively in falling stockmarkets – which is bad for 
shareholders. Laxey's request has already had some effect asAlliance Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alliancetrust> is already actively buying 
back shares.

There have been hints that Laxey may make more proposals if the current move 
fails, including pressing the trust to consider contracting out its management 
to another investment group. But, even if that does happen, there is no 
guarantee it will work, or be beneficial, and it would be fought tooth and nail 
by the board.

So how can loyal shareholders – and, having been on the register for 15 years, 
I must count myself as one – register their desire for change? They could back 
Laxey merely as a protest, in the hope that the proposal will be voted down but 
win enough votes to make it clear there is a need for change. A second, more 
nuclear option is to vote against the re-election of Garrett-Cox to the board. 
That is risky – after all, it could leave the board rudderless and the trust 
without a manager. But, with the majority of its shares held by slavishly 
supportive small investors, the chance of it getting passed is so slim as to be 
negligible.

Perhaps the most sensible option is to follow the board this year and trust 
that Garrett-Cox's commitment to performance actually yields results this year. 
If it does not, there is still a nuclear option for the 2012 annual general 
meeting. The deadline for postal or internet votes is 16 May and the AGM is on 
20 May in the trust's Dundee home town.
 