
Allied Irish Banks <https://www.theguardian.com/business/allied-irish-bank> 
(AIB) expects to cut more than 2,000 jobs by the end of next year, after 
reporting more than quadrupled losses of €10.4bn (£9.2bn).

The bank said business and market conditions remained difficult and costs 
needed to be lowered. The staff will go on a phased basis during 2011 and 2012.

The €10.4bn loss last year compares with €2.3bn in 2009.

AIB, once Ireland's largest bank but now 92.8% state-owned, needs another 
€13.3bn bailout after the results of long-awaited stress tests.

The Irish government plans to shrink the state's creaking banking sector from 
six homegrown lenders to two so-called pillar banks.

AIB and EBS Building Society will merge to form one banking "pillar", while 
Bank ofIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> will form the second.

AIB employs around 12,000 staff through its Irish divisions, with another 
2,507 in its UK operations.

The bank said the commitment of further state support highlights its systemic 
importance to the domestic Irish economy.

"The very strong capital base that will result from the generation of €13.3bn 
of capital will enable AIB to provide long-term support to its customers and 
play an active role in the recovery of the Irish economy," the bank said in a 
commentary on the results.

Some €7.2bn in state support has already been pumped into the bank.

David Hodgkinson, AIB executive chairman, said the job losses would be spread 
across the organisation as the bank needs to "slim down".

"We expect to get the vast majority on a voluntary basis," he told RTE Radio.

"The first thing we have to do is to agree with our major stakeholder, the 
government, on what is appropriate and then we will start the consultation 
period with the union."

Hodgkinson said he believed the bank should be "reasonably generous" to staff 
facing redundancy.

The executive chairman said the group's losses were about poor-quality loans 
where the bank does not expect to get paid.

"There was almost a kind of collective madness, everybody went crazy on 
property and for a very long time," he said.
 