
The career of Allister Sparks, one of South Africa’s greatest newsmen, tracked 
65 extraordinary years of the country’s history. He long outlasted not just his 
peers but the apartheid system that he chronicled and fought, remaining a 
robust political commentators virtually until his death in Johannesburg last 
week, aged 83.

Sparks got a premonition of what was to come when, as a rookie reporter in 
1953, he interviewed the minister of native affairs, Dr Hendrik Verwoerd, 
perched on an old iron bedstead in a Queenstown hotel. Verwoerd gave him a 
grandfatherly lecture on his vision of grand apartheid, which was to be imposed 
on the country over the next 40 years at terrifying cost.

Sparks is principally remembered as the crusading editor of the Rand Daily Mail
 in the late 70s and early 80s, which broke theinformation scandal 
<http://www.sahistory.org.za/topic/information-scandal> that brought down the 
government of John Vorster, exposed the murder in detention of the black 
consciousness leader Steve Biko and started serious reporting about black 
politics and the black labour movement for a predominantly white (though 
burgeoning black) readership.

Instead of an award for his journalism, he was fired in 1982 by the paper’s 
owners for being too left wing and attracting too many black readers, exposing 
the mining companies that owned the English-language newspaper groups as poor 
custodians of a free press. Three years later, having failed to destroy the DNA 
of the newspaper by getting rid of a succession of editors, they closed theRand 
Daily Mail down. Sparks reached out to his international contacts – Donald 
Trelford at theObserver, Ben Bradlee of the Washington Post, André Spoor of NRC 
Handelsblad – and launched a new career as a foreign correspondent, just as the 
country lurched into the township rebellion that would lead to the demise of 
Afrikaner rule.

He had a rich turn of phrase that bruised his adversaries. They hated him for 
it

Having reached the pinnacle of his profession, Sparks had to make a difficult 
transition, rather like a general returning to the trenches. He accomplished it 
largely because he was at root a reporter.

One of his greatest scoops was tracking down to Botswana the ANC military 
operatives Arthur Goldreich and Harold Wolpe who had escaped police detention 
in 1964, evading a nationwide dragnet.

In the dark days of the 80s, Sparks showed bravery and perseverance, risking 
teargas and bullets on township streets, and taking time to listen to the 
stories of the victims. He was a passionate man and there was a gusto to his 
columns, an ability to latch on to inconvenient facts like a bulldog, a 
perceptiveness and a rich turn of phrase that bruised his adversaries. They 
hated him for it.

At a cocktail party for foreign correspondents, then President PW Botha, who 
usually managed to avoid him, was accidentally brought face to face with his 
liberal nemesis. “Why are you so bitter?” asked Botha. As Sparks started to lay 
into Botha, his aides wheeled the visibly angry president away. Sparks took 
crap from no one.

Though he had charm and a wonderful penchant for storytelling, Sparks never 
lost the commanding presence of an editor and could come across as gruff and 
intimidating. Yet his was a positive vision of the country, one he shared with 
Archbishop Desmond Tutu, whom he later wrote a book about. He had a special 
relationship with Nelson Mandela and, in 1994, the African National Congress 
put Sparks on its candidates list for the first democratic elections.

He declined, opting instead to launch an institute aimed at advancing 
journalism skills, and guided the transformation of the South African 
Broadcasting Corporation, which had been the propaganda mouthpiece of the 
apartheid government. He launched the SABC into a golden age that was not to 
long outlast the expiry of his contract, after which it reverted to mediocrity 
and sycophancy.

Sparks wrote a series of books about South Africa, the first an 
anthropological examination of the “mind of South Africa”, the others 
chronicling the transition from apartheid to democracy. Age never dimmed his 
pen. He thundered on week after week, growing disenchanted with the leadership 
of the ANC, especially the corruption and missteps of Jacob Zuma. In his 
autobiography,The Sword and the Pen 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Sword-Pen-Allister-Sparks/dp/1868425592>, published 
earlier this year, Sparks noted that despite his disappointment with Thabo 
Mbeki and Zuma, South Africa is still a much better place than it was under 
apartheid.

.

Phillip van Niekerk is a former correspondent of the Observer and editor of 
South Africa’sMail and Guardian
 