
Alliance Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alliancetrust>, one of 
the UK’s oldest investment firms, has reached an 11th-hour compromise with its 
rebel investor Elliott Advisors, which had been pushing for change at the 
company.

In a reversal of its previous position, the 127-year old institution said it 
was appointing to the board two of the three independent directors nominated by 
the US hedge fund, its largest shareholder.

In brings to an end a brief but bitter battle between the parties, which will 
now avoid a showdown at Alliance’s annual general meeting on Wednesday.

In return for Alliance’s appointment of the former investment bankers Anthony 
Brooke and Rory Macnamara to the board, Elliott agreed to drop its nomination 
of a third director of its choice – Peter Chambers – and said it would support 
the board on all other resolutions at the AGM.

Having previously told shareholders – including at least 50,000 retail 
investors – that Elliott’s intervention “threatens the very existence of the 
company” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/20/alliance-trust-says-hedge-fund-bid-threatens-its-existence-elliott-advisors>
, there was a notable change in Alliance’s tone in Tuesday’s statement. Karin 
Forseke, the chairman, said: “On behalf of the whole board, I would like to 
express my gratitude to our shareholders for engaging with us on this important 
issue.

“Having considered this feedback we have worked with Elliott to find a 
compromise which we believe is in the best interests of all our shareholders. I 
would also like to welcome Anthony and Rory to the board where their 
significant experience will be a considerable asset.”

 Elliott has a 12% stake in Alliance Trust and had argued that a new approach 
was required by the company, which it said had persistently performed worse 
than other investment trusts.The hedge fund also criticised the pay of 
Alliance’s chief executive, Katherine Garrett-Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/31/us-fund-elliott-advisors-steps-up-attack-alliance-trust-katherine-garrett-cox>
, one of the most high-profile women in the City. She earned £1.34m last year.

In a statement on Tuesday, Elliott indicated that it would keep up the 
pressure despite reaching agreement over the two independent directors. It 
said: “We are pleased to have reached an understanding with Alliance Trust and 
look forward to following the enlarged board’s progress on strategic and 
business matters over the next year and beyond.

 “Elliott acknowledges and appreciates the widespread engagement and support 
from fellow shareholders of the company and others in recent weeks. We believe 
that this solution is in the best interests of all shareholders.”

However, as part of the agreement announced on Tuesday the hedge fund agreed 
that it would not call a general meeting “or seek to agitate against the 
company, its board or management publicly until after the company’s 2016 AGM at 
the earliest”.

Shares in Alliance rose 1.2% to 525p in early trading.
 