
Asthma <https://www.theguardian.com/society/asthma> and allergies in children 
could be prevented by altering the type of microbes inside their gut as babies, 
researchers have suggested.

The team found that a particular pattern of gut microbes in babies just a 
month old was linked to an increased risk of them developing asthma and 
allergic reactions as they grew up.

“Early-life intervention may be a strategy by which we can offset allergic 
asthma in perhaps a portion of the population,” said Susan Lynch, co-author of 
the research from the University of California, San Francisco, adding that such 
interventions could include supplementing young babies with a cocktail of 
bacteria and other microbes lacking in their gut.

According to Asthma UK, the UK has one of the highest rates of asthma symptoms 
in children in the world, with one in 11 currently receiving treatment for the 
condition. While the disease can be managed, there is currently no cure.

Writing in the journal Nature Medicine 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nm.4176>, Lynch and colleagues describe 
how they analysed the gut microbes of 130 babies aged around one month old by 
examining their stool samples. They then followed up on the health of the 
children at two and four years of age.

Microbes such as bacteria and fungi are passed from mothers to babies during 
birth, while breastfeeding, the surrounding environment and the use of 
antibiotics are also thought to influence the mix.

The researchers found that the babies fell broadly into one of three groups, 
based on the mix of microbes living in their gut.

One of the groups, composed of 11 babies, were three times more likely to have 
allergic reactions at two years and asthma at four years old compared to the 
other groups.

The stools of these babies, Lynch added, had low levels of bacteria including 
Faecalibacterium and Bifidobacterium and high levels of fungi such as Candida 
andRhodotorula. That raises the possibility of manipulating the mix of gut 
microbes early in development to reduce the risk.

To unpick how the microbes could affect the likelihood of developing allergies 
and asthma, Lynch and colleagues exposed immune cells from healthy adults to 
sterilised stool samples from the lowest and highest-risk babies. The upshot 
was that samples from the high-risk babies triggered an immune response and 
suppressed cells involved in keeping allergic responses in check.

That, says Lynch, “[suggests] that the microbes in the gut and their products 
in these highest-risk children drives an allergic response from very early 
infancy”.

The researchers also delved into possible explanations for why some babies had 
the problematic set of gut microbes, finding that those children were more 
likely to be boys and to grow up in a household without a dog.

Benjamin Marsland, an expert on the impact of microbes on the immune system 
from the University hospital of Lausanne in Switzerland, described the new 
research as “important”.

“There is a growing awareness that events very early in life can shape how our 
immune system matures, and as a consequence, our susceptibility to, or 
protection against, allergies,” he said.

The new research, he adds, is a stepping stone towards new ways of tackling 
asthma and allergies. “If we can ensure that a baby is exposed to the right 
microbes early in life, we might be able to reduce the global burden of 
allergic diseases, such as asthma,” he said.

But William Cookson, professor of genomic medicine at Imperial College London, 
urged caution, noting the small number of children considered to have asthma or 
allergy in the study and that an increase in allergic reactions at two years of 
age was not found using conventional definitions.

“Asthma is a disease of the airways, it is not a disease of the bowel, and the 
airways have their own microbiota – fungi and bacteria – which are very, very 
plainly abnormal in asthmatics,” he added. “So the more logical thing to do, to 
me, is to look at the lungs, rather than to look at the bowels.”

Dr Erika Kennington, head of research at Asthma UK, said: “We know that gut 
bacteria can influence our health in many different ways, including determining 
our risk of developing asthma, but we don’t yet know exactly how this process 
works.

“This new research helps us better understand the link between gut bacteria 
and asthma in young children and, in the future, could potentially help us to 
identify youngsters at higher risk of developing asthma and develop treatments 
to help them manage it.”

Lynch adds that early life gut bacteria are not likely to be the whole story. 
“My personal view is that there are many ways to develop the disease,” she said.
 