
Hours back from Norway, about to fly out to Amsterdam, at the halfway point of 
a 22-festival summer tour ("Is it still 22? I think we added more dates"), the 
two members of the bandAlunaGeorge <http://www.alunageorge.com/> sit in a 
London park, replenishing energy.

Aluna Francis, 24, prods at a takeaway tub from a local veggie place, forking 
up everything except unfancied chunks of beetroot. George Reid, also 24, smokes 
a roll-up. They make each other laugh remembering a promoter, met backstage at 
one or other of the festivals, who handed them a business card with his name, 
number and naked photograph on it. They reminisce about "boiling hot dancing" 
at Sonar in Spain and a "perfect afternoon" playing Glastonbury a week ago.

This band are overworked and delighted about it. At the start of the year they 
were listed as one of the BBC Sound of 2013; they were critics' choice nominees 
at the Brits. Now, after months of bubbling interest, they're ready to release 
a debut album,Body Music, a dozen sunny, electronic tracks (including an 
entertaining cover ofMontell Jordan's 1995 R&B hit 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0hiUuL5uTKc> This is How We Do It) built around 
Aluna's vocals and George's beats. An infectious pairing.

"We're very fortunate to have met each other," says Aluna. "I don't think 
everyone in creative partnerships enjoys this kind of harmony. You hear of 
animosity, big heads… I'd worked with some weirdos in my time, so when I met 
George, I thought: I'll have this one! Making music with him is fun and 
actually relaxed."

They were introduced about four years ago. Aluna, from Hertfordshire, had 
moved to London with the idea of becoming a musician or an artist. (Her 
specialism? "Bad painting.") She had odd jobs selling T-shirts and working as a 
receptionist and she was the singer in a band,My Toys Like Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/feb/18/new-band-my-toys-like-me>. 
George was living with his parents in Molesey, making music in his bedroom and 
hoping to build a name as a remixer. He was invited to work on tracks for My 
Toys Like Me. Shortly after that, George and Aluna embarked on what was, 
essentially, a professional affair – an extended musical fling.

Aluna: "I just found myself in his bedroom at some point."

George: "So we thought…"

Aluna: "While we're here…"

George: "Let's do some music on our own. And that was very easy and very fun. 
We believed the music was good. So we carried on."

Every so often they get asked if they're a couple. "It comes up," says Aluna. 
George blames early press shots in which she was draped over him. They're not 
together, just colleagues. Clearly good mates, too, which will help in the 
coming months. After their monster festival run, they'll tour on through 
September and October. Chicago, Toronto, Oxford, Reykjavik. "We're keeping 
busy," says George.
 