
“The internet is not something that you just dump something on,” the American 
senator Ted Stevens famously said in 2006. “It’s not a big truck. It’s a series 
of tubes.”

Ted Stevens was wrong. The internet is a big truck, and Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> wants to drive it right up to 
your gaff to give you better upload speeds.

That truck isn’t a metaphor, by the way. It’s literally a big truck, called 
the “snowmobile”, carrying a shipping container holding a mobile data centre 
which can store up to 100 petabytes (100 million gigabytes) of information. 
Drive it up to your own data centre, plug it in with a fibre connection, fill 
it up and let it go.

If you need to upload 100 petabytes to the cloud, it turns out there is 
literally no faster way than driving it down the highway at 75mph.

The truck is the successor to 2015’s “Snowball”, a pre-packed hard drive that 
could store 50TB of data 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/08/cloud-computing-amazon-snowball-postal-service>
 that Amazon would post to customers needing to upload large amounts of data. 
The Snowball, which can now store 80TB, even uses a Kindle screen on the 
outside to skip the need for a pre-printed postage label.

Both services are marketed at developers who want to use Amazon’s cloud 
computing service, AWS, but don’t have the time to upload large amounts of 
data. They’re a twist on the old concept of the “sneakernet”: physically 
transporting storage media to send large files around the workplace, often by 
carrying a USB flash drive or portable hard-drive.

The sneakernet, and it’s modern equivalents, can often beat the internet on 
both speed and cost. Even a fast modern connection, at 1Gb/s, uploading 50TB of 
data will take four days; uploading 100 petabytes over the same connection 
would take a little over 25 years. On cost, however, Amazon is tight-lipped, 
saying nothing more than “we intend to make sure that Snowmobile is both faster 
and less expensive than using a network-based data transfer model”.
 