
Amazon has launched a real-world shop that allows customers to walk in, take 
what they want and walk out. No checkouts, no queues. Asthey explain in the FAQ 
<https://www.amazon.com/b?node=16008589011> about Amazon Go:

Our checkout-free shopping experience is made possible by the same types of 
technologies used in self-driving cars: computer vision, sensor fusion, and 
deep learning. Our Just Walk Out technology automatically detects when products 
are taken from or returned to the shelves and keeps track of them in a virtual 
cart. When you’re done shopping, you can just leave the store. Shortly after, 
we’ll charge yourAmazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> account 
and send you a receipt.

This new model of shopping not only challenges established retailers, but it 
raises serious questions about the future of work and the changing nature of 
the economy more generally. Furthermore, it suggests the role of government 
will need to change, involving itself less with regulating business and more 
with redistributing wealth.

At this stage the store is only available to Amazon employees, though public 
versions are due to be opened in the US early in 2017. An Australian version is 
likely some time after that. Indeed, Amazon iscurrently gearing up 
<http://www.afr.com/business/retail/amazon-trademarks-reveal-australian-ambitions-20161206-gt4w7r>
 to launch a number of its services in Australia, including AmazonFresh, its 
grocery delivery service.

All of these are likely to shake up the various cartels (Coles/Woolworths, 
David Jones/Myer) that dominate certain retail sectors in Australia, but it is 
Amazon Go that is likely to be the real disruptor.

The ramifications for employment seem obvious. In the US, around five million 
people <http://www.bls.gov/ooh/sales/retail-sales-workers.htm> are employed in 
retail, while Australia has 1.3 million and Britain 2.8 million. Stores like 
Amazon Go could therefore mean many job losses. Retailers could realise savings 
of something in the order of 15% of running costs, an amount that is likely to 
make the technology very attractive. And really, it is just the next logical 
development from the automated checkouts already in use in most supermarkets, or
the self-serve kiosks 
<http://www.businessinsider.com.au/self-service-kiosks-are-replacing-workers-2016-5?r=US&IR=T>
 McDonald’s is already rolling out.

Could automation make life worse for women?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/08/could-automation-make-life-worse-for-women>
Of course, Amazon Go may create work too, most likely value-add services 
involving things like handling returns or gift-wrapping, but that is hardly 
likely to make up for other job losses. It will also need people involved in 
stock ordering and logistics, though again, not many. Amazon is already well 
advanced in using robotics to do these things, with years of experience 
developing such technologies in its “fulfilment centres” (the creepy name they 
use for their warehouses).

So by any measure, it’s hard to see how an operation like Amazon Go doesn’t 
ultimately mean fewer jobs.

Is it all bad? Of course not. I mean, no queues or checkouts? From a shopper’s 
point of view, what’s not to love?

Amazon Go addresses another rising problem too. There has been concern for a 
while that cities and other retail centres will hollow out as people 
increasingly shop online, but imagine shopping if all the big stores were like 
Amazon Go. With no checkout queues, it’s easy to picture a vibrant city or 
suburban centre where people come to buy the stuff they want, are less stressed 
about it and are therefore willing to linger in public spaces listening to 
buskers or drinking coffee. Who knows what other services they might avail 
themselves of?

But there is a more important point to make.

Amazon Go, along with businesses like Uber, Airbnb, Netflix, and even Google 
and Facebook, are part of a fundamental restructuring of the economy and the 
work that goes with it. It is not simply that the technology is causing jobs to 
be lost. It is that it is changing the relationship between businesses and 
employees, governments and citizens.

We are moving from a globalised world of manufacturing giants to a networked 
one of technology giants.

In the former, the role of government was to coordinate and create markets, 
local and international, and to define the rules under which we all operated. 
Firms themselves tended to do just one thing – make cars, for instance – and so 
benefited from a permanent, full-time workforce. This provided security and 
prosperity to a substantial middle class.

In the networked world of technology companies, firms are no longer 
stand-alone silos that do a single thing. They tend to be project-based, 
pulling together casual workforces to achieve particular outcomes. Their 
employees are almost by definition contingent (and often not technically 
employees).

The role of government in this sort of economy is more to facilitate 
innovation and education, but that won’t be enough.

Basic income for all: a 500-year-old idea whose time has come?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/11/basic-income-for-all-a-500-year-old-idea-whose-time-has-come>
Left to itself, this sort of economy is also a recipe for massive inequality 
and insecurity. Platforms like Uber or Amazon Go, because they need so few 
workers, tend to funnel the wealth they generate to owners and investors rather 
than distribute it broadly via wages.

The role of government therefore becomes one of equalisation, of finding ways 
to see that the wealth generated in the new economy doesn’t simply flow to a 
tiny number of people at the top of the new corporations. The most efficient 
way for governments to do this is by the mechanism of a universal basic income, 
a guaranteed wage for everyone, that not only provides a financial floor below 
which no one can fall, but allows us to redefine the sort of work we do and 
find meaningful.

That is to say, by breaking the link between survival and work, UBI allows us 
all to not only benefit from the technology, but to reinvent what we even mean 
by the concept of work.

Aside from climate change, this reinvention of work is the most wicked problem 
facing humanity, and we can see the unease it causes reflected in the politics 
surrounding Brexit, and of Donald Trump, Bernie Sanders, Jeremy Corbyn and 
Pauline Hanson. What all these politicians have in common is they promise to 
“bring back the jobs” because they understand how important a decent job is to 
most people.

But developments like Amazon Go are a sharp reminder of how hollow such 
promises are. Our societies are being transformed right before our eyes. 
Automation is increasingly displacing human workers and so the politicians we 
need are not those playing on our insecurities by conjuring an image of the 
past, but those who can offer us a realistic vision of what comes next.

 