
I was in Berlin at the end of 2005 when my agent called and asked me if I'd 
write a book on Calcutta. It was a work of non-fiction he wanted: Indian 
non-fiction was going to be the new Indian fiction. I declined, saying, "I'd 
rather write about Berlin"; but I saw where he was coming from. Suketu Mehta's 
compendious narrative of Bombay low-life,Maximum City 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2004/11/21/books/review/21KAPURL.html?_r=0>, had been a 
critical and commercial success. It wouldn't have taken much to guess that it, 
and a country transformed by 15 years of economic deregulation, would unleash a 
stream of books on what, in journalistic shorthand, is called the "new India". 
I'd written three novels which had Calcutta as their setting, and my agent 
probably saw me as the ideal candidate for producing a non-fiction work on the 
city. The mid-2000s was a time of complete immersion in the present – a 
characteristic of free-market capitalism – so that things that had happened 15, 
10, or even five years ago felt remote, and the frequent "all-time best" lists 
in newspapers covered a span of, at most, 20 years. From the perspective of 
this compressed view of eternity, my novels about Calcutta might almost have 
inhabited another era. Perhaps it was time to write a new book about the city.

I instinctively knew that I couldn't, and didn't want to, do a Maximum City 
with Calcutta. Mehta's book, whichI had reviewed 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v28/n15/amit-chaudhuri/the-view-from-malabar-hill> and 
admired, wasn't just about Bombay; it was a creation-myth for a new nation and 
its unprecedented, amoral provenance. History may not have ended, but the 
Nehruvian era had, with its "mixed" economy of socialist development, Five-Year 
Plans, idealistic hypocrisies and circumscribed private enterprise. Dams, the 
avowed temples of the older, industrialising nation, had given way to new 
temples where the rich and the aspirational classes could congregate in a kind 
of celebration, such as international airports (Katherine Boo's recent book,
Behind the Beautiful Forevers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jun/29/behind-beautiful-forevers-katherine-boo-review>
, records the doomed theatre of a slum that festers, hidden, behind Bombay's 
Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport).

I, who'd grown up in Bombay, leaving it for Britain in the early 1980s, had 
barely encountered the city Mehta described during my 21 years there – although 
the rise within it of new buildings, a new rich and underclass, the rightwing 
Shiv Sena and BJP, had become disconcertingly visible by the time of my 
departure. The Bombay I grew up in – though it had long been India's financial 
centre – was genteel and tame in comparison. When PV Narasimha Rao, the prime 
minister at the time, officially deregulated the economy in 1991, the city that 
was most responsive to the event was Bombay. Post-independence India had 
stricter, prissier demarcations – between the polite and the profane, the 
admissible and the inadmissible – than theIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> energised by the free market. One 
trivial instance will do: I recall how film stars were tacitly impeded from 
buying property in haute bourgeois areas like Bombay's Malabar Hill until the 
late 1970s, and were forced, instead, to live in plush mansions on the 
outskirts of the city, in Juhu and Bandra. Deregulation allowed Indian cities 
to expand outward and gentrify internally, appropriating areas that had earlier 
been peripheral. Mirroring, and arising from, this sudden jostling of old and 
new spaces was a new, somewhat bizarre set of juxtapositions, a new kind of 
neighbourliness, that at once galvanised and troubled the country, bringing 
together criminals and politicians; the Indian novel in English, the paintings 
of MF Husain, and religious fundamentalism; Bollywood actors, sportspeople, 
and celebrity activists; a smart, Anglophone middle class, fairness creams, and 
female foeticide.

A new universe was at hand, comprising an impatient aspirational class. To 
write of it, one would probably need to adopt the epic mode, or the 
expansiveness of the 19th-century novel, one of whose themes was the invention 
of fortunes – albeit of families, rather than of nations and cities. One could 
partake of this creation-myth by writing of Bombay, because it embodied its 
ambitions so vibrantly, and of New Delhi, which had benefited even more 
tangibly than Bombay in terms of political power from the new dispensation. 
Bangalore, too, and even Chennai and smaller cities could be part of the new 
epic. But not Calcutta, which was out of joint.

I knew this, and it was one of the reasons I said no to my agent. At the time 
of our conversation, West Bengal, the state of which Calcutta is the capital, 
had had 28 years of Left Front rule: already a world record for a 
democratically elected communist government. The Left Front, throughout the 
1990s, had made noises about the necessity of attracting investment, even 
foreign investment, to the state to boost its largely agrarian, badly ailing 
economy. But Calcutta, and Howrah, its manufacturing suburb, had become well 
known for lock-outs, strikes and "sick" companies; and West Bengal for itsbandh 
days, or closures, observed as stringently and frequently as religious and 
national holidays.

In fact, Calcutta had become synonymous with politics, nationalism, and 
trouble in general from the late 19th century. For this, it was penalised by 
the British government; the capital of British India since 1772, it ceased 
being so in 1911, when the seat of power was transferred to Delhi. The home of
Subhas Chandra Bose <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subhas_Chandra_Bose> (a 
leading light of the Congress Party who had differences with Gandhi and went on 
to found the ragbag but influential Indian National Army), it was seen to have 
often embraced a mode of political agitation counter to Gandhianahimsa 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ahimsa>. After independence, the city moved 
increasingly leftward, especially with the emergence in 1967 of a militant, 
Mao-inspired faction in the Left's ranks called the Naxals (after Naxalbari, 
the place where the movement originated), who wanted not so much to change the 
system through electoral means but, in the Bolshevik manner, to overthrow it, 
and among whose progeny are today's Maoists, creating serious disturbances in 
far-flung areas and bringing a sense of crisis to upbeat, liberalised India.

Some of the old Naxals survive today, either in anonymity, or rehabilitated as 
respectable academics; but most – including, so we were often told, a number of 
that generation's most "brilliant students" – disappeared when that movement 
was brutally crushed at the end of the 1960s. In 1977, 10 years after the 
Naxals first appeared, the more dominant, less radical group in the left, the 
Communist Party of India (Marxist), was voted into power in the state with its 
allies, and so began 34 years of Left Front rule, with the party winning seven 
successive assembly elections, not only because of its splendid achievements, 
but also because of total political disarray among its opponents.

Left rule in Bengal was, in one sense at least, akin to a colonial presence, 
in that it thrived, as British rule had, on the splintering of the opposition, 
and on the political void outside itself. But it had two great achievements. 
The first took place early, and was almost undone later: Operation Barga, by 
which land was "redistributed" from landlords to sharecroppers and peasants in 
rural Bengal. The second is less advertised than the first, but is undeniable: 
a largely secular governance, which – though the Left by no means eschewed 
vote-bank politics – did not foster religious polarisation. This couldn't stop 
the egress of industry. Three decades under a single party brought a certain 
kind of stability to Bengal, the kind that became hard to distinguish from 
a fatal stasis. India changed rapidly, often disturbingly, after 1991; Calcutta 
remained resistant to globalisation and the new world order, cultivating their 
irrelevance to itself, and its own to theirs. For this reason, an exemplary 
epic about Calcutta – in the manner of the new non-fiction work about India – 
was difficult to write.

As a child, I escaped Bombay and school, during my summer and winter holidays, 
into Calcutta. It was like a journey towards the pastoral. But it was a strange 
pastoral, given that it comprised low houses with terraces, Maoist graffiti, 
acrid smoke from charcoal ovens in December, neon signs on Chowringhee and Park 
Street, and Naxalite violence in the area where my uncle lived. It wasn't 
exactly tranquility and nature, but I was electrified by it, as Wordsworth 
claimed his younger, unthinking self had been by rocks and trees. "Deprivation 
is for me what daffodils were to Wordsworth," said Philip Larkin once, speaking 
as a resident of Hull. I could repeat that statement, replacing "deprivation" 
with "Calcutta". Calcutta was an antithesis of both the suburban and the 
natural; it constituted, for me, during those visits to my uncle's house, my 
first, and at the time only, encounter with urban modernity. I was bored 
by nature and trips with my parents to hill stations; like Martin Amis's John 
Self inMoney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/may/15/martin-amis-money-tv-series>, 
who was "addicted to the 20th century", I became addicted, in Calcutta, to 
modernity and its smells, the combination of petrol,dhuno (for worship, and to 
ward off mosquitoes) and urine.

One thing that gave Calcutta the characteristic of a special region, and 
therefore of the pastoral, was the ubiquity of Bengali, the language spoken 
there. It was a language without classical antecedents and pedigree (though it 
had a rich devotional phase in the 15th century). It was in the early 19th 
century that it gained the modern provenance by which it is now identified; by 
the 1860s, it had been made respectable as the principal language of the Bengali
bhadralok, or "gentle folk". This language helped create a particular world in 
Calcutta. People outside that world in India knew of it by reputation; outside 
of India, it was hardly known, except, occasionally, through the luminous 
cinema ofSatyajit Ray <https://www.theguardian.com/film/satyajitray> and 
through translations ofTagore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jul/08/rabindranath-tagore-rereading> 
that teetered between the parodic and the perplexing.

This meant that, when I visited my uncle's house, I encountered a 
self-sufficient world of secrecy that spoke to me as a child. This was 
notwithstanding the public figures that this culture had produced in the 19th 
and 20th centuries, such as Ray and Tagore; Raja Rammohan Roy ("the father of 
modern India", according to school textbooks, and Asia's "first secular 
intellectual", in the words of the historian Chris Bayly); the religious 
revivalist Swami Vivekananda; the nationalist Bose; and, even later,Ravi Shankar
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ravi-shankar> and the economist Amartya Sen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/mar/31/society.politics>. To the 
sciences it had given two shadowy figures who altered the course of modern 
science: Jagadish Chandra Bose, who, using the woeful infrastructure of 
Calcutta University, discovered the radio waves on which not only the early 
"wireless" was dependent, but also much of life as we live it now, including 
our use of mobile phones; and Satyendra Nath Bose, whose "Bose-Einstein 
statistics" made the transition to quantum mechanics in physics possible, and 
through whose work the particle that the physicist Paul Dirac named the boson 
was discovered. Despite all this, that culture is little-known; which is why 
I have to recite that litany of names, and why it means so little.

This boundedness, this simultaneous obscurity and centrality, gave to what 
I found in my uncle's house its air of the bucolic, of being at once fantastic 
and real. Ordinary things – the Bengali letters on the spine of a book; a toy; 
the cover of a children's annual; a photo album – became extraordinary, because 
I could sense they were deceptive markers of a great historical change of which 
I didn't know enough. When I came to write my first novel,A Strange and Sublime 
Address, about a 10-year-old boy from Bombay visiting his uncle's house in 
Calcutta, it was the quotidian, as a result, that became my subject. At the 
time – the late 80s – Calcutta, if it was at all thought about in the larger 
world, was hardly associated with the quotidian. It was famous primarily for 
Mother Teresa, and throughDominique Lapierre 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dominique_Lapierre>'s book, City of Joy (about a 
real-life-inspired Polish priest working in a slum), and thefilm, starring 
Patrick Swayze, of the same name <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0103976/>. For 
me, Calcutta's ordinariness was its most compelling feature – the word 
"strange" kept recurring in my tale of everyday objects and occurrences – and, 
to convey this, I had to go against the grain not only of a certain kind of 
narrative about that city, but also the sort of novel in which character and 
psychology on the one hand and historical sweep on the other was predominant.A 
Strange and Sublime Address was not going to be a novel of the nation. In fact, 
to write about Calcutta meant risking not writing a proper novel (in terms of 
plot and character) at all.

Just as I'd escaped to Calcutta as a boy, to write about it was to escape the 
unspoken, but increasingly palpable, duty – for the Indian writer in English – 
to write about India. It was also to remove the experience of the city from the 
Lapierrean "joy" with which it had been made one in the media, out of angelic, 
Christian, western, even corporate acts of charity. This is not to say that the 
way I thought of Calcutta was joyless; in fact, my sense of the commonplace 
aspects of its petit bourgeois life was fundamentally joyful. In the novel's 
seventh chapter, Sandeep's uncle, Chhotomama, shaves in the balcony on a 
Sunday; then goes into the toilet armed with cigarette and newspaper; then has 
a bath during which he sings two songs – an old popular Bengali song, and 
another one by Tagore: "bahe nirantar ananta anandadhara", or "endless and 
unbroken flows the stream of joy". Chhotomama's "joy" (ananda), unlike 
Lapierre's, goes back to Tagore's belief thatananda was essential to creation, 
both aesthetic and divine; a belief not so far from the young James Joyce's 
that "the spirit which proceeds out of truth and beauty is the holy spirit 
of joy".

Joyce's self-appointed task was to relocate this spirit in the everyday in 
Dublin; when asked by an interviewer if Molly Bloom's climactic monologue in
Ulysses was an example of "stream of consciousness", he reportedly said, "when 
I hear the word 'stream' … what I think of is urine and not the contemporary 
novel … Molly Bloom … would never have indulged in anything so refined as a 
stream of consciousness". In retrospect, I see it's logical, given that the 
"holy" could now only be discovered in the commonplace, that Chhotomama should 
have been singing of "the stream of joy" in the bathroom, in neighbourliness to 
the toilet he'd just departed. These analogies may not be altogether fanciful. 
There were convergences in the 19th century that made both Calcutta and Dublin 
major cities of modernity, and which metamorphosed humdrum, low aspects of 
their lives – in rebellion against grand, national histories – with a new kind 
of comedy and affirmation.

By the time my agent asked me to write about Calcutta, this idiosyncratic, 
middle-class incarnation of the city had been put to rest for decades, and 
I too felt I had nothing more to say about it. Calcutta had not only become 
more inconsequential, it had also been renamed: Kolkata, a city not 
subterranean, unlike its predecessor, but provincial and with little except 
a utopian sense of its history, this utopianism reflected in the city's new 
name. In 1999, I moved back to India from Britain. Having lived all my life 
in Bombay and Britain, I set about fulfilling my childhood fantasy, of living 
in Calcutta; but it wasn't the city I'd daydreamed about. It wasn't just that 
the relentless departure of capital, of its intelligentsia and middle class, 
had left it hollowed from inside; it was also the way local politics had 
territorialised it. Policies, neighbourhoods, streets, universities, and 
projects were carved out among the Left Front and its allies; the main 
political party in the opposition, the Trinamool Congress, led by a charismatic 
but volatile woman, Mamata Banerjee, appeared to have no long-term purpose but 
getting the Left Front out. When I'd said to my agent that I wanted to write 
about Berlin, I wasn't being flippant. Berlin proved that the modern city as 
I'd come to know it wasn't entirely dead; the way it bore the marks of its 
history – of the second world war, of reunification – gave to it, as I'd 
journeyed daily within it from west to east, something like the atmosphere of 
concealment and strangeness that Calcutta had had.

In 2007, a friend of mine, the poet Utpal Kumar Basu, gave me a perspective on 
present-day Calcutta: the city I now lived in but was studiously ignoring. He 
told me that he sometimes went to the major railway station in the north, 
Sealdah, where large numbers of commuters (many of them daily wage-earners) 
arrived and departed. He'd get there about 10pm, and hover discreetly; his main 
purpose was to eavesdrop on the homeless who lived around the station. He was 
particularly drawn to an elderly woman with a vivacious turn of phrase, whom he 
namedkhurima, or "aunt". Once, he heard her reprimand a policeman who was 
harassing her and her comrades with the words "Ami bhikeri hote pari, pagal noi"
– "We may be destitute, but we aren't mad." It then dawned on Utpal Basu that 
sanity was a prized, probably a proud, possession for the homeless; to have 
neither home nor sanity in a city meant you had nothing.

Another time, he overheard the woman say to a man who'd come looking for 
someone with an "address" scribbled on a piece of paper: "Theekana diye ki 
hobe, soye kothhai seta bolo" – "What use is an address, tell me where he goes 
to sleep." Again, it occurred to Basu that an important distinction was being 
made: the homeless have no address except the spot where they sleep at night. 
Referring tokhurima, Basu said gravely but simply to me: "These are our 
citizens." Although the city was blithely obliterating its history, 
the anecdotes made me wonder if there was more going on in it than I admitted. 
The fact that stories could circulate about, and emanate from, people who lived 
here now, including those I didn't notice, perhaps pointed to a sort of subtle 
but vigorous regeneration. And was my move here – to a city I no longer admired 
– as a sort of reluctant "citizen" one of these stories too?

As I began to feel, for the first time, that a new book about Calcutta was 
possible, precipitous political changes were taking place. I wrote an opening 
paragraph in 2008; by the time I resumed writing in 2009, it was clear that the 
Left Front government might not be re-elected in the state assembly elections 
that would take place nationwide in 2011. The signs for the Left Front were 
worrying; it had emphatically lost seats in the general elections in 2009 to 
Banerjee's Trinamool Congress. Everyone knew this had to do with its panicky 
mishandling of industrialisation. Bankrupt, it had tried to hasten investment 
by creating special economic zones (as the rest of India was doing), 
peremptorily wresting agricultural land from farmers – land it had once 
"redistributed". The way it invited, in particular,Tata Motors 
<http://www.tatamotors.com/> to Bengal to produce the Nano, "the world's 
cheapest small car", reserving almost a thousand acres of farmland in the 
village of Singur for the factory, met with militant opposition from villagers 
and censure from celebrities. Banerjee and the Trinamool Congress stepped in to 
mobilise dissent, and Tata's Nano never crystallised in Bengal; Tata moved to 
the industry-friendly, right-wing Narendra Modi's Gujarat to bring the project 
to fruition. In Bengal, there was rejoicing that an unjust form of development 
had been rebutted; but there was also melancholy about the fact that Tata's 
departure confirmed that investment in the state seemed impossible. Could 
things get any worse?

It was on the back of this triumphal despair that Banerjee looked poised to 
sweep into power, promulgatingparibartan, or "change". The story of Calcutta 
was now the story of being between a rock and a hard place. Did Bengal want to 
become part of the "new India", and of a mode of development often based on 
state violence and inequity? Banerjee's punitive approach to industry made that 
look uncertain, anyway. Or did it want to continue opting out of globalisation, 
preferring instead to be in the grip of local politics and power struggles? 
Living in such a Calcutta for decades had made that alternative untenable. 
Would Bengal, in 2011, choose more of the Left Front; or would it go for a 
party without clear policies and no discernable core but its restive, combative 
leader?

I wrote my book in real time, experiencing the changes as they happened, 
witnessing the Left's debacle and the Trinamool's victory; but also absorbing 
the passage of seasons, the way the city responded with festivals, and trees 
with repeated flowerings; taking in, too, the destruction of old houses as the 
topography altered; and returning to the question of my presence amid these 
events and localities. Just as the experience of reading changes your 
perception of your immediate environment – when you look up from the page 
there's a small adjustment to be made – so does a period of writing. The book I 
have written is as muchof the city as about it, bringing to me a new sort of 
immersion in where I live.
 