
Israeli novelist Amos Oz is the favourite to take this year's Nobel prize for 
literature, according to the bookies.

Ladbrokes has backed Oz at 4/1 to take the 10m Swedish Krona (£815,000) prize, 
ahead of Algerian novelist Assia Djebar at 5/1, Spanish writer Juan Goytisolo 
at 6/1 and American novelists Joyce Carol Oates and Philip Roth at 7/1. But Oz 
needn't start preparing his Nobel speech quite yet: last year's eventual 
winner, the French novelist JMG Le Clézio, was initially given odds by 
Ladbrokes of 14/1 – although these fell after a sustained gamble down to 2/1 
before Ladbrokes closed its books with Le Clézio as 1/2 favourite.

Odds on reclusive American writer Thomas Pynchon have narrowed to 9/1 – last 
year he was at 20/1 (and 40/1 to win and attend the ceremony).

Ladbrokes's top 10 is rounded out by Syrian poet Adonis at 8/1, with last 
year's favourite, the Italian scholar Claudio Magris, at 9/1 together with 
Italian novelist Antonio Tabucchi and Japanese author Haruki Murakami.

British writers have little chance of taking the prize this year, if Ladbrokes 
are to be believed. It puts AS Byatt at 50/1 (well behind American folk 
troubadour Bob Dylan at 25/1) with Salman Rushdie at 80/1 and Beryl Bainbridge 
and Ian McEwan at 100/1.

The Nobel prize committee usually receives around 350 proposals for Nobel 
candidates a year, and whittles this down to a longlist of 20 names which it 
presents each April to the 18 Academy members who select the winner. By now, 
the Academy will have shortened this list to about five names, and will reveal 
its choice in early to mid-October.

Last year, the Nobel prize's top jury member Horace Engdhal came under fire 
for describing American writing as ignorant and insular, saying US writers were 
"too sensitive to trends in their own mass culture" and that they "don't really 
participate in the big dialogue of literature".

Winners over the last decade have had a distinctively European bent, with the 
French Le Clézio taking last year's prize, preceded by the UK's Doris Lessing 
in 2007. Turkey's Orhan Pamuk, the UK's Harold Pinter and VS Naipaul, Austria's 
Elfriede Jelinek, Portugal's José Saramago, Hungary's Imre Kertész, France's 
Gao Xingjian and Germany's Günter Grass have all won over the last 10 years.
 