
The Amtrak train that derailed in Philadelphia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/philadelphia> and a separate commuter 
train in the vicinity may have been hit by projectiles of some kind shortly 
before the wreck, a US transportation official said on Friday, after 
investigators interviewed members of the Amtrak crew.

The Federal Bureau of Investigation has been called in to examine a remnant of 
theAmtrak <https://www.theguardian.com/business/amtrak> locomotive’s shattered 
windshield with a circular damage pattern, Sumwalt said.

The revelation that Amtrak train No. 188 might have been struck by a bullet, 
rock or other object added an unexpected twist to a crash probe that initially 
focused on why the train had accelerated to over 100 miles per hour (160km/h) 
in the minute before it went into a curved track segment where the authorized 
speed limit was just 50mph (80 km/h).

When questioned for the first time about the crash on Tuesday night, the 
Amtrak engineer who was driving the train said he had no memory of anything 
that happened shortly before the wreck, which killed eight people and injured 
more than 200 others, said Robert Sumwalt, a member of the National 
Transportation Safety Board (NTSB).

Amtrak crash: safety mechanism to slow speeding trains was close to operational
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/15/amtrak-crash-positive-train-control-nearly-operational>

An assistant conductor told NTSB investigators on Friday the train run that 
day had been unremarkable until a few minutes after pulling out of 
Philadelphia’s 30th Street station, the last stop before the accident occurred, 
Sumwalt said. At that point, she heard the engineer, 32-year-old Brandon 
Bostian, talking by radio with the driver of another train from the Southeastern
Pennsylvania <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/pennsylvania> Transportation 
Authority (SEPTA).

The other driver, according to her account, said he had reported to a train 
dispatcher that his windshield had been cracked by a projectile that he 
believed was either fired from a gun or thrown at his train, and that he had 
made an emergency stop as a result, Sumwalt said.

The conductor told investigators that Bostian then replied that he believed 
his own New York-bound Amtrak train had been similarly struck, Sumwalt said.
It was moments later that the Amtrak train began to round the curved section 
of track at twice the authorized speed and derailed in the city’s Port Richmond 
neighborhood along the Delaware River, according to her account.


Sumwalt said FBI agents would arrive on Friday night to examine a portion of 
the lower left-hand corner of the locomotive’s battered windshield that 
appeared to have been cracked by a flying object of some type.

The Philadelphia Inquirer newspaper and other media outlets reported Friday 
that a third train, an Amtrak Acela, had also been hit by an unidentified 
projectile that cracked a window on one of the cars about five minutes before 
it entered the 30th Street station, citing an account of a passenger.

CBS News cited federal safety investigators as saying they were aware of the 
report of a third train being hit.
Sumwalt said investigators still have no explanation for why the train was 
going as fast as it was, and why it had accelerated from 70mph to 100-plus mph 
in the 65 seconds before the crash, as was shown on video footage taken by a 
camera mounted on the locomotive.

Families of eight Amtrak crash victims mourn loved ones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/15/families-eight-amtrak-crash-victims-mourn-loved-ones>
The engineer activated the emergency breaking system seconds before the wreck, 
investigators said.

Sumwalt said on Friday that Bostian told them he had no recollection of doing 
that, or of anything else after ringing the train’s signal bell as it rolled 
through the North Philadelphia station, about midway between the 30th Street 
stop and the crash site.

Otherwise, Bostian reported no difficulties during what he remembers of the 
run, telling investigators he did not feel fatigued or have any illness before 
the accident, Sumwalt said.

“He felt fully qualified and comfortable with his equipment and reported no 
problems with his train handling. And when asked, he demonstrated a very good 
working knowledge of the territory, speed limitations, things like that,” 
Sumwalt said.

Sumwalt said Bostian was accompanied by his lawyer for the interview but was 
“extremely cooperative” during the 90-minute interview.

Experts said the train’s speed in the moments before the crash raised several 
questions: could a technical glitch have caused the locomotive to speed up so 
rapidly? Would it take a deliberate action by the engineer? Or could human 
error, a medical issue, or some other factor like clumsiness explain the sudden 
burst of speed?

Sumwalt said the train, as designed, could be accelerated only by manual 
control, but the NTSB would examine whether a mechanical malfunction could have 
caused the train to speed up on its own.

He said Bostian reported to investigators he had experienced technical 
problems on his way south to Washington from New York earlier that day. He did 
not elaborate.

Bostian, he said, began his railroad career as a brakeman while in college, 
joined Amtrak as a conductor in 2006 and became a locomotive engineer in 2010. 
He had been on this particular route for several weeks, driving the train from 
New York to Washington and back once a day, five days a week.

Steve Sullivan, a conductor-turned-consultant at RL Banks and Associates, said 
it was unlikely that a mechanical issue with the locomotive caused the 
acceleration, though the NTSB has not ruled out that possibility. Sullivan said 
he never heard of a train accelerating without someone moving the throttle.

The throttle of the locomotive that Bostian was operating has eight settings, 
with each click forward accelerating the train, said Charles Culver, a 
certified conductor and engineer based in Texas who is not connected to the 
investigation.

Culver said it did not take much force to move the throttle forward and it was 
possible the engineer could have fallen and moved the throttle. Passenger 
trains, unlike freight trains, can increase speed rapidly, he said.

“In order to increase the speed as much as it was increased in this case, you 
would have had to really, really move the throttle,” Culver said. “Frankly, I 
am puzzled about the whole thing.”

The engineer’s attorney, Robert Goggin, has said Bostian had turned off his 
cell phone, as Amtrak requires of all engineers behind the controls.

Sumwalt said federal law required transportation personnel involved in an 
accident to be tested for drugs or alcohol but it would take “some time” for 
those results to come back.
 