



Federal authorities said on Monday they are unsure anything struck the 
windshield of an Amtrak train minutes before a deadly derailment inPhiladelphia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/philadelphia> last week, adding another 
twist to the investigation the day trains started running to New York again.

The National Transportation Safety Board said it has not ruled out the 
possibility an object may have struck the windshield but is uncertain the 
locomotive was hit at all before the 12 May derailment, which killed eight 
people and injured more than 200 others. Investigators are certain a gunshot 
did not strike the train.

Amtrak crash survivors recount 'awful' moments as train careened off tracks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/14/amtrak-crash-philadelphia-survivors-accounts>
FBI agents performed forensic work on a grapefruit-sized fracture on the left 
side of theAmtrak <https://www.theguardian.com/business/amtrak> locomotive’s 
windshield, and the NTSB said they found no evidence of any damage that could 
have been caused by a firearm.

The developments on Monday raised new questions about the events leading up to 
the derailment, including a conversation an assistant conductor told 
investigators she heard between the Amtrak engineer and a regional rail train 
engineer minutes before the train sped up and went off the rails at a curve.

The assistant conductor said she heard the regional train engineer say he had 
been “hit by a rock or shot at” and she thought she heard the Amtrak engineer 
say his train had also been struck.

The NTSB said the regional train engineer recalled no such conversation, and 
investigators listened to the dispatch tape and heard no communications from 
the Amtrak engineer to the railroad’s dispatch centre to say that something had 
struck the train.

The Southeastern Pennsylvania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/pennsylvania> Transportation Authority 
said it does not know what caused the damage to its train that night.

Investigators have focused on the acceleration of the Amtrak train as it 
approached the curve, reaching 106mph as it entered a 50mph stretch and slowing 
down only slightly before the crash.

Amtrak engineer Brandon Bostian, among those injured, has told authorities he 
does not recall anything in the few minutes before the derailment.

The NTSB said on Monday it could be a year before it determines the probable 
cause of the derailment.

Amtrak resumed service on Monday with a 5.30am southbound train leaving New 
York City.

The first northbound train, scheduled to leave Philadelphia at 5.53am, was 
delayed and pulled out of the 30th Street Station at 6.07am. About 10 minutes 
later, it passed the area where Train 188 derailed.

Both trains arrived at their destinations about 30 minutes behind schedule. 

About 60 people boarded the New York-bound train in Philadelphia. Passenger 
Christian Milton, of Philadelphia, said it was “great to be back”.

“I’ve never had any real problems with Amtrak,” Milton said. “I’ve been 
travelling it for over 10 years. There’s one accident in 10 years. Something 
invariably is going to happen somewhere along the lines. I’m not worried about 
it.”

Milton said he would think about the victims and maybe say a prayer as the 
train navigated the curve where the derailment happened.

Mayor Michael Nutter was on hand to see the train off and hugged the first 
passenger in line.

All Acela Express, Northeast Regional and other services also resumed service.

Amtrak officials said on Sunday that trains along the Northeast Corridor from 
Washington to Boston would return to service in “complete compliance” with 
federal safety orders.

President Barack Obama, landing in Philadelphia before a visit to nearby 
Camden, New Jersey, thanked the city and its rescue workers for their response 
to the derailment. He shook hands with Nutter, the police commissioner, Charles 
Ramsey, and other city officials after arriving at Philadelphia international 
airport on Air Force One.

At New York City’s Penn Station early on Monday, police with dogs flanked the 
escalator as a smattering of passengers showed their tickets to a smiling 
Amtrak agent and headed down to the platform.

A sign outside the train flashed “All Aboard” in red letters. 

The conductor gave a broad all-clear wave, stepped inside and the 
Philadelphia-bound train glided out of the station.

Passenger Raphael Kelly, of New York, looking relaxed, said he was “feeling 
fine” and had “no worries”.

Kelly, who takes Amtrak to Philadelphia weekly, said with a smile that if he 
did have any concerns, “I have to get over it”.

Tom Carberry, who had been driving 45 minutes to an hour to take a commuter 
train from Trenton, New Jersey, to New York, praised Amtrak for restoring 
service so swiftly.

“My biggest takeaway was the under-promise and over-deliver and the surprise 
of having it come back this morning when that wasn’t expected,” said Carberry, 
of Philadelphia. “That was a good thing for Amtrak.”

An Amtrak spokesman, Craig Schultz, said it was important to restore service, 
calling the Northeast Corridor “an economic engine here on the east coast”.

Lawyers for four passengers injured in the derailment announced lawsuits 
against Amtrak on Monday. Amtrak has said it does not comment on lawsuits.

Senator Bill Nelson introduced legislation that would increase the cap on 
damages Amtrak could be forced to pay from lawsuits from $200m to $500m.

 