
Today F, for flexible advertising... which was one of the key goals of the 
project. This exposes one of the significant aspects of R2: it was neither 
editorially driven, nor technically driven, nor commercially driven. It was 
driven by a unity of needs right across the company, and it needed to be 
successful in all these areas.

There are a few ways in which we've added flexibility to our advertising 
system, but I'll mention just a couple here.

One form of flexibility is in the use of our ad slots. Our pages have been 
designed to display ads of various sizes, and reshape themselves accordingly. 
This is most obvious on some of the right hand ad slots -- sometimes you'll 
find them displaying an ad that's a squareish rectangle, sometimes you'll 
return to the same page and find another that's markedly taller. In theory 
that's a trivial piece of work, and HTML and CSS can handle that with ease. But 
in practice, of course, it's more challenging. One of those challenges is 
trying avoid using an iframe container which ensures ads don't unduly interfere 
with the rest of the page, but which force you define their size before the ad 
server has had a chance to tell what size the ad needs to be.

Another, related, form of flexibility is in our non-use of ad slots. You'll be 
able to see this on the theguardian.com home page which sometimes has ads on 
it, and sometimes doesn't. In the early stages of R2 the ad sales team made a 
decision I've always admired: not to fill certain ad slots just because they 
could, and ensure there were periods when the theguardian.com home page was 
ad-free. Apart from any other advantages this means that when ads do appear 
they have more impact, and of course it increases the value of advertising on 
the home page.

I like the work we've done on advertising less because of the technical 
achievements, but much more because it shows we've used R2 as a chance to 
rethink how we approach our business and break away from some conventional 
thinking.
 