
Today G, for Guardian America... which was not part of the project scope when 
we started R2. It's fair to say that when we began implementing in February 
2006, the idea ofa Guardian America launch 
<http://www.brandrepublic.com/News/755898/GN-M-launches-Guardian-America-online/>
 was not on the radar. Yet by the middle of 2007 it was being talked about very 
seriously, and increasingly so. How did we fit in an additional sub-project?

As much as technologists might sometimes think they hold the key to success, 
when it comes to media it's still true that content is king. Guardian America's 
success is driven from its editor, Michael Tomasky, and his team. But 
technology did provide the vehicle for that.

The most valuable thing we technologists did for Guardian America was to not 
reinvent the wheel. We recognised that the core elements had already been built 
-- most notably a front page designed to showcase a variety of content was 
already in use as the theguardian.com front. Making use of that also ensured 
design consistency. But that's not to say there was no work to do. The content 
management system was not originally designed to support two major fronts, 
particularly with a variation in branding. The core work, then, was to extend 
something we had already delivered and make it more useful.

Using this approach everyone won. The Guardian America team got all the 
functionality and flexibility that we had delivered for the team running the 
original site front, and they got it relatively quickly. From an operational 
point of view, by managing Guardian America in the same way the theguardian.com 
front was managed, the GA team was able to share skills, people, advice and 
creative ideas. The tech team got to show they could deliver technology for a 
high-profile project on very short timescales. The business as a whole won 
because the overall R2 budget remained constant. We managed that by 
deprioritising a small amount of less important work in the usual Agile manner. 
I don't think there were any arguments about what, exactly, was deprioritised, 
since Guardian America was so clearly more significant than many other features 
on our list.
 