
Today N, for News section... which was one of the two highest priority 
launches of project. Yet it happened around 12 months after we planned it, and 
between the planning and the launch we also launched the theguardian.com home 
page, video integration, and sections for Media, Technology, Business, Science, 
Society, Money and Environment. If it was so important, why did we take that 
seemingly roundabout route?

Actually, it wasn't that indirect. In January and February 2007 planned all 
the work that was to follow the launch of the Travel section, which had gone 
out in November 2006. From our senior stakeholders we sought the business 
priorities, and there were two major milestones: changing the home page of 
theguardian.com would send the clearest public signal of intent (even though it 
was only one page), and launching our news content in the new design would 
demonstrate the depth, extent and utility of the transformation. So those were 
our two major targets.

But there was another major requirement running through all our launches, and 
that is that they should be sufficiently comprehensive and largely complete at 
the moment of launch -- there shouldn't be any obviously missing features or 
tools. Since the news agenda is both urgent and highly volatile the news desk 
needed a comprehensive set of tools with strong integration to be able to deal 
with the daily demand. That included polls, improved galleries, an audio player 
with better podcast integration, a wider range of layout templates, many more 
navigational components, more streamlined tools, cartoon pages, very flexible 
keyword management, and much more.

It was, in total, around a year's worth of work, so getting there directly 
would have meant no major launches -- no tangible benefits -- for a year, and 
that just wasn't on. Agile development is about providing value early. To deal 
with this problem we exploited that fact that many sections, such as Science 
and Media, would benefit greatly from early launches and wouldn't need such a 
comprehesive featureset as News from the word go. And developing those other 
sections would help build up towards News. We then calculated that if we wanted 
to get to the News launch with a detour through those other launches then it 
was a difference of only 6%.

Clearly there were big wins all round. Many sections were launched early so 
those desks got the benefits early; the commercial team was able to make use of 
the flexible advertising early; the technology going to the news desk was 
tested and refined well ahead of launch; andthe risks normally inherent in a 
big bang launch 
<http://niksilver.com/2006/05/12/big-bangs-and-telegraphcouks-redesign/> were 
drastically reduced.

Speaking personally, I found the launch of the News section surprisingly 
muted. Lots of the public excitement and discussion around the reworking of our 
site had occurred when we launched the front page many months before, and 
continued in varying forms with the release of each subsequent section. By the 
time we got to the News section it was much less startling to those outside 
looking in. But in terms of internal change so much traffic goes through the 
News section, and it involves so many people working with it each day, it was 
very significant. Frankly, big launches which happen with so little fuss is 
something I'm very happy to live with.
 