
Every British city has something to offer the curious birder. You'll find 
snipes, pied wagtails and meadow pipits on the brownfield sites of Leicester, 
for example. In York, there are little ringed plovers living in gravel pits on 
urban wasteland. In Old Trafford, Manchester, I've seen sparrowhawks and 
cormorants fly over while I've been watching the match. Show me a city, and I 
can show you a bird – that's my philosophy.

My enthusiasm for city birding goes back to my childhood. When I was a young 
kid, birdwatchers came in one guise: tweed-wearing, walking-stick wielding, 
white, middle-class, middle-aged country-dwelling men. As a black kid from 
London, I was a true anomaly.

I was born with an innate curiosity about birds. They held a special 
fascination for me from an early age. I remember trying to lure birds by 
sticking scraps of newspaper to my clothes and squatting by the back door 
surrounded by pieces of bread … Needless to say, my early attempts at 
attracting birds failed, so I resorted to exploring my immediate surroundings, 
studying every bird book I could get my hands on. Over time, I became a 
fully-fledged "urban birder".

Even today, birders remain sceptical of the term, shunning the city in favour 
of deserted coastal headlands, but I've had some incredible experiences of 
birding in cities. Nowadays, my local patch is Wormwood Scrubs in west London. 
During the migratory season in April and May, I'm out there every morning from 
sunrise. I've seen ospreys flapping overhead and heard quails singing in the 
grass. And I consider myself blessed because, for eight years, my all-time 
favourite bird, the ring ouzel (a blackbird-sized thrush with a white crescent 
on its chest), has stopped off here on its migratory path. Predominantly found 
in remote mountainous areas in the north and west of Britain, these birds are 
really hard to spot. Even in their natural habitat you can't get within 100 
yards of them, so I feel incredibly lucky to have them visit my patch.

The most emotional experience I've had birding occurred in April 2010, when I 
noticed a pair of skylarks had decided to settle on Wormwood Scrubs. They are 
such rural birds I felt duty bound to protect their space, so I worked out 
where they were nesting and warded off the dogs-walkers in a desperate attempt 
to encourage their stay. But sadly, the clamour of the city proved too much. I 
was there the morning they took off east, never to return. That was probably my 
saddest day in birding.

That said, there are birds that thrive in urban settings. The black redstart, 
for example, isthe archetypal urban bird. They first bred in the capital in 
1922 and, during the second world war, nested in bomb sites. There are only 
25-73 pairs of these birds left breeding in the UK and yet, occasionally, in 
bustling Soho, you can look up and find a male singing on top of an aerial. How 
amazing is that?

While not every species can survive the city, urban areas provide nesting, 
resting and feeding sites in a multitude of habitats. This is partly because 
urban centres generate a "heat island" (the temperature can be three degrees 
warmer in the day and 10 degrees higher at night than the countryside), but 
also because we city-dwellers love to feed our garden birds.

Nowadays, I offer urban birder masterclasses. These guided tours can be on 
your doorstep: in local cemeteries, on heathland, even in the concrete-clad 
city centre. I'm not trying to turn everyone into a birder, just to give 
city-dwellers more of an awareness of the spectacular sights that surround them.

Urban birding for beginners

The following will help fledging birders, but remember you don't have to 
identify everything: just enjoy birds for the beautiful creatures they are.
 Great spotted woodpecker Photograph: Alamy 
Feed the birds
Gardens are great places to learn about urban birds. By providing nest boxes 
and food you will attract garden birds. Surprise visitors might include a 
marauding sparrowhawk, a squawking parakeet or a handsome great spotted 
woodpecker.

Buy a book and binoculars
Keep a bird book by your kitchen window (the RSPB Handbook of British Birds 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/RSPB-Handbook-British-Birds-Ornithology/dp/0713657138> 
is ideal for beginners). Soon you will be able to identify everything that 
ventures into your garden. And ask for a pair of binoculars for your birthday. 
They will open up a whole new world of delight.

Look up
Even in the very centre of Britain's cities, birds are flying overhead. You 
only have to look up to notice gulls, wood pigeons and peregrines soaring 
through the skyline.

Find fellow birders 
Hang out with and learn from more experienced birders by joining your local 
bird club orRSPB group <http://www.rspb.org.uk/localgroups/>.

Mark your territory
Find an area close to your home and start watching it on a regular basis. Get 
to know the resident birds and, over a year, you will notice changes in the 
populations as the different seasonal visitors make their appearance.

• David Lindo <http://theurbanbirder.com/> is a writer and broadcaster. His 
latest book,The Urban Birder 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Urban-Birder-David-Lindo/dp/1847739504>, is 
published by New Holland at £9.99. Watch David explore his local patch at
guardian.co.uk/environment <http://guardian.co.uk/environment>
 