
How did you come to write about 20th-century music?

I was that rare kid who grew up listening only to classical music of the 
Bach-to-Brahms variety. In college I belatedly entered the 20th century, 
consuming classical modernism, the postwar avant-garde, free jazz and post-punk 
rock. The Rest Is Noise replicates that journey of discovery, travelling from 
fin-de-siècle Vienna to the 1960s New York of Steve Reich and the Velvet 
Underground. My hope is that others will follow similar paths, whether their 
point of departure is Mahler or Radiohead. Many friends of mine know their 
Picasso, Woolf and Eisenstein but haven't come to terms with Stravinsky, 
Shostakovich and Britten. This book shows how these figures fit into a broader 
cultural and historical landscape. In two words, the topic is "composers 
matter".

How does writing a book differ from journalism?

I quickly realised that book chapters and magazine essays are very different 
beasts. I initially planned to base The Rest Is Noise on pieces I'd written for 
the New Yorker - extended portraits of the likes of Strauss and Shostakovich. I 
usually ended up having to start from scratch. There was no need to wave my 
arms rhetorically in a bid for the reader's attention. The pacing could be more 
leisurely, the tone more even-handed. I found myself trimming away my sharper 
opinions. It's a mix of critical and scholarly approaches.

How did you go about researching it?

I'd been unconsciously researching this book for years, but when I started in 
earnest, in 2000, I assigned myself long CD listening lists. I combed through 
hundreds of books and scholarly articles. On various trips I stopped to see my 
protagonists' homes: Strauss's villa in Garmisch, Schoenberg's Spanish-style 
dwelling in Los Angeles. I spent many fascinating hours at the National 
Archives in Washington. And I met some of the principals: Ligeti, Reich, 
Schnittke, John Adams. The research process was dangerously enjoyable and might 
have gone on for ever.

How easy was it to define the territory of the book - are there things it was 
hard to leave out?

I finished the first draft in early 2005, while riding a New Jersey Transit 
train from Newark to New York. In a giddy mood, I ran a word count on the 
various files. To my horror I discovered it came to 390,000 words - which would 
have been well over a thousand pages. So I faced the task of cutting the 
manuscript in half. It was an excruciating process, during which I had to let 
much great music fall by the wayside. I had to be fairly ruthless about keeping 
the main narrative of the book flowing along. One thing eased the pain: in 2004 
I started a blog (www.therestisnoise.com <http://www.therestisnoise.com>), and 
sometimes posted the day's discarded matter, thereby saving it from total 
oblivion.

How long did it take and how did you manage to keep yourself on track?

I finally finished in early 2007, some five years after the initial deadline. 
The blog became a distraction, and often the only way to get work done was to 
take my laptop to some noisy coffeehouse outside internet range. I recall 
writing about Messiaen's ecstatic religious visions while two youngsters next 
to me had a horribly awkward blind date.

What are you most pleased with?

My dream was that this book would make sense to readers who knew little about 
the subject. In the US we've sold almost 70,000 copies, surely not all to 
classical-music fanatics. When I hear that someone started listening 
obsessively to Sibelius or Messiaen after reading what I wrote, my day is made.

What would you do better/differently next time?

I should have cut more. The book might have benefited from having fewer names 
in certain sections and a stronger emphasis on the historical context. Also, I 
wish I'd found ways to make it more geographically diverse.

Who were your literary models?

The musicological writings of Richard Taruskin helped prompt the entire 
project: this scholar of genius has led the way in confronting music with 
social and political realities. Louis Menand's The Metaphysical Club, a 
brilliant account of pragmatist philosophy, showed how a difficult topic could 
be made lucid. Joan Didion is perhaps my favourite modern writer. Strangely, my 
greatest inspiration was a novel that I read when I was 18 and that has haunted 
me ever since: Thomas Mann's Doctor Faustus, the tale of a composer in league 
with the devil. My book is a kind of Faustian tale with a happy ending.

• Listen to Alex Ross discussing The Rest Is Noise at 
www.theguardian.com/books/books+content/audio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/books+content/audio>
 