
1. Tulipa 'Ballerina' is from the lily-flowered group with pointed petals. It 
is hardy and has very strong stems. This soft orange cultivar is sweetly scented

2. Hornbeam is a good backdrop as the fresh green new leaves coincide with the 
flowering of tulips. Beech, on the other hand, can often still be brown at this 
stage

3. 'Flaming Parrot' is bright yellow kissed with crimson. Like all the Parrot 
group, it is sturdy and makes excellent cut flowers

4. Like most tulips, 'Amethyst' needs a warm, sunny site with good drainage. 
Grit should be added to heavy soils and humus or well-rotted manure to thin, 
sandy soil

5. Forget-me-nots are the perfect accompaniment to tulips as the soft blue 
haze complements the bright colours well. They are easily removed when the 
flowers finish and readily self-seed

There are more than 2,600 tulip varieties, which makes choosing the right ones 
for your garden somewhat treacherous. Most catalogues have helpfully whittled 
this down to a couple of hundred, but you only need to know a dozen at the 
most. Tulips are arranged into 15 divisions according to their shape and when 
they flower. Most gardens are awash with daffodils until mid-April, so you can 
ignore any tulip described as early flowering to avoid unsightly clashes. That 
leaves mid-season Darwin and Triumph varieties and the late flowering types, 
which combined will give you colour from mid-April to mid-May.

Now is the ideal time to get planting. Avoid the Victorian bedding look by 
choosing tulips of different heights, and plant in clumps, not straight lines. 
If you plan to naturalise tulips (try small-flowered varieties and Darwin 
types), plant the bulbs about 20cm from the bottom of the bulb to the soil 
surface: a little less if treating them like bedding, as they do at Chenies 
Manor.

Tulips allow you to get away with lurid colour combinations that would usually 
make you nauseous, but three to five colours is about right. Use white to tone 
things down, but avoid strong contrasts of two colours such as red and white.
 