
The dubious means by which 18th and 19th century anatomists obtained the 
bodies of babies and infants to dissect has been revealed in a study by two 
Cambridge scientists.

Specimens procured as a result of grave-robbing, infanticide or mothers so 
poor they were prepared to sell their dead babies, ended up in many museums of 
anatomy, including the collection of Cambridge University. In a new study, 
Piers Mitchell and Jenna Dittmar, of the Cambridge Department of Archaeology 
and Anthropology, reveal that the little bodies were obtained with considerable 
difficulty, but were regarded as precious- a way of demonstrating human growth 
and development - and treated with great care to preserve them for display and 
teaching. The research is published this week in theJournal of Anatomy 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/joa.12515/epdf>.

The bodies of some children who died in infancy were sold to the anatomists by 
their desperately poor mothers, say Mitchell and Dittmar.


Making dissections of cadavers public helps us embrace life, as well as death 
| Carla Valentine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/31/public-dissection-of-cadavers-about-time-embrace-death>
“We are not suggesting that poor mothers killed their babies to keep their 
other children - but faced with the tragedy of the death of one child, selling 
its body to the anatomists could feed the rest of the family,” explained 
Mitchell.

Mitchell, who is both a medical historian and an NHS hospital consultant, has 
great sympathy for the despairing mothers, even those who may have resorted to 
infanticide after a disastrous change in the law in 1834. This change - a 
misguided attempt to reduce the rate of illegitimate births - ended both parish 
support and the obligation for a father to support his child. Selling the 
bodies not only brought in some money, but saved the cost of a funeral. Poverty 
also explained why many children who died in workhouses or charity hospitals 
were left unclaimed. Their bodies were passed to the anatomists after another 
law change in 1832, this time an attempt to stop the gruesome trade in digging 
up graveyards.

“There was a particular problem before then obtaining child and infant 
specimens as one of the main sources for dissection was the bodies of hanged 
criminals: babies and child criminals were not executed,” he said. The grave 
robbers also preferred adult bodies, as “the smalls” were sold by the inch and 
so less profitable. There remained a further source, until 1838, however: a 
legal loophole meant that the bodies of foetuses, stillbirths or babies who 
died before they were baptised or registered were not regarded as fully human, 
so could legally be sold.

Cadavers in pearls: meet the Anatomical Venus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/17/anatomical-venus-anatomy-human-biology-joanna-ebenstein-books>
“Our research shows that the major sources of the bodies of very young 
children were from stillborn babies of destitute mothers, babies who died from 
infectious diseases, those dying in charitable hospitals, and unmarried mothers 
who secretly murdered their newborn to avoid the social stigma of single 
parenthood,” they report.

The scarcity of infant bodies led to some appalling cases. Their research 
uncovered the story of a young woman called Flora McLean, whose baby died at 
two days old in a Glasgow hospital in 1877. She paid ten shillings for a proper 
burial, but was distraught when she went to see her baby laid out to find it 
had already been dismembered and crudely sewn back together. She insisted on 
the police being called, and the investigation revealed that in the interim it 
had been taken to the anatomists in another hospital, and its head mislaid.

 Mitchell knows that some of the early specimens which came from the anatomy 
department to the Cambridge University anatomy museum- a teaching collection 
with human remains dating from between 1768 and 1913 - were bought from 
“resurrectionists”: professional grave robbers. Others were bought from 
families and from other anatomy collections, but the records are too patchy to 
establish the source of the 54 foetus and infant bodies in the collection.

The specimens were treated with great care, so they could be preserved for 
display and teaching. The standard procedure with an adult skull was to begin 
by sawing off the top to expose the brain, but only one of the baby specimens 
in the collection had been treated in that way. The soft tissue was very 
carefully removed using small instruments and brushes, to preserve as much of 
the bone structure as possible. The bodies were small enough to display the 
entire skeleton, or preserve the entire circulatory or nervous system injected 
with coloured wax.

The bodies were far more likely to be kept permanently than those of adults, 
whose remains were usually buried after dissection.

 