
On Monday afternoon, the news from Hollywood was bleak. Warner Brothers' 
syndication arm announced that Anderson Cooper's talk show, Anderson Live!, 
would not be coming back for a third season "in a marketplace that has become 
increasingly difficult to break through".

If daytime TV's success or failure is all about timing, Anderson Cooper's 
couldn't have been worse. When substituting for Regis Philbin on ABC's morning 
show Live! gave him a taste for the daily talk show format, the CNN host openly 
hankered to fill the Philbin seat. Cooper and co-host Kelly Ripa had great 
chemistry, they seemed genuinely to like each other, and they evenwent on 
holiday to Croatia <http://instagram.com/p/OWbWGeEkJ_/>. 

The pair gave the show a watchable energy. But two years ago, the aging 
Philbin seemed like he was never going to leave, so Cooper accepted an offer 
from producers Telepictures and Warner Brothers syndication to try it alone.

Yet from the start in September 2011, his solo syndicated show (called 
Anderson for the first season before becoming Anderson Live this year) 
struggled to find its identity. Cooper interviewed an eclectic range of guests, 
from his mother, Gloria Vanderbilt, in season one, to Honey Boo Boo and her 
mother in season two. But without Kelly Ripa he seemed uncomfortable – even 
with the addition of a number of guest hosts in his second season.

Meanwhile over at ABC, Philbin retired and Kelly Ripa needed her own new 
co-host. She made no secret that Cooper was her first choice. But it wasn't to 
be – he was now committed to being Anderson.

When the pair appeared together on Andy Cohen's Watch What Happens Live on 
Bravo, Cohen asked them, "Do you two feel like 'These are the ones that got 
away?'"

"I still feel," said Ripa directly to Cooper as she answered the question, 
"like you and I are destined to be together, someday, somehow."

With his show cancelled, Cooper will be available at the end of this season. 
Which makes it even more poignant that a few weeks ago Ripa filled her empty 
chair with former NFL player Michael Strahan. The pair's ratings are strong and 
the show is a hit, so the "someday" she talked about with Cooper won't be today 
or tomorrow.

Now that Cooper is gone from daytime, the spotlight turns onto Katie Couric, 
whose debut talk show has also been disappointing. Will she make it? The show 
is already in flux. In the ongoing television game of musical chairs, Katie's 
executive producer, former NBC head, Jeff Zucker is due to leave her show soon, 
and has been named as a possible head of the troubled CNN – whereAnderson Cooper
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/anderson-cooper> still works. For now 
Cooper's future at CNN seems secure. He will reporting throughout primetime on 
hurricane Sandy with co-host Erin Burnett. Addressing the demise of his talk 
show earlier today, he issued a brief statement.

I am very proud of the work that our terrific staff has put into launching and 
sustaining our show for two seasons. I am also grateful to Telepictures for 
giving me the opportunity, and indebted to viewers, who have responded so 
positively. I look forward to doing more great shows this season, and though 
I'm sorry we won't be continuing, I have truly enjoyed it.
 