
The Barcelona midfielder Andrés Iniesta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andres-iniesta> is confident that despite 
their transfer ban the team has the depth to win trophies as they start the new 
year with a trip to face Real Sociedad on Sunday hoping to keep the pressure on 
La Liga leaders Real Madrid.

The Catalan club will be unable to reinforce their squad in the following two 
transfer windows astheir appeal against a Fifa sanction over the transfer of 
foreign under-18 players was rejected by the court of arbitration for sport 
(Cas), this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/30/barcelona-transfer-ban-court-of-arbitration-for-sport>
.

The decision is likely to cause most concern for Barça’s defence where they 
have continued to look weak despite making several signings ahead of the 
season. In particular, there is a lack of cover at right-back for Dani Alves 
who himself has received plenty of criticism for below par displays.

Still, Barça are only a point off an imperious Real who have played a game 
less and take on Valencia on Sunday looking for their 23rd straight win in 
official matches.

“It is not even crossing our minds the idea of not winning anything this 
season,” said Iniesta. “The squad that we have has sufficient quality to win 
trophies and the important thing is to believe in ourselves and that we can 
keep improving so as to reach our maximum.

“I don’t know the full legal details but having come through the La Masia 
[Barcelona’s youth system] myself, I think that the opportunity that it gives 
to youngsters not only on a footballing level but also personal, is very high.

“We cannot sign now and that is obviously a handicap but we need to 
concentrate on this season with the players we have and look to win.”

Iniesta believes that the team is on the right course while he also has not 
ruled out the title chances of Atlético Madrid, currently third in the table, 
who face Levante on Saturday.

“They [Real] won a lot of trophies last year and they will be in the fight. 
All teams go through ups and downs and while Real are doing well now we are 
making good progress,” he said. “Atlético though are the reigning league 
champions and it is our job to take the trophy from them. They have done well 
for several seasons and we know that they will be challenging.”
 