
For decades the Saudis have worked on the assumption that restricting the 
supply of oil to keep its price high was the best way to get rich. And for 
decades Australian governments, state and federal, have worked on the 
assumption that building as many mines as possible would make Australians rich.

One of these assumptions is completely wrong, and last week Twiggy Forrest was 
howled down for suggesting that the Saudis might be on to something.

ACCC slaps down Andrew Forrest's call for cap on iron ore production
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/25/accc-slaps-down-andrew-forrests-call-for-cap-on-iron-ore-production>
The biggest difference between the Saudi approach and the Australian approach 
is one of time frame. While Australian political leaders have focused on the 
thousands of short term construction jobs that come from building lots of new 
mines, the Saudis have focused on the trillions of dollars to be gained by 
keeping the price high. While Australian leaders are focused on next month’s 
unemployment figures and next year’s budget deficit, the Saudis understand that 
because you only get to sell your natural resources once, you better get the 
best price you can.

In the past decade, as world demand for our natural resources grew far faster 
than anyone expected, the price we received for our coal and iron ore hit 
record prices. That’s a great problem to have.

But rather than cash in on a once-in-a-generation price boom, we decided to 
host a once-in-a-century mine construction boom. In less than a decade we 
poured more than $200bn into new resource projects in order to flood the world 
market with more supply and drive the price down to its current record lows. 
What a cracking idea.

Rio Tinto and BHP are quite upfront about their determination to push the 
price Australia received for its resources down. Such a strategy might make 
sense for their foreign shareholders, but it makes no sense for the Australians 
whose resources they are selling.

It gets worse.

Not only did building hundreds of new mines all at once drive down the prices 
we received for our commodities but it also drew thousands of skilled 
tradespeople out of manufacturing and other industries, driving up the price of 
building everything from roads to factories. The massive boom in construction, 
and the associated increase in construction costs, forced the RBA to lift 
interest rates to “slow down” the non-mining sectors of the economy. Apart from 
causing non-mining businesses to shut down, the higher interest rates led to 
much higher mortgage repayments for Australian homebuyers.

And then of course there was the exchange rate. The combination of record 
commodity prices, hundreds of billions of dollars of capital flowing to 
Australia to build hundreds of new mines, and some of the highest interest 
rates in the world led to the highest exchange rate in modern history. Bye-bye 
car industry. The record high dollar devastated tourism, education and some 
agricultural exports as well.

But when Forrest questioned the benefits that flow from foreign companies’ 
desire to drive down the price of Australia’s resources, the business press 
went into meltdown. Commentators citing first-year economics talked about the 
benefits of competition and free trade as if selling a natural resource once 
and for all was analogous to the market for coffee and as if benefits to 
foreign steel mills should be of concern to Australian taxpayers.Ross Gittins 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/australia-doormat-for-foreign-miners-20150330-1m9wwc.html>
 was the only one to get it right when he stated: 

Joe Hockey and Competition and Consumer Commission boss Rod Sims must surely 
deserve a medal for their selfless devotion to the interests of foreigners.

Australia has a larger share of the world trade in coal and iron ore than the 
Saudis have in the world oil market. If you think the Saudis are big in oil, 
then we are huge in coal and iron ore. There is no doubt that the decisions 
made by companies operating in Australia and indeed, the policies of our state 
and federal governments, have the capacity to shape world prices and, in turn, 
the profitability and taxes paid by companies operating in Australia. At a time 
when the government points to the falling iron ore price and is complaining it 
does not have any money we might expect Hockey to join the dots.

While the genuflecting towards BHP and Rio Tinto from large slabs of the 
business community might be expected, it is harder to explain why those 
concerned about the environmental and economic impacts of mining have been so 
quiet in their defence of the points made by Forrest.

Whether you want to tackle climate change, fix the budget deficit or create 
long-term well paid jobs for Australian miners, it makes sense to stop the 
price war between foreign companies seeking Australia’s natural resources at 
bargain basement prices.
 