
Our palates are supposed to get more sophisticated as we get older. All those 
things that tasted bitter at 18 – like espresso and Stephen Sondheim – at 30 
suddenly make sense. (Ditto hiking, architecture and anchovy stuffed olives). 
Less acknowledged, perhaps, is that with age comes a certain imperviousness to 
embarrassment. As your 30s progress, the number of things that make you want to 
gnaw your own arm off generally diminish until, one day, you find yourself 
voluntarily listening to the soundtrack to Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor 
Dreamcoat, while considering downloading the soundtrack to Cats, and wonder 
what appalling new stage of life you have entered.

Like a lot of people who love Broadway, I spent years disparaging Andrew Lloyd 
Webber <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/andrew-lloyd-webber> for a certain 
kind of dorkiness. It was, I thought, thanks to him and his love of dry ice and 
melodrama that musical theatre had such a bad name. The fact that Phantom of 
the Opera has stuck around in the theatre districts of most capital cities for 
over 25 years now was not an indicator of its value, I thought, but the exact 
opposite: it was instead a lowest common denominator designed to appeal to as 
many people as possible by causing as little offense as you can while still 
remaining alive.

This week, Lloyd Webber’s new musical, School of Rock, goes into limited 
preview in New York (it will open on Broadway in December). The show is an 
adaptation of the Jack Black movie of the same name and, in thepress release 
<http://www.broadwayworld.com/article/Andrew-Lloyd-Webber-Kicks-Off-SCHOOL-OF-ROCK-Preview-Concerts-Tonight-20150603#>
, Lloyd Webber promises theatre-goers the “iconic” story of a group of kids who 
“find and empower their real selves through rock music”. He signs off with a 
picture of his cat – one assumes he has read somewhere that cats win the 
internet – and the words “may the Spirit of Rock be with you.”

The script for the latest Lloyd Webber production has been written by Julian 
Fellowes, the creator of Downton Abbey, which means it will be quite jolly and 
also exceptionally pleased with itself. And the show does have the advantage of 
building on tested material: the original School of Rock, which came out in 
2003 and was directed by Richard Linklater, made some $130m worldwide and won 
Jack Black a Golden Globe nomination.

But Lloyd Webber is at his least persuasive when he tries to be funny or 
modish, and he is usually completely tone deaf to the ironies that Black’s 
comedy relies on. To wit: the mostrecent Broadway production 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/23/theater/reviews/jesus-christ-superstar-at-the-neil-simon-theater.html>
 of Jesus Christ Superstar was a disco version that played like a bunch of high 
school students who’d just discovered this hilarious new register called camp. 
Evita, too, is at its most mortifying in those parts where the score strains 
towards some kind of rock credibility.

He is, by contrast, at his best when he plays to his strengths – and to that 
end, it’s the dorkiest works that are by far the most loveable. Cats is great 
because it is so silly. Joseph is essentially a kids’ show. (Although, let’s 
give the man his due, the lyric “all those things you saw in your pajamas / are 
a long-range forecast for your farmers” is one of the best lines ever written 
in a musical.)

Appreciation for the merits of these shows is something you can perhaps only 
come to when you have yourself stopped straining to be cool and understand the 
appeal of unselfconscious fun. In this age – in which even the flimsiest 
140-word effort is over-wrought and over-thought – it is nice, sometimes, to 
enjoy a production with absolutely no subtext.

In my case, it is also a question of pragmatism: Lloyd Webber, it turns out, 
works wonders on babies. When I played Joseph to my two this week, they shouted 
with laughter. When I tried Sondheim on them – in a terrible fit of 
aspirational parenting, which held firm through Into the Woods and on into 
Sunday in the Park With George – no kidding, they both screamed.

Meanwhile, Phantom of the Opera is still playing on Broadway, the longest 
running show 
<http://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/news/2012/9/phantom-of-the-opera-officially-now-longest-running-show-in-history-of-broadway-44694/>
 in New York’s history. It’s not clever or funny but, as only babies and the 
over-40s truly understand, it is stupidly, ludicrously fun.
 