
Andrew Breitbart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/01/andrew-breitbart-dies-at-43> and 
the liberal media shared one, dirty secret that was so obvious as to have gone 
all-but unstated in his lifetime: he made liberals money. Maybe not as much as 
actuallybeing Andrew Breitbart generated, but ultimately, whether the liberal 
was Arianna Huffington (whom he helped launch her eponymous website) or the 
legions of liberal writers and editors (like me) who followed his every move, 
broadcast his antics or reported on his latest broadside at establishment 
journalism or liberal politics, he always made for good, reliable rage clicks.

He knew it, too. By being reliably Breitbartian, by shouting at Occupy 
protesters outside of CPAC or cracking wise in the press room while reporters 
held up camera phones, by launching broadsides against reporters from perch at 
the helm of "The Bigs" (Journalism, Hollywood, Government and Peace) or 
engaging in yet another Twitter war with a liberal, he knew one good, solid 
outburst would generate a raft of coverage, hate-filled or not, on the topic of 
his choice. That, after all, was his raison d'être: to force the establishment 
and liberal media to cover the stories he was convinced we actively ignored.

And we're still doing his bidding, to a degree, even as his family, friends 
and fans mourn his untimely death: we're talking about Acorn and former 
Congressman Anthony Weiner's shenanigans, theundeserved hit job on Shirley 
Sherrod 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/22/shirley-sherrod-sue-andrew-breitbart>
 and his as-yet unsubstantiated accusations against the Occupy movement. We're 
reminding a forgetful public about the existence of James O'Keefe and the 
left's seething hatred for a man who claimed to be simply exacting his own 
manner of revenge for all the times he said liberals had done it to 
conservatives.

Breitbart could not have been so successful, either as a businessman or as an 
activist, if he couldn't get liberals to click, to act as a bullhorn for his 
accusations, spurious or not, or to acknowledge that at least some of the 
stories he promoted had at least some small kernel of truth. People like to say 
that he killed Acorn or got Shirley Sherrod fired – and goodness knows, he was 
usually perfectly content taking credit for being a successful evil genius. But 
in reality, if it hadn't played on our own weaknesses, he wouldn't have been 
remotely as successful. He declared us willing to defend the indefensible and 
sat back, chortling, as some twisted themselves in knots to defend Acorn 
employees, who were, at best, poorly-trained, teaching O'Keefe's fake pimp to 
take advantage of tax law. (But note: kudos still needs to be extended to the 
woman in California whobeat O'Keefe at his own storytelling game 
<http://www.mediaite.com/online/james-okeefe-and-fox-news-promote-fake-acorn-murder-confession/>
.)

Breitbart called us cowardly and then laughed as Agriculture Secretary Tom 
Vilsack sacked Sherrod before the end of the news cycle because of the 
deceptively-edited video Breitbart had posted, only to attempt to hire her back 
again. He declared us too willing to buy into defenses of our own, and laughed 
all the way to the podium at Weiner's resignation press conference after scores 
of people attempted to determine how the first public picture of Weiner's 
unmentionables had been faked – as, all the while, Breitbart kept showing his 
friends the more explicit photo he carried on his phone.

Breitbart purposefully made himself into one of the left's most hated men on 
the right, knowing that coverage ofhim meant at least some coverage of whatever 
he wanted to expose. And we happily, and unhappily, complied.

There were, of course, innocent victims along the way: the unfairly-maligned 
Sherrod who sued him over the false expose; theindividuals he took potshots at 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2011/may/18/us-politics-higher-education?INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487>
 who found Breitbart's followers salivating like lions in a Roman amphitheatre 
at their predicaments; and, most assuredly, a level of civility in public 
discourse. Breitbart claimed that liberals started it, hounding him and his 
ideological compatriots out of Hollywood, and conservative writers out of 
journalism, of course. This was another argument that, to a degree, wecreated 
him – as you could hardly argue that he didn't know how to manipulate emotions 
or present compelling entertainment on television – but he brought it to a new 
level and then took pride in exposing the vitriol and invective hurled at him 
in public forums.

He was driven by ideology, often uncivil to those who disagreed with him, 
apathetic about abuses and hypocrisy on his own side of the aisle, and prone to 
self-aggrandizement. But so were we, he said, so that made it OK. And if he 
could have read the not-exactly-kind eulogies that began appearing Thursday 
from some liberal writers and activists, he probably would have said "I told 
you so", yet again.

Although you could hardly cover a controversial conservative figure without 
someone on the left arguing that if we just ignored that person, he or she 
would disappear (see also, Sarah Palin), no one truly argued that you could 
ignore Breitbart. The thought is almost laughable. Besides, it would be 
dishonest to try to claim that we really wanted to.
 