
Andrew Veitch, who has died aged 70, was one of those journalists with a 
sustained talent for self-invention: a talent driven by enthusiasm, curiosity 
and a generous sense of responsibility. It took him to Channel 4 News as 
science correspondent, covering health and environment stories, as well as the 
occasional international crisis, and then from 2003 to BBC World, working as a 
freelance producer, writer and presenter of documentaries made by Rockhopper 
Productions.

However, Andy started in print, joining the Guardian in 1971. He became a 
subeditor in the features department – taking the reporter’s typewritten prose 
and the photographer’s printed pictures and composing them into finished 
newspaper pages to be steered through a complex process of hot metal production 
– but metamorphosed into a medical correspondent.

He did so in a single unilateral act, after being awarded the role of 
assistant technology correspondent to write about the then new technology of 
personal computing. Instead, he found a story about genital herpes – not a 
subject at the time high on the national news agenda – wrote about it, and 
slapped on the first page the words “Andrew Veitch, medical correspondent”. At 
the time, the paper had no medical correspondent, and had not thought it needed 
one.

In vitro fertilisation was a new and advancing field, with much to be 
explained. The arrival, very swiftly, of a then mystifying source of sickness 
and death that was later to be called HIV/Aids settled the matter. Andy became 
a distinguished medical correspondent, and reported with energy, intelligence 
and forthrightness on a swiftly changing, and politically charged, field of 
research.

At the time, a bewildered government balked at confronting what would become 
an international epidemic of devastating proportions. A shared understanding 
between research scientists and journalists helped to change attitudes and 
educate a nation, and Andy was one of those who led the way. Words and phrases 
once rarely used in mainstream newspapers – semen, rectum, retrovirus, shared 
hypodermic needle and so on – became part of the language of public debate, and 
he used them as always with good humour and gusto. Throughout a lifetime career 
he sustained the same enjoyable mix of self-deprecation and colossal enthusiasm 
for the story in hand.

Born in Wrexham, north Wales, Andy was the son of Andrew, an engineer, and May 
(nee Silver), a primary school teacher. As his father was working on contracts 
abroad, he spent his early childhood in Guyana, an experience that he claimed 
led to a passion for travel and adventure. At the age of 11, he returned to 
England to board at Reading school, and went on to Trinity College Dublin. It 
was there, at 18, that he met his wife-to-be, Liz. They married in 1968. He 
claimed that he scraped through a social science degree, and he may have 
devoted more enthusiasm to the student newspaper, which in his last year he 
edited.

He began as a journalist on the Middlesbrough Evening Gazette and then joined 
the Manchester office of the Guardian, as a subeditor on the then separate 
northern edition. In 1976 the two editions merged, and Andy moved to the 
newspaper’s new Farringdon Road headquarters in London. Like most subeditors, 
he could write well, and could have been a brilliant theatre critic: at the 
time, however, the newspaper already had a brilliant theatre critic in Michael 
Billington, so Andy’s reviews were occasional.

He became a subeditor on the Guardian’s women’s pages, at a time when 
columnists including Jill Tweedie and Polly Toynbee set the social agenda, and 
worked closely with two women’s editors, Liz Forgan and Frances Cairncross. He 
also edited a gloriously funny anthology of sexism called The Naked Ape (1981), 
based on a women’s page column of the time.

Forgan went to the newly founded Channel 4, and after 17 years at the Guardian 
Andy followed her in 1988. HIV/Aids remained a powerful story. At the time 
there was no treatment, still only limited understanding of the infection, and 
diagnosis was understood to be a slow sentence of death. But the 1980s also saw 
the first ominous reports of climate change, the beginning of the politically 
embarrassing and economically devastating decade-long drama of bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy (BSE or mad cow disease), a nationwide epidemic of 
foot-and-mouth disease and a consortium of scientists pushing through a 
programme to sequence the entire human genome, a project at the time so huge 
that it was called “biology’s Apollo”.

Andy’s to-camera reporting career – often in a navy blue blazer, sometimes 
topped by a big red waterproof anorak – took him to the Arctic, the Antarctic, 
the tropics, Russia and the Kurdish refugee camps after the first Gulf war. He 
was awarded honours by the Royal Television Society for his work in exposing a 
Russian nuclear weapons disaster; by the Terrence Higgins Trust for his 
reporting on Aids; and by the British Association for the Advancement of 
Science and the Wildscreen and One World film and TV festivals. He also won a 
record seven British Environment and Media awards, mostly for his films from 
Russia and the polar regions.

He maintained a sharp sense of integrity, but was never sententious. 
Throughout he remained the generous, zestful and sometimes turbulent colleague 
he had always been, with a huge appetite for life and work. “He could drink you 
under the table and still beat you to the story,” said one television colleague.

Andy lived in Hackney, in the East End of London, and there became a force 
behind the hugely successful Broadway Market initiative, raising sums for local 
charities. He developed the bone marrow disorder myelofibrosis, needing care 
first at Bart’s hospital and then at St Joseph’s hospice in Hackney, but he 
carried on, being who he was and doing what he could for as long as he could.

He is survived by Liz, their sons, Joel and Alexander, and five grandchildren, 
Abigail, Zachariah, Bliss, Toby and Tallulah.

• Andrew Veitch, journalist, born 15 July 1946; died 4 September 2016
 