
Conservative internet publisher Andrew Breitbart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrew-breitbart>, the man behind 
investigations that led to the resignations of New York congressman Anthony 
Weiner and government official Shirley Sherrod, has died aged 43 in Los Angeles.

Breitbart's website BigJournalism.com announced on Thursday he died of natural 
causes. His death was confirmed by Breitbart.com editor-in-chief Joel Pollak, 
who said he was at the hospital, and by the Los Angeles county coroner's office.

He was walking near his house in Brentwood shortly after midnight when he 
collapsed, his father-in-law Orson Bean told the Associated Press.

Someone saw him fall and called paramedics who tried to revive him. He was 
rushed to the emergency room at UCLA Medical Center, Bean said.

Breitbart had suffered heart problems a year earlier, but Bean said he did not 
know what happened.

"I don't know what to say. It's devastating," Bean said.

Larry Dietz, watch commander at the Los Angeles county coroner's office, said 
the cause of death was unknown and an autopsy would "more than likely" be 
conducted.

Breitbart is survived by his wife Susannah Bean Breitbart, 41, and four 
children.

Tributes flooded news and social media sites, the medium which offered the 
firebrand blogger and activist a platform for his brand of indignat journalism.

Breitbart, an innovator who embraced partisan online journalism early on, was 
a star of the Tea Party and his devoted followers have lauded him as exposing 
what they see as left-wing media bias.

Larry Solov, president of Breitbart.com, described him as a "happy warrior and 
patriot" and announced the news of his passing "with a terrible feeling of pain 
and loss".

"Andrew lived boldly, so that we more timid souls would dare to live freely 
and fully, and fight for the fragile liberty he showed us how to love."

"RIP 'O Mighty Warrior!" Texas governor Rick Perry said on Twitter, in a 
message which was soon echoed by Breitbart's legions of fans.

Republican presidential hopeful Rick Santorum described Breitbart as a 
"powerful force" when he learned of his death from reporters at a rally in 
Dalton, Georgia.

"He will be a huge loss ... for our country and certainly for the conservative 
movement and my prayers go out to his family," Santorum said. "I'm really sorry 
to hear it."

Mitt Romney posted to Twitter: "Ann and I are deeply saddened by the passing 
of @AndrewBreitbart: brilliant entrepreneur, fearless conservative, loving 
husband and father."

Newt Gingrich tweeted: "Andrew Breitbart was the most innovative pioneer in 
conservative activist social media in America. He had great courage and 
creativity."

A former editor for the Drudge Report, Breitbart helped Arianna Huffington 
launch the Huffington Post, but they parted ways soon afterwards for 
ideological reasons. He cited her as an inspiration and a model for what he 
would later create, describing her in an interview with the New Yorker as "the 
closest thing I ever had to a collaborator who was working on the same energy 
levels and with the same kind of skill set".

He launched Breitbart.com, which carried aggregated news from AP, Reuters and 
other news wires, in 2005, later adding a series of subsites including 
BigGovernment.com, which, like the Huffington Post's early model, used unpaid 
journalists to provide content.

Twitter was where Breitbart responded to his critics in excoriating style. His 
final message called a follower "a putz".

But even among the victims of Breitbart's potent keyboard-lashings and those 
who had more cause than most to consider him a foe, there were kind words.

In a much-anticipated message, Eric Boehlert, a writer with which Breitbart 
engaged in what he described as "daily trench Twitter warfare" did not tweet 
about him directly, but re-tweeted a post directing followers to his watchdog 
website, Media Matters for America.

A post on the site read: "Media Matters has a long history with Andrew 
Breitbart. We've disagreed more than we've found common ground, but there was 
never any question of Andrew's passion for and commitment to what he believed. 
Our thoughts and prayers are with his family today."

Sherrod, who sued him for reputation damage last year, also released a 
statement. She said: "The news of Mr Breitbart's death came as a surprise to me 
when I was informed of it this morning. My prayers go out to Mr Breitbart's 
family as they cope through this very difficult time."

A former Georgia state rural development director, Sherrod, who is black, was 
fired from her job in July 2010 after the appearance of an edited video of her 
making what appeared to be a racist remark.

She is seen telling a local NAACP group that she was initially reluctant to 
help a white farmer save his farm more than two decades ago, long before she 
worked for US government.

Missing from the video was the rest of the speech, intended as a message of 
racial healing, in which Sherrod said he realised her mistake and helped the 
farmer.

Sherrod sued Breitbart, his employee, Larry O'Connor, and an unnamed "John 
Doe" defendant for "defamation, false light and intentional infliction of 
emotional distress".

When the lawsuit was filed against him, Breitbart said she was fired not 
because of the film but due to her part in the 11-year-old Pigford case, in 
which black farmers sued for discrimination against the agriculture department.

Breitbart, an outspoken critic of the mainstream media, said: "I can promise 
you this: neither I, nor my journalistic websites, will or can be silenced by 
the institutional left, which is obviously funding this lawsuit."

A lawyer for O'Connor told the Associated Press on Thursday that it is unclear 
whether the case will proceed for the other two defendants, who were in the 
process of trying to get the case dismissed from federal court.

It was not the first time he triggered a storm of criticism.

In 2009, he posted an undercover film on one of his websites which brought 
ridicule to the community group Acorn, the Association of Community 
Organizations for Reform Now. The film, in which a pair of conservative 
activists posing as a prostitute and her pimp who go to the agency for advice 
on a brothel to house Salvadorian children, show Acorn staffers offering them 
advice on taxes and other issues.

An internal review later concluded the videos "feed the impression that Acorn 
believes it is above the law". The internal investigation and a government 
accountability office report cleared Acorn of criminal activities.

But Congress defunded Acorn and the group eventually disbanded.

It was also Breitbart who posted the lewd photographs of Anthony Weiner on his 
website, and said it had been sent from the New York representative's Twitter 
account to a 21-year-old woman in Seattle.

Weiner initially lied and said his account had been hacked, but was forced to 
admit the story was true when a second photo was posted and acknowledged 
further online activity with up to six women.

He told the New Yorker that his online work had changed his brain chemistry 
"mostly for the better".

He said: "This is the environment I needed in order to become what I needed to 
become. With the internet, I have communication with large amounts of people, 
in perpetuity. Always having a new war, a new battle."
 