
His usual metier may be schmaltzy ballads and epic orchestral songcraft, but 
Andrew Lloyd Webber is to strap on a Strat and unfurl his devil horns for his 
next project:a Broadway production of School of Rock 
<http://edit.hollywoodreporter.com/news/school-rock-taking-enrollments-broadway-759246>
.

The hit film starred Jack Black as Dewey Finn, a luckless musician who 
impersonates his more responsible roommate to bag a job as a substitute teacher 
– and co-opts his young charges into becoming a band, training them up for a 
talent contest.

Lloyd Webber will write new music for the production as well as incorporating 
songs from the movie, which included the likes of Led Zeppelin’s Immigrant Song 
and Edge of Seventeen by Stevie Nicks.Julian Fellowes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/julian-fellowes> will similarly depart his 
comfort zone of Downton Abbey and Gosford Park to write the script, with 
Tangled songwriter Glenn Slater penning the lyrics.

Bringing some rock credentials to the creative team is producer Rob Cavallo, 
who manned the boards for bombastic records like Green Day’s American Idiot and 
My Chemical Romance’s The Black Parade.

Lloyd Webber said: “It is a joy for me to return to my Jesus Christ Superstar 
roots. When Deep Purple’s Ian Gillan was recording Jesus for Tim Rice and me at 
London’s Olympic Studios, Led Zeppelin was recording next door and a glimpse of 
a Stone or two was routine! School of Rock is hugely about how music can 
empower kids.”


Lloyd Webber is arguably in need of a hit, after the failures of his new works 
Love Never Dies and Stephen Ward, each of which underperformed in the West End. 
He’s found more success with his remake of The Wizard of Oz, and with his 
reality-TV-assisted arena tour of Jesus Christ Superstar, though an anticipated 
US run of the latter starring John Lydon and Destiny’s Child’s Michelle 
Williams failed to transpire – Lloyd Webber issuing the producers for £3.2m 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/andrew-lloyd-webber-sues-us-promoter-over-cancelled-jesus-christ-superstar-tour-9699220.html>
.


While a sequel to Richard Linklater’s film has never been made, it lives on in 
other ways – Nickelodeon are also lining up a TV adaptation. The musical 
version of School of Rock will open for previews on November 6 at the Winter 
Garden theatre in New York.
 