
Angela Lansbury <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angela-lansbury>, an 
actor returning to the London stage with a mantelpiece full of awards and a 
glittering career on Broadway stretching back more than half a century, has 
ruefully admitted that she is doomed for ever and worldwide to be known as the 
star of the television series Murder, She Wrote.

The actor is returning to the West End in March after an absence of 40 years, 
in the bravura role for which older female actors give thanks to Noël Coward: 
the scatty medium Madame Arcati in his black comedy of a marriage haunted by a 
previous wife,Blithe Spirit <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/blithe-spirit>.

Her performance in the role under the direction of Michael Blakemore – who 
will also take the helm of the West End revival – has already won her a Tony 
award onBroadway <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway>. However, she 
cheerfully conceded that it was not Coward, nor her own stage pedigree, which 
drew young audiences from all over the world.

They came because of her television character Jessica Fletcher, the crime 
writer turned private eye she incarnated from 1984 to 1996, a series still 
running on some cable channel 24 hours a day. "I'm very grateful for it," she 
said.

She described Madame Arcati as one of the greatest roles of her long career. 
"I don't have any illusions about being able to repeat that, but I'll do my 
best. I'm full of energy and raring to go."

By a coincidence worthy of Madame Arcati's shambolic powers, Lansbury is 
returning to the same theatre on Shaftesbury Avenue – now the Gielgud, then the 
Globe – where her own mother, Moyna Macgill, made herWest End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/westend> debut in 1918. Lansbury – Dame 
Angela since the New Year honours list – was born in the East End but evacuated 
to the US as a young teenager in the war.

Her screen break came in the 1944 classic thriller Gaslight, with Ingrid 
Bergman, followed by two more smash hits, National Velvet with the very young 
Elizabeth Taylor, and then The Picture of Dorian Gray.

After that she said she "wasted" eight years because the MGM studio had no 
idea what to do with her, before a triumphant rebirth on stage in musical 
comedy.

Her hits included a three-year run as Mame on Broadway – a role which made her 
an eternal gay icon, which the mother and grandmother, who enjoyed a 50-year 
marriage, said she regarded as a great honour.

For many years Lansbury lived mainly in Cork in Ireland, where she still has a 
house. She became an Irish citizen, and credits the easygoing life there with 
saving her then teenage children from the California drugs scene.

Her only regret about returning to the London stage was finding it impossible 
to get a cup of properly strong tea – she yearned for the Irish brand Barry's, 
and the Irish Times correspondent promptly promised to organise a supply.

"I can't believe it's 40 years," she said, "It doesn't seem like that to me."

"I always say there are two things in life that I know how to do – one is to 
keep house and the other is to act. Acting usually takes precedence: the house 
gets a bit messy."
 