
In the play Blithe Spirit, the wildly eccentric and chaotic clairvoyant Madame 
Arcati,Noël Coward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/apr/17/featuresreviews.guardianreview29>
's most colourful creation, announces that "time is the reef upon which all our 
frail mystic ships are wrecked".

No aphorism has ever applied less than this does to the actress now about to 
don the headscarves and bangles to play Arcati in the West End at the age of 88.
Dame Angela Lansbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jan/23/angela-lansbury-murder-she-wrote-west-end-blithe-spirit>
, ennobled earlier this month, has defied the laws of nature by becoming more 
theatrically prolific as her years have advanced. In 2007, she was Tony 
award-nominated for her role in a newTerrence McNally play, Deuce, on Broadway 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qzpFV3uJ160>; in 2010, she was nominated again 
for a revival ofSondheim's A Little Night Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/mar/13/theatre.artsfeatures>; and then, 
four years ago, she secured the award for playing Arcati on Broadway.

The description of Arcati as "eccentric and chaotic" is also not one we can 
easily associate with Lansbury. As an actress, she remains most famous for 
portrayals of neat, middle-aged characters such as Jane Marple inThe Mirror 
Crack'd, the Hollywood version of an Agatha Christie story, or as Jessica 
Fletcher in the long-running American television show,Murder, She Wrote.

Venerated these days in much the same way that Julie Andrews is, both by 
children and by those who appreciate high kitsch, the British-born star has 
straddled genres and eras in the entertainment industry.

Since her Oscar-nominated cinematic debut in 1944, playing opposite Ingrid 
Bergman as a teenager inGaslight, she has portrayed Elizabeth Taylor's elder 
sister inNational Velvet, and performed alongside Judy Garland and Cyd Charisse 
in the "golden era" screen musicalThe Harvey Girls. She also played Elvis 
Presley's mother inBlue Hawaii and the aspirant witch in Disney's Bedknobs and 
Broomsticks, before becoming, for more than a decade, one of the most powerful 
people in American television during her prime-time stint solving homicides 
each week in fictional Cabot Cove, Maine.

Her roles throughout her career have been wide-ranging, despite her 
persistently cosy image. And, according to her cousin, Terry Lansbury, who 
spoke to the Observer this weekend, it is the role that most confounds this 
tame image that stands as her best screen performance so far.

"The Manchurian Candidate was her greatest part, I think," he said, referring 
to the portrayal of the politically committed villainess Eleanor Iselin that 
earned Lansbury another Oscar nomination in 1963.

"She told me once that she regretted that she had never been given a part 
early on that she could really get her teeth into. She is an incredibly bright 
star, but she often got the role of the other woman," he added.

Speaking to journalists at London's Gielgud theatre last week, a venue where 
her mother, the Belfast actress Moyna MacGill, once performed, Lansbury 
confirmed her status as a character actress with clarity and good grace. At 
least it had meant, she said, that she did not suffer from the ageist casting 
policies that afflict other actresses. "For those women who were lovely, were 
known for their beauty and so on, it is darn difficult," she said. "But I was 
playing older parts when I was terribly young because I wasn't a big screen 
beauty."

Before the curtain goes up at the Gielgud in March, Lansbury's return to the 
London stage after 40 years is already a triumph of determination. Two years 
ago, she told theObserver she hoped to come back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/may/01/angela-lansbury-mother-west-end> 
soon, to perform in the city where she gave an award-winning performance as 
Mama Rose in Stephen Sondheim'sGypsy in 1973, before going on to play Gertrude 
inHamlet at the Old Vic in 1975.

Her mother appeared in comedies opposite the great leading men of the day, 
including Herbert Marshall, John Gielgud and Basil Rathbone. She married Edgar, 
son of the firebrand George Lansbury, the politician who caused a stir in 
Westminster in 1903 by leaving the Social Democratic Federation to join the 
Independent Labour party. Three years later, it became Keir Hardie's Labour 
party and, in the 1910 general election, Lansbury was elected MP for Bow and 
Bromley, before leading the party between 1932 and 1935.

"My grandfather was very charismatic," Lansbury told this paper in 2011, 
recalling hearing him speak in the Albert Hall. "He recognised the moment and 
grabbed it. The whole place was transfixed. It was really something. It had a 
stunning effect on me. We realised that we had in our circle someone who was 
enormously charismatic. He was a great Labour leader and a pacifist. He was 
not, I suppose, speaking for everyone, but he wanted to represent the working 
class."

Once settled in the US, Lansbury retained the family interest in politics as a 
committed Democrat, but was "absolutely steeped in Englishness" because of her 
childhood. "I lived in Mill Hill and went to school in Hampstead, and I had 
holidays by the seaside and in the countryside."

For her cousin, Terry, who lived a few houses away in Mill Hill, the young 
Angela was a fierce competitor. "I was envious of her. We both tried to show 
off all the time." He believes his "warm and easygoing" relative has inherited 
their grandfather's magic. "He was extremely energetic and she has that energy, 
too. She is one year older than me but 10 years younger physically," he said.

Before winning the breakthrough part in Gaslight, the teenage Lansbury studied 
acting at Webber Douglas in London for a year. Then, in 1935, following the 
death of her father, she moved out to Hollywood with her mother. There, 
Englishness was to prove an ace card. "But I had to shed my accent afterGaslight
 andDorian Gray," she said. "The Harvey Girls, where I played a western 
dancehall girl, got me right away from my Englishness, and I was able to work 
with MGM for seven years."

In 1957, she made her Broadway debut playing the wife of Bert Lahr 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZcjDZgdNbKk> in a French farce. In 1960, she 
returned to the New York stage asJoan Plowright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/20/national-theatre-50-joan-plowright>
's mother inA Taste of Honey by Shelagh Delaney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/21/shelagh-delaney>. The first Tony 
award came in 1966 forMame, and Lansbury went on to win others as the Madwoman 
of Chaillott inDear World (1968), as Mama Rose in a 1974 revival of Gypsy and 
as Mrs Lovett inSweeney Todd (1979).

From 1984, the TV role of Jessica Fletcher dominated Lansbury's working life 
and, guided by her second husband, Peter Shaw (whom she claims was the shrewd 
business head of the duo), she took on a production role. In 1989, her company, 
Corymore Productions, began co-producingMurder, She Wrote with Universal.

Lansbury had two children with Shaw. And after the end of the television 
series in the late 90s, and her husband's death in 2003, she admitted she lost 
all heart. It was the call of the Broadway stage that saved her, she believes, 
coupled with a move to a new £2m apartment in Manhattan and a part as the 
baddie in Emma Thompson's hit children's filmNanny McPhee.

"Nanny McPhee pulled me out of the abyss. I love Emma. She has an enormous 
heart," Lansbury said. And according to her cousin this is typical of the sort 
of admiration and respect Lansbury often grants other actresses. "Angela 
appeared in films with Katharine Hepburn and Spencer Tracy and stayed close 
friends with Hepburn right up until her death. She really looked up to her and 
felt she had managed not to change, unlike other stars."

Lansbury has also spoken of her approval of other strong female stars, 
including Bergman and the British director and actressIda Lupino 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0526946/bio>, saying: "Ida was a real front runner. 
It was her Englishness, too, that enabled her to burst through the screen and 
to burst through that barrier. I have often felt I could have been a director."

Last year, Lansbury received one of the highest accolades in Hollywood's gift, 
an honorary Oscar, but it is possible the newly appointed dame will feel 
equally honoured this April when she attends the opening of theAngela Lansbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angela-lansbury> film festival on the 
Poplar housing estate next to her east London birthplace that bears the name of 
her illustrious grandfather.
 