
One of Britain's brightest and most durable stars of stage and screen, Angela 
Lansbury <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angela-lansbury>, is hoping 
to round off her Hollywood and Broadway career with a theatrical run on the 
West End stage where her mother performed.

"I really would love to play the Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Royal Haymarket, because that is 
where my mother played," she said. "It nearly happened last year, and if that 
venue could be guaranteed I would come. I only want someone to make the offer."

Lansbury, 85, is due to return to her native Britain next week to celebrate 
the life of her grandfather, George Lansbury, a founder of the Labour party. On 
the eve of her visit, she talked to theObserver about her English heritage, 
both political and theatrical. "I am still absolutely steeped in Englishness. 
It is a part of my memory of my father and my grandfather, of our family life 
then: how we lived," she said.

Lansbury is the daughter of George Lansbury's politician son Edgar and of the 
Belfast-born actress Moyna Macgill, a stage star of the 1920s who appeared in 
light comedies opposite the leading men of the day, Herbert Marshall, John 
Gielgud and Basil Rathbone.

Angela, who lives in Los Angeles, began her film career in 1944 when she 
appeared inGaslight with Ingrid Bergman. She is next to be seen alongside Jim 
Carrey in the comedyMr Popper's Penguins, released in the UK in August. Yet she 
is probably best known as the aspirant witch, Eglantine Price, in Disney's
Bedknobs and Broomsticks, or as Jessica Fletcher, the television detective she 
played for 12 years inMurder, She Wrote.

The octogenarian, who won a Tony award two years ago for her Broadway 
performance as Madame Arcati in Noël Coward's comedyBlithe Spirit, is enjoying 
a fresh flowering of her career and aims to cap her success with a return to 
the London stage, where she last gave an award-winning performance as Mama Rose 
in Stephen Sondheim'sGypsy in 1973, before playing Gertrude in Hamlet at the 
Old Vic in 1975. However, her trip to London for the unveiling of a plaque 
commemorating her grandfather in Bow will serve to underline her little-known 
political inheritance. "My grandfather's presence in the family was very 
evident," she said. "We had in our circle someone enormously charismatic. He 
was a great Labour leader and a pacifist. He was not, I suppose, speaking for 
everyone, but he wanted to represent the working class. He recognised a 
political moment and grabbed it."

In 1903, George Lansbury left the Social Democratic Federation and joined the 
Independent Labour party, which three years later became the Labour party led 
by James Keir Hardie. In the 1910 general election he was elected as the MP for 
Bow and Bromley and led the party himself between 1932 and 1935.

The actress remembers watching her grandfather speak at the Albert Hall. "The 
whole place was just transfixed. It was really something. It had a stunning 
effect on me." She has always voted Democrat in America, but she regards 
herself as apolitical. "I am not bright enough at all to have very clear views. 
Although I know what I believe in, of course: equality and all those 
good things."

As a teenager, Lansbury studied drama at the Webber Douglas school in London 
before her mother moved the family out to Hollywood after the death of her 
husband in 1935. Once there, the young actress began to play her Englishness as 
an "ace card". "But I had to shed my accent afterGaslight and Dorian Gray," she 
said. "For The Harvey Girls, with Judy Garland, where I played a western 
dance-hall girl. That got me right away from my Englishness for quite a while, 
and I was able to work with MGM for seven years."

Lansbury looked up to Hollywood "strong women" Bergman and Katharine Hepburn 
and also knew and admired Ida Lupino, the English actress who went on to 
direct. "She was a real front-runner. It was her Englishness too, I think, that 
helped her break through into directing – to burst through that barrier. She 
was a damn good actress, as well as a director. I have often felt I could have 
directed, but I don't think I have the energy now."

After the death in 2003 of her husband, Peter Shaw, the man who had helped 
marshal her television success, Lansbury became disheartened. But another 
former Hampstead schoolgirl, Emma Thompson, revived her spirits with the 
unexpected offer of a film role. "Nanny McPhee pulled me out of the abyss. I 
love Emma. She has an enormous heart," she said.

Lansbury has played Miss Marple on screen, and she was startled to hear of 
Disney's plans to remake the Miss Marple canon with the 39-year-old Jennifer 
Garner in the lead role. "Will you please tell me how?" she asked. "How can 
they cast this lovely young girl in that role? It doesn't make any sense at 
all."

Lansbury is forthright when it comes to her roles. In Mr Popper's Penguins. 
She asked the screenwriters to develop her part before she would take it. "So, 
they went to work and they wrote somebody. They wrote a character. So, when 
they wrote the character, I said, 'All right'."

Clearly the indomitable spirit of George Lansbury has been passed down the 
line.
 