
In a country where jobs and housing are in short supply, a water reclamation 
plant is turning mining waste into low cost homes.

Anglo American's eMalahleni plant in Mpumalanga province, South Africa, 
purifies waste water from five mines and turns it into drinking water for local 
people.

But that's just one strand. The waste produced from this process – 200 tonnes 
of gypsum a day – is being made into bricks to build homes that will enable 
workers moving away from mine villages to buy affordable homes.

The plant is the first of its kind in the mining industry. It recovers 99.5% 
of its water and provides 80,000 people with drinking water, meeting 20% of 
their daily needs and those of the five mines.

Mining operations generate mineral and non-mineral waste. Traditionally, 
non-mineral waste has gone into landfill, but the gypsum from this plant alone 
could provide up to 7,000 homes a year.

Last year Anglo American's Zimele communities fund helped set up enterprises 
to manufacture bricks and build the homes. The production process is the same 
as standard brick-making but half the sand or cement is replaced with gypsum. 
Gypsum brick houses cost less to build and each produces three tonnes less CO2.

Local contractors built 66 three-bedroom homes almost entirely from 
gypsum-based materials and the first residents moved in at the end of 2010. 
Another 300 homes will be built in 2011.

It took 15 years of research by Anglo American to investigate uses of waste 
gypsum and conclude that the greatest potential was in building materials.

The plant aims to produce zero waste, a move which will mean big cuts in 
running costs. It is designed to be run as a social or commercial enterprise 
that will continue meeting local peoples' water needs and the gypsum bricks 
will help safeguard its future.

Jackie Wills is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 