
A 42-year-old man has admitted posting abusive Twitter messages about the 
murder of schoolteacherAnn Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire>.

Robert Riley, from Port Talbot, south Wales, appeared before magistrates in 
Leeds, where he admitted sending a message of a grossly offensive, abusive or 
malicious character.

The messages were not read out in court but the bench heard that some of them 
related to the murder of Maguire, 61, at Corpus Christi Catholic College in 
Leeds a week ago.

Magistrates were told that Riley needed to be sentenced where the messages 
were sent and agreed to transfer the case to Swansea magistrates court.

Riley, of Dan Y Coed, Cwmavon, Port Talbot, was given conditional bail.

Riley left court saying nothing, with his grey tracksuit top pulled over his 
head.

During the 10-minute hearing his solicitor Michael Walsh said: "He is 
mortified by his own behaviour and he apologises for any upset that may have 
been caused to everybody."

Walsh asked the magistrates to free his client on bail, telling them the only 
reason he had been held overnight was for his own safety.

He suggested that Riley may be in more danger in a Leeds prison than he would 
be walking the streets.

Earlier, Sandra White, prosecuting, told the court that Riley had posted a 
number of offensive tweets, only some of which related to the murder of Maguire.

She said the offence had come to the attention of West Yorkshire police 
because of this connection but told the bench that it should properly have been 
charged in south Wales.

White said the magistrates in Swansea would also be in a position to deal with 
Riley's existing community order. No details of this order were given in court 
on Monday.

Riley was given bail on condition that he does not use social networking sites 
and the internet generally between now and his appearance on Thursday.

The defendant sat in the dock with a woman security officer, wearing his 
tracksuit top over a grey T-shirt and blue jogging bottoms.

Riley is the second person to be charged with sending a "malicious 
communication" in the wake of the death of Maguire.

Jake Newsome, 21, from the Harehills area of Leeds, was released on bail after 
being charged for the alleged abuse, officers said.

He is due to appear before Leeds magistrates court on Wednesday 14 May.

Maguire died after she was attacked during a Spanish lesson at the school 
where she had taught for more than 40 years.

She was due to retire in September.

The killing is thought to be the first time a teacher has been stabbed to 
death in a British classroom and the first murder of a teacher in a school 
since the 1996 Dunblane massacre.

On Sunday, prayers were said for Maguire and her family.

Deacon Sean Quigley included the family of the 15-year-old boy charged with 
murdering the 61-year-old in his homily at Corpus Christi church in Leeds which 
is attached to the school.

Quigley, a retired teacher at the college who knows the Maguire family, told 
the congregation: "The school, staff and pupils have been consoled by messages 
from around the world and by many gifts of flowers, and also of food and books.

"The family of the young man involved also have been consoled in their great 
distress by the messages of love they have received."

A 100 metre-long shrine of floral tributes now connects the church with the 
school gates.

A book of condolence has also been opened at the cathedral in Leeds for those 
who want to express their sympathies.

Later on Monday, past and present pupils from Corpus Christi are expected to 
gather on the field opposite the school to remember Maguire and mark a week 
since her death.

A 15-year-old boy appeared in court last week charged with mother-of-two 
Maguire's murder and was remanded in custody.
 