
A second teenager has been arrested in connection with the fatal stabbing of 
teacherAnn Maguire <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire> in her 
classroom.

West Yorkshire police confirmed on Thursday that the boy was arrested at 
Corpus Christi Catholic college and later released without charge.

The force would not say what offence he was arrested on suspicion of, but said 
it was not murder. The arrest is understood to be related to online "banter" 
dating back to some time before the attack, but the boy had claimed it related 
to a computer game and not the murder.

Meanwhile, the 15-year-old boy charged with murder has been remanded in 
custody after appearing before Judge Geoffrey Marson QC on Friday. The judge 
set a provisional trial date of 3 November.

The teenager, who cannot be named for legal reasons, appeared via videolink at 
Leeds crown court a day after he appeared at the city's youth court accused of 
murdering 61-year-old Maguire as she taught a class on Monday morning.

On Thursday, her husband stared intently at the boy during the two-minute 
hearing. Donald Maguire, 62, sat between his daughters, Kerry and Emma, at the 
back of the courtroom and clutched their hands as the boy stood in the 
glass-fronted dock flanked by security guards.

The family released a tribute to the long-serving Spanish teacher, describing 
her as "our shining light".

A few hours after they attended court, the family visited the school to lay 
flowers at the gate and attend church, where they were told they were supported 
by a "sea of love".

The family spent about 10 minutes in the drizzling rain inspecting the 
hundreds of messages and flowers, which stretch from the school's entrance for 
about 100 metres to the gates of the neighbouring Corpus Christi church.

Maguire's death is the first time a teacher has been stabbed to death in a 
British classroom, and the first killing of a teacher in a school since the 
1996 Dunblane massacre.

She went to Corpus Christi as a student teacher and last year the school held 
a celebration of her 40 years' service. This year, she moved to working four 
days a week before her planned retirement in five months.

Maguire, who was head of year 11 at the school for more than 10 years, lived 
in the Moortown area of Leeds with her husband, who is a retired maths teacher 
and landscape gardener.
 