
A 15-year-old boy has appeared in court charged with murdering a teacher at a 
school in Leeds.

The teenager, who cannot be named for legal reasons, was led into the dock by 
three security guards at Leeds youth court in front of his parents and the 
family ofAnn Maguire <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire>, who was 
stabbed to death at Corpus Christi Catholic College on Monday.

He briefly glanced at his parents through the bulletproof glass, and spoke to 
confirm his full name, address and date of birth.

Wearing a blue sweatshirt and dark tracksuit bottoms, the boy ran his hands 
through his hair as the clerk told him that he had been charged with Maguire's 
murder. Asked if he understood, the boy said: "Yes."

He showed no visible emotion during the two-minute hearing, but glanced at 
journalists present in the courtroom.

The prosecuting lawyer, Helen Grant, said the charge was so serious that it 
could only be dealt with in the crown court. The boy was remanded in youth 
detention until the hearing at Leeds crown court on Friday, where he will 
appear via video link.

Maguire's husband, Donald, sat at the back of the court in silence, supported 
by other family members.

Before the hearing on Thursday, the Maguire family released a statement via 
West Yorkshire police, saying: "Our beautiful Ann, our shining light, she 
brightened the world for so many of us.

"A loving wife, the best mother, a treasured sister, a true friend. This 
horrific happening has robbed us of all of this and so much more. We are 
devastated. Her selfless, genuine, caring nature will remain with us eternally.

"We are overwhelmed by the support, sympathy and kind tributes we have 
received, they have been a source of great comfort at this dark time. We would 
ask the media to kindly respect the privacy of family and friends in the coming 
weeks and months. Ann, we will love you always, your loving family."

The teenager was charged with Maguire's murder after he was arrested and 
interviewed under caution by police on Monday.

A postmortem confirmed that Maguire died from multiple stab wounds.

The head of the school, Steve Mort, has described his immense pride at leading 
the students and staff as they tried to cope with the tragedy. He singled out 
the pupils for praise as he inspected the mass of floral tributes that have 
accumulated outside the school.

Maguire's death is the first time a teacher has been fatally stabbed in a 
British classroom, and the first killing of a teacher in a school since the 
1996 Dunblane massacre.

Maguire first went to Corpus Christi as a student teacher, and last year the 
school held a celebration of her 40 years' service. The head of year 11 at the 
school for more than 10 years, this year she switched to working four days a 
week, and she planned to retire in five months' time.

She lived in the Moortown area of Leeds with her husband, Donald, who is 
believed to be a retired maths teacher.

Supporting Maguire's husband in court were the couple's two daughters, 
osteopath Kerry, 32, and ballerina Emma, 30, a soloist with the Royal Ballet.

Also with them was one of the teacher's nephews, who lived with the family 
after his mother –Maguire's sister – died in 1986. He told police he considered 
himself like a son to the Maguires after being brought up by them.
 