
A judge has warned bloggers and social media users that they face serious 
consequences if they publish anything that could jeopardise the trial of a 
15-year-old boy accused of murdering a teacher.

The teenager, who cannot be named, appeared via videolink at Leeds crown court 
on Friday charged with stabbing to death 61-year-oldAnn Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire>, who taught Spanish at Corpus 
Christi Catholic college in Leeds.

He was remanded in custody after his defence barrister, Richard Wright QC, did 
not apply for bail. A provisional trial date was set for 3 November.

Flanked by two prison officers, the boy spoke only to confirm his name and to 
say that he understood the proceedings.

The barristers and judge all sat in the courtroom without their normal wigs 
and gowns and dispensed with some of the normal protocols of the crown court 
due to the defendant's age.

The boy's parents were not in court on Friday, though they were present to 
support him at the youth court in Leeds for his first appearance on Thursday.

The prosecuting barrister, Paul Greaney QC, asked the judge to warn members of 
the public as well as the media that the boy had a right to a fair trial.

Addressing the court, Greaney said: "This case has understandably generated 
public concern and public interest in equal measure.

"The print and broadcast media have reported the case very extensively and 
prominently and there has been much comment about it online in social media."

As proceedings were active, he said, "any publication which creates a 
substantial risk that the course of justice in the proceedings will be 
seriously impeded or prejudiced will be a contempt of court.

"It should be understood that this applies not only to publications by news 
organisations but also by users of online social media and bloggers.

"Obvious examples of publications that may create a relevant risk are those 
dealing with the defendant's history and background, whether medical or 
otherwise, and his relationship with Mrs Maguire or other teachers at the 
school, or with his parents or other young persons."

The judge, Geoffrey Marson QC, reiterated Greaney's point, saying that 
bloggers and users of social media sites were "just as much bound by these 
rules as the press".

"The consequences for individuals, I want to emphasise, can be serious if 
there's a breach," he said.

Under English law, any child involved in court proceedings is entitled to 
anonymity. Normally, that means media cannot name their school or college.

But the judge agreed with Greaney that it would be absurd for reports to omit 
that the charges related to Maguire's death at Corpus Christi on Monday.

None of Maguire's family attended court on Friday.

Before the events at the court, it emerged that a second teenager had been 
arrested on Thursday in connection with the killing.

West Yorkshire police confirmed that a boy had been arrested at the college 
and was later released without charge.

The force would not say what offence he was arrested on suspicion of, but said 
it was not murder.

The arrest is understood to be related to online banter dating back to some 
time before the attack, but the boy had claimed it related to a computer game.
 