
The 20-year minimum sentence handed out to the killer of teacher Ann Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire> is too harsh and puts Britain 
out of step with more lenient attitudes in the rest of Europe, according to a 
leading youth justice campaigner.

Will Cornick, who was 15 when he stabbed to death the Spanish teacher in 
April, was told that he may never be released when he wassentenced to at least 
20 years on Monday by Mr Justice Coulson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/03/will-cornick-leeds-ann-maguire-murdered-teacher-jail>
.

Announcing the sentence, the judge said that he was going for a higher tariff 
than the minimum of 12 years for the crime because of seven aggravating 
factors. These included the fact that it was premeditated, committed in public, 
in front of children and witnesses who were traumatised, and that Maguire had 
died in “extreme pain”. Leeds crown court heard he hoped to kill two other 
teachers, including one who was pregnant. He told doctors his plan was to stab 
her in the stomach to kill her unborn child.

That penalty is the longest given to a child in Britain for more than a 
decade, according to the Standing Committee for Youth Justice.

Its chairman, Penelope Gibbs, said Cornick should have been given a chance at 
rehabilitation by being sent to a specialist psychiatric jail such as Grendon 
in Buckinghamshire, which tries to reform violent criminals through group 
therapy.

Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Gibbs said: “Everybody has the 
capacity to change. It seems clear that he [Cornick] had serious mental health 
issues. He should not be released until he has changed sufficiently to make 
society safer. But there is no evidence that will take 20 years. There are very 
good prisons, there’s a prison called Grendon, which is a therapeutic 
community, and prisoners go there for a few years, and it has great results.”

Gibbs, a former magistrate, claimed nowhere else in western Europe would 
impose such a long sentence on a child.

She said: “We are out of line with the whole of western Europe. There are no 
other countries in western Europe which give children, and this boy is seen as 
a child under the UN convention on human rights … a life sentence.

“We think this is the longest sentence given to a child in at least 10 years. 
I’m not going to tell you what the right sentence would have been, but 20 years 
and a life sentence is too long.”

Gibbs asked: “What do we want from the justice system? What I want is that 
those who offend come out less likely to offend. Punishment is also incredibly 
important, particularly for the victims and families, but the fact is how many 
years do we need for punishment?

“We have given him a sentence which is more than his own lifetime. He was 15 
when he did this crime and we would say you don’t need that long to punish.”
 