
Ann was an instinctive, intuitive, very hands-on teacher and leader. Her work 
was always carried out with a generous smile and giving nature. This was 
matched by a marvellous ability to inspire and enthuse. Pupils knew the high 
standards expected of them and Ann appealed to their higher nature.

She knew generations of families who had been to the school and would always 
make a pupil proud of their school, their family, themselves, while planting in 
them a desire to achieve the best they could for all three. Pupils also felt 
deeply cared for and loved – each knew personally that she was their teacher 
first and foremost. There was always a stream of former pupils visiting school 
who wanted to see Mrs Maguire or wanted a reference from their trusted teacher.

Pupils with difficulties always knew they would be listened to – but it never 
ended there. Ann would not rest until a problem had been bottomed and she could 
be found on the phone to homes and pupils hours after the end of the school 
day. The consequence of this was a remarkable degree of harmony and focus in 
her year group that led to tremendous achievements by her pupils in Spanish 
(many attained one or two grades higher than in any other subject) but also by 
those in her year group; a key reason she was in charge of Year 11 in their 
crucial final school year.

The sound of the Corpus Christi choir, Ann’s supplementary responsibility, 
brought great joy to awards evenings, official functions and school liturgies. 
Ann, who could not read music, taught and engaged by ear, bringing remarkable 
sounds, moving harmony and joyous singing from generations of pupils. 
Invariably the first thing guest speakers, from the bishop to MPs, would 
comment on was the engaging and uplifting singing, but this had already been 
evidenced by the strength of applause from audiences.

The Ann Maguire Arts Education Fund <https://www.justgiving.com/ann-maguire/>, 
established by her family, is a fitting legacy for somebody who loved and 
employed the performing arts for the betterment of others. As Ann’s nephew 
Andrew Poole said at her memorial service: “Music was a direct link to Ann’s 
soul.”

The Ann Maguire Gala 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2015/ann-maguire-gala/> is on 22 March at 
Sadler’s Wells; annmaguire.org <http://annmaguire.org/>
 