
The taxi driver knows exactly where to go, even though Ann Widdecombe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ann-widdecombe> lives 10 miles from 
Newton Abbot, the nearest railway station, at the top of a hill on the edge of 
Dartmoor. They ferry her back and forth a lot, and like her. "No airs and 
graces," they say. "Very down to earth." When I arrive, a few minutes late, 
having accepted the taxi driver's suggestion that we take the scenic route, she 
is waiting outside her large, functional house, which she has called 
Widdecombe's Rest. She walks a little creakily, and I wonder how she copes 
living in such a spot. Her hair is grey and windswept. The blond phase and the 
Strictly Come Dancing curls have gone. Truly, no airs and graces.

She bought the house in 2008 and spent three years renovating it, so it was 
ready to move into when she retired as an MP in 2010 at the age of 62. She has 
had a large pond built at the front and a swimming pool installed at the back, 
more for her great-nephews' benefit than her own. "I used the Strictly money to 
pay for it," she says. The large, newly built conservatory is very Homes & 
Gardens, but the furniture in the sitting room looks like it has followed her 
round every house she has ever owned. The ancient coffee table is so heavy we 
can hardly move it. On the top sit two DVDs – Dr Finlay's Casebook and The 
Virgin Queen, a 1955 film starring Bette Davis as Elizabeth I. I suspect 1920s 
Scotland and late 16th-century England might both appeal more to her than 
21st-century Britain.

Widdecombe's autobiography, Strictly Ann, is published this week, an account 
of her combative life in politics and curious afterlife in showbiz, hosting 
Have I Got News for You, acting as quizmaster on a short-lived Sky programme 
called Cleverdicks, twice starring with Strictly Come Dancing judge Craig Revel 
Horwood in panto, evenappearing on stage at the Royal Opera House 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/news/ann-widdecombe-takes-to-the-stage-with-the-royal-opera>
 playing the Duchesse de Krakentorp in Donizetti's La Fille du Régiment, to the 
horror of opera purists. The book is breezily written, as befits the author of 
four novels, and characteristically honest, though the halfhearted attacks on 
excessive bureaucracy and national fecklessness are rather wearing, as if her 
editor is constantly reminding her to conform to strident, rightwing type.

I had been hoping she would be bossy with me, too, perhaps berating me for my 
lateness, since it's always easier to print the legend. But I'm disappointed. 
She makes me a cup of tea and promises me some homemade Victoria sponge later – 
made not by her but by a neighbour who acts as a part-time housekeeper. Her 
love of animals, especially cats (her website lists every cat she has ever owned
 <http://www.annwiddecombe.com/ann-widdecombe-cats.php>), and vigorous 
opposition to foxhunting belie her tough-as-nails image, and the Victoria 
sponge may be the icing on the revisionist cake.

It's tempting to portray her life in her moorland eyrie as a lonely one, but 
she insists she enjoys living alone and that the odd mix of activities that now 
make up her life is satisfying.Her column 
<http://www.express.co.uk/comment/columnists/ann-widdecombe/299271/Helping-those-who-aren-t-glad-to-be-gay>
 in the Daily Express means she still has a political soapbox, and the TV and
panto appearances <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-kent-12626500> have 
provided a release. Doing Strictly, she felt free for the first time in 40 
years. "I loved the fact there was no responsibility," she says. "For years, 
everything I'd done was going to affect people. With Strictly, apart from Anton 
[du Beke's] shins, it couldn't affect anything. If I fell down in a heap on the 
floor, nobody suffered. People said: 'Is this dignified?' I said: 'No, why must 
it be? Get it into your heads, folks, I'm not an MP.' I know that; nobody else 
seems to."

She has, she insists, left the Commons far behind. "I got the point of exit 
right. If I'd gone earlier I would have missed it, and if I'd gone later I 
would have been jaded. When I left government [in 1997], I lost the habits of 
government very quickly, and I understood the difference between government and 
opposition, which a lot of my colleagues didn't for a while, and similarly when 
I ceased to be an MP, I lost the habits of an MP. I didn't think I'm an MP in 
retirement; I thought I'm not an MP. Gone. When I go back now, it's as if I was 
never there. I don't go in and think 'home'."

Given her 23 years as MP for Maidstone, her time as prisons minister and 
stints as shadow health secretary and shadow home secretary, she could have 
expected to be elevated to the House of Lords, but the call from David Cameron 
never came. "I was very disappointed," she admits, "but no one has a 
prescriptive right to go there. It's entirely within the gift of the prime 
minister. I don't think about it any more." Some have suggested her opposition 
to hunting was the reason she was ignored, but it may have been more personal 
than that. "I don't meet his [Cameron's] modernisation agenda," she says. "He 
probably put the flags out when I left parliament."

In the book, she calls Cameron "big-headed" and "pig-headed". "I wish he would 
acknowledge the concerns there are, and listen to people," she tells me. "All 
through gay marriage the story I got back was not that the prime minister 
disagreed with people, but that he wouldn't give them a hearing. You've got to 
listen, or at least pretend to be listening." Etonian arrogance? "That's the 
caricature," she says, "but I'm not worried about Eton. Douglas Hurd went to 
Eton, Harold Macmillan went to Eton. It's a question of understanding the role. 
He got it far too soon. He would have brought greater maturity and kindness to 
the job if he'd been a bit older and a bit more blooded by the world."

While welcoming Iain Duncan Smith's attack on welfare dependency and Michael 
Gove's education shakeup, Widdecombe is pleased to have escaped this 
parliament. "I wouldn't have enjoyed coalition. I certainly would not have been 
at one with him [Cameron] over gay marriage, and I don't like this thing of 
image, image, image." She is not a fan of fast-tracking women and ethnic 
minority parliamentary candidates, and has some fun in the book at Louise 
Mensch's expense. "A lot of the A-listers didn't realise what it was about," 
she says, contrasting favoured candidates being parachuted into the Commons 
with her own experience of standing in two unfavourable seats before landing a 
safe one. "I understood what a committee room was; I'd done the jumble sales; I 
knew how to relate to the volunteers."

Ah, yes, the swivel-eyed loons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/may/19/tory-chairman-feldman-swivel-eyed-loons>
 allegedly castigated by one of Cameron's aides. "What a thing to say," she 
exclaims in her slightly strangulated voice. "Even if it was a joke, it was a 
stupid thing to say, because it reinforces the view that Downing Street doesn't 
care tuppence for the people who put them there." Widdecombe was always the 
darling of local Conservative associations and still speaks at meetings, but 
these days they want her more for her celebrity than her trenchant views on 
capital punishment and immigration. "All they want to hear about now is 
Strictly," she says. "When I start talking about the economy and universal 
benefits, they're not as interested as once they were."

I quote Enoch Powell's old saw – that all political careers end in failure. 
The Tory defeat in 1997 and the party's long period in opposition meant she 
never served in the cabinet, and her planned leadership bid after William 
Hague's resignation in 2001 quickly collapsed. Was she satisfied with what she 
achieved? "If you'd said to me when I was 21, 'You're going to get into 
parliament, be a senior minister of state, shadow health secretary, shadow home 
secretary, a privy councillor, be endorsed by the Times as a candidate for 
Speaker, have four novels published, and then have great fun after you retire,' 
I'd have said, 'That sounds like a good life.' I've never understood this 
business of 'I could always have had something more.' If what you had was good, 
then thanks be to God."

God. He has never been far away in Widdecombe's life. He is certainly here at 
Widdecombe's Rest, where she is converting a small room into a chapel. Her 
parents were practising Anglicans; her late brother was a C of E vicar, as is 
her nephew. She converted to Catholicism in 1993 because she objected to the 
ordination of women, and in the book describes her meeting with Pope John Paul 
II in 1996 as the most memorable day of her life. Her faith colours everything: 
her views on gay marriage and abortion; her sense that life should be governed 
by duty; her belief that society has lost its moral bearings.

She balks at my description of her as a social authoritarian. "Let's take the 
issue of gay marriage," she says. "I do not care tuppence what consenting 
adults do. It's not my business. The state does not belong in bedrooms. So I'm 
not authoritarian. I don't say: 'You shouldn't do this, you must do that.' What 
I do say is that the state must have a preferred model, and the model that has 
served us throughout the millennia is marriage – a man and a woman in a union 
that is generally open to procreation. Marriage isn't about two people; it is 
the basis for the family. That's why it's unique, and therefore I think society 
can say we're keeping marriage for a man and a woman."

I ask her what she thinks when she looks at the society around her. "I try not 
to look," she says. "If you drive through any city centre on a Friday or a 
Saturday night, you will be treated to the sight of young women wearing 
virtually nothing, drunk as owls, falling off pavements and thinking this is a 
normal way to spend a happy evening, with all the moral danger that entails. I 
worry about the culture of excess; I worry about the culture of celebrity; I 
also worry about the breakdown of the family. I hate young women having four or 
five children by different fathers, Dad playing virtually no role in their life 
and going off and having four or five children by other women; the utter 
breakdown of neighbourliness and the extended family."

She contrasts the anomie of society now with the world in which she grew up. 
The early chapters in her autobiography paint a nostalgic picture of a colonial 
upbringing – her father was in the Admiralty and part of her childhood was 
spent in Singapore – and an Enid Blytonish Catholic boarding school in Bath. 
When her mother became frail in her 90s, she went to live with Widdecombe. 
Family bonds are very powerful for her, and her long-lived parents were central 
to her life.

There was a long-term boyfriend called Colin Maltby when she was a student at 
Oxford – in the book there is a photograph of them in a punt – but they broke 
up ("my overwhelming sensation was one of relief", she says of the moment when 
Colin bailed out) and she never had another relationship. Whether she has ever 
had sex is one of the great unanswered questions in British politics. "It's 
nobody else's business," she told Woman's Hour presenter Jenni Murray when the 
latter bravely raised the issue.

I ask her whether her closeness to her family was one reason she never 
married. "Not at all," she says. "My family wanted me to marry and have 
children, and they always rejoiced in my brother's family. It just didn't 
happen. I never set my face against it. I never said: 'I've got a political 
career, I can't get married.' When I broke up with Colin, I rather assumed 
somebody else would come along. But it was never a sufficient priority to go 
out looking. If someone had barged his way into my life, I would probably have 
been quite receptive, but he never did and I never went looking. There might 
have been the odd man I looked at and thought, 'You're rather nice', but there 
were no other relationships." Just a lifelong love affair with the Tory party 
and, of course, with God.
 