
Featuring a "conceited brute" of a politician, a professional dancer named 
Beautella LaReine and a backstage murder on a popular televised dance contest, 
Ann Widdecombe's first foray into detective fiction has just been 
self-published onAmazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon>.

The former member of parliament has released The Dancing Detective 
<http://www.annwiddecombe.com/ann-widdecombe-books.php> through Amazon's 
CreateSpace self-publishing arm. Drawing from Widdecombe's own experiences on 
Strictly Come Dancing, it is set around the fictional dance competition Lively 
Toes – and includes a character named after Widdecombe's Strictly partner Anton 
du Beke, who Widdecombe writes has "graciously agreed to be the model" for her 
creation, one Anton Caesar.

"No judge or contestant is above suspicion," when the murder is committed, 
according to the book's description on Amazon. "As events escalate and it seems 
that the murderer may strike again, the crime-solving efforts of the police are 
supplemented with those of a mysterious dancing detective in a desperate race 
to discover whodunnit. Moving between past and present and unearthing long held 
secrets along the way, this is a case teeming with possible motives and in 
which nothing is as it first seems."

Her ambitions for The Dancing Detective are, she told the Guardian, fairly 
modest: "I'm not aiming to to rival PD James and Ruth Rendell. It's just a bit 
of fun really."

Widdecombe told the Herald Express in Torquay 
<http://www.torquayheraldexpress.co.uk/Ann-takes-quick-step-whodunnit-writing/story-22841042-detail/story.html>
 that she had been thinking about writing her Dartmoor-set detective story ever 
since she appeared on Strictly Come Dancing in 2010, "but had to stop writing 
it because the publishers wanted my autobiography done first".

She chose, she said, to publish the novel herself because she has a series 
planned about the same detective, and "if you give it to a publisher it's nine 
months before it comes out and nine months before the next one. With Amazon you 
can put them up whenever you like and there's a lot higher royalty on the 
Kindle edition than any author is going to get in publishing."

Self-publishing <https://www.theguardian.com/books/self-publishing> has become 
an increasingly popular route for writers today. According to Nielsen BookData, 
in 2013 18m self-published books were bought by UK readers, up 79% on the 
previous year. As well as Widdecombe, names including Steven Berkoff, Joe 
Simpson and David Mamet have all chosen to make their own way to market.

Widdecombe said the book was "not a detective novel about Strictly, that's 
where the references stop. A lot of it is set on Dartmoor and it's … very 
traditional with the clues laid."

She enjoyed, she told the Torquay paper, the "challenge" of writing a 
detective novel. "It's the reverse of how I normally write. I normally start 
the book and don't know what's going to happen, I let the characters decide 
that. With a detective novel you have to know whodunnit, where and how. 
Otherwise you can't lay out the clues."

But she added that she writes "quite completely the first time round", and 
doesn't tend to "go through draft after draft".

"I get to the end and then make a few changes, but it won't be an extensive 
rewrite. Unlike a conventional publisher, Amazon don't supply a copy editor so 
you have to check your own copy and make sure every comma is in the right 
place. Saying that, I've found the odd error in my published works before."

The novel already has two positive reviews on Amazon. "Another winner from 
Widders!" writes "I Dale", giving the book five stars. "A brilliant told tale. 
As in her other novels,Ann Widdecombe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ann-widdecombe> really knows how to tell 
her story and keep the reader gripped." "Lesley Gent" gives it four stars, 
writing: "Very enjoyable read, great twist right at the end."

It opens as Beautella dances with Cobb Grainger, the unpleasant but handsome 
politician. "He meant her to fall, was going to let go, was enjoying her fear 
now that he was sure she realised," writes the former MP. "She looked down, 
down to where she must land and then into his eyes. They were surprisingly 
normal eyes, greyish blue, clear, guileless, not orbs glittering with evil 
intent. Her own, she knew, were fear-filled, pleading but not weeping. She 
could not weep because there was no time before she was spinning through the 
air and falling."

Widdecombe has written novels before, but published them through traditional 
publishers. An Act of Treachery, in which a French girl is in love with a 
German officer, was released by Orion in 2002; The Clematis Tree, released by 
the same publisher in 2000, focuses on a child who suffers brain damage in an 
accident. It drew the following review from Ruth Rendell in the Sunday Times: 
"Widdecombe once memorably said of a certain home secretary that he had 
'something of the night about him'. She has something of a Sunday afternoon 
about her, but her book is readable and, not surprisingly, she is good on the 
political bits."

Her autobiography, Strictly Ann, was published by Weidenfeld & Nicolson last 
year. The Observer's Rachel Cooke was nominated for the Hatchet Job of the Year 
for her review, which said that while "Ann is a stickler for grammar … in every 
other respect her memoirs bear a strong resemblance to her paso doble: no 
rhythm, no beauty, no humour and, above all, no feeling".
 