
The public interest is not served by the prurient media disclosure of the 
identity of a child who has committed a crime, no matter how trivial nor how 
serious. Any judge who claims that it is in the public interest to identify a 
16-year-old boy convicted of murder –as happened today to the killer of 
schoolteacher Ann Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/03/ann-maguire-killer-named-will-cornick-judge-lifts-reporting-restrictions>
 – risks giving in to the voracious media and to public voyeurism.

The severity of the sentence, in this case a 20-year prison term, is what 
serves the public interest. We have all the information we need to meet the 
requirement of deterrence. The public may be interested in hearing more details 
about the perpetrator, but that is not the same thing as the public interest.

The face of a child staring out from a newspaper is no succour to the family 
of his victim. It offers no additional protection or support to them. Indeed, 
it is likely to whip up a lynch mob mentality and exacerbate completely 
unnecessary fear about an extraordinary and unique crime.

There are very few children who commit serious and violent crimes, and 
parading them in public fuels the mistaken view that this is more prevalent. 
There are only 16 children in custody for murder. It is, thankfully, an 
extremely rare crime.

Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> who commit crimes, 
even the most heinous, are afforded additional protection in international and 
domestic law, but this is being flouted increasingly by courts who are supine 
in the face of media pressure.

The reason we are supposed to have the welfare of children at the heart of the 
penal system is that we hope that we can help young people to mature and become 
good citizens. Children do not have the resilience or experience to deal with 
public opprobrium at the same time as coming to terms with what they have done. 
There has to be redemption at some point for a 16-year-old.

The 20-year sentence in this case is one of the longest given to any child, 
and will mean this boy is in late middle age before he is likely to be moved to 
an open prison and considered for release. We have about 13,000 men (mostly men)
serving life and indeterminate sentences in England and Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/may/19/prisoners-challenge-indeterminate-sentences-supreme-court>
, more than all the other 46 countries in Europe added together.

The decision to identify a child is also a life sentence, as this information 
will be on the internet for life. The child will be notorious inside prison and 
will never be able to grow past the crime he committed. The crime is now his 
permanent identity.

Public knowledge about the child also brings with it identification of his 
wider family, who in their way are also victims of such terrible tragedies, and 
will never be able to live free of it.

The criminal justice process should seek to heal an event that has wrought 
havoc and misery. We should support victims and witnesses and families. We 
should not exploit an individual child to sell newspapers.
 