
The woman at the centre of one of the most intriguing spying scandals since 
the cold war rubbed shoulders with some of Britain's highest profile 
businessmen at glittering evenings in London nightclubs.

Anna Chapman <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-chapman>, one of 10 
suspected Russian spies charged in the US, was allegedly taken to parties at 
Annabel's nightclub attended by businessmen including the private equity 
billionaire Vincent Tchenguiz, and Philip Green, who owns some of the UK's 
largest retailers.

The emerging picture of the glossy social circles Chapman moved in during her 
time in Britain mirrors FBI suspicions that the Russian secret service wanted 
her to ingratiate herself with influential people in the west. She was, said 
one businessman who knew her, a "great networker".

Wayne Sharpe, 53, executive chairman and founder of Bartercard, a trading 
exchange firm, said he met Chapman, 28, a number of times during 2005 at social 
gatherings. He said she was then the personal assistant of Nicholas Camilleri, 
chief executive of the Mayfair-based hedge fund company Navigator Asset 
Management Advisers. "The business people [in attendance] were the highest lot 
– I'm talking about Philip Green and Vincent Tchenguiz. She was in that set 
well and truly by being at Nick's side until the wee hours of the morning," 
said Sharpe.

"She was one of many intelligent Russian women who worked with Nicholas. It 
was always hard to determine what she did in his business, but she was very 
intelligent, attractive, personable and very articulate in English. She 
certainly was a great networker. She constantly ingratiated herself with all of 
the high-end businessmen Nicholas introduced her to."

A spokesman for Tchenguiz said it was "almost certainly true" he had met 
Chapman. "Vincent and Nick know each other and both go to Annabel's every 
Thursday," he said. "If Chapman was with Nick, she would have been introduced. 
But it would have been a passing encounter – totally innocent."There is no 
suggestion that Chapman obtained any information from the businessmen she mixed 
with. It is understood Green seldom visits Annabel's and has no recollection of 
meeting her.

Speaking exclusively to the Guardian last night, Camilleri said he found it 
hard to picture the 23-year-old girl he employed as a PA in 2005 as a Russian 
spy.

"She was a 'green, wet behind the ears' type of girl," he said. "She came 
across as having none of those sorts of spying-type aspirations, so I can't see 
how she developed them later."

Camilleri said that although Chapman was married when she worked for him, she 
never spoke of her husband and he never met him. "She was just an ordinary 
girl. She had nothing of any consequence about her. She was quite a quiet 
person."

He said that he did not introduce Chapman to Green, but added: "I go out every 
single night of the week and had many PAs before, during and after her. How 
could I remember who I took where and when?"

Barclays Bank confirmed yesterday Chapman had worked in its London office 
before moving to the US. Earlier, the British private plane hire firm, NetJets
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, said that she worked 
for it in the UK, but not for as long as the CV claimed, or at such a senior 
level. Chapman's extensive online presence, including more than 90 photographs 
posted to Facebook and an apparently glamorous lifestyle as a property 
millionaire, has made her the focus of much of the media coverage of the case.

But quite what was her part in the spying network is a mystery. Inquiries in 
the US have established she was arrested after she herself had gone to a New 
York police station after a meeting with a supposed Russian agent who wanted 
her to pass on a false passport. In fact the Russian had been a US undercover 
investigator. While Chapman agreed to the task, when asked if she was willing 
to step up her spy work, she then failed to turn up to the set-up meeting. 
Instead she went to the First Precinct station in New York and told police that 
the passport had been forced upon her. It was only then that she was arrested 
by the federal authorities.

The manner of her arrest has been seized on by her lawyer, Robert M Baum, as 
evidence she was not the super spy the prosecution claims. "The government's 
case is very thin against Ms Chapman. There is no allegation she ever met face 
to face with any government official; and no allegation despite constant 
surveillance that she ever delivered anything to anyone or received any money," 
Baum told ABC News.

Several thousand miles away in Moscow, a few more pieces of the jigsaw of 
Chapman's life were emerging.

She grew up in the southern town of Volgograd (formerly Stalingrad) and came 
from an influential diplomatic family. She studied in Volgograd's middle school 
– where she was known as Anya Kuschenko – and lived with her grandmother when 
her parents decamped to Moscow.

Her father became Russia's ambassador to Kenya when she was in the 8th grade, 
friends said. "I'm certain this is all some kind of set-up," one friend told 
news portal lifenews.ru. "Even if you suppose she had become an intelligence 
agent, she would never have allowed herself to fail in this way. She was such a 
clever girl."

Another classmate, Tatyana Shumilina, recalled her as a "party animal" who 
introduced the other teenage girls to "decent music" including Metallica and 
Nirvana. She was usually dressed in ripped jeans, black T-shirts and had a punk 
style. "She was an excellent student. The boys liked her. You only had to see 
her once to realise she was very pretty. As she got older she got even 
prettier. She made no effort to hide her diplomatic connections – everyone knew 
her father was an ambassador in an African country."

After school she moved to Moscow, and studied at the People's Friendship 
University ofRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, one of the top 
Soviet-founded schools. After graduating in 2004 she went into business, 
initially for Fortis Investments. She set up her own online real estate 
business – apparently conceived from her experience of moving flats across 
Moscow.

Lifenews.ru says she married an Englishman, and moved to Britain, returning to 
Russia from time to time. Friends are unable to confirm this. "I don't know 
about her personal life," said Dmitry Porochkin, who met Chapman at a function 
of Moscow's young entrepreneurs' club. By this point she had dumped her Russian 
surname and was using the name Chapman, he told the Guardian. "She was an 
extremely talented businesswoman who specialised in start-ups," he said. "She 
was a genuine entrepreneur. She showed no interest in politics. She was someone 
who wanted to achieve her business targets, and said she planned to start an 
investment project in New York. How she ended up in the view of the US special 
services is a mystery."

Chapman's online real estate business www.domdot.ru was yesterday still up and 
running. Nobody answered the phone at its Moscow office. The portal offers a 
property search in 90 different regions of Russia and was highly successful, 
Porochkin said.

Chapman had intended to launch a similar online version in New York. She had 
also worked in banking in London, and for a hedge fund, Russian reports 
claimed. Other friends suggested that after frequent business trips she had 
moved to New York permanently only last year – camping out temporarily with her 
sister.
 