
The British connections of the alleged Russian spy, Anna Chapman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-chapman>, strengthened today when 
Barclays Bank confirmed that she had worked in its London office before moving 
to the United States.

Barclays had earlier denied knowledge of Chapman, who is accused by the FBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> along with 10 others of being part of 
a "deep cover" spy ring operating since the 1990s.

But after a more extensive search by the bank, a spokesman confirmed to the 
Guardian that an Anna Chapman did work in its small business banking division 
between 2004 and 2005.

On her LinkedIn profile <http://www.linkedin.com/in/chapmananna>, Chapman 
claimed she worked for the investment banking section.

The discrepancy helps explain why it took Barclays so long to confirm her 
employment history. It is also understood that she worked at Barclays for six 
months, not the year claimed on her profile.

Chapman's extensive online presence, including more than 90 photographs posted 
to Facebook and an apparently glamorous lifestyle as a property millionaire, 
has made her the focus of much of the media coverage of the case.

Earlier another British based company, the private plane hire firm NetJets 
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, confirmed that she 
worked in the UK, but not for as long as the CV claimed, or at such a senior 
level.

"Ms Chapman was employed by NetJets Europe from May to July 2004, as an 
executive assistant in the sales department," a spokesman said.

Her CV claims that she worked for a year at NetJets and was "primarily 
involved in selling private jets to companies and individuals in Russia".

A spokesman for the company said that he was "not aware" whether the company 
had been contacted by the FBI. He added that none of the current employees 
remembers working with Chapman. "It was six years ago, no one is talking about 
it," he said.

Chapman's CV also claimed that she worked for a hedge fund in London called 
Navigator.No record has yet emerged that such a fund existed 
<http://www.finalternatives.com/node/13004>, according to the specialist 
hedge-fund website, FINalternatives.

She is also said to have been married to a British citizen, but this has not 
been confirmed.

The Associated Press reported today that she was arrested in a New York police 
station after handing in her passport.

Chapman was arrested by the FBI along with nine others, including Tracey Lee 
Ann Foley, who allegedly held a fake British passport.

The ten accused were arrested in the US and charged with failing to register 
as foreign agents, a crime that is less serious than espionage, and which 
carries a sentence of up to five years in prison. Some also face money 
laundering charges.

An 11th suspect, Christopher Metsos, was arrested in Cyprus, accused of 
passing money to the other 10 over several years. To the surprise of the 
Cypriot police, he was released on bail.

The FBI moved in to break up the ring because one of the suspects – apparently 
Chapman – was thought to have been on the point of leaving the country, bound 
for Moscow, according to court papers.

At a federal court hearing on Monday in Manhattan, where Chapman was jailed 
without bail, her attorney described the case against her as weak.

He said she had visited the United States on and off since 2005 before 
settling in Manhattan to start a business.

Chapman apparently took an apartment near Wall Street and began using online 
social networks, including LinkedIn and Facebook, to develop business contacts 
and to market her skills.

On her LinkedIn page, she is listed as the chief executive officer of 
PropertyFinder Ltd, which maintains a website featuring real estate listings in 
Moscow, Spain, Bulgaria and other countries.

In court, Chapman's lawyer said the business was valued by his client at $2m 
(£1.3m).

In more than 90 photos posted on Facebook, Chapman is pictured in various 
countries, including Turkey, where she is in one of the rooms of the luxurious 
Hotel Les Ottomans in Istanbul.

There is also a photo of her posing with a glass of wine between two men at 
the Global Technology Symposium at Stanford University in March, which costs 
more than $1,000 to attend.

Details have been emerging of the other accused. One, Vicky Peláez, was a 
journalist for a Spanish-language newspaper in New York and earned about 
$50,000 a year, according to a court affidavit she filled out.

Another, Cynthia Murphy, reported an annual income of $135,000 as a financial 
planner, her affidavit says.

In Montclair, New Jersey, Murphy's neighbours said that they detected an 
accent. When they asked where she was from, she said Belgium.

"We're from a generation where everyone was afraid of the Red Menace, of 007 
and hiding under desks during drills – all of that stuff. There was real fear, 
so it's shocking to see something like this," said Alan Sokolow, a neighbour of 
Cynthia Murphy and her husband, Richard. "I can see it happening in the 
mid-1950s, but now, in 2010, it comes across as more comical, with the lo-tech 
stuff they said they were using."

The arrests raised suggestions that Moscow has planted other couples in the 
US. Federal prosecutor Michael Farbiarz said the allegations are "the tip of 
the iceberg" of a conspiracy by Russia's intelligence service, the SVR.

Yesterday, the foreign ministry in Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> said the charges were "baseless". 
Today, it took a more emollient tone. It said it had taken note of the White 
House's comments last night that the scandal should not derail US-Russian 
relations.

"We hope that the incident linked to the arrest of a group of people in the US 
on suspicion of spying for Russia will not have a negative impact on 
Russian-American relations," a Russian foreign ministry spokesman told the news 
agency Interfax. "We have taken note of thestatement given by the White House 
press secretary Robert Gibbs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/richard-adams-blog/2010/jun/29/russian-spy-ring-live-updates>
," the spokesman said.
 