
Anna Massey <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/anna-massey> was for a long 
time acknowledged and admired as the owner of the best fictional voice on BBC 
radio, and if you were lucky enough to meet her in person, then you would 
recognise that the voice was the woman: funny, warm, intelligent and lucid, 
with a sharp edge which very quietly but firmly kept you in line.

She and I were friends for 40 years, and if she hadn't died so soon, we 
intended to be friends for a great deal longer. In fact, when I think of 
friendship, I think of Anna: regular phone calls, very good jokes and steadfast 
loyalty.

She appeared in my first play, Slag. It had made a fair splash at Hampstead in 
1970 when I was just 23, but the following year the Royal Court theatre had a 
gap in its programme and decided to revive my hip little comedy, only with a 
starrier cast. Anna seemed to me the height of glamour. At the age of 17 she'd 
made her West End debut inThe Reluctant Debutante, and then become the go-to 
leading lady for HM Tennent. John Gielgud and Ralph Richardson had both acted 
with her. She was as familiar with TS Eliot as she was with Noël Coward. Anna's 
mother,Adrianne Allen <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adrianne_Allen>, who had 
played Sybil in the original production ofPrivate Lives, haunted the dressing 
rooms at the Royal Court, loudly declaring of my play to anyone who would 
listen, "It's just likeAngela Brazil 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Angela_Brazil> – only filthier."

Of course when I got to know Anna, I realised how much hurt her strange 
upbringing had caused her, not least because her father,Raymond Massey 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raymond_Massey>, had walked out when she was 
three. Because she'd been born into the higher showbusiness, she was immune to 
its charms, and never remotely susceptible to its dangers. The thing that 
bonded us immediately was our mutual love of gossip, which we both saw as 
evidence of proper human curiosity. How can you not be interested in talking 
about other people? But in a rehearsal room Anna was more nervous than any 
actor I ever met.

She fell upon our director, Max Stafford-Clark, because he was of a new 
generation, working for the first time in London, and she always said 
afterwards that he was the first person to give her acting structure. Max 
introduced her to the idea of exploration, and gave her some of the technique 
with which to do it. If you saw the scripts of her radio broadcasts, then the 
apparent fluency and ease which the listener so prized was achieved through the 
most exhausting preparation. I learnt quickly you couldn't take her out to 
dinner the night before. "I've got a radio tomorrow."

When, in 1985, I realised I could only direct King Lear in the Olivier theatre 
if I had some friends along – Roshan Seth, Anthony Hopkins, Bill Nighy and 
Suzanne Bertish were among the early recruits – then I never thought of anyone 
but Anna for the part of Goneril, although even by then, in spite of her 
brilliance in plays likeHeartbreak House and The Seagull, she'd already 
half-decided that the theatre represented more anxiety than it was worth. And 
by the time she met her wonderful Russian husband, Uri Andres, a few years 
later… well, thereafter there was simply no question of going out and wasting 
an evening acting.

It's hard for me to accept that Anna is dead because I'm always going to be 
that young man going down the King's Road in a group of four with Lynn Redgrave 
and Barbara Ferris on what I always remember as warm, sunny days, making our 
way from Sloane Square to a carefree lunch at Alvaro's. I've never since known 
a time so charged with promise. And nor, I think, did she. When she was in a 
hospice earlier this year, my wife, Nicole, wrote her a letter in which she 
said one of the best things about meeting me was that it meant that she'd 
thereby met Anna. Anna, on her deathbed, told her son David she'd received 
quite a few nice letters. I bet she did.

At her funeral in July, a priest, from Smithfield, I think, dared to say to 
the overflowing mourners that he knew that many of us were not devout, but did 
we really believe that someone who had once been so full of life was really now 
nothing but a pile of dust? It was an outrageous and provocative question, 
especially about a woman he'd never met. But he knew he'd get away with it 
because he could tell from the way everyone spoke that day, and behaved, that 
nobody could believe she'd been extinguished.
 