
In the summer of 1910 an English newspaper thrilled readers with a description 
of "the hundred or so spies, all trusted soldiers [who have] passed unnoticed 
into the country". Worse than that, said theDaily Mail, was the unmistakable 
ambition of a hostile European power to subvert our way of life: "Working in 
unison, each little group of two or three has been allocated its task and has 
studied the most rapid and effective means."

Sounds familiar ? Not for the last time, the Daily Mail was over-stimulating 
the blood pressure of middle England with a quasi-factual account of the 
imminent threat to national security.The Invasion of 1910 by William le Queux 
(pronounced Kew), a popular Edwardian novelist, even published maps to show 
where the Germans – the national foe – could be expected to invade next 
morning. It was an immediate bestseller and inspired scores of imitations. The 
British reading public has hovered on the edge of spy mania ever since.

Last week's headlines – "The Spy Who Loved Me" and "A Russian Spy at 
Annabel's" – are perhaps more plausibly connected to some kind of reality, but 
still seem every bit as farcical as the fabrications of Le Queux, who believed 
he was writing for "everyone who has the welfare of the British Empire at 
heart".

Island Britain will always be prey to insular paranoia, but our American 
cousins share an appetite for national jeopardy. The US may be a global 
superpower, but its instinctive, default position is the kind of isolationism 
that nourishes the "Red menace" and "Un-American Activities". The citizens of 
the Republic, who live in their "shining city on the hill", are just as 
vulnerable to scare stories about "spy rings", especially when the "spies" 
appear to take orders from Moscow.

A good spy story should hold up a mirror to contemporary society. Ian 
Fleming's 007 reflects the shameless and slightly desperate hedonism of postwar 
Britain. John le Carré's Smiley answers the introspective self-doubt of the 
tortured 1970s. For the internet age, these suburban Russian agents (and where 
is more suburban than Montclair, New Jersey?) are the spies next door. They 
grow hydrangeas! They hold barbecues! They're just like us! They're... the 
YouTube Spies! A lot of what glamorous Anna Chapman's colleagues allegedly got 
up to – "infiltrating" the neighbourhood and "going to cocktail parties and the 
PTA" – is what even the most slovenly middle-class English mum would regard as 
entry-level "networking" in a new neighbourhood.

The ordinariness of the YouTube Spies is wonderfully helpful in the 
international promotion of their story in the aftermath of exposure by theFBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi>, but there's something else at work 
here: the Anglo-American appetite for spy fiction, from Le Queux to Stieg 
Larsson. The effortless way in which newspapers on both sides of the Atlantic 
slipped into a jargon of "dead letter drops", "brush past" and "flash" 
meetings, references to "codewords" and all the hokey paraphernalia of the 
secret world illustrates the willing suspension of disbelief, a transition to a 
familiar landscape we have only recently, and perhaps reluctantly, learned to 
leave behind. After all, spy stories involving Russians enhance our sense of 
national importance. The British press has wasted no time in transforming 
Chapman into a Bond girl.

For almost 100 years after Le Queux, the British – and, to a lesser extent, 
the American – spy story became a literary genre in the antechamber of 
greatness. From Somerset Maugham's Ashenden, a tradition that takes in Buchan, 
Ambler, Greene, Fleming, Deighton and, lately, William Boyd, shabby dramas of 
compromise and treachery have been rehearsed in tales that have come to shape 
the way we interpret the world around us, even when that world has essentially 
changed beyond recognition. It's 21 years since the cold war ended, but the 
YouTube spies have been recruited to "work in little groups of two or three" to 
threaten the very fabric of our society. How fortunate for this version that 
Chapman's father should have been a "senior figure" in the KGB, placing us back 
on the front line between East and West.

Within this genre, there were always two currents, the romantic and the 
existential, which finally merged in the haunting, bleak majesty of the later 
Smiley novels. The romantic tended towards stirring tales of latter-day 
chivalry in exotic locations, as in the best of Buchan, Ambler and Fleming. The 
existential stressed the drab monotony of the secret world, as in the best of 
Maugham, Greene, Deighton and Le Carré.

Again, both strands were mirrored in real life. The truth about the British 
secret service is that you could hardly make it up. At least until the cold 
war, and possibly much later, espionage in Britain was a bizarre mixture of 
public school larks, cross-dressing fantasy andBoy's Own malarkey.

Founded in 1909, Britain's secret service was a mirror to an empire in crisis 
and decline. The paranoia ofMI5 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi5> and SIS 
became the expression of a failing power's swansong. In these fascinating 
twilight years, the security services attracted an extraordinary cast of 
improbable characters from the upper echelons of British society – novelists, 
barristers, journalists, actors, dons and adventurers. These English mavericks, 
who included Arthur Ransome, Graham Greene, Malcolm Muggeridge, Somerset 
Maugham, Muriel Spark and Compton Mackenzie, acted out their delusions of 
national defence in plots and strategies that were, frankly, fantastic.

But after more than a century of empire, Britain was indeed confronted by 
ideological enemies, first German, then Russian, equally committed to 
conducting secret wars, military and psychological. The upshot: an 
extraordinary tangle of myth, make-believe and melodrama, deception and 
derring-do. During the second world war, signing off on one particularly 
elaborate espionage operation, Winston Churchill observed: "In the higher 
ranges of Secret Service work, the actual facts of many cases were in every 
respect equal to the most fantastic inventions of romance and melodrama."

Amid the farcical, but compelling, antics of the protagonists of Agent Zigzag 
and Operation Mincemeat, lately retold with bestselling brio byTimes journalist 
Ben Macintyre, one story was, in Greene's words, "far more gripping than any 
novel of espionage". This was existential, it was bleak, and it was largely 
fought in the no man's land of the secret state (many men died). This was the 
true story of the Cambridge Five – Burgess, Blunt, Philby, Maclean and 
Cairncross. "Kim" Philby, of course, was formerly a correspondent of theObserver
, the paper that, in 1967, with theSunday Times, published the reports that 
precipitated the publication of Philby's masterpiece,My Silent War.

To open any page of this chilling record of deceit is to taste the poison of 
treachery in its purest, most evil, form. Even Greene, who was Philby's friend, 
quailed before Philby's "chilling certainty in the correctness of his judgment, 
the logical fanaticism of a man who, having once found a faith, is not going to 
lose it because of the injustices or cruelties inflicted by erring human 
instruments".

Does this remind us of the YouTube Spies ? Hardly. With their Tupperware, 
hydrangeas and cosy rendezvous in Starbucks, Chapman and her associates display 
no "logical fanaticism", however the press tries to suggest to the contrary.

No, Greene's words summon up the infinitely more terrifying forces of another 
fanaticism: al-Qaida, Muslim extremists and the worldwide jihad, all the more 
terrifying because it derives from a faith and culture of which we have 
virtually no understanding. If there is a secret war being fought today, it's 
not by soccer mums in the leafy suburbs of Arlington, Virginia, but suicide 
bombers in the alleys of Karachi or sleepers in deprived parts of Bradford and 
Leeds.

Ironically, the one party to this crisis who seems to have the measure of 
what's happening is the SVR, heir of the KGB. The Russians who, having 
protested at the FBI's propaganda as "baseless and improper", then expressed 
the hope that the crisis would not reverse "all the positive gains" recently 
made by the Obama administration. Eventually it was left to a US state 
department official to give the best summary. "We're moving towards a more 
trusting relationship," said Philip Gordon, assistant secretary for European 
affairs. "We're beyond the cold war."
 