
The youngest and most glamorous of Russia's 10 self-confessed spies, Anna 
Chapman <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-chapman>, triggered the FBI 
swoop when she made an anxious phone call to her father in Moscow saying she 
was worried that her cover had been blown.

Chapman's call, together with a planned trip to Moscow by another spy, Richard 
Murphy, prompted US law enforcement officials to end months of covert 
surveillance on 27 June by arresting the 10 spies, prompting the biggest 
international espionage furore since the end of the Cold War.

A red-headed former Barclays Bank employee who holds British citizenship, 
Chapman became suspicious when anFBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> 
officer, posing as a Russian consular officer named "Roman", summoned her to a 
meeting on 26 June in New York, gave her a fake passport and asked her to pass 
it on to another purported spy.

Apparently unconvinced by the FBI officer, Chapman went directly from the 
meeting to a Verizon telecoms store, where she bought a pay-as-you-go Motorola 
phone. Her lawyer, Robert Baum, has revealed that she called her father, an 
intelligence officer in Moscow, who told her to hand the passport to the police 
– which she did, at a police station prompting the FBI to arrest her.

At about the same time, New Jersey-based Richard Murphy, a father-of-two whose 
real name is Vladimir Guryev (married to a fellow spy, Lydia Guryev), was due 
to fly to Russia for a meeting. Speaking on CBS television yesterday, the US 
attorney-general, Eric Holder, said the FBI moved in because "one of the 
husbands of one of the couples was in the process ofgoing to France and then on 
his way toRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and the concern was 
that if we let him go, we would not be able to get him back".

Holder also said that all of the spies' children, other than those old enough 
to decide to stay in the US, had been "repatriated" to join their parents. He 
said the spies had not succeeded in passing any "classified information" to 
Moscow and added that the decision to swap them for four people jailed in 
Russia as western spies was to benefit both the US and Britain.

"These are people, as I said, who have been charged with intelligence 
activities in Russia and in whom we had a great deal of interest, as well as 
England, and we have gotten those people back," said Holder.

The international spy exchange between the US and Russia was a good deal – 
even if America had to wave goodbye to red-haired tabloid favourite Chapman, 
the US vice-president, Joe Biden, quipped on a late-night television chat show. 
Holding up a picture of her, comedian Jay Leno asked the vice-president: "Do we 
have any spies that hot?" Biden jokingly replied: : "Let me be clear. It wasn't 
my idea to send her back. I thought maybe they'd take [rightwing polemicist] 
Rush Limbaughor something. That would've been a good move."
 