


It may be a long time before Anna Chapman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-chapman> sees Weybridge again.

The spy whose attractive photographs and marriage to a British trainee 
psychologist from Bournemouth propelled her onto the front pages when she was 
arrested by the FBI last month in the US, has had her British passport revoked.

Theresa May, the home secretary, rather disappointingly for the media, decided 
today that her return to Britain would not be in the public interest.

A letter telling Chapman – whose birth name is Kushchenko – that her British 
passport is no longer valid was handed to her in Moscow by embassy staff after 
she was returned to her homeland last week in the biggest spy swap since the 
cold war.

Chapman's US lawyer had said the 28-year-old, formerly married to a British 
man and resident in London, would like to return to the UK in the future.

The Russian diplomat's daughter was exchanged along with nine other Russian 
agents for four western agents in a spy swap on the tarmac at Vienna airport 
after pleading guilty in a Manhattan court to conspiracy to act as an 
unregistered agent of a foreign country.

Prosecutors claimed she had used a specially configured laptop computer to 
transmit messages to the computer of an unnamed Russian official.

She was arrested at a New York police department precinct after turning in a 
false passport given to her by an undercover FBI agent. Other members of the 
spy ring apparently sent information from the US back to Moscow using invisible 
ink, false passports and code words.

Chapman lived in Britain for four years before moving to the US in 2006. Her 
activities in the UK included working in the small business banking division of 
Barclays Bank between 2004 and 2005.

She was married for a time to Alex Chapman, who has spoken of how he believes 
she grew cold towards him because she was being conditioned by the KGB.

Her former father-in-law, Kevin Chapman, a mortgage adviser from Weybridge, 
where she stayed for some weeks after getting married, told the Daily Mail last 
week: "She's simply not some Mata Hari, she can't be … she's just an ordinary 
girl. I'm convinced it wasn't a honey trap. They were so much in love. It just 
doesn't add up. She was a very pleasing daughter-in-law and they were talking 
about having kids. I don't know why they split up. If she was being groomed by 
the KGB, you would have thought they would have set her up a bit better … they 
didn't give her a very good expense account."
 