
Lestat, the blood-sucking anti-hero who made his first appearance in Interview 
with the Vampire almost 40 years ago and was played by Tom Cruise in the 1994 
film, is set to return, authorAnne Rice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/annerice> has announced.

To a chorus of delight from fans – Vampire Bibliographica called it "the most 
enticingly delicious news of the decade 
<http://www.vampirebibliographica.com/news/the-most-enticingly-delicious-news-of-the-decade/>
" – Rice revealed that her next novel would be called Prince Lestat, and would 
update readers on her most famous creation, whom she refers to as the "Brat 
Prince", and his latest doings.

The new book would be "a big Vampire Chronicle," she told The Dinner Party 
Show,an internet show co-hosted by her son Christopher Rice 
<https://www.facebook.com/TheDinnerPartyShow>. "It is all about Lestat and all 
about the vampires, and what they are doing right now, how they are coming to 
terms with everything that's happened to them, how Lestat is dealing with the 
demand from all side that he steps forward and becomes some sort of leader of 
the tribe."

"I just cried! And squealed! And generally completely freaked my family out! 
Thank you, Anne! Thank you, thank you, thank you! I have missed Lestat so!" 
wrote one fan on Rice's Facebook page. "Take your Throne back, Mrs Rice! Remind 
the current vampire novelists what a real vampire book is all about," said 
another.

Rice, who published Interview with the Vampire to huge success in 1976, has 
previously spoken dismissively of the vampires dreamed up by Stephenie Meyer 
for Twilight, saying she "feel[s] sorry for vampires that sparkle in the sun", 
and that Lestat "would never hurt immortals who choose to spend eternity going 
to high school over and over again in a small town – any more than they would 
hurt the physically disabled or the mentally challenged". In her novel The 
Vampire Lestat, the character says: "I'm Gentleman Death in silk and lace, come 
to put out the candles. The canker in the heart of the rose." "My vampires 
possess gravitas. They can afford to be merciful," Rice said in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/31/anne-rice-stephenie-meyer-vampires>
.

Prince Lestat, which will be published in October, and which Rice finished 
last year, will be a sequel to the first five Vampire Chronicles stories, she 
announced, and novel one of a new series. "I'm very happy to announce it 
because it took me a very long time to write this," said the author. "I had to 
read all the Vampire Chronicles over again and I had to kind of … I don't want 
to be irritating or pretentious talking about a character as if he's a real 
human being, but I really had to wrestle Lestat to the ground, and beat him up, 
and say 'look, you've got to talk to me, I've got to know what you've been 
doing'. Because I can't really write novels about that character unless he 
wants to come through, and it really is like he's a living breathing being 
somewhere, and suddenly he did, he came through, and he started to talk and I 
was taking the dictation, and everything went splendidly well and it was very 
exciting."

Rice had thought she would never write about Lestat again – she hasn't tackled 
the world of vampires since 2003's Blood Canticle. But then she "finally had a 
novel to write, a story to tell with him, and I had his voice again with me … 
and it happened. I couldn't make that happen, I couldn't force that, I couldn't 
pull it out of a hat like a rabbit," she said.
 