
Twelve years after she converted to Christianity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity> from atheism, bestselling 
author Anne Rice has "quit being a Christian" because of the religion's 
attitude to birth control, homosexuality and science.

In a message posted on her Facebook page 
<http://www.facebook.com/annericefanpage?v=wall&story_fbid=129786343731298&ref=mf#!/annericefanpage?v=wall&ref=mf>
, Rice said she was "out". "In the name of Christ, I refuse to be anti-gay. I 
refuse to be anti-feminist. I refuse to be anti-artificial birth control. I 
refuse to be anti-Democrat. I refuse to be anti-secular humanism. I refuse to 
be anti-science. I refuse to be anti-life. In the name of Christ, I quit 
Christianity and being Christian. Amen," the author wrote.

An atheist for decades, Rice returned to her childhood faith of Catholicism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/catholicism> in 1998. The author of a series 
of bestselling books about the vampire Lestat – brought to the screen by Tom 
Cruise in the film Interview with the Vampire – her conversion caused 
consternation among her old fans, while Christians questioned the morality of 
her vampire books.

In a 2007 essay <http://www.annerice.com/Bookshelf-EarlierWorks.html>, Rice 
answered her critics, saying that she saw her earlier novels as part of a long 
tradition of "transformative" dark fiction, from Dante's Inferno to Hamlet and 
Macbeth. "I feel strongly that dark stories demand that the audience earn the 
transformation; they require a certain suffering on the part of the audience as 
the price of eventual affirmation," Rice wrote.

"I would like to submit that my vampire novels and other novels I've written 
... are attempting to be transformative stories as well. All these novels 
involve a strong moral compass. Evil is never glorified in these books; on the 
contrary, the continuing battle against evil is the subject of the work. The 
search for the good is the subject of the work. [They] are not immoral works. 
They are not Satanic works. They are not demonic works. These are uninformed 
and unfair characterisations of these books, and this situation causes me deep 
personal pain."

In 2002 the author "consecrated her writing entirely to Christ, vowing to 
write for Him or about Him". She began to write novels about the life of 
Christ, completing Christ the Lord: Out of Egypt in 2005, and publishing Christ 
the Lord: The Road to Cana in 2008 when she also released the memoir Called Out 
of Darkness: A Spiritual Confession, about her conversion at the age of 57. She 
is currently writing a series about angels, in which a contract killer is 
recruited by a seraph.

Rice posted on Tuesday revealing her distress about a news story in which an 
American "punk rock ministry" said that"executing gays is 'moral'" 
<http://minnesotaindependent.com/58393/gop-linked-punk-rock-ministry-says-executing-gays-is-moral>
. "The bottom line is this … they [homosexuals] play the victim when they are, 
in fact, the predator," the Minnesota Independent - linked to by Rice - quoted 
the frontman of ministry You Can Run But You Cannot Hide as saying. "On 
average, they molest 117 people before they're found out. How many kids have 
been destroyed, how many adults have been destroyed because of crimes against 
nature?"

Rice was horrified. "No wonder people despise us, Christians, and think we are 
an ignorant and violent lot. I don't blame them. This kind of thing makes me 
weep. Maybe commitment to Christ means not being a Christian," she said.

Later that day, she linked to a report about the Westboro baptist church in 
Kansas 
<http://abcnews.go.com/2020/raised-hate-kids-westboro-baptist-church/story?id=10809348>
, which "spreads the message that because the United States condones 
homosexuality, abortion and divorce, all Americans are going to hell", 
according to the story.

"This is chilling. I wish I could say this is inexplicable. But it's not. 
That's the horror. Given the history of Christianity, this is not inexplicable 
at all," Rice wrote, pointing to Gandhi's statement: "I like your Christ, I do 
not like your Christians. Your Christians are so unlike your Christ."

"When does a word (Christian) become unusable?" she asked. "When does it 
become so burdened with history and horror that it cannot be evoked without 
destructive controversy?"

The next day, Rice announced her decision to "quit being a Christian" – a 
comment "liked" on Facebook by almost 2,000 people. "I remain committed to 
Christ as always but not to being 'Christian' or to being part of 
Christianity," she said. "It's simply impossible for me to 'belong' to this 
quarrelsome, hostile, disputatious, and deservedly infamous group. For 10 
years, I've tried. I've failed. I'm an outsider. My conscience will allow 
nothing else."

Yesterday, the author reiterated that her faith in Christ was "central" to her 
life. "My conversion from a pessimistic atheist lost in a world I didn't 
understand to an optimistic believer in a universe created and sustained by a 
loving God is crucial to me," she said. "But following Christ does not mean 
following His followers. Christ is infinitely more important than Christianity 
and always will be, no matter what Christianity is, has been, or might become."
 