
When director and screenwriter Anthony Minghella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthonyminghella> accepted one of The English 
Patient's nine Oscars at the Academy Awards in 1997, he held it aloft and 
proclaimed: "This is a great day for the Isle of Wight." This weekend, a year 
after his death, that same isle is to play host to a festival organised by 
Minghella's close relatives that will pay a personal tribute to to the 
director's impact both on, and off, the screen.

The Minghella Movie Marathon <http://www.minghellafilmfestival.com/> will show 
seven features between tomorrow night and Sunday, introduced by family members 
and former colleagues, with the support of local businesses and the Young 
Chamber charity for young entrepreneurs. Behind-the-scenes documentaries and 
talks are also scheduled for the event, which begins with Minghella's first 
feature film, Truly, Madly, Deeply, to be hosted by the director's sister Gioia 
Minghella and introduced by stars Alan Rickman and Michael Maloney.

Gioia, who is also the director of the festival, said: "In a way, it was 
Anthony's idea to have a film festival on the Isle of Wight. He and I discussed 
it over quite a long period, but somehow, the time was never right for me to 
move it forward – something I deeply regret now. It would have been marvellous 
to do this with him at our side."

Jude Law <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jude-law> and trumpeting legend 
Guy Barker will also be in attendance, to introduce a screening of the 
Bafta-winning film The Talented Mr Ripley on Saturday. On the same day, Law 
will host a sold-out intimate audience following a screening of the 
documentary, Climbing Cold Mountain.

"One thing that motivated me [to create the festival] was a desire to gain a 
sense of his extraordinary artistic achievement," said Gioia. "As Anthony often 
remarked, cinema's evanescence as an art form is a part of its beauty. It's 
quite rare these days to be able to see old films on the big screen, in the way 
they were intended to be seen."

All the screenings will take place at two cinemas and an arts centre in 
Newport – relatively small-capacity venues given the stars in attendance. 
Casting director Reg Poerscout-Edgerton, who has recently worked on Guy 
Ritchie's Sherlock Holmes, will be discussing Breaking and Entering with actor 
Martin Freeman. Poerscout-Edgerton cut his teeth on Minghella's films: "I 
mainly saw Anthony off set. He knew what he liked and he listened to ideas. He 
could talk to a group of people and somehow make you feel like he was talking 
just to you. I never saw him lose his temper or say a bad thing about anyone. 
People just wanted to work with him and do their best for him."

Though the festival will be welcomed by the hordes of people who admired his 
work, it is more than a mere retrospective for Minghella's family, who are 
still coping with his sudden death after cancer-related surgery on 18 March 
last year. His niece, Lillie Jeffrey, said: "Organising the festival has been 
very good for us all, and we have found such a positive focus for such a sad 
time. We're glad to be able to mark this first anniversary with an event that 
celebrates him, that feels personal but inclusive, and will allow us to help 
some of the causes Anthony believed in."

There are plans to establish a regular annual event in honour of the director 
to focus on young film-makers. "My brother was the least solemn of men and he 
would have wanted us to be happy but needless to say, that hasn't always been 
easy in the last year," Gioia said. "But we're trying to move forward and I 
think he'd be delighted to know we're remembering him with pride here on the 
island he loved."
 