
The former owner of a Florida medical clinic who posed as a doctor and 
illegally supplied steroid injections and other performance-enhancing drugs to 
professional baseball players and even high school athletes was sentenced 
Tuesday to four years in federal prison.

Anthony Bosch – who choked back tears in court and said the clinic was a 
legitimate business gone awry – sought a more lenient term because of his 
cooperation in the investigation, but US District Judge Darrin Gayles refused.

“This defendant was the most culpable in this conspiracy,” the judge said.

Prosecutors said Bosch could still get his sentence reduced through further 
cooperation, including potential trial testimony.

Gayles said Bosch falsely held himself out as a licensed medical doctor at his 
Biogenesis of America clinic, where he accepted thousands of dollars a month to 
provide steroid injections to players such as New York Yankees starAlex 
Rodriguez <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-rodriguez> and Ryan Braun of 
the Milwaukee Brewers. Most troubling, Gayles said, was Bosch’s injections of 
high school players in the Miami area.

“He was the mastermind,” Gayles said. “He was the one who recruited others to 
assist him.”

Bosch, 51, pleaded guilty in October to conspiracy to distribute testosterone, 
the sixth person charged in the Biogenesis case to do so. Bosch and Rodriguez 
are expected to testify if the last two defendants – Rodriguez cousin Yuri 
Sucart and ex-University of Miami pitching coach Lazaro Collazo – go to trial 
as scheduled in early April.

MLB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb> imposed a record season-long 
suspension last year on Rodriguez, one of 14 players penalized in the scandal. 
The Yankees say Rodriguez, 39, is no longer their third baseman and will have a 
chance to earn at-bats as a designated hitter.

MLB spokesman Pat Courtney declined to comment.

Bosch, who has been undergoing treatment for cocaine addiction since his 
guilty plea, was joined by more than two dozen friends and family members at 
his sentencing hearing.

“I’m ashamed of myself. I’m remorseful,” Bosch said. “I can’t put into words 
how sorry I am.”

But Assistant US Attorney Michael Sullivan said that rather than help people 
with medical problems, Bosch’s main goal was to rake in money by illegally 
making the athletes “bigger, stronger and faster ballplayers.” Bosch liked to 
call himself “Dr. T,” according to court records.

“He was not a legitimate doctor. He wasn’t treating an illness. He wasn’t 
treating a disease,” Sullivan said.

Bosch lawyer Guy Lewis, a former US attorney in Miami, said that without his 
cooperation, MLB would not have had sufficient evidence to sustain Rodriguez’s 
suspension. Lewis said Bosch has met dozens of times with U.S. Drug Enforcement 
Administration agents and helped prosecutors pore over thousands of pages of 
documents.

That cooperation, Lewis added, came despite threats from unnamed people 
warning Bosch to keep his mouth shut, forcing him to hire security services and 
move to several different locations. Bosch was also offered $150,000 to flee to 
Colombia and “lay low,” but he did not, Lewis said.

“Mr. Bosch has cooperated thoroughly and extensively,” Lewis said. “He was 
truthful. He was reliable.”

But Gayles refused Lewis’ request that Bosch receive a lighter sentence of 
just under three years.
 