
The Labor frontbencher Anthony Albanese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/anthony-albanese> has flagged his 
support for voluntary euthanasia, arguing the wishes of dying people should be 
respected.


Albanese told Sky News on Tuesday he had made his views known publicly 20 
years ago during the parliamentary debate about a bill banning the ACT and the 
Northern Territory from legislating on the issue, and he remained a supporter 
of assisted dying.

The Labor frontbencher said he supported voluntary euthanasia because when 
someone was at the point of death, and they were prepared to make that 
decision, then the law needed to “respect their personal wishes”.

“I’m a supporter of voluntary euthanasia,” Albanese said, adding that any 
change to the law should always be the subject of a conscience vote, and any 
legal regime should have proper safeguards to ensure the interests of dying 
people were properly protected.

Bob Hawke calls for euthanasia to be made legal in Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/12/bob-hawke-calls-for-euthanasia-to-be-made-legal-in-australia>
His comments come before an address to the National Press Club on Wednesday by 
the broadcaster and television producer Andrew Denton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/24/andrew-denton-the-one-argument-stopping-australia-from-legalising-assisted-dying-is-implausible>
 on assisted dying. Albanese said he intended to attend the Denton address.

Denton has spent the past couple of years campaigning for an assisted dying 
regime. He argued ina speech late last year 
<http://www.wheelercentre.com/notes/an-argument-for-assisted-dying-in-australia-andrew-denton-s-di-gribble-argument-in-full>
 that assisted dying was already happening in Australia but no one knew to what 
extent, “or whether it’s being done well, or for the right reasons, or with the 
consent of patients – as they do overseas – because the absence of a law here 
means we have no guidelines, no reporting mechanisms and no system of review”.

“All we have is doctors doing what they believe is best, depending on their 
moral view of the universe,” the broadcaster said.

Earlier this year, members of a cross-party federal parliamentary working 
group also telegraphed their intention to bring forward a bill overturning the 
ban on voluntary euthanasia that was legislated in the Howard era courtesy of a 
private member’s bill brought forward by Kevin Andrews.

The cross-party bill was introduced in early March but it did not progress to 
the stage of substantive debate. The bill, which was co-sponsored by the Labor 
senator Katy Gallagher and the Greens leader, Richard Di Natale, lapsed when 
the parliament was prorogued.

It is not clear whether or not the bill will be reintroduced when the new 
parliament resumes later this month, but the issue is likely to come back on 
the political agenda given there is residual support for change across party 
lines.
 