



A piece of music composed by Anthony Burgess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthonyburgess> has been discovered among 
the belongings of a woman to whom he dedicated it more than 60 years ago.

Burgess, who died in 1993, is best-known for his savage social satire A 
Clockwork Orange. But as well as a novelist, he was also a prolific, though 
less successful, composer.

The song that has come to light is a five-page musical setting of 
Shakespeare’s Sonnet 116 about enduring love, which begins: “Let me not to the 
marriage of true minds/Admit impediments.” It was discovered by chance: John 
Beck, an artist, found it among possessions of his late wife, Barbara, 
nicknamed “Boo”, to whom it was dedicated in 1951.

The nature of her relationship with Burgess is unclear. In the early 1950s, 
they were neighbours in Oxfordshire when Burgess was teaching English at 
Banbury. Beck recalled that they were certainly “friends”.

Burgess was drawn to Barbara Beck through their love of music. While she was a 
singer, his first wife, Lynne, was tone deaf and loathed music with a passion. 
Burgess recalled in his autobiography that, whenever he played the piano, she 
feigned a coughing-fit and fled the room.

Beck obviously treasured the score, wrapping it around a harmonica that 
Burgess played and composed for, and both bear his proper initials JBW (John 
Burgess Wilson); he adopted Anthony Burgess as a pseudonym.

Professor Andrew Biswell, Burgess’s biographer, described the discovery as 
“very exciting”. He said it was unclear why Burgess chose such a romantic 
sonnet for Beck, “because it speaks of a very close friendship with someone 
else’s wife and it’s a sonnet about the marriage of two minds”.

Biswell said he considered the relationship to be one “that can exist beyond 
marriage”, and it was not him to say whether is was sexual. “But certainly 
[musically] there’s a very passionate declaration … in this piece.”

Biswell is the head of the International Anthony Burgess Foundation, an 
educational charity in Manchester, and the musical manuscript has become part 
of its extensive archive.

Burgess was inspired by Shakespeare, writing a novel, a biography and a ballet 
about him, as well as setting three other sonnets to music. Biswell describes 
Burgess as “a novelist of Dickensian or Tolstoyian stature” as well as “a very 
good composer”, something about which there is growing acknowledgement.

The foundation will be premiering the song on 26 November, in a performance by 
soprano Zoë Milton-Brown and pianist Ben Powell.

Music was in Burgess’s blood: his mother was a singer and dancer, his father a 
pianist in music halls and silent cinemas. Biswell said that, although 
self-taught, Burgess was a musician before a novelist: “[Before] he’d published 
his first novel, he’d written two symphonies and various chamber pieces … It 
was only because he’d [not found] an audience for his music that he became 
interested in writing.”

In 1991, Burgess wrote: “I wish people would think of me as a musician who 
writes novels, instead of as a novelist who writes music on the side.” He was 
also a man of letters and a former literary critic for both the Guardian and 
the Observer.

• This article was amended on 25 November 2014. An earlier version described 
John Beck as a 100-year-old artist. Beck died earlier this year, aged 99.
 