
The Association of Online Publishers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aop> 
had so many subscribers to its video forum it had to find a bigger venue, which 
tells half the story. These AOP forums have a very commercial focus, so the 
discussion was really about how to make money out of all this.

The end of the 30-second ad

ROO Group executive director Robin Smyth had some pretty solid basic tips on 
incorporating video: add mini players within the site, embedded video in the 
site (that means not having a pop-up media player, like the iPlayer...), having 
a simple content management system, good marketing, a user content element and 
focusing on live events.

Smyth said the user attention span for web video had increased from 4.5 
minutes in December 2004 to 25 minutes now, and that's up to as many as nine 
clips. The growth of broadband connectivity, better user interfaces and more 
compelling content has driven this increase in web video use and there's no 
doubt, he said, that the internet will become accepted as the largest 
broadcasting platform in the world.

Smyth used some fairly in-your-face examples of advertiser-sponsored channels 
in the US including one for the NFL and one sponsored by General Motors. ROO, 
who have hadplenty of press 
<http://media.theguardian.com/newmedia/story/0,,2007694,00.html> recently, have 
a web video package that has done very well recently, thank you very much. 
Times Online and Mirror Group Newspapers are just two clients.

Thirty second ads made for TV just don't work online. That's the consensus.

ROO uses pre, mid and post-roll ads, as well as related display adverts around 
the player that extend the message. A 10-15 second video ad with banners 
alongside was very effective, he said.

"Move into video sooner rather than later, make sure you understand what your 
audience wants and that you deliver that. Otherwise you'll have to try and win 
back your audience later on."

Yahoo: Web video publishers must self-regulate

Yahoo Europe's video product manager Matt West mapped out the extremes of the 
online video market with the Wild West of YouTube and its' copyright 
infringement at one end and the editorially-controlled, closed video channels 
at the other. It's the latter end of the market that appeals to advertisers, 
who want control over their message and where their content appears.

US video ad revenues in 2006 were just over half a percent of all TV ad 
budgets, so there's still some way to go.

Again, Yahoo looks at pre, mid and post-roll video ads alongside branded 
channels, but West also referred to the EU's much-discussed Television 
Frontiers directive. It is likely, he said, that TV ad regulation could be 
extended to cover web ads and that publishers should rep-empt that.

"We need to self-regulate before that applies to ourselves".

Advertising: "We are at a tipping point"

Ad creative Simon Cam from Superglue said he has to try and convince companies 
to invest a bit more in exploring web video, rather than slapping linear 
30-second TV ads online. It's a totally different dynamic and that's because of 
the interactivity. He even got to quote Confucius, like a line from one of 
those Pocket Books of Media Wisdom you might find in an interesting toilet: "I 
hear and I forget. I see and I remember. I do and I understand."

"With digital," he said, "brands can get off their soapbox and mingle. There's 
a shift from an almost paternal handing-down of that finished, edited message 
to brands getting more involved with consumers."

He played four examples of ads by Superglue which involved simple interaction. 
The Coke boybands ad asked the viewer to click on each boyband member to see 
them disappear into something like a fiery pit of hell, and the Mini overboost 
ad invited the user to press the accelerator to see the effects of its new 
Gforce-inducing turbo charge. More entertaining than it sounds.

"We're now at a tipping point in terms of what we can do with video 
advertising online," said Cam.

"The link between agencies and the tech companies that put this stuff on the 
pages will be key to moving the industry forward. We've only scratched the 
surface as far as online interactivity goes."

VNU's investment in audio and video production

VNU has been through something of a transformation after being bought by 
Incisive Media. The newly merged company base has a rather impressive 
four-piece sound studio and though the studios are used around 30% of the time 
at the moment, the publisher plans to expand its audio and video output 
significantly.

Publishing director Duncan Tickell said the financial case for the six-figure 
investment in its own production facilities was already sound: VNU had already 
been spending money on producing a range of audio and video podcasts.

It's cheaper to use your own equipment, and also means they have the 
facilities on site to develop more service on top of the business club 
discussions and specialist IT/financial audio and video they already produce.

'We invested because we wanted the new audio and video to be editorially led, 
and not just sponsor-led," he said.

It's worth noting that VNU isn't recruiting new journalists for all this new 
audio and video, but retraining its print journalists.

"Fortunately the teams have seen it as a challenge and something new, rather 
than a burden," he said. "It's a collaboration, rather than something that has 
been enforced on staff like it has at other publishers."

He admitted that the revenue model isn't exactly there yet, but that is what 
the users want.

"We recognise the opportunity to connect more deeply and engage with readers. 
We feel that's the way things are going and we want to be there to leverage 
that, and underline our position as a leader in that space."
 