
Content, Convergence and Creativity are the 3Cs of the AOP 3C summit at 
Islington's Business Design Centre, London.

The global editor of multimedia at Reuters, Chris Cramer, with more than 40 
years of experience in international broadcasting said: "In reality media never 
were the gatekeepers of news.

"Against the hysteria about the future of news provision, the real reason to 
worry was exhibited by the Pew study: The level of trust in US media is the 
lowest in 20 years. And trust is still very important for media.

"People will consume trustful and intelligent information that matters, but we 
have to get used to the fact, that we deal with real-time journalism today.

"These days journalists rarely break the story, most compelling pictures come 
from eyewitnesses, and not from journalists. Curating news is as important as 
news gathering, because citizen journalism is not a fad or an intriguing 
addition to traditional journalism, but here to stay. Social media is the news 
gathering of the first resort, he said, but must be checked and checked again. 
Passive audiences are gone forever. Today, media owners need to embrace the 
'digital conversation' with their new, activist, audiences." 

How your information can gain more online intelligence, was the question posed 
by Shawn Colo of Demand Media. He suggested, that companies should stop 
spending so much on search engine marketing. Instead they should take that 
money and invest it in the production of great content, because good content 
will lead to repeat visits.

In a time that Facebook would be the 4th biggest country in the world, social 
optimisation, the direct and targeted connection with users, is as important as 
search optimisation.

And it might become even more relevant, he explained, because targeted groups 
of users might become very important in advertisements – and therefore for the 
revenue stream of publishers. Although online advertisements just revealed some 
amazing figures, it still has to catch up: Newspapers get 7% of our time, Colo 
explained, but 20% of the money spend on advertisements. So consumers, he 
concluded, are ahead of their time, with the internet getting 25% of their 
media time but only 8% of the money spend on advertisements.

Luke Johnson, the chairman of Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4>, opened the morning with a call to 
look forward to the digital future, explaining that history has shown 
pessimists have always been on the losing side. He insisted that – especially 
in a recession – there is a potential for change, although these were times of 
lower margins and more media fragmentation and an urgent need to invest. But 
developments like the iPhone applications can help to revive the spirit of 
invention. 

Debating online revenue, David Gilbertson of Emap, part-owned by the Guardian 
Media Group <https://www.theguardian.com/media/guardianmediagroup>, said: "You 
can't charge much for information and news but you can charge a lot for 
business intelligence.

"Publishers need a sustainable uniqueness of content or an actual 
differentiation, that the user values. Does your information affect the 
customers' business? Is your information a must have or a nice to have? These 
questions are important to ask.

"If your information is intelligent enough, it must be consumed at work. If 
not, you can consume it at home – and nobody will pay for it. Print products 
therefore have to face a cultural challenge and deliver an online intelligence 
in a way online-originated businesses don't." 

 