
The Apec summit <https://www.theguardian.com/world/apec-summit> has endorsed a 
Beijing-backed route towards a vast free trade area in the region, its host Xi 
Jinping said on Tuesday, calling it a “historic” step.

The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation meeting also saw a flurry of diplomatic 
activity, with Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin – often criticised by the 
west – meeting his US counterpart,Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>, and, separately, the 
Australian prime minister, Tony Abbott.

A day earlier Xi had met Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/10/xi-jinping-shinzo-abe-ice-breaking-meeting-apec-starts>
, in the first formal leaders’ meeting for nearly three years between the Asian 
neighbours, who have an often difficult relationship.

China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> has been keen to underscore 
its rising trade and diplomatic clout during the summit, at a lakeside venue 
north of the Chinese capital, and Xi said the bloc had “approved the roadmap 
for Apec to promote and realise the Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific”.

He called it a historic step reflecting the “confidence and commitment of Apec 
members to promote the integration of the regional economy”, and symbolising 
“the official launch of the process towards the FTAAP”.

The FTAAP would build on other initiatives including the smaller US-backed 
Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), but China’s firm advocacy of the plan over TPP 
has added to Sino-US trade rivalry.

Besides accounting for more than 50% of global gross domestic product, the 
21-member Apec also makes up nearly half of world trade and 40% of the 
population on Earth.

Obama, Xi and Abe respectively lead the world’s three biggest economies, while 
Russia is a powerful player in energy exports whose annexation of Crimea and 
support for Ukrainian rebels have sent relations with the United States into a 
tailspin, with the west imposing sanctions on Moscow.

But Obama held talks of about 15-20 minutes with Putin, according to the White 
House, with their conversations covering Iran, Syria and Ukraine.

The Russian leader also held a bilateral meeting with Abbott, who has publicly 
declared his fury at the downing of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 over eastern 
Ukraine, killing 298 people including 38 Australian citizens and residents.

Abbott’s office underlined that evidence suggested a Russian-supplied missile 
from a launcher that was then returned to Russian territory was responsible, 
labelling it “a very serious matter”.

For its part China is embroiled in territorial and historical disputes with 
Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, but Abe stressed cooperation 
with Beijing after the summit, calling for the neighbours to press ahead with 
tentative efforts to put their deep hostility behind them after he met Xi.

“Japan and China, we need each other. We are in a way inseparably bound with 
each other,” Abe told reporters. “Japan and China both have responsibility for 
peace and prosperity of the region and of the world.”

Washington has been pushing the TPP, which aims for a loosening of trade 
restrictions and embraces 11 other Pacific Rim countries including Japan, 
Canada, Australia and Mexico, while notably excluding China.

Some Chinese analysts and state media have framed the TPP as an attempt to 
check Beijing’s growing economic clout – allegations Washington dismisses.

At the meeting Obama himself praised China for focusing attention on Apec’s 
role in eventually achieving the FTAAP, first proposed in 2006, but also 
reiterated the US priority was the smaller TPP.

“The many regional initiatives will contribute to the eventual realisation,” 
he said. “We see our engagement in the Trans-Pacific Partnership as a 
contribution towards that effort.”

Xi hosted Obama for a private dinner on Tuesday at the Zhongnanhai leadership 
compound in Beijing. The two men walked through the grounds beforehand, and 
were to meet again on Wednesday.

China’s increasing economic and military prominence has led to tensions with 
Washington, including over rival allegations of cyberspying.

But both sides say they want to manage their relationship to avoid clashes in 
the past that have occurred between rising and established powers.

In a sign that they can work together, the White House announced on Tuesday 
that it had “reached an understanding” on an agreement to reduce tariffs on 
information technology trade.

Obama also announced in Beijing that the two governments had reached a 
reciprocal agreement to extend visa validity periods to as long as a decade.

But Xi unmistakably underscored China’s intention to enhance its world 
influence by laying out his vision of a Chinese-driven “Asia-Pacific dream” in 
a speech on Sunday to Apec business leaders.

Meanwhile Obama has stressed US leadership, calling his country a “thoroughly 
Pacific nation”.
 