
It's not often you hear a director thank "all the spirits and all the ghosts 
in Thailand" in an award acceptance speech, asApichatpong Weerasethakul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/apichatpong-weerasethakul> did in Cannes on 
Sunday night. But even before he won the Palme d'Or, it was clear that 
Weerasethakul was not your typical director. For the benefit of westerners 
stumped by Thai pronunciation, he often shortens his name to "Joe" – but his 
cinema makes no concession to foreign expectations.

It's a stance that has paid dividends. In a Cannes competition criticised for 
including too many familiar faces and a rash of globalised arthouse-by-numbers 
entries, Weerasethakul's dreamy, mystifying Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His 
Past Lives was a breath of fresh air. It's a movie full of questions that 
aren't always answered, of talking animals and embodied spirits, of borders 
between this world and the next. "I've been asked to explain it a lot in the 
past week," says Weerasethakul. "I don't always give the same answer."

We speak just before the 39-year-old director gets on the train from Cannes. 
It's the morning after the night before, and he's feeling "kinda shocked, kinda 
surreal". His impressions are of "a lot of photographs, meeting people like Mr 
[Tim] Burton, just trying to remember the whole thing. But now it's all 
starting to sink in and I'm very proud. We've worked three and a half years on 
this. It's a labour of love, so it means a lot."

As the title suggests, Uncle Boonmee is steeped in Thailand's Buddhist faith 
and the possibilities of reincarnation; but it is no straight-faced art movie, 
what with a "monkey spirit" resembling Chewbacca, monks using mobile phones, 
and a love scene between a princess and a catfish. It is based on a true story 
a Buddhist abbot told Weerasethakul about a man, called Boonmee, who claimed he 
could see his past lives when he meditated, "playing behind his closed eyes 
like a movie". Boonmee had died by the time Weerasethakul heard the story, so 
this is not a biopic – more an imagining of what that movie might have looked 
like. The film also brings in Weerasethakul's own family history, and childhood 
memories of lo-fi horror movies and TV shows (lots of red-eyed monsters, shot 
in darkness to cover up their shoddy costumes). On the subject of 
reincarnation, Weerasethakul is ambivalent: "I kind of believe in it, but the 
more I worked on the film, the more I started to question my beliefs. I 
wouldn't say I believe in it 100%. You need proof, and in this lifetime we 
probably cannot do that yet. But it's a possibility I fancy."

He heard the story of Boonmee while in north-east Thailand working on an art 
project called Primitive (partly British-funded and currently showing at the 
British Film Institute in London). Primitive was made in a village named Nabua, 
which in the 1960s was put under brutal military control by the Thai 
government, who regarded it as a haven for communists. Working with local 
teenagers, Weerasethakul's project sought to commemorate the region's history 
of executions, torture, rape and evictions through short films and multi-screen 
installations. Uncle Boonmee is tangentially related, he explains. "They're two 
angles on how memory works in the same region. Because of [Nabua's] violent 
history, you have the repression of memories. People don't want to talk about 
what happened there. With Uncle Boonmee, he remembers so much, so I think 
there's a relevancy. The movie is very ancient in a way. It's like a 
lamentation of the landscape and the movie styles that nobody makes any more – 
they're both disappearing." (Among his influences, Weerasethakul cites the 
Chinese director Edward Yang, 1940s American avant-gardist Maya Deren and 
Iranian Abbas Kiarostami – his hero, whom he met in Cannes on Sunday.)

This region of Thailand is home to many of the redshirts who have been 
protesting in Bangkok these last few weeks. There have been insinuations that 
the Cannes jury was swayed by the fact that Uncle Boonmee comes from a bona 
fide political hotspot, an idea Weerasethakul dismisses. "People can link the 
two things, but basically I talk about more universal matters. Yes, that 
includes oppression and freedom of expression, but [I'm] not specifically 
referring to current events." He has fallen foul of the Thai authorities in 
the past: he protested against proposed cuts to his 2006 film Syndromes and a 
Century (among them a scene depicting monks playing with a toy UFO), and he has 
campaigned for artistic freedom.

In any event, Weerasethakul's films are far too gentle and subtle to register 
as strongly political. They are rooted in landscape, while also operating on 
planes far above immediate earthly concerns. He will never fill multiplexes, 
but his work will doubtless outlive most of the films that do – even now, while 
his career as a film-maker is only just beginning. "We tend to establish a 
certain logic when we watch movies," he says. "But for me they are more 
powerful and diverse than that. I want to open up the mysteriousness of life. 
You encounter things you cannot explain, and that's the joy of living."
 