
A decade ago, Berthon Boat Company had just 11 applicants for its 
apprenticeships, none of whom were "particularly employable", says the firm's 
managing director Brian May. This year, there were 400 applicants, with around 
40 people vying for each available place.

"Following a decade of government policy pushing everyone into university, we 
had arrived at a situation where neither parents, students – and worst of all – 
teachers, were interested in apprenticeships at all and the only applications 
we were getting were from candidates with very low GCSE grades," says May.

Having worked closely with local schools, delivering information sessions, 
attending open days and giving young people work experience placements at the 
company, Berthon now attracts students with the highest GCSE grades to do 
apprenticeships in a range of sectors, including marine engineering, spray 
painting and boat building.

While the company recruits apprentices of all ages, Mays says school leavers 
bring loyalty, fresh ideas and enthusiasm and can be trained to meet a 
company's specific needs. "When you're a highly skilled operation like ours," 
he explains, "you can't just pull someone in from another business as they will 
have completely different ways of doing things. By training young people 
ourselves, we know we'll get exactly what we need."

Berthon is amongst an increasing number of businesses that recognise the 
benefits of growing their own talent. BT, BAE Systems and Rolls-Royce are 
amongst a host of blue-chip companies that now run their own apprenticeships 
for school leavers, many of which are now oversubscribed. In 2010, BT had 
24,000 applications for just 221 places on its apprenticeships – more than 
Oxford University had for its degree courses.

Managers of the future

Kwik Fit, the automotive parts replacement specialist, recruits around 320 
apprentices a year – many of whom join straight from school – and sees them as 
a key feature of the company's succession planning, says Dan Joyce, operations 
manager for the south-west region. "It's not about Saturday boys or part-time 
timers who help us out," he says. "They are the managers and master technicians 
of the future."

But while perceptions of apprenticeships are changing, there is still some way 
to go, says Graham Hoyle, chief executive of the Association of Employment and 
Learning Providers (AELP). He is concerned that under new arrangements for 
delivering careers advice (now the responsibility of schools, following new 
legislation introduced in September), school leavers may not get the advice and 
support they need – particularly about vocational careers.

Hoyle says: "While there is genuine good work on the part of the government on 
apprenticeships, too many under-16s do not get independent advice and guidance. 
If schools interpret their new role in different ways – as we suspect they 
might – some young people may not have the information they need to make 
informed career choices."

Case studies
 Chelsea Passmore in front of the Sembcorp Utilities chemical works 
Chelsea Passmore, 19, is a third-year chemical process technician at Sembcorp 
Utilities UK in Teesside. After completing the first two years of her four-year 
apprenticeship at college – gaining a BTEC in chemical engineering as well as 
an NVQ level 2 and City & Guilds level 2 in processing – she is now working 
towards the HNC and NVQ level 3 in the workplace.

"I'm learning about the types of pumps used in different chemical processes 
and my job is to make sure everything is running correctly," she explains. "I 
did an apprenticeship because it was the best route – you get the practical 
experience as well as the academic qualifications."

"I hope to be offered a job at the end and there is also an opportunity to go 
on to do a degree in chemical engineering," she says. "A lot of my friends say 
I made the better choice because they finished college but they can't find 
work."

Chelsea receives £185 per week plus shift allowance and spends one day a week 
at college. She has even managed to buy her first car.
 Katie Gaston at Fennie's Under 5 nursery 
Katie Gaston's teachers weren't impressed when she ditched her A-levels to 
start work as an apprentice at Fennie's Under 5's nursery in Croydon. But less 
than three years later – and with a level 3 childcare qualification under her 
belt – she is now assistant manager.

"I was doing well at college but I wanted a career in childcare and I realised 
that taking A-levels in geography and art wouldn't get me there," she explains.

"The head of my sixth form read me a letter from someone who had left sixth 
form halfway through to go and get a job which said, 'I wish I'd listened to 
you, it would have been so much better for me to stay because now I'm in a job 
I hate and I'm not getting paid enough.'"

Undeterred, Gaston, now 20, trained in the workplace, completing her initial 
level 2 qualification in a year, before progressing to level 3. She now has her 
sights set firmly on becoming a nursery manager. She says: "In a just a few 
years, I've gone from a nervous apprentice to management. It's the best 
decision I ever made."

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional> in association with the 
National Apprenticeship Service <http://www.apprenticeships.org.uk>. To get 
more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly 
Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 