
The chief executive of Aquarius Platinum has left the mining group after ten 
years amid the continuing unrest in South Africa.

Stuart Murray will step down immediately, the third platinum boss to step down 
this year. No reason for his departure has been given. The company has been 
struggling with falling platinum prices recently but a growing concern is the 
strikes for higher wages which are spreading across the industry, with the 
unrest leading to almost 50 people losing their lives.

The news helped push Aquarius shares 4p lower to 43.5p, a decline of more than 
8%. Matthew McDonald at Seymour Pierce said:
 The company has suffered with the rest of the industry in South Africa due to 
labour unrests, cost inflation and a lack of short term platinum demand growth 
that has seen the suspension of its Marikana and Everest operations and the 
temporary suspension of its Kroondal mine last month.

In addition, we see the company facing a number of uncontrollable variables 
including the activities and agendas of unions and authorities in South Africa, 
the timing and scale of indigenisation in Zimbabwe as well as significant 
exchange rate volatility that contributes to our negative outlook and our 
reduce recommendation. 
Alison Turner at Panmure Gordon said:
 Mr Murray's departure follows the resignation of David Brown as chief 
executive of Impala Platinum in January this year and Neville Nicolau's 
resignation as chief executive of Anglo Platinum in July and we believe the 
resignation is a sign of the depth of the challenge of operating a platinum 
company in arguably the toughest conditions ever to have faced the industry.

Meanwhile Xstrata, still in the throes of attempting a merger with commodities 
group Glencore, has fallen 6.5p to 947p after the company confirmed workers at 
its Eland platinum mine had gone on strike on Friday.

Worries about the situation in South Africa have also hit insurer Old Mutual, 
down 3.4p at 169p on concerns about its operations in the country.
 