
Aquarius Platinum has regained some ground, on hopes that a South African 
directive about mining practices 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/marketforceslive/2010/jul/19/aquariusplatinum>
 may not be as draconian as first thought.

After a meeting yesterday between a number of mining companies and the 
country's regulators, Aquarius said miners would be allowed to consult about 
any changes rather than facing a unilateral ruling from the regulator. At issue 
was how much ore could be extracted using a process known as bord and pillar. 
Aquarius - which has recently suffered two fatal accidents at its mines - said 
the meeting was positive, and it was reviewing mine design to present best 
practice guidelines to the regulators about each mine individually. Chief 
executive Stuart Murray said:

It is clear that all parties have safety as their priority and are looking for 
a pragmatic solution to achieve that objective.

The company's shares - which have lost more than 70p since Friday - recovered 
22.1p to 249.2p. Seymour Pierce analyst Asa Bridle said:

Aquarius and other mining companies potentially affected by the North West 
Region's directive on bord and pillar mining practices met yesterday with the 
country's Chief Inspector of Mines and other senior officials in the Health and 
Safety Inspectorate of the Department of Mineral Resources. The meeting is 
reported to have been positive and Aquarius is able to continue to apply its 
existing mining techniques, while its mining consultant gets underway with a 
review of mine design and support parameters on each of the company's mines 
based on best practice guidelines. Following this review, the company plans to 
present the DMR with its alternative solutions to reducing fall of ground 
incidents.

The DMR appears to have expected the directive to be interpreted in a 
subjective manner - all parties working together to reduce fall of ground 
incidents over time - as opposed to the objective reading given to the industry 
and market. Better communication by the regional and national departments would 
seem to be the key. While the company has much work to do, particularly at 
[its] Marikana [mine], we reiterate our outperform stance.

Ambrian analysts added:

The outcome was that all 'bord & pillar' type mining operations, such as 
carried out at Aquarius ( 93% of its total operations) and Xstrata (100%), can 
continue to mine using existing mining techniques, but will be reviewed on a 
mine by mine basis.

This doesn't mean life carries on as normal and will likely mean some changes 
will be implemented to the bord & pillar technique that will most certainly 
result in rising cash costs. It could well lead to some changes in technique 
and adjustments to production forecasts.
 