 Aquarius Platinum. Could it be the age of you making money? 
It's an Australian-based, Bermudan-registered, South African-operated platinum 
mining company floated at the end of last year.

 Sounds a little dodgy to me. 

Well, if you want to check it out yourself, try its website at 
www.aquariusplatinum.com.au <http://www.aquariusplatinum.com.au.>. It also has 
a full listing on the Australian stock exchange.

 OK. But surely all that glisters is not... 

This time it might be. The worldwide demand for platinum fuel cells has leapt, 
lifting Aquarius's share price to a record high this month. In this country it 
is listed on the junior market AIM and is currently at 217.5p compared to 80p 
six months ago.

A fuel cell battery for mobile phones has just been unveiled and cars are 
increasingly being manufactured with platinum catalysts. General Motors has 
recently issued a statement reiterating its commitment to use platinum instead 
of palladium in its vehicles.

Even more exciting for investors, platinum fuel cells are now being developed 
which could eventually replace the car's combustion engine. Daimler Benz, Ford 
and GM all plan to use these cells on the production line from 2003. Emerging 
markets are also using more platinum.

Platinum jewellery sales are shooting up - in 1999 by 68% in the UK and 53% in 
China, and last year demand for the metal exceeded supply by 730,000 ounces. 
The platinum price is now at a record high.

For more information on the metal check out the Platinum Metal's Review's 
website atwww.platinum.matthey.com/publications/pmr.html 
<http://www.platinum.matthey.com/publications/pmr.html>. 

 And is Aquarius well placed to take advantage of this? 

This week, the company announced it has secured its third mining project, 
Everest South. This should be in production by 2002, and when it is, it will be 
Aquarius's largest mine yet. Aquarius has also just commenced production at a 
new mine in South Africa - Kroondal - two months ahead of schedule. When this 
mine reaches peak capacity, it will be churning out 100,000 ounces (metrication 
has evidently not yet reached the mining world) of platinum and 50,000 ounces 
of palladium a year.

It has also received very positive results from a feasibility study on another 
mine - Marikana, which is also in South Africa. The mine could contribute up to 
$72m in gross revenues.

 What about the competition? 

It is a small market, but those competitors that there are, are also doing 
very well. Anglo American Platinum, Impala Platinum and Northern Platinum are 
the biggest, and their share prices have risen 72%, 114% and 74% respectively, 
over the past few months.

Impala, the world's second largest platinum producer, is also Aquarius' 
biggest shareholder.

 So what does the City say? 

Share price estimates range from £10 in the medium term to £3 in the short 
term. Its London brokers are Williams de Broe.

 And what do the small investors think? 

The bulletin boards are a'buzzin - not surprising, as it is a very sexy sector 
at the moment. But remember, a lot of what is said in the unregulated cyber 
lounges is misleading, deceptive or just plain wrong.

Maurillac, writing on the Hemscott board, says: "I was going to get some, but 
my bank manager recommended them - put me right off!"

Another, more serious, chatter writes: "Rumour is that more expansion is to 
come (within three weeks). This looks a pretty good share to me."

Robur on UK-iNvest's board says: "The chart is not a buy or sell at the 
moment, though the huge increases in volume suggests that the price probably 
will break out and then become a definite buy. I would watch it very closely 
over the next few days."

Those Citytipsters (remember them? the group emailing anonymous, but generally 
accurate, share information to select people, in order, presumably, to see the 
value of their holdings go up) are understandably keen.

They say: "This week, we believe we have found one of the most exciting 
stocks, with a solid past performance and huge upward momentum. Aquarius has 
recently sprinted ahead to reach a closing price of 213p. At this current 
price, our research shows there is plenty of distance left to run and the 
target is £10."
 