
A colleague on the arts desk here at Guardian Towers recently reminisced about 
a wedding she'd attended, where the guests divided roughly into northern and 
southern camps. Come the disco, she reported, the two tribes divided just as 
clearly on the dancefloor: the northerners came out in force for rock and 
indie, the southerners saving themselves for funk and dance. Now, it's likely 
sociologists – or, in fact, anyone with half a brain – would not accept that as 
scientific evidence of a north-south divide in musical taste.

But here's something else (though the caveats about sociologists and anyone 
with half a brain still apply). In March,we published an interactive map of the 
UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ng-interactive/2014/mar/27/uk-most-popular-music-city-by-city-spotify-interactive>
 which took the 10 acts most streamed on Spotify in 22 different towns and 
cities, and enabled you to see how popular each act was in each city. Now the 
people at Spotify have gone a step further. The two most popular acts overall 
were Arctic Monkeys and Bastille, so Spotify's Martin Vacher mapped them 
against a wider selection of towns and cities, highlighting which act was the 
more popular in which place.

Guess what? Arctic Monkeys dominate the north; Bastille dominate the south. 
Now, obviously, both bands are huge right across the UK – which is whyArctic 
Monkeys <https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcticmonkeys> play massive outdoor 
shows in London at Finsbury Park, rather than a support slot at the Half Moon 
in Putney. But the divide is absolutely stark. So what can we learn from this 
research?

1. Towns with beaches and football clubs are outliers

Sunderland – grimy, industrial, depressed (pick your cliche) – was the only 
true northern town to chooseBastille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bastille>. Brighton – hipster, metrosexual, 
fashionable (pick your cliche) was one of only two southern towns (alongside 
Luton) to go for Arctic Monkeys. What links Sunderland and Brighton? They both 
have beaches. And football clubs. And last season both football clubs were 
managed by Spanish-speaking men. That's science.


2. The south now encompasses the east Midlands

Disagree all you like, people of Leicester, Derby and Nottingham. But if you 
were culturally aligned with the north, you'd prefer Arctic Monkeys. You don't, 
though. It's probably something to do with the east Midlands being so flat 
(topography may also explain Luton's preference for Arctic Monkeys: 
Bedfordshire has the Dunstable Downs, which is, in a very real sense, the 
south's answer to the Lakeland fells).


3. Nothing

Truthfully, that's what we can learn from this map. But it's kind of 
interesting, anyway.
 