
The Panthers’ undefeated bid fell Sunday, and with it, their aura of 
invincibility.

Carolina were stunned by the Falcons on the road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/27/carolina-panthers-unbeaten-no-longer-while-jets-work-overtime-to-top-patriots>
, 20-13, as they sought to match the Patriots’ perfect regular-season record of 
16-0. The Panthers have been viewed as the team to beat in the NFC, but just 
maybe, that label should belong to the Cardinals.

No, one loss doesn’t mean much, especially with the MVP-caliber season Cam 
Newton has had, but Carson Palmer hasn’t been far behind and was excellent 
again, piloting Arizona to a38-8 blowout over the Packers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/27/arizona-cardinals-clinch-first-round-bye-with-thrashing-of-green-bay-packers>
.

Palmer led the NFL’s No1 offense on six scoring drives to wrap-up a 
first-round bye (the franchise’s first ever) and notch a ninth consecutive 
victory. He passed for 265 yards with two touchdowns and one interception, and 
now has 4,542 yards on the year.

His 106.8 passer rating is second only to Russell Wilson. 

“We’re playing really good football, at the right time,” said Larry 
Fitzgerald, who has topped the 1,000-yard plateau for the seventh time. “This 
is the time of season you want to be peaking. I don’t want to say we are 
peaking, but we’re playing at a good clip. That’s a good feeling.”

And they have reason to feel good. Bruce Arians’ unit also possesses the 
league’s fifth-ranked defense, and appears to be the most well-rounded club 
outside of New England. The passing attack boasts two bona fide No1 receivers 
in future Hall of Famer Larry Fitzgerald and Michael Floyd. The Panthers don’t 
even boast a great No2 receiver, and rely on star tight end Greg Olsen, who has 
been stellar.

Rookie David Johnson has been a revelation for Arizona on the ground, the kind 
of punishing back good teams rely on come January to grind out victories. “When 
your defense is playing like that, you’re better off just making them tackle 
235lbs,” Palmer said of Johnson.

He started his fourth straight game since Chris Johnson was lost for the 
season, and posted 88 yards receiving on three catches vs. Green Bay. That 
follows a 187-yard, three touchdown performance v the Eagles in Week 15.

Not only is Johnson young, he’s fresh after not receiving a full workload over 
the first 12 games. And he only received nine carries Sunday after entering 
with a knee injury, but should be good to go next month.

Jonathan Stewart has been solid for Carolina, with a 4.1-yards-per-carry 
average over 13 starts. He missed Sunday’s loss with a foot injury, the second 
consecutive game he’s been sidelined. His power style complements Carolina’s 
excellent defense, highlighted by Defensive Player of the Year candidate Josh 
Norman, Kawann Short, who has a whopping 11 sacks from his defensive tackle 
spot, and linebacker Luke Kuechly.

The D is ranked No4 in the NFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl>, and 
will be a stern test for any squad in the playoffs. But for Carolina to match 
it’s regular-season play in the postseason, Newton expects a lot better from 
himself and the team as a whole. He was unimpressive Sunday, completing 17 of 
30 passes for 142 yards and one rushing TD.

“There’s no magic words that need to be said. You’re not going hear me wave a 
wand or do anything like that,” said Newton, who became the first player ever 
with at least 30 passing scores and eight rushing TDs in a season. “We got our 
ass kicked today, and to a lot of degree, we deserved it, especially the type 
of way we played. Offensively, defensively and special teams. And I’m talking 
with the mirror in front of my face.

“ … We have too much riding on this season for us just to sit back and say, 
‘Well, this week wasn’t as good as we wanted.’ Bull crap.”

Right now, it’s Arizona who is playing its best football, and that kind of 
consistency counts for a lot in a topsy-turvy NFL. But Carolina will be back, 
though by the time they are, they could be looking up at the Cardinals, the new 
team to beat in the NFC.

Stat of the week

5. The number of career fumble recovery and interceptions touchdowns DeAngelo 
Hall has a piece – the only play in NFL history to do so – after his 17-yard 
scoop-and-score during Washington’s 38-24 win over the Eagles. Hall, who 
converted to safety midseason, tied Falcons linebacker Jessie Tuggle for second 
most recovery TDs (Jason Taylor holds the mark with six). The victory clinched 
the NFC East for the Redskins, who go from worst to first and make the 
postseason for the first time since 2012.

Why the smartest man in football made the dumbest decision of the year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/27/why-the-smartest-man-in-football-made-the-dumbest-decision-of-the-year>
How the Patriots cheated this week

Patriots’ special teams captain Matthew Slater shockingly chose to kick during 
the coin toss preceding overtime. Sure, the Pats usually select to defer, but 
when a touchdown puts the game away, it’s a bizarre choice. Complicating 
matters, Slater began to debate with referee Clete Blakeman, saying, “Hey, we 
won. Don’t we get to choose?” referring to the pick of which goal to defend. 
But Slater didn’t choose a goal initially; he said kick. The Jets marched down 
the field with ease, and Ryan Fitzpatrick found Eric Decker for the winning 
score.

“We wanted to kick off,” Slated said. “We won the toss. We kicked off, which 
is what we wanted to do. I just asked (Bill Belichick) three or four times just 
to make sure I’m not the guy that goes out there, ‘Yeah, we want to kick off.’ 
So I double-checked three or four times. I think he was looking at me like ‘Are 
you concussed?’ because I kept asking him.

“But that’s what we wanted to do. You never question a coach’s 
decision-making. He’s the best in the business and we trust him fully, so 
that’s what we do.”

Belichick confirmed Slater’s account following the game. The defeat won’t 
likely damage New England: they already clinched a first-round bye and can tie 
up home-field advantage with a win v Miami or Bengals loss to the Ravens in 
Week 17. But the victory was huge for New York. They entered the day tied with 
the Steelers for the final AFC wild-card spot, and Pittsburgh was upset by the 
Baltimore, putting Gang Green in the driver’s seat.

Quote of the week

“The allegation that I would do something like that is complete garbage and is 
totally made up. It never happened. Never. I really can’t believe somebody 
would put something like this on the air. Whoever said this is making stuff up.”
 – Peyton Manning, responding to an Al Jazeera report connecting him to PED use 
following a broken neck in 2011

Fantasy player of the week

Tim Hightower, Saints running back. He was out of the league for three-plus 
seasons, but surprisingly leapfrogged CJ Spiller for New Orleans’ starting job 
after Mark Ingram went down. Hightower paid dividends for any fantasy owners 
who also took a chance on him, as he exploded for 122 yards and two touchdowns 
on 27 carries. The rejuvenated back also added 47 receiving yards on three 
catches.

Gif of the Week
SB Nation GIF (@SBNationGIF) 
Jarvis Landry was possessed by the spirit of Odell Beckham Jr. today! 
https://t.co/WWfptaGaHF <https://t.co/WWfptaGaHF> pic.twitter.com/uN6hJVTpzY 
<https://t.co/uN6hJVTpzY>
 <https://twitter.com/SBNationGIF/status/681216881672359937> December 27, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/SBNationGIF/status/681216881672359937> 
This just might be the best catch of the year, and it comes from – who else – 
an LSU alum. Jarvis Landry topped the 1,000-yard mark Sunday and flashed his 
own spectacular mitts on the same day his college teammate – Odell Beckham Jr – 
missed action due to suspension. The Dolphins lost to the Colts, though, 
keeping Indy alive in the AFC South race. They need to top the lowly Titans in 
the finale, and also require a Texans defeat to the Jags, to avoid missing the 
postseason just one season after reaching the AFC title game.

Elsewhere around the league

 * Charles Woodson’s final game in Oakland – and possibly the Raiders’ last 
game there, too – was one to remember, even if the Raiders are eliminated from 
postseason contention. The Silver and Black topped the rival Chargers in 
overtime, but once again, will finish with a record of .500 or worse. They 
haven’t posted a winning record since 2002, when they reached the Super Bowl 
and lost, but they have something to build on. Oakland possesses a strong 
nucleus on offense, with Derek Carr, Latavius Murray, Amari Cooper and Michael 
Crabtree. Stud pass-rusher Khalil Mack anchors the defense. If GM Reggie 
McKenzie can bolster the rest of the back end, the Raiders can return to 
contention. 
 * Andy Reid’s bunch started 1-5, but is headed to the postseason after the 
Chiefs notched their ninth consecutive win with a victory over the Browns. Just 
the second team ever to make the playoffs after such a start, KC can still win 
the AFC West with a win over the Raiders in Week 17 and one loss by the Broncos 
in their final two games. Alex Smith and co have done all this without star 
running back Jamaal Charles and appear primed for a run. 
 * Seattle was also riding high, but that ended after a 23-17 stunner to the 
Rams. Wilson had never played in an NFL game – 72 – where he didn’t hold a 
lead, but that record fell, and so did the Seahawks’ five-game winning streak. 
The offense was pedestrian, but Seattle has already clinched a playoff berth 
and will seek to return to the Super Bowl for a third consecutive season. 
They’re currently the No6 seed, but if they win and the Vikings lose next week, 
they’ll jump to the No5 spot by virtue of a Week 13 beatdown of Minny. 
 * Kirk Cousins inexplicably kneeled down at the end of the first half of 
Washington’s win over the Eagles on Sunday, but it didn’t end up costing the 
Redskins. Jay Gruden said they had a fade dialed up to Garcon, which would have 
left enough time on the clock for a field-goal try if it wasn’t converted. 
Cousins, though, said he was confused by the play call and kneeled, ending the 
half. The QB made sure it didn’t come back to bit them with a big second half, 
and finished the game 31 of 46 for 365 yards and four TDs. 
 * The Vikings are back in the playoffs after a 49-17 romp over the Giants on 
Sunday night. Adrian Peterson rushed for 104 yards and one touchdown before 
resting during the final quarter. Safety Harrison Smith added a pick six. 
Minnesota is assured of a wild-card spot, but will play the reeling Packers in 
a winner-take-all contest for the NFC North title next week.  