
On another downbeat day for the market, chip maker Arm is bucking the trend.

It has announced the acquisition of Geomerics, whose lighting technology has 
been used in best-selling computer games such as Battlefield 3 and 4, and Medal 
of Honor: Warfighter.

On top of that, there are reports that Google could be planning to design its 
own server processors using Arm technology 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-12-12/google-said-to-mull-designing-chips-in-threat-to-intel.html>
. Arm shares have added 42p to £10.14, making it the biggest riser in the 
leading index. But the news has not stopped analyst Janardan Menon at Liberum 
repeating his sell recommendation:
 [The Google report] is likely to be supportive for Arm's share price. In 
reality we do not think it makes a significant difference as there are a large 
number of chip vendors already making Arm-based server processors and trying to 
sell them to end customers like Google.

So Google's move to design chips for its own internal consumption is unlikely 
to materially change the market share equation. It is also unclear if Google 
actually wants to go ahead with such an expensive design process when Arm-based 
semiconductor suppliers exist, or if it is putting this speculation in the 
market to reduce prices of both Intel and Arm-based processors. In any case we 
forecast Arm to take about a 20% share in the web-server market in coming years 
and believe this is already priced into Arm's share price. Also, contrary to 
previous expectations we do not expect Arm-based processors to make any 
material traction in the server market in 2014, with this now being pushed out 
to 2015. Arm's core smartphone and tablet markets are slowing down and rapidly 
moving low-end, putting pressure on Arm's royalties. Intel is also taking share 
in the tablet market. The stock is expensive. 
After Thursday's 12.5% plunge in the wake of disappointing profits and a 
cautious outlook,Sports Direct International has recovered some ground, up 
19.5p or nearly 3% to 693.5p.

Overall the FTSE 100 is down 6.27 points at 6438.98, as concerns grow that the 
US Federal Reserve may begin to trim its $85bn a month bond buying programme 
next week, given recent positive US data and, at long last, signs of a budget 
agreement.

RSA Insurance is leading the fallers, down 19.3p at 80.3p after its third 
recent profit warning and the departure of chief executive Simon Lee.

Aggreko has dropped 34p to £15.16 ahead of a trading update on Monday, after a 
sell note from Numis. The broker said:
 Due to the lack of contract wins and a weaker dollar/pound we have reduced 
our forecasts to below the bottom end of the range for 2014. Despite the 
positive long term outlook we believe the shares are fully valued on 20 times 
our new 2014 forecasts and we continue to see the shares under performing. We 
lower our target price to 1,234p from 1,400p. 
Perform, the sports rights company which slumped on Thursday after it warned 
on earnings, has added 25p to 205p.
 