
The author of The Thick of It has written a pilot episode about the world of 
social media for an American television company.Armando Iannucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/armando-iannucci> is in discussions with 
HBO, the cable company that madeThe Wire and The Sopranos.

He tells Andrew Rawnsley, the Observer's chief political commentator, in the 
New Review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/sep/02/armando-iannucci-andrew-rawnsley-interview>
 that he is unlikely to write another series ofThe Thick of It and plans to 
focus his attention on the new centre of power in California's Silicon Valley.

The last series of The Thick of It begins on British TV this week, featuring a 
Conservative minister and his Liberal Democrat junior in charge of the 
Department of Social Affairs and Citizenship, while the Malcolm Tucker 
character, allegedly based on Alastair Campbell, aids the opposition.

The series has infuriated some in government, but is seen by many politicians 
as an accurate depiction of some aspects of Westminster life.

"Probably this will be the last series of The Thick of It. The door is left 
open at the end to come back and do specials, but I feel I have explored every 
crevice now and it's time to take stock and move on. I'm thinking about the 
power of the internet," said Iannucci. "Microsoft, Google, Facebook; you have 
these twentysomethings who have a way into billions of households. Where's the 
power gone? The power is gravitating towards these companies."

Iannucci said he was also interested in Apple – the way it controls and 
restricts access to new software through its App store – and in technology 
tycoons such as Bill Gates.

"I'm also interested in that personal thing of what it does to you when you're 
25 and you're a multibillionaire and everyone in the world knows who you are," 
said Iannucci.

The creation of Facebook has been dramatised in the film The Social Network 
and information technology workers have been satirised in the Channel 4 series
The IT Crowd. However, the rise of social media companies has been almost too 
recent to have come under the full glare of TV satire.

Iannucci has already shown he can strike a chord with audiences in the US. His 
seriesVeep, a satire about the role of America's vice-president, has already 
had a successful run on HBO.

The Social Network demonstrated that it was possible to make the world of 
computer programmers dramatic and sexy, while recent developments such as 
Facebook's disastrous stock market flotation show the industry has potential 
for hubris and failure. One aspect of social media that Iannucci hopes to 
examine is the tension between venture capitalists, who have all the money and 
no specialist knowledge, and social media entrepreneurs, who have all the 
knowledge and no money.

He also feels that social media has not received the scrutiny it deserves. "I 
always see it from a sort of storytelling point of view. The story might make 
it look frightening or it might make it look farcical," said Iannucci.

He explains to Rawnsley that he began to feel sorry for politicians, although 
that transformed into a conviction that there was a problem with the British 
political system.

"We the people put the pressure on them to be absolutely perfect, to not 
stumble, to have a fully thought-out, fully budgeted opinion on every topic we 
throw at them. Not to buy anything, not to have a salary, not to go on holiday, 
none of that. I actually started feeling sorry for them.

"This time around, I've come at it with a feeling that the whole system 
doesn't work. And it's primarily because we have a generation of politicians 
who have done nothing apart from politics. They do the politics degree, become 
an MP and then they're in the cabinet by the time they're 39."
 