
There's probably no other comedy character who has lasted as long as Alan 
Partridge. Though he's not always been on screen in his 22 years, when Steve 
Coogan and I meet up we'll always fill in the gaps and speculate about what 
he's been up to. His life runs simultaneous to ours.

I grew up in the Glasgow Hillhead constituency which, for a political geek, 
was like going to Glastonbury. We had Roy Jenkins in a by-election in 1982, 
Edward Heath speaking, Tony Benn. Then you'd bump into Shirley Williams.

Anger has to be in my comedy. Blair and the Iraq war was the first demo I had 
been on since I was a student – a lot of that went intoThe Thick of It.

I refuse to work evenings or weekends. If a script sees my character meeting 
for dinner, I put a line through the words and make them meet for lunch. After 
6pm I turn my phone off. I told the Americans I don't do calls after then.

If I am doing nothing, I really like to indulge in the doing-fuck-all thing. 
You know, just stare at a tree or something.

I still feel I haven't gotten round to applying for a job.

The class divisions we grew up with have been replaced to a large degree by 
divisions of wealth. People are judged by how much they earn or how much they 
own and want to think they have arrived somewhere. In America everyone is 
called vice-president.

The time to dance on Thatcher's grave was when she resigned. You can't shout 
and holler at someone for not showing any feeling towards social classes, when 
you are demonstrating you have no feeling for an individual.

I have seen the effect of government cuts. I am patron of the specialist 
maternity unit in Oxford where all three of my kids were born. I thought I was 
opening the summer fête, then it was threatened with closure and so it has been 
a massive campaign.

I assume everyone around me is older because they look more responsible.

The fear of doing the same thing forever comes from my dad. He started as a 
journalist in Naples in the 1930s working for a newspaper that was 
anti-Mussolini and anti-Hitler, and eventually fled to the hills and changed 
his name. When he escaped to the UK he had loads of jobs and businesses – you 
could never define him by what he did.

Everything I've done for the past six years is really displacement activity 
for not writing the novel I was supposed to be writing. Whatever else I 
achieve, there will always be a voice saying: "Yeah, but you never wrote that 
book."

I briefly thought of becoming a priest but quickly saw that would be 
ridiculous.

I am an optimist even though I am told everything I do is negative and cynical.

Alan Partridge: Alpha Papa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2013/jul/22/alan-partridge-alpha-papa-video>
is released in cinemas nationwide on 7 August
 