
Armando Iannucci <https://www.theguardian.com/media/armando-iannucci>, creator 
of The Thick Of It, hopes to write an episode of Doctor Who, reuniting him with 
its star, Peter Capaldi.

Iannucci, whose credits include Alan Partridge and White House comedy Veep, 
said he had talked withDoctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> showrunner Steven Moffat 
and had a good idea where he would take the Doctor, played to universal acclaim 
by Capaldi since last year.

He would join a long list of famous writers on the BBC1 show, which in recent 
years has included Richard Curtis, Neil Gaiman and Simon Nye.

“I’m a big fan of Doctor Who and obviously with Peter, who’s loving it, it 
would be nice to,” Iannucci said. “I’ve spoken off and on to them but it’s a 
case of being able to fit something in. It’s a nice thought.”

Iannucci helped make Capaldi a household name for his role as foul-mouthed 
spin doctor Malcolm Tucker in The Thick Of It, which came to an end on BBC2 in 
2012. In an interview with the Guardian, Iannucci said: “In our conversations 
there was an idea we had, but it may be a wee while yet before we get round to 
working out when it would be. Knowing I am committed for the next year or so, 
it’s all on hold. Let’s get back in touch when we can.”

With negotiations around the renewal of the BBC’s charter and its future 
funding due to begin after the general election in May, Iannucci also said the 
BBC should “bite the bullet” and accept the licence fee was coming to an end. 
“I reckon in 10 years [the licence fee] will be gone,” he said. “This 
generation – there have been several generations – just don’t watch television 
in a traditional way.”

He said there was “something contemptuous” about David Cameron’s attitude to 
the TV leader debates, comparing him to a “petulant child who doesn’t want to 
do his homework coming up with more and more excuses as to why it can’t happen”.

“I kind of half take his point that these leader debates turn into the main 
thing and it kind of detracts from the rest,” he said. “But if what you are 
saying is I don’t want to discuss my politics during a general election 
campaign to as wide an audience as possible, then you don’t really deserve to 
be in politics.”

Iannucci said he would also like to make another film, six years after The 
Thick of It <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-thick-of-it> spin-off 
In The Loop, although it would not be based on politics. He is also exploring a 
comedy, based around people’s relationship with social media.

Iannucci said: “The more you look at the world of politics the more you 
realise how limited political power is. Companies like Google and Facebook have 
a much greater influence over individuals and that just intrigues me.

“The way the crowd can suddenly turn nasty and ugly within minutes of 
something happening … is an interesting area. It’s like an infection, or a mass 
hysteria. It’s kind of spooky.”



 