
The good old British bus may be many things: cultural icon (Routemaster), butt 
of jokes (you wait all day, and then two …), mass commuter mover ("Full up. 
There's another one just behind"…). But it is not the holiday transport of 
choice. Unless, of course, you want to get as far away from Britain as possible 
(the 13-week journey from London-Sydney on board theOzbus 
<http://www.oz-bus.com>, and, from next March, the 18-week London-New York 
trip).
 Dixe Wills puts his summer holiday in the hands of Britain's public transport 
But within Britain, outside the realms of chartered bus tours, it seems that 
the public transport system is not to be trusted with something as precious as 
our summer holidays. Which is why, earlier this year I decided to take myself, 
a tent and a large scale map of the UK on the ultimate challenge: a tour around 
the edges of mainland Britain using nothing but local buses. I planned nothing 
in advance; I checked neither timetables nor routes. I didn't even know whether 
a complete circuit was possible – I simply caught the first bus from outside my 
London flat armed with a determination to keep going for as far as possible.

I confess to having had considerable doubts before I left. I had barely 
boarded a bus in the previous 10 years. Those doubts were confirmed in the most 
unexpected of places, often in the most entertaining of ways: from the day in 
the Fens when the back of the bus fell clean off; to finding myself stranded 
for 65 hours in Spalding – one of Lincolnshire's largest towns.

Over the next few weeks, I'll be sharing the highlights of the trip and I'll 
also be spilling the beans as to whether itis actually possible to get all the 
way round or whether I'm writing this from a bus shelter in some small village 
that time forgot.

First stop: Zennor, Cornwall

Celebrity resorts are not what they used to be. Today's rich and feckless 
favour private islands in the Caribbean or paparazzi-free hideaways in the 
south of France. There was a time, however, whenthe place to go was a tiny, 
obscure parish in the far west of Cornwall. DH Lawrence, Katherine Mansfield, 
Emperor Haile Selassie, the artist Patrick Heron and a lavish sprinkling of the 
great, the good, or the merely beautiful, have made Zennor their home at one 
time or other. And to enjoy the spot Virginia Woolf called "the loveliest place 
in the world", all you need is the price of a ticket for the open top bus ride 
from St Ives.

There can hardly be a more exhilarating way of arriving in Zennor than with 
sea breezes blowing through your hair and with eyes wide to accommodate the 
wild Atlantic views. It's the same route by which Lawrence himself stumbled 
across the village. Never one for understatement, the novelist declared, "When 
I looked down at Zennor I knew it was the promised land and that a new heaven 
and a new earth would take place." (As it happened, he ended up getting 
expelled by the War Office for allegedly signalling to German submarines from 
the cottage he rented here, but you can't fault his idealism.)

None of my fellow passengers was moved to such lyricism but any questions they 
might have had about Zennor's pulling power dissolved at first sight. Below us, 
on a miniature plain between hills and the sea, a loose gathering of farms were 
scattered around a hamlet whose stone houses huddled under the square tower of 
an ancient church. Streams criss-crossed the fields, forming a giant spider's 
web with the dry-stone walls. Beyond, cliffs lurched from the waves and a sea 
mist provided them with flowing white beards.
 Zennor's Wayside Folk Museum 
By the time I entered the Wayside Folk Museum 
<http://www.chycor.co.uk/tourism/zenor_museum/zenor_museum.htm>, the mist was 
close to swallowing the village. It speaks volumes about Zennor that a place 
that can disappear in a few minutes at the whim of a weather pattern should run 
to a whole museum. And it's quite a place too – unstuffy, full of interesting 
nooks and crannies, and unashamed in giving the lives of the common people as 
much significance as its prominent former residents. Its owners, Bob and Sara 
Priddle, are on hand to answer questions. Zennor may be a romantically 
old-fashioned place (mains water only arrived in 1966) but, they inform me, 
it's more than just an eye-popping muse to the stars.

For a start, there's the Zennor Mermaid 
<http://www.connexions.co.uk/culture/html/mz.htm>. To trace her story, I walk 
past the chapel that now serves as a bunkhouse, alongside the River With No 
Name, to Zennor Head, whose grassy bulk is ripped open by jagged tors. Far 
below is Pendour Cove, beautifully formed and accessible only to the brave or 
foolhardy. It was here that a local lad, Matthew Trewhella, walked into the sea 
to follow his one true love, an impossibly pretty yet mysterious girl who 
appeared at the church to hear him sing. Happily, young Matthew adapted well to 
sub-aquatic life and he and his mermaid bride brought up a family beneath the 
waves. You can admire a likeness of her as carved long ago on a pew in the 
church.

Then there's Zennor Quoit <http://www.pznow.co.uk/historic1/quoits.html>, over 
5,000 years old and unrivalled for size in the whole of Europe. Visiting this 
massive burial chamber requires a more energetic hike – up the hill and across 
a lonely heath. It's refreshingly untainted by signposts (you'll need a map) 
and information boards, leaving the scene much as it must have looked at the 
time it was built, give or take the odd crumbling stone wall. The sheer 
remoteness of the place and the pleasing lack of anything there but the quoit's 
huge stones, and collapsed capstone, piled up like a giant's house of cards, 
makes the return journey to the village seem like a pilgrimage to a metropolis. 
If you long for a bit of time out from a world of sensory overload, here's your 
desert.

Back at St Senara's church, I learn from a plaque on the wall that Zennor has 
yet another claim to fame – it oversaw the death of a language. In 1891, John 
Davey drew his final breath and so departed "the last person to possess any 
considerable Traditional Knowledge of the Cornish Language". Apparently, with 
no one left to talk to, he ended up conversing with his cat. He (and perhaps 
the cat) would no doubt be pleased to know that Cornish (orKernowek 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kernowek_Standard>) is once again being taught. 

It's ironic, then, that it was in Zennor's pub that some of the most iconic 
lines in English literature were committed to paper. The lovely Tinner's Arms, 
built in 1271 to accommodate masons working on the church opposite, was a 
Lawrence haunt and the closing chapters of Women in Love were penned behind a 
shielding hand in one of its dark corners.

When pressed, Bob and Sara admit that even today Zennor is not without its 
noteworthy inhabitants. However, they're far too discreet to let slip their 
names.

Dixe Wills is the author of The Z to Z of Great Britain (Icon books, £7.99) 
First Bus No 300 between St Ives and Land's End; all day travel pass – adult 
£6.50 child £4.30;firstgroup.com <http://www.firstgroup.com>; +44 (0)845 600 
1420
Tinner's Arms B&B double room from £75; tinnersarms.com 
<http://www.tinnersarms.com> +44 (0)1736 796927
 