
A group of writers, artists and directors from half a dozen countries have 
written an open letter condemning the decision to hold the first ever major 
international sporting event inBelarus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus>, often known as Europe's last 
dictatorship.

Dozens of people have been arrested in Belarus in recent days in the runup to 
the ice hockey world championships, which started on Friday and finish on 25 
May. The championships are being projected as a personal triumph for President
Alexander Lukashenko <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-lukashenko>, 
a huge ice hockey fan who is celebrating 20 uninterrupted years in office this 
summer.

"Please do not let yourselves be used by a despot," says the appeal to the 
hockey players, signed by Tom Stoppard, Stephen Fry, Jude Law,Emma Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-thompson>, Alan Rickman, James Bierman 
and Janet Suzman, among others. "Join us by showing you do not support the Last 
Dictator of Europe and that you stand with the people of Belarus by wearing a 
red and white scarf after the match. These are colours of our national flag 
that is recognised in Belarus as symbol of resistance."

The protest echoes the calls for athletes to express sympathy for gay and 
lesbian Russians during the Sochi Olympics.

Lukashenko has been accused of persistent human rights abuses through two 
decades in power, throwing opposition figures in jail, tolerating no political 
dissent and developing a cult of personality.

"For him this is like a great party," said Natalia Kaliada, a Belarusian who 
fled to London three years ago after being arrested, and who helped organise 
the protest letter. "He is dancing on bones." She noted that Lukashenko was 
awarded the championship just days after one of his most brutal crackdowns 
following elections in December 2010.

Lukashenko has toed a delicate line over the years, trying to assert his 
nation's independence of Russia while conscious of the power that Vladimir 
Putin holds over him. But the Ukraine situation has upended Lukashenko's 
geostrategic calculus by demonstrating what can happen if you defy Moscow.

This week he was summoned to Moscow and emerged on Friday with a $2bn loan to 
help Belarus through a deepening economic crisis. The two countries will 
formally launch an economic union along with Kazakhstan this month.

"Now Lukashenko is in a very vulnerable position because Ukraine shows that if 
he doesn't obey Russia then Putin will look to military threats, military force 
and he can remove him by stopping his subsidies and his oil supplies," said 
Andrei Sannikov, an opposition leader detained for more than a year after the 
2010 election.
 The protest echoes the calls for athletes to express sympathy for gay and 
lesbian Russians during the Sochi Olympics. Photograph: Mark Blinch/Reuters 
The letter signatories were: Laurie Anderson, Michael Attenborough, James 
Bierman, Kim Cattrall, Stephen Fry, Ralph Gibson, Hugh Grant, Paul Haggis, 
David Lan, Natalia Kaliada, Nicolai Khalezin, Jude Law, Joanna Lumley, Alan 
Rickman, Mark Rylance, Vladimir Shcherban,Tom Stoppard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/stoppard>, Andy Summers, Janet Suzman and 
Emma Thompson.


The full letter

Open Letter to all Ice Hockey Players who are taking part in the World Cup of 
Ice Hockey in Belarus:

We are artists writing to athletes, asking you to take a moment to consider 
the political situation of the country where the Ice Hockey World Championships 
is taking place.

Alexander Lukashenko is known as "Europe's Last Dictator". Belarusians have 
lived for 20 years under Lukashenko's regime, and have faced torture, 
kidnapping and murder, intimidation and harassment for speaking out against his 
inhumane laws and regulations.

Lukashenko has created a publicity campaign with the slogan: "Big ice hockey 
supports Alexander Lukashenko". We do not believe that. We believe ice hockey 
players support freedom and human rights. Please do not let yourselves be used 
by a despot. Join us by showing you do not support the Last Dictator ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and that you stand with the 
people of Belarus by wearing a red and white scarf after the match. These are 
colors of our national flag that is recognized in Belarus as symbol of 
resistance.

On 21st of December, of 2010 after a bloody crackdown of a peaceful rally when 
citizens of Belarus went to protest against falsification of elections, seven 
of us started the campaign with a slogan "Don't Play with Dictators". Those 
people included a unique person the late Vaclav Havel, a playwright and 
dissident born under a communist dictatorship who went on to be President of a 
free Czechoslovakia.

We ask you to show the Belarusian people that the courage and strength you 
show in your sport is not blind, and to join them by demonstrating your 
opposition a regime that violates human rights. This simple act of support 
would give millions strength in a time of political turmoil, just as the brave 
actions of athletes at Mexico in 1968 and Sochi in 2014, touched countless of 
people around the world.

We are not in a position of executive power, but we believe by uniting as 
artists and athletes we can make a difference simply by showing the Belarusian 
people that we value human rights and freedom and that we stand with them. We 
have a moral authority and it should not be misused by dictators for their own 
aims.

Belarus has been frozen in time. Its people have no opportunity under its 
Soviet style dictatorship. The recent invasions of the Ukraine by Russia means 
that the entire region is in danger of returning to the austere times of the 
Soviet Union.

Artists and athletes have a responsibility to make voices heard on behalf of 
those who are silenced, not as athletes or as artists, but as fellow human 
beings.

You are people of strong will and action. Usually it's the fans who show their 
support for you, now it's your turn to support them.

Put a white-red-white scarf on when you get on the ice. The red represents 
courage and white represents compassion. The scarf will demonstrate to the fans 
that you recognize the dictator for who he really is, and show that you stand 
behind the fans. Wearing the scarf will give them courage and let them know 
that their voices are heard.

Sport should be kept out of politics but when its not, athletes must 
demonstrate that they know what is going on, that they care, and they stand 
behind their fans in their quest for human rights and freedom.

Don't play with Dictators, support your fans!
 