
You have valuable strengths to exploit


Far from being less valuable than those with technical degrees, arts and 
humanities students develop key skills. Lydia Fairman, owner of HR and 
consulting firmFairman Consulting <http://fairmanconsulting.co.uk/> says: 
“Don’t be constrained by your subjects – see them as a foundation. There’s a 
lot to be said for creativity, thought and consideration. Those with a more 
creative degree, particularly in a humanities/sociology direction, are likely 
to have a broader understanding of behaviour and self-awareness, which are 
valuable assets in the workplace.”

The limited contact hours in many arts and humanities degrees can be good 
preparation for the world of work, rather that the sign of an easy course, says 
Lisbeth McGuire, founder ofGiraffe CVs <http://www.giraffecvs.co.uk/>: “When 
you are only committed to lectures for a few hours a week, you need 
self-discipline, organisational skills, and a drive to keep going. It’s habit 
forming and helps you throughout your life.”

The key to any job application is deciding what you want to do and showing a 
potential employer that your experience fits well with their sector. Katherine 
Burik, founder ofThe Interview Doctor <http://www.jobinterviewcoaching.org/>, 
says: “Critical thinking and analytic skills are the advantages of a humanities 
programme. [You should] highlight the ways you have used these skills in school 
to apply to problem solving at work.”

Make your career path something you enjoy

Your career options are endless, so take the time to think about what you 
enjoy and what this might lead to. Andrew Fennell, director ofStandOut CV 
<http://standout-cv.com/blogs/cv-writing-advice-blog/41315012-7-easy-cv-formatting-tips-that-will-get-you-more-interviews>
, says students should use their course as a starting point. “Speak to 
lecturers and alumni from your university and look at the elements of your 
course you like and are good at – whether that involves direct humanities 
knowledge or transferable skills such as research, written communication, 
organisation, etc.”

Jon Gregory, editor of win-that-job.com <http://www.win-that-job.com/>, agrees 
that narrowing your search according to your passions is a good starting point: 
“Use that information as a springboard to delve deeply into the sectors that 
could offer you roles that draw on your talents. Dig in and research. Approach 
people directly who are already doing the job you might like and ask how they 
got there.

“It’s common (and very frightening) not to have any idea on career direction 
at certain stages in your life. Don’t panic, keep calm and take it one step at 
a time,” he adds.

Prepare while still at university 

Many graduates leave university without experience in their chosen field. But 
experts advise getting a good grounding in the work world while still studying 
– even if this isn’t in the field you eventually go into. Not only will this 
stand out on your CV, but it might give you some direction deciding which 
career to pursue.

Burik says: “The trick is using those summer jobs, internships and work during 
the school year to try out the career you want. You might change your mind but 
the work experience will help you when you finish school.”

Most universities should be encouraging students to do this, Gregory adds: 
“Even the old die-hard universities are waking up to the need to get their 
students work experience. Any experience is worth having if you think about how 
to sell it into the role you’re looking at.”

Dasha Amrom, founder of Career Coaching Ventures 
<http://www.ukcareercoaching.com/> agrees, adding that the relationships 
students make at university can open doors later: “Network, network, network 
throughout your whole degree. Gain any extra skills you might need outside of 
the classroom.”

An arts degree can still appeal to technical sectors

Just because you’ve studied arts and humanities at university doesn’t mean 
you’re limited to certain industries such as teaching, the media, or marketing. 
Fennell says it’s all about how you position your skills and experience.

“The key to making your CV appeal to any institution or employer is 
researching their needs and giving them what they want,” he says. “Take a look 
on their websites and find out exactly what they expect from successful 
applicants. Be sure to make those elements prominent in your application – 
whether they be skills, knowledge or experience.”

Gregory also recommends looking back to your degree to see if there are any 
relevant crossovers: “Look at some of the individual subjects or modules you’ve 
taken and think about the transferable skills you have. Try to gain an 
understanding of the challenges you’ll face in the role and use that 
information to show how you add value to the job.

“Don’t wait for adverts – network and approach people inside your target 
organisations directly to ask about future opportunities. Be ready to tell your 
story – why do you want this and what makes you a suitable candidate?”

Don’t be afraid to change careers if it’s not working

Deciding on a career can be daunting, but Fairman points out you can always 
change your mind if you’re not enjoying the path you’ve chosen: “The most 
important thing to remember is that you’re free to make different choices and 
change direction if it doesn’t first work.”

McGuire agrees: “Sometimes there’s no substitute for thrashing it out and 
gaining some practical experience to help you define your goals. Careers can 
seem unstructured and scattered but there’s often an undercurrent that is 
carrying you towards your destined career choice.”

If you are disillusioned with your first job out of university, take time out 
for introspection before making your next move. “We have our candidates answer 
a few questions,” Burik says. “What 10 things do you love and hate in your work 
and personal life and why? What are your hobbies? What connects the things you 
love, hate, and spend your free time on?”

Above all, be proud of your degree. “Even if it won’t influence your future 
career path, give it your all,” McGuire says. “A dedicated approach and 
positive grade can open doors.”

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 