
Alastair Cook must go! Alastair Cook might go. Alastair Cook could conceivably 
go. Providing, you know, he’s OK with it. In the buildup to the final Test 
against India in ChennaiCook announced that no decision would be made 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/alastair-cook-england-captaincy-joe-root-india-series-defeat>
 “in the heat of the moment” on his future as England’s Test captain. No shit, 
Sherlock. This has been the mission statement throughout, an England era forged 
in the ice of the late Flower years, where all decisions were made in the cool 
of the moment, bowling dry, captaining dry, press conferencing dry.

And now finally we have the spectacle of Cook ceasing to captain England in 
stages, exiting with all the unhurried deliberation of a genuinely great 
cricketer whose craft, grit and basic stillness have been an understated marvel 
of the sporting age.

It is all a little mannered, don’t you think? Like one of those mature, 
bloodless divorces where everyone stays friends and holds hands at the 
Christmas carol concert and weirdly still goes on holiday together. But then 
England Test captains don’t get hounded out these days. Look back and you could 
say there hasn’t been a really good, gimlet-eyed hounding since the sacking of 
David Gower, who always had a very hound-able style, so louche and airy at 
times you expected to look down and notice he’d spent the post-lunch session 
batting with an ivory shooting stick in a pair of silk moccasins.

England’s long-term needs top of captaincy agenda, says Alastair Cook
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/15/england-captaincy-alastair-cook-andrew-strauss-ashes-ecb>
Mike Gatting was hounded out over a nonsense, when he really should have been 
hounded out on his record. EvenKevin Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen>, who tied himself in knots 
hounding his own head coach, simply slipped away in the end. Cook washounded 
from the one-day team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/20/alastair-cook-gutted-eoin-morgan-england-world-cup>
, although only when it became unavoidable what an unsustainable role this was 
for him all along; and only after a period where he genuinely did try to adapt 
his game, albeit always a little awkwardly, like the village curate gamely 
learning to breakdance.

And yet Cook has not been hounded as Test captain. There have been persuasive, 
reasoned assessments, the odd sharp remark. But no actual Cook-must-go-stuff, 
no calls for a sacking not a resignation. This despite the fact there’s a case 
Cook is one of the worst Test captains England have ever had. Yeah, you heard 
me. This hasn’t really come up much has it? So let’s do it here.

As has been widely noted if England lose the current Test Cook will creep past 
Mike Atherton’s all-time Test loss record. Fair enough. Cook has captained in 
more Tests than everyone else. Still, though. Look back further and of 16 
England captains to have racked up 20 matches or more only Atherton 
(marginally) and Gower (runaway leader on 56%) have lost a higher percentage 
than Cook.

Plus of course there is the issue of resources. Atherton, Gower, Gatting, even 
Graham Gooch all straddled the basket-case days of cartwheeling instability, 
loopy selectors, terrible prep and at least one, if not two steamrollering Test 
opponents on regular rotation. By contrast the Age of Cook has been blessed 
with unprecedented stability, centrally contracted players, endless wonks, 
fluffers, gophers and every last crowning glacé cherry of sports science. Cook 
has had England’s most successful fast bowling partnership of all time in his 
quiver. All this at a time when much of the rest of the world has stopped 
treating Test cricket as the grail. Let’s face it, England should have been 
cleaning up out there.

And yet the past four years have been fretted with defeat, with 20 losses in 
Cook’s last 42 matches alone, including the invertebrate collapse in Australia, 
a one-offthrashing in Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/bangladesh-beat-england-draw-test-series>
 and home defeat to a semi-interested Sri Lanka. On the stats it is a run of 
failure to trump anything that has gone before. And all at a time of 
unprecedented good health at the top. You could even say over the past three 
years, Cook has been the worst captain England have ever had. And yet he 
remains unhounded. How can this be?

The answer, of course, is that none of the above is really true. Or at least 
it’s not the whole truth. It’s a line. Cook hasn’t been a very inspiring 
captain, true. His best qualities are probably not really captaincy qualities. 
The worst of his leadership has been evident in the current series. It has been 
a weary endgame.

And yet Cook’s England team have still won two Ashes series, won in India and 
won brilliantly in South Africa at the start of the year. The loss statistics 
are skewed by the fact there just aren’t really many draws these days. Look 
closer and Cook has also won as many Tests as Andrew Strauss. He’s been OK, 
decent, not bad, and more menaced by instability than it might look at first 
glance given the weirdness of the unlovely Paul Downton era.

The real reason for attempting, belatedly, a little hounding here is simply 
the lack of it, a feeling the office of England Test captain at least deserves 
a little froth, the odd thunderingly partial rant, and that Cook might have got 
some in times past when cricket filled the skies, a genuine national summer 
sport.

Joe Root finds frustration again in his search for Test perfection | Ali Martin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/16/joe-root-perfectionist-century-england-india>
It isn’t hard to see why Cook has escaped such treatment. He remains an 
admirable and likable elite sportsman, not to mention an all-time English 
batting A-lister. His batting has always been a marvel of pared-back craft, 
proof in its own way that there is also brilliance in the slow, the considered, 
the attritional. On his best days he settles in the middle like some relentless 
Soviet-era combine harvester steadily toiling its way from horizon to horizon. 
But blessed also with that wonderful pull shot, a moment where he seems to lose 
himself, becoming suddenly natural and loose, all graceful swivelling violence. 
And not forgetting the Cook cut shot, springing back and scything down on the 
ball like a man startled up out of his wicker conservatory chair thrashing 
furiously at a mouse with a stick of firewood.

Cook doesn’t deserve a hounding, just as houndings are in isolation fairly 
unhelpful in any case.Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> 
journalists are reasonable people, aware of the difficulties of the sport, the 
complexities of leadership and succession, the fact the captain himself is 
often a little powerless. And yet it is still hard not to conclude there should 
have been a hounding all the same, that perhaps the slightly graceless 
stat-picking above will have to do in its place. I don’t want England captains 
to come and go in this measured, grown-up fashion. I want the news pages to bay 
for blood. I want agenda-heavy ranting, news hacks with a grudge.

I want the wonderfully overblown Michael Henderson calling Cook’s England 
“buttock-clenchingly awful” as he did the class of 1999, causing swoons in the 
press box. I want Henry Blofeld accosted by Ian Botham, or the excellent 
Stephen Brenkley being throttled across a dinner table by the chairman of the 
ECB. This has to matter, and to a stupid degree. Cook will depart unhounded, as 
is, in all likelihood, only right. As Test cricket continues to shrink back 
into its heartlands, the task for his successor is not only to lose a little 
less, but also to remain in sight, to seem to matter, to exist beyond an 
increasingly internecine register of worth and value. With any luck, even to be 
hounded a little in time.
 