
Q I am a newly qualified solicitor at a small legal aid practice and would 
very much appreciate any advice you could offer me.

I have qualified with very large debts, each of which I am paying off over 
five years. I have one professional studies loan and one graduate loan with my 
bank, Lloyds TSB. Each of them were for £10,000 and I have been paying them for 
two years. I pay £250 and £204 per month respectively.

I also have a loan which I recently took out with MBNA for £10,100. The 
interest rate on this is lower at 8.9%. I pay £243 a month. I paid off a high 
interest career development loan with the money and a large chunk of my credit 
card debts. I still have £4,000 on my MBNA credit card and just over £2,000 on 
my Egg card. I pay approximately £120 (the minimum) a month.

My salary is £24,500. I pay £817 per month in debts and I take home £1,530 
after tax so the debt repayments take up a huge amount of my wage, with renting 
in London and travel on top.

I find that I am transferring at least a few hundred pounds a month from my 
credit card to my current account just to keep my head above water. I would 
like to consolidate my loans and repay them over a greater period of time, do 
you have any suggestions?

Alternatively I would like to get a 110% mortgage and consolidate some of the 
debt. However, I don't know how realistic this is given both my small salary 
and the fact that I would be buying alone.

DM 

A There is light at the end of the tunnel, but it will mean that you need to 
take some tough decisions about your finances. You certainly don't want to go 
bankrupt because it would threaten your job. Nor should you consider taking on 
extra debt via a hefty mortgage. You need to clear your existing debts before 
you borrow against a house, as if you fail to pay a mortgage debt you could 
lose your home, with disastrous consequences.

Your debts of £36,000 are costing you almost £820 a month and although you 
don't say how much spare money you have left after rent and travel, it seems 
the situation is unsustainable. You are borrowing on your credit cards just to 
afford life's necessities, which is a very dangerous thing to do.

You have three options, and the first one is the best although I don't know 
whether it will be possible in your situation. Could you persuade family or 
friends to lend you enough money to pay off your debts in a lump sum? It 
wouldn't necessarily have to be the full £36,000, although this depends on how 
keen your creditors are to negotiate with you. If you could raise a reasonable 
sum, then you could offer it to the loan and credit card companies as a full 
and final settlement.

A spokesman for the National Debtline says: "Some creditors will go for this 
because it means they get jam today rather than jam tomorrow."

If this isn't possible, you could make an offer to your creditors based on 
what you can afford to pay each month. It's likely to be less than the £820 you 
are currently shelling out. You could make your own proposal to them, asking 
for them to freeze the interest they are charging on your loans and accepting 
your monthly sum to pay off the capital you owe instead. After all, you are 
paying a very high rate of interest on your two loans.

Alternatively, you could draw up a debt management plan with one of the two 
organisations that the National Debtline approves of. These are the CCCS 
(Consumer Credit Counselling Service), which is a charity, and Playplan, which 
is part of a not-for-profit organisation called Federated Credit. Don't make 
the mistake of going to a debt consolidation company who will charge you fees 
and may tie you into repayments over many years. These sorts of companies have 
had a very bad press and can rip off customers.

CCCS and Payplan will draw up a plan for you where you pay an agreed amount 
each month to them and they pay off in full the debt to your creditors. Unlike 
other debt management companies they won't charge you a fee, but you will have 
to decide how much you can afford each month and you will have to continue 
paying up until your debt to CCCS or Payplan is cleared. This could take a long 
time but would mean that every pound you pay off is going straight towards 
reducing your debt, and not towards interest or other charges.

The final option which National Debtline suggests is to use the services of an 
insolvency practitioner to draw up an agreed plan with your creditors. But this 
is backed by a court order and will go on your credit reference file and the 
consequences are serious if you don't pay up. You can be bankrupted, which 
would be a personal and professional disaster for you. In the meantime, are 
there ways you could reduce your monthly outgoings - cycling to work instead of 
travelling by tube, or sharing a flat with friends instead of renting on your 
own?
 