
There are many things worth getting nostalgic about that the internet age has 
rendered hopelessly naff or just unnecessary. The phrase "lolling about", for 
example; now impossible to use without sounding like an overexcited teenager.

The demise of the erotic thriller, however, probably isn't worth shedding many 
tears over. While the genre may have nourished a generation of Channel 
Five-fuelled adolescents, even the most well-regarded efforts were, on the 
whole, barely watchable.

It's strange then to see posters for Chloe 
<http://www.tribute.ca/interviews/Atom+Egoyan/starchat/731>, a new addition to 
the field from directorAtom Egoyan <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/atom-egoyan>
, plastered all over the underground. The film was also given a surprising 
level of prominence at last year's London film festival, where I was lucky 
enough to randomly stumble into a packed screening. Are people really still 
interested in watching classy soft porn?

A "reinvention" of the 2003 French film Nathalie, Chloe attempts to add a 
veneer of respectability to this seemingly seedy enterprise, as a strong cast 
(Julianne Moore, Liam Neeson) and a half-decent third act bring it to a level 
most erotic thrillers can only dream of – it would almost be enjoyable if you 
had seen it on a plane and all the sex was cut out.

In fact, Egoyan felt confident enough about the quality of his film to speak 
of vague, noble aspirations atthe accompanying press days 
<http://forum.hyeclub.com/showthread.php?t=17614>. "There is a very specific 
social milieu that this film was examining, and there is a class structure that 
it's also looking at," he said last summer.

Unfortunately, this weighty "examination" all happens in the ridiculous, 
hypersexualised world that these films tend to exist in. Every character is 
effortlessly and inexplicably wealthy. No one has any problems in their lives 
that aren't related to sex. Perhaps this is a lifestyle that the super-rich 
film-making elite can relate to, but, for your average cinemagoer, the result 
is irritating and alienating.

Barring one jarringly intense lesbian scene, Chloe is forgettable – and also 
deeply incoherent. It attempts to be both a legitimate psychological drama and 
a titillation-fest – much like its 1980s and 90s forebears – but fails in both 
camps. In fact, Moore is the only participant to emerge from the film with any 
credit – summoning an incongruous depth of performance that Shannon Tweed 
herself would be proud of.

The fact that a film like this can get a cinema release in 2010 seems 
baffling. Why would anyone bother paying to sit through an upgraded Animal 
Instincts 2 when there are hundreds of thousands of hours of free erotica 
online, waiting at your fingertips? Never mind the fact that, during its cinema 
run, you'll have to enjoy it in a public setting.

Perhaps it's interesting for audiences to see famous-ish faces like that girl 
from Mamma Mia! doing what they're used to seeing on a computer screen. Or 
perhaps the erotic thriller satisfies a certain respectable clientele – not 
prepared to watch porn, but still looking for a steamy diversion.

Regardless, the simple problem with Chloe is that, with its cast, it really 
should be so much better. It seems somehow in a film about sex, story, 
character and dialogue are no longer deemed important. And while that may have 
worked for your average top-shelf straight-to-video fare, nowadays people 
probably need more of a reason to see a film than Liam Neeson getting a hand 
job in a greenhouse.
 