
This week, Waterkeeper Alliance passed an important milestone. We licensed our 
300th Waterkeeper organization. I just came back from a week in Peru, where we 
have three Waterkeeper organizations fighting dam projects on three of the most 
important rivers in Latin America. A week before that, I was in the Himalayas 
and India, where we have seven Waterkeeper organizations protecting the major 
waterways that supply water to 40% of the planet.

The first Waterkeeper organization was founded on the Hudson River in 1966 by 
a blue collar coalition of commercial and recreational fishermen who mobilized 
to reclaim the river from its polluters. Many of the people I represent come 
from families that have been fishing the river continuously since Dutch 
colonial times. These were people who had little expectation that they’d ever 
see Yosemite or Yellowstone or the Everglades. They didn’t have the resources 
to take those kinds of vacations. For them, like for most Americans, the 
environment was their backyard.

The troubling evolution of corporate greenwashing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/aug/20/greenwashing-environmentalism-lies-companies>
One of the things I’ve recognized in my 30 years of doing this work is that 
wherever you see large scale environmental injury, you’ll also see the 
subversion of democracy. You’ll see the corruption of public officials, and the 
capture of the agencies that are supposed to protect Americans from pollution – 
they become sock puppets for the industries they’re supposed to regulate.

You’ll see the disappearance of transparency in government, the corruption of 
the press and the diminishment of local control. I’ll give you an example: in 
the town where I live, Bedford, New York, somebody tried to build a quarry. We 
passed a zoning law to say, “Hey, you can’t do that” because it’s going to 
diminish everyone else’s property values. So yeah, you’re going to make that 
one guy rich, but all the rest of us are going to pay for it.

That law was upheld by the top appellate court in New York. In Kentucky and 
West Virginia, where I do a lot of my work, they don’t have those laws. Those 
laws have been abolished constitutionally so that there is no way for 
localities to object to mountaintop removal mining, for example. In North 
Carolina, laws have been abolished that would allow localities to object to 
factory farms in their backyard. And the agencies in these states are really 
just mouthpieces for the industries which they’re supposed to regulate.

In North Carolina, Rick Dove, a 27-year veteran of the US marine corps [and 
one of the founding members of the Waterkeeper Alliance], owned a commercial 
fishing operation on the Neuse River. It was his dream job after he retired 
from the marines. Two years after he started that business, a billion fish died 
in the Neuse River with lesions on their bodies, and no one could explain why. 
Rick traced the pollution to the hog industry, which had happened below 
anybody’s radar. Why? Because the hog factories were placed in poor communities 
that had no voice, and no access to public office.

A [North Carolina] state senator named Wendell Murphy had looked at what 
happened to the chicken industry in this country. He’d seen how three men – 
Tyson, Pilgrim and Perdue – had put a million independent chicken farmers out 
of business and changed the chicken industry from an agricultural one to an 
industrial one. They would shoehorn up to a million birds into a single 
facility and keep them in tiny battery cages where they could not turn around, 
and then dose them with drugs and hormones and manipulate them with light and 
cause them to literally lay their guts out over a short and miserable life.

They made themselves billionaires. And Wendell Murphy said, “I can do that 
with hogs”. He passed laws that made it almost impossible for anyone to sue 
anyone who called themselves a hog farmer, even if it had nothing to do with 
farming. At that time, there were 28,000 independent hog farmers in the state, 
raising hogs sustainably, providing jobs. Heput every hog farmer in the state 
out of business 
<http://www.witn.com/home/headlines/HOG-FARMERS-Ongoing-lawsuit-has-pushed-us-to-bankruptcy-319701941.html>
, except those who would sign a contract with him. That contract doomed those 
farmers to involuntary servitude. In 10 years, [the state] went from 28,000 hog 
farmers to 2,200 factories. And those factories were deliberately put inareas 
of the state with minority populations 
<http://qz.com/433750/the-world-eats-cheap-bacon-at-the-expense-of-north-carolinas-rural-poor/>
 – blacks, Hispanics – where people wouldn’t complain.

Polluters always choose the soft targets of poverty. Four out of every five 
toxic waste dumps in this country are in a black neighborhood. The largest 
toxic waste dump in America is in Emelle, Alabama, where a third of the 
population is in poverty. The highest concentration of toxic waste dumps in 
America is on Chicago’s South Side. The most contaminated zipcode in California 
is East LA.

Navajo youths have a thousand times the rate of sexual organ cancer as other 
Americans because the thousands of tons of uranium tailings that have been 
dumped on their reservation lands. In North Carolina, we now have an air force 
that flies over the state every day filming these industries because they can’t 
be photographed from the road. We are not only bringing the hog industry under 
control, but also one of the worst toxic polluters in the country: coal ash 
from utilities. There are now 1,400 uncontrolled coal ash pits leeching poisons 
into local waterways at every coal-burning power plant in the country. And 
again, the [plants] are almost always located in impoverished neighborhoods.

This is one of the corollaries of the idea that the best measure of how 
democracy functions is how it distributes goods. Every person in the state of 
North Carolina should be able to go down to the Neuse River and pull in a fish 
and bring it home to feed it to their family with the security that they’re not 
poisoning somebody. We have that right: the constitution guarantees it. But 
those rights have been stolen from us.

You’ll hear this a lot from the big polluters, the Koch brothers, from their 
indentured servants in Washington DC and their toadies on Fox News: “Oh we have 
to choose between economic prosperity on the one hand and environmental 
protection on the other.” That is a false choice. In 100% of situations, good 
environmental policy is identical to good economic policy.

We should be measuring our economy on how it produces jobs and how it 
preserves the value of the assets of our community. If, on the other hand, we 
want to do what the Koch brothers and the big polluters want us to do, which is 
to treat our country as if it were a business in liquidation, convert our 
natural resources to cash as quickly as possible, have a few years of 
pollution-based prosperity ... then we can generate an instantaneous cash flow 
and the illusion of a prosperous economy and make a few people billionaires by 
impoverishing the rest of us.

But our children are going to pay for our joy ride. And they’re going to pay 
for it with poor health and huge cleanup costs that are going to amplify and 
metastasize over time. Environmental injury is deficit spending. It’s a way of 
loading the costs of our generation’s prosperity onto the backs of our 
children. One of the things that I’ve done over the past three decades as an 
environmental advocate is to constantly go around and confront this argument 
that an investment in our environment is a diminishment of our nation’s wealth. 
But it’s not – it’s an investment in infrastructure. It’s the same as investing 
in telecommunications or road construction. It’s an investment we have to make 
if we’re going to ensure the economic vitality of future generations.

I’ve always been asked the question: What’s the most important environmental 
law that you’d pass? And I’ve always said the same thing: I’d have true free 
market capitalism.

But now, I’d say something different: I would get rid of Citizens United. 
Because for capitalism to work, you need democracy to work. And right now we 
don’t have democracy. We have what I would call a corporate kleptocracy, an 
oligarchy by the corporations and the wealthy. You can’t have a clean 
environment when you have that.

Can our need for a carbon-free future override our fears of nuclear energy?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/12/carbon-free-plants-nuclear-energy-future-power-state-sources>
The fishermen on the Hudson had a business plan that worked. It worked for 
three and a half centuries. They wanted their children to be able to do the 
same thing. It didn’t stop working because of a failure of their business 
model. It stopped working due to a failure of capitalism. A failure of 
democracy. General Electric had better lobbyists in Albany and they were able 
to persuade the governor to waive the law that made it illegal for GE to dump 
their PCBs into the Hudson. And GE dumped their PCBs in and all the fisheries 
were closed, and men and women were put out of work. It wasn’t their fault the 
fisheries collapsed – it was GE’s subversion of democracy.

As long as we have Citizens United, the polluters are going to be in charge of 
our country. And that’s going to happen every time we try and do something good 
for our children, or something sustainable. Our assets are going to be 
liquidated and turned into profit by the big shots who own our government.

So we need to get right of Citizens United or nothing else works. The reason I 
believe that true free market capitalism is the best thing for the environment 
is because a rational marketplace promotes efficiency, which means the 
elimination of waste. And pollution is waste. In true free market capitalism, 
you can’t make yourself rich without making your neighbors rich and without 
enriching your community.

What polluters do is make themselves rich by making everyone else poor. They 
raise standards of living for themselves by lowering quality of life for 
everyone else. And they do that by escaping the discipline of the free market. 
You show me a polluter, and I will show you a subsidy. I will show you a fat 
cat using political clout to escape the discipline of the free market and force 
the public to pay for his production costs. That’s what all pollution is.

At Waterkeeper Alliance, we don’t consider ourselves environmentalists 
anymore. We think of ourselves as free marketeers. We catch the cheaters and 
polluters and we say to them: “We’re going to force you to internalize your 
costs the same way you internalize your profits.” Because as long as somebody 
is cheating the free market, none of us get the advantages of the efficiency, 
the prosperity and the democracy of free market capitalism.

What we have to understand as Americans is that there’s a huge difference 
between free market capitalism, which makes a nation more efficient, more 
prosperous and more democratic, and the kind of corporate crony capitalism 
which we’ve now embraced in this country. This is as antithetical to 
prosperity, democracy and efficiency in America as it is in Nigeria.

This is an edited transcript of a keynote speech given by Robert F Kennedy Jr 
at the SXSW Eco conference on 10 October 2016, in Austin, Texas.

Robert F Kennedy Jr is president of Waterkeeper Alliance, 
<http://waterkeeper.org/> a global movement for swimmable, drinkable and 
fishable water.He is also a US radio host, environmental activist and attorney 
specializing in environmental law.
 