
Despite China’s objections, the United States and the Philippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> will call for a stop to 
island-building work, military deployments and other aggressive actions that 
raise tensions in the disputed South China Sea in an annual diplomatic meeting 
in Malaysia, officials said Tuesday.

Beijing has opposed any mention of the thorny territorial rifts in the 
meetings of foreign ministers from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
and their Asian and western counterparts. But Washington has said it would call 
for a halt to aggressive actions byChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and other rival nations to allow a 
diplomatic solution to a problem that threatens regional stability.

Philippines foreign secretary Albert del Rosario said on Tuesday that his 
country would push the US call in the meetings this week, but would not agree 
to be bound by it unless China and other countries locked in the conflict also 
do so.

China conducts South China Sea live drill 'to improve at-sea combat ability'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/29/china-conducts-south-china-sea-live-drill-to-improve-at-sea-combat-ability>
“As a means of de-escalating tensions in the region, the Philippines fully 
supports and will proactively promote the call of the United States on the 
‘three halts’ — a halt in reclamation, halt in construction and a halt in 
aggressive actions that could further heighten tensions,” del Rosario said.

“We have to emphasise, however, that this should not in any way legitimise the 
status of the features reclaimed by China,” del Rosario said, referring to 
massive artificial islands that China started building last year on at least 
seven disputed reefs.

China, the Philippines and four other governments have wrangled over ownership 
and control of the South China Sea, a resource-rich and busy waterway, in a 
conflict that has flared on and off for decades. Tensions flared last year when 
China began work to build artificial islands in the Spratly Islands, amid fears 
the actions could impede freedom of navigation and overflights in a major 
transit area for the world’s oil and merchandise.

Washington is not a party to the conflict and has a policy of not taking sides 
in the territorial row, but says a peaceful resolution of the problem and 
freedom of navigation in the disputed waters were in the US national interest. 
China rejects any US involvement.

The disputes have led to deadly confrontations between China and Vietnam, and 
Washington and governments in the region are concerned that boosting military 
deployments increase the risk of miscalculations and accidental clashes that 
can spiral out of control.

What’s behind Beijing’s drive to control the South China Sea? | Howard W French
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/28/whats-behind-beijings-drive-control-south-china-sea-hainan>
Chinese officials say the disputes should not be discussed in the meetings in 
Malaysia. Top south-east Asian diplomats will meet their US and Chinese 
counterparts in the Asean Regional Forum, an annual Asian security gathering, 
in Kuala Lumpur on Thursday.

In Washington, US State Department spokesman Mark Toner said on Monday that 
secretary of state John Kerry would tackle the territorial issues in Malaysia.

“This is a forum in which critical security issues need to be brought up and 
discussed,” Toner told reporters, adding the US would view as “provocative” any 
moves to “significantly increase the physical size or functionality of disputed 
features, or to militarise them.”
 