
The spread of a deadly fungus killing ash trees in the UK could affect up to 
three-quarters of the species in the worst-hit areas within just four years, 
according to government scientists.

Conservationists said such a rapid spread would be "devastating" to landscapes 
and have a "very real economic cost".

Chalara fraxinea, a fungus that was found in England in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/oct/30/ash-tree-crisis-dieback-disease>
 after being blown over the English channel or imported via nurseries, causes 
the crown of ash trees to blacken and wither, and can kill younger trees.

Ministers have admitted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/mar/26/ash-dieback-landowners-restock-woodlands>
 the spread of the disease cannot be stopped, and are resigned to mitigating 
the worst distribution and impact of the organism on the UK's estimated 80 
million ash trees.

By 2018, more than 75% of ash in Kent will be infected by ash dieback, with a 
similar percentage of ash in Sussex affected,modelling published in the 
government's tree health management plan shows 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/tree-health-management-plan>. Ash 
is the most abundant species in Kent, making up around a fifth of the county's 
trees.

Other counties in the east will be badly hit, it predicts, with around half of 
ash trees in Essex, Norfolk and Suffolk expected to be infected by 2018.

Austin Brady, director of conservation at the Woodland Trust, said: “If the 
predicted spread of ash dieback is accurate it would prove devastating to the 
landscapes of Kent and East Sussex in particular. This highlights the need to 
ensure that other species can fill the gaps and help restore lost tree cover. 
This will only happen in the long term if we ensure that risks to our remaining 
species are identified and minimised and we work to boost the natural 
resilience of our woods by improving their diversity.”

Nick Johannsen, director of the Kent Downs Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, 
said:“Ash is a critical component of Kent’s land and townscape and already we 
have seen a major impact from ash dieback. The costs of the loss of many ash 
trees in the county will be many fold, our landscapes and townscapes will 
diminish and our wildlife will suffer, there will be a very real economic cost 
in making roads, railways and urban areas safe as trees succumb to primary and 
secondary infections over time."
 Ash dieback distribution map. Photograph: /Defra 
Ash makes up just under 5% of the UK's woodlands, and as well as being a vital 
part of the UK's ecosystem – 45 species are only found on the trees – it makes 
for valuable timber. It is estimated to be worth £72- £124m annually in social 
and environmental benefits and is famously good for burning, known in poems as 
a firewood fit for a queen.

The Department for Environment Food and Rural Affairs said that it had already 
agreed payments totalling £120,000 for the removal of young ash trees to be 
replanted with other species,a strategy it announced in March 2013  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/mar/26/ash-dieback-landowners-restock-woodlands>
to tackle the disease's spread.

A spokesman for Defra said: "This projection is based on our current 
understanding of Charala. We are learning about this disease all the time, 
having invested £8million into research in tree and plant health. We are 
working to identify a strain of ash tree which is naturally resistant to 
Chalara, both through research projects and through the largest field trial of 
its kind with 155,000 trees planted in East Anglia. Our woodland changes all 
the time but these measures will help to ensure that ash continues to have a 
place in our forests."

The tree health plan said that while there was no known cure for Chalara 
fraxinea, the pathogen has been tested with 17 chemical treatments, four of 
which it proved highly sensitive to.


"Further research is under way to test the level of control that can be 
achieved using the most promising chemicals under field conditions," the plan 
said.

The report highlights other threats to Britain's woodlands, including a 
caterpillar that is toxic to humans and strips oak trees of their leaves.

The oak processionary moth, so-called because of the way the caterpillars 
march in procession, has taken hold across south west London and officials were 
so concerned by its spread to a wood in Berkshire that theysprayed the area 
with insecticide from a helicopter last year. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/may/06/pest-caterpillars-helicopter-blitz-insecticide>

Spraying to limit the caterpillar's spread in London will continue this year, 
"to contain the outbreak in south-west London and seek to eradicate outbreaks 
where they occur outside the outlying sites of infestation."
 