
A tiny beetle could wipe out Britain’s ash trees much faster than the 
established ash dieback disease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/apr/30/ash-dieback-trees-2018> 
which is expected to eventually kill millions of the trees, according to the 
government’s leading authority on pests and pathogens threatening UK forests.

“The emerald ash borer is moving uncontrolled through Russia. It flies long 
distances, moves quickly and can reproduce in the UK,” said Nicola Spence, 
chief plant health scientist. The beetle has not has yet arrived in the UK, but 
she warned: “There is a high risk of it being introduced and establishing 
itself.”

According to Prof Spence, the ash borer is now top of the UK’s plant risk 
register, which now counts 811 pests and diseases threatening trees and plants. 
While ash dieback disease, or chalara, has been given a score of 100 out of 125 
as a relative risk, ash borer disease registers the maximum 125.


According to the Forestry Commission, the borer beetle, which is native to 
Asia, kills trees in two to three years and has established itself across many 
thousands of square miles of the US and Canada.

It has also reached the Moscow region of Russia where it is spreading west and 
south at a rate of 25 miles a year. It is likely to have arrived in North 
America in imported wooden packing material.

The beetle, which is difficult to detect, could arrive in EU countries via 
imported firewood, said Spence. “We have identified the risk pathways of [how 
it could arrive in Britain]. We are worried about firewood coming through the 
Ukraine or Baltic countries near Russia,” she said.

She added that all firewood being imported into Britain will shortly be 
regulated and liable for inspection.

Geneticists at Queen Mary’s College, London, are racing to sequence the 
world’s 35 species of ash tree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/31/ash-dieback-gm-genetic-modification-woodland-crisis>
 to identify genes that may be resistant to both the beetle and the disease. 
“Preliminary research suggests the Manchurian ash is the best candidate,” said 
biologist Richard Buggs.


With 90% of the UK’s ash trees about to be wiped out, could GM be the answer?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/31/ash-dieback-gm-genetic-modification-woodland-crisis>
In addition, the Woodland Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/may/30/ancient-trees-risk-woodland>
, Forestry Commission and the Earth Trust are hoping to identify resistant 
trees to form the basis of a nationwide tree-breeding programme.

According to Buggs, there are eight ways to respond to the disease, ranging 
from doing nothing and allowing resistant trees to develop, to genetic 
modification.

The six other alternatives include using gene markers to identify tolerance in 
ash trees and then growing them conventionally; propagating saplings showing 
tolerance; and finding genes in other species of ash tree which could be 
inserted in British ash trees.

No preference has been identified by the government, but a social survey of 
1,400 people conducted by Oxford university showed strong opposition both to 
doing nothing and to genetic modification using genes from other species.

The survey also found that 83% of people questioned would be “very concerned” 
if ash trees disappeared from the British countryside, with only 2% said they 
would not mind at all.

According to Buggs, it could take several generations for ash trees to 
naturally develop resistance to the die back diseaase, compared to about 20 
years if GM methods were used. “It will take about two years to find resistant 
genes. [But] We do not know if there is one gene that is resistant to both 
diseases.”

According to the Forestry Commission, ash dieback disease is progressing 
steadily through Britain. It affects the crown of trees at first, and then 
slowly kills the whole tree. Trees’ susceptibility to the disease depends on 
stress caused by drought or extreme climatic conditions.

“We don’t yet know what the full impact of chalara will be in Britain,” said 
the commission. “Evidence from continental Europe suggests that older, mature 
ash trees can survive infection and continue to provide their landscape and 
wildlife benefits for some time.”
 