
I've often thought that indie kids try to purport a more enlightened sense of 
gender relations between themselves (the boys and the girls dress really 
similarly, for example). Is this the case, and is their subculture some kind of 
equality-based utopia? Or are gender stereotypes still present but instead 
played out in a different way?
GuidedByVeal

Without a doubt, indie has a more enlightened sense of gender relations than 
many musical genres. You can see this in a number of areas, such as pioneering 
co-ed bands (Pixies, Arcade Fire, Lush, the White Stripes, Elastica, My Bloody 
Valentine, Quasi, Slowdive,the xx 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/apr/10/the-xx-interview> , Autolux 
<http://www.atpfestival.com/recordings/artist/autolux/view.php>, Beach House, 
the Kills, feel free to carry on) and the blending of gender-coded imagery 
where androgyny has been consistent in clothing and physicality. Blur didn't 
write "Girls who are boys, who like boys to be girls, who do boys like they're 
girls, who do girls like they're boys" for nothing. Androgyny can even been 
seen in the common use of falsetto by male singers as a higher register is 
usually associated with femininity. The blending of gender imagery is common in 
rock and pop, but the central value of equality, even between performers and 
audience has made humanist gender relations the ideal in indie.

However, in practicality, indie does not exist in some parallel universe. I 
can't tell you the number of times I've seen female musicians ignored in 
interviews. Additionally, female spectatorship and fanship is sexualised. There 
is an assumption if you are female at a show that you are sexually available to 
performers. Just earlier this year, on Jeopardy (a popular game show in the 
US), university student Lindsay Eanet said she would like to be a music 
journalist like the fictional character William Miller (from Almost Famous, 
based on theexperiences of Cameron Crowe <http://www.squidoo.com/cameroncrowe> 
writing for Rolling Stone). The host said, "Oh, so you want to be a groupie?" 
As she explained that she wanted to be a professional journalist, he once again 
mouthed to the camera "groupie". Of course, it implies all female professionals 
are there to get guys in bands (like this is such a hard thing – seriously, you 
don't need to work in the music industry to get laid). This assumption that 
audiences are filled with sexually overwhelmed girls is belied by the fact that 
for rock and metal as well as for indie the audiences are disproportionately 
male. 

 

At indie shows, you still see gender distinctions in distribution patterns and 
activities. Women tend to stand right at the front and by the speaker stacks, 
rarely in the central area where dancing might happen. Groping is absolutely 
taboo, yet women are still loathe to crowd surf because it only takes one jerk 
in an audience to violate a woman which limits her ability to participate in 
audience activities available to males. During my research I've been told by 
countless women that they refrained from crowd-surfing and most of them 
(including myself) had been groped at shows (interestingly, both men and women 
came to my defence – this is a typical tale from many female audience members). 
After that happens, they often chose a different location or move further back 
so it won't happen again.

The restriction of female participation was part of the rationale for stopping 
stage diving and discouraging crowd-surfing. British indie has been – and still 
is – consistently and significantly more egalitarian in terms of gender 
relations than America. In the noughties, when indie aesthetics overtook 
alternative music in the US, it ostensibly produced more female equality. The 
musical points of reference moved from "aggressive" to "fey" and "effeminate" – 
in line with UK bands of the 1980s and 90s. With indie, the feminine body and 
voice replaced the punk rockism of grunge and Riot Grrrl.

However, even in 2006, when Pitchfork reviewed my book 
<http://pitchfork.com/features/puritan-blister/6384-puritan-blister-18/> on the 
culture of indie music, the writer actually talked about my cleavage! Always 
something you want to include in a review of a female author's book. I'd like 
to say it's a big topic that needs more discussion, but if I did that, someone 
might call me a tease.

If you have a question for the indie prof, please leave a comment below or 
email her attheindieprofessor@gmail.com  <>
 