
"Why do you presume all bands and their tour drivers are dudes in your 
article? Don't us women do those jobs too?! " FromRebecca Jade 
<http://twitter.com/RebeccaJade> via Twitter.

This is an excellent point and one I often consider when writing about music. 
Gender is one of the many issues explored in rock'n'roll performances. It's a 
place where roles are transposed, accentuated,blurred and collapsed 
<http://fashionbombdaily.com/2010/04/23/style-verdict-menswear-inspired-fashion/>
. However, this exploration is an expression and critique of existing cultural 
roles for men and women. It challenges us to discuss these issues and the 
contrasting behind-the-scenes realities and practicalities of the music 
industry.

Thus, my previous article on touring 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2010/nov/02/indie-professor-touring-rules>
 was not so much a presumption, more an observation. The truth is that females 
are the minority on tours. Thus, when you are talking about patterns of 
behaviour, male is the normative. That is not an evaluation, just a fact. There 
are challenges that come from being a female in a male-dominated profession. 
Not just any profession, but one that is sexually charged as well. It means 
that a woman on tour has got a different set of challenges to deal with.

The most fundamental one is that she is basically exiled in guyville, a female 
visitor to the boys' club (which as we know can be fun as a tourist, but hard 
as an ex-patriot). Masculine cultural norms are constantly displayed in vans, 
tour buses and venues. Thus, to avoid criticism, women keep the female stuff to 
themselves (I'm violating this principle right now). Female professionals are 
vigilant about not reinforcing gender stereotypes. This means women often 
conform their behaviour to masculine stereotypes and circumscribe "feminine" 
behaviour. If a female professional does anything that conforms to a female 
stereotype, she is pilloried. Take something as simple as preparing to go on 
stage. Western assumption is that attention to looks and presentation is a
female characteristic 
<http://society.ezinemark.com/mr-sahara-a-male-beauty-contest-in-niger-773661944df1.html>
. Therefore, a female artist's need or desire for some privacy and time to 
attend to her looks before going on stage is viewed as an irritant and 
liability. However, in some genres such as goth or death metal, male performers 
need and often take more time to put on makeup and clothing than their female 
counterparts. If the male artist does so, he is teased that he took longer to 
get ready than "a girl".

Ultimately, there is just more pressure on females. The reason for this is 
that being a minority means your behaviour is not assessed in the same fashion 
as your male counterparts. If a guy in a band has a conflict with a male 
colleague, he'll just put it down to the colleague being an ass. But if he has 
a conflict with a female musician, you'll hear him boldly state: "I'm never 
working with a woman again." This is the essence of sexism or racism. Instead 
of judging the behaviour of an individual, it is instead taken as indicative of 
the behaviour of a class of people. Often when you talk about gender, there is 
a section of the population who invariably look at this asmen v women 
<http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/music_blog/2010/09/gaga-sexuality-and-21st-century-pop-speaking-truth-to-camille-paglia.html>
. The more accurate depiction would be that this is against all of us. Gender 
roles circumscribe the range of human potential into categories and every 
person, male and female, is limited by gender stereotypes. It's one of the 
reasons that musical spectacle is a domain where the arbitrariness of these 
gender conventions get to be transgressed.

It can be lonely being the only female on tour in a male-dominated industry. 
On those rare occasions when the band gets hotel rooms, the solo female will 
get her own room which is an advantage for privacy, but a disadvantage for 
camaraderie. Sometimes she is forgotten and not included in the day's 
activities or meals. She wakes up to find she has been left behind. The shared 
interests of male tour companions means the female is often left out. However, 
things can change. So the more women, or any other minority, that participate, 
perform, crew, tour and succeed set in motion changes in the culture of music.

PS: The only female bus drivers I've ever found have been the ones that drove 
me to school.
 