
I think @indiegodess <http://www.twitter.com/indiegodess> should address this 
RT@GdnFilmandMusic <http://www.twitter.com/gdnfilmandmusic>: Why do people go 
to gigs to talk?

From Valerio Berdini (@liveon35mm <http://www.twitter.com/liveon35mm> )

Audiences go to gigs not just to listen to music. In my studies of audience 
behaviour, I found patterns of who talks, where they talk and why. The space 
occupied by audiences at gigs can be organised into three zones based on 
distinct types of activities found in each. Zone one, closest to the stage, is 
the most complicated in terms of physical engagement and has the youngest 
audience members. The second zone begins about a quarter of the way back into 
the venue. Interpersonal distances are greater and the audience older. Zone 
three, at the back of the venue, features the most varied activities and is 
where the music industry professionals stand – as well as those who don't like 
the show.

Talking in venues follows a predictable pattern. Speaking occurs in a cline 
with the least talking in the front and the most in the back. Those closest to 
the stage rarely talk. They pay most attention to the band and the phones and 
cameras they use to document the performance. Moving further back in the venue, 
talking increases with the majority of chatter in the rear by industry 
professionals and those who don't like the show. The range of professionals – 
promoters, managers, agents, publicists, executives, journalists and musicians 
– network at shows. This is not just in service to themselves, it accomplishes 
a great deal for the industry. These discussions help shape festival bills, get 
press or create company alliances. Or, if not, they at least nurture 
relationships between industry professionals.
 Chatter boxes ... Audience zones in a concert hall. Photograph: Wendy Fonarow 
Additionally, most industry personnel have attended hundreds, if not 
thousands, of shows. For them, shows even by the greatest of bands are 
predictable. They know if the house lights are down there will be an encore. 
They know this is the same set list as last night, last week, last month. 
Sometimes they might even know what the artist plans to say between certain 
songs. On top of that, industry personnel rarely pay. They go to see bands 
without personal cost, only potential benefit. It's why they are called 
liggers. A "lig" is an archaic term referring to a cover that hung from the 
king's bed. Therefore, those professionals are essentially hanging on to the 
seat power, which at a show is the band and music.

Most significantly, however, is the fact that going to a show is a social 
event. If you wanted to just hear music, why not plug into SoundCloud and put 
on your headphones? The gig transforms a fractured community of online, print 
and private discourse into one of face-to-face interaction. Fans find each 
other in activities that designate one as a member of the community – and live 
shows are the pre-eminent event that accomplishes this. As more music 
connections occur virtually, direct contact is sought at shows. How are you 
supposed to cop off if you can't talk to someone new?

Talking varies not just in terms of space but during the set as well. Not 
everyone likes the band to the same degree, nor do they all like the entirety 
of a band's repertoire. Audiences with low thresholds for boredom often want to 
hear just the hits. They are uninterested in more recent songs or obscure 
B-sides. While they wait for their favourites, concertgoers turn to alternative 
forms of entertainment. This means talking, flirting, tweeting, getting a pint 
or playing Angry Birds. The quieter the band the more obvious these patterns 
are. Ultimately, talking at shows is a bit like watching someone play with 
their smartphone. It's irritating whenever it isn't you.

• Got a question for the indie professor? Then post one below. Or email her at 
theindieprofessor@gmail.com <>! Or tweet her at @indiegodess 
<http://www.twitter.com/indiegodess>
 