
How does a band plan their tour schedule? Besides the obvious answer of 
whatever venues will book them, how do they plan the route? Which cities take 
preference? How many nights in each city? I'm very curious!

Samantha Hayden, via email

Tour dates are organised by one of the most essential roles in the music 
industry, the booking agent. Great agents, by helping artists play the right 
dates of the right size at the right times, can make the difference in a band's 
success or failure. It's the booking agent who translates a band and 
management's assumptions and aspirations into a concrete tour itinerary. A 
great booking agent knows the size of their artists' audiences at each stage in 
their career and plans a tour accordingly. For a newer band with a little buzz, 
they will be booked into "major markets". In the UK, the major markets are 
London, Glasgow, Leeds, Brighton, Bristol, and Manchester. There are some newer 
bands that want to play everywhere. This is a huge amount of work for agent and 
band who, if they are lucky, might break even. However, playing live helps 
cement an intimate relationship with artists and audiences, particularly in 
areas that rarely have bands come and play. More established bands branch out 
into secondary market cities and have longer tours in bigger venues.

The major factor in routing is minimising travel time and days off. Every day 
on the road has a huge overhead, even tours without crews. Agents tend to plan 
dates in a circle around the country to avoid doubling back. Then, there is a 
question of which venue to play. Some venues have club nights with built-in 
audiences so a band gets paid very little but is assured of a full crowd (soft 
tickets). At other venues, the band is the draw and then it's a matter of 
making sure the venue is not too big. It's always better to have a sold-out 
small show than a half-full big one.

The timing of tours is organised around release dates and key events on the 
international touring calendar such as SXSW and festivals. Agents are essential 
for creating a tour that brings a band to key events. The importance of a 
booking agent is even more crucial for festivals. Promoters start by choosing 
festival headliners and then work on a deal with the agent. Part of what the 
agent negotiates is not just a good wage for the headliners, but also 
leveraging the band's clout for good slots on the festival bill for other acts 
on the agent's roster. Now, this might seem like trading on the cachet of the 
premier band, but remember, this is exactly how the premier band got the 
exposure, breaks, and festival positions on their way to becoming headliners.

What's your favourite musician joke? 

BH, via email

I can't say my favourite musician joke because it's taboo, but I can tell you 
my second favourite one.
 Two guys are standing on the side of the road. One's a musician and the other 
one doesn't have any money either. 
Nothing makes a joke less funny than analysing it, but as most of these aren't 
very funny to begin with I don't feel too bad. Denigrating jokes allow the 
expression of hostility in a culturally acceptable form and also illustrate 
cultural stereotypes. The musician joke cycle serves both these functions 
allowing the teller to feel superior to the butt of the joke and express the 
negative stereotype of an occupational class. The stereotype of musicians is 
that they are juvenile wastrels who can't support themselves. Here are some 
examples from the musician joke cycle:
 What do you call a musician without a girlfriend? Homeless. 
 How many musicians does it take to screw in a lightbulb? 20: one to hold the 
lightbulb and 19 others to drink until the room spins.
 What is the difference between a musician and a mutual fund? A mutual fund 
eventually matures and earns money.
 A child says to his mother, when I grow up I want to be a musician. His 
mother replies, now I already told you, you can only do one or the other.

General musician jokes are especially productive as they can be used to 
ridicule any performer. These jokes are often told on tours, helping 
professionals deal with the interpersonal conflicts that arise from touring. So 
if someone is bothering them, being arrogant, or if they are just agitated by 
boredom, the touring professional can use a ready repertoire of musician jokes 
to, as Freud would say it, "have catharsis through articulation". In layman's 
speech, this means to relieve stress and conflict by having a laugh at someone 
else's expense.
 