
Dear Wendy,

Is food the new indie rock? 

Rachel R, via email 

As rock has recently been declared dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jan/10/rock-n-roll-read-last-rites> by 
Paul Gambaccini, many are wondering what will take its place? The question 
appears to be answered by new blogs such asFoodisthenewrock 
<http://www.foodisthenewrock.com/>, and musicians M Ward and Jim James's site 
devoted to creme brulee <http://www.cremebrulog.com/>. Perhaps food is the new 
rock. There are parallels between music consumption and the modern foodie 
movement, at least in the United States. Both have become sources for 
documentation. At gigs, a significant portion of the audience watches the show 
through the lens of a mobile phone. The hit songs that used to produce the most 
dancing now produce the most illuminated screens held aloft. Foodies are 
chronicling their eating habits in a similar fashion. At meals, people stop to 
photograph their food and upload the images to social networking sites before 
they take their first bite.

Yet, this could be an extension of the overall trend of life tourism, where 
experiences in the real world provide fodder for our cyberselves. It doesn't 
really explain why bands and fans seem to be increasingly enthralled by food. 
Bands are interested in food primarily because what they eat is often out of 
their control.Food <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/food> on the road 
tends to be fast and cheap. It's one of the reasons why you are likely to see 
bands huddled at a Little Chef off the M1 or at a Denny's in the States. 
Musicians travel the world and if they don't put in any effort, it will be a 
long series of diners and trays of processed food accompanied by supermarket 
dips. For ageing music fans, life circumstances make active participation in 
music scenes difficult: partners, children, babysitters, early morning 
commutes. People's passion for new music has apparently turned into an 
obsession with food.

What I find most fascinating is how the modern foodie movement expresses many 
of indie values. The indie music scene finds ownership and means of production 
to be ethical issues, preferring small independent local operations to large 
corporations.Indie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/indie> values include DIY 
aesthetics, simplicity, purity, an antipathy to the synthetic and manufactured, 
a desire for authenticity, a longing for the past (be it 7in singles or 
cassette tapes), and the elitist discourse of the art critic.

These concerns are shared by new hip food obsessives who want to know how food 
is made, where it comes from, how far it travels and how much integrity it has. 
The more artisanal the food is, the better. If you are paying attention to food 
production and consumption isn't that similar to paying attention to how your 
music is made, who owns it, and how it is delivered to you? Foodies are 
concerned if food producers are exploited or if distribution produces a large 
carbon footprint. You can look at a label of any artisanal food and see indie 
values: locally sourced, independently owned, limited quantities, traditional 
methods, purity, simple ingredients, and most of all organic, uncontaminated by 
additives. The food artisan produces commodities not widely distributed or 
easily found. Food entrepreneurs should be small and local, producing food with 
methods you could do yourself if you chose to. Not food produced by 
transnational corporations manufacturing synthetic concoctions such as mystery 
meat in a can. It's about restoring traditional methods in the face of 
modernity. Chemicals are clearly rejected. Perhaps this is why people are so 
skeptical about molecular gastronomy. Sure it's creative and distinctive, but 
it's so tainted by the future and science.

Contemporary foodies search for authenticity. What makes cuisine authentic is 
how traditional it is, not how expensive. As our cities are awash in menus from 
all over the globe, experimental foodies seek out the most exotic regional 
foods and assess them according to how closely the food is reproduced to its 
original form. If the food is extraordinarily rare, its cultural capital 
increases. If you go to a Thai restaurant that serves frog legs in tealeaf 
curry, a dish specific to one highland region of Thailand, isn't that just as 
good as getting a limited-edition coloured vinyl EP?

Then there is the connoisseurship. Foodies aren't just fans, they use the 
discourse of critics to suggest they have the aesthetic acumen to proclaim the 
absolute "best" of some cuisine and vigourously debate the relative merits of 
each dish orinventive food truck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/sep/23/gourmet-taco-trucks-los-angeles?INTCMP=SRCH>
. If an establishment becomes popular, many will declare it's not as good as it 
used to be. The indie values of the foodie movement may explain the cult of In 
and Out Burger, the first stop for people in the know when they arrive on the 
west coast. It's beloved not only because it tastes good, but also because it 
feels good as well. In and Out Burger is independently owned. Its marketing is 
primarily word of mouth so fans have their own sense of discovery and personal 
investment once they have eaten there. In and Out controls its means of 
production and distribution. Everything is fresh, never frozen. They have 
complete transparency, even allowing you to watch the food being prepared. 
Their governing principles are quality and simplicity. They serve burgers, 
fries, and drinks done exactly to the customers liking. Thefabled secret menu 
<http://www.in-n-out.com/secretmenu.asp> is just a short cut to genuinely 
having it your way as opposed to being told you'll have it your way, but 
actually getting exactly the same thing as everyone else.

So foodie values are akin to the philosophy of indie music, but the topic is 
different. Instead of arguing about the merits of, say, the Vaccines, foodie 
discourse provides endless opportunities to argue the relative merits of 
various creme brulees or express your connoisseurship for tapas. So if food is 
the new indie rock, which band would Heston Blumenthal be in?
 