
Is the folk thing finished yet?

Alex Kapranos via Twitter

Folk originates from the German word "volk", meaning people, and therefore a 
fairly inclusive term. The word most commonly used by a culture to refer to 
itself is "people". But as the meanings of words change, folk came to be 
associated with the "common people". Currently, the use of "folk" is deeply 
enmeshed in American political discourse. It is a way for politicians to 
express affiliation with the American working and middle classes. In the US, 
the imagined middle class is conceived as the common people. In music, folk was 
initially used to describe traditional song and dance. The originator of the 
work was unknown and therefore it became the property of the folk, along with 
stories and other forms of intellectual property.

This "folk thing" hardly refers to traditional music, so it must concern a 
more recent trend. My first thought was Mumford and Sons, broadly described as 
a British folk band. Also, because one of my favourite questions was: "If 
marooned at sea, which member of Mumford and Sons would you eat last?" I asked 
some musician friends what they thought "folk" means. Lou Barlow said: "Does he 
mean freak folk like Devendra Banhart? Or someone like James Yorkston?" I 
speculated that modern folk meant having lots of interesting instruments and 
lots of members, but I was overruled because Arcade Fire have lots of 
interesting instruments and no one was willing to call them folk. The person 
who said "it has a banjo" was booed.

I thought it could be useful to use SXSW to check the status of the "folk 
thing". As the festival could be considered a snapshot of emerging artists 
attempting to get a foothold in the industry, it is an apt location to consider 
the health of various musical styles. In applying to play a showcase, artists 
are given a set of genres they must choose from that includes folk, but does 
not include subgenres such as chillwave or sadcore. Other options are country 
and alt-country. Yet, there is only the category of rock, no alt-rock or indie. 
Perhaps because alt-rock/indie has become so ubiquitous it is the assumed 
association of rock. If so, you'd need to develop some retro nomenclature for 
the few rock bands culture pundits feel free to vilify such as Nickelback and 
Train. Maybe the genre of "uncool rock", although I'd be interested to see if 
anyone would dare use it.

So here is a breakdown of the genres chosen by the 2,000 bands playing 
official showcases. SXSW features hundreds more bands playing parties, special 
performances and marquee events. None of these artists are required to 
categorise themselves. So Bruce Springsteen doesn't have a genre under his name.

Rock 31.10%

Hip-hop/rap 12.91%

Pop 10.94%

Electronic 9.07%

Singer-songwriter 5.75%

Folk 4.46%

Avant/experimental 3.73%

Punk 3.01%

Alt-country 2.64%

DJ 2.59%

World 2.18%

Metal 2.07%

Dance 1.66%

Americana 1.35%

R&B .98%

Latin rock .93%

Country .93%

Blues .83%

Reggae .52%

Funk .52%

Gospel .47%

Bluegrass .47%

Jazz .41%

Tejano .26%

Classical .21%

Now what this data tells us is questionable. On one hand, it is clear that 
less than 5% of performers at SXSW consider themselves to be folk musicians, 
not a particularly significant number. Additionally, while many have claimed 
rock is dead, the majority of performers coming to Austin aspire to success in 
rock, more than double the closest rival in hip-hop/rap. Yet, this also 
demonstrates the shortcomings of self-classification. After all, the Ting Tings 
have classified themselves as punk and the Magnetic Fields as pop, which might 
not be unreasonable ways to think about their music after all.
 