
Here's this week's answers! Please post your questions for the indie professor 
in the comments section below or email theindieprofessor@gmail.com

Why can't people think of anything else to say other than "testing, one, two 
..." at soundchecks?

OT Dude

This isn't a matter of creativity. Saying "testing, one two" or "check, one 
two" is formulaic and serves the same function as other formulaic expressions, 
such as greetings. People often claim that formulaic expressions are 
meaningless, ignoring the work they do. When someone says, "How are you?" in 
English or "Have you eaten?" in Thai, they aren't really asking about your 
well-being or your last meal, they're expecting to receive an answer from a
predictable repertoire of replies 
<http://blog.beniers-consultancy.de/archives/tag/proverb>. This opens lines of 
communication and allows the parties to focus on other important interactive 
information. With formulaic speech, you don't need to focus on content or 
specific words, but rather the acoustic information provided by slight 
variations in sound. By saying the same thing at a soundcheck, crew and 
performers can hear the significant contrasts in sound quality. The content of 
a formulaic expression is arbitrary. However, "check, one two" has a variety of 
sound units: the voiceless postalveolar affricate in "ch" (which has a lot of 
turbulence) and an alveolar plosive (which has a strong expulsion of air). 
Additionally, the audience are also aware of this routine and, therefore, don't 
pay attention to it. If something different was said, such as a movie quote, it 
would draw attention to the soundcheck and create confusion. However, if you 
ask a crew why the soundman says "one, two", their answer is "because you lift 
on three".

Hey Prof,

What kind of living can non-chart-topping indie bands make? I went to see 
Teenage Fanclub <http://www.uncut.co.uk/music/teenage_fanclub/interviews/8605> 
recently – they sold out a 600-capacity venue and release an album every five 
years that will sell modestly, but how do they keep the wolf from the door?

meadowside

Currently, this is the issue in the music industry, at least for the 
professionals who like music. It's the question of economic remuneration for 
artists and, at present, there is no model. Because of this, I can only answer 
historically when fans actually paid for music. The answer to what kind of 
living a non-chart-topping band makes is, they don't make a living. The "big" 
advance a record company gives an artist is shared between the managerand 
lawyers, and covers the recording costs of an album. Now, divide what's left 
between the four or five band members. This advance is not income – it is a 
loan that needs to be repaid by the percentage of income allocated to the band 
from an album's sales. For a major label the standard is around 13%; for an 
independent label it can be up to 50%. However, while the label is "supporting 
your record", its expenses are added to your debt. It's called recoupable and 
most things that a record company does for a band are paid for by the band, 
which increases their debt. This includes the cost of videos, publicity and 
tour support. (By the way, if you think a band makes money by touring, ask 
yourself why labels have to pay bands' tour support). A band must also rely on 
a record company accountant to keep track on how much of their debt has been 
repaid. Almost every band, including some platinum-selling artists, never 
recoup – they are always in dire need of that next advance. The 
non-chart-topping bands that persist do so through fool-hearted doggedness, 
wise early decisions, luck and/or having another means of support.

Normally, the only real source of revenue is from publishing. Publishing is 
the money paid to songwriters, primarily from mechanical royalties (CDs, MP3s, 
soundtracks). This system was designed in the era of sheet music, when one 
person wrote music and another wrote lyrics. This carried over to the present 
so that usually it's only the singer and guitarist who receive songwriting 
credits while the percussion section gets a bigduck egg 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/busalshots/453274032/>. Thus, the most important 
decision for a young band is the one that is usually the least thought out. If 
you don't divide the publishing fairly, you'll have two people living in a 
house and two who are basically homeless. This will eventually result in the 
breakup of the band. The disparity in funds and prestige also impacts on the 
sexual politics of bands, with musicians disproportionately taking advantage of 
sex available on the road. Counter-intuitively, rhythm section members, who are 
less likely to receive material rewards, are more likely to pursue carnal ones.

PS For those of you wondering about money from licensing, merchandise or 
touring <http://www.bugmusic.com/faq.aspx>. Ask and I'll tell you: it doesn't 
change the answer above.
 