
Last month in Madrid, Diego A Manrique, a man who is pretty much the Spanish 
equivalent of John Peel, introduced me at the Dia de la Musica festival as the 
world's only professor of indie music. I'm not sure if I'm the only indie 
professor, but I've spent the last 18 years recording, examining and writing 
about the culture of indie and the international music industry.

The Guardian has decided it's high time that this research be made readily 
available to the public and so, starting this week, they're debuting "Ask the 
indie professor". This column will be a place where your questions about the 
music scene or industry can be answered. Why Keds and Converse? Why do people 
love the Reading festival? How do bands make a living? Why are people at gigs 
recording the event rather than watching the band or dancing? And please 
someone ask me about why Americans think they invented indie. I've been dying 
to answer that one.

For those of you who think that getting a PhD in indie music is just another 
rock'n'roll swindle, here are my credentials. I did my doctorate in Cultural 
Anthropology at UCLA. This means I spend as much time looking at the rituals of 
Northwest Coast Indians and gender roles among the Wodaabe as I do observinghow 
Foals fans behave <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/jul/06/foals-review> at 
shows. I did my fieldwork in the UK, going on tours, filming audiences and 
working at record companies (I even had the fun of helping out a nascent Domino 
Records where I got to potato print 7in singles and babysit Bonnie Prince 
Billy). My book,Empire of Dirt: The Aesthetics and Rituals of British Indie 
Music 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Empire-Dirt-Aesthetics-Rituals-British/dp/0819568112> 
tackles questions such as "Why are drummers the most ridiculed band members?" 
and "How do members of the music industry blag their way into shows?". But on 
the serious side, it shows how this form of popular culture allows people to 
address taboo subjects and why indie music is so meaningful to those who listen 
to it.

So if you are curious about why cassettes are the new vinyl, or whatever else 
takes your fancy, here is your chance to ask. Simply post a comment below, or 
if you feel shy email me atTheIndieProfessor@gmail.com 
<mailto:TheIndieProfessor@gmail.com>. I'll pick the best questions and answer 
them in the following week's blog post.
 