
Why do so many sound engineers insist on setting such unnecessarily high 
levels at gigs?
Thanks,
Nat Harding, via gmail


According to a recent study, it could be in a venue's best interest to have 
loud music 
<http://www.spring.org.uk/2008/09/why-loud-music-in-bars-increases.php>. 
However, in this case I'm going to turn the question over to an expert in sound 
engineering. Here's what my friend had to say …

"There are some engineers who simply like it really loud – however, this is 
not usually why sound engineers crank up the volume. In truth, there is no real 
enjoyment in mixing loud – it becomes self-defeating. Your ears begin to close 
down, as does the audience. So most engineers will try quite hard toavoid it 
getting too loud. However they are usually at war with three other factors: the 
musicians, the equipment and the venue.

The primary job of most sound engineers is to help the audience hear the 
singer. However, in a small venue it can become difficult when other musicians 
are playing too loud. Guitarists and drummers are the prime culprits. Guitar 
amps compete in the same frequency range as the singer. This leads to the 
singer being turned up to be heard over the sound of the guitar. We are now on 
the slippery slope. The guitar and vocals are now loud, so what about the bass 
and drums? Let's turn them up a bit to redress the balance. Now the vocals are 
getting lost again, just tweak them up a bit – and so on. The result? A very 
loud gig.

This is compounded by microphones, which are inherently stupid. The vocal 
microphone doesn't know that it's just a vocal microphone. It spends its time 
pretty much picking up anything in front of it. This is obviously the singer 
but also the drums and guitar, which are then amplified along with the 
vocalist. The whole effect is that everything gets turned up a bit, and usually 
not the nice bit, but the "toppy edgy" sound of the guitar and cymbals, 
reducing the clarity of the vocals.

This is further compounded by the venue, the engineer's third enemy. The 
smaller the stage, the closer things are together and the greater the spill on 
to the microphones. Getting a clear sound from a small stage is virtually 
impossible in these situations. Unfortunately, in 25 years of mixing, the 
number of times the musicians have said "Hey, this is a small stage! Let's all 
turn down a bit and give the singer a chance!" can be counted on the fingers of 
one foot. Venues can also exacerbate clarity by being large and reverberant. A 
bad-sounding venue can force the engineer to turn things up in an attempt to 
achieve clarity, and to a certain extent this can work. Halls with low 
ceilings, glass or flat parallel walls don't make for pleasant venues. This is 
why old theatres were designed the way they were – and they make some of the 
most rewarding places to mix for a sound engineer. Converted warehouses, modern 
box clubs and dingy cellars with low ceilings do not.

So a difficult venue, a band that is just a bit too loud and an engineer who 
is perhaps a tad too enthusiastic can lead to a gig that, in the audience's 
perception, is too loud.

Is it always the sound engineer's fault? I would say, on the whole, probably 
not. He is just one of the reasons. There are many who are inexperienced and, 
given a difficult band, venue or sound system, turn up the volume to overcome 
problems that would be dealt with differently by a more experienced engineer. 
Still, at the end of the day, one man's loud is another man's background music 
so it's not just for me to say."

Question for our indie professor? Then post a comment below or email 
theindieprofessor@gmail.com <>
 