
Q: I'd like a decorative grille that I can fit into wooden floorboards. We had 
dry rot under the floor a few years ago and although we had air bricks put into 
the walls I would like more ventilation. I have seen grilles in the floors of 
old houses. Any ideas?
Sarah


A: Good eco houses will have a 'ventilation strategy' aimed at balancing the 
need for fresh air and the reduction of draughts that will cause heat loss. 
This is governed by the building regulations, and your local building control 
officer should be able to help you further. As far as I'm aware, these grilles 
were used to conceal underfloor heating systems and not to increase 
ventilation. Providing you have good ventilation via air bricks, this should be 
sufficient to prevent rot to your floorboards. If you open up the floor with 
grilles you could be in danger of perforating your house and risk making it 
cold and draughty. But if you want to proceed, look to traditional foundries 
such as Thomas Dudley for antique floor grille designs (www.thomasdudley.co.uk 
<http://www.thomasdudley.co.uk>).

Q: I currently use very small 60w candle bulbs in my ceiling light fittings. I 
live in a small cottage with a living room/kitchen. Both fittings are the same 
and fit close to the ceiling. I use lots of lamps with eco-bulbs (I rarely use 
the central light), but the only light bulbs suitable for the ceiling lights 
are the very small candle bulbs. I can't find replacement eco-candle bulbs that 
are sufficiently small and am told that they are not made.
Carole Underwood


A: You're right to want to switch your whole home over as the energy saving 
far exceeds the extra costs of the bulbs and you will only have to change the 
bulb every 10,000 hours (that's every three to five years on average) and not 
every 1,000. Some of the best, sleekest eco bulbs I've found are made by 
Megaman (www.megamanuk.com <http://www.megamanuk.com>), which now also does 
dimmable bulbs. They have a range of small eco candle bulbs (at 99mm long using 
just 7w of power, but equivalent to 35w of power), but even smaller are the 
round 'ping pong' bulbs at just 83mm long (www.lightbulbs-direct.com 
<http://www.lightbulbs-direct.com>).


· If you have an interior design question for Oliver Heath, email him at 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
 