
What's the ethics for wearing a band's T-shirt to one of their gigs? From how 
recent a tour can it be? I've always thought wearing a T-shirt you bought at 
the merchandise stall that very evening is cheating somehow.
SterlingArcher 

T-shirt display isn't a question of right or wrong, it's a question of what 
you want to communicate. It's an act that expresses affiliation to anyone who 
recognises the band's name or logo. At gigs, most fans wear the T-shirt of a 
different band than the act they have come to see because it's obvious that in 
being there they are already endorsing the group playing. Wearing a T-shirt of 
an artist fresh from the merchandise stand is pointless. It's clear to others 
present that you like the band, so why are you wearing their shirt? As this 
tends to happen with the youngest, most enthusiastic but least experienced 
fans, it communicates the status of novice and is seen as amateurish and 
ungainly. A fan can more fully express his or her taste by wearing a different 
artist's T-shirt. I'm watching Band of Horses, but I've also seen Pavement. Or 
perhaps something ironic, like I'm watching Autolux, but I also like Mr Blobby.

However, fans will often wear the T-shirt of band playing if it is from a 
previous tour. The older the tour, the higher the prestige and the greater 
likelihood the shirt will initiate conversations about the fan's experience. On 
the Wedding Present's current tour, which revisits theirBizarro album 
<http://www.scopitones.co.uk/tours>, some fans are wearing shirts from the 
original 1989 tour, much to the delight of fellow fans. The wearer's prestige 
is augmented by the longevity of their support. Festivals, however, are another 
story. With so many bands, an audience member may be attending to see any 
number of artists. So it's entirely typical for fans to buy a band or festival 
T-shirt and put it on immediately. Part of the fun of wandering around 
festivals is to see who is winning the attention of the T-shirt-clad crowd.

There are exceptions. For example, at a gig where the crowd can be wild, a fan 
who has made the mistake of buying a T-shirt before the show might have to put 
it on to avoid losing it in the moshpit. Recently, I met a couple of fans who 
had waited eight years for the chance to see their favourite band play a 
festival in Canada. Wanting to commemorate the experience, they opted for a 
T-shirt rather than a photograph of the show. After the band played, they went 
to the festival merch stand to find there were no more T-shirts on sale. 
Crestfallen, they visited theband's website 
<http://weezer.shop.bravadousa.com/Product.aspx?cp=13940_16864&pc=BGCTWZ27> and 
each bought a T-shirt. Imagine their surprise when one month later they found 
their favourite band playing a secret show in Las Vegas during their planned 
trip there. The two fans showed up wearing their new T-shirts. Very cool indeed.
 