
I think the festival wristband is the new band T-shirt ... see how long people 
make theirs last for. Agreed?
elvisbragg


Not unlike T-shirts, wristbands and guest passes communicate to members of a 
music community. But unlike T-shirts, which express band affiliation, passes 
and wristbands are status markers. A basic festival wristband signifies 
attendance. Some festivalgoers will leave them on for days afterwards, letting 
others notice they participated. Perhaps they want people to know they went to 
Glastonbury, but for others, it's because – let's face it – after wearing 
something on their wrists for three days when they haven't been washing, they 
forget it's even there. Guest passes, on the other hand, have a specific code 
of display related to whom the guest-pass holder wants to be aware of their 
privileged access. A novice will prominently display their guest pass, 
generally on the chest, the outside of a jacketor any other overt location 
<http://www.lindsayfincher.com/2005/10/now-go-and-show-the-world-what-the-valleys-already-know.html>
. Such obvious display is ridiculed by more experienced members of the 
community. Music industry professionals use discreet pass placement so only 
fellow privileged professions know they have increased access. Professionals 
place passes on the insides of jackets and the undersides of shirts and 
dresses. The subtle signalling of status is nothing novel. Ornamental display 
is often used to convey wealth, power, social rank, leisure, profession and/or 
aesthetics. A glance at theplacement of a turban on a Tuareg man's head 
<http://www.lonelyplanetimages.com/images/440086> is all that is required to 
know his social rank.

Things become more interesting with high-prestige passes. The rarer the pass, 
the greater the access, the higher the status accrued. For a typical gig, 
passes range from aftershow, guest, photo pass, table pass, access all areas 
and laminate. The laminate is the most prestigious as it is the same pass that 
band members have. This means at live shows, industry professionals negotiate 
status by the degree of direct access they have to performers. Now the fact 
that people in the industry scoff at the uninitiated who boldly wear their 
passes, doesn't mean they're not interested in showing off. However, 
professionals show off in ways that imply such behaviour is inadvertent. When 
an industry member gets a higher-access pass, it is placed in such way as to 
suggest it was accidental: half-obscured on a T-shirt or peeking out of a 
jacket. Of course with musicians, you are lucky if you can get them to even 
find where they left their tour passes. As band members are the fetishised 
commodity within the hierarchical system of access and privilege they have no 
need to show their passes at all.

With festivals, the dance of insider and outsider status is becoming 
increasingly limited because levels of access are determined by wristbands, 
where there is no flexibility of display, other than pushing up or pulling down 
sleeves. Yet, never to miss an opportunity, the professional who wishes to 
distinguish themselves from the industry hordes tries tomaximise the number of 
wristbands acquired <http://plixi.com/p/50930192>. If done properly, at a 
destination festival such as Coachella, you can get wristbands for the weekend 
VIP, the main stage, the headlining band, the secondary stage, the production 
area and a few house parties to boot. These wristbands demonstrate a temporary 
accumulation of status markers not unlike the desirability conveyed by young 
Masai women by the number of glass necklaces 
<http://fotobank.ru/image/JW01-6475.html> they have received. After the fact, 
guest passes and wristbands are mementos of the experience of live music where 
the lines of inclusion, exclusion and prestige were clearly demarcated.
 