
While alcohol is rejected in hardcore punk it is celebrated in indie. Why? And 
why does indie favour certain brands (I'm thinking Red Stripe, which seems to 
be the indie band drink of choice since the 90s)?

Adam, via email 

Did you ask this question because my Twitter account says "I'm the 
anthropologist of everything fun except beer"?

Music genres often express strong attitudes towards altered states of 
consciousness. As straight edge manifested the most strident Protestantism, all 
forms of hedonism or anything that would inhibit sobriety wererejected 
<http://www.skaponk.com/lyrics/5322/>. Reggae is deeply connected to 
Rastafarianism. For reggae, the drug of choice is cannabis (referred to as 
ganja). Alcohol and preserved or chemically altered foods are to be avoided. 
Rastafarianism rejects Babylon, an idea that western civilisation is corrupt 
and materialistic in contrast to a spiritual Zion. Ganja, is seen as a 
sacrament that aids in a relationship with God (Jah) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2HMlbtksV1o&feature=related>. When one 
considers the apathy engendered by smoking cannabis, you can see how well ganja 
dovetails with the rejection of a Protestant work ethic and capitalism's drive 
towards material acquisition. 

Alcohol, however, is the drug of choice for the indie community. But why Red 
Stripe in the UK or Pabst Blue Ribbon in the US? I haven't found a definitive 
answer, but I have several hypotheses that correspond to explanatory paradigms 
in the social sciences. The first would be a Marxist interpretation of economic 
motivations. Both Red Stripe and Pabst Blue Ribbon are relatively inexpensive. 
As indie audiences tend to be younger, less expensive options are preferred. 
However, there are several inexpensive beers to choose from, so the Marxist 
approach seems only partially satisfactory. Another explanation is historical 
particularism. This theory, associated withFranz Boas 
<http://www.nndb.com/people/861/000097570/>, posits that historic incidents, 
culture contact and the environment are the chief determining factors in 
cultural manifestations. Indie's antecedents can be found in post-punk . The 
Clash werefamously pictured 
<http://www.thepublican.com/story_attachment.asp?storycode=64006&seq=2&type=P&c=1>
 drinking Red Stripe. The influence of Jamaican music in areas where punk 
emerged – such as Ladbroke Grove – made drinking the lager a way to express 
affiliation with other oppressed groups and movements in opposition to British 
imperialism.

Additionally, Red Stripe was sold at the London Astoria, a major venue for 
touring indie bands in the 90s. The beer served at a favoured venue is taken up 
as a favourite by the bands that play there, by fans drinking there or fans 
emulating the artists. The companies selling the product embrace the clientele. 
Red Stripe sponsors a breakthrough artist award and associates its brand with 
music in marketing campaigns. In the US, Pabst Blue Ribbon regularly advertises 
on All Songs Considered, National Public Radio's music wing that despite its 
title is strongly skewed toward thecontemporary indie aesthetic 
<http://plixi.com/p/59458836>. What the historic antecedents are for Pabst Blue 
Ribbon I wouldn't know, but it was originally brewed inMilwaukee 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Milwaukie,_Oregon>, a city viewed as hardy and 
working class. It was also a dollar a can in the 90s, which appealed to 
low-income drinkers. The brand capitalised on its perceived working-class 
identity by funding contests between bike messagers in Portland and 
skateboarding exhibitions. This association with the perceived authenticity of 
the non-bourgeois has meant that Pabst Blue Ribbon is no longer the least 
expensive brand, but it's still the lager of choice for American gig-goers.   

Another intriguing possibility is the symbolic approach. Both brands have 
simple designs featuring national colours – red, white and blue for the US, and 
red and white for England (sorry, Scotland and Wales). Simplicity is a dominant 
motif in indie practices. Indie's puritan foundations lie in rejecting 
embellishments and a return to the basics of worship. Both brands have simple 
lines and colour schemes making the products mirror the sonic aesthetics of 
purity and simplicity. Both are lagers, the weakest of beer. The tastes are 
often characterised as "basic". It's as if the notions of "effete" and "back to 
basics" had been reproduced in the beverage itself. Rarely have I heard someone 
say they think Red Stripe or Pabst Blue Ribbon tastes the best, but rather 
something like "Pabstenance", the basic necessity that one needs to survive on 
beer. I am sure there are other theories that may explain the phenomenon. Feel 
free to share your insight. I'm still not the anthropologist of beer, but if 
you want to know anything about cheeseburgers or the culinary proclivities of 
indie bands, just ask. 

 

Ask Wendy about cheeseburgers or anything else indie-related by commenting 
below or emailing theindieprofessor@gmail.com
 