
With several retailers issuing market-pleasing updates, one exception is Asos.

The online fashion retailer is down 81p or 2.5% at £30.99 despite reporting a 
recovery in sales growth in the US and Europe following its moves to make its 
prices more responsive to exchange rate volatility after recent sterling 
strength. But this, along with increased competition, means the company’s 
margins are being depressed.

Asos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asos> said total retail sales rose 
22% in the first quarter to December but gross margin fell by around 40 basis 
points. Tiffany Hogan, analyst at Kantar Retail:

Continued expansion of its zonal pricing tool helped to boost sales but 
continued to depress margins by 40 basis points.

Asos is facing stiff competition at home from competitors such as Boohoo and 
the aggressive moves from Amazon into UK fashion retail. Low prices and fast 
fulfilment are now becoming common place across Asos core trading area of UK 
and Europe and is no longer sufficient in and of itself. Asos must focus 
investments on new forms of engagement and content to continue to connect with 
its core target consumer of “20 somethings”.

In a hold note, Freddie George at Cantor Fitzgerald said:

The company is now of a meaningful size with sales forecast at over £1.3bn in 
2016, has relatively strong cashflow and a ‘state of the art’ logistics 
infrastructure.

Earnings, however, have declined over the last two years and although they are 
set to improve in the current year, the improvement in momentum, we believe, is 
priced into the stock. The departure of Nick Robertson as chief executive, who 
was the ‘guiding light’ of the business, is an added concern. The stock remains 
highly valued at 59.3 times our 2016 fully diluted earnings forecasts.

But Andrew Wade at Numis was positive:

In our view this was an exceptional performance, particularly given the 
continuation of the shift in stance towards full price, the unfavourable 
weather, and net currency headwinds. We leave our forecasts unchanged and 
retain our positive stance.
 