
Online clothing retailer Asos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asos> has 
reported that profits have fallen by a tenth during the first half. This comes 
after three profit warnings for the company in 2014, although Asos’s chief 
executive, Nick Robertson, has said he is confident in the outlook for the 
second half and believes full-year profit margin will be in line with 
expectations.

City analysts had the following to say:

Andrew Wade, Numis

We leave our forecasts unchanged, expecting sales growth to accelerate and 
gross margin to stabilise before returning to positive territory as the 
clearance activity and fire are annualised. However, given the positive 
reaction Asos has seen to the price investments made and the clear benefits to 
come in the second half from progress on warehousing, we see scope for upside 
which we would expect to be reinvested in the customer proposition, through 
pricing and delivery enhancements. While still early days in Asos’s two-year 
repricing journey, and despite a strong recent run in the shares, we retain our 
positive stance, encouraged by the momentum being built and, fundamentally, 
Asos’s unique customer proposition.

Freddie George, Cantor Fitzgerald

The company is now of a meaningful size with sales forecast at over £1.1bn in 
2015, relatively strong cashflow and a state-of-the-art logistics 
infrastructure. We continue to have question marks, however, over the 
robustness of the model and believe the company will have to continue to 
discount and offer free delivery charges and returns to maintain sales 
momentum. We are also concerned about the valuation. After two profit warnings 
over the last year, forecasts for 2015 and 2016 have broadly halved so in 
relative terms the stock is almost back to being at an all-time high in terms 
of earnings multiples. We are retaining our sell recommendation and target 
price of 3,000p.

 Keith Bowman, Hargreaves Lansdown

In all, Asos remains an enticing but highly volatile and therefore higher risk 
investment. Ongoing global expansion, aided by current group investment, 
continues to be weighed against the now established difficulty of correctly 
valuing internet growth stocks. For now, and with sales growing potentially at 
the expense of profits, analyst consensus opinion currently points towards a 
hold.

Mark Photiades, Canaccord Genuity

Today’s results were better than expectations. Management comments that it 
expects 2015 pretax profit to be in line with market expectations and we 
therefore do not expect any material changes today as further investment in 
price is expected in the second half. We continue to expect sales growth rates 
for the business to improve as the year progresses, as initiatives gain further 
traction and comparatives ease. Whilst the size of the longer-term prize 
remains significant and the route map to the next staging post of £2.5bn of 
sales looks achievable, execution of the plan remains key. We are encouraged 
that the anticipated sales progression is being achieved as hoped.

Alistair Davies, Investec

Interim results are ahead of expectations due to disciplined marketing spend 
and improved performance in delivery and third party income. Management has 
reaffirmed guidance for the year ahead and sales expectations are likely to be 
towards the upper end of the range, with second quarter trading momentum giving 
confidence this can be achieved (at least). Reflecting the positive momentum, 
we raise our forecasts by 2% and 5% this year and next. Long-term we continue 
to believe the shares are overvalued.
 