
A daily dose of aspirin can double the life expectancy of patients with 
cancers affecting the gastrointestinal tract, according to a study.

It was already known that that frequent use of aspirin can prevent bowel cancer
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/aug/06/aspirin-could-dramtically-cut-cancer-risk-say-scientists-biggest-study-yet>
, but the most recent study also suggests that men and women with a range of 
cancers who take the anti-inflammatory painkiller experience a significant 
survival benefit compared with those who do not.

The study of 14,000 cancer patients in the Netherlands found that regular 
users of aspirin were twice as likely to still be alive after a four-year 
period as those who did not take the cheap drug.

According to the report’s authors, the impact of aspirin on survival was seen 
after adjusting for factors such as gender, age, stage of cancer, treatments, 
and other medical conditions that could have influenced death rates.

The trial coordinator, Dr Martine Frouws, from Leiden University in the 
Netherlands – who presented the findings at the 2015 EuropeanCancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> Congress in Vienna – said the 
findings could have a “great impact” on patients and national healthcare 
systems.

“Now we would like to analyse tumour material from these patients to try and 
discover which ones would benefit from aspirin treatment,” Frouws said.

“Through studying the characteristics of tumours in patients where aspirin was 
beneficial, we should be able to identify patients who could profit from such 
treatment in the future. Given that aspirin is a cheap, off-patent drug with 
relatively few side-effects, this will have a great impact on healthcare 
systems as well as patients.”

The most common tumour sites for patients in the study were the colon, rectum 
and oesophagus.

Following on from the study, a randomised controlled trial is investigating 
the effect of a daily low dose of 80mg of aspirin on the survival of elderly 
patients with bowel cancer in the Netherlands. At a later date, the study is to 
cover gastrointestinal cancers and hopes to provide convincing proof that more 
patients can benefit from aspirin treatment. Researchers are comparing the 
effects of taking aspirin with a placebo.

Prof Peter Naredi, scientific co-chair of the congress, said: “We have good 
evidence that the frequent use of aspirin in the population can prevent some 
cases of colorectal (bowel) cancer. Now, Frouws and colleagues show that in 
over 13,000 patients who were diagnosed with a gastrointestinal cancer, aspirin 
also improved survival compared with those who did not use it.

“With more and more data to support the beneficial role of aspirin, we must 
consider whether we should recommend it to a wider public.”
 