
A daily dose of aspirin reduces a woman's chance of developing a particular 
type of breast cancer by 16%, according to a study of more than 126,000 women.

The latest research backs up a review of 21 studies which found that 
anti-inflammatory drugs such as aspirin reduce breast cancer risk by up to 20%. 
About 45,000 women a year in the UK are diagnosed with breast cancer.

In the new study, Dr Gretchen Gierach and colleagues at the US National 
Institutes of Health in Rockville, Maryland, studied 126,124 women aged between 
51 and 72. When the study started, none of the volunteers had breast cancer. 
During follow-ups between 1995 and 2003, 4,501 of the women developed breast 
cancer. The team found that women who took aspirin daily were 16% less likely 
to develop so-called oestrogen receptor positive breast cancer. Around 
three-quarters of breast cancers are oestrogen receptor positive.

Contrary to previous research, the study did not find a reduction in breast 
cancer risk overall in the group of women who used aspirin regularly, and did 
not find that other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) reduced 
breast cancer risk.

Aspirin <https://www.theguardian.com/science/aspirin> is thought to influence 
cancers by blocking the action of an enzyme called cyclooxygenase. This in turn 
lowers the amount of oestrogen in the body. The results are reported in the 
journal Breast Cancer Research.

Liz Baker, science information officer at Cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> Research UK, said anyone 
considering taking aspirin regularly should consult their doctor first. 
"Weighing up the risks and benefits, it's too soon to recommend aspirin as a 
way of reducing the risk of cancer."

In a separate study, researchers have found that having a child appears to 
give mothers some protection against breast cancer.

Dr VK Gadi, at the University of Washington in Seattle, and colleagues found 
that stem cells left behind in the mother by the foetus appear to make her less 
likely to develop breast cancer. The study is reported in New Scientist 
magazine.
 