
Doctor-assisted dying is about to become legal in Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> without clear legislation regarding 
how it would work.


 Canada’s supreme court last year struck down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/06/canadas-strikes-down-ban-doctor-assisted-dying>
 laws that bar doctors from helping someone critically ill die, but put the 
ruling on hold until midnight on Monday to give the government time to come up 
with a new law. The House of Commons passed a law last week but it requires 
Senate approval and that could take days or weeks.

Provincial regulators issued guidelines based on the eligibility outlined by 
the supreme court but the health minister, Jane Philpott, said Monday the 
guidelines did not provide enough clarity and protection to doctors. She hopes 
the federal legislation will pass soon.


 “Doctors may have inadequate protection and I expect in these early days, 
many physicians will be extremely reluctant to provide assistance to patients 
wanting medical assistance in dying,” Philpott told healthcare professionals in 
a speech in Ottawa. Philpott noted the guidelines vary from province to 
province and doctors lack standard criteria for who is eligible.

“Some of the regulatory recommendations talk about an age of 18 or over and 
some don’t. There are differences in how many witnesses are required. In some 
cases it is one, others two,” she said.


 Philpott offered no advice to fellow doctors on whether to proceed with 
physician-assisted dying without legislation in place. She said they should 
contact their professional associations for advice.

Assisted suicide is legal in Switzerland, Germany, Albania, Colombia, Japan 
and the US states of Washington, Oregon, Vermont, New Mexico and Montana. 
California lawmakers have also passed legislation, expected to take effect in 
June, under which proof of state residency will be required.

Canada’s supreme court ruling means a doctor can’t be prosecuted for assisting 
with death for those with “grievous and irremediable” illnesses. The 
government’s proposed law applies to “adults who are suffering intolerably and 
for whom death is reasonably foreseeable”. It says the person must be mentally 
competent, 18 or older, have a serious and incurable disease, illness or 
disability and be in an advanced state of irreversible decline of capability.


The proposed Canadian law applies only to citizens and residents, meaning 
Americans won’t be able to travel toCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> to die. To get a doctor’s help under 
Canada’s proposed law, a written request is required either from the patient or 
a designated person if the patient is incapable. The request would need to be 
signed by two independent witnesses.

Two independent physicians or authorized nurse practitioners would have to 
evaluate it, and there would be a mandatory 15-day waiting period unless death 
or loss of capacity to consent was imminent.

Some groups have said the law doesn’t go far enough and have noted it excludes 
people who have received a diagnosis of dementia or Parkinson’s from making a 
request in advance for assisted suicide.


Before the supreme court decision last year, it had been illegal in Canada to 
counsel, aid or abet a suicide, an offense carrying a maximum prison sentence 
of 14 years. But the top court said doctors were capable of assessing the 
competence of patients to consent, and found there is no evidence that the 
elderly or people with disabilities were vulnerable to being talked into ending 
their lives.





 