
Ruth Brownlee was today appointed the director of the UK's Association of 
Online Publishers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aop>.

Brownlee has worked in digital media for 13 years. Most recently she worked as 
a consultant commercial strategist for several UK major publishing brands.

She has also been advertisement director at Handbag.com, group head at Yahoo 
and commercial development controller at Channel 4, where she oversaw a series 
of cross platform projects. She takes up the new position in January.

AOP has more than 160 UK members across broadcasting and publishing, including 
the BBC, Telegraph Media Group, BSkyB and CNET.

Simon Waldman, director of digital strategy and development for Guardian Media 
Group, is chair of the AOP.

He welcomed the appointment, saying Brownlee's "industry experience and 
breadth of online expertise is second to none".

Brownlee's strong commercial background is set to signal a change of direction 
at the AOP, which has become increasingly influential since it was established 
in 2002.

She told MediaGuardian.co.uk that a key priority would be creating a single 
audience research and media planning method, something that is in development 
by the AOP and several advertising industry trade bodies.

"The huge issue for the sector is really managing growth," she said.

"There have been stellar figures in users numbers and ecommerce. But 
publishers need to develop that experience for the consumer and for 
advertisers to ensure they deliver what consumers want."

Brownlee worked with a diverse management board on Handbag.com - at 
the time the property was a joint venture between Boots and the 
Telegraph. 

By the time she left, the site had healthy revenue growth and she was also 
recognised with several performance awards during her time in Yahoo's 
commercial sector.

At Channel 4, she worked on cross-platform projects for Big Brother and Graham 
Norton, and brought high-profile sponsors on board for new digital offerings.

Brownlee said she planned to consult extensively with the AOP's stakeholders 
and board to develop a clear strategy for the next three years.

"Everyone in the business has to address these key issues relating to 
community, mobile and video, and this role is about galvanising that 
membership around those big issues," she said.

Former director Alex White left in July after five years at the trade body. In 
September White joined the BBC's commercial arm, BBC Worldwide, as a launch 
director for new digital projects.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 