
The number of Britons with asthma could almost double by 2050 because the air 
inside homes is becoming more polluted as they become more energy-efficient, a 
new report warns.

The trend towards airtight houses could also worsen allergies as well as 
breathing problems, and even exacerbate lung cancer and heart problems, 
according to a leading expert in indoor air quality.

Airborne pollutants created by cooking, cleaning and using aerosols such as 
hairsprays will increasingly stay indoors and affect people’s health as homes 
are made ever more leak-proof to help meet carbon reduction targets, a report 
by Professor Hazim Awbi claims. Small amounts of chemicals found in detergents 
can stay on the fibres of washed clothes, be emitted into the air and combine 
with particulate matter from logs burned in a real fire, for example.

“Poor indoor air quality is connected with a range of undesirable health 
effects, such as allergic and asthma symptoms, lung cancer, chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease, airborne respiratory infections and cardiovascular disease,” 
says the report written by Awbi, who is professor of the built environment at 
Reading University’s school of construction management and engineering. “With 
the expected increase in airtightness for UK dwellings, it is anticipated that 
indoor air quality will generally become poorer, resulting in an increase in 
the number of cases of health symptoms related to poorer indoor environment 
quality.”

People with long-term health conditions and three groups who spend a lot of 
time indoors – young mothers, children and older people – will be particularly 
at risk, the report says.

It predicts that by 2050 – the date by which Britain is supposed to have 
achieved an 80% cut in carbon emissions – declining indoor air quality could 
have led to:

■ An 80% rise in the 5.4 million people already suffering from asthma.

■ Concentrations of volatile organic compounds – chemicals linked to the use 
of aerosols – being 60% above WorldHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Organisation 24-hour limits.

■ Nitrogen dioxide levels rising to 30% above the WHO’s limits.

The report’s findings reflect growing concern that indoor pollutants, not just 
fumes and other chemicals in the outdoor environment, can damage health. The 
WHO has already identified indoor air quality as a health hazard. And Public 
Health England, an agency funded by the Department of Health, is finalising a 
report on “climate change and the domestic indoor environment”, which it will 
publish before Christmas.

Lack of proper ventilation in both newly built homes and those that have been 
refurbished to reduce their consumption of gas or electricity is storing up 
future health problems, Awbi said.

“Many people spend 70-80% of their time at home, or even as much as 90% 
indoors if you include workplaces. Given that the average person takes in 500 
litres of air an hour, if the air you are breathing in is polluted, you can 
imagine how much of this pollution is going to be absorbed,” he added.

He fears that increasingly airtight houses in which too little fresh air gets 
in are causing indoor air quality to deteriorate and preventing pollutants from 
being dispersed quickly. Humidity caused by poor ventilation also helps the 
proliferation of mould and house dust mites, which can cause asthma and other 
allergic conditions, according to Professor Peter Howarth, a professor of 
allergy and respiratory diseases at Southampton University.

Formaldehyde, a toxic gas emitted by wooden furniture, can also be 
problematic, added Howarth, who said he believed Awbi’s estimates were a 
realistic assessment of the harm to human health if building regulations are 
not overhauled to improve ventilation and ensure “air exchange”.

Simply opening windows to let in fresh air is not enough, and some form of 
mechanical ventilation is needed, according to Awbi.

“Poor indoor air quality can have a negative effect on people’s health, 
including aggravating asthma,” said Dr Sotiris Vardoulakis, Public Health 
England’s’s head of environmental change. “While energy-efficient houses will 
help address climate change, it is important to ensure that adequate 
ventilation levels are maintained and indoor air pollution sources minimised to 
protect public health.”

How do I know if I really have asthma?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/09/how-do-i-know-if-really-have-asthma>
Awbi’s report was funded by Beama, a body which represents the UK’s 
electro-technical industry, which includes firms that install ventilation 
systems.

Andrew Proctor, director of advice and support at Asthma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/asthma> UK, said: “We know that indoor 
exposure to allergens can be a real problem for some people with asthma, but it 
is difficult to avoid them.” The one in 11 Britons with asthma should always 
seek help promptly when they have symptoms suggesting an attack, he said.

The Department for Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> and 
Climate Change said simply that government was committed to ensuring energy 
efficiency improvements in homes met the highest standards of installation.
 