
Asthma <https://www.theguardian.com/society/asthma> is being overdiagnosed in 
children, with youngsters being prescribed medications they do not need, 
experts have warned.

Currently 1.1 million children in the UK are being treated for asthma. But a 
growing body of international research suggests that many children diagnosed 
with asthma do not actually have the condition, raising concerns about the 
impact of unnecessary treatments.

In a leading article <http://adc.bmj.com/adc/april/adc309053> published in the 
Archives of Disease in Childhood, Professor Andrew Bush and Dr Louise Fleming 
of Imperial College, London, argue that overdiagnosis of asthma is exposing 
patients to the potentially harmful side effects of medications they do not 
need, including growth suppression and a higher risk of respiratory infections. 
They write: “Is there any other chronic disease in the world in which children 
are committed to potentially hazardous, long-term therapy without every effort 
being made objectively to document the diagnosis?”

What’s more, they argue, overdiagnosis is costly and risks trivialising the 
condition, with inhalers now “almost a fashion accessory.” “Asthma is a killing 
disease and it needs to be taken seriously,” Bush told the Guardian.

It is an issue of growing concern. In January 2015 the National Institute for 
Health and Care Excellence (Nice)warned that  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/28/1m-people-uk-wrongly-diagnosed-asthma>
up to 30% of adults diagnosed as having asthma may not have the condition, 
while earlier this yeara Dutch study <http://bjgp.org/content/66/644/e152> from 
Julius Healthcare Centers and University Medical Center Utrecht, found that 
more than half of a group of 652 children had been diagnosed as having asthma 
when it was unlikely that they had the condition.

Bush believes the need for doctors to use objective tests to confirm 
diagnoses, often based on symptoms such as wheezing, is urgent. “It is a case 
of attitudes of mind,” he said. “It is not something that is going to cause the 
health service to have to spend millions - it will probably save resources if 
inhalers weren’t given to those who didn’t need them.”

Nice is attempting to develop guidelines for the diagnosis and monitoring of 
the condition. The draft guidelines clearly instruct doctors not to “use 
symptoms alone without an objective test to diagnose asthma,” with measurements 
of airflow obstruction and airway inflammation among the tests advised for 
adults and young people. Two of these tests, quality-assured spirometry and 
fractional exhaled nitric oxide, are currently beingfield-tested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/26/gps-to-trial-new-tests-for-asthma-amid-concerns-about-overdiagnosis>
 by Nice.

“Accurate diagnosis of asthma has been a significant problem which means that 
people may be wrongly diagnosed or cases might be missed in others,” said 
Professor Mark Baker, director of clinical practice at Nice. “We are in the 
process of developing a guideline that will give clarity and set out the most 
clinical and cost-effective ways to diagnose and monitor asthma in children, 
young people and adults. Some of the recommendations are now being trialled in 
primary care to provide evidence on whether or not the guideline can be 
introduced into the NHS effectively and efficiently.”

It’s a move welcomed by Bush. “What they are trying to do is to say if you 
make a diagnosis of asthma, you should make every effort to back this up with 
simple objective tests,” he said. But Bush and Fleming believe Nice could go 
further, arguing that children under the age of five should also be diagnosed 
on the basis of objective tests, and that more robust therapeutic trials are 
needed. Moreover, they point out, many children outgrow symptoms of asthma. “No 
matter who as made the diagnosis, always consider whether it was actually 
correct in the first place, or whether it is still relevant,” they write.

But Bush is also quick to warn that patients should not consider abandoning 
their inhalers. “If you have asthma these are life-saving, fantastic 
medications, and if you have asthma it is really important that you take them.”

Commenting on the article, Dr Samantha Walker, director of research and policy 
at Asthma UK, said: “This illustrates the challenges that GPs face every day, 
because there currently isn’t one definitive way of easily diagnosing asthma. 
It’s astonishing in the 21st century that there isn’t a test your child can 
take to tell if they definitely have asthma.”


The problems, she added, are complex. “Asthma isn’t one condition but many, 
with different causes and triggered by different things at different ages. 
Asthma symptoms also change throughout someone’s life or even week by week and 
day by day. This complexity means that it is both over and underdiagnosed, in 
children and in adults, so people don’t get the care they need to manage their 
asthma effectively. We urgently need more investment in asthma research to get 
to a definitive test to ensure people get the right diagnosis.”
 