
Asthma sufferers who rely on an inhaler to manage their condition owe a debt 
of gratitude to a teenage American girl. A sufferer of the disease, in the 
early 1950s she posed a question to her father:“Why can’t they put my asthma 
medicine in a spray can like they do for perfume?” 
<http://www.pharmaceutical-journal.com/news-and-analysis/news/50th-anniversary-of-the-first-pmdis/10002907.article>

Fortunately for her and for asthma sufferers everywhere, the then 13-year-old 
girl’s father happened to be George Maison, president of Riker Laboratories, 
now part of 3M Pharmaceuticals. Rather than dismissing the suggestion, he took 
the idea and charged his company’s pharmaceutical development laboratory with 
trying to find an answer.

The result was the pressurised metered-dose inhaler (pMDI), said to have taken 
less than two years to take from concept to clinical use – a mere blink of the 
eye compared with modern research and development periods.

The puffer, as it is also known, is now in its 60th year and has been credited 
with saving the lives of millions of people. But this week concerns were raised 
that it has become, in a sense, a victim of its own success. The charge, from 
two leading respiratory doctorsin a scientific journal 
<http://adc.bmj.com/content/early/2016/03/08/archdischild-2015-309053.short?g=w_adc_ahead_tab>
, was that asthma is now so over-diagnosed by doctors that inhalers are being
“dispensed for no good reason, and have become almost a fashion accessory”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/05/asthma-overdiagnosis-in-children-must-be-tackled-experts-warn>

Prof Andrew Bush and Dr Louise Fleming of Imperial College, London, also 
warned of potential side-effects including adrenal failure, and a risk of 
respiratory infections in adults.

GPs to trial new tests for asthma amid concerns about overdiagnosis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/26/gps-to-trial-new-tests-for-asthma-amid-concerns-about-overdiagnosis>
The finger of blame seemed to be pointing at GPs, although Bush and Fleming 
acknowledge that the lack of an objective test makes things difficult for 
doctors trying to make a diagnosis.

So it is unsurprising that family doctors have led the fightback against the 
“fashion accessory” label. Dr Imran Rafi, chair of clinical innovation and 
research at theRoyal College of General Practitioners <http://www.rcgp.org.uk/>
, said the label was “completely unhelpful with respect to the importance of 
inhalers in managing asthma”.

Dr Khetan Bhatt, a GP at a Hertfordshire practice with about 700 asthma 
sufferers, said: “The difficulty we get is getting people to take inhalers 
rather than people wanting to have inhalers. Children at a young age do not 
take it seriously.”

Bush and Fleming said the word “wheeze, the hallmark symptom of asthma, is 
used imprecisely by parents and professionals”. Stories of children being 
prescribed inhalers when they do not have asthma are not difficult to find on 
parenting forums. In the absence of an objective test, Rafi said, inhalers can 
be issued without certainty of an asthma diagnosis.

“It’s sometimes difficult making a diagnosis because of the fact that the 
symptoms overlap with many different types of conditions,” he said. “A viral, 
irritating cough can persist for a number of weeks. We wouldn’t put children on 
medication unless we really feel it’s necessary. Sometimes we have to use the 
blue [reliever] inhaler as a trial but ask the parents to monitor the peak flow 
(lung capacity) and we can use that as a diagnosis later. There’s no one single 
definitive test.”

He stressed that a clear management plan was essential to ensure the child was 
not taking something unnecessarily over a prolonged period.

For all the benefits that inhalers have brought over the decades, this is not 
the first time they been stigmatised. After their introduction in 1956, 
inhalers and the medicine they contained at the time, isoprenaline, were linked 
to an asthma epidemic in the 1960s.

A 400% increase in deaths from asthma in the five- to 34-years age group 
coincided with a 600% increase in prescription and sales of inhalers containing 
isoprenaline. In anarticle for the Primary Care Respiratory Journal, 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Internet%20Downloads/15_6_326_331%20(1).pdf> 
Graham Compton wrote that as a result “both clinicians and patients considered 
pMDIs to be dangerous”.

It was not long before salbutamol (marketed as Ventolin) replaced isoprenaline 
as the primary medicine used in inhalers for relief of asthma symptoms, and it 
remains so today.

If salbutamol was one breakthrough, the later introduction of steroid inhalers 
(which are brown, as opposed to the blue reliever puffers), which prevent 
symptoms rather than relieve them, was even more significant.

Dr Francis Gilchrist, trustee of the British Lung Foundation 
<https://www.blf.org.uk/?gclid=CLmKlouU_8sCFZEK0wodkCADtA>, said: “The inhaled 
steroids have absolutely revolutionised asthma care. Previously steroid tablets 
were the mainstay of treatment, which had more side-effects including 
restricted growth. The idea [with inhalers] is that you’re breathing the 
medicine directly into the lungs, only a small proportion is absorbed into the 
blood and so there are fewer side-effects.”

Steroid inhalers are considered the most effective medications for controlling 
asthma when taken regularly and can reduce the need for the blue puffer over 
time.


Given the importance of the device, Gilchrist, a paediatric respiratory 
consultant, is concerned that people will take the wrong message from the 
“fashion accessory” description.

“There is the possibility that inhalers are given to children who do not need 
them,” he said. “But the reverse needs to be made clear, that if inhalers are 
not given to children who do have asthma, they are at risk of dying from an 
asthma attack.

“There are side-effects associated with inhaled steroids, which are the most 
commonly prescribed preventative treatment, but if standard doses are used 
these are usually mild.”

For his part, Bush admitted his language may have been “facetious”. He said 
that for patients with mild to moderate asthma, steroid inhalers had been 
“life-transforming”. But he could not resist another unflattering comparison.

“Instead of being seen as an important piece of equipment that can be 
life-saving,” he said, “like a handbag, everyone’s got one.”

The inhaler – a profile

Born: 1956 in the US.

Career: On its introduction, replaced the cumbersome squeeze-bulb glass 
nebuliser. Initially held medicine used to relieve symptoms but later also used 
(separately) to issue preventive medicine.

They say: “Dispensed for no good reason, and have become almost a fashion 
accessory” (Prof Andrew Bush and Dr Louise Fleming). “Inhaled steroids have 
absolutely revolutionised asthma care” (Dr Francis Gilchrist).

High point: Replacing steroid tablets, which had higher risk of serious 
side-effects such as growth suppression. With inhalers the medicine is breathed 
directly into the lungs, only a small proportion is absorbed into the blood and 
so there are fewer side-effects.

Low point: Shortly after their introduction, when they contained a medicine 
called isoprenaline, their use was linked to the asthma epidemic of the 1960s.
 