
With markets under the cosh in early trading, pharmaceuticals group AstraZeneca
 is a notable exception.

The company said it was likely to return to growth faster than analysts had 
expected. It has been suffering from a number of key drugs losing patent 
protection amid concerns about its future pipeline.

But in a presentation due to be given at a JP Morgan healthcare conference 
later, chief executive Pascal Sonot will say:
 AstraZeneca has made good progress in accelerating and replenishing its 
portfolio in its three core therapeutic areas. [Its] late stage pipeline now 
comprises 11 phase 111 programmes, almost double the number of programmes a 
year ago, and 27 phase 11 programmes.

Following the acquisition of Bristol-Myers Squibb's interests in the companies 
diabetes alliance...and as the alliance's pipeline of new products is 
progressively launched, AstraZeneca continues to believe a return to growth 
should come earlier that analyst consensus currently forecasts.

AstraZeneca now expects 2017 revenues to be broadly in line with 2013 revenues.

AstraZeneca's shares have added 79p to 3742.5p, but Savvas Neophytou at 
Panmure Gordon was not convinced, repeating his sell rating:
 The strong outperformance of recent months can now be quantified, with 
management providing long-term guidance to 2017 "revenues to be broadly in line 
with 2013"; implying some $3.3bn upgrades to consensus (currently stands at 
$22.4bn).

In our view, management is stepping onto thin ice with this same sort of 
guidance already attempted – and failed – this decade by previous management. 
We assume the upgrade can only be derived from the pipeline (according to 
consensus currently due to contribute some $1.4bn). In our view, a step-change 
from $1.4bn to $4.7bn from the pipeline is aggressive and management may be 
setting itself up for a fall. We have been sellers of the stock – and wrong – 
since November 2013 as we are not ready to take on pipeline risk in this name 
yet and therefore re-iterate our overall sell recommendation.

Overall the FTSE 100 has fallen 35.22 points to 6721.93, following a late sell 
off on Wall Street overnight. Comments from Federal Reserve members that it 
could continuing trimming its $75bn a month bond buying programme despite poor 
jobs data last week knocked sentiment, while investors were also nervous about 
the current US reporting season. On top of that Japan's current account deficit 
came in higher than expected.

Financial groups were among the leading fallers, with Schroders down 62p at 
£25.28 andAberdeen Asset Management 9.5p lower at 450.4p. Ashmore, down 48.8p 
to 360p, has issued a disappointing trading statement, showing that clients 
withdrew $3.5bn more from its funds in the last three months of 2013 than they 
put in. The outflows came amid concerns about the US Federal Reserve's monetary 
policy and its effects on emerging markets, a core business forAshmore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ashmoregroup>.

But BSkyB has climbed 30p to 869.5p despite news that the EU was investigating 
licensing arrangements between US film studios and pay-TV firms. The satellite 
broadcaster was lifted by UBS raising its rating from neutral to buy.
 