
S knows I’m coming. But I’m still not sure what he thinks about it.

A few Sundays ago I called him for a chat (it’s something that we’ve started 
to do every now and then). I told S that I had decided to visit some friends in 
Europe over Christmas and had thought about taking the four-hour flight to see 
him. He interrupted me: “Can’t you still come?”.

I said “Naw” and “Won’t you be tired?” and “You will have just got back from a 
trip to Moscow” and “Won’t it be difficult since you’re subletting someone’s 
place right now?” but he insisted that I was welcome, which made me feel 
reassured. I booked my tickets the next day.

•••

It’s three days until I go and I feel calm. This past holiday week has been 
mercifully busy: I bought gifts, saw old friends and family and consumed meal 
after meal. I’ve thought about S in between but not with any really strong 
emotion – occasionally I’ve wondered what I’ll say, but mainly his face has 
simply floated into focus in my head only to disappear back out again.

•••

It’s two days until I go and I’m not so sure this is a good idea.

Last autumn, S came back to the city where we first met (and where I still 
live) to attend a wedding. I met him and his friends at a bar and we ended up 
loafing around until late. It was good to see him but painful too (he was in 
love with the woman he had gone back to be with).

Asymmetric love, part one: I'm going to tell him how I feel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/31/asymmetric-love-column-part-one-im-going-to-tell-him-how-i-feel>
Among the group was Rob, S’s best friend. He didn’t have a place to stay that 
night, so I offered him my couch. I don’t know what it was I said to Rob in the 
cab that night but I remember him suddenly turning to me and saying “Hang on – 
are you in love with S?”. “Uhhh maybe,” I replied, cringing. Without pausing, 
Rob said: “Hm. I always imagined him with a tall, blonde, beautiful woman.”

About two months ago, S broke up with his girlfriend. I’m ashamed of this, but 
when he told me they were having problems (on a phone call I had initiated – 
our first since he had moved away) I smiled so largely I was worried it was 
audible. I don’t know much about her, except a few short stories S has told me 
which, together, don’t make up a personality. What I do know is what Rob knows: 
she was tall, blonde and pretty – things we both know I am not.

That’s one of the three reasons I’ve been single for most of my life. For a 
long time, I considered myself unattractive – repulsive, really. A bit short, a 
bit fat, a bit small breasted, a bit large-nosed, a bit buck-toothed and a bit 
acne-prone. Seeing as I’m not white (unlike every single one of S’s exes) I’m 
also very not blonde. Men’s opinions on the matter of my appearance are 
irrelevant (as are other women’s); my views on my body are the only ones that 
count and they’re all the more debilitating given my ambivalence about sex 
(reason number two for long bouts of celibacy).

I don’t want to attribute this to a specific race, religion or culture but 
some combination of the three (together, no doubt, with my parents’ 
personalities) meant I grew up in a household where I instinctively felt sex 
was dangerous, reprehensible and filthy. Those things were never said, but were 
understood.

I haven’t really been able to shake the belief that my naked body shouldn’t be 
shown to anyone but a doctor (even then, preferably female) and that sex is not 
a pastime to be undertaken lightly. My sister and I knew we should avoid men 
not only to preserve family honour but more importantly to preserve ourselves – 
to succumb to sex was foolish. We thought of men as lustful creatures who would 
jump on top of anything with a hole and heartbeat.

Which brings me to reason number three. As friends, colleagues, uncles and 
cousins I’ve got plenty of time for men – I know generous, sensitive and 
intelligent ones. You might doubt my sincerity based on the scorn I’ve 
expressed here, but I mean it. It’s only as lovers that I don’t have much time 
for them – I’d rather they didn’t dawdle on their way out of the bedroom. I 
don’t really trust them.

I’ll give you just one example (of many, including my shrug-worthy quota of 
run-ins with public masturbators and gropers but I feel like I’ve already dwelt 
too long on negatives here). Two Christmases ago, at a holiday party where I 
was feeling plenty uncomfortable (I didn’t feel like I belonged with these 
wealthy, white, intelligent people, and I had also showed up in clothes too 
revealing for the occasion), I bumped into a colleague who was also waiting in 
line for his coat, waiting to get the hell out of there. We had spoken a few 
times in the office and I had found him open-minded, friendly and incredibly 
encouraging about my work.

A few minutes later we’re standing on the street, he’s grabbing my hand, 
stroking my face and saying he knew I was special from the moment I first 
walked into our work’s meeting room. I glanced at his fingers and asked him if 
everything was OK with his wife. We spent the rest of the journey to our 
respective homes talking about how he loved her but didn’t really communicate 
with her, resulting in him feeling neglected and unloved.

That night I felt sorry for him. The next day, I just felt angry. 

It’s only recently that I’ve got clarity on the reasons for my singlehood – I 
know that they are negative (it’s even more obvious when writing them here) but 
I think their consequences can be positive: knowing how to be alone is a 
strength. It’s just that recently I’ve started to worry that maybe I don’t know 
how to not be on my own.

•••

I leave tomorrow morning. Today, I got a pedicure and a bikini wax and said 
goodbye to my friends and family. I feel content. I think the reason I’m going 
now is because I can withstand rejection. This past year, I’ve escaped a 
miserable job and a little bleak apartment. Nowadays, my life is often joyful. 
If it turns out that I don’t love S or that S actually doesn’t love me, my life 
won’t really have lost anything. Plus, I do believe S is not the only good man 
out there.

That said, I do feel like it’s a now-or-never scenario. Because S has started 
seeing someone. I knew he wouldn’t stay single for long – he’s not the type. 
They’ve only seen each other a few times and it doesn’t sound like it’s very 
serious yet. But still.

•••

In the airport now. S just texted to say the first snow of the year fell last 
night and he’s excited to see me. He attached a beautiful picture of the white 
view from his window. Everything’s fine. It’ll be fine, won’t it?

The third column of this series will be published next Thursday
 