
I’ve been single for nine of the past 10 years. If your first thought is 
“that’s weird”, I couldn’t agree more. There are three reasons why I am the way 
I am, but I’ll come to them another time. For now, what I really want to talk 
about is S.

I met S two years ago at a bar the week that I moved to this city. I was 
tired, bored and had the vague impression that he was after a job connection 
more than a friendship. I didn’t think I could provide the first, and wasn’t 
even sure I wanted the second . At one point, I sighed and rudely filled a 
silence with “What do we talk about now?” He just smiled and said: “I don’t 
know.”

Strangely, we continued to meet.

Asymmetric love, part two: I'm flying to see him, and he knows it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/07/asymmetric-love-part-two-im-flying-to-see-him>
A few weeks later, he suggested we go to the museum. It was closed but neither 
of us cared because the weather was so good, so we went for a drink outside 
instead.

Then we met for lunch and talked about work. We met at the cinema and both 
thought the film was bad, but for different reasons. We met at a concert and 
laughed. We went to a comedy show and laughed more. We met at the park, lots of 
times at the park.

I know this writing sounds like I’m working towards some terrible clich ed 
love story but I suppose that’s what happens when you’re trying to create a 
narrative for two people when there just isn’t one. There’s only my version of 
events, and question s about his.

I’m reading over our messages now and feel less crazy, because they still seem 
ambiguous even now that time has passed. (I’m sort of laying these out as 
evidence to a jury that might be able to judge his feelings more fairly than I 
ever could.)

Context: I had asked him what the word “banter” meant.

Of course I could have just asked what he meant. I could have replied saying: 
“What do you mean ‘friends … just’???”, but asking for clarity just isn’t what 
you do when you’re on a perpetual first date. Ambiguity is fun, it’s 
flirtatious. It can even make you sound intelligent. A need for precision 
sounds more desperate than romantic.

OK, text number two.

Context: that night, one of the last times I saw him, he had taken a picture 
of me on his camera and when he looked at it, he started laughing. I asked if 
it was because I’m slightly cross-eyed and he said it wasn’t that, but didn’t 
explain and kept on laughing (S is not thenegging 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Negging> type, before you go there). Oh, and I 
had given him a hideous kimono-shaped wine cooler as a dumb parting gift.

I’ve slept badly since I was 19 so it was in the early hours of the morning 
that I rolled over and read his message. I smiled then stayed up stressing 
about it. I couldn’t tell whether he was referring to platonic or romantic love.

I knew what I wanted. By the time S told me he was going to move back to 
Europe to move in with his girlfriend, I wanted him to lose his passport and 
lose her. But I cautiously replied: “I will save all outpouring of affection 
for once you’re safely a million miles away.”

I’ve been sort of fixated on S ever since. I’m on a plane writing this, and 
I’ve started to cry (embarrassing I know, but I’ve also had a few drinks so cut 
me some slack) at the thought of all the ways he’s different to the dumb bros 
I’ve met since he left.

S asks me how I am and seems genuinely interested in the answer. S talks 
slowly – even his laugh is a slow “Ha … ha … ha … aaaah” that makes me feel 
still. S has huge feet and walks softly on them. I think he might have too many 
teeth but the overall effect when he smiles (sometimes with his tongue 
protruding the tiniest bit between his upper and lower jaw) is quite flooring. 
When I tell S about my professional victories, I feel like he is genuinely 
happy for me. S smells so good that when he lifts up his arm and reaches for 
things the air smells better. It takes a lot for S to think someone is a total 
oxygen thief – some mornings I think that of people who press the elevator for 
a floor before mine. S doesn’t pretend he’s unattractive but he doesn’t dwell 
too long on the fact that women throw themselves at him. When I’m being 
ridiculous, he breaks down the syllables of my name with a pause in between to 
let me know he knows I’m being ridiculous and he knows I know I am. S doesn’t 
really have a country – and neither do I any more. We’ve both lived in too many 
different places for too long.

Since S left I’ve been dating, or trying to. There was the rock climber who 
had so much dirt under his long fingernails that his hands reminded me of 
misshapen feet. I came to notice and be repulsed by his hands while he was 
telling me about himself. During our date, he told me where every single one of 
his great grandparents was from. He described each one of his tattoos. He told 
me how many people he managed at work and which computer systems they used to 
have and which ones they now use. He didn’t utter a single sentence that ended 
in a question mark, apart from “Want to come to mine?” (I said yes.)

Then there was the guy who kept on bringing up phlegm then swallowing it while 
he was talking to me. And the guy who told me he hated every woman he has ever 
slept with. And the guy who shouted “Swallow it!” at me while he I was giving 
him some (unreciprocated) oral sex (I didn’t). There was the man who told me 
that he was surprised I was dressed in a short skirt because I actually seemed 
quite frigid (during the “discussion” which followed he asked me several times 
to “please lower your voice, other people are listening”). And the arrogant 
chubby lawyer who asked me what I was doing to help men get ahead in the 
workplace. There was the blond with the webbed hand who told me all Asian 
people look the same. There was the guy, who after he left, I noticed had left 
skid marks on the bed sheets. And finally, the guy whose third message to me 
was “naked pictures plz”.

Do you love S yet (by comparison if nothing else)? Maybe I’ve just 
mythologized him because of that wilting bouquet of sad dicks I’ve been dating. 
Maybe I’ve sculpted him into something he’s not, never was.

This is where I am now. Uncertain of how I feel (except knowing that I miss 
him terribly) and even less sure of how he feels about me. It’s been a year and 
a half since he left and I just want to know. So I’ve booked a ticket to go and 
see him for three days and find out.

Frighteningly, I feel optimistic. When I’ve switched off the lights, turned to 
my side and raised my knees to my stomach, I think about which words he might 
use when he tells me that he feels the same. That he always did – that all 
those times we met, when I looked away, he wanted to touch my neck as much as I 
wanted to touch his.

Hope is a terrible thing. I’ll let you know what happens.

Part two will be published next Thursday
 