
Dear OTL,

It took only the headline to your piece to pull me right out of oblivion. I 
had a stiff drink and a cigarette and started reading. Your writing made me 
smile, laugh and blush. In the eyes of what I suppose amounts to tens of 
thousands of readers, I have somehow become S, the cross-continental player 
treading softly on giant feet. It was a flattering read, to say the least.

I didn’t know what your visit would mean. I was worried that our intentions 
differed. That you would be staying at mine, where there is only one bed. I 
floated the idea to a friend, who played things down. “It’s patronizing to 
assume responsibility for other people’s feelings,” he said. Then he told me 
about the last time he broke someone’s heart.

During your stay, I did what I typically do when I sense that someone has 
unreciprocated feelings for me: I let everything linger in ambiguity. Or in any 
case, I shy away from making things any clearer.

Asymmetric love, part one: I'm going to tell him how I feel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/31/asymmetric-love-column-part-one-im-going-to-tell-him-how-i-feel>
It got comical at times. If I wasn’t playing dumb or naive, I would fake a 
hearing impairment as you showered me with hints about why you had come, how 
you really felt, and what the topic of your column was going to be.

“I guess this series will have a dull ending,” you pretended to loudly tell 
yourself, when you were in fact talking to me.

At home, a few hours later, you told me you were glad that you had finally 
made it here.

“I thought about coming right after you and your ex had broken up,” you said. 
“But that probably wasn’t great timing, was it?”

I had of course wondered why you had seemed so keen to keep in touch with me. 
For a long time, I was certain that all I did was bore you.

You intimidated me from the moment we met. You are witty, smart and clearly 
able to cut the bullshit out of any conversation. At the time, you had 
established yourself in the very field I was trying to enter. I think that goes 
some way to explain my indistinct text messages.

When you asked me what “banter” meant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/31/asymmetric-love-column-part-one-im-going-to-tell-him-how-i-feel>
, I felt pressed to come up with a succinct, smart and funny answer. Funny 
because I know how quickly people from your country bore of dull conversation. 
Smart because everything you ever said was thought-provoking.

So I replied that in our case, the banter was “between friends … just”. In my 
mind, my answer teetered between sincerity and dry humour. The word “just” was 
a kind of a get-out clause, should the conversation move in any uncomfortable 
direction.

Asymmetric love, part two: I'm flying to see him, and he knows it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/07/asymmetric-love-part-two-im-flying-to-see-him>
I meant that we were friends, just about. You weren’t all that nice to me, 
which I liked. You weren’t especially nice to my friends, either, which for 
some reason I also liked. It made me feel like I was one of the few people you 
really cared about. I admired you and still do. I was proud – even boastful – 
about the fact that we had become friends.

I don’t like to bother with friendships unless they mean something, and I 
think you feel the same. Rarely, though, have I made it clear to people close 
to me – male or female – that I am not interested in love. I haven’t felt the 
need to. Besides, why slam that door shut if at some point I actually do start 
to have feelings?

This behaviour is so consistent that I figure it can’t be unintentional. I 
guess I do it because I don’t like to hurt people. Or rather because I want to 
keep their feelings from weighing too much on my conscience.

The selfish reasons are more plausible, I figure. At least that’s what some of 
your readers think. “He enjoys the idea that he could have you if he wanted to 
but ultimately he chose the girlfriend. Even if you somehow ended up with him, 
he’d still be leading someone else on, somewhere because that’s how he seems to 
operate,” wrote a user called Soundsmadeup (it wasn’t, I assure you).

I did create my fair share of tricky situations, that much is true. Especially 
during my last months in your city, which I treated as a final hoorah in the 
world of wide horizons, grand career ambitions and constant mobility. Cliched 
as it sounds, it was a taste of freedom before moving back home to stability 
and coupledom.

Asymmetric love, part three: what happened after I stepped off the plane
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/14/asymmetric-love-part-three-what-happened-after-i-stepped-off-the-plane>
The examples abound. You weren’t even the only person I took for an ambiguous 
walk around the park. Then there was E, whom I saw one-on-one maybe five times 
without ever clarifying that I didn’t think we were on a date. Or S, who 
probably figured we were on a date when in my head it was just a friendly beer 
in a bar not far from the apartment I was sharing with my girlfriend. I say 
friendly, I mean ambiguous.

Different countries, same story. Clarity is not my strong suit. And speaking 
of clarity, let’s talk aboutthat second text 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/31/asymmetric-love-column-part-one-im-going-to-tell-him-how-i-feel>
.

A few months into our friendship, around the time I sent that message, I had 
come to feel reasonably confident that you enjoyed my company. That stupid 
kimono, which I have of course kept, suggested that you would miss me once I 
left. So I felt the need to say that I would miss you too.

I ended with the same two words that you sent me as a farewell text last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/14/asymmetric-love-part-three-what-happened-after-i-stepped-off-the-plane>
 after we spent three days skirting the elephant in the room.

My gut told me that your “Love you x” sign off from the airport was wholly 
different from the one I had sent you two years ago. I’m glad to read that it 
wasn’t and, as ever, I hope that you want to be friends.
 