
A few weeks after R came out of rehab for the first time, I said: "Do you 
think they'd take me now? Like a two-for-one?" The more R told me about his 
stay, the more envious I grew and the more frequently I thought: You had an 
oligarch's holiday and I got full-time care of the children and a husband who 
knows where his kundalini is.

When I was feeling unsympathetic, nothing he shared with me about being there 
seemed very taxing at all. He got to loll about on palatial lawns; all of his 
meals were cooked for him; his bedroom and bathroom were cleaned daily; he did 
yoga, meditation and group therapy, which sounded like an almightily liberating 
thing to do; he could sit in a room full of people and offload his darkest 
secrets, safe in the knowledge that someone else would have done far more 
shameful things.

A year later, when he went into rehab again, I kept on saying: "What about 
me?" in the hope that he'd trade his place for mine. "I could plead exhaustion 
for the 28-day programme, surely?" I'm lucky, therefore, to have my parents' 
home, which is filled with books, music, photographs, old out-of-tune 
instruments and properly made beds with cool pillows on which to lay my head. 
There is a hidden garden where I can sneak the odd cigarette away from the 
children, and if I want the full rehab experience I can wait for any one of my 
brothers to arrive, or familiarise myself with some of the locals, who are 
mostly alcoholic or recovering. There is even anAl-anon 
<http://www.al-anonuk.org.uk/> meeting nearby.

Mobile reception is so patchy that I can pretend there are media restrictions 
(again, getting into the whole rehab experience) and my mother can step into 
the role of professional therapist, asking me questions such as: "Do you think 
the chaos in which you grew up damaged you?" To which I answer: "Most 
certainly. But show me one person on this planet who isn't damaged."

On holiday/alternative rehab/my parents' house, the children and I sit at a 
breakfast table that is always handsomely laid, and afterwards feed the donkeys 
or I walk the dogs through the woods on my own. I keep thinking that when my 
parents aren't around, I'll never be able to replicate anything half as lovely 
as this for my children.

And there is always wine in the evening – which, since R has been home and our 
house has been dry, is a welcome change.

Exhaustion was my default setting until not so long ago, and I needed three 
days to sleep it off before I could enjoy any sort of holiday. Even last year, 
when I was reunited with my sister and her children at our parents' house, 
there was a sting in my heart that I couldn't suppress: I had recently broken 
up with R and I wanted to be on holiday for ever and be looked after by my 
parents. I did not want to have to face the music at home. At the end of that 
holiday, I remember panic rising as I waved goodbye to my parents and sister, 
the sharp realisation that avoidance of home – and of facing important things – 
was no longer an option.

As a child, I remember feeling such dread when the last day of the holiday 
arrived – no more darting from one friend's house to another on my bicycle. The 
abruptness of the first day of term replaced all of that with never-ending 
Sunday night fever, the fear that just thinking about the tyranny of a certain 
teacher brought about, the morning wrestle into stiff uniform that set the tone 
of a stifled day.

I was anxious about everything: maths, being liked enough by other girls, and 
preparing for the exams. In essence, all the stuff that the teachers kept 
telling me to care about, that would help make being a grownup more bearable. 
All of it caused nothing but gut-wrenching fear.

And here I am: a grownup, who for the first time managed to treat a family 
holiday in the way that most sensible people seem to: as time for enjoyment. I 
tried to let things be. I didn't shout at my daughter when she chose to spend 
whole evenings finding a good wi-fi signal on her mobile; I wasn't that 
bothered when my elder son watched three hours of television one sunny 
afternoon, though he probably should have been outside growing freckles; and I 
did not freak out at the thought of R in London, and what he might be doing 
(drinking, or not. I am powerless over that even when I'm home).

I even forgot to worry about money because where my parents live the most 
expensive thing within a one-mile radius is an ice-cream. So much cheaper than 
rehab.
 