
The idea runs so counter to everything that big league sports teams stand for 
these days that it seems it must be a gimmick. When the Atlanta Falconsopen 
their new stadium in 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/24/atlanta-falcons-mercedes-benz-stadium>
, they plan not to drive up food prices – something of a tradition for all 
teams opening new stadiums – but rather to slash the cost of hotdogs and soda 
to a time more reminiscent of when they moved into their current home, the 
Georgia Dome, in 1992.

 Hotdogs will cost $2, as will pretzels, popcorn and bottled water. Beer will 
be $5, and sodas will cost $2 with unlimited refills.

Even more astounding, the team say they are doing this because they listened 
to their fans.

“When we did our fan surveys about the stadium experience, food and beverages 
were rated the lowest,” Rich McKay, the Falcons president, told the Guardian.

Which makes them another oddity in today’s sports world: a team that not only 
besieges their fans with surveys, but actually pays attention to what they say.

“You can tell fans are not getting what they want,” McKay said. “They sensed 
the same thing I do when I got to a movie and I have to share a drink with my 
wife because it’s so expensive. I hate that I have to do that. I don’t want to 
pay so much for a drink that I have to share it.”

McKay said the idea of lowering food prices came about four years ago, when 
the new stadium was first being discussed. Owner Arthur Blank told employees 
that he wanted everyone to rethink the notion of “a stadium experience for 
fans”. While normally that means wider seats and a better scoreboard, the 
Falcons also took it to mean lowering the cost of food.

And it won’t be only for Falcons games: the new prices will also apply to the 
annual Chick-fil-A Peach Bowl and SEC championship games, as well as the 2018 
college football playoff national championship and the 2020 Final Four. This 
led to some awkward conversations with potential concessions companies, who 
struggled to grasp the new policy. Several times they asked the Falcons if they 
were sure this is what they wanted to do.

“We said: ‘You aren’t listening to us,’” McKay said.

Of course, the Falcons’ new field won’t be cheap. Mercedes-Benz has already 
bought the naming rights, which gives an idea of the kind of image the stadium 
will project. And it’s not as if Atlanta is getting a bargain with the new 
football palace: building costs are expected to run to about $1.4bn, and the 
public is contributing close to $600m. Selling tickets in a more expensive 
stadium may be challenging – and it’s possible that higher ticket prices will 
make up for the loss in food revenue.

But the cost of food at most American stadiums – where hotdogs alone can run 
close to $10 – has long been a source of outrage among fans. The fact that 
someone could buy a $2 soft drink and return to a refill machine as many times 
as they want during the game is a remarkable turn of events.

“This is an investment in the fan experience,” McKay said. “The fan experience 
needs to be better than it has been. Fans invest a lot in you. They not only 
buy tickets; they buy other things. Arthur [Blank, the Falcons’ owner] started 
Home Depot, and Home Depot had cheaper stuff. Now Home Depot is still in 
business and its competitors who had higher prices are not.”
 