 Atonement, the epic film adaptation of Ian McEwan's novel, is leading the pack 
in this year's Bafta race, with 17 nominations in the longlists revealed 
yesterday.
The winners will be announced at the annual ceremony at the Royal Opera House 
in a month's time, but the appearance of the Joe Wright-directedAtonement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/atonement> in every category in which it 
could be given an award is, to say the least, striking.

It could come away with nothing, although that is unlikely, and its appearance 
in longlists does not mean it will make the cut in shortlists revealed next 
Wednesday. The film, which stars Keira Knightley and James McAvoy, also has 
seven nominations in this weekend's Golden Globes - the traditional guide to 
which way the Oscar wind is blowing.

The other notable winner in the longlists is a film British audiences have yet 
to see: Paul Thomas Anderson's There Will Be Blood, with its titanic central 
performance from Daniel Day Lewis and its memorable original score by 
Radiohead's Jonny Greenwood, features 13 times.

Tim Burton's Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street, another film we 
will see soon, was described by one critic as the best ever musical film. 
Surprisingly, it has not been listed in the best film category, but it has got 
nine other nominations, including for its leads Johnny Depp and Helena 
Bonham-Carter.

Control, the Joy Division biopic which was top of many people's lists of 
British film of the year, features 10 times, including nominations for its lead 
Sam Riley and director Anton Corbijn.

Hollywood action blockbusters are led by Paul Greengrass's spy thriller The 
Bourne Ultimatum, which has eight nominations. Many people's money for surprise 
success will be on Ang Lee's Lust, Caution, which was released at the weekend. 
Set in Japanese-occupied Shanghai and Hong Kong during the second world war it 
is a long and beautiful movie. It has 10 nominations, including one for the 
newcomer Tang Wei in the leading actress category.

The longlist is good news for Britain's most successful film production 
company Working Title, which gets 31 nominations. As well as being behind 
Atonement, it was responsible for Elizabeth: The Golden Age, with 13 
nominations, and Hot Fuzz, which is nominated in the best original screenplay 
category.

One of the most fiercely-contested categories may be best supporting actress, 
a list of 15 which features four stars from Atonement: Brenda Blethyn, Romola 
Garai, Saoirse Ronan and Vanessa Redgrave.

Tim Bevan, co-chairman of Working Title, said they were delighted by the 
nominations. "With such strong British contenders ... in all categories, it is 
looking like a great year for British film and the British film industry."
 