
Fresh from its success at Sunday's Golden Globes, Atonement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/atonement> looks the film to beat at next 
month's Baftas. Joe Wright's adaptation of the Ian McEwan bestseller racked up 
an astonishing 14 nominations, including best film, director, actor and 
actress. The Coen brothers' acclaimed No Country For Old Men and Paul Thomas 
Anderson's oil saga There Will Be Blood were in joint second place with nine 
nominations apiece

Atonement has home turf advantage at an awards ceremony with a long-standing 
British bias. Wright's drama will obviously be aiming to take the crowning best 
film Bafta, where it is listed alongside American Gangster, The Lives of 
Others, No Country For Old Men and There Will Be Blood. But it also looks a 
shoo-in to win the sister prize of best British film. The other nominees in 
this category are Control, The Bourne Ultimatum, This is England and Eastern 
Promises.

Globe winner Daniel Day-Lewis appears the frontrunner in the race for best 
actor, thanks to his performance in There Will Be Blood. He is joined by George 
Clooney (Michael Clayton), James McAvoy (Atonement), Viggo Mortensen (Eastern 
Promises) and the late Ulrich Muhe (The Lives of Others). "In a year of such 
fine performances, it is a lovely thing to be included amongst them," Day-Lewis 
said in a statement. "And in a year of exceptional films, that ours has been so 
fully recognised is the best news of all."

The best actress Bafta looks more open, with Globe winner Julie Christie (Away 
From Her) and Keira Knightley (Atonement) both installed as the early 
favourites. The other nominees are Cate Blanchett (Elizabeth: The Golden Age), 
Marion Cottilard (La Vie en Rose) and 20-year-old Ellen Page (Juno).

The race for the best director Bafta is between Joe Wright (Atonement), Paul 
Greengrass (The Bourne Ultimatum), Florian von Donnersmarck (The Lives of 
Others), Joel and Ethan Coen (No Country For Old Men) andPaul Thomas Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/paul-thomas-anderson> (There Will Be Blood).

Tipped as a possible winner at next month's Academy Awards, Tim Burton's 
acclaimed musical Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street came away with 
a scant two nominations (for costume design and make-up and hair). Bafta 
organisers reportedly did not send screeners of the film out to voters, 
claiming that it was not finished in time.

Nominations for the Orange British Academy Film Awards were announced at 
Bafta's London headquarters this morning by the actors Naomie Harris and Kelly 
Reilly. The awards ceremony follows on Sunday February 10.

This year's Baftas <https://www.theguardian.com/film/baftas> could well prove 
a high point for the awards. With the Golden Globes crippled by the ongoing US 
writers' strike and the Oscars similarly threatened, the ceremony could find 
itself with a monopoly on A-list nominees, lavishing it with a profile and 
prestige beyond the organisers' wildest dreams.
 