
Most scientists, on achieving high office, keep their public remarks to the 
bland and reassuring. Last week Nina Fedoroff, the president of the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), broke ranks in a spectacular 
manner.

She confessed that she was now "scared to death" by the anti-science movement 
that was spreading, uncontrolled, across the US and the rest of the western 
world.

"We are sliding back into a dark era," she said. "And there seems little we 
can do about it. I am profoundly depressed at just how difficult it has become 
merely to get a realistic conversation started on issues such as climate change 
or genetically modified organisms."

The remarks of Fedoroff, one of the world's most distinguished agricultural 
scientists, are all the more remarkable given their setting.

She made them at the AAAS <https://www.theguardian.com/science/aaas> annual 
meeting, an event at which scientists normally revel in their latest 
accomplishments: new insights into marine biology or first results from a 
recently launched satellite, for example.

But this year there has been a palpable chill to proceedings. Yes, good work 
was reported to the 8,000 who attended the various symposia and lectures at the 
meeting in Vancouver.

However, these pronouncements were set against a background of an entire 
intellectual discipline that realises that it, and its practitioners, are now 
under sustained attack.

As Fedoroff pointed out, university and government researchers are hounded for 
arguing that rising carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere are changing the 
climate. Their emails are hacked while Facebook campaigns call for their 
dismissal from their posts, calls that are often backed by rightwing 
politicians. At the last Republican party debate in Florida, Rick Santorum 
insisted he should be the presidential nominee simply because he had cottoned 
on earlier than his rivals Newt Gingrich or Mitt Romney to the "hoax" of global 
warming.

"Those of us who grew up in the sixties, when we put men on the Moon, now have 
to watch as every Republican candidate for this year's presidential election 
denies the science behind climate change and evolution. That is a staggering 
state of affairs and it is very worrying," said Professor Naomi Oreskes, of the 
University of California, San Diego.

Oreskes is co-author, with Erik Conway, of Merchants of Doubt, an 
investigation into the links between corporate business interests and campaigns 
in the US aimed at blocking the introduction of environmental and medical 
measures such as bans on smoking and the use of DDT, laws to limit acid rain, 
legislation to end the depletion of ozone in the atmosphere and attempts to 
curb carbon dioxide emissions.

In each case, legislation was delayed by years, sometimes decades, thanks to 
the activities of a variety of foundations – such as the Heartland Institute – 
which are backed by energy companies such as Exxon and billionaires like 
Charles Koch.

These institutions, acting as covers for major energy corporations, are 
responsible for the onslaught that has deeply lowered the reputation of science 
in many people's minds in America. This has come in the form of personal 
attacks on the reputations of scientists and television adverts that undermine 
environment laws. The Environmental Protection Agency, which is responsible for 
blocking mining and drilling proposals that might harm threatened species or 
habitats, has become a favourite target.

"Our present crisis over the rise of anti-science has been coming for a long 
time and we should have seen it coming," adds Oreskes.

This point was backed by Francesca Grifo of the Union of Concerned Scientists 
(UCS), although she added that one specific event had brought matters to a head 
this year: the decision by the United States supreme court to overrule the law 
that allowed the federal government to place limits on independent spending for 
political purposes by business corporations.

"That has opened the gates for corporations – often those associated with coal 
and oil industries – to flood the market with adverts that support rightwing 
politicians and which attack government bodies that impose environmental 
regulations that these companies don't like," she said. "The science that 
supports these regulations is attacked as well. That has made a terrible 
difference over the past year and it is now bringing matters to a head."

Her remarks are backed by a UCS report, Heads They Win, Tails We Lose: How 
Corporations Corrupt Science at the Public's Expense, which was published at 
the Vancouver meeting on Friday. It chronicles the methods used by corporate 
businesses to attack their targets: harassing individual scientists, 
ghost-writing scientific articles to raise doubts about government research, 
and undermining the use of science to form government policy.

"People may believe that political interference in science went extinct when 
George W. Bush left office, but the reality is that the pressure to politicise 
science is still with us," added Grifo.

Most scientists acknowledge that President Barack Obama is sympathetic to 
science. "The trouble is that he still hasn't been able to do anything to help. 
He is continually blocked by Congress, and that only adds to our worries and 
sense of desperation," said Fedoroff. "If the current president is for us, but 
still cannot do anything to help us, then what will happen if a Republican gets 
into the White House this year?"

In general, the worst excesses of the anti-science lobbies are confined to the 
US. However, there are signs that their influence is spreading, and that raises 
worrying issues, said Bob Ward of the Grantham Research Institute on Climate 
Change, in London.

"In coming years, we will have to ask ourselves if public policies should be 
based on the advice of experts who have carried out robust and rigorous 
analysis of the evidence, or if they should be guided by lobbyists who appear 
driven by narrow ideological dogma.

"The answer may seem obvious, but we should be aware of the efforts being made 
in the UK to promote ideology over rational evidence-based decision-making, 
particularly when it comes to climate issues," said Ward.

Just how this rise of anti-science antagonism pans out in the end remains 
unclear.

"It has taken the scientific community a long time to realise what it is up 
against," says Oreskes. "In the past, it thought the problem was just a matter 
of education. All its practitioners had to do was make an effort to reach out 
and talk to teachers, the public and business leaders. Then these people would 
see the issues and understand the need for action.

"But now they are beginning to realise what they are really up against: 
massive organised attempts to undermine scientific data by people for whom that 
data represents a threat to their status quo. Given the power of these people, 
scientists will have their work cut out dealing with them."
 