
A $230m cyber security strategy, which includes cash for more specialist 
cybercrime officers in the Australian Crime Commission and theAustralian 
federal police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-federal-police>, has 
been announced by the government.

The crackdown is designed to tackle cyber crimes including malware which 
attempts to force users to pay a ransom, “hacktivism”, denial of service 
attacks and theft of data or intellectual property through cyber espionage.

Passwords, phones and privacy settings: how to protect yourself online
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/19/how-to-protect-yourself-online-passwords-phones-privacy-settings>
It is estimated 101 more cyber security experts will be hired across the 
government and its agencies, about half of whom will be officers in the two 
crime-fighting agencies.The federal police will get a further $20.4m and the 
crime commission $16m to conduct threat detection, technical analysis and 
forensic assessment.

Cyber crime costs Australia more than $1bn a year, the strategy says, but adds 
that “the real impact of cybercrime to Australia could be around $17bn [a 
year]”, based on estimates that losses from cyber security attacks are about 1% 
of GDP a year.

“The Australian Cyber Security Centre threat report 2015 says the cyber threat 
is undeniable, unrelenting and continues to grow,” it said. Threats come both 
from other countries and non-state actors such as criminal networks.

The strategy said cyber espionage activities target Australian government 
networks almost daily and gives a frank admission that government systems have 
been compromised.

In December, reports suggested China had conducted a successful cyber attack 
on the Bureau of Meteorology 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-12-02/china-blamed-for-cyber-attack-on-bureau-of-meteorology/6993278>
 that compromised sensitive systems across the federal government.

The government will assess its agencies’ cyber security weaknesses and improve 
security advice on emerging technologies to help mitigate and deter attacks.

Most cybercrime targeting Australians originates overseas, so the strategy 
calls for greater international cooperation to shut down safe havens for cyber 
criminals.

The government will boost its expertise with a new minister assisting the 
prime minister on cyber security, special adviser in the department of prime 
minister and cabinet, and a cyber ambassador.

In a foreword to the strategy Malcolm Turnbull said it was important to 
promote international norms of behaviour that were consistent with a free, open 
and secure internet.

“These norms include that states should not knowingly conduct or support 
cyber-enabled intellectual property theft for commercial advantage,” the prime 
minister said.

The $230m funding commitment comes on top of $400m already committed to cyber 
security in the defence white paper.

The strategy is equivocal on the impact of encryption, noting it helps to 
secure information and improve users’ cyber security, but may also be used to 
hide illegal activity such as recruiting individuals to terrorist or criminal 
enterprises.

The government wants to share information with the private sector on cyber 
threats. It will spend $39m to move the Australian Cyber Security Centre from 
Canberra and $47m to set up threat sharing centres in capital cities and an 
online portal to improve cooperation.

Cyber threat information should be shared in real time between and within the 
public and private sectors, the strategy said. “Both have unique information to 
contribute to the threat picture.”

Sharing information will help identify patterns and to analyse and predict 
cyber security threats.

Businesses own and operate most internet infrastructure and have info about 
malicious activities on their networks and systems. The strategy said the 
government had intelligence and restricted information it may share. Businesses 
which want to share information about attacks with each other will be able to 
do so using the government as an honest broker.

Big businesses in the ASX 100 will be able to participate by signing up to 
voluntary cyber security health checks to understand their weaknesses. The 
government will also give $15m in grants to small businesses to have their 
systems tested and improved by accredited experts.

Facebook scammers: expert advice on how to stay safe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/21/facebook-scammers-safety-cybersecurity>
The government will spend $30.5m from its innovation policy to set up a Cyber 
Security Growth Centre to support innovation and companies that can 
commercialise cyber security solutions for sale worldwide.

The CSIRO will get $7.5m to conduct cyber security research.

The strategy said Australia must address a cyber security skills shortage by 
expanding training in registered organisations such as Tafes and potentially 
developing cyber security apprenticeships. It noted a lack of diversity in 
information security, as just 10% of professionals in the sector were women.
 