
Andrew Leigh: 'Plenty of goodies for cigar-chomping plutocrats, but not much 
for a minimum wage worker'

 In her terrific book Dirt Cheap 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/617585.Dirt_Cheap>, the late Elisabeth 
Wynhausen decided to take leave from her journalism job and try life as a 
low-wage worker. In one job, Wynhausen moved to a country town and worked 
packing eggs. She earned near minimum wage in a job that started at 6am, left 
her body aching at the end of the day, and where the smell from the nearby 
chook sheds was constant. Three weeks in, the manager, a millionaire several 
times over, came to tell the workers they were losing their jobs.

I thought of Wynhausen's story again last night as I looked at the budget 
papers. For the billionaires: a mining tax cut and a parental leave scheme that 
gives most to those who have most. For the battlers: cuts to the pension, cuts 
to family support, and a punitive regime for young jobseekers.

After a generation of rising inequality, the Abbott government has delivered a 
budget that will widen the gap. In an environment when the three richest people 
in Australia have more wealth than the bottom one million, the government is 
cutting foreign aid and student support to make room for tax breaks to 
multi-millionaire superannuants and multinational firms.

Budgets are about priorities. This is a budget that has plenty of goodies for 
cigar-chomping plutocrats, but not much for a minimum wage worker at an egg 
factory, who will be forced to work till 70 before getting the pension. For 
Canberrans, it will be particularly brutal, with many of the 16,500 public 
service job cuts sure to fall on the nation's capital. These include people 
like the unemployed constituent who contacted me yesterday, fearful that if her 
husband lost his job too, they wouldn't be able to pay the mortgage.

What Joe Hockey didn't tell people last year was that his own decisions had 
doubled the deficit. What he didn't tell people last night was that he couldn't 
even manage to halve it again. He's left Australia with a whole lot of broken 
eggs, but no omelette in sight.

• Andrew Leigh <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-leigh> is 
the shadow assistant treasurer

Matt Grudnoff: 'This 'budget crisis' is a political fabrication'

 At a time when unemployment is rising, economic growth is sluggish and our 
terms of trade are in decline, the government has decided to take $36bn out of 
the economy. Usually economists suggest the budget is used to counter the 
business cycle. That means when the economy is declining, the government should 
spend more and tax less. Pulling money out of the economy will push economic 
growth down and put upward pressure on unemployment.

The primary reason the government has given for such large cuts is that the 
budget is in crisis. This of course is just political fabrication, as any 
economist will happily tell you. As the budget papers reveal, with the economy 
growing below trend, revenue is down as a percentage of GDP from its long run 
average. If the economy is allowed to recover, tax revenue will also recover. 
Big cuts to the budget now have the potential to slow that recovery and hence 
the recovery of tax revenue.

While there are some tax increases to the well off, motorists and the sick, 
there are also big tax cuts to large mining companies, big polluters and 
businesses. In fact while most of the $36bn comes from middle and low income 
households, big business, particularly mining companies are likely to be much 
better off. The government might be keen to say that we all have to do our 
share but it seems big business is getting a free ride on the backs of the less 
well off.

• Matt Grudnoff is a senior economist at The Australia Institute

Laura Eadie: 'Independent institutions are being axed in what amounts to false 
economy'

 This budget is about the national interest. It's meant to prepare for 
structural change and drive economic sustainability. But will it?

It's promising to see a government grappling with the economic implications of 
an ageing population. Even if it comes after 12 years, three intergenerational 
reports – and one very distracting mining boom that both major parties hoped 
was a structural change, but that ultimately wasn't.

What's missing is an understanding of the real structural changes taking place 
in the global economy. Ageing is just one global mega-trend challenging 
economic growth. Other trends are as big or bigger. We're heading into a carbon 
constrained world. In Asia particularly, we're seeing a race to control 
resources and win advantage in green technology.

Whether Australia is ready or not, our economy will be reshaped by these 
trends. Arguably, it already is. Coal prices have collapsed as China moves to 
aggressively cut growth in coal use. Domestic gas prices are surging as we move 
to export our reserves offshore. Rooftop solar has taken the cream off 
coal-fired power profits as its price dropped 7-fold in four years, again 
mostly due to China.

Rapid change to our economic structure is inevitable. Forward looking policy, 
and independent institutions, will be essential to make it a smooth - or at 
least less bumpy - ride. That's where this budget falls down. Rewind a few 
years, and we had bipartisan agreement on key policies for resources and carbon 
management. Today, we see independent institutions being axed in what amounts 
to false economy.

Cutting the National Water Initiative may save $20.9m over four years. Yet 
spreading its responsibilities amongst un-named agencies hardly inspires 
confidence that water management won't become a political football again.
Axing ARENA may save $1.3bn over 5 years. Yet it could cost us a lot more in 
the future, if we miss the opportunity to make Australian renewable energy 
competitive.

Joe Hockey is right that we're facing an emergency. We do need to prepare for 
economic risks before it's too late. But delaying action to develop a 
sustainable economy will cost us all in the long-run.

• Laura Eadie is the research director for the sustainable economy program at 
the Centre for Policy Development

Frank Bongiorno: 'Pain for many, but no sharp break with the past'

"We are a nation of lifters, not leaners." Hockey's budget speech borrowed 
these words from Robert Menzies' The Forgotten People broadcast of 1942. The 
budget itself recalls the Menzies government's so-called "horror Budget" of 
1951.

The Abbott government has tried to justify its harsh budget by claiming the 
existence of an emergency. In 1951, with inflation running at 20%, the 
treasurer Arthur Fadden's claims of an emergency were more plausible, but they 
did not prevent a very rough public reception for a budget that increased taxes 
across the board. The Hockey budget will probably receive similarly rough 
handling. Only professional economists seemed to think Fadden's budget any 
good. They'll also have kind words for Hockey's.

Some historians have been more kind to the "horror Budget", pointing out that 
it correctly attacked the problem of excess demand, and that did so not by the 
time-honoured orthodox method of simply cutting spending but by dealing with 
the revenue side of the equation. This was good Keynesianism, even if it did 
not prevent a recession.

Hockey won't rationalise his infrastructure spending in Keynesian terms. It's 
clearly designed as a political pay-off for higher petrol taxes, just as the 
Medicare co-payment, far from producing the bad outcomes about which health 
experts have warned, will apparently help find a cure for cancer. Nor has 
Hockey done anything much on the revenue side, with the three-year levy on the 
rich performing more of a political than a financial function.

Hockey began his budget speech claiming that the country's future depended on 
his budget. He's not the first federal treasurer to make exaggerated claims of 
this kind. Paul Keating's 1988 budget, with its massive surplus, was going to 
bring "home the bacon". What followed was "the recession we had to have".

Treasurers are often poor guides to historical significance: the most 
significant budgets have usually only gained due recognition in retrospect. The 
apparent importance of Bill Hayden's only budget as treasurer in 1975 was that 
it was blocked by the Senate, leading to the dismissal of the Whitlam 
government. Hayden's budget actually mattered much more for quite different 
reasons; it was an exercise in economic rationalism and therefore the 
granddaddy of pretty much every federal budget ever since, including Hockey's.

There's no reason to suspect that Hockey's budget carries any such 
significance. It will deliver pain for many, but no sharp break with the past. 
It attacks the supposed entitlements of some – mainly the poor – while leaving 
rackets such as negative-gearing in place. Above all, it does nothing to deal 
with the elephant in the room; that the federal government is failing to 
collect enough revenue to do what the majority of Australian people still 
expect of it.

• Frank Bongiorno teaches history at the Australian National University

Ged Kearney: 'The cuts will reduce the quality of public services that 
Australians receive'

Budgets are a chance for governments to set out their vision for the country, 
and today revealed that Tony Abbott and Hockey's vision is of a harsher, less 
equal Australia.

There are so many cuts to the social safety net in this budget, it's hard to 
know what's the worst. But the almost complete abandonment of support for young 
unemployed people stands out. If you're under 30 and unemployed, you're on your 
own for six months, with no income support at all. After that, you'll get 
inadequate welfare payments for six months and be required to work for the 
dole, a scheme that has been shown to be counterproductive.

You'd think a government that was concerned about getting people into work and 
boosting productivity would emphasise training programs and skills development, 
but you'd be wrong. The government has gutted support for skills and training 
by cutting half a billion in funding as well as scrapping a range of key 
agencies (like the Australian Workforce Productivity Agency) to be abolished 
and funding for key programs (like support apprentices) scrapped.

The savage cuts to public sector jobs will not only put more than 16,500 
hard-working Australians out of a job, it will reduce the quality of public 
services that Australians receive. You'll wait longer on the phone to Medicare 
or the Tax Office, and stand longer in Customs queues. These cuts are 
unwarranted, short-sighted, and come on top of years of tight budgets in the 
public sector.

For working people, this budget represents an attack on the social wage – the 
public services and social safety net that are so important to our way of life. 
Universal health care is being fundamentally undermined. The Age Pension, 
Disability Support Pension and other payments will be cut, as will family 
payments.

There are a few superficial measures that make it seem as if the pain in this 
budget is being shared broadly, like the deficit levy that will only affect the 
top few per cent of income earners. But these are distractions from the real 
pain, which will hit the young, the poor, people with disability, retirees, 
apprentices, tertiary students, families, and anyone who might need to go to 
the doctor but now can't afford it.

• Ged Kearney is president of the ACTU

Trisha Jha: 'Some progress has been made towards fixing perverse incentives'

 The reforms to family tax benefits are the most significant since the current 
policies were first introduced as part of the GST reform package.
Family Tax Benefit Part B was designed for families with one main earner and 
single parents, with a slightly higher payment for those whose youngest child 
is under five. In the Budget, the primary earner income test has been brought 
down from $150,000 to $100,000. Income support customer statistics suggest this 
change would affect under 100,000 families. The major change is that new 
applicants whose youngest child is aged six or over are no longer eligible for 
FTB Part B at all. This would remove some of the workforce disincentives for 
secondary earners in couple families who have primary school-age children.

The changes also amount to a significant reduction in benefits for single 
parents. The new $750 supplement attached to the maximum rate of FTB Part A for 
single parents of children aged 6-12 is intended to ameliorate this, but the 
yearly loss is in the thousands.

The changes to FTB Part A represent a missed opportunity for real reform. The 
Commission of Audit recommended abolishing the second income test for the 
payment, which simplified four tiers of payment to just a maximum rate and a 
part rate which reduced to nil with a 20c taper. However, the government has 
gone for the blunter option and merely removed the per-child additional income 
threshold. At least 107,000 families will be cut off payments with the effect 
of trimming some fat, as payments will now cut out around $94,000 in income. 
Unfortunately, it does little to reduce complexity: there are still three tiers 
of payment because the part rate reduces to the base rate before the hard 
cut-off.

This budget was always going to be about cuts and not wholesale reform, but 
some progress has been made towards fixing perverse incentives.

• Trisha Jha is a policy analyst at The Centre for Independent Studies
 