
Australia Post <https://www.theguardian.com/business/australia-post> says 
losses from regulated mail delivery will “overwhelm the entire company” without 
urgent changes to its community service obligations, after its full-year profit 
fell 34%.


The government-owned business made a full-year profit of $116.2m for the 
2013-14 financial year, which was 34.5% below its result a year earlier.

But the company recorded a net loss during the second half – the first since 
it was corporatised in 1989.

Losses from the letter-delivery business blew out to $328.4m for the full 
year. That was offset by growth in the parcel delivery business, which raised 
its earnings more than 20% to $337.5m for the year.

The chief executive, Ahmed Fahour, said the continued decline in letter 
deliveries would drag Australia Post to a full-year loss in the near future, 
without changes to its service obligations.

“Unfortunately, without significant and urgent reform of our community service 
obligations, the loss in the regulated mail business will overwhelm the entire 
company and result in the enterprise making a loss in the near future,” he said.

Fahour said without changes to the mail delivery business it could incur 
cumulative losses of $12.2bn over the next 10 years.

He said Australia Post could no longer count on growth in its parcel business 
covering the losses from mail delivery. “Profit growth in parcels has covered 
the growing losses in letters again in this full year but possibly for the last 
time,” he said.

“These results are a stark illustration of the urgent need for changes to the 
regulations governing our letters service.”

The union representing postal workers said the losses from Australia Post’s 
letter delivery business should not be used as a reason to sack more employees.

The CEPU NSW postal and telecommunications branch secretary, Jim Metcher, said 
Australia Post’s small after-tax profit showed reforms could be made without 
resorting to job cuts.

“Today’s profit announcement shows present decline in letter volumes and 
associated costs can be offset by the performance and returns with parcel 
volumes and retail revenues,” Metcher said on Thursday.

Australia Post made a net loss of $105.9m during the second half, as the slide 
in mail delivery overshadowed the growth in the parcel business. The company 
cut its dividend to the federal government by more than half to $78.8m.

Australia Post increased revenue 8.3% during the year, but that was offset by 
a 5% fall in letter volumes and fixed costs associated with the mail business. 
Parcel delivery volumes lifted nearly 13%, while earnings from Australia Post’s 
retail arm were stable at $175.6.
 