
Australia Post <https://www.theguardian.com/business/australia-post> will 
spend up to $190m on staff redundancies and may shed almost 2,000 jobs as it 
attempts to stem the bleeding from its declining mail business.

Unions have warned the planned cuts will hit regions hardest.
The company is grappling with an expected $500m full year loss thanks to the 
mail business, which has lost $1.5bn in the past five years.
It has set aside $190m to cover voluntary redundancy payments over the next 
three years, with1,900 jobs reportedly set to go 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-06-26/australia-post-to-slash-1900-jobs-amid-mail-losses/6574752>
 as the government-owned business restructures its operations.
The chief executive, Ahmed Fahour, said the overhaul was necessary for 
Australia Post to survive.
“We have reached the tipping point that we have been warning about where, 
without reform, the business becomes unsustainable,” Fahour said.
But he said there would be no forced redundancies as the company retrained and 
redeployed workers.
“I have made a commitment that there will be no forced redundancy of staff 
impacted directly by changes in our mail service and who are actively seeking 
jobs in other parts of the business,” he said.
“The provision will provide a safety net for employees who we know will choose 
not to transition with us and who may be legally entitled to a voluntary 
redundancy.”

Changes allowing Australia Post to process mail at a slower pace are before 
federal parliament, and the union said they would open up job cuts outside the 
city.
“That would allow all of those mail processing jobs in regional areas to be 
shifted to metro areas,” Communication Workers Union assistant national 
secretary Martin O’Nea said on Friday.

O’Nea said there had been constant anger and frustration from Australia Post 
union members who were unhappy with the way the government-owned business was 
operating.

Fahour said most of the losses would be in metropolitan areas.

The expected full-year loss, the first in more than 30 years for Australia 
Post, comes after a 10% slide in mail deliveries in the past year.
In the communications minister, Malcolm Turnbull, approved Australia Post’s 
plans for a two-tier mail delivery service and a rise in basic stamp prices to 
$1.
Fahour said Australia Post was looking to shift jobs from mail delivery to 
growing areas of its operations, such as parcels, as it looked for a way back 
to profitability.
“Our ambition is to continue to grow jobs in areas such as parcel delivery and 
trusted services for consumers and small business, both in-store and online,” 
he said.
“The changes we are making are essential so we can continue to invest in our 
business, particularly in these growth areas.”
About 4,400 Australia Post staff have been shifted into new roles since 
October 2013.
 