Which of these <b>isn't</b> a couplet from Gina Rinehart's ode to mining, Our 
Future?  Some envious unthinking people have been conned/To think prosperity is 
created by waving a magic wand  The world's poor need our resources: do not 
leave them to their fate/Our nation needs special economic zones and wiser 
government, before it is too late  I know what Australia is worth/Its lucrative 
black lumps, gloriously torn out of the earth  Is our future threatened with 
massive debts run up by political hacks/Who dig themselves out by unleashing 
rampant tax According to a disgruntled ex-employee, which of these 
transgressions isn't included in the secret document of behaviours that will 
get you fired from James Packer's yacht?  Complaining and being negative  
Saying "that's not my job"  Refusing to rub suntan lotion into the boss's back  
Discussing the "movement or operations" of the yacht Clive Palmer is a famously 
early riser. What did he say he was doing at 3am on Christmas morning, 2012?  
Phoning world leaders to plan an initiative in Africa to alleviate poverty  
Wrapping his Christmas present to his wife, Anna, a miniature version of Jeff 
the Dinosaur made by Cartier in gold and diamonds  Going through the job 
applications for captain of Titanic II, the replica of the doomed ship Palmer 
will put to sea in 2016  Coming back from midnight mass somewhat the worse for 
wear What did Andrew 'Twiggy' Forrest say his priorities in life were?  Family, 
friends, business and God – in that order  God, family, friends and business – 
in that order  God, family, busines and friends – in that order  Sex, drugs and 
rock'n'roll Frank Lowy led the campaign for Australia to host the 2022 World 
Cup, said to have cost Australian taxpayers $43m. How many votes – out of 22 – 
did the country receive?  One  18  Nine  None Which statistic about Gina 
Rinehart's wealth, according to a 2012 Green Left Weekly audit, <b>isn't</b> 
true?  If she spent $1m a year her money would last for 29,170 years  In 2011, 
she earned $1.5bn more than was spent on the entire New South Wales health 
system  Her personal wealth is one and a half times greater than the GDP of 
Cambodia  She could buy up the economies of the world’s 10 poorest nations, and 
still have about $22bn left over What did Tom Cruise do when he read that James 
Packer had lost $365m in the ill-fated One.Tel company?  Offer to lend him a 
fiver  Laugh heartily  Invite him to go skiing  Say "cheer up, it might never 
happen" What did Clive Palmer buy his daughter for her 15th birthday?  A 
private concert from Beyoncé  A 30m-long yacht worth $5.3m  The entire range of 
Hermes handbags  Nothing – he wanted her to understand the value of money What 
was controversial about The Songs of the Mission, a short 2007 documentary 
funded by Andrew Forrest?  No one expected him to be interested in old goth 
groups from the north of England  It featured him performing a romantic duet 
with Gina Rinehart  It divulged embarrassing details about his rivals' 
businessess  The makers said it “offers a different perspective” on the Stolen 
Generations, by featuring Aboriginal people for whom “the Mission experience 
was a very positive one, giving them skills, knowledge and a self-belief that 
has served them well their entire lives” What did Frank Lowy say when asked how 
he was at Westfield's 50th anniversary dinner?  "Pretty fly"  "Always a 
struggle, always a struggle"  "Where's my damn croissants?"  "What would happen 
if I strangled Sepp Blatter?"  You got…  When it comes to Australia's 
billionaires, you are an expert – but it could be time to get out more  Not 
bad, but more hard work and application is required. Read The Art of War by Sun 
Tzu for starters. And watch Top Gun  You clearly need to brush up on your ideas 
about the 0.00002% – otherwise you'll never get a job on their yachts  
Challenge your friends Submit answers  