
Australia Post <https://www.theguardian.com/business/australia-post> has put 
its hand up to run Medicare and the pharmaceutical benefits scheme (PBS) 
services from its shop fronts, as the federal government calls for expressions 
of interest in its plan to outsource the ageing and expensive system to make 
budget savings.

However, the government’s plan goes against a key recommendation by the 
National Commission of Audit not to outsource the assessment of payment 
entitlements.

The payment processes make up the second largest responsibility of the 
Department of Human Services, which disburses more than $400m every day, but 
the ageing 30-year-old IT system is posing a “significant risk to a core 
function of government”, according to the commission of audit in May.

“The complexity of the payments architecture and interactions between payments 
creates customer confusion, errors and rework, and requires a highly 
knowledgeable workforce to provide support,” it said.

A replacement system, authorised in the 2013-14 budget, is expected to cost 
between $1.2bn and $1.5bn, and the Department of Health is now calling for 
expressions of interest from Australian companies with IT and shop front 
capacity to take over.

The chief executive of Australia Post, Ahmed Fahour, confirmed at a Q&A in 
Sydney on Thursday that his company would make an application.

“Australia Post is a proven, trusted services provider and has a demonstrated 
track record delivering important services to the community,” Fahour told 
Guardian Australia. “We will be responding to the expression of interest by the 
Department of Health.”

Citing their involvement in passports, travel and tax services, Fahour told 
the Australian Financial Review 
<http://www.afr.com/p/national/post_to_pitch_for_bn_medicare_z0iCxA9t5K2XR4crl92mJP>
 the company is “uniquely positioned as an organisation that provides these 
trusted services across a range of areas throughout the last number of years, 
and certainly with its physical presence and its trusted brand, we would be in 
a very strong position.”

A spokesman for the Department of Health told Guardian Australia the recipient 
of the contract will be expected to process claims and assess entitlements as 
well as process payments.

However, this plan goes against the commission of audit 
<http://www.ncoa.gov.au/report/phase-one/part-b/10-4-outsource-government-payments-system.html>
, which specifically stated it “does not support the outsourcing of assessment 
of entitlements.”

“The commission recognises outsourcing of the payments system arrangements 
would be a substantial and potentially high-risk undertaking. It requires very 
careful consideration,” it said. “This would include a judgement on whether the 
assessment of entitlements is an appropriate activity for outsourcing; whether 
outsourcing should be confined to the development and maintenance of the 
replacement for the Income Security Integrated System, or whether the payment 
mechanism only should be outsourced.”

The Labor party has strong misgivings about the plan, opposition health 
spokeswoman, Catherine King, told Guardian Australia.

“Labor is extremely concerned about the impact this will have on Australian 
jobs, the data security of all Australians and the efficiency and effectiveness 
of basic frontline services like the processing of Medicare claims,” she said. 
“The Abbott government’s moves towards privatising Medicare and the 
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme claims means even more cuts to frontline public 
services and Australian jobs.”

It has previously been suggested that Australia Post could take over 
Centrelink services 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-10-28/australia-post-plan-to-takeover-centrelink-operations/5049336>
 as well. A proposal by the company envisaged physical service points would 
include 334 Centrelink centres and 139 Medicare offices brought into the 
Australia Post network.

National Australia Bank is also considering making a pitch for the Medicare 
and PBS services, the AFR reported.
 