
Britain's top accounting regulator is investigating claims that Autonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation>, a former darling of 
the technology sector, fraudulently misrepresented its profitability.

The Financial Reporting Council (FRC) said it had launched a rare 
investigation into Autonomy's financial reporting between January 2009 and June 
2011 
<http://www.frc.org.uk/News-and-Events/FRC-Press/Press/2013/February/Investigation-announced-in-connection-with-Autonom.aspx>
, three months before it was taken over by Hewlett-Packard in an $11bn (£7bn) 
deal.

HP claimed in November last year that there appeared to be a "willful effort 
on behalf of certain former Autonomy employees" to inflate the value of the 
company "to mislead investors and potential buyers".

Meg Whitman, HP's chief executive, said the alleged fraud forced HP to write 
down the value of Autonomy by $5bn.

Mike Lynch, Autonomy's former chief executive and billionaire founder, has 
said he "utterly rejects all allegations of impropriety". Lynch, who holds a 
PhD in mathematical computing from Cambridge University, made about £500m from 
the takeover.

Lynch and the rest of Autonomy's former management team said they welcomed the 
FRC's investigation. "As a member of the FTSE 100 the accounts of Autonomy have 
previously been reviewed by the FRC, including during the period in question, 
and no actions or changes were recommended or required," theysaid in a 
statement on a website set up by Lynch 
<http://autonomyaccounts.org/statement-in-response-to-announcement-of-frc-investigation/>
.

"Autonomy received unqualified audit reports throughout its life as a public 
company. This includes the period in question, during which Autonomy was 
audited by Deloitte. We are fully confident in the financial reporting of the 
company and look forward to the opportunity to demonstrate this to the FRC."

The FRC said it decided to investigate after consulting with the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW), which represents 140,000 
chartered accountants.

A spokesman for the FRC said individuals could be fined an unlimited amount 
and banned from serving as directors if the investigation finds evidence of 
wrongdoing.

The biggest fine issued by the body so far was £1.4m against 
PricewaterhouseCoopers last year for failing to properly audit JP Morgan.

"If the tribunal upholds a complaint, there is a wide range of sanctions which 
it can impose including an unlimited fine, exclusion from membership of a 
professional body covered by one of the schemes and withdrawal of practising 
certificates or licences," the FRC said.

The FRC declined to state whether it was investigating Autonomy's former 
management or Deloitte, the company's auditors. Deloitte said it would 
"co-operate fully" with the investigation, adding that it wasn't hired to carry 
out due diligence on the HP acquisition. "As previously stated, Deloitte had no 
knowledge of any accounting improprieties or misrepresentations in Autonomy's 
financial statements. We conducted our audit work in full compliance with 
regulation and professional standards," the accountancy company said.

The watchdog describes itself as the disciplinary body for accountants and 
actuaries, and deals with "cases which raise important issues affecting the 
public interest".

It is currently attempting to strike off William Rollason, a former director 
of Farepak and parent company European Home Retail (EHR), for his role in the 
collapse of Farepak, the Christmas hamper business.

The US department of justice has already begun an investigation into the 
alleged improprieties at Autonomy. HP has also called on the UK's Serious Fraud 
Office (SFO) to investigate the claims. The SFO has refused to confirm or deny 
whether it is investigating the allegations.

Shareholders are also suing HP for failing to spot the alleged accounting 
irregularities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/nov/27/hp-investors-sue-over-autonomy-writedown>
. A class action filed in San Francisco late last year stated: "At the time 
Hewlett-Packard agreed in principle to acquire Autonomy, defendants were 
looking to unwind the deal in light of the accounting irregularities that 
plagued Autonomy's financial statements."

HP said the alleged manipulation of financial performance at Autonomy had not 
been spotted at the time of the deal, and was only revealed later by a 
whistleblower.

Lynch has strenuously denied any wrongdoing and said: "They've had to do a 
very big writedown and they tried to blame it on the accounting but obviously 
something else is going on. People realise I'm certainly not going to be used 
as HP's scapegoat when it's got itself in a mess."

Last week Lynch said he had raised £6m to invest in fledgling British 
technology companies via his Invoke Capital fund.

• It must be embarrassing for the UK's top white collar fraud squad to 
discover it could have to investigate one of its own suppliers. Especially if 
that supplier's technology has been used to help crack previous cases.

That is the situation facing the Serious Fraud Office, which has been asked to 
probe technology group Autonomy over allegations of a $5bn fraud but which has 
a £4.4m contract to use the company's fraud-detection software .

Oliver Heald 
<http://www.theyworkforyou.com/wrans/?id=2013-02-05a.141530.h&s=speaker%3A10267#g141530.r0>
, the solicitor general, told parliament that the SFO pays Autonomy £664,098 a 
year to license software used to track down rogue Société Générale trader 
Jérôme Kerviel.

Mike Lynch, the billionaire founder of Autonomy, has also boasted that the 
company's technology, that can listen to millions of hours of phone 
conversations and search emails and texts, is used by all three of the UK's 
main political parties. "We're the arms dealer of British politics,"Lynch told 
Director Magazine in 2011 
<http://www.director.co.uk/MAGAZINE/2011/5_May/mike-lynch_64_09.html>. "Every 
time someone says something, the system finds out where and when they've said 
something different."

A spokesman for the SFO said: "The SFO is using Autonomy but we don't want to 
add any further detail. The SFO has not confirmed or made any comment about the
Hewlett-Packard <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hewlettpackard> 
announcements regarding Autonomy."
 