
The founder of Autonomy, Mike Lynch, has confronted the US computer firm 
Hewlett-Packard <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hewlettpackard> on the 
day of its annual shareholder meeting, saying the British software firm's 
former management team "refuse to be a scapegoat for HP's own failings".

In a tirade that marked the latest round of hostilities between the two camps, 
Lynch accused HP of acting "in an aggressive and unusual manner" over recent 
months. HP boughtAutonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation> for $11bn (£7bn) in 
2011, only to announce a related $8.8bn writedown last November, citing false 
accounting.

HP investors are preparing to rebuke the company's board over the disastrous 
acquisition, with shareholder advisers recommending a vote against the 
re-election of the chairman, Ray Lane, and other directors whom they criticise 
for "inconsistent strategies" and a "dismal stock performance".

In an open letter 
<http://autonomyaccounts.org/open-letter-from-mike-lynch-to-the-shareholders-of-hewlett-packard/>
 published on Wednesday on the website Lynch set up to defend his reputation, 
the entrepreneur, worth an estimated £480m thanks to the sale of his company, 
called on HP to answer a series of questions at its shareholder meeting.

HP alleged in November there were "serious accounting improprieties, 
disclosure failures and outright misrepresentations" in Autonomy's business, 
but has provided no other detail. Lynch has rejected the allegations, saying 
the problem with the Autonomy acquisition lies in the "mismanagement" of the 
business by HP.

Lynch is demanding to see a copy of a report by the accountants PwC on which 
HP's accusations are based, and to be told the findings of a committee which he 
claims was appointed by HP to investigate the circumstances behind the 
acquisition.

He also asked whether HP had approached the UK Takeover Panel, which 
supervises the acquisition of publicly listed companies, in an attempt to 
rescind its offer to buy Autonomy before the deal was voted through by 
shareholders. Lynch writes: "If so, what was the reason it gave and why was 
this material change of view not communicated to shareholders?"

Autonomy's book-keeping is now under scrutiny on both sides of the Atlantic. 
The UK'sSerious Fraud Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office> and the accountancy 
watchdog, the Financial Reporting Council, have announced investigations, as 
has the Department of Justice in the United States. The work of Deloitte, 
Autonomy's auditor until its resignation in December 2012, will also be 
assessed.

In a statement HP said: "We have handed over our information of serious 
misrepresentations in Autonomy's accounting to the proper authorities. We 
continue to co-operate and provide requested information to the relevant 
authorities on an ongoing basis."

Among those recommending votes against the re-election of HP directors is John 
Liu, the head of New York City's employee pension funds. Liu wants the two 
longest serving board members, John Hammergren and Kennedy Thompson, voted off 
"because of their failure to protect investors from costly, misguided 
acquisitions". He believes they should share the blame for the earlier 
ill-fated purchases of the IT groups EDS and Palm, and for the hasty hiring of 
Léo Apotheker, whose short-lived tenure as chief executive ended shortly after 
the Autonomy acquisition that he engineered.

Institutional Shareholder Services, which advises stockholders on voting, 
recommends that investors vote against Lane, Hammergren and Thompson. Glass 
Lewis & Co is also advising against the return of the venture-capital investor 
Marc Andreessen and the lead independent director, Rajiv Gupta.
 