
Autonomy, the software search specialist, came under pressure ahead of its 
trading update on Thursday.

The company seems to divide opinion in the City like few others, but today one 
of its consistent supporters turned more negative, following disappointing 
results from US computer group IBM. George O'Connor at Panmure Gordon cut his 
recommendation from buy to hold saying:

We are conscious that IBM shares took a pummelling in the wake of its second 
quarter results and we can see a similar reaction to Autonomy's results.Autonomy
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation> is set to report an 
in-line quarter, and while it will talk through its (many) drivers for earnings 
upgrades shares, following the usual pattern, shares are likely to be hit on 
the day. This should give investors an opportunity to buy on weakness.

So with fading hopes that the company would beat expectations, the shares lost 
51p to £18.15, making them one of the biggest fallers in the leading index.

Overall the FTSE 100 edged down 8.82 points to 5139.46 following more evidence 
of a slowdown in the US, from a drop in new housing starts to disappointing 
results from Goldman Sachs and Johnson & Johnson. On top of that came record UK 
public borrowing figures and renewed concerns about European sovereign debt, as 
Hungary - already in dispute with the International Monetary Fund over its 
deficit and a $25bn loan package - cut the amount of bonds on offer in its 
latest debt auction by more than a fifth.

A profit warning from Cable & Wireless Worldwide left its shares 14.55p lower 
at 69p. The company blamed the decline in earnings on the government's spending 
cuts, a comment which sent shares in other businesses involved in the public 
sector sharply lower.Serco slid 33p to 537p, BT dropped 4.5p to 134.5p, Capita 
closed 22.5p lower at 718p andLogica lost 7p to 101.7p.

Meanwhile Vodafone fell 1.7p to 142.95p after analysts at ING cut their 
recommendation on the company from buy to hold and their target price from 165p 
to 155p:

The shares have been the best performing of the mega caps in the past year and 
are near the top end of the recent trading range. In aggregate we do not expect 
the upcoming trading statement [on Friday] to be weak but have concerns about 
operational performance in Italy and Spain. At current levels our view is that
Vodafone <https://www.theguardian.com/business/vodafonegroup> needs to deliver 
on its plans for value realisation through some portfolio changes, but we do 
not believe anything is imminent. At the same time we are concerned about 
negative newsflow around developments in India, taxation, and spectrum. We note 
that earnings momentum will not be helped by the weakness of the euro.

We are concerned that some companies have significant potential demands on 
that cash that are not fully reflected on their balance sheets; Vodafone has 
tax liabilities of as much as £5bn.

But miners were boosted by a rise in metal prices, with Rio Tinto adding 
124.5p to £31.73 andVedanta Resources climbing 88p to £23.16. BHP Billiton was 
55.5p better at £18.72 as Barclays Capital raised its target price from £27 to 
£29:

We expect a significant rerating of BHP's equity valuation over the next year. 
BHP is now one of our preferred miners.

Aquarius Platinum added 28p to 255.1p as it appeared possible curbs on its 
projects in South Africa may not be as draconian as first feared.

A positive trading update from Enterprise Inns, with sales boosted by the warm 
weather and the World Cup, lifted the company's shares 4.3p to 98.3p. Rival
Punch Taverns added 4p to 71p.

Dairy Crest rose 3.5p to 392p after the company said the year had started 
well, helped by strong growth in its Cathedral City cheese and Country Life 
butter. Evolution Securities issued a buy note, but suggested the company could 
be on the takeover trail again. Analyst Warren Ackerman said:

It's becoming increasingly obvious that acquisitions are on the agenda and 
Dairy Crest <https://www.theguardian.com/business/dairycrestgroup> has a 
history of paying very full prices. Although they have done a reasonably good 
job with St. Hubert, they paid an eye-watering four times sales.

Lower down the market Findel fell 7.1p to 9.65p after the home shopping and 
education supplies group reported a halving in full year profits and a hefty 
debt level of around £310m.

Abbeycrest, the jewellery group, said it had breached its banking covenants 
and was now working with its senior lender, Burdale Financial, to reset the 
limits. Trading has been hit by the rising gold price, which increased its 
costs at the same time as dampening consumer demand. Its shares lost 1.25p to 
5p. Analysts at HB Markets said:

We believe higher unemployment, tax and interest rates expected in the next 12 
months will prevent a quick recovery in consumer confidence. The breach of its 
covenants, a slow recovery with the scope for a double dip and high gold prices 
encourages us to reduce our hold recommendation to a sell.
 