
Autonomy's $11bn (£6.6bn) sale to Hewlett-Packard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hewlettpackard> faces further scrutiny 
after documents cast doubt over the structure of some transactions conducted by 
the British software firm before its takeover.

New evidence has come to light which, according to HP, raises questions over 
some multimillion-dollar deals with middlemen – resellers of Autonomy software 
– who bought theAutonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation> products on credit 
in order to sell them on to a named end-user. The documents refer to reselling 
deals with three blue-chip companies: food group Kraft, drugs company Eli 
Lilly, and accountancy firm KPMG.

The news comes as a San Francisco court prepares to rule on Monday whether a 
group of HP shareholders can settle a dispute with the US tech firm over the 
Autonomy transaction.

Autonomy's founder Mike Lynch and HP boss Meg Whitman have been at loggerheads 
since California-based HP announced in November 2012 that it waswriting down 
the value of Autonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/nov/23/hewlett-packard-autonomy-mike-lynch>
 on its books by $5bn. HP said it had uncovered "serious accounting 
improprieties, disclosure failures and outright misrepresentations" at Autonomy.

Lynch and his team deny all allegations of wrongdoing, attributing much of the 
problem to differences between British and American accounting standards. They 
blame bad management by HP.

"This was the first time you had a fundamental software technology business go 
worldwide out of the UK and they have destroyed it," Lynch told the Guardian 
last week. "The star example for UK software technology at world class levels 
has now been irreparably damaged."

One of the documents seen by the Guardian is a letter sent by Autonomy's then 
finance director during a confidential 2011 review of Autonomy's accounting 
methods by the Financial Reporting Council (FRC), which polices what UK firms 
tell shareholders about their performance.

HP, which bought Autonomy in October 2011, has queried over $200m of the $1bn 
in revenues Autonomy reported in 2010. HP attributes $100m of the sum to a 
string of big deals with various resellers. A source with knowledge of the 
matter said HP believed "dozens" of Autonomy's contracts with resellers from 
January 2009 onwards were questionable. Autonomy says it signed 15,000 deals in 
the period.

Lynch said that Autonomy's auditor, Deloitte, was aware of every transaction 
that has been questioned, and approved Autonomy's accounting methods. The 
Guardian has seen the relevant Deloitte audit notes. A spokesperson for the 
auditor said: "Deloitte conducted its audit work in full compliance with 
regulation and professional standards."

The deals centred around contracts with a reseller to buy software on credit 
and with little or no money changing hands up front. The contract would name an 
end user, such as a bank or government agency, to whom the reseller intended to 
sell the software. Under UK accounting standards, Autonomy could count such 
promises as real revenues as long as the reseller signed a legally binding 
agreement stopping it from returning the software if it couldn't find a buyer.

But the documents suggest the resellers were not always able to sell the 
software to the named end customer. In some cases their purchase from Autonomy 
was cancelled, and at least one reseller received fees from Lynch's company in 
compensation. On 30 September 2009, the last day of a financial quarter, a 
reseller called Capax placed a $4m order with Autonomy for software it intended 
to sell to Kraft, which owns the chocolate maker Cadbury. Capax made a $400,000 
downpayment on the deal. But in the following quarter Kraft arranged to buy the 
software directly from Autonomy. Autonomy subsequently cancelled its sale to 
Capax, and paid it a $400,000 one-off feein compensation. The $400,000 
downpayment Capax had made for the Kraft deal was carried over to a new deal, 
for software Capax intended to sell to Eli Lilly.

Details of the transaction emerged from a letter sent on 8 June 2011 from 
Autonomy's then finance director, Sushovan Hussain, in response to questions 
from the Financial Reporting Review Panel, which acts for the FRC. In August, 
the panel said it "does not intend to pursue any of the above matters further". 
Following on from HP's concerns,The regulator is now rechecking Autonomy's books
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/feb/11/autonomy-investigated-over-fraud-claims>
, having opened a full inquiry in February 2013. The FRC declined to comment.

The correspondence shows that on 31 December 2009, the last day of Autonomy's 
financial year, Capax signed a $6m purchase order for software for Eli Lilly. 
But the following year, in June 2010, with the money still outstanding from 
Capax, the pharmaceutical group apparently decided to deal directly with 
Autonomy, again bypassing the reseller. Hussain's letter says Capax was made a 
party to the contract, invoiced Eli Lilly for the software, and remained liable 
to pay Autonomy for it.

A second document highlights a deal with a British reseller, Tikit, which is 
now owned by BT but was an independent company at the time. On 31 December 
2010, Tikit signed for $6m of Autonomy's WorkSite software, which it hoped to 
sell to KPMG. But the document, a letter dated 31 December and signed by 
Autonomy and Tikit executives, appears to transfer some financial risk back to 
Autonomy. It promises nearly $1m of work to Tikit should the company not 
complete its KPMG deal by 30 March 2011. The letter states: "Tikit shall be 
appointed as the second line support and maintenance provider to KPMG under the 
existing maintenance agreement between KPMG and Interwoven [an Autonomy 
company] for three quarters from 1 January 2011 for a fee of up to £320,000 per 
quarter."

A spokesman for Lynch confirmed Tikit was eventually contracted to work with 
Autonomy for KPMG, and paid for the software. He added that software customers 
often sign deals at the end of a quarter to negotiate the best price from the 
supplier, and that most software vendors operate on a credit basis.

Lynch said: "This is another example of selective disclosure by HP. They have 
partially leaked details around a few deals, out of over ten thousand that took 
place, which were all reviewed and cleared by the auditors, including any fees, 
and recorded as such at the time. They were noted as extremely rare cases and 
the cash was received for all of them. In short they were handled correctly. HP 
needs to explain where the $5bn write-off came from, not run a smear campaign 
of selective facts and spin."

"They want to destroy us through spin before the facts are tabled. If this was 
a multibillion-dollar fraud why were people paying us? There would have to be 
an enormous cash hole and there isn't. If you have got cash coming in year 
after year, that's a sustainable business."

HP says it signed 150 new customers for Autonomy in 2013, and has increased 
headcount at the division by 25% since the acquisition.

"We were able to bring in world class management like Robert Youngjohns to 
lead the organization, we have seen a significant turnaround in all aspects of 
the business including employee morale, customer satisfaction, and product 
innovation."

A source with knowledge of the matter said HP and its advisers did not have 
access to the Deloitte audits or work papers during the due diligence process. 
But Lynch's spokesman said HP's due diligence team was entitled to inspect all 
documents, and if there were documents they did not see, it was only because 
they were not asked for.

The deal to acquire Autonomy was conceived by Leo Apotheker, the then chief 
executive of HP, who planned to sell its personal computer division in order to 
concentrate on servers and software, a strategy in which the British firm was 
to play a leading role. But Apotheker was ousted after investors took fright 
and HP shares plummeted.

The case has triggered shareholder lawsuits, one of which is due to be settled 
in California on Monday. Hussain is hoping to block the settlement.

Regulators have launched inquiries on both sides of the Atlantic, with FBI 
agents assigned to investigate in the United States. The Serious Fraud Office 
announced a preliminary criminal investigation in March 2013.

Lynch, whose fortune was boosted by an estimated £500m when HP acquired his 
company, has now expressed regret that the deal ever took place. It is 
understood he hopes eventually to sue HP for damages. "Autonomy was set up to 
change the software industry, it wasn't just another application. Leo's vision 
was to change the world as well. What is sad now is that dream will never come 
true.

"The thing about a technology acquisition is you value it on what you can do 
with the technology. I think Leo's plan to change HP was a great one and in 
that light I don't think they overpaid. If they were buying it to bolt it on I 
wouldn't have bought the company at that multiple."
 