
Well doesn't this sound jolly. Aveva, the FTSE 250 engineering software 
company hosted an analysts' dinner at the Don restaurant in the City of London 
last night.

We could do far worse than to quote Seymour Pierce's Derek Brown on the 
evening, who seemed to enjoy himself but then decided to be rather grudging in 
his subsequent report on the company:

Aveva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/avevagroup> hosted a dinner last 
night which was well attended by analysts. The company fielded a good selection 
of representatives, including their head of HR, fresh from all the downsizing.

At our table we had the luxury of interrogating both the finance director and 
chairman. The event reconfirmed our neutral view on the stock. The company has 
(1) very low visibility of revenue for the second half; (2) there are some 
important rental renewal negotiations due in the next few months and customers 
may seek price cuts or reduce their implementations; (3) there is no sign of 
recovery in demand in Marine, despite a stronger Baltic dry index (not actually 
a good guide to demand for Aveva); (4) demand in the power and oil and gas 
markets is firm, but not frantic.

Where the mounting cash pile is concerned [Aveva has £134m in the bank at the 
end of September], their broker is very keen to spend it, but the management 
seemed a bit too coy at the suggestion they seek a large acquisition in the US 
- which would seem to be the sensible next step to us.

The after dinner speaker was the entertaining Rear Admiral Terry Loughran 
<http://www.key.aero/view_feature.asp?ID=4&thisSection=military>, who was 
rather non-PC and had a seemingly endless collection of Falklands anecdotes.

You can just imagine, can't you. Meanwhile Panmure Gordon issued a bullish 
note after the dinner (entitledI came, I saw, I ordered seconds) and on the 
subject of the company's cash, analyst George O'Connor said:

We do not get the sense of nervousness about cash as we did at interim results 
– the money is not burning a hole. Cash is earmarked for an acquisition, but 
there is nothing imminent. The finance director suggests that £50m to £60m is 
enough for the business – around £100m for other purposes.

The company is clearly benefiting from last night's event - its shares have 
been marked up 10.5p to 985.5p this morning.
 