
Aveva, whose software is used to design power plants, shipping and energy 
facilities, has dropped sharply following a disappointing update.

The company's shares have lost 195p or 7.5% to £23.71, making it the biggest 
faller in the mid-cap index. The headline figures showed an 11% increase in 
half year revenues to £108.5m and a 6% rise in profits to £27.3m, but within 
that, its enterprise solutions division showed a slower than expected 5% 
revenue rise.

The company blamed a Latin American shipyard customer running into serious 
financial difficulties, and a major oil and gas group abandoning an information 
management project.Aveva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/avevagroup> 
added that the market was still evolving so sales cycles were hard to predict. 
Analyst George O'Connor at Panmure Gordon issued a hold note, saying:
 In the wake of these results we have elected to increase revenue and reduce 
pretax profit. Salient factors include (1) a poorer first half than we expected 
from enterprise where we now factor in a full year loss; (2) better than 
expected on engineering and design; (3) stronger than expected cash generation. 
Ahead of the results, we had anticipated full year revenue of £240.7m, pretax 
profit of £81.9m and earnings per share of 86.6p with the divisions enterprise 
£203.3m and engineering and design £37.4m. We now revise these to revenue 
£242.1m, profit £76.9m and earnings 83.7p, with the divisions, enterprise 
£37.4m and engineering and design £206.8m. 
Julian Yates at Investec reduced his recommendation from buy to hold:
 The headline numbers were in-line with our estimates but the focus will be on 
the divisional performance. While the core engineering and design performed 
well, slightly ahead of our estimates, enterprise solutions was below 
expectations. Its outlook has been revised down to flat 2014 sales due to 
longer sales cycles and customer specific issues. A planned cost reduction in 
the second half of 2014 in enterprise and the modest engineering outperformance 
should mean group 2014 profit expectations are still met. With no near term 
catalyst to justify a higher target price, we move to hold.  