
It is a dilemma that has frustrated middle-class families for years: how many 
avocados are needed to make the perfect batch of guacamole to feed a hungry 
brood?

But Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> has come to the rescue 
and will start to sell what it claims is the world's largest avocado, nicknamed 
the Avozilla.

Weighing an impressive 1.3kg, the South-African-grown fruit, a vivid green 
colour, is five times bigger than an average avocado. Tesco described the fruit 
as extremely rare and said it came from just four trees grown by one of the 
world's biggest suppliers of avocados. They will be priced at £3 each.

Sales of avocados across Europe have grown in recent years with 240,000 tonnes 
shipped to the region last year, an increase of 9% on 2011.

Derek Donkin, chief executive of the South African Avocado Growers 
Association, said: "Commercial demand is growing rapidly in Europe and despite 
the downturn, supply has increased.

"They are highly nutritious and high in monounsaturated fats which are the 
good fats which reduce cholesterol. They are high in potassium, higher than 
bananas, and it's not just a salad item – you can make anything from avocado 
cheesecakes to ice creams."

The avocado was first cultivated by the Aztecs, but is now grown in several 
subtropical countries with the UK supplied mainly from Peru, Israel, South 
Africa, Chile and Spain.

Lucy Harwood, brand manager for the Latin American restaurant chain Las 
Iguanas, said guacamole was its best-selling starter.

She added: "Our sales of our Holy Guacamole have been growing and growing, and 
we now sell more than 300,000 portions each year.

"Mexican food, which has rocketed over the past few years, has been fuelled by 
an appreciation of the freshness and quality of the cuisine when done properly 
– guacamole being a perfect example of great ingredients coming together to 
give wonderful flavours."

Tesco's decision to sell the Avozilla is not the first time the UK's biggest 
supermarket has stocked giant fruit.

Last Christmas giant brussels sprouts the size of snooker balls were sold, 
while giant melons, pineapples and pomegranates have all adorned the shelves. 
In 2004 Tesco introduced giant strawberries called Scarlett Johanssons.

Tesco's salad buyer Emma Bonny said: "We believe the Avozilla will appeal to 
shoppers who are looking for value for money, but especially large families.

"The Avozilla has a fantastic taste with a rich, juicy, buttery texture, and 
creamy flavour.

"The ripe fruit is an attractive vivid green colour – different from the 
darker coloured, smaller variety – and its thick skin can actually be used as a 
serving bowl for guacamole."
 