
And so to Cypress Lakes Resort in New South Wales’s Hunter Valley for the Jack 
Newton Celebrity Classic <https://www.facebook.com/JackNewtonCC>, a three-day 
palooza of golf and good times with famous people that is fun like a barrel of 
rum full of crack-crazed spider monkeys.

Crack monkeys? Rum-crazed crack monkeys? It’s not that much fun. How could 
anything be that much fun? How could you have more fun than a legion of spider 
monkeys, on crack, gambolling about in a vat full of rum? You could not. You 
flat out could not.

But it’s still good fun,“The Jack”. Top fun.

“The Jack” is what they call it, along with “Schoolies for Adults” and “the 
world’s greatest Christmas party bar none in the world”. It runs for three days 
and three nights and raises millions for diabetes research and junior golf by 
gathering like-minded golf hounds and party people into the purpose-built party 
palace that is Cypress Lakes Resort. Good times.

Jack Newton? One of Australia’s great golfers. Nearly won the 1975 British 
Open at Carnoustie, losing in a play-off to five-time winner Tom Watson who 
rolled in a 20-foot bomb on 18. In 1980 he tied for second in the US Masters at 
Augusta, going down to 23-year-old Seve Ballesteros by four shots. He won the 
Open championships of Australia, Holland and Nigeria, and in 1976 was “Cock of 
the North” in Zambia. Whatever that is, you’d take it, and put it on a business 
card.

And then, on the verge of challenging Greg Norman for all-Australian 
hairy-chested global golf manliness, he wandered into a small plane’s propeller 
and lost an arm, an eye and nearly the whole job lot.

He spent months in hospital, looking out the window at a pub across the road. 
When he got out he went straight in for a beer. And he’s been laughing about it 
since. When you nearly die you come out with a different perception of what’s 
important. You don’t sweat small stuff. You celebrate life. And the Celebrity 
Classic is nothing if not a celebration.

Of what? Life, damn you, have you read nothing? What are we here for? Good 
time or a long time? We’re all but one fleeting beeping blip on the great heart 
monitor of the universe. No-one gets out alive, not Tony Abbott, not the 14th 
Dalai Lama, not all the ayatollahs of Iran. No matter how hard you beseech your 
god to grant you ever-lasting existence plucking harp-strings or making love 
with virgins orbowling Viv Richards on the last ball of the day at the 
Melbourne Cricket Ground <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BINRTIFKixw>, 
forever, when blood stops servicing your brain, then that’s it. That’s you. You 
are inanimate. You’re an ex-parrot. And maybe that’s a bummer and not a little 
frightening. But, you know. There it is.

Well. Didn’t that go on a tangent fast.

The first “Jack” was in 1979 in Tewantin Noosa, and there’s been one a year 
since. It was held on Queensland’s Sunshine Coast until 2005 until Penrith 
player Craig Gower got “as full as Santa’s toy sack on Christmas Eve,” 
according theSunshine Coast Daily. And thus in the pre-Christmas slow news 
month, other newspaper people rolled about like nude people in money, detailing 
Gower’s various excesses. So much so that Novotel Twin Waters, host of the 
party and accommodation bits, decided they didn’t like the “bad PR” and brushed 
the event.

So our Jack, bless him, in his all-Australian, gravel-throated, John Elliott 
on Rubbery Figures saying “pig’s arse” sort of way 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vsshTU05rZM> took the event to his own patch in 
the Hunter. And here it’s been since: a giant golf-party for charity.

What happens is this: you lob on the Monday, check in, sign in, say hello and 
have a yarn with Judy and Jackie and Susan, and effectively take up 
conversation you left the year before. And that’s also part of the allure of 
“The Jack”; people are firm friends for three days a year.

So you hook up with your pals and head out for a hit in the practice round on 
Cypress Lakes which is all red clay and kangaroos and fairways which wind 
between vineyards like fat velvet snakes slinking through the backyard of 
Bacchus, Roman god of wine. Something like it. But it’s a fine enough golf 
track, and perfect for our needs given we cruise about in golf carts enjoying a 
locally-brewed beer called Arvo. And if there’s a better way to spend a Monday 
arvo then you could sell it, perhaps to rich people from China.

My golf mates today are Blackie and BJ and Donnie “Big Donnie” McKinnon, the 
former rugby league man known as “The Terror Bear” because it’s a scary name, 
and because when you played against him on the flinty hard cricket pitch patch 
of North Sydney Oval, chances are Big Donnie would be running at you, all knees 
and hard bones and a well-known motto of “don’t tackle high and you won’t get 
the elbow”. Good times, and Donnie played 183 games for North Sydney Bears and 
six for Manly Sea Eagles, and once for Australia and NSW in State of Origin, 
and is remembered forhaving a wee at Lang Park on the telly 
<http://www.liveleak.com/view?i=7af_1370302831>. As they say: just one goat. 
And he’s not a bad golfer who was a copper with Blackie and takes the money off 
BJ and me.

So there you go. 

And so we putt out and shake hands, and pitch into the outdoor Welcome 
Barbecue where everyone’s dressed in football jumpers, it’s a Thing. And for 
the Australian sports and television-watching punter - and we are legion - it’s 
a like awax museum with a pulse 
<http://quotacle.com/watch.php?id=53d5507b99&rand=true>. Everywhere you look 
there’s a footballer, a golfer, and that guy from that show, you know the one, 
shot in St Kilda, a crime show, maybe, or something about young doctors in love.

I actually don’t recognise many of the TV people because they’re on shows I’d 
rather eat my own thongs than watch, but actors on the telly “who you might 
remember from such shows shows as … <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Troy_McClure>
” include: Rhys Muldoon, Gyton Grantley and Brad Cranfield fromThe Block. 
Lincoln Lewis is onHome & Away, and the next day I play golf with his dad …

… Wally Lewis! Yes, The King! We are not worthy, we are not worthy, all that. 
The great man, up there with Dennis Lillee, Greg Norman,Rod “The Rocket” Reddy  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rod_Reddy>and Mark Ella in my personal Aussie 
sports hero pantheon. Indeed at The Jack, The King’s up there with the patron 
(Bob Hawke) and the host (Jack Newton). He’s only missed two events in 36 
years. And everywhere he goes people, in that slightly piss-takey Australian 
way, address him as “sire” and “your highness” and “King”. Don’t go changin’, 
country, you funny big old lug.

We play with a pro from Wyong called Luke Whitbread who hits the ball purer 
than Jesus drinking Pure Blonde, and a happy old digger called Karl, a local 
engineer. Each four-ball has a celebrity, a pro golfer, a sponsor and an 
amateur.

And so we golf and have a yarn, and discuss with His Majesty important matters 
of golf and wine and rugby league, and that he plays left-handed despite 
kicking a footy with his right foot. And if you’re a footy and golf nerdo - and 
I can say unequivocally that I am, oh yes - it’s a grand way to spend a 
morning, especially with the fine golf and wine-tasting on the 14th hole.

And so into the dress-up cocktail party where we sing Waltzing Matilda that 
would have been sung by the great RJ Hawke but isn’t because he came over a 
little crook. The man’s 85. When his doctor says take it easy, champion, he 
says okay. And so we eat lamb shanks and drink velvet red and celebrate life. 
And next day we do it again.

Kram from Spiderbait rips off a fine solo of “Black Betty” 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nU1VfYYKMDk>. Auction items raise tens of 
thousands for diabetes research, a disease which kills people. People think 
diabetes is like something fatties get because they ate too manyTwisties 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twisties> as kids. But - cue that noise poker 
machines make when you’re wrong,Bump-bow - that would be wrong. Diabetes is a 
global pandemic. It can just get you. And The Jack’s raised $3.5m trying to 
find a cure because government funding is hampered by miners and rich people 
not wanting to pay tax.

Oops, off on a tangent again.

Anyway. 

And so there is dancing as a three-piece rock-n-roll outfit belt out some 
tunes, and people leap into the pool because they’ve won various stuff (another 
Thing), and there is talk of golf as famous TV types pair off with hottie golf 
pros. And one thinks, wouldn’t mind being a 25-year-old person on the telly, 
you could make love heaps.

And then around 1am you toddle off home because nothing good happens after 
midnight for the old. Plus they’re shutting off the taps soon anyway. Once upon 
a time, the drink ran all night and all day, and men would go from the bar to 
the first tee, and splat the ball about like rum-soaked crack monkeys. Today, 
in these more enlightened, more sensible, slightly more closeted Times when we 
must think of the children, there’s drinking and dancing and a bubbling, happy 
hubbub. And precisely zero overt drunken cavorting. Good times.

Really good times. 

 * The Jack Newton Celebrity Classic on Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/JackNewtonCC>  