
And so to Rat Park in North Narrabeen on Sydney’s northern beaches for a club 
rugby derby on a sunny Saturday afternoon. It’s home town Warringah Rats 
hosting their arch-enemy-friends from down the road, Manly Marlins. And it 
should be good.

We park on a median strip and wander across some playing fields towards the 
ground, visible for four thin lights that tower above the ground like old 
cranes. We pass the Manly team, warming up, running through drills. In pro 
sport teams warm up on the arena or in their dressing sheds. If they could 
they’d warm up in man-sized humidicribs, such is their fear of the people who 
watch them play games. They like the fans. But they don’t want to touch them.

I see a fellah I know, Damien Cummins, “The Turtle”. A chunky man in the way 
of the hooker, Turtle coached Georgia to the 2011 Rugby World Cup. Georgia, the 
country whose national dish is cheese-filled bread and eggplant-and-walnut 
surprise. I read it. Top tucker. Turtle is assistant coach at Manly and before 
the match declared to The Manly Daily that his boys would “unleash hell” on the 
Warringah team. Top stuff.

Rat Park is open and wide looking. The western grandstand has a steel, sheer 
look about it, as if designed by an architect who preferred function over 
aesthetic. It looks like a half-open hangar for a Sopwith Camel.

The other three-quarters are grassy hill, the northern and southern ends quite 
steep. Kids roll down them laughing like hairy little logs. They reckon they 
filled these hills in the olden days. Today, for the derby: their best crowd of 
the year (a bit over 4,000). Doesn’t look as many.

Big game? Yeah … not really. Not in the grander context of Australian sport. 
This is semi-pro ball. Sydney-centric. It’s a big game in terms of Shute 
Shield, the Sydney grade comp: first versus third, a derby. ABC television is 
here, with their cameras and giant trucks, calling it. Mates watch the game at 
the pub and send me photos of themselves doing it, the silly moos.

Onto the eastern hill and people drink tinnies dressed in Sydney winter chic: 
caps, hoodies, maybe a jumper. They know not of winter in Sydney. They think 
they do. But they don’t.

Manly run out. There’s one giant, Greg Peterson, “Big G”, towering above all 
others, an outlier event. Their No.1, Dane Maraki, a tight-head prop, is a 
squat, bald man with a big orange beard, like one of those axe dwarves in The 
Hobbit. In the nightclub, this man would see little action. On the rugby field, 
he’s the middle of the action. He is the action. And given the nature of rugby, 
for every fancy pants manoeuvre by the backs (players described as “pinheads” 
by such men as Maraki) there’s a couple of trolls with their face in the dirt, 
laying foundation, rugby’s brickies. Indeed old mate axe-dwarf is nigh-on MVP.

Here come the home side. And the people say, “Yaaay”. And there is clapping. 
It’s not like the crazies running out the start of a Superbowl. Indeed the game 
seems almost inconsequential. On the hill here it’s more about the gathering, 
like in that movie, The Gathering. And like in that other movie, with Sean 
Connery and old mate with the eyes, Connor MacLeod of the Clan MacLeod, and 
they had “The Gathering” so they could cut each others head off.

Whatever. It’s good here at Rat Park, and social. It’s friendly park footy 
watched by friendly people. In Gaza they’re hurling rockets at each other. 
Consider Southern Sudan. Consider Adelaide. Where would you rather be?

And so into a few more beers because beer is good. We can forget that in these 
sometimes cloistered times in which each public utterance must be screened lest 
it unduly influence The Children. But I’m here to tell a man, beer is good. I 
like it. And it’s good because like many drugs - that’s right, drugs, alcohol 
is a drug, beer-drinkers are drug-takers, it's a fact,Google it 
<https://au.answers.yahoo.com/question/index?qid=20091006104830AAfrX2O> - beer 
makes you feel good. It’s social, it’s heady, it releases endorphins, God’s 
magic fairies, into your brain-blood. Which is good.

Yes, drink too much and it’s bad, beer. Stone fact. It’s like anything. Look 
at that chocolate sauce they put on top of ice cream, with the icing stuff that 
sets hard like a layer? You know the stuff. See how you go drinking a bottle of 
that a day. Same as old mate who spent a month eating McDonald’s. Nearly killed 
him.

Yet no-one’s thinking about beer other than who’s shout it is at Rat Park on 
this glorious, winter’s afternoon. The footy is willing and skilled, and the 
tips of the grass are like tinsel, bathed in golden, sparkling hues.

And then … Rat attack! Sweeping back-line movement. Break by full-back David 
Feltscheer, a fair player, another beardy. There’s a ball inside, another one, 
and … try-time! And people on the hill say, “Yeeeeah”. And there is clapping.

Top game of footy here. Yet the difference between this and Super Rugby is 
like a couple of age-groups up. The collisions in the first-class, elite grade 
between the biggest, the fastest, strongest people, they’re monstrous. Blood 
and bone. Krakatoa.Google Will Skelton 
<https://www.google.com.au/search?q=will+skelton&espv=2&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ei=vSfHU7PcI8b28QX924GADw&ved=0CAYQ_AUoAQ&biw=1443&bih=896>
.Google his little brothers 
<https://www.google.com.au/search?q=will+skelton+brothers&espv=2&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ei=2ifHU6G_C9be8AW0rYEI&ved=0CAgQ_AUoAw&biw=1443&bih=896>
. They’re like Tongan statues of Lenin. Giant people.
 Bayfield Cup man of the match, Warringah Rats full-back David Feltscheer. And 
his dad. Photograph: Greg Black 
Shute Shield clubs are meant to be feeders to the Waratahs and other Super 
Rugby <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/super-rugby> clubs, and certainly 
there’s a few guys out here who have played for the state. But it’s not really 
how it works. First-class teams own their players most of the year. Suck the 
best young ones into academies. Train them in camps. Feed them the finest 
meats. Those that don’t go into an Australian Super set-up, if they’re good 
enough, head to Europe, Japan, Adelaide.

To offset the gap in class there’s now a third-tier of Australian rugby, above 
the Sydney and Brisbane grade comps: the National Rugby Championship. And good 
luck to it. They tried it a few years ago, it cost so much money that banker 
John O’Neill knocked it on the head soon as his bum lobbed back in his mahogany 
seat.

Back on the hill and fans are divided by the bar in the middle. There’s a 
couple of security guys here, presumably by law. Because there’s as much chance 
of these rival fans lobbing grenades at each other as there is of them Morris 
dancing. Millwall FC fans take a train to a game that’s met by police on 
horseback who shepherd them to the ground and back. People from neighbouring 
churches in the same religion fight in Jerusalem, I may have read it. Say what 
you will about this big old lug of a country, but there’s none of that.

Manly throw the ball wide on the halfway. Rats centre Tui Tuisavaii shoots out 
of the line and stops the runner cold. Boom. His mates pile in. And over. The 
ref, smallest man on the park, a Hobbit among the giants, blows a penalty. 
Rats. There’s exclamation from the hill. Hoo-ha. Players push and shove. Crowd 
into it. How good’s this? Seminal moment. Derby. Feisty. Top stuff, humans.

An old cow-bell rings to signal half-time, like one of those ones in a village 
square, with a town crier man announcing, “Hear ye, hear ye, it’s six o’ the 
clock and we’re about to throw veggies at a peasant in the stocks”, etc. True 
story. Living history.

Yet play continues, it’s a rugby thing, the ball is live until it’s dead. 
Penalty Rats. For something. Doesn’t matter what. And Rats five-eighth Hamish 
Angus of the Clan Angus swings in a penalty goal and Warringah go to half-time 
up 16-6, a tidy lead running into the sou’wester.

And so kids flood the playing field and kick the ball about in the golden 
light. It’s On Golden Pond 2: Derby at Rat Park. Top grade rugby league used to 
have this, Australian Rules too - kids on the field at the breaks, kicking 
footies. Today at half-time pro footy grounds are full of security guards in 
hot-yellow bibs, bouncers, goons, staring at people. Hoping for action.

A theory: Anyone who wants to be a security guard, somewhere in their heart 
they relish the idea of physicality. Belting an evil-doer. Action. Yet if 
anything happens that requires them to chase after and tackle some pissed-up 
pelican who’s run onto the field, they’re not exactly George Gregan in terms of 
cover defence. Look at that big nude bloke in the State of Origin a few years 
ago, whatever his name was. Wati Holmwood -150 kilograms of molten blubber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/18/state-of-origin-streaker-wati-holmwood>
 who ran 200 metres through the cream of ANZ Stadium security, onto the ground, 
length of the field, right into the middle of the bloody play. In the nude! 
Greased up like an Inuit fisherman lathered in whale blubber! And there’s 
security - for the entire night doing nothing but standing about staring at 
people - waddling after him in puffer jackets. Goatees. Bald. Useless.

So yes, there should be a rule: You want to be a security guard? You’re not 
allowed. Sorry, champion. Try Macca’s. Or … go build something.


Same with politicians. There should be a thing: if you’re a kid, in your 20s, 
and you actually express a desire to be a politician, that’s it, you’re the 
last person in the world should be allowed to be a politician. Your dance card 
is marked “X”, Bubba.

And when the revolution comes, so shall it come to pass.

No it won’t. Instead the teams run out at the same time from opposite 
change-rooms and criss-cross each other like synchronised motorcycles at the 
Edinburgh Tattoo. Not really like that. They just sort of mesh. And head to 
their places as the footy-kicking kids realise they have to get off the field. 
And soon there’s 30 players ready and a ref ready to go and there’s kids 
everywhere, taking their time getting off. Five-year-olds. Teens. Just 
wandering off. And it’s all good. And we move on. And the Rats kick off.

Then Manly knock on. Rats attack. Rats score! There is rucking, mauling. And 
someone crashes over for Manly. And the crowd goes wild. They don’t go wild. 
There’s more a sort of “Yeeah” from half of the hill. Tinnies are tipped 
skyward. It’s Saturday afternoon gold.

And then - try of the year.

The ball begins behind the Rats try-line, they pass it along the line, bust 
out of danger, scream out to the right wing, go through hands into the middle 
of the park and over to the left, through some hands again, running hard, 
straight, until can it be? Yes! Michael Adams touches downs for just about the 
best try you’ll see in the game of rugby this year. Any year: a dozen sets of 
hands, some of them twice, fluid ball movement, incision, strong running. And 
when the Rats mob Adams and dance about, you hold both hands above your head, a 
tinnie in each mitt, and declare to your posse, Did you see that? How about 
that?

And the Rats win 43-34. And the players drink beer out of giant pewter mugs 
like vikings.

And it’s all good.
 