
To call Sydney Harbour beautiful would be to infer Jessica Alba is a bit cute. 
It would insult old mate Roget and his wonderful thesaurus.Have you learned 
nothing from my great book of words? Did I slave so many hours so you might 
blithely describeSydney <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> 
Harbour as“beautiful”? I kill you! 

Ha. But beautiful it is. 

We’re bobbing about on the Harbour on a little ferry just off Woolwich on a 
superb spring morning. It’s a bellbird, bluebird, flat-out spectacular day: 
sky-blue sky, light heat haze, white diamonds glinting on the briny. Plenty of 
boat types aboard in chambray shirts, blue blazers, the odd stripy one, long 
pants. No boater hats, which I find surprising. Mainly it’s boat chic. School 
ties. Money people.

We’re here for the Great Australian Boat Race, Melbourne University versus 
Sydney University in the eights, men’s and women’s. The universities have rowed 
sporadically since 1860 but annually since 2010. And it’s a bit of a big deal.


Tall people here aboard, boys from Shore and Cranbrook, and New Zealand. The 
former are the top boaters of their famous old schools, the unis recruit them.
Join us, we can be heroes. The Kiwi is a giant man-beast of rowing in his 
native land. Big unit. Kieran Read in a row-boat.


And so we chug by Harbourside mansions perhaps owned by these very boat 
people. And you think:Sweet Jesus, it is a goddam glorious day. Water taxis bob 
about, decked out in the colours of Sydney (red) and Melbourne (blue). Skyline 
of the city is visible through a light white haze.

“Quite the flotilla of spectator vessels,” says the commentator man on the 
intercom of the eight or 10 boats bobbing about. Does that constitute a 
flotilla? Perhaps it does, a relative term.

And … racing! And the girls eights are off, and Melbourne surges ahead 
courtesy of an upbeat “stroke rating” which is how many paddles they rip off 
per minute. Don’t have the numbers handy. But Melbourne’s is bigger and they 
burn the Sydney girls early.


And so our commentators do their best, though it’s a bit like hearing about 
one of those Olympic sports that poke their head above the dustbin of public 
apathy each quadrennia. Archery, say, or sailboarding. There’s a caller and an 
expert, and it’s not always great colour. “They are rowing,” is about the nub 
of it.

And yet it’s pretty exciting stuff, for no reason you can really put your 
finger on. There’s a helicopter overhead making chopper noises, the sea is 
being chopped up white by the flotilla. There’s a media boat, couple of police 
boats with lights on. It’s a bit like the start of Sydney-to-Hobart. A bit.


And so it’s Melbourne now by two lengths. The Sydney crew, according to the 
commentator man, are stuck in “dirty water,” which means choppy, frothy stuff, 
the wake of the Melbourne crew. Sydney’s cox tries to counter the Melbourne 
boat’s wake. But courtesy of a superior stroke-rate, Melbourne steadily 
increase their lead. And thus Sydney are burned off early. And steadily blown 
away.

“It’s a brutal sport,” says a fellow near me, George Masselos, a Sydney 
laundromat czar. “Mostly in the legs, the big power muscles. But shoulders too, 
arms. Middle, core muscles.” His son, James, is captain of the Cranbrook 
eights. James trains 15 times a week. He has shoulders like Dolph Lundgren.

And so the girls sluice into Darling Harbour and past the giant new casino 
complex because Sydney needs another casino instead of better transport and 
schools and children’s hospitals. Or maybe there actually will be a trickle out 
of the pockets of Jamie Packer and his marks, the gambling whales of Asia, and 
he’ll fleece the poor dumb bastards and flood the government coffers with 
revenue, and Secure The Future for all. But Jamie’s worth several billion 
dollars and would like to triple or quadruple that number and get himself 10 
more helicopters and a dozen new speed-boats, and diamond teeth and a big 
golden head. A giant golden head, for the billionaire with everything. Beat 
that, Sultan of Brunei.

And then Melbourne University Women’s Eights team win the Bella Guerin Trophy, 
named for the first woman graduate from Melbourne University. Top stuff.

And so our ferry surges back to Woolwich for the start of the men’s event. Few 
more boats now. Another police boat. Chopper doing its thing. Couple of blokes 
in a tinny. And the teams line up for 4.4km of fury through the Sydney Harbour 
chop.

At Sydney International Regatta Centre, the Olympic river, it’s a 2km flat 
dash, like a sprint up the Flemington straight. This is more a middle-distance 
event. Some eights races go for 7km or thereabouts. Indeed the first 
manifestation of this one did in 2010 but they shortened it so that one team 
wouldn’t beat the other too badly.


And so the crews line up, floating about, jockeying into position, like Clancy 
and the cracks gathering at the fray. And …racing! And the teams sluice off in 
high synchronicity, powerful, fluid; multiple man-turks in harmony. There’s 
chop like on Sydney-to-Hobart day, white water. Boat people in thrall, 
straining for vantage. Police boats, water taxis. And two crews of eight rowers 
and a cox, heaving, ho, backwards to glory.

Commentators continue to do their best. Yet Ray Warren would struggle. “And 
they are rowing! Many people, rowing. In a couple of sleek long rowboats.Rowing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rowing>. Still rowing. Rowing…”. And you 
think, as a television sport, rowing is rubbish. One for the purists. Yet for 
spectator-craft sport, accept no substitute. It’s exciting. And you wonder why. 
Maybe it’s like when mariners are joined on their jaunt by a big pod of 
dolphins, the wonder of that. Or like that bit in Jaws when they shoot the 
shark with the harpoons and the beast swims off towing barrels, and we’re 
chasing it, and there’s jaunty music. Maybe that’s it. We may never know.

Nearly home and it’s Sydney by a length. We slide by Goat Island and into 
Darling Harbour. The Sydney cox is steering to glory, countering anything 
Melbourne might try.Eat our wake, bitches, he probably doesn’t think. 

Past Barangaroo and it’s no more appealing, and into Cockle Bay and Sydney Uni 
own this. Muscles working, glistening with sea-spume and sweat. And after 15 
minutes of unforgiving action, they sluice by warship HMAS Vampire, 
Oberon-class submarine HMAS Onslow, the Sydney Aquarium, a tourist trap called 
Wildlife Sydney 200, and, of course, Madame Tussauds waxworks museum, whatever 
that is, mannequins that look like famous people, there is no hope for 
humanity, none.

And Sydney University win the Edmund Barton Trophy, named for Australia’s 
first prime minister who also rowed at Sydney University. And Sydney Uni own 
the Harbour, and the hearts of the Rowing Nation.

The teams alight and carry their long sleek crafts above their heads. People 
applaud. Must be a great buzz. Acclamation for mega-fitness, bodies sculpted by 
hard yards on the water pre-dawn. And so to the presentation. Member for Hume, 
Angus Taylor, tells us he’s an alumni of Oxford and Sydney University. How 
about him? How much stuff would he know? Fair bit. He adds that the race is a 
“true rival to the Boat Race we see in London”. And everyone does their best 
Marge Simpson:Hmmmm. 

For setting, sure, it owns the turgid old Thames. Sydney Harbour would own any 
venue. Sydney Harbour would own a giant canal purpose-built around the pyramids 
of Giza. But for history, tradition, meaning, all that, the Great Australian 
Boat Race has been going since 2010. Oxford and Cambridge have raced every year 
bar a couple in the wars since 1829. The Oxford and Cambridge boat race is 
called The Boat Race.The boat race. You don’t trump that with a dash up the 
Yarra.

Rowers are given medals, trophies. There’s one (1) tattoo among all of them. 
Smart kids. Could be a Gen-Y record. And you think again:the physiques on these 
people!Ropey muscles and veins like brown snakes. A blonde man, Cameron 
Girdlestone, is fair dinkumChesty Bond 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chesty_Bond>. His mates are all chunky thighs and 
V-shapes. The girls are lean and strong. The perfect rower would be a 
high-jumper with the muscles of a 400m runner. A long, powerful person. 
Etymologically you couldn’t ask for better specimens, if you were, you know, 
classing humans thus.

The crowd is mostly family. They’ve taken over this bit of Darling Harbour. 
The NSW government’s chucked in some shekels. It’s an Event, how things work. 
They’re exhibiting Sydney Harbour to the world. It’s not a hard sell.
 