
A stretch disco Hummer, one of those flashy, gaudy abominations shaped like a 
coffin for the crew of a Viking longship has just dropped off a boozy crew of 
men wearing giant curly fright-wigs like that guy who sang that song, “We’re 
not gonna take it”, whoever that was,old mate from Twisted Sister 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4xmckWVPRaI> who I can’t be arsed googling.

We’re outside Sydney’s Hordern Pavilion for the Sydney Darts Masters 
<http://www.pdc.tv/australian-tour>, the fourth and final leg of a world tour 
by darts’ elite. If you’d said 10 years ago there’d be a world tour by darts’ 
elite you’d have been laughed at, possibly stabbed. Perhaps with darts. But not 
only is there a World Tour, it rates its arse off. Darts is a phenomenon.

Now, writing these “Away Days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/series/away-days>” yarns, you’re looking for 
“colour”. It’s observational stuff, a hunt for malarkey. Well, “the darts” – 
and that’s what you call it, “the darts” – is all colour and mostly malarkey. 
More colour than the rainbow flag.

Malarkey? A group of men and women in their 50s, dressed as convicts, one in 
sexy prison warden’s outfit, are told they’re not allowed to take their 
papier-maché prison balls into the arena. Presumably because they’re a security 
risk. Security? There’s a sign warning people, “You could be frisked”. And 
people are being frisked. This isthree weeks before the latest terror alert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/23/islamic-states-call-to-kill-westerners-has-terrorism-experts-divided>
. And given there’s no metal detector or drug sniffer dogs, it can only be for 
contraband booze.

And then we’re in. Maybe 5,000 people, mostly men, dressed in all sorts of 
malarkey. Heaps of trestle tables. Piles of red cups. Two huge screens. On 
stage a massive map of Australia.

Ladies in green encourage gambling (responsibly). There’s a “Welcome to 
Country”. There’s dressing up, colour, noise, big bass beats, “atmosphere”. 
“Thanks for all the fancy dress. Brilliant!” says a man. He introduces the 
introducer guys, TV heads. It’s a show, a production. Like Hillsong for 
pisspots. It’s silly fun. Man-fun. They play darts anthemChase The Sun by 
Planet Funk <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T6SvXr9r3OQ>, and they’re all up 
and doing the “Hey! Hey! Hey!” bit.

The Responsible Service of Alcohol (RSA) watchmen are here, these guys love 
their work. At the cricket or the footy, you want to know where’s Wally? He’s 
out the back having the shit kicked out of him. But not really. But I have seen 
people dressed as Lego kicked out. Officious? They took the trumpet off the 
Barmy Army. They will have to curb their normal tendencies here. Close the bar 
here and the convicts could riot.

Mark Bosnich is interviewing the darts men as they come out the green room. He 
played for the Socceroos, Manchester United, few others. Hasn’t he done some 
stuff, Bozza. You’d say his life has come full circle but it’s more a zig-zag, 
like everyone’s.

There are actual darts aficionados here (as opposed to the teeming majority 
who’ve come along to sing songs and drink beer). They occupy the middle tables, 
near the front. These are the purists, men who compete in weekly darts 
competitions. They wear Hawaiian shirts with their names on the breast. One has 
a totally tattooed head.

The darts? Semi-final time and Stephen “The Bullet” Bunting comes out to 
Bullet in the Gun by Planet Perfecto. Funky tune, heap of heavy bass, loud, 
thumping, electric ripples up your leg. The soundtrack at the darts could 
energiseThe Pickled Possum <http://pickledpossum.com.au/>. Can you buy it like 
you can Ray Hadley’s Country Music selection? We may never know.

Bunting and James “The Machine” Wade (song: Bonkers by Dizzee Rascal 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ISy0Hl0SBfg>) arrive on stage and ante up to 
the oche. The oche? Dunno. The magic of Google can offer only theories. 
Something about hockey. Something about brewers called Hockey whose kegs were 
the same length as the distance arrow man to board. Google says that’s untrue. 
What did we do before Google? Believed stuff?

And we are away. Oh no we’re not. They’re warming up, chucking darts at the 
board.


Now we are away. And they play darts, the effects mic picking up the dull thud 
of dart into rubber.Thud ... thud ... thud.


And a player’s score is read out by a raspy-throated announcer man. “Onnne 
hundred!” Soon enough they’re all up, the people, mostly Poms, in the way of 
Poms, singing, “Stand uppp! If you love your darts. Stand uppp! If you love 
your darts. Stand uppp! If you love your darts. Stand up…” 
And so on. 

And you realise, whoever made darts a made-for-TV spectator sport is an 
oracle, a genius. Because darts, watching actual darts is, yeah. It’s really, 
really boring. No wonder everyone’s on the drink. You can sell that as a 
spectacle you can sell church to the kids. In fact there’s a bit of Hillsong 
about it.

Superman walks by with Alice in Wonderland.


“ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY!” exults our raspy-throated announcer man, and they’re 
all up like they love their darts, these funny drunk Poms dressed as Jesus and 
monks and clowns and Snow White, they would not understand this in Balochistan 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Balochistan,_Pakistan>.

Bunting shoots treble 20, 16 and double 16 to close out a match. It’s fine 
marksmanship, top arrows. Good darts men need … gee, what do you reckon? Good 
aim? Soft fingers? Tungsten livers?

Thud ... thud ... thud. Darts <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/darts> drop 
into pizza sections like little bombs exploding many miles away, the pop of 
distant fireworks. Bunting goes up 5-2 with back-to-back “
One-hundred-and-eightiieeees!” and they’re all up and singing again, standing 
up if they love their darts, standing up, if they love their darts, standing up 
to show their love for darts. Actually most of them don’t give a flying eff 
about darts. But they do like drinking and singing and playing dress-ups, the 
funny, silly moos. And good luck to them.

Bit of a Pommy thing, isn’t it, singing in big halls, at the football, the 
cricket.What’s that thing, the Night of the Proms? 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yprh8ElXgbU> Everyone up and smiling and 
swaying together, up for a sing-song. Did Ginger Spice sing Prince Charles 
happy birthdaylike Marilyn did for JFK 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k4SLSlSmW74>, all sexy and stuff? Did that 
even happen? Google could tell you.

Half-time in the semi-final and Planet Funk’s Do-do-do-do-doooo doof-doof song 
comes on again, and the people are all up doing the“Hey! Hey! Hey!” bit. The 
stands empty. The beer queues fill. Smokers head out into the night. And apart 
from the fabled nine-darter, darts’ version of snooker’s perfect break, you 
have now seen everything at the darts.

There’s a VIP bit here, different from the trestle tables nearby because it 
has a fence around it. James Graham, the Bulldogs prop is here. And Glenn 
Munsie, the ubiquitous moon-head of the punt.

Types on trestle tables sing “You can’t afford a table” to the punters in the 
stands. Some respond with “Who are ya?” but not many do. Someone’s trying to 
get Waltzing Matilda going, standing up in front of the people. God I hate 
these people, crowd conductors. Security should take them out the back, 
puncture them with many darts.

Back into the action, such that it is, and old mate’s “One hundred and 
eightieeeees” are getting ever more elongated and raspy. The worst Snow White 
ever walks by, a boulder of a man, Shrek-like. Huge Snow White. Horrible Snow 
White. A child’s nightmare.

Red cups pile up on trestle tables. Red rags to the RSA bulls. This sort of 
drunkenness, it’s sort of old-fashioned. And in olden times there was fighting.

Bunting whacks a dart into the bulls eye and wins his match 10-4. 

On the big screen Bozza interviews Kyle “The Original” Anderson, the nickname 
a play on “Original Aboriginal”. Bozza doesn’t rib him that it isn’t very 
original. There’s vision of Anderson impressing the punters at the nearby Bat & 
Ball Hotel with his silky arrow-work. A bloke on screen says, “This is great 
for Aussie darts.” Wonder if it is.

And here he comes, big Ando. There’s the low hum of the didgeridoo: Hmmm, hmmm
, and some rap music by Street Warriors who sing “Rock the southern cross of 
black red and yellow /

Flowin’ through my veins the beat red blue yeah ah the man / Thousands have 
died just to make me a warrior / Leader, trend-setter, master with an IQ only 
rivalled by a few”, and so on. Anderson waves to the people. Vision cuts to the 
Aussie flag, home made signs, Snow Whites, Duffmen.

And then: trumpets, blaring like royal … trumpets, heralding the arrival of 
one man. A powerful man.The man. Phil “The Power” Taylor. Sixteen times world 
champion. More accurate than a killer attack drone from space. Looks like the 
bloke from your fish-and-chip shop.

“I’ve got the power” booms across the arena, big, thumping bass. Punters line 
the … thing, where he comes out from. The laneway. The alley. Heap of phones 
take pictures. Famous man, The Power. And there’s super noise and acclamation, 
trumpets and big bass noise, and for a build-up like this our politicians 
should be fighting with light sabres in the nude to the death.

Instead there is … darts. 

Thud… thud … thud.


Nevertheless they’re all up again, the fans, the people, standing up because 
they love their darts. And because Taylor versus Anderson promises to be 
interesting. A clash of cultures, two worlds united by tungsten arrows. The 
slayer from Stoke-on-Trent versus The Original, originally of Perth, now of 
Nottingham. Bring it, arrow-men.

Thud ... thud ... thud.


Taylor takes the first leg, all laser-beam focus. Anderson wins a leg with a 
bulls eye and celebrates by punching an imaginary dwarf in the face.

Stand upppp if you love your darts.


An RSA monitor man goes by, walking backwards, silently, gliding like a spy, 
intent, ear-piece in, staring, looking for signs of drunkenness, of which there 
would be upwards of 4,000. “Are there any women here?” asked John Cleese. Lot 
of convicts here. A few Supermen. Heap of Duffmen.

Thud. Taylor hits a bull. Thud. Double-16. And game. He goes ahead 4-1. He’s 
owning The Original. Wonder why he’s so good at this particular thing. What his 
synapses have that other dartsmen’s don’t. Dartsmen’s doesn’t. Something. 
Someone should do a study.

Soon enough Taylor’s up 6-1. Anderson hits 180. And wins a leg. Intermission. 
They play the doof-doof music. People singhey-hey-hey. Drunk men dance 
together. Do that at the cricket they’d have you executed. Stone fact. Maybe 
not executed. But party times such as these are not permitted at the cricket, 
indeed you’d be thrown out for drunk dancing, probably by these very same 
security types.We’ll have none of that here. Anyway. A pox on these people. 
Maybe not a pox. Maybe a headache, say, or a cold sore. A nice little itch, 
middle of the spine.


Stand upppp if you love your darts.



There’s Tin Man, Cowardly Lion, Scarecrow, and really big, terrible Dorothy. 
And … is that … I think it is! Julian Assange! It’s Julian Assange! Ha. Top 
costume, friend. The infamous internet guy holed-up in the Ecuador embassy. Top 
costume. Actually, hang on … oh! It’s not a costume.

Wow. Sorry about that, spooky white-maned man. Actually … maybe it is Julian 
Assange. Wouldn’t that be a turn-up, Julian Assange at the darts. International 
incident. Maximum exposure. Global reach. Great for Aussie darts. Wonder what 
security would do. Probably jump on him, stab him, with darts.

Fools are still trying to get Waltzing Matilda going, but it’s not happening. 
It’s out of context. This is little England. This is a social club in 
Shropshire. Waltzing Matilda barely works at Wallabies Test matches. A bloke in 
the VIP bit falls over again. He won’t last. Security is onto him. Having a 
confab, talking tactics. Earpieces. Many men.

Stand upppp, if you love your darts.

Taylor goes up 7-3. Christ these fools are still trying to sing Waltzing 
Matilda. Hideous caterwauling. Security! Arm yourselves! Double-20 to Anderson. 
It’s back to 9-3. Anderson lives.


Then Anderson dies. Taylor: too good. 

Doof-doof-doof, hey-hey-hey. 


Stand up you love your darts. And now you’ve seen everything at “the darts” 
again.

So then you leave.
 