
Royal Randwick Racecourse on a big day bubbles like a massive wedding. It’s a 
giantDimboola <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dimboola_(play)> of 25,000 people 
in their slinky best, expensive suits and ties and cufflinks, sticky-up hair, 
make-up, lipstick and fluffy hats, and hats that aren’t even hats at all but 
rather bits of expensive stuff stuck on a woman’s head. It’s theatrical and 
loud and “Sydney”, and drips with sex and money like the The Wolf of Wall 
Street.

Maybe not that bad. But it drips. It drips. There’s drinking and gambling and 
the ever-louder, bubbling “noise” of a room full of inebriates. There’s bosoms, 
legs, flesh, tattoos, flesh, big hair, lips and flesh. There’s happy drunks and 
TV shouters, and sullen-eyed bookmakers counting money, mumbling numbers. Party 
boys pose, suited suburban types pretend they’re stock-marketeers of the turf 
while women of all ages check each other out, their eyes quickly swivelling, 
scanning, and imperceptibly registering the enhanced breast, the Botoxed 
forehead, the tan from a can.

Flesh? Dear sweet Jesus have a happy resurrection, brother, the flesh. The 
glorious, svelte flesh, flesh soluxurious the Germans would have a word for a 
man’s desire to pay top dollar to stroke it, to run his stubble across it, to
breathe on it. 

I’m here with Wifey, out for a date more refined than being drenched at 
Leichhardt Oval 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/apr/09/away-days-leichhardt-oval>, 
by the rail in the Members Enclosure of Royal Randwick on a gorgeous and fine 
autumnal day. It’s day two of the newly-minted “The Championships”, a 
multi-million dollar and aptly-named “carnival” of Group One thoroughbred 
racing that’s partly funded by Racing NSW and the Australian Turf Club – groups 
of sundry rich people who provide “entertainment” in the form of horse races 
upon which people gamble – and partly by the New South Wales tax-payer via 
Destination NSW, the tourism mob who put up the loot.

Loot? A veritable motza, friend. The NSW Government kicked in $10m for The 
Championships’ first year, most of which became prize money for the 10 elite 
Group One events including the $3m Doncaster Mile (the world’s richest race 
over 1600m), the $4m Queen Elizabeth Stakes (which overtakes the Cox Plate as 
the richest weight-for-age event in Australia) and the $2.5m TJ Smith Stakes 
(the world’s richest sprint race). Throw in the AJC Derby, Sydney Cup and a 
veritable container-ship full of money, and some of the world’s best horses, 
trainers and jockeys have come like smart bears to bee honey.

And the punters have come in their droves – 50,000 over the two weekends, big 
numbers in the Sin City of Sydney that boasts a plethora of opportunities to 
liberate people of their recreational entertainment coin. Yet unlike competing 
interests like the Easter Show or Sydney Swans at the SCG, The Championships 
drip with sex and money. And as any brand man would tell you, these are 
powerful, driving forces.

Consider the dress-makers. For blessed are the dress-makers. For surely there 
is no industry that puts so little material into their products and charges so 
royally for them. One Amazonian creature strides by in a figure-hugging orange 
jumpsuit … dress … thing that reminds you ofthat woman from The Fifth Element 
<http://mutantreviewers.files.wordpress.com/2011/11/fifth-element.jpg>, 
remember her? The perfect woman - “Jubla”, or something. “Jimalo”. Something. 
I’ll google it later. But Bruce Willis pashed her without permission, then 
saved the world, clever Bruce.

Another young woman in figure-hugging purple, all shoulders and legs and 
well-formed bits and bobs, strides by faux-nonchalantly, knowing there’s eyes 
on her. There’s a glass of champagne in one hand, a smart phone in the other, 
and a TAB ticket impaled on the heel of her long black stiletto. Is it a 
visible-panty-line sort of faux pas? We may never know. But to the bar she 
wanders, and you think …Who are these people? And where do they come from? Do 
they shop at Coles? Do they use libraries? Some of them are just so knock-down 
delicious it’s like they are uber-people. Uber-people of Love. Procreation 
specialists. Top humans.

(“Leeloo” was that uber-woman’s name, Milla Jovovich in an orange wig.)

“Send me a drop-pin with where you are,” says a nubile young thing all legs 
and giant black witch-hair. “A drop-pin,” she repeats. “Adrop-pin. A DROP-PIN!” 
She hangs up, looks at her friend, shakes her head. “I mean, come on,” she says.

I look at Wifey, raise eye-brows. “Drop pin?” She explains it’s one of those 
electronic widget things on your phone, like when you’re in Google Maps or 
something, and it puts a spot on the map where you are or where you want to be. 
And apparently you can now zap these things in messages to other people’s 
phones and so explain where you are because it’s too hard to “talk” using one’s 
“voice” and “explain” one’s whereabouts in these modern times when technology 
is so cool we would forgo even convenience to use it. And if you’re now 
thinking,Yes, I, too, could be getting old, then you are. And then you will die.

Like the run of heavily-supported $2.75 favourite Catkins in the $1m Group One 
Cellerbrations Queen of The Turf Stakes over 1600 metres. Catkins, a grey mare 
trained by leading man Chris Waller and ridden by top hoop Hugh Bowman, leads 
the field for all but 300 metres of the 1600m journey before deciding she is 
now too tired. And so we part company with a $50 TAB ticket that will hopefully 
find its way onto some young spunk’s stiletto and get around Randwick like a 
message in a bottle.

My, but I can go on.

But! There’s a silver lining to Catkins’ decision to stop running fast and it 
is this: the winner of the race was a lady horse called Diamond Drille who is 
ridden by Tommy Berry,the 23-year-old who tragically lost his twin brother the 
week before 
<http://www.smh.com.au/sport/horseracing/nathan-berry-farewelled-20140408-36ain.html>
. And as they pass the post there’s a moment that’s welded in my memory: Tommy 
Berry standing up aboard a massively muscled horse running at high speed and 
pointing with one finger up to the skies, looking up and he’s yelling, “That’s 
for you, Nath!” I explain the context to Wifey. She cries. We hug. 

And it’s here you think, while horse racing does indeed exist for one reason 
only and that’s for the racing – “gambling” – industry to liberate punters – 
“mugs” – of their money, it is just about the only sport that continually comes 
up with these most compelling of storylines. Battlers win big races. Trainers 
come from nothing. And Tommy Berry can win three mega-rich events in one day 
and each time point to this twin brother in heaven. Well … you couldn’t write 
that as fiction for a mini-series.

And so Tommy Berry returns after finally slowing down nearly a kilometre away 
on Diamond Drille, and he’s still pointing to the heavens. It’s lovely, a 
beautiful thing. There’s applause for him. “Goodonya Tommy!” yells a fellow, in 
fact it is me. And others follow suit. “Well done, Tommy!” Though there isn’t 
much acclaim for his horse, Diamond Drille, a bloody 33-1 shot that’s cruelled 
most everyone’s TAB tickets, most of them bearing Catkins’ name.

Soon enough the next race is foreshadowed by a bloke in a red jacket and 
frilly white shirt and tie combination like those fox-hunting guys wear with 
the little brown hairy helmets. He blows his trumpet for that traditional tune –
bar-bar-bumpada-bumpada-bumpada-baaarr – which means the runners in the 7th – 
the Seven News Australian Oaks over 2400m – can now liberate punters/mugs of 
their money. The trumpet man mugs for the people. Leaves to do God only knows 
what. Punt?

And so the bar and a bookmaker to punt on the Oaks and the races after that. 
Wifey and I don’t win on any of the nine events, but she does meet some friends 
inside the Members, though, the still-venerable booze hall that they’ve left as 
is after spending many millions doing up Randwick into a world class race 
track. Which is kinda nice.

Wifey looks up from her phone (she’s been reading a recipe for 
bread-and-butter pudding) and points out a table full of blokes looking upwards 
in rapt attention at the nearby stairwell. I follow their gaze up the stairs 
and find a girl heading upwards, in a short dress.I quickly avert my gaze to 
focus on the phone and the pudding recipe.


And looking back at the day, I think: yes, it’s good to be a punter. Even a 
mug. For the sun shines on all of us, sometimes.
 