
The list of things imported from the United States of America to the island 
nation of Australia includes: McDonald’s; Pepsi Cola; 7/11; Happy Days; the 
comedic stylings of Arj Barker; many very fine movies; and the deadly 
cigarettes of Marlboro. We’ve had rap music, Dr Pepper and all the drugs.Tina 
Turner even promoted the National Rugby League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/feb/28/tina-turner-nrl-promos-rugby-league>
. If it’s happened or happening - even or “happening” - in America, chances are 
it’ll head across the Big Blue ditch to Australia soon enough.

And yet we’ve never adopted tailgate parties. And why not? For surely if 
there’s a cultural activity Australians enjoy most it’s barbecuing while 
drinking beer and watching football on the television. That’s what Australia 
was built upon, that’s what’s made Australia the thrusting middle power of 
nationhood we are today.

No it didn’t. But we do love to barbecue meat, and drink beer, and watch 
football on the box. Why do we get Doctor Pepper but not tailgate parties? What 
is doing, Cross Cultural Influencers? Why would you tell us about Robin Hood, 
Russell Crowe, and not tailgating?

We’re in a car park the size of a mighty American mega-mall with ‘Club 49’, 
one of the legion ofSan Francisco 49ers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/san-francisco-49ers> supporter groups who 
set up shop before each home game in a parking lot near Levi’s Stadium, Santa 
Clara. And there they form a small city of buses and RVs and pick-up trucks 
decked out with televisions and sound systems and barbecues, and they 
‘tailgate’, which is one of the most fun things you do before a football match 
short of playing golf with Arj Barker in the nude.

There’s fans here from Canada and Australia and the United Kingdom. There are 
fine big chunks of New York steak and mashed potato and corn, and meaty little 
pork balls of some description that are sweet and meaty and delicious. And 
there is beer and shots of Grey Goose vodka downed ritually by this happy pack 
of supporter people.

The police are here, indeed they enjoy the steaks and pork balls before 
boarding their mountain bikes to help police what must be close to 50,000 
people, most of whom won’t even head into the game. That hip-hop music booms 
from speakers possibly urging people to eff the police matters not a jot. This 
is party time, all ages, and a very good vibe.

And so we raise thimble-sized plastic cups and knock down shots and loudly 
proclaim “Niners!” followed by “Argh!” I meet a couple of good dudes from 
Canada, “Jo-Jo” a local man wearing a Mardi Gras necklace, and Kevin Gibson 
from Toowomba who like me found the club from a Google search for “49ers” and 
“tailgate”.

Nearby is a bloke DJ-ing out of a bus. Heaps of huge tour buses here, makes 
sense to car-pool given a single parking spot costs $160. Ravens people in 
purple. They have a bus. Probably didn’t drive 2,848 miles from Baltimore, 
though, that would be stretching fandom.

There’s the smell of smoke, beer, shots. Even the odd sweet bit of weed. 

So then you leave and cross a highway and head towards the giant square 
stadium and you come to … a whole other carpark, with another 50,000 or so 
people eating and barbecuing and doing something with beanie balls tossed into 
a lump of wood with a hole in it. And you wonder afresh: why isn’t this in 
Australia? Maybe not the beanie ball thing, that seems a bit pointless. But the 
music, beer, television, and greater cultural shared tribal experience of 
standing about in your colours … that’s sports supporter gold.

And so to the stadium and many metal detectors and people searching bags, such 
are the times. We’re through a couple of check-points manned by friendly 
battle-axes, up an elevator, out into the media centre and to our seat in front 
of a giant glass wall. And there it is: Levi’s Stadium. And it is magnificent. 
All gleaming glass and tens of thousands of red seats, and hi-res big screens 
of mega-million mega-pixels. The field below is a brilliant, billiard-table 
surface of crisp white lines and red-and-white paint and iridescent yellow 
posts. It makes the Coliseum look likeLeichhardt Oval 
<http://www.tigers.org.au/index.php/sports/leichhardt-oval/>. 

One entire side is a giant flat wall of glass like a sky-scraper backed into a 
stadium. The rest is all red seats full of people in red football jumpers. It’s 
brilliant.

A fog-horn as if from the Lusitania, say, or the QEII, goes off to tell us 
that it’s an hour from “player introductions” which is when the players run out 
for the acclamation of the people.

There’s Niners Man (he may be called), the mascot thing, a Yosemite Sam-like 
prospector with a beard and mattock. Men in shorts run the length of the field 
with flags. There are fire breathers and many women in long white boots. There 
are men with drums banging out beatslike that song by Fleetwood Mac, 
bump-ba-bar, bump-bum-bar, etc <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u033yND2lG4>. 

Here come the players! The Ravens run out in their white suits, and there are 
boos. The Niners ancillary guys run out, the kickers and punters, those guys. 
People are still booing. Probably not at them. They’d more likely get complete 
ambivalence.

Many cheer girls line the runway from where there Niners are about to emerge. 
There’s a tunnel and the players are gathered before that, bubbling about. And 
here they come! And the flag men run about and great gussets of flame launch 
from the mouths of a fire-breathing troupe, and here come the Niners’ Star Men: 
NaVorro Bowman and Alex Boone and Jordan Devey, a bunch of other guys. Carlos 
Hyde, Vernon Davis. Colin “C-Kap” Kaepernick runs out, something of an enigma. 
Locals aren’t yet sure whether to love him. Yes, he led them to the Super Bowl 
as a rookie three years ago, but the Niners are 1-4. Quarterbacks tend to own 
results, like pitchers, and politicians.

We see some military types on the stage, holding flags. There’s the brilliant 
national anthem, belted out by a girl with huge pipes. And as she reaches that 
spine-tingling crescendo, fireworks shoot out of the stadium scoreboard and 
four Harrier fighter jets of the Marines roar overhead. And the hair on your 
arms stand stiff like porcupine needles. It is brilliant. Top stuff, United 
States of America.

The four captains from each team stride out from each side to shake hands and 
man-hug. The Niners have five captains, I don’t care to research why. The 
mighty fog-horn of the Lusitania goes off again. There’s a sound like a space 
ship is about to launch out of Battlestar Galactica, a noise that builds up as 
kicker runs in to get us under way. And everyone is yelling. And it’s 
everything you can do not to run out into the media centre and crash tackle 
someone, anyone. For truly the joint is ready to rumble.

Then the kick-off goes over the kick return man’s head and all that build-up 
leads to teams swapping sides. It’s a common theme. Kickers boot the ball dead. 
The game starts again on the 20-yard line. They could brush the kick-off and 
just start from the 20-yard line. Or penalise the kicker if the ball goes dead 
on the full with a restart on the 30 or 40 or halfway.

Just a thought.

Otherwise – apart from the many breaks in play for television and timeouts and 
for reasons unknown that stretch11 minutes of actual in-play game action 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052748704281204575002852055561406> into 
three-and-a-half hours of drawn-out standing about – it’s a brilliant 
spectacle. There is beast-like defence and super-fine throwing and acts of 
tremendous bravery, men catching the ball knowing they’re about to be really 
badly belted by committed, physical belters. The quarterbacks arms are strong 
and super-accurate and receivers catch the balls thrown at great velocity in 
two hands above their heads. It’s skilful, fast, dynamic and brutal.

And it’s great fun. And they should bring it to Australia like they brought 
Major League Baseball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/mar/24/major-league-baseball-in-sydney>
. And if not an actual NFL game (because it would probably cost a lot of money) 
then at least let me take home these tailgate parties. They’d certainly last 
longer than Dr Pepper.
 