
The place Goodwood, Sussex
The date 18-20 September

The event A zoom down memory lane: this three-day race-meeting relives 
Goodwood's glory days in the 1950s and 60s, when the circuit was home to every 
kind of motor racing including Formula One. Famous faces such as Giacomo 
Agostini, Jenson Button and Rowan Atkinson have pulled on retro overalls to 
race here, while nostalgia-lovers salivate over the classic cars and former 
world champions wander around the open-access paddock. 2008 was the event's 
10th anniversary - this year the 80th birthday of Sir Stirling Moss, right, 
will spark the celebrations.

The place Set in the extensive Sussex grounds of the Earl and Countess of 
March, near Chichester, and overlooked by the Regency-period Goodwood House, 
this has a claim to be the poshest sporting venue in the country. For the 
revival, its postwar heyday is recreated in superb detail - with visitors 
encouraged to dress in period style.

The locals Racing stars from Sir Jack Brabham and John Surtees to David 
Coulthard and Damon Hill love this event, and are normally very willing to 
chat. If you spot a rather dashing 54-year-old Hugh Grant-a-like, chances are 
it's Charles, Earl of March.

Where to stay The estate's luxurious Goodwood Park Hotel, with its own pool 
and spa, will likely be booked long in advance but on its website,goodwood.co.uk
 <http://www.goodwood.co.uk>, you can find a list of recommended B&Bs. There 
are also 350 plots in the new onsite camping facilities (call 01243 755055 to 
book).

Where to eat and drink There are plenty of options at the festival, from 
champagne-and-seafood bars, to the Oily Rag pub, and even a Naafi wagon. If 
you're inspired by the smart surrounds, the area around Chichester boasts 
Michelin-starred West Stoke House (weststokehouse.co.uk 
<http://www.weststokehouse.co.uk>) and 36 On The Quay (36onthequay.co.uk 
<http://www.36onthequay.co.uk>). 

What else to do If you manage to drag yourself away from the air displays, 
tractor rides and fairground amusements, the Chichester Festival Theatre has 
Iain Glen and Stephanie Cole starring in Terence Rattigan's Separate Tables.

How to get there Drive, obviously. Parking is free, and if you're in a 
pre-1966 car you can display your baby at the Revival Car Show. Otherwise take 
the train to Chichester - there's a regular bus service from the station. If 
you're feeling particularly exhibitionist, the estate has its own aerodrome.

What not to do Forget your wellies: if it rains, you'll regret those vintage 
stilettos.
 