
On losing her faith…

"Working my way through university as a Dutch-Somali translator, I met many 
Muslims in difficult circumstances: in homes for battered women, prisons, 
special education classes. I never connected the dots – I could not see the 
connection between their belief in Islam and their poverty, between their 
religion and the oppression of women and the lack of free, individual choice. 
It was, ironically, Osama bin Laden who freed me of those blinkers. After 9/11, 
I found it impossible to ignore his claims that the murderous destruction of 
innocent (if infidel) lives is consistent with the Qur'an. I looked in the 
Qur'an, and I found it to be so. To me, this meant I could no longer be 
a Muslim. In fact, I realised then that I had not been a Muslim for a long 
time."

On her father

"I learned he was sick in June 2008, only a few weeks before his death. I 
didn't tell my half-sister Sahra that I planned to visit him in hospital in the 
UK. It's a hideous thing to write, but I didn't really know if I could trust 
her with that information. I assume the closest members of my family don't 
actually want to kill me, but the truth is that I have shamed and hurt them; 
they have to deal with the outrage that my public statements cause, and 
undoubtedly some members of my clan do want to kill me for that.

"When I arrived at Heathrow, a large black car from the Dutch embassy was 
there to greet me; another, smaller but even safer, held men from Scotland 
Yard. We drove to the hospital. To my relief, my father lay alive before me.

"I felt heavy with the burden of everything I had never said to him and the 
sheer waste of all the years we'd been apart. The only words I could find were 
trite messages of love, and I said them over and over again. It was too late 
for anything else."

On her family

"Reconnecting with my extended family – cousins and my own half-sister – who 
live in the US, the UK and elsewhere, I found them tragically unsteady on their 
feet. One has Aids, another has been indicted for attempting to murder her 
husband, and a third sends all the money he makes back home to Somalia to feed 
the clan.

They all claim to be loyal to the values of our tribe and of Allah. They are 
permanent residents and citizens of western countries, but their hearts and 
minds lie elsewhere. I believe that the dysfunctional Muslim family constitutes 
a real threat to the very fabric of western life. It is in the family that 
children are groomed to practise, promote and pass on the norms of their 
parents' culture. It is therefore of the utmost importance that we understand 
the dynamics of the Muslim family, for they hold the key to the susceptibility 
of so many young Muslim men to Islamic radicalism. It is above all through 
families that conspiracy theories travel from the mosques and madrasas of Saudi 
Arabia and Egypt to the living rooms of homes in Holland, France and America."

On terrorism

"Many people in Europe and the US dispute the thesis that we are living 
through a clash of civilisations between Islam and the west. But a radical 
minority of Muslims firmly believes that Islam is under siege, and is committed 
to winning the holy war it has declared against the west. A larger group of 
Muslims, most of them in Europe and America, believes that acts of terror 
committed by fellow Muslims will unleash a western backlash against all Muslims 
indiscriminately. With this collective feeling of being persecuted, many Muslim 
families living in the west insulate themselves in ghettoes. Within those 
ghettoes, the agents of radical Islam cultivate their message of hatred and 
seek foot soldiers to fight as martyrs. Unhappy, disoriented youths in 
dysfunctional immigrant families make perfect recruits to such a cause. With 
continuing immigration from the Muslim world and a significantly higher 
birthrate in Muslim families, this is a phenomenon we ignore at our peril."

On Muslim integration

"I see three main barriers to the process of Muslim integration. The first is 
Islam's treatment of women. The will of little girls is stifled by Islam. They 
are reared to become submissive robots. They are required to comply with their 
father's choice of a mate, and after the wedding their lives are devoted to the 
sexual pleasures of their husband and to a life of childbearing.

"The second is the difficulty many immigrants from Muslim countries have in 
dealing with money. Islamic attitudes toward credit and debt, and the lack of 
education of Muslim women about financial matters, means that most new 
immigrants arrive in the west wholly unprepared for the bewildering range of 
opportunities and obligations presented by a modern consumer society.

"The third obstacle is the socialisation of the Muslim mind. All Muslims are 
reared to believe that the Qur'an, as "revealed" to Muhammad, is infallible and 
must be obeyed without question. This makes Muslims vulnerable to 
indoctrination in a way that followers of other faiths are not. Moreover, the 
violence that is endemic in so many Muslim societies, from domestic violence to 
the incessant celebration of holy war, adds to the difficulty of turning people 
from that world into western citizens. I can sum up the three obstacles to the 
integration of people like my own family in three words: sex, money and 
violence."

On racism

"The west tends to respond to the social failures of Muslim immigrants with 
what can be called the racism of low expectations. This western attitude is 
based on the idea that people of colour must be exempted from "normal" 
standards of behaviour. There are many good men and women in the west who try 
to resettle refugees and strive to eliminate discrimination. They lobby 
governments to exempt minorities from the standards of behaviour of western 
societies; they fight to help minorities preserve their cultures, and excuse 
their religion from critical scrutiny. These people mean well, but their 
activism is now a part of the very problem they seek to solve. Their efforts to 
assist Muslims and other minorities are futile because, by creating the 
illusion that one can hold on to tribal norms and at the same time become a 
successful citizen, the proponents of multiculturalism lock subsequent 
generations born in the west into a no man's land of moral values. What comes 
packaged in a compassionate language of acceptance is really a cruel form of 
racism. And it is all the more cruel because it is expressed in sugary words of 
virtue."

On her security

"I have had to pay a price for leaving Islam and for speaking out. I have to 
pay for round-the-clock security because of the death threats against me. 
People often ask me what it's like to live with bodyguards. The short answer is 
that it's better than being dead. It's also better than wearing a headscarf or 
a veil, which to me represents the mental and physical restrictions that 
so many Muslim women have to suffer.

"Bodyguards keep me safe. When you live with death threats all the time, you 
do feel fear, and have horrible nightmares. When a car is parked outside for 
too long, I ask myself whether I am being watched. If a delivery boy rings the 
bell, I hesitate. Is he really who he appears to be? Should I answer the door?

"I try to stay vigilant. I don't keep a routine. But I have decided not to 
stop writing, not to stop drawing attention to the plight of Muslim women and 
the threat that extremists pose to free thought, free speech and democratic 
governments. If I were to stop, I don't think it would help my situation. 
Once an enemy, always an enemy."

• Edited extracts from Nomad: A Personal Journey Through The Clash Of 
Civilisations, by Ayaan Hirsi Ali, published by Simon & Schuster at £12.99. To 
order a copy for £9.99 (including UK mainland p&p), go to
theguardian.com/bookshop <https://www.theguardian.com/bookshop>.
 