
"All my life I have been a nomad," writes Ayaan Hirsi Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayaan-hirsi-ali> at the beginning of her 
second memoir, the appropriately titledNomad. Often when people make this kind 
of statement, they're speaking metaphorically or with a certain melodramatic 
exaggeration. In Hirsi Ali's case, her geographical and cultural shifts have 
been many, profound and life-changing.

She spent her first eight years in war-torn Somalia, then lived under virtual 
house arrest in Saudi Arabia, before being thrown out to Ethiopia, then in turn 
to Kenya. From there, she was supposed to move to Canada in an arranged 
marriage, but on the flight there she took a detour to Holland, where she 
gained asylum. As she studied and embraced the Dutch way of life, she gradually 
cast off her tribal attitudes and Islamic beliefs.

With the 9/11 attacks, she decided she was no longer a Muslim and became an 
increasingly outspoken critic of the religion she was born into. Within a few 
years, she required police protection and after the film-maker Theo van Gogh, 
with whom she shot a feminist critique ofIslam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>, was slaughtered in the street, she 
was forced into hiding. Finally, having become a Dutch MP, she was persuaded to 
relocate to the US when her own government revoked her citizenship and her 
neighbours, fearful of terrorism, gained her eviction under human rights law.

The continual uprooting would be enough to disorientate and dispirit even the 
most stable of minds. Then there's the added inconvenience of being the subject 
of repeated death threats (at one stage in Holland, she says, the police were 
uncovering three or four plots a week on her life). But she seems almost 
serenely relaxed when we meet in a Soho restaurant.

"I am able to adapt," she says. "Sometimes, I think it's because of my early 
childhood training, when each move felt like a trauma. But there was a period 
of extreme pain and mental anguish in 2006 [when she was effectively forced out 
of Holland] and the way I dealt with it was by telling myself that it wasn't 
the end of the world. The future seemed much more uncertain when I left Kenya 
to come to Holland."

None the less, she feels bitter about how the Dutch government, which had 
encouraged her to speak out, removed her police protection. "I thought that was 
disgusting because, indirectly, it's setting you up for murder."

For the past year or so, she's been going out with the historian Niall Ferguson
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/niall-ferguson>. She was shocked to see the 
British press coverage about their relationship. "So I asked my publishers, 
what's this about? They said, 'It's not you. He's the one who's a celebrity.'"
 