
The Egyptian surgeon turned militant mastermind Ayman al-Zawahiri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayman-al-zawahiri> has succeeded Osama bin 
Laden as head of al-Qaida.

The announcement by al-Qaida's ruling council, made through an affiliated 
Islamist website, marks a major attempt to re-assert its authority six weeks 
after the US special forces raid that killed Bin Laden in northern Pakistan.

But questions remain about whether Zawahiri, considered more argumentative and 
less charismatic than the Saudi, can unite al-Qaida's various factions across 
south Asia and the Middle East while evading his American pursuers.

The 59-year-old has also officially replaced Bin Laden as the world's most 
wanted fugitive, with a $25m reward for his capture. The next largest US 
bounty, $10m, is for the Afghan Taliban leader, Mullah Omar.

Today's appointment marks the end of a six-week consultation headed by Saif 
al-Adel, head of al-Qaida's ruling council, who served as interim leader. Yemen 
is now considered the most powerful faction, although al-Qaida remains 
headquartered along the mountainous Afghanistan-Pakistan border.

Bin Laden's deputy had already taken on the mantle of leader, and in a recent 
video message <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m5OSYypOZ1U> addressed the 
concerns about his leadership qualities, adopting a distinctly inclusive tone.

Dressed in a white tunic and sitting beside a gun, Zawahiri called on al-Qaida 
affiliates to "continue along the path of jihad" while warning America it faced 
"a rebelling nation which has awaken from its sleep in a jihadist renaissance".

"It was a complete change of language," said Palestinian journalist and 
militancy expert Baker Atyani. "He's no longer giving instructions or going 
into detail but talking in general terms, like a leader, as Bin Laden used to."

From a family of wealthy doctors and religious scholars in Cairo, Zawahiri met 
Bin Laden in Saudi Arabia in 1986 and helped him found al-Qaida in the 
Pakistani city of Peshawar two years later.

The US later indicted him for his role in the August 1998 bombings of US 
embassies in Tanzania and Kenya, which killed 224 people and wounded several 
thousands.

After 2001 he became the most visible face of al-Qaida, appearing in video 
messages much more frequently than Bin Laden, spouting fiery rhetoric.

"He likes to talk, to argue, to discuss. Bin Laden was very quiet, he would 
count his words," said Atyani, who met both men near Kandahar in June 2001.

Long been thought to be hiding in Pakistan's tribal belt, he escaped death in 
a 2006 drone strike on a house in Bajaur that killed 18 people. Other reliable 
reports over the past decade have placed him in north and south Waziristan.

But since the discovery of Bin Laden in Abbottabad, a garrison town 35 miles 
north of Islamabad, experts believe Zawahiri may also be sheltering outside the 
tribal belt. "The border is too dangerous for anyone right now," said Ahmed 
Rashid, author of several books on militancy.

But his greater problems may be from within, Rashid added. He said: "Osama was 
much better at placating the various wings of al-Qaida – the Yemenis, the 
Somalis, the North Africans. I'm not sure Zawahiri can do that."

Efforts to capture him may be hampered by growing distrust between Pakistan 
and the US. Yesterday it emerged that Pakistani intelligence had captured five 
people accused of helping the CIA run a secret operation to catch Bin Laden.

Humiliated and angered by the US raid that killed Bin Laden, Pakistan's 
generals want to stop the CIA drone campaign in the tribal belt. Pakistan has 
reportedly stopped supplies entering the remote base where the drones are 
stationed, and the US has moved some across the border to Afghanistan.

Four of the six intelligence "fusion centres", where the CIA and Pakistan's 
Inter-Services Intelligence share information, have been closed, according to 
the Washington Post. Any further deterioration in relations between the spy 
agencies could seriously damage efforts against al-Qaida.

In his last statement, Zawahiri warned that al-Qaida was preparing to mount an 
attack similar to "black Tuesday" – a term for the 9/11 attacks. Whether he can 
pull off such a terrorist spectacular will determine both the strength of 
al-Qaida and Zawahiri's relevance following the loss of Bin Laden.
 