
Today, al-Qaida's new emir – or leader – turns 60. There is unlikely to be 
much celebration. This is partly becauseAyman al-Zawahiri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayman-al-zawahiri>, appointed to the post 
following the death of Osama bin Laden in May, has little to celebrate given 
the challenges faced by the organisation he now leads. It is partly because 
Zawahiri and the few dozen militants who comprise the central senior leadership 
of the group frown on birthdays as a secular distraction. It is also because 
there has been little joy in Zawahiri's life before and it seems unlikely that 
this would change now.

Zawahiri has lived most of the past 30 years plunged in violence, bereavement, 
grief and pain – his own and that which he has inflicted on many thousands, 
possibly tens of thousands, of other people.

Even before becoming involved in Islamic extremism in his homeland of Egypt in 
the 70s, the young Zawahiri was a joyless child. He was born the son of a 
university pharmacology professor in a Cairo suburb. His family were not part 
of the Egyptian elite with their westernised ways, their wealth, their 
servants. His father was a distracted academic, from a good family but without 
resources, and Zawahiri went to a state school. As a student, he did not like 
sport, but was quick, intellectually impatient and intense. He easily won a 
place at medical school.

His marriage was arranged by his parents. The match they found was a good one. 
As devout as her husband-to-be, Azza chose to wear first a veil, unusual among 
women of her class at the time, then the full niqab, which leaves only the eyes 
uncovered. When the two of them married, wrote American author and journalist 
Lawrence Wright, they demanded that there be no music or dancing after the 
ceremony.

The 70s were a time of political ferment in Egypt. On universities, leftwing 
activists battled physically and ideologically with increasingly extreme 
factions of the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood organisation. The tall, thin, 
bespectacled Zawahiri became an underground organiser for the latter. When he 
was 28, the Soviets invaded Afghanistan and the young surgeon, recently 
married, travelled to Pakistan to care for wounded refugees and fighters.

Conditions were extremely basic, the wounds were often horrific and there was 
insufficient medicine. Zawahiri returned to Egypt with new venom in his already 
uncompromising rhetoric. His journey through violence – what bullet does to 
bone, what shrapnel does to flesh, what confinement can do to the mind – was 
only just beginning.

In 1981, a group of Islamists assassinated President Anwar Sadat of Egypt. 
Zawahiri, though not directly involved, was rounded up, along with one of his 
brothers. He was, according to a variety of sources, not only confined for 
months to a 4ft by 6ft cell but beaten every day. It appears that, under 
torture with electricity, he betrayed his associates.

When he left prison, he travelled to Pakistan, with his wife, to restart his 
work with Afghan refugees. He took up a medical position at a hospital funded 
by the Kuwaiti government in the seething frontier city of Peshawar and 
delivered firebrand sermons each Friday that were popular with the city's 
growing Arab community.

It was in Peshawar that Zawahiri met the Saudi-born Osama bin Laden. Bin 
Laden, six years his junior, had much that Zawahiri lacked. He had charisma and 
a quiet calm that the intense, angry Egyptian could only envy. He also had 
access to money, which Zawahiri needed for his own militant followers. The 
partnership was to last 20 years.

By the early 90s, with the war against the Soviets in Afghanistan over, 
Zawahiri was travelling again. He may even have visited Europe at this time, 
but appears to have spent some time in the Caucasus, possibly even in a Russian 
prison. His main base, however, was Khartoum, in Sudan, where bin Laden had set 
up a ragged centre for expatriate Islamic militants. The latter rode beside the 
Nile and watched off-duty extremists play football. Zawahiri did not. Instead, 
he organised a series of bombings in Egypt, one of which killed a schoolgirl 
and sparked a popular backlash which crippled militancy in the country for 
decades.

"The unintended death of this innocent child pained us all, but… we had to 
fight the government, which was against God's sharia and supported God's 
enemies," he later wrote.

By 1997, Zawahiri and his family had joined bin Laden, somewhat reluctantly, 
in Afghanistan. In addition to a 10-year-old son and three daughters, the 
couple now had a baby girl, born with Down's syndrome and called Aisha. Abdel 
Bari Atwan, the editor of the London-based Arabic language newspaperal-Quds 
al-Arabi, travelled to eastern Afghanistan to interview bin Laden that year. 
Zawahiri was with the al-Qaida leader, but kept his distance both from Atwan 
and from bin Laden's entourage. "He was cold, arrogant, kept himself apart," 
Atwan remembered last week. "A brilliant mind, a real strategist, but very 
difficult, wary, no charm at all."

Zawahiri was one of the key voices within al-Qaida arguing in favour of 
launching a major attack on America. Despite his continuing fascination with 
his homeland – his voluminous writings include reams of diatribe against both 
its rulers and those Islamists he felt had sold out – the former surgeon was 
one of the leading advocates of the shift in strategy from attacking "the near 
enemy", ie the regimes in the Middle East that are now falling one after 
another, to the "far enemy", the US. By striking at the latter, "the head of 
the snake", as bin Laden called it, al-Qaida's aims would be realised much 
faster.

Nearly 3,000 people died in the 9/11 attacks. Zawahiri was to pay a personal 
price, too. In the bombing of Afghanistan by US-led coalition planes that 
followed the strikes, the house in which his family were sheltering was hit. 
His wife died of her injuries. Aisha, four years old, died of hypothermia in 
the Afghan winter air as rescuers worked to excavate her mother, unaware of the 
child in the rubble. Zawahiri escaped from his pursuers and almost no hard 
information about his whereabouts has emerged since.

There have been some possible sightings. And like his stay in an Egyptian 
prison, like his twisted campaigns in his native land, like his support for 
9/11, like his attempts to hide his family from the falling bombs, Zawahiri's 
presumed passage has led to pain, grief and death for many. In 2006, the 
militant leader was thought to be staying in a small village called Damadola, 
close to the Afghan border in Pakistan. A missile strike killed 18 people, 
mainly villagers, leaving Zawahiri, if he was in the vicinity, unharmed.

"They dropped bombs from planes and we were in no position to stop them or 
tell them we were innocent… I don't know Zawahiri. He was not at my home. No 
foreigner was at my home at the time the planes came," said Shah Zaman, a 
jeweller from the village, who lost a son and a daughter in the attack.

At one point, it looked like the corpses mounting up around him – Zawahiri is 
thought to have had a hand in several of the major al-Qaida-linked attacks in 
this period – might finally trip him up.

In 2004 and 2005, the veteran militant had warned the younger, thuggish Abu 
Musab al-Zarqawi, the head of al-Qaeda in Iraq, about the risks of 
indiscriminate violence. By 2007, in a question and answer session on the 
internet organised through jihadi forums, it was Zawahiri who was on the 
defensive, tetchily answering aggressive emailed questions about al-Qaida's 
record of killing Muslims.

But years in the field, the violence he has seen and provoked, have hardened 
Zawahiri. Through the latter part of the last decade, he carefully built 
networks of contacts with affiliate groups in east Africa and the Maghreb. When 
bin Laden died, it was the support of these that made his succession 
effectively uncontested despite potential opposition.

With al-Qaida marginalised by the events of the Arab Spring and its 
charismatic leader gone, the irascible, dour, argumentative Zawahiri inherits 
an organisation in crisis. Atwan, the editor, argues that if anyone is up to 
the job of restoring its fortunes, he is. "There is the vision, the brilliant 
strategic mind. He will take al-Qaida forward and it could be more dangerous 
than before," he says. Other analysts are less sure that Zawahiri can keep 
the diverse elements that bin Laden had united.

Zawahiri may not survive long enough to do anything much at all. The trail of 
blood and destruction may be ended by a Hellfire missile launched by an 
unmanned drone in the days or the weeks or months to come.
 