
A week before becoming leader, on 8 May, Zawahiri spoke about his next steps 
for al-Qaida. America's fiercest enemy laid out its new battlegrounds, exposed 
its major weaknesses, targeted new global audiences and made public new 
aspirations. All the while, America looked inward and focused on the tidbits of 
lewd photos of an American lawmaker. Only a month ago, the US was in jubilation 
about Bin Laden's killing. America's short attention span – in contrast to 
al-Qaida's long-range view – was a theme to whichAyman al-Zawahiri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayman-al-zawahiri> repeatedly alluded in 
al-Qaida's latest 30-minute broadcast to the world.

Released last Wednesday evening, in the middle of a busy media week with the 
German Chancellor in Washington DC and the trivia of Representative Anthony 
Weiner, most of America ignored Ayman al-Zawahiri's excellently timed video. He 
was not operating on US time; he was on Arab time. It was a carefully 
orchestrated release to ensure that al-Qaida's communication was ready for the 
beginning of the Arab weekend: Thursday and Friday. By Thursday, tens of 
thousands of young Arabs across the Middle East had viewed the video. By 
Friday, many more were talking about it on jihadist web forums. More 
importantly, al-Qaida was alive and relevant to the unfolding developments of 
the Arab Spring, or civil wars, inYemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>, Syria and Libya on Friday.

A frail, ill-looking Zawahiri stabbed the air repeatedly as he delivered his 
barbaric message to new audiences that are now operationally accessible for 
al-Qaida in Egypt, Yemen, Libya, Syria,Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> and Somalia. Zawahiri mentioned 
those countries repeatedly for a reason: there was an al-Qaida presence in 
those places that could now be expanded to demand hardline interpretations of 
sharia as state law. His interest was not in Saudi Arabia, or Iraq – as was the 
case a decade ago. Moreover, leading clerics in several of those countries had 
openly mourned Osama bin Laden's "martyrdom"; they had held mass 
funeral-in-absentia prayers in Cairo, Karachi, Somalia and elsewhere. Zawahiri 
senses a new radical sympathy for al-Qaida. His best evidence for this 
development was the fact that the US government did not release pictures of Bin 
Laden dead, for fear of offending these very supporters of al-Qaida. Can we 
fault his logic? Zawahiri knows he is onto something: he scents fear in his 
enemy.

My hope is that before Zawahiri feels safe enough to relocate to an Arab 
country, the US armed forces will annihilate this adversary, too. In this 
video, he may have accidentally disclosed his location in either Afghanistan or 
Pakistan, among the Mullah Omar-supporting elements of the Taliban. Why else 
would he go out of his way to, again, publicly vow his allegiance to a rebel 
leader inAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>? This is 
significant because Zawahiri and Mullah Omar fell out after the former refused 
the orders of the latter on several instances – most notably before 9/11, when 
Mullah Omar called on Zawahiri not to attack America from Afghan soil. To 
maintain his presence among the Afghan Taliban networks, and become relevant 
anew after American forces begin to withdraw next month, Zawahiri renews his 
allegiance to Mullah Omar. If Zawahiri were in Yemen or Libya, Mullah Omar 
would be irrelevant.

Just as Zawahiri might have inadvertently given us his current location, he 
exposed his major weakness, too: the public relations damage done by al-Qaida 
operatives killing ordinary Muslims. He pleads with his jihadist followers not 
to kill Muslims in market places, as it is for Muslims and securing their 
rights, lifting oppression from them that he and others left their homes, 
migrated afar. One cannot help but detect a weariness in Zawahiri's tone and 
tenor: gone are the days of blaming America for falsely accusing al-Qaida of 
killing Muslims in Iraq. Zawahiri has de facto acknowledged the success of US 
efforts to cast his boss as a mass murderer, and the US government's constant 
public messaging about "al-Qaida having killed more innocent Muslims than 
anybody else".

But this sharpens their focus on al-Qaida's primary target: westerners, and 
Americans in particular. Zawahiri ends his tirade as he started it, with 
animated Arabic poetry. While we in the west may wonder about the utility of 
poetry in adulating Bin Laden or threatening America with another "hateful 
Tuesday" (a disgraceful reference to 9/11), Zawahiri knows that in Arab 
countries, poetry competitions are like the American musical show "American 
Idol" – his words will be remembered, his poetry admired and his message 
considered, if not received with some sympathy.

It is in this spirit of new-found confidence that Zawahiri offers his hand to 
work with Islamist organisations around the world. His brigades of violent 
Salafis in countries such as Egypt are already being courted by the likes of 
the current leadership of theMuslim Brotherhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/muslim-brotherhood> – much to the distaste 
and disapproval of their youth wing. In Gaza, Hamas condemned America for 
killing Bin Laden, and praised him as a "warrior and martyr". Such newfound 
love between Arab Islamists and al-Qaida's Salafists will not last long: 
Islamists are too worldly and opportunistic, pragmatic and power-hungry to 
follow al-Qaida to the battlefields of certain defeat. 

America cannot continue to be led by al-Qaida, as it was into Iraq and 
Afghanistan. As al-Qaida eyes up new territory, flirts with possible new allies 
and attempts to reach new audiences, so must America. In a newly shaped Arab 
world, America cannot be seen to be fussy about partnerships. When Hillary 
Clinton failed to meet with some of the revolutionary elements in Tunisia and 
Cairo, Zawahiri was only too pleased to chide her. The Arab world must mean 
more to America than just oil supply, counter-terrorism and garnering support 
for Israel. Arabs need America today more than ever. In their pursuit of 
developing national infrastructures, trade partners, educational institutions 
and free market economies, America can and must help. Let's see al-Qaida offer 
an alternative.
 