
ITV drama Broadchurch <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/broadchurch> 
won a hat-trick of Bafta television awards including best female actor for its 
star Olivia Colman, with the programme winning more prizes than the whole of 
BBC1 and BBC2 combined.

Colman, who made it three Bafta awards in two years, gave a tearful acceptance 
speech on Sunday night in which she paid tribute to the "fucking genius" of the 
show's creator, Chris Chibnall, and her co-star David Tennant: "Standing 
opposite you is a joy and a treat."

The acclaimed murder mystery, ITV's biggest hit since Downton Abbey and the 
most popular new midweek drama hit for a decade, also won best drama series and 
best supporting actor for David Bradley, who played newsagent Jack Marshall.

Chibnall, who has remade the show for the US and is currently working on the 
sequel, said he had the "greatest cast I could ever hope for as a writer. This 
means a lot to us".

ITV said last week that Tennant would join Colman in the second series, with 
Charlotte Rampling also due to join the cast.

But it was a bad night for the BBC in the ceremony at London's Theatre Royal, 
with the corporation losing out in a string of categories where it was fancied 
to win. BBC1 won two awards, for Sarah Lancashire's role in Sally Wainwright's 
drama Last Tango in Halifax and the Radio Times audience award, voted for by 
viewers, for the 50th anniversary episode of Doctor Who.

But BBC2 failed to win a single prize, with shows such as The Great British 
Bake-Off, which will switch to BBC1 later this year, and serial killer drama 
The Fall, starring Gillian Anderson, missing out. There were two awards for 
BBC3 – for supernatural drama In the Flesh and sitcom Him & Her: the Wedding.

But those awards were inevitably overshadowed by BBC director general Tony 
Hall's decision to axe the TV channel next year to help fund drama on BBC1. The 
BBC3 brand will survive online but with a much reduced budget.

The double win is likely to be seized on by BBC3's supporters as evidence that 
the channel should be saved. An online petition, Save BBC3, has so far gathered 
nearly 250,000 signatures.

Kenton Allen, chief executive of Him & Her producer Big Talk, said BBC3 was an 
"incredible creative hotbed of support and opportunity". He added: "I don't 
think winningBaftas <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/baftas> will stop 
it from moving online – it's a much bigger question – but I think winning among 
all this competition from terrestrial channels may make some people think 
again."

ITV and Channel 4 won eight awards each, with two awards for ITV's Anthony 
McPartlin and Declan Donnelly show Saturday Night Takeaway, and another double 
for Channel 4 sitcom The IT Crowd with prizes for two of its stars, Richard 
Ayaode and Katherine Parkinson.

Channel 4's Gogglebox, made up entirely of people watching TV, was another 
winner, as was Sean Harris, who won the leading actor prize for his role in 
Channel 4 drama Southcliffe.

Harris, who was at the centre of a storm around recent BBC1 drama Jamaica Inn 
after viewers complained that they could not understand the dialogue, made 
light of the incident, telling the audience as he accepted his award: "Try not 
to mumble, try and speak clearly."

Other Channel 4 wins included Olly Lambert's Dispatches programme, Syria: 
Across the Lines, and Guy Hibbert's spy drama Complicit, starring David 
Oyelowo, which won the single drama prize.

ITV's News at Ten coverage of the Woolwich attacks won the news prize, with 
the award dedicated to editor Bernard Cole, who died this month aged 49.

Another ITV programme, Long Lost Family, presented by Nicky Campbell and 
Davina McCall, beat BBC2's The Great British Bake-Off to the features award. 
Sky won three awards, including the specialist factual prize for David 
Attenborough's Natural History Museum Alive 3D, more than 50 years after the 
88-year-old presenter won his first Bafta.

BBC1's coverage of Andy Murray's historic Wimbledon win last year was beaten 
to the sports and live event award by Sky Sports' coverage of last summer's 
first Ashes Test between England and Australia.

The international award was won by Breaking Bad, the US series made by cable 
channel AMC which became a hit in the UK on video-on-demand service Netflix.

A sign of the changing way in which viewers watch television, it was up 
against another Netflix-only show, Kevin Spacey's House of Cards, along with 
acclaimed French drama The Returned, which aired on Channel 4 in the UK, and 
the last series of BBC4's Danish political thriller, Borgen.

Julie Walters was honoured with the Bafta fellowship, more than 30 years after 
her big break opposite Michael Caine in Educating Rita, since when she has gone 
on to win six Baftas.

Walters described it as a huge accolade. "It is still very hard for older 
women to get on television," she said. "I've been very lucky, sort of coming up 
with the baby boom generation, so there's a lot more women in television and 
running TV. There are more women writers and directors, so it is changing, but 
slowly."

Cilla Black received Bafta's special award in recognition of the Surprise, 
Surprise and Blind Date presenter's 50-year entertainment career.

The awards presenter, Graham Norton, who missed out despite two nominations 
for his Friday night chatshow, had a dig at Jeremy Clarkson after his recent 
N-word controversy, which saw the Top Gear presenter a final warning by BBC top 
brass. "Eeny, meeny, miny, moe, catch a tiger by the toe. Is it that hard?" 
asked Norton.
 