
It is on the world's largest lake, has hillsides that sprout fire, and the 
national game is nerd. This is Azerbaijan. Proud winner of Eurovision and 
proudly independent since 1991, Azerbaijan is probably where the Vikings came 
from, and definitely has the most mud volcanoes in the world. But a herdsman 
living 2km from the volcanoes had never heard of them.

Tourism is in its infancy here. You share your flight to the capital, Baku, 
with a load of oilmen. Sundry Nobels and Rothschilds helped found the world's 
first oil and gas industry here, and today you fly in over thousands of smudgy, 
nodding-donkey wells, and a city of rigs sitting in the lapis blue Caspian, 
some linked by causeways that look like Scalextric sets.

Baku has a pretty medieval core surrounded by an old city and a new one. Old 
Baku is elegant, with sturdy turreted and cupola'd stone buildings. New Baku is 
brash, boom-built and crowned by three almost-finished skyscrapers shaped like 
flames, for Azer means "fire". In between, there are rather a lot of concrete 
apartment blocks, gifts from the eastern bloc.

Tom Ford has three shops here; a babushka sells tomatoes from a doorway next 
to the Dior store; boys too young to shave drive around in Lamborghinis. Baku 
intends to become the Dubai of the Caspian, and its permissive atmosphere makes 
it more swingy than its neighbours. But oil money means Baku is pricey, so I 
head south, towards the border with Iran.

Azerbaijanis have two driving styles: dawdle or hurtle. Samir, our driver, 
does both on the way to the seaside city of Lenkoran. We detour to Qobustan 
national park, where ancient man left cave graffiti clearly showing the 
longships that led Thor Heyerdahl to trace his Viking roots here.

More of Thor later. There are no road signs to the mud volcanoes, nor are they 
marked on the map. We eventually find them up the roughest of tracks, where 
they squelch, grepse and fart in a lunar, Clanger world.
 Mud volcanoes in Qobustan. 
Back on the coast road, recumbent, rusting oil rigs and glamorously ruined 
Soviet-era factories give way to wetlands where men on horseback herd flocks of 
buffalo. The Soviet legacy of overworked Ladas and churches with Iced Gem roofs 
is evident, and the sense is of a peaceful, fertile land, where you show your 
wealth in the artistry and gleam of your zinc roof and the gold in your teeth. 
Flashy smiles are an Azerbaijani speciality, as is an irresistibly gallant form 
of hospitality.

By the end of the day, we've seen miles of vineyards, and tremendous birdlife, 
and beautiful women in fuschia headscarves tending fields of greens. There are
chaikhana(tea houses) every 500m, where the traditional offering of a pot of 
good tea and a bowl of jam is yours for amanat – less than a quid. Outside 
Baku, food is consistently delicious, and good value: Azerbaijani cuisine is a 
lovely mixture of Turkish, Iranian, Caucasian and Mongolian, characterised by 
impeccably fresh ingredients served in Brobdingnagian proportions.

Lenkoran is low-built and pretty, with Lada taxis a go-go, and a shoreline of 
charcoal sand. At Astara, close to the Iranian border, there are cloud forests, 
flower meadows, open-air roadside bread ovens, tea plantations and sheep 
sheltering in petrol stations. We wave across desultory barbed wire at bored 
border guards sheltering from the sub-tropical rain.

Azerbaijan was, in 1918, the world's first Islamic democracy. Though nominally 
Shia, the people have developed remarkable tolerance through millennia of 
invasions (Greeks, Romans, Arabs, Seljuks, Mongols, Arabs …) leavened with 120 
years of Soviet rule. Muslims, Christians, Jews and Zoroastrians live in peace 
here, and all communities seem very partial to a drink. A blight on this 
tolerance is the Armenian occupation of the Nagorno-Karabakh region in the 
west. Everyone I speak to is hurt and angered by this, and confused at the UN's 
refusal to intervene, despite four resolutions demanding an immediate, 
unconditional Armenian withdrawal.

After Lenkoran we have to retrace our route to Baku, as Azerbaijan is cleaved 
by huge, unspanned gorges and mountain ranges. Another day, and we're on our 
way north to Gabala. One of many ancient khanates (an area traditionally ruled 
by a Khan), it is now home to Gabala FC, managed by Tony Adams, ex of Arsenal 
and Engerland.

As we climb out of dusty Baku, the landscape gets greener and more wooded. In 
this Xanadu, wild horses nibble and gallop free, and we graze on tea and 
spoonfuls of carnelian cherry jam. There's a river called A Gazelle Cannot 
Cross It, and isolated villages whose zinc roofs are a mix of Mongol and 
Moorish styles. A mountainside of butcher's shops features adjoining penned 
flocks of sheep, in the local before-and-after style. High above, an eagle eyes 
us. At Vandam (cue Jean-Claude jokes) we drive through a magical pistachio 
forest, and here's the ancient mountain city of Gabala, which is roughly the 
size of Stroud. Swish hotel complexes cater for Bakuvians who come for the 
alpine air and views, and in one of these live Tony and his assistant, Gary 
Stevens.

Gabala FC attracts crowds of up to 300, and lies seventh in a league of 12 
teams. But Tony and Gary are upbeat optimism personified, and are enjoying the 
adventure and the anonymity. "They don't know me from Adam," says Tony, 
toasting Azerbaijan in sweet tea.

On to Shaki, ("Shaky" in football circles), while Samir talks music: Nazareth, 
Suzi Quatro and Shakatak are all Big in Baku.

In the charming hill village of Kish, the Albanian temple has been restored by 
the Norwegian government. Outside it, men are playing nerd, the local 
backgammon, and keeping score on an abacus, under a bust of Heyerdahl with the 
quotation: "Scandinavian mythology describes a god called Odin that came to 
northern Europe from a place called Azer. I have studied the writings and 
concluded that it is not mythology. It is real history and geography." By local 
legend a skeleton found underneath the temple showed these early Vikings to 
have been two metres tall, and blond with blue eyes.
 One man and his wolf in Shaki. 
The inhabitants of Shaki are short and dark, but wear very tall hats made of 
lambskin. Shaki is a glory: wooden and stone houses strung either side of a 
steep mountain river, a grand caravanserai-turned-scruffy hotel and a richly 
decorated khan's palace, outside of which a man with a stuffed wolf charges one 
manat to make the bulbs in its eyes flash weakly. Shaki is famous for its 
walnut and honey halva. A halva kitchen is called asexi.

We breakfast the following day in Shaki's market on chewy bread, rich butter, 
runny honey, salty cheese and thick cream. Next stop will be Ganja, home to 
Nizami Ganjavi, a 12th-century poet who wrote the story Majnun and Layla, a 
precursor to Romeo and Juliet.

Outside Ganja is the village of Hash. I can report that Ganja is smoking, as 
it is wedding season.Shadliq sarayi (palaces of joy) are banqueting suites 
where people stuff themselves silly and dance artfully. The bride and groom, 
tightly primped, are enthroned upon a flower-decked plinth. Azerbaijani 
hospitality being generous as it is, I am invited that night to Two Weddings 
and a Circumcision.

Our last excursion is to Quba, up near the Dagestan border. It lies on the 
banks of the Qudryalçay river and is everything you'd imagine a beautiful, 
remote Caucasus town to be, and more. Its left bank is a grid of low-built 
villas hung with cherry blossom and wisteria. There's a fascinating carpet 
workshop where you can have your photo woven into a rug, and a forest 
restaurant serving the bestlula (minced lamb) kebabs you will ever taste. 
Guba's right bank is even more remarkable.

This is Krasnaya Sloboda, or "red village", home to 3,500 Mountain Jews, whose 
forefathers came from Iran and Iraq a few thousand years ago, and who live 
today in perfect tranquillity. Rav Adam runs the yeshiva religious school and 
preaches tolerance and love to his skullcapped charges. In Soviet times one of 
the synagogues became a sock factory; now restored it commands a view of the 
wide river and the shiny mosque on the opposite bank.
 A wedding party at Ganja. 
Oil wealth means that Azerbaijan is developing fast, but outside Baku time is 
still a commodity to be spent freely on many small pleasures. Over many pots of 
tea, I muse that Azerbaijan isn't everyone's cuppa, but if you're an aficionado 
of post-industrial ruins, of amazing nature, of exotic headgear, of world 
history, of kind gentleness and wild strangeness, Azerbaijan will surely light 
your fire.

• This article was amended on 23 May 2011. The original contained a 
misspelling of Suzi Quatro. This has been corrected.
 