
I pay a legitimate commission. You pay a shady referral fee. He pays a bribe. 
Welcome to the fierce debate over the impending ban on referral fees in 
personal injury claims.

It has only added to the furore over the legal aid, sentencing and punishment 
of offenders bill 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/bills/cbill/2010-2012/0205/12205.i-v.html>
, which peers will start dissecting line by line on 20 December. Combined with 
the Jackson reforms to civil litigation costs in part 2 of the bill, new 
clauses 54 to 58, introduced in the Commons, will "reduce legal costs and 
speculative suing, so that businesses, schools and individuals can be less 
fearful of unnecessary claims encouraged by those looking for profit rather 
than justice", said the justice secretary, Ken Clarke.

But will it work? Despite pressure from his Labour predecessor, Jack Straw, 
the government has decided against making the payment or receipt of a referral 
fee a criminal offence. It recognises the difficulty of defining a referral fee 
in such a way that ensures less straightforward arrangements are caught and 
lead to a conviction beyond reasonable doubt.

Instead regulators such as the Solicitors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/solicitors> Regulation Authority, Bar 
Standards Board, Claims Management Regulator and Financial Services Authority 
will be required to monitor and enforce the ban (the government hasn't worked 
out how to catch unregulated people), giving more leeway to look behind 
arrangements to ascertain their true intention.

While there is some sense in this, it also feeds the perception that the ban 
is more about politics and being seen to clamp down on the "compensation 
culture". In part this is because the bill includes a crucial get-out clause. A 
payment will not be a referral fee if the regulated person can show it was 
"consideration for the provision of services or for another reason".

To defendant insurers, who believe they effectively pay for referral fees 
through the lawyers' costs they pay out, this is a gaping hole in the ban. For 
example, says insurance law firm Kennedys, law firms could pay a significant 
'membership fee' to be on a panel for non-injury legal work, and receive the 
injury cases in return for free.

Alternatively, law firms could pay their work referrers for services such as 
training, risk management assistance, commercial expertise and business 
consultancy. They could pay towards a referrer's marketing costs, or provide 
funds for the running of a jointly owned alternative business structure (ABS). 
Lawyers, after all, are trained to find these types of holes.

For Mark Boleat – the former Association of British Insurers chief who set up 
the Claims Management Regulator for the Ministry of Justice and now sits on the 
government's regulatory policy committee – the ban will turn an arrangement 
that is "currently reasonably transparent into something totally opaque".

In evidence last month to the transport select committee, which has looked at 
referral fees as part of its inquiry into motor insurance, he said: "By using 
introducers, solicitors are merely outsourcing part of what they would 
otherwise have to do themselves."

Boleat predicted that if referral fees are banned, solicitors – individually 
or collectively – will acquire claims management companies or employ claims 
farmers directly; solicitors will increase their own marketing spend; and when 
ABSs are introduced, the larger claims management businesses will acquire 
solicitors.

Further, referral fees would continue to be paid "but suitably disguised" – as 
he said happened when they were previously banned before 2004.

I sense little enthusiasm for enforcing the ban among legal regulators – I 
understand the Legal Services Board is cool on the idea, while the Solicitors 
Regulation Authority argued for it to be a criminal offence, probably as much 
out of self-interest as anything else.

But passions will soon be running high when the government moves on to the 
level of solicitors' fees in personal injury cases, as it has committed to do. 
Should they come down once referral fees are banned? There is little gain to 
the system if they do not, but every other business includes marketing/the cost 
of acquisition in its charges. And what about those solicitors who do not pay 
referral fees now – why should they be penalised?

Banning referral fees will undoubtedly be difficult. But expect blood on the 
floor when it comes to renegotiating lawyers' fees.

Neil Rose is the editor of www.legalfutures.co.uk 
<http://www.legalfutures.co.uk>
 