
Banks were better but miners missed out as leading shares moved higher ahead 
of Wednesday's US Federal Reserve meeting.

The FTSE 100 finished 43.72 points higher at 6374.21 as investors awaited 
comments from Fed chairman Ben Bernanke which they hoped would clarify its 
intentions regarding its $85bn a month bond buying programme. Central bank 
actions to stimulate the global economy have been supporting the markets for 
months, but comments in May from Bernanke suggesting an end could be in sight 
sent shivers through investors.

As well as the anticipation for Bernanke's press conference, there was early 
talk that China may ease its policy by cutting the reserve requirement ratio - 
the amount of capital banks have to set aside in case of financial trouble - in 
the next day or so. New comments from Mario Draghi, the head of the European 
Central Bank, that it was "ready to act" where needed also helped sentiment.

Among the banks, HSBC ended 14.5p higher at 696p after Citigroup raised its 
recommendation from neutral to buy. It said:
 A potential beneficiary of rising rates, and an attractive income stock, we 
upgrade HSBC [with a] target price of 770p.

Royal Bank of Scotland rose 7p to 323p and Lloyds Banking Group was lifted 
0.88p to 62.18p.

Whitbread was the top riser in the FTSE 100. The Costa Coffee and Premier Inn 
business jumped 106p to £30.31 aftera well-received trading statement. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2013/jun/18/poor-british-weather-sales-whitbread-restaurants>

Easyjet added 27p to £12.79 on news of an $11bn Airbus order. The deal needs 
shareholder approval but is likely to face opposition from founder Sir Stelios 
Haji-Ioannou.

Vodafone climbed 1.65p to 184.35p despite US group Liberty Global making an 
offer for its bid target Kabel Deutschland, raising the prospect of a takeover 
battle.

RSA Insurance ended 2.6p higher at 120.4p, lifted by news that Credit Suisse 
has moved from neutral to outperform and raised its price target from 125p to 
138p. The bank said:
 Having been a long-term neutral on RSA, our decision to turn more positive 
reflects our belief that earnings are poised to improve following what has been 
an extended period of stagnation. 
But miners were heading lower as metal prices fell ahead of the Fed news, and 
on continuing worries about China's economic growth.Eurasian Natural Resources 
Corporation fell 10.7p to 229.6p while Antofagasta dropped 17.5p to 879p.

Aggreko lost 39p to £17.52 as the temporary power supply company said it was 
on track to meet first half expectations although trading remained subdued. 
Last year the company issued two profit warnings, but now says forecasts for 
the year are unchanged with a pickup in the second half expected.

Security group G4S, where Bill Gates was recently revealed as a shareholder, 
dipped 3.1p to 241.7p after Goldman Sachs issued a sell recommendation and cut 
its target price from 200p to 194p. The move was made to take into account 
recent movements in emerging market currencies, and has led to the bank 
reducing its earnings estimate forG4S <https://www.theguardian.com/business/g4s>
 by 3% for 2013.

One of the day's biggest fallers is software company SDL, down nearly a third 
after a profit warning. But analysts said the slump could leave it vulnerable 
to a takeover.

SDL, which sells licences for translation software as well as consulting and 
language services, said full year profits would be between £15m and £20m due to 
slowing sales. Analysts had been expecting around £30m profit, according to 
Thomson Reuters estimates.

Its shares, which were already down 25% this year, dropped 115.5p to 271p, 
making it the biggest loser in the FTSE 250. Alexandra Jarvis at Peel Hunt 
issued a sell note, saying:
 Another, and very material, profits warning from SDL, reflecting sales 
underperformance across the business, higher investment and margin pressure. 
The turnaround strategy may be on track according to management, but it will be 
some time before there is clear evidence of this. 
Milan Radia at Jefferies raised the prospect of a bid:
 SDL has acquired some leading vendors in sought-after technology segments, 
which we believe renders the company a takeover target in its own right. We are 
minded to retain our buy rating post this profit warning, backing management's 
ability to execute its way through the current phase.

But Aveva added 121p to £23.73 after Citigroup issued a positive note on the 
IT systems company. The bank moved from neutral to buy with a £24.50 price 
target, saying:
 Aveva has seen a subdued performance year to date, admittedly after a strong 
2012, meaning it has de-rated by around 10% and this is despite the recently 
announced special dividend of 147p. Whilst we accept the shares are not cheap, 
trading on a calendarised PE of 23 times 2014 earnings, Aveva remains to our 
mind a quality business with a strong market position with the potential for 
good upside to our 2015 and 2016 earnings per share if it can gain traction 
with its E3D software.

Lower down the market, One Media iP, a specialist in music and video 
intellectual property rights which joined Aim in April, climbed nearly 7% to 
9.875p after unveiling a 28% rise in profits to £262,180. The company also 
announced the acquisition of a number of video catalogues, including episodes 
of TV series The Adventures of Skippy, a 1990s sequel to the original programme 
about a bush kangaroo.

Finally Coms, the Aim-listed telephony business, rose nearly 5% to 2.7p on 
trader talk of further contracts in the pipeline. On Friday the company 
confirmed a previously announced deal worth around £15m over two years was with 
outsourcing group Mitie, and involved delivering broadband services to housing 
tenants. Dealers expect a contract of a similar size with another business to 
be unveiled before long.
 