
Andrés Iniesta <https://www.theguardian.com/football/andres-iniesta> will 
always be a hero to Barcelona and Spain fans but some had started to question 
whether the 30-year-old’s best days were behind him.

The playmaker’s outrageous skills were on full display again on Tuesday, 
however, as he cut through theParis Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> midfield and released 
Neymar in front of goal to put Barça 1-0 ahead in the 14th minute of their 
Champions League quarter-final, second leg.

Already leading 3-1 from last week’s first leg in Paris, Neymar’s goal, the 
first of a double in a 2-0 win for Barça on the night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/21/barcelona-paris-saint-germain-champions-league-match-report>
, effectively killed off PSG’s chances of a comeback.

The Catalan giants eased through to the last four for the seventh time in 
eight seasons and a record 11th time in the Champions League era.

Iniesta’s stunning slalom in the buildup to the opening goal brought the home 
fans at the Camp Nou to their feet.

Receiving the ball from the centre-back Javier Mascherano deep in the Barça 
half with his back to the PSG goal, a clever feint took Iniesta past the 
advancing midfielder Yohan Cabaye.

The forward Edinson Cavani attempted to rob the ball but Iniesta simply 
motored past him before a burst of pace took him away from midfielder Marco 
Verratti’s desperate lunge.

Advancing on the retreating PSG backline, Iniesta waited until the perfect 
moment before threading a pass between the defenders and Neymar took the ball 
around the PSG goalkeeper Salvatore Sirigu and poked it into the empty net.

It was only a third assist of the season for Iniesta in the Champions League, 
while he has made none in La Liga and two in the Copa del Rey as Barça chase a 
treble of trophies to match their historic haul from 2009 under Pep Guardiola.

“I was never away but some people see things one way and others another,” 
Iniesta said.

“I always try to do things well,” he added. “I am very happy with the way 
everything is working out. I think you can always improve everything.”

Barça will learn who their opponents in the last four are in Friday’s draw, 
with Bayern Munich already through after they crushed Porto on Tuesday.

The holders Real Madrid host Atlético Madrid later on Wednesday with the city 
rivals locked at 0-0, while the Italian champions Juventus have a 1-0 advantage 
when they play at Ligue 1 side Monaco.
 