
Banks were among the leading fallers as the market ended the week on a 
downbeat note.

Investors, already nervous ahead of the European stress tests next week, 
deserted the sector following results from Citigroup and Bank of America which 
showed falling second quarter revenues, with both reporting a drop in 
investment banking profits.Barclays closed 15.7p lower at 284.65p, on worries 
about the implications for its Barclays Capital division. Lloyds Banking Group 
lost 2.29p to 59.61p andRoyal Bank of Scotland fell 1.49p to 43.71p after Bruce 
Packard at Seymour Pierce issued a sell note on both banks. He expressed 
concern that pressure to boost earnings ahead of an early sale of the UK 
government's stakes in Lloyds and RBScould damage the longer term outlook 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/marketforceslive/2010/jul/16/bp-barclay>. 

So after a bright start the FTSE 100 finished 52.44p lower at 5158.85, not 
helped by a 190 point fall on Wall Street by the time London closed. On top of 
the banking results, the US market was hit by news of a third consecutive 
monthly fall in consumer prices and a consumer confidence survey which hit an 
11 month low.

The fall in the FTSE would have been worse if not for BP, up 5.4p to 407.15p 
as its cap on the Gulf of Mexico oil spill seemed to be working.

Invensys, the engineering and technology group added 3.5p to 265.3p after UBS 
raised its recommendation from neutral to buy ahead of a trading update at the 
end of the month. The bank said:

[The company's] 20% share price underperformance versus the UK capital goods 
sector in three months, combined with the emerging upside in the controls 
division, has prompted us to upgradeInvensys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/invensys> to buy. Leading indicators in 
controls suggest 2011 is shaping out to be a decent year – we estimate 14% 
reported revenue growth versus management guidance of 5-8%. This suggests 5% 
upgrades to group consensus. While not huge upside, this may be enough to 
reverse recent underperformance.

But Rio Tinto fell 25.5p to £30.05 as Credit Suisse cast new doubts on its 
planned iron ore joint venture withBHP Billiton, down 13p at 1811.5p. The bank 
said:

We caught up with a stalwart of the Australian competition regulatory scene to 
discuss the regulatory approvals the joint venture faces. Overall he was 
doubtful [it] would be approved by the European Commission, Australian 
Competition and Consumer Commission and other global regulators. If we take the 
advice we got literally, it is just a matter of timing when this joint venture 
falls over and BHP and Rio are left to their own devises in the Pilbara [region 
of western Australia]. Although the significant synergies would be lost, it 
would make Rio a clear relative winner against its Anglo-Australian peer. Rio 
is progressing plans for the medium-term expansion of its already superior iron 
ore business and its other capital expenditure projects are viewed positively 
by the market (especially Oyu Tolgoi), and even with earnings downgrades from 
lower iron ore prices, Rio would be attractively valued. Meanwhile on BHP's 
horizon would be a more expensive iron ore expansion, ongoing uncertainty about 
its Gulf of Mexico business and a greenfield potash project that not everyone 
is convinced of.

Experian, the credit information company, was unchanged at 649p following news 
that chief operating officer Chris Callero had sold £872,000 worth of shares at 
648p each, following an upbeat trading statement yesterday.

Among the mid-caps Dana Petroleum rose 67p to £14.83 after a positive drilling 
update and amid speculation its board was meeting this weekend to discuss the 
preliminary bid approach from Korea National Oil Corporation.

Telecity, the data centre company, continued to climb on takeover talk, up 
another 16.7p to 420p. ButCandover Investments, the private equity firm, fell 
31p to 654p after it said talks about a potential takeover had ended. Traders 
said the bidder was thought to be Canadian pension fund Alberta Investment 
Management Company.

Taylor Wimpey dropped 1.38p to 26.09p as Morgan Stanley pointed to growing 
uncertainty in the housing market, as changes to the planning system began to 
delay some development projects.

Aquarius Platinum dropped 45.5p to 256p as it revealed an instruction from 
South African mine inspectors to change certain codes of practice, which would 
affect two of the company's operations.

Finally shares in Paypoint, the electronic payment group, jumped 86.5p to 350p 
after a provisional decision preventing lottery operator Camelot from offering 
services such electronic fund transfers and mobile phone top-ups through its 
terminals. Paypoint said such a move would have distorted competition in the 
sector.
 