
"You would like a taxi to the valley of death?" said the hotel receptionist. 
There was a long silence. "OK," she said. "What do you want the driver to do 
when you get there?" I told her. She looked at me as if I were mad.

I was in the tiny port of Balaclava in the south-west of Ukraine's Crimea 
peninsula, a few miles from the valley where, on 25 October 1854, the Light 
Brigade made its suicidal horseback charge at the Russian artillery.

Five days earlier, I'd flown with my rucksack into Simferopol, capital of the 
autonomous republic of Crimea, an hour out of Kiev, itself three hours from 
London. I'd been attracted by a passing interest in the complicated 
19th-century war Britain fought there, and by the prospect of cheap independent 
travel and some late summer sun. In that at least I wasn't alone. Russians and 
Ukranians flock here for their summer holidays, reliving childhood memories of 
an era when foreign travel was impossible, and this was the most exotic place 
on earth.

Just an hour and a half after buying a £1.50 bus ticket at Simferopol, I was 
strolling along the beachfront at the spa town of Evpatoria, before heading 
into the medieval maze of the old town. I rounded off the morning with a 40p 
lunch of borscht and meatballs in one of the stolovayas, the ubiquitous 
canteens offering stodgy cut-price meals.

After an afternoon on the public beach, I meandered past the seafront 
restaurants, bars and the shooting stalls where proud fathers were helping 
their young sons get to grips with imitation Kalashnikovs.

Next stop was Sevastopol; still, thanks to its deep bay and easily defended 
harbour, home to Russia's Black Sea fleet, and, until the mid-90s, a "closed 
city" surrounded by military checkpoints. I did make it into town – but every 
hotel was booked up.

In desperation, I decamped on a local bus to Balaclava, 10 miles south. During 
the Soviet era, Balaclava was so militarily sensitive it didn't feature on 
maps. But in September it was an absolutely stunning little place, nestling in 
steep hills. Opposite the glitzy marina, which – despite the town's exclusive 
reputation – was lined with plenty of pleasant and reasonably priced bars and 
restaurants (I had borscht, pizza and ice-cream) was the reason for all that 
cold war secrecy: a former Soviet submarine base hidden away inside the 
hillside. Now a naval museum, its seemingly endless damp-smelling corridors and 
the engineering stations and dry dock hewn out of the rock were both impressive 
and grim.

The next day, I took the marshrutka back into Sevastopol. The area was once 
settled by Greeks, whose style has been enthusiastically adopted by local 
architects over the years, giving the city a Greek-classical air. The Moskva 
warship, flagship of the Russian Black Sea fleet sat ominously in the harbour. 
Before lunch, I walked up to the hill in the city's south, to see the stunning 
Sevastopol Panorama, a massive 360-degree painting depicting the 1855 Battle of 
Sevastopol. After lunch (a beer and a hotdog in a waterside park), I hopped on 
a boat east to Inkerman, to visit the bizarre and beautiful cave monastery of 
St Clements.

And so, the next day, to the valley of death. Ilbruce, my taxi driver, turned 
up but didn't know where it was. The vague instructions in my guidebook didn't 
help. The hotel's security guard was stumped. And the receptionist. It was 
Ilbruce who suggested looking it up online in the back office. So with a 
hastily printed map, off we set.

We found the main Russian monument to the Crimean war dead and stopped to take 
some pictures. Then we drove a short distance back towards Balaclava and turned 
off into a vineyard, to find a small white marble monument commemorating the 
Light Brigade. Then on foot, we toiled on for 15 minutes in the late summer 
heat across the valley of death itself.

It wasn't much of a valley, more of a dip in the rolling hills but we climbed 
on up the north side until we stood where the Russian soldiers would have shot 
at the cavalry charging past. I handed my video camera to the hapless Ilbruce, 
opened my book and read outAlfred, LordTennyson's immortal lines 
<http://www.poetryarchive.org/poetryarchive/singlePoem.do?poemId=1570>:

… Theirs not to reason why,

Theirs but to do and die;

Into the valley of Death

Rode the six hundred. Only a light, warm wind answered.

• Ukraine International Airlines (flyuia.com <http://www.flyuia.com>) flies 
Gatwick-Simferopol via Kiev from £240 return. The Ukraina Hotel (+380 652 
510165,ukraina-hotel.biz <http://www.ukraina-hotel.biz>; doubles from £52) in 
Simferopol is a big, old hotel in the city centre. In Evpatoria, Dolce Vita 
(+380 656 960729,dolcevitacrimea.com <http://www.dolcevitacrimea.com>) has 
apartments from £20. Supposedly the hotel of choice for oligarchs visiting 
Balaclava, the Dakkar Hotel (+380 692 637763,dakkar-resort.com 
<http://www.dakkar-resort.com>) has lovely double rooms from £37
 