
Pressure is mounting on the agriculture minister, Barnaby Joyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/barnaby-joyce>, to toughen up 
federal legislation to stop greyhounds from being exported after an 
investigation uncovered appalling conditions faced by many animals sent to Asia.

The rules of racing imposed by the industry body, Greyhounds Australasia (GA), 
prohibits the export of greyhounds unless they have a permit, known as a 
passport. Passports are issued only if export countries meet Australian animal 
welfare standards.

But there is no federal legislation that makes their export illegal, and GA 
can issue passports only to breeders, trainers and exporters who are members of 
its industry body.

In exposing cruelty in greyhound racing, did the ABC need to promote 
activists' shock tactics? | Eleanor Robertson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/17/in-exposing-cruelty-in-greyhound-racing-did-the-abc-need-to-promote-activists-shock-tactics>
A joint investigation by Animals Australia and the ABC’s 7.30 program, aired 
on Wednesday, found that despite the rulesscores of animals are being sent to 
Asia <http://www.abc.net.au/7.30/content/2015/s4369266.htm> where they risk 
mistreatment and death.

Freedom of information documents obtained by the ABC show that nearly 170 
animals were sent to the Middle East and Asia between January and August this 
year.

“With little or no animal welfare laws to protect them in these countries, 
greyhounds are routinely injured, mistreated and finally killed when they are 
no longer profitable,” the Greens senator Lee Rhiannon said. “The export ban 
announced by Greyhounds Australasia in 2013 has become a farce, with routine 
breaches and little or no enforcement effort. Breeders and trainers who ignore 
the ban and export dogs to prohibited countries don’t even risk a slap on the 
wrist.”

Heather Neil, chief executive of the RSPCA, said: “At the Canidrome in Macau, 
where 700 Australian greyhounds currently reside, 20% to 30% of the dogs are 
injured at any one time and on average 30 are killed every month. Greyhounds 
are also being exported to China where greyhound racing is an illegal practice.

 “I have seen first-hand the conditions Australian greyhounds face at the 
Canidrome in Macau and it is nothing short of appalling. No animal should ever 
be subjected to that level of confinement or risk of injury and death.”

Greyhounds Australia has blamed the federal government, saying the industry 
was unable to enforce its rules.

“For the GA passport scheme to be effective, it requires government regulatory 
change,” the chief executive officer, Scott Parker, said. “While additional 
export controls add to regulatory burden, GA submits that the additional 
requirements are appropriate and necessary to safeguard animal welfare.

Breeders and trainers who ignore the ban and export dogs to prohibited 
countries don’t even risk a slap on the wrist
Greens senator Lee Rhiannon 
“Since 2005 GA has sought federal government intervention to stop the 
exportation of Australian greyhounds to destinations where that movement would 
be contrary to the greyhound’s best interests and the interests of the industry.

“In August 2014 GA wrote to [Joyce] seeking his personal commitment to 
strengthening commonwealth export control legislation to minimise the current 
risk to the welfare of Australian greyhounds and to Australia’s reputation as a 
responsible live animal exporter.

“The minister noted the federal government’s focus on removing regulation 
where possible and that they were not prepared to impose additional regulation 
without evidence of market failure and efforts by industry to resolve problems 
first.

“The government’s reluctance to act on industry and community concerns risks 
adverse welfare outcomes for exported greyhounds and threatens Australia’s 
standing as a strong advocate for animal welfare.”


Greyhounds Australasia has joined animal rights groups, Labor, the Greens and 
some independents asking Joyce to change the federal export control order to 
stop the export of greyhounds to countries that do not meet Australian welfare 
safeguards.

“The government could move to make the passport system mandatory for all 
exporters, but Barnaby Joyce won’t have a bar of it,” the opposition 
agriculture spokesman, Joel Fitzgibbon, said.

Rhiannon said: “Joyce must realise that this violates the common standards of 
decency that his constituents would expect. He needs to quickly intervene and 
give the export ban some legislative teeth.

“Dogs will continue to suffer until the industry export ban is enshrined in 
federal law and rigorously enforced.”

A spokesman for Joyce told Guardian Australia that the minister would continue 
to work with the industry on regulation, but rejected calls to make the 
passport system mandatory.


“State and territory governments are responsible for regulating the domestic 
greyhound racing industry,” the spokesman said. “The Australian government’s 
role is limited under the Export Control (Animals) Orders 2004 to issuing 
export permits and health certificates that assure the animal will meet the 
importing country requirements and export legislation.

Queensland to review greyhound industry after live-baiting revelations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/02/queensland-to-review-greyhound-industry-after-live-baiting-revelations>
“Once exported dogs reach their destination, they come under the jurisdiction 
of the importing country.

“The Australian government is committed to ensuring animals are exported in a 
manner consistent with community expectation, however the government does not 
have confidence that the regulatory model proposed by industry would address 
the welfare concerns as intended.

“Given the potential for exported animals to be further re-exported, it would 
be problematic for government to adopt the industry proposed passport system to 
regulate greyhound exports, or to simply ban exports to nations deemed 
unacceptable by animal welfare groups.”


Rhiannon and the independent MP Andrew Wilkie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-wilkie> want an end to 
greyhound racing altogether.

“If the federal government genuinely cared about improving animal welfare they 
would have shut this industry down a long time ago,” Wilkie said. “Let’s hope 
that the federal minister listens to the enormous public outcry this time and 
acts immediately to end the cruelty.”

The greyhound racing industry is still smarting from revelations that emerged 
earlier in the year about theuse of live animals to train greyhounds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/17/greyhound-racing-live-baiting-allegations-devastating-for-industry>
.


Several jurisdictions launched statewide investigations into the practice.
 