
A digital video distributor backed by ex-Endemol chief Peter Bazalgette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/peter-bazalgette> has signed a deal with 
leading independent producer All3Media International.

Founded by Kelvin Mackenzie's son Ashley, myvideorights.com turns programmes 
into saleable clips for websites.

The company reformats and sells short extracts from shows to online publishers 
such as Bauer, which runs popular sites such as Heatworld.com.

Ashley MacKenzie has invested around £1m creating a technical platform that 
allows content makers to generate revenue from their back catalogue of 
programmes.

MacKenzie said his research has found that most programme-makers have neither 
the time, nor the manpower to focus on making money out of selling short clips 
of their shows to the expanding online market.

Instead their content turns up on video-sharing websites, with none of the 
profits made going back to those who created or appeared in the original TV 
shows.

MacKenzie said that advertisers were loathe to have their brand associated 
with sites that aired clips that were pirated or not cleared for rights.

All the content his company provides has been cleared and edited and encoded 
to make it easy to upload.

He and his team then target the online publishers they think will like certain 
clips.

"We're constantly talking to people on sites so we know the kind of things 
FHM.com or the Telegraph TV, for example, want," MacKenzie said.

 "We think we add value to producers and to the licencees - we're business to 
business, it's not in our business plan to become consumer-focused though you 
can never say never," he added.

"We think there is a clear progression towards shutting down piracy and 
allowing people who've invested in content to reap the rewards back."

Myvideorights.com's board members include Bazalgette, Sun columnist Kelvin 
MacKenzie and former Carlton content chief executive Rupert Dilnott-Cooper.

The company is Bazalgette's first major investment since he left Big Brother 
makerEndemol <https://www.theguardian.com/media/endemol> earlier this year.

He said he wanted to build up a portfolio of digital investments. "When you 
make an investment you look for a good idea and the digital distribution of 
video rights is a growth area." Bazalgette added.

The All3Media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media> programmes 
myvideorights.com is already working on editing and selling include the ITV 
documentary Guarding the Queen.

MacKenzie said his company makes its money via a pay per view model, 
underpinned with minimum guarantees for clients.

All3Media International managing director Louise Pedersen said: "Our decision 
to partner with myvideorights.com is a step towards ensuring control of where 
our content will be published and in what context, and we are delighted to be 
working with them."

· To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 