
The BBC wants Jonathan Ross's agent Addison Cresswell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/addison-cresswell> to be its answer to Simon 
Cowell on a new Graham Norton talent show.

Mr Cresswell, who brokered Ross's controversial £18m three-year deal with the 
corporation, has been approached to be one of the judges on the Saturday night 
show, provisionally titled Saturday Showdown.

He has a reputation as one of the industry's toughest negotiators and 
represents Ross, Jack Dee and Lee Evans at his Off The Kerb talent agency.

In an ironic twist, Mr Cresswell has hired Richard Allen-Turner of rival 
talent agency Avalon to negotiate the deal with theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>.

Mr Cresswell's list of personal demands include a £1,000-a-show costume 
budget, consultation and veto over the other judges and all the contestants, 
script approval and an executive producer credit.

"He said he had been approached to do a new Graham Norton talent show and 
would I act as his agent? I said why not, just for a laugh," said Mr 
Allen-Turner.

"I think Addison thought it was just a bit of fun, but part of him is probably 
a bit intrigued as well," he added.

"It is actually quite a sensitive situation. He does a lot of business with 
the BBC and probably feels a bit awkward because he wouldn't want to do 
anything to jeopardise that relationship. It will be interesting to see what 
happens."

One producer working on the BBC show said in an email to Mr Cresswell that he 
would be "fantastic" as one of three on-screen judges.

"I'm convinced you could be a riot and I'd genuinely like you to consider 
doing the show. You don't need to be an expert in [variety acts], instead we 
want your succinct opinion (pre and post watershed!) about their abilities."

Mr Cresswell's other personal demands - presumably at least partly tongue in 
cheek - include a star dressing room, a personal driver with Mercedes and car 
parking space in the middle of TV Centre, personal make-up in his dressing room 
("will not attend general make-up room") and a personal publicist, James 
Herring.

Saturday Showdown is the latest Saturday night talent show format for BBC1, 
after Strictly Come Dancing, Strictly Dance Fever and How Do You Solve a 
Problem Like Maria?.

Norton is also hosting a Maria follow-up, Any Dream Will Do, to find cast 
members for a West End production of Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor 
Dreamcoat.

ITV1 has also commissioned a theatre-related talent show looking for actor 
wannabes to play Danny and Sandy in a new production of Grease.

The show launches early next month and is being made by Simon Cowell's 
production company, Syco, and Talkback Thames - the team behind The X Factor.

Mr Cowell is also making another reality talent format for ITV1 next year, 
Britain's Got Talent, after the success of America's Got Talent in the US.

Unlike the ITV show, which will invite all comers of any age to take part, 
Saturday Showdown will feature exclusively professional acts from Britain and 
America.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 