
The BBC is to go ahead with the scheduled transmission on Easter Sunday of the 
BBC1 single drama The No 1 Ladies' Detective Agency in spite of the sudden 
death of its director and co-writerAnthony Minghella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthonyminghella>.

A BBC source confirmed that discussions were currently taking place between the
BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> and Minghella's family over an 
"appropriate" way to pay tribute to the Oscar-winning director of The English 
Patient as part of the broadcast.

Minghella co-wrote The No 1 Ladies' Detective Agency with writer and 
anti-poverty campaigner Richard Curtis and also directed the film which was 
based on Alexander McCall Smith's books about Botswanan detective Precious 
Ramotswe. Recently the BBC confirmed that it is committed to co-producing six 
further episodes with US cable network HBO.

Tributes continued to pour in for the director, who has died at the age of 54 
from a haemorrhage after last week undergoing an operation on a growth in his 
neck.

Mark Shivas, the former BBC head of drama and the executive producer of 
Minghella's first major directing success, Truly Madly Deeply, which was 
developed as a TV project by the corporation then given a theatrical film 
release in 1991, said he was "devastated" at the death of a man he described as 
a "friend and colleague".

He told MediaGuardian.co.uk: "He was wonderful with people and actors. I 
remember his truly sweet nature his incredible ability to charm people to get 
them to do things.

"He had a sweetness, which was not sentimental but had a warmth which is 
perhaps rare in a number of British directors and writers."

Shivas said that he hired Minghella to direct his script for Truly Madly 
Deeply despite his lack of experience directing feature length dramas at the 
time.

Previously Shivas had worked with Minghella on the 1986 Channel 4 drama What 
If It's Raining, as well as on the puppet series Storyteller, made with Muppets 
creator Jim Henson in the late 1980s.

"His death is a great loss to British directing and to the world," added 
Shivas. "I would like to think Truly Madly Deeply was a risk which worked – it 
was the one of the things about the BBC then, and maybe now, that it could take 
those kind of risks."

BBC Fiction controller Jane Tranter said: "Everybody at the BBC was very upset 
to hear of Anthony's death. It is a huge shock to us all and our thoughts are 
with his family at this terrible time.

"The work he had recently completed on The No. 1 Ladies' Detective Agency was 
quintessentially Anthony – epic but personal, thought provoking but 
entertaining, edgy but with a strong moral heart and warmth. He was one of the 
UK's finest writing and directing talents and he will be sorely missed."

Alan Yentob, the BBC's creative director who commissioned Truly Madly Deeply 
when he was BBC2 controller, added: "This is a terrible shock. Anthony was not 
only a wonderful film-maker but also a great champion of British cinema, an 
elegant advocate for the craft and a marvellous mentor for new talent. This 
news is hard to take for all of us, and especially his family."

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 