
Shiny new football-themed commercials are part of the joy of big tournaments 
in my view – the superannuated ex-stars carrying away wheelbarrow loads of 
money probably feel the same. But forEuro 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro2012>, they seem to have been in 
short supply, with Nivea For Men, the England team's "official moisturiser" one 
of the few being advertised heavily on ITV. It features Paul Ince, David 
Seaman, and Terry Venables – presumably to evoke warm fuzzy feelings about Euro 
'96 which we will then associate with the face cream. I think that's how Proust 
reckoned these things work.

Despite this disappointment, though, ITV goes into the next phase of the Euros 
holding a narrow lead over theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> in 
the battle for the hearts and minds of Britain's couch potatoes.

While the BBC has stuck pretty rigidly to the cast of pundits familiar to us 
from Match Of The Day – Lee Dixon, Mark Lawrenson, et al (Both Als actually, 
Shearer and Hansen) – ITV has taken a chance by digging slightly deeper into 
what one hesitates to call the talent pool, and has been rewarded with the 
refreshingly outspoken analysis ofJamie Carragher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/jamie-carragher>.

Carragher is the only pundit on either channel with recent experience of 
England manager Roy Hodgson's training methods, having played under him during 
the coach's ill-starred, short-lived spell in charge of Liverpool. The 
centre-back does not give his former boss a favourable review.

When fellow pundit Gareth Southgate marvelled at what Hodgson had achieved 
with England after just three matches and 10 training sessions, Carragher 
commented drily: "Yeah, 10 training sessions that were probably not all that 
different." He made the point that the experienced players at Liverpool did not 
appreciate Hodgson drilling his requirements into them over and over.

Plain speaking of this kind is not common currency from the analysts' chairs. 
In the land of the mealy-mouthed, only Sky punditGary Neville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gary-neville>, whose presence at this 
tournament is restricted to reaction shots of the England bench, consistently 
calls a spade a shovel. (Interestingly, Neville too was ITV's discovery, having 
been drafted in as a pundit when injury kept him from the 2002 World Cup.)

Joining Carragher in ITV's impressive studio overlooking Warsaw's Castle 
Square is Roy Keane, who once promised he would never take the easy punditry 
pound and thus forfeits any respect; the spiky Gordon Strachan, one of the few 
modern-day managersto make it into books of quotes 
<http://www.metro.co.uk/sport/football/756336-gordon-strachans-greatest-quotes> 
("This sounds like a daft question, Gordon, but you'll be happy to get your 
first win under your belt won't you?" "It is a daft question, you're spot 
on."); and Roberto Martinez, Wigan's young manager, whose knowledge of world 
football is unimpeachable.

Against this, the BBC set-up in Salford with the usual suspects – plus 
Holland's Clarence Seedorf – looks a little prosaic.

The BBC's Gary Lineker, however, remains a more comfortable skipper than the 
opposition'sAdrian Chiles <https://www.theguardian.com/media/adrian-chiles>, 
whose chummy Brummie (all right, Black Country) banter wears thin over an 
evening. Also, I may be reading too much into this, but it seems to me as 
though the presenter is trying just a little too hard to be Keane's best 
friend, and Keano is not having any. (Forget him, Adrian, he's not worth it.)

The denizens of the commentary box have more or less all irritated in equal 
measure although, if my twitterfeed is anything to go by, it is the 
co-commentators who are attracting the most scorn. One correspondent borrowed 
John Cleese's famous line, stating "the bleedin' obvious," to describe the role 
of second banana in the box, giving a particularly dishonourable mention to the 
BBC's Mark Bright.

The sad truth for ITV, though, is whatever it does now will be irrelevant when 
it goes head-to-head with the BBC in the knock-out stages. Viewers always feel 
somehow safer with the public service broadcaster and frankly don't want 
commercials. I, however, prefer them to more of the BBC's little travelogues, 
and don't feel overly hassled by them. After nearly a week of solid football on 
ITV, I still haven't been tempted by McDonalds' new cheese 'n' bacon striker.
 