
Reading a bedtime story when you've still got a hangover is hard. My youngest 
keeps looking at me as I pause, my tongue tripping on the simplest of words, my 
monosyllabic tone dulling the cheerful premise of the story.

At the end of John Burningham's Would You Rather? – in which a little boy has 
to choose between brilliant, sometimes risky but always thrilling scenarios – I 
ask myself this: "Would you rather leave the bar with friends and get the tube 
home at a reasonable hour or stay out half the night and get so drunk you have 
to ask the taxi driver to open your front door?"

The previous day at 5pm, at a members club of which I am not a member, I think 
about going home. I have been drinking since midday, and I barely know the 
people sitting opposite me. The friend I met for lunch has long since gone.

I am supposed to meet another friend for a couple of drinks in a pub round the 
corner before returning home. I ring her and say I can't get a babysitter, 
which is rubbish considering that R has been looking after the children all day.

At the club, I keep getting up to leave, but when I finally move I only make 
it as far as the roof terrace, where I scrounge a cigarette and talk, 
uninvited, to a man and a woman holding hands at a table. I tell them about my 
feelings of guilt over someone on the tube who had been begging for money 
earlier that day.

"I just want to know why nobody looks up? Why are we always so scared to make 
eye contact?"

"Did you give her any money?" the woman asks, keen, I'm sure to get back to 
her conversation.

"No," I say. I realise that there is no real point to my story, and I sound 
moronic and drunk.

Stumbling back to the sofa, I sink into its warm sumptuousness. I make a 
fuzzy-headed decision to stay longer, to wait for something to happen that will 
make staying on worthwhile, so I send R a short text to say that I won't be 
home for dinner because my friend is very late to meet me. I put a kiss at the 
end but don't apologise. Then I tuck my phone back into my bag and don't look 
at it again until 1am, when I'm in a taxi headed for home.

In the back seat of the cab, with the diesel engine rattle and the jolty 
movements making me nauseous, I try to keep myself steady by concentrating on 
the back of the taxi driver's head.

I'm digging for ibuprofen in my bag because my head is throbbing. My phone 
vibrates. I pick it up and it is R, checking to see that I am OK. His voice is 
kind and concerned, and I instantly feel horrid because I realise I've ignored 
his texts.

At home, he asks if I had a nice night, but I am too drunk to answer in any 
detail. I can't even work out if it was nice.

A day later, I don't know what I feel. As I flick through my phone, there are 
photos of people I don't even remember being with. There are none of me (save 
one early on in the day in which I look like Spike Milligan), so I can't even 
see how drunk I looked.

I find a receipt from the members club of which I am not a member, for an 
amount that would usually be spent on the weekly food shop. I think I kept 
drinking espresso martinis in the hope that the caffeine would keep me alert.

It's hard to know why I wanted to lose myself so much; to spend money I didn't 
have; to sit in the company of relative strangers instead of friends; to cancel 
on my family, and to lie in the process. Sometimes I just don't want to go home.

I don't feel terrible now, but I feel scared that I might do it again, because 
it didn't feel all that bad. Knowing that R might get better and I could one 
day be the one letting him down all the time is weird. His understanding, 
despite me ignoring his texts, at first made me think that he was planning for 
another major binge.

But then I realise that what I did had nothing to do with what other people 
had done, or were doing to me. Right or wrong, I did what I did because I 
wanted to.
 