
On 22 May 1980, Japanese arcade machine manufacturer Namco changed video games 
forever. Its new release, Pac-Man, was designed to appeal far beyond the 
teenage boys pumping coins into early shooters like Space Invaders and 
Galaxian. Designer Shigeo Funaki specifically set out to create a “comical” 
game that everyone could enjoy,especially women 
<http://www.eurogamer.net/articles/iwatani-pac-man-was-made-for-women>. His 
loveable lead character is effectively a pizza with a slice missing, the 
enemies are four cute ghosts with names like Blinky and Inky, and you collect 
colourful fruit for bonus scores. What could be nicer? The game would go on to 
sell 400,000 machines within two years and has seen countless home console 
conversions, updates and spin-offs. Pac-Man is a cultural icon. Everyone loves 
Pac-Man.

He perhaps surmises that if he eats enough, he will attain … perfect 
roundness. But it can never happen
Stephen Poole 
But then you look a little closer, and there’s something … dark. While most 
players see a cute character chugging around a maze gobbling pills and running 
away from cute ghosties, others build a more sinister narrative.


For some cultural commentators the sheer compulsion of the game, its almost 
narcotic effect, is the darkness at its heart. If you’re good at it, Pac-Man 
ostensibly never ends. When you clear a maze, another one appears and you 
continue munching, driven by the “wacka wacka” sound effects. WhenMartin Amis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/martinamis> wrote his now fabled book on 
arcade games, Invasion of the Space Invaders, his thoughts on Pac-Man largely 
concerned its enslaving properties: “I have seen bloodstains on the PacMan 
joystick [...] I know a young actress with a case of PacMan Hand so severe that 
her index finger looked like a section of blood pudding – yet still she played, 
and played through her tears of pain.”

More well-known perhaps is Marcus Brigstocke’s oblique comparison between 
Namco’s game and the rise of the ecstasy-fuelled club culture. “If Pac-Man had 
affected us as kids,” he said, “We’d all be running around in dark rooms, 
munching pills and listening to repetitive electronic music.”
 Madness of Mission 6 – a Pac-Man true story by Travis Pitts 
In his book Trigger Happy, writer and gamer Stephen Poole saw Pac-Man as a 
precursor to the “survival horror” genre of games such as Resident Evil and 
Silent Hill. It is, after all, about being trapped in a claustrophobic 
location, desperately attempting to stay alive while being relentlessly tracked 
by supernatural enemies. As in the Resident Evil titles, ammunition (in the 
form of power pills) is in short supply, and only has a temporary effect on 
monsters. Player power is only ever fleeting, and the monsters always come back.

Elsewhere, in his essay on the game, Dots, Fruit, Speed and Pills: The Happy 
Consciousness of Pac-Man 
<http://www.digra.org/wp-content/uploads/digital-library/digra2014_submission_85.pdf>
, researcher Alex Wade draws comparisons between Pac-Man’s inescapable maze and 
the Labyrinths imagined by Argentinian writer Jorge Luis Borges – the exits are 
just entrances to other parts of the whole. Similarly, comic writer Zach 
Weiner, has pictured the game as a sort ofterrifying Kafka-esque nightmare 
<http://www.smbc-comics.com/?id=2736>, in which a man wakes up to find he has 
been reduced to a living mouth that must consume to survive.

This ties in with another interpretation of Pac-Man as the ultimate modern 
shopper, trapped in a cycle of meaningless consumption and endless binging on 
electronic treats in a sterile technological landscape. “He is the pure 
consumer,” wrote Poole in Trigger Happy. “With his obsessively gaping maw, he 
clearly only wants one thing: to feel whole, at peace with himself. He perhaps 
surmises that if he eats enough, in other words buys enough industrially 
produced goods – he will attain … perfect roundness. But it can never happen.”


The most pure expression of the lurking horror behind the Pac-Man concept 
though, is one simple T-shirt illustration by designer Travis Pitt.

Named The Madness of Mission 6 <http://www.playthepast.org/?p=2048> it is 
effectively a Pac-Man narrative in one image: a desperate astronaut trapped on 
a doomed spacecraft, wolfing down anti-anxiety pills while his dead shipmates 
haunt his feverish mind.

Funaki would be truly horrified. 
 