
My enduring memory of Ben Bradlee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ben-bradlee>, years on from his courageous 
stand over Watergate, concerns an incident in Belfast.

He was in the city as guest of honour at the 2001 Society of Editors 
conference and decided to take a car trip around some of Belfast's trouble 
spots.

It was at the time when children were being abused as they made their way each 
morning to Holy Cross primary school in the Ardoyne area of northBelfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast>.

At one point, Bradlee saw a group of people on the Ardoyne Road and - against 
the advice of his companion, Brendan Hopkins, the then chief executive of the 
UK arm of Independent News & Media - he started to get out of the car to 
confront them.

Hopkins restrained him as he opened the car door and began to address the 
gaggle of angry loyalists from the back seat. Bradlee, then 80 years old, 
demanded to know why they were stoning and screaming at youngsters.

They shouted at him and Hopkins told me it looked ugly for a while. Bradlee, 
ignoring the danger, refused to close the door. He was eager to get his point 
across.

He wasn't in the least bit interested in their political and religious 
differences with the parents of the children, he just wanted to tell them to 
lay off the kids.

Hopkins's good sense saved him from a possible physical assault, although the 
tall, ramrod straight Bradlee would have towered over them.

Bradley, having reluctantly agreed to remain in the car, told Hopkins: "I want 
to get under their skin."

Later, at a BBC Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> reception, news footage of the 
scenes outside the Holy Cross school was shown. I saw Bradlee wince as he 
exclaimed: "They shouldn't do that... look at those children... my God, no!"

A local journalist told him it was a complex situation, to which Bradlee 
replied: "It isn't complicated. It's simple. It's wrong."

There, in a short sentence, was the straightforward ethical stance that had 
guided Bradlee throughout his journalistic career. The loyalist protests 
reminded him of his reporting of the white supremacists' attacks on black 
people in 1950s Alabama.

Similarly, it was that "simple" moral ethos that had guided Bradlee through 
the dark times duringWatergate <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/watergate> 
when the story looked as if it wouldn't stand up.

Once he had decided that Richard Nixon's administration had done wrong, he 
refused to let it go. He backed the investigation by his young reporters, Bob 
Woodward andCarl Bernstein <https://www.theguardian.com/media/carl-bernstein>, 
in spite of scepticism from some of his older staff.

He also had the bearing and conviction that ensured support from the 
Washington Post's publisher, Katharine Graham.

By the time I met him, he had retired from the Post, retaining the title of 
vice-president-at-large, and had become a consultant for Tony O'Reilly's 
Independent News & Media (INM), acting as joint chairman of the group's 
international advisory board. He loved the role, not least because he liked 
O'Reilly, another renowned story-teller.

It was a delight to be in Bradlee's company because it didn't take much 
prompting for him to tell anecdotes about his life, including his friendship 
with Jack Kennedy. In his trademark gravelly, husky voice he enjoyed recalling 
his times at the White House

But his most riveting stories concerned his earliest reporting days in the 
late 1940s when he was a cub reporter on the Post. He recalled being sent to 
cover race riots but complained that these conflicts were not getting their 
rightful space in the paper.

The young Bradlee helped to change the Post's agenda on such stories, which 
were then promoted to front page status. He went on to be the Post's senior 
editor from 1968 until 1991.

Bradlee was garlanded with awards but remained surprised by such things. When 
told last year that he was to receive the presidential medal of freedom, the 
highest civilian honour in the United States, he said:

"Good God, how fabulous. What more can a man get? I feel terribly honoured. 
What does a person do to deserve this kind of prize?"

I could have told him in a sentence. He changed the nature of journalism in 
the United States and across the world. He did not invent investigative 
journalism but he gave it glamour that it has never lost.

Every reporter looks back to the Post's achievement in forcing a president to 
resign for being implicated in a crime. Now every scandal, no matter how small, 
is referred to as a "gate." Bradlee did that.
 