
Just above the water's surface are the knee-like roots of the swamp cypress, 
Taxodium distichum. They are almost hollow and allow the tree to breathe

The open lattice baskets often used for aquatic plants are unnecessary in 
ponds of this scale. Plants should be rooted directly into the soil, which 
slopes right down into the water

Perennials such as gunnera, rheum and astilbe are happy in full sun as long as 
their feet are damp. In drier soils they need some shade for at least part of 
the day

If built and planted correctly, bigger ponds require minimal maintenance as 
they will quickly achieve a balanced ecosystem. Floating plants keep the water 
cool and reduce algal growth

Water deeper than half a metre restricts the spread of irises and other 
marginals that can choke shallow pools and require unnecessary maintenance

Damp gardens usually peak in spring with candelabra primulas (P. beesiana), 
water forget-me-nots (Myosotis scorpioides) and the like, but at the Beth 
Chatto Gardens the season is extended into late summer.

The acclaimed gardener and garden writer and her late husband Andrew began 
work here in the 1960s. The gravel garden was carved out of an old car park in 
1991, but the heart of the place is still the extensive woodland with water 
gardens set around natural ponds.

The ponds allow a wide range of plants to be grown in and around the water, as 
they provide all combinations of damp, dry, sun and shade in a very dry part of 
the country. Rudbeckia, for instance, don't need particularly damp soil, so are 
planted on the outer edges of the beds where they put on a show from August.

The trees are carefully spaced so the site remains open and sunny, and the 
ponds have large surface areas to reflect the plantings on the far side. 
Ornamentals have been set among the ancient oaks - dawn redwoods, swamp cypress 
and deciduous conifers to provide dramatic autumn colour.

In places, the grass paths allow visitors to come right up to the water's 
edge. The lack of hard paving results in a green and tranquil atmosphere in 
this famous garden (bethchatto.co.uk).Andy Sturgeon
 