
In an abandoned yard in central Freetown, a young man is making his way 
through the shadows of two burnt-out cars. His legs are buckled by polio into a 
knot beneath him and he pulls himself forward on his fists. His name is Fengai, 
he is 21, and this is his home: a neglected community of disabled street 
children in one of Sierra Leone's forgotten corners.

"This," Fengai spits out, "is a bomeh, a dumping ground, for rubbish and for 
the crippled." He gestures around at a gathering of tiny broken huts. A crude 
tattoo on his arm spells out "Go Arsenal". "There are more than 50 of us here 
and we have nothing. No water, no food. They are sick, these boys, but who will 
help them? Go home," he shouts, "and tell them that we are living in misery!"

Fengai is shaking with frustration and anger. But after 10 years as a disabled 
street child in one of the world's poorest countries, he knows his voice is 
heard by few. The United Nations estimates as many as 30% of street children in 
Sierra Leone are disabled. Many have been outcast because of their disability, 
chased into the shadows by social stigma and family shame. On the streets they 
are exposed to disease, abuse and hunger. Yet often the streets are safer than 
home.

The belief that disability is caused by sin, voodoo or black magic is deeply 
entrenched in Sierra Leone, especially in the rural provinces. Without the most 
basic health awareness, misconceptions about the causes of disability can 
thrive. Such beliefs can ignite fear in a community and inflict terror on an 
already vulnerable child. In the worst cases, it can lead to neglect, 
abandonment or infanticide.

Eleven years of civil war in Sierra Leone brought about an increase in 
disability. Thousands of young people suffered, both as a result of forced 
amputations – the tragic hallmark of the rebel forces – and the collapse of the 
national health system including childhood immunisations. As vaccinations 
ceased, disabling diseases such as polio crept back into dilapidated villages 
and overcrowded slums, mainly affecting children under the age of five.

Access to knowledge

Professor Osman Bah, west Africa regional programme manager of Leonard 
Cheshire Disability, is no stranger to this suffering. He contracted polio in 
his formative years and has struggled throughout his life against the prejudice 
that can destroy lives. He now supports hundreds of young people like Fengai, 
who have been rejected by their communities because of their disability. On the 
risks facing disabled young people, he is very clear: "The most dangerous 
threat is ignorance. Ignorance will keep a disabled child locked away or it 
will force her out on to the streets.

"Here in Sierra Leone, parents do not have access to the medical knowledge 
that teaches them that polio is a disease of poverty caused by a virus and poor 
sanitation. Instead a child will be taught to hate and fear itself."

Traditional healers, rather than a medical professional, are commonly sought 
to cure children's disabilities. At a centre for epilepsy in east Freetown, a 
group of women recall their experiences of traditional remedies. Aminata's 
seizures started as a young child; "I was taken to a juju man. He boiled herbs 
and I had to inhale the leaves. Afterwards he poured the mixture into my nose. 
When it did not work, my family rejected me. They told me the devil had taken 
hold of me."

Dr Max Bangura, who runs the centre, says the practice of traditional healers 
is often cloaked in secrecy. This can allow a darker side to thrive: "Sexual 
abuse of young disabled girls is common. A healer may tell the girl that the 
devil is a jealous spirit and that sexual relations will drive him away. A girl 
arrived at my centre who had been made pregnant by a healer in this way. When 
he found out, he said it was the devil's child and forced her to drink 
kerosene."

Some, however, are unable to flee. Sitting under a tree in a village in the 
rural district of Koinadugu, Leonard Cheshire Disability community worker 
Alusine Koroma lowers his voice as he speaks of a four-year-old girl with 
cerebral palsy who was brought before the community elders by her parents. 
Confused and frustrated by the child's inability to talk or walk, they 
proclaimed that the child must be bewitched. To rid the community of this evil, 
they carried her deep into the forest where they dug a hole and buried her 
alive. "I am afraid this is common," says Koroma sadly, "and it rarely makes 
the news."

Dominic O'Neill, head of the UK Department for International Development in 
Sierra Leone, has watched the spotlight move away from the region as the child 
soldiers of the civil war are reintegrated and the conflict recedes. "The 
plight of vulnerable children in Sierra Leone continues and we cannot stop 
working to protect their rights, especially for those children with 
disabilities." With less than a third of the population able to read or write, 
however, the spread of information needed to change attitudes is slow.

But inside a radio station in the northern town of Kabala, 23-year-old 
Elizabeth Katta is preparing to speed things up. For the last two years she has 
been campaigning for awareness as part of Leonard Cheshire Disability's Young 
Voices programme, which empowers young people with disabilities to become 
agents of change in their communities.

In 2009, Young Voices successfully lobbied the Sierra Leonean government to 
ratify the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities. At the dawn of a new chapter of post-war governance, this small 
group of young people grabbed the chance to initiate change for those with 
disabilities across the country.

Each member of Young Voices has their own story of courage to share. 
Elizabeth, for instance, knows she is lucky to be here. Her eyes harden as she 
speaks of the chronic neglect she suffered at the hands of her mother. Abused 
and starved, she was told she would amount to nothing. Today, after an hour on 
the mic at the radio station, her face is shining. With the same force of youth 
as Fengai, she shouts out, "The time for action is now! We have been hidden for 
too long. We are here and we speak for the voiceless."

'I lost my mother's love'

"I was not born blind," says Agnes. "When I was 13, I contracted a pox, which 
went into my eyes. I was taken to the hospital but it was to no avail. They 
spoke to us of African mischief [voodoo] so I was taken to the traditional 
herbalist. He rubbed herbs into my eyes. In the process my eyes went out."

As Agnes struggled to adjust to her life without sight, her mother also 
struggled to cope. "When I became blind, I lost my mother's love. She would 
leave me so hungry, she did nothing to care for me. I only survived with the 
help of neighbours."

When the rebels came during the civil war, Agnes's mother gathered her 
daughters and ran. Agnes was left behind. Unable to follow, she sat in the 
empty house and listened in terror as people raced past. A voice inside told 
her that she would die if she stayed there. "So I crawled to the door and 
waited. As soon as I heard somebody I grabbed hold of that person and hung on. 
We ran. Later I was found and taken to a church in Freetown."

After the war, Agnes was enrolled in school, where she learned to read 
braille. Eight years later, she is about to start university. With the Young 
Voices programme, she has spoken out about disability rights to audiences 
across the country. She has also forgiven her mother.

Libby Powell's assignment in Sierra Leone was hosted by Leonard Cheshire 
Disability
 