
A spate of speculation helped a nervous market end the day on a positive note, 
despite continuing worries about the eurozone crisis.

Reheated takeover talk sent shares in British Gas owner Centrica higher with 
an unusually large volume of shares traded. Gazprom has been tipped in the past 
as a possible predator, and the Russian energy group's name was back in the 
frame again, although political considerations would surely play a role here. 
An alternative story concerned interest from Qatar. The country signed a 
liquefied natural gas deal last year, which promptedsome analysts to suggest 
its sovereign wealth fund could end up taking a stake in Centrica to cement 
their links 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/marketforceslive/2011/may/11/centrica-up-on-vague-bid-talk?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

All that was enough to help push the group's shares up 1.8p to 335.5p with 
more than 40m shares traded, well above normal volumes.

Meanwhile United Utilities continued to be buoyed by bid rumours ahead of a 
trading update on Thursday. There was some scepticism in the City, but analysts 
at Bank of America/Merrill Lynch took a less negative view on the tale, saying 
an offer at around 900p-950p was plausible:
 We believe a bid from a consortium seems more feasible than a bid from a 
single fund due to United Utilities' large size, and the names mentioned look 
plausible to us given infrastructure appetite.
In our opinion, the low bond yield and high inflation environment remains a 
key support for regulated inflation-linked assets like UK water.

We also expect M&A momentum could support Severn Trent and Pennon although we 
believe Pennon is a less likely M&A candidate due to its non-regulated waste 
activities.

United closed 19.5p higher at 727p, Severn added 4p to £17.12 while Pennon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pennongroup> put on 5.5p to 745p.

Overall the FTSE 100 finished 20.32 points higher at 5888.48 after two days of 
falls, as Japan became the latest central bank to introduce stimulus measures. 
But there was still nervousness around Greece, which has yet to agree budget 
cuts demanded under the terms of its latest bailout, and Spain, where it is 
still unclear whether the government will ask for financial help.

Aviva, downgraded on Tuesday by Deutsche Bank and Bank of America/Merrill 
Lynch, fell another 11.5p to 333.4p as its shares went ex-dividend.

Among the banks Barclays lost 0.25p to 225.15p after the Financial Services 
Authority released memos relating to the appointment of Bob Diamond as chief 
executive. ButHSBC was 9.9p higher at 587.8p after a recommendation from 
analysts at, yes,Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay>.

BP rose 4.8p to 443.75p after reports it has been in talks to sell its Texas 
City refinery to Marathon Petroleum. The sale could fetch up to $2.5bn, and is 
part of BP's disposal programme to help cover the costs of the Gulf of Mexico 
disaster.

AstraZeneca added 54.5p to £29.59 as Exane BNP Paribas moved from underperform 
to neutral in the wake of recent management changes. Analyst Nicolas 
Guyon-Gellin said:
 We see an intensification of value-enhancing bolt-ons to replenish the 
research and development pipeline (up to $14bn with potential targets like 
Amarin, Biomarin, Forest or Actelion) and to leverage untapped emerging market 
opportunities (expansion outside China). We view any larger deal (Shire or 
AbbVie) as unlikely and doubt a "run for cash" scenario.

After having been the worst large cap performer over 12 months ( down 9% 
relative) and in view of new management we see a turning point; the usual 
valuation metrics (30% PE discount and 7% dividend yield) should provide clear 
support. Yet much needs to be done (R&D productivity, emerging markets) to fix 
long term growth uncertainties before we can turn more positive - we are still 
3%-9% below long term consensus earnings per share. 
Sage rose 2.1p to 318.3p on talk the accountancy software group could be 
looking to sell its US operations. The company has recently been the subject of 
takeover speculation.

Smiths Group, the technology business whose products range from bomb detectors 
to medical equipment, ended up 12p at £10.54, after a 7% rise in full year 
profits.

Ashmore, the emerging markets fund management group, had been under pressure 
recently after a dip in full year profits, and is set to leave the FTSE 100 at 
the end of this week. But Morgan Stanley began coverage of the company with an 
overweight rating and 390p price target, helped push its shares up 3.5p to 
338.5p. The bank said:
 Concerns over fund performance, pressures on margins, equity and multi 
strategy are priced in. With our earnings 5% ahead of consensus we believe 
Ashmore offers attractive risk/reward with size of opportunity still 
underappreciated. We expect acceleration in growth to drive 18% earnings per 
share compound annual growth rate and re-rating. 
Among the mid-caps, recruitment group Michael Page International slipped 1p to 
389p after a sell note from Seymour Pierce, which pointed to a downbeat 
statement from Swiss rival Adecco. Analyst Kevin Lapwood said:
 The Adecco trading update ahead of today's investor day indicates that there 
has been little improvement in European staffing markets. This is consistent 
with data from other sources and leads us to reiterate our negative stance. We 
note that Michael Page has enjoyed a good bounce in recent weeks which we 
believe is premature. France accounts for 17% of net fee income at Michael 
Page. The shares are expensive, trading on a prospective PE of 24.5 times 
compared with a staffing peer group average of 16.5 times. 
Lower down the market Hibu, the ridiculous new name for Yellow Pages group 
Yell, dropped 35% to 0.44p after it warned again on profits and repeated that 
its restructuring discussions could lead to an outcome where its ordinary 
shares had no value.

In a similar boat were shareholders in AEA Technology, down 33% to 0.06p. The 
environmental advisor said it was in talks with a number of parties, but that 
none of these were likely to lead to an offer for the company, meaning there 
will be little or no value for shareholders. It suffered a shareholder 
rebellion at its annual meeting over its remuneration report, surely too little 
too late as a protest?
 