
Bill Shorten <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> has 
demanded the prime minister rule out any inquiry into the iron ore industry, as 
Fortescue Metal chairman Andrew “Twiggy” Forrest accused the two big mining 
companies of “flying planeloads of lobbyists to Canberra” to try to ensure it 
does not proceed.

Asked last Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/15/tony-abbott-backs-inquiry-into-whether-miners-are-driving-down-iron-ore-price>
 about a mooted joint parliamentary inquiry into claims that BHP Billiton and 
Rio Tinto have flooded the market to drive down the iron ore price and damage 
competitors, Tony Abbott said: “I think we do need an inquiry.”

Tony Abbott backs inquiry into whether miners are driving down iron ore price
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/15/tony-abbott-backs-inquiry-into-whether-miners-are-driving-down-iron-ore-price>
Asked Wednesday, after public differences between cabinet ministers on the 
issue, he said no decision had been made but he strongly suggested the 
government would not be backing the idea.

“The last thing we would want to see is anything that smacked of a witch hunt 
against some of our most important businesses,” he said. “There’s no way that 
this government would ever seek to regulate the iron ore market. It’s a free 
market. Always been a free market, should always be a free market and there’s 
no way that we want to interfere with it.”

The opposition leader initially demanded to see the terms of reference, but 
his position has also hardenedin recent days.

“I have grave concerns about such an inquiry and the prime minister and 
treasurer’s stated position in support of it,” Shorten said on Wednesday night, 
suggesting an inquiry could cost Australia iron ore sales to China and Japan.

“It also sends a terrible signal to customers and flies in the face of 
commitments to our largest customers such as China and Japan that they can 
count on secure supply at sustainable prices.

“I am hugely concerned that our customers may look with greater favour at our 
competitors. They have never contemplated a similar inquiry and will make the 
most of the proposed inquiry in their favour.”

He called on Abbott to “put [the issue] to bed, end his dithering ... bring 
back some certainty to business, investors and customers”.

Forrest told ABC radio the big miners had “gone into full panic mode”.

“They flew planeloads of lobbyists into Canberra. I have never seen 
multinationals fighting so hard against the cause of transparency,” he said.

And he linked the issue to separate revelations to a Senate committee on 
corporate tax avoidance about the big miners reducing their taxable income 
through complicated international structures.

“My whole reason for doing this is that I believe ... Australians need to know 
what goes on inside this most important industry ... why they transfer profits 
away from the Australian economy, why they only pay tax on 50% of their revenue 
... these are questions Australians want answered,” he said.

Independent senator Nick Xenophon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon> has said he will 
push for a Senate inquiry despite the apparent opposition from both major 
parties.

“This talk of a witch hunt is completely overblown,” he said. “I think it is 
verging on hysterical for some companies and some cabinet ministers to assert 
that somehow this will damage our relationship with China for simply having an 
inquiry.”
 