
Bill Shorten <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> has 
accused Tony Abbott of “stubborn isolationism” on climate change that could 
hurt Australia’s international trade in the long term.

Responding to the significant post-2020 greenhouse gas reduction commitments 
by the US and China, the prime minister said he was “not focusing on what is 
happening in 16 years’ time” but rather on what his Direct Action scheme might 
achieve straight away. Australia will have to unveil a similar post-2020 
commitment next year.

Citing Abbott’s reaction, the Labor leader said: “I fear it will not be long 
before this stubborn isolationism takes a toll on our international 
competitiveness.”

In a speech to the Sydney Institute, he said it was impossible for Australia 
to “expect the rest of the world to do the heavy lifting on greenhouse gas 
pollution, while ignoring our inaction”.

“Sooner rather than later, Australia’s refusal to act on climate change will 
affect our trade negotiations. I would not be surprised if future international 
trade agreements included a carbon-price equivalent as a mandatory condition.”

And he attacked Abbott’s insistence that the G20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/g20> is not an appropriate forum to discuss 
climate because it should focus on economic issues.

Asked about Australia’s reluctance to discuss climate at the Brisbane meeting, 
despite the urging of many other G20 countries, Abbott said; “There are lots of 
venues to deal with climate change … there’s a conference coming up in Lima 
which will be a climate change conference. There’s a conference coming up in 
Paris next year which will be a climate change conference. The UN is a forum 
which is regularly dealing with climate change – that’s as it should be.

“But this is a major economic conference; it is the world’s premier economic 
conference. And I certainly expect that the focus will be on economic reform, 
economic growth, how we drive growth and jobs.”

But Shorten pointed out that the US and Chinese presidents had used Apec – 
also an economic forum – to make their climate policy announcement.

And he accused the Coalition of “abandoning internationalism” when it suited 
its political agenda.

“It is not good enough to say yes to Iraq, but no to action on Ebola,” he 
said. “It is not good enough to say yes to free trade agreements, but no to 
global action on climate change. It is not good enough to attack the 
unemployed, yet ignore tax havens.”

Australia has been resisting a last-ditch push by the US, France and other 
European countries for G20 leaders at next week’s meeting in Brisbane to 
include climate change on the leader’s agenda for discussion, and to back 
contributions to the Green Climate Fund.

The prime minister has previously rejected the fund as a “Bob Brown bank on an 
international scale” – referring to the former leader of the Australian Greens.

The fund aims to help poorer countries cut their emissions and prepare for the 
impact of climate change, and – along with national greenhouse reduction 
pledges – is seen as critical to securing developing-nation support for a 
successful deal on reducing emissions at the UN meeting in Paris next year.

As reported by Guardian Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/02/g20-australia-makes-token-concession-on-climate-change-after-us-lobbying>
, Australia has reluctantly conceded the final G20 communique should include 
climate change as a single paragraph, acknowledging that it should be addressed 
by UN processes. Australia’s original position was that the meeting should 
focus solely on “economic issues”.

An early text read “We support strong and effective action to address climate 
change, consistent with sustainable economic growth and certainty for business 
and investment. We reaffirm our resolve to adopt a protocol, another legal 
instrument or an agreed outcome with legal force under the United Nations 
framework convention on climate change that is applicable to all parties at the 
21st conference of the parties in Paris in 2015.”

This has been further negotiated by officials in the leadup to the weekend 
meeting.

Australia had previously insisted the G20 should discuss climate-related 
issues only as part of its deliberations on energy efficiency, but the energy 
efficiency action plan to be agreed at the meeting,revealed by Guardian 
Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/04/g20-energy-efficency-action-plan-offers-little-no-action>
, does not require G20 leaders to commit to any actual action.

Instead it asks them to “consider” making promises next year to reduce the 
energy used by smartphones and computers and to develop tougher standards for 
car emissions.
 