
Osama bin Laden <https://www.theguardian.com/world/osamabinladen> spent all 
his personal wealth on jihad, stinting on meat and electricity as luxuries so 
he could save his money to help fund terror attacks, according to recollections 
by his deputy and successor .

Yet, in the second of his Days With the Imam series of online videos, posted 
on Saturday,Ayman al-Zawahiri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayman-al-zawahiri> said Bin Laden would pay 
readily for hospitality for his guests – although the former al-Qaida leader 
lived mostly on bread and vegetables, he once invested in an entire herd of 
sheep to slaughter in case visitors came by.

Zawahiri, who became head of al-Qaida after Bin Laden was killed in a US raid 
last year, spoke conversationally while dressed in a white robe and turban.

Zawahiri is seen as lacking his predecessor's personal authority within the 
far-flung terror network, and may be trying to boost his popularity by 
emphasising his closeness to the more charismatic Bin Laden.

Bin Laden was born to a wealthy family, but ran into financial troubles after 
he was pushed out of Sudan in 1996, Zawahiri said.

Shortly thereafter, he said, Bin Laden spent $50,000 to help finance the 1998 
bombings of US embassies in Kenya and Tanzania at a time when he had only 
$55,000 to his name. Those bombings killed 224 people. Bin Laden's personal 
wealth also helped finance the September 11 attacks in 2001.

"He is well-known for living austerely but he spent all his money for jihad," 
Zawahiri said. "If you enter his house you would find simple furniture … and if 
we were invited to eat, he offered us what was available in his house, bread 
and vegetables."

But the terror leader was "generous to his guests by slaughtering sheep for 
them and because of continuous visitors, he once bought a herd of sheep so that 
he would be always ready for them".

Zawahiri said Bin Laden used to encourage the mujahideen – "holy warriors" – 
to live without electricity, which he considered a luxury. "Luxury is the enemy 
of jihad and if the mujahideen were brought up to live in asceticism, they 
would tolerate the burden of jihad," Zawahiri quoted Bin Laden as saying.

Zawahiri said Bin Laden was also generous to his bodyguards, who were devoted 
to him. Once in Afghanistan, he came under shelling, but the bodyguards took 
him to a wall and formed a human shield around him.

In the first video in the series, posted on jihadist websites in November, 
Zawahiri said he wanted to show Bin Laden's "human side". He described a 
sensitive man who cried when his friends lost family members, remained close to 
his children despite the hard life of an international jihadist, and fondly 
remembered – by name – the 19 men who carried out the deadliest terrorist 
attack ever on US soil.
 