
When the London bombers struck five years ago, many people blamed the invasion 
of Iraq for inspiring them. But the connection between 7/7 and British foreign 
policy goes much deeper. The terrorist threat to Britain is partly "blowback", 
resulting from a web of British covert operations with militant Islamist groups 
stretching back decades. And while terrorism is held up as the country's 
biggest security challenge, Whitehall's collusion with radicalIslam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> is continuing.

Two of the four London bombers were trained in Pakistani camps run by the 
Harkat ul-Mujahideen (HUM) terrorist group, which has long been sponsored by 
Pakistan to fight Indian forces in Kashmir. Britain not only arms and trains 
Pakistan but in the past provided covert aid benefiting the HUM. There are 
credible suggestions that Britain facilitated the dispatch of HUM volunteers to 
fight in Yugoslavia and Kosovo in the 90s. Earlier, MI6's covert war in 
Afghanistan involved themilitary training of various Islamist groups to counter 
the Soviet occupation of the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1999/jan/17/yemen.islam>. Many HUM militants 
were instructed by an insurgent faction that Britain was covertly training and 
arming with anti-aircraft missiles.

One of that faction's warlords was Jalalludin Haqqani, who is now the 
Taliban's overall military commander fighting the British; his past is not 
something the Ministry of Defence relates to the young soldiers deployed to 
Helmand province. Another old friend is the Afghan commander Gulbuddin 
Hekmatyar, known as a ruthless killer, who was given covert aid and training in 
the 1980s and was even received by officials in Whitehall. It was Hekmatyar who 
Britain backed to conduct secret operations inside the Muslim republics of the 
Soviet Union.

The further twist is that Britain is now reliant on doing a deal with these 
forces to secure something more than a humiliating exit from the increasingly 
brutal war in Afghanistan. The stakes are exceedingly high – General Sir David 
Richards, the head of the British army, has said that the "UK's authority and 
reputation in the world" are on the line in Afghanistan. He also remarked last 
week thattalks should be held with the Taliban "pretty soon" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/jun/27/taliban-talks-afghanistan-head-army>
.

In fact, Whitehall has been desperately trying to do a deal with the Taliban 
since at least 2004, when it is claimed thatMaulana Fazlur Rahman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/feb/18/pakistan3>, a radical 
pro-Taliban cleric in Pakistan, was invited to visit the Foreign Office. Rahman 
told the Pakistani media that "Britain is holding indirect talks with the 
Taliban militia to seek an honourable American exit from Afghanistan".

This dependence on militant Islamists to achieve foreign policy objectives is 
an echo of the past, when such collusion was aimed at controlling oil resources 
and overthrowing nationalist governments. The Anglo-American operation in Iran 
in 1953 to remove the popular Mossadeq government, which had nationalised 
British oil operations, involved plotting withAyatollah Seyyed Kashani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/dec/31/iran-conspiracy-theories>
, the founder of the militant fundamentalist group Devotees of Islam. MI6 and 
the CIA financed demonstrations against Mossadeq, and even discussed installing 
Kashani – a predecessor of Ayatollah Khomeini – as Iran's leader after the 
coup. The Foreign Office noted that in power Kashani "would conceivably accept 
western money", but viewed him as "a complete political reactionary", and 
therefore not reliable as a long-term asset.

Also targeted was Egypt's Gamal Abdel Nasser, who in 1952 overthrew the 
pro-British King Farouk, providing an Arab nationalist alternative to the 
pro-western monarchies in the Middle East. Britain had first covertly funded 
the Muslim Brotherhood, a new radical force with a terrorist wing, in 1942, and 
further links were made with the organisation after Nasser's revolution. By 
1956, when Britain invaded Egypt, contacts were developed as part of plans to 
overthrow Nasser. Indeed, the invasion was undertaken in the knowledge that the 
Muslim Brotherhood might form the new regime. AfterNasser died in 1970 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/october/1/newsid_2485000/2485899.stm>
, and the pro-western president Anwar Sadat secretly sponsored militant 
Islamist cells to counter nationalists and communists, British officials were 
still describing the Brotherhood as "a potentially handy weapon" for the regime.

Declassified files reveal that planners recognised their Islamist 
collaborators as anti-western, but entered into marriages of convenience to 
achieve short-term objectives. As British power waned in the Middle East, 
Whitehall sought out all the allies it could find, with little regard for the 
long-term consequences. Britain's role in the emergence of global terrorism 
should not be exaggerated, but there are many contributions: opposition to Arab 
nationalism, which paved the way for the rise of radical Islam in the 1970s; 
support for the Afghan holy warriors in the 1980s, from which emerged Osama bin 
Laden's al-Qaida; and the phenomenon of "Londonistan" in the 1990s, when the 
capital became an organising centre for global jihad, tolerated by the 
authorities.

But Whitehall's view of Islamist militants as handy weapons or shock troops is 
far from historical. In 1999, during Nato's bombing campaign against 
Yugoslavia, the Blair government secretly trained fighters in the Kosovo 
Liberation Army to act as Nato's soldiers on the ground. The KLA was openly 
described by ministers as a terrorist organisation, and worked closely with 
al-Qaida fighters who joined the Muslim cause; their military centre was in the 
same camp network in Kosovo and Albania where the SAS were providing training. 
One KLA unit was led by the brother ofAyman al-Zawahiri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayman-al-zawahiri>, Bin Laden's right-hand 
man. This murky feature of Blair's "humanitarian intervention" remains 
conveniently overlooked in most accounts of the war.

The attacks of 9/11 and 7/7 have made Britain revise but not end its secret 
affair with radical Islam. In the occupation of southern Iraq, Britain's weak 
position led to conniving with Shia militias. Liberal, secular forces were 
bypassed after the invasion, and when Britain withdrew its combat forces it in 
effect handed responsibility for "security" to these militias. The irony is 
that Britain's favoured collaborator, the Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq, has 
long been Iran's favoured vehicle for its policy in Iraq. Britain also 
continues its deep alliance with a Pakistan that is the main protector of the 
Taliban, and does little to press Islamabad to end its support for the jihad in 
Kashmir. Thus, in the wars in Iraq andAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, Whitehall has been in the 
bizarre situation of being allied to its enemy.

Militants may be serving other useful functions. The then Foreign Office 
minister Kim Howells told a parliamentary inquiry in March 2007: "At dinners at 
embassies around the world I have suddenly discovered that somebody happens to 
be sitting next to me who is from the respectable end of a death squad from 
somewhere. The ambassador has, with the best will in the world, invited that 
person along because he thinks that, under the new democracy, they will become 
the new government."

The government says it has prevented 12 bomb plots in the last decade and that 
we face a threat from 200 networks. My concern is that the wards of state 
pledging to protect us have neither accounted for "blowback" nor stopped 
contributing to it. Governments guided by morals would have different 
priorities and would discontinue policies based on interests that endanger us 
and much of the world.
 