
Q I live in a Thirties semi, where the party wall is very thin. We can hear 
one another's voices and because of this, we use the radio to muffle the sound. 
Our neighbours play the piano and as they don't have carpets, we hear 
everything. They are unwilling to do anything about it. What to do? You have 
written about Portuguese cork tiles: could we paper over them, and how would we 
attach them? I read somewhere that an insulating paint exists. If so, is it 
toxic? Three-quarters of our living space shares the party wall.
MN

A Sound is transmitted through air waves or as structure-born vibration, so 
the best way of preventing unwanted sound is to either trap air or build a 
solid heavy wall. Sticking cork tiles to your wall may work to a small degree 
as their mass contains up to 50 per cent air and this will stop noise 
transmission. But to stop noise transmitting through the structure, get a 
builder to construct a three-by-two-inch wooden stud frame wall and fit it two 
inches away from your party wall. Fill the void with insulation such as 
Rockwool, to trap air. Then plasterboard and skim the wall to give it mass. If 
this is too lengthy and costly, buy a karaoke machine and give them a taste of 
their own music.

Q We recently stayed at a hotel in New York that had bedside lamps we'd like 
to replicate in our own home. So far, we have had no luck finding them this 
side of the Pond. Can you help? The lights were wall-mounted and wired into the 
mains with a flexible metal stalk and a halogen bulb at the end.
Richard Sargeant

A A big problem with halogen lights is that they have a short lifespan and are 
wasteful of electricity. For a more forward-thinking alternative to 
spotlighting, LED lights are the answer. They last up to 100,000 hours and use 
a fraction of the electricity. A solution to your New York light problem can be 
found at the top of the LED section ofwww.thelightingsuperstore.co.uk 
<http://www.thelightingsuperstore.co.uk> (and uses just three watts of 
electricity): turn it on, and wake up to a brighter, lower-carbon future.
 