
Anthony Bosch, the owner of the drugs clinic that supplied baseball who became 
Major League Baseball's star witness, says he administered drugs toAlex 
Rodriguez <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-rodriguez> before later 
becoming scared for his life.

Bosch, the key to MLB's case against A-Rod, says he designed and administered 
an elaborate doping program for the 14-time All-Star that started in 2010.

The owner of Biogenesis, the now-closed Florida anti-aging clinic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/02/biogenesis-peds-scandal-explained>
, said in an interview with CBS TV show "60 Minutes" that the 38-year-old 
sportsman paid him $12,000 per month for an assortment of banned drugs 
including testosterone and human growth hormone.

MLB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb> chief operating officer Rob 
Manfred said that Bosch agreed to cooperate with the investigation because he 
felt his life was in danger.

The New York Yankee slugger was banned for 211 games last August but appealed 
and kept playing until the end of the season. On Saturday Rodriguez's 
suspension was reduced by arbitrator Fredric Horowitz to 162 plus all playoff 
games in the 2014 season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/11/alex-rodriguez-suspended-for-2014-season-arbitrator-rules>
, effectively the same ban minus the time A-Rod played under appeal and still 
the longest ever baseball doping ban.

The players' association said in a statement it is disappointed MLB 
participated in the show and is considering its legal options.

Commissioner Bud Selig, who did not testify during the slugger's appeal, 
defended the largest suspension ever handed out under the Joint Drug Agreement.

"In my judgment his actions were beyond comprehension. I think 211 games was a 
very fair penalty."

Bosch said he began working with Rodriguez five days before the New York 
Yankees <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-yankees> third baseman hit 
his 600th career home run on August 4, 2010. Bosch said the first words 
Rodriguez said to him were: "What did Manny Ramirez take in 2008 and 2009?"

Ramirez was suspended for 50 games in 2009 while with the Los Angeles Dodgers 
after testing positive for a banned drug, his first of two offenses.

Bosch, who was once fined $5,000 for practicing medicine without a license, 
outlined his relationship with the three-time American League MVP. He said he 
designed the program to help Rodriguez maximize the effects of the drugs and 
remain clean in the eyes of baseball. Rodriguez never failed a test during the 
period in question.

Bosch said the duo used code words for the drugs like "gummies" for 
testosterone lozenges, which Rodriguez sometimes took just before games. Bosch 
said he once tested A-Rod's blood in the bathroom stall of a Miami restaurant.

Bosch also said he injected A-Rod with banned drugs because the slugger with 
654 career homers was afraid of needles.

Bosch told "60 Minutes" he was an expert in doping who only stopped and agreed 
to speak up because he got caught. 

Rodriguez has never failed a dope test and has repeatedly denied any 
wrongdoing. He declined to appear on "60 Minutes", according to CBS News. 

Bosch said in the interview:

"I was very good at what I did. I had a track record. I have been doing this 
for many years." 

"If you had the knowledge that I had, the experience that I had, and you know 
the truth about the testing and the flaws, it was almost a cake walk actually." 

Bosch said he provided Rodriguez with steroids, human growth hormone, insulin 
and supplements, over several years and personally injected him with some of 
the banned substances. 

"Alex is scared of needles, so at times, he would ask me to inject," Bosch 
said. 

Bosch said Rodriguez's target to be baseball's home run king: "The most 
important one [objective] was the 800 home run club." 

The existing all-time record is 762, held by Barry Bonds, who was also 
investigated for using performance-enhancing drugs during his career. Rodriguez 
is fifth on the list with 654 home runs but is already running out of time to 
reach Bonds, let alone 800, and a year away from the game would damage his 
fading chances. 

A-Rod will lose $25 million in salary this season although the Yankees still 
owe him $61 million for three more seasons, plus bonuses for reaching home run 
milestones after he returns from suspension.

Rodriguez and his lawyers argued that the critical testimony Bosch provided to 
MLB was not reliable because he was discredited source and only agreed to 
cooperate after MLB dropped a lawsuit against him and paid all his legal fees. 

MLB Commissioner Bud Selig handed down the initial suspension last August 
against the three-time most valuable player Rodriguez over allegations of his 
involvement with the clinic. Thirteen other players were suspended, with 12 
agreeing to 50-game suspensions and Ryan Braun of the Milwaukee Brewers a 
65-game ban. 

Of the 14 players suspended as a result of MLB's investigation into Biogenesis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2013/aug/05/mlb-players-suspended-biogenesis-ped>
, Rodriguez was the only one to appeal against the ban, saying that he was 
singled out for excessive punishment and called into question the way evidence 
was gathered. 

The Players Association said that Sunday's broadcast may have violated the 
privacy requirements of the Joint Drug Agreement between MLB and the players' 
union. 

"It is unfortunate that Major League Baseball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baseball> apparently lacks faith in the 
integrity and finality of the arbitrator's decision and our Joint Drug 
Agreement, such that it could not resist the temptation to publicly pile-on 
against Alex Rodriguez." 

"It is equally troubling that the MLB-appointed Panel Arbitrator will himself 
be appearing in the '60 Minutes' segment, and that Tony Bosch, MLB's principal 
witness, is appearing on the program with MLB's blessing." 

MLB responded that it had notified the players' union "on numerous occasions 
that we intended to respond to all of the attacks on the integrity of our Joint 
Drug Program. Those attacks continued yet again yesterday with Mr. Rodriguez's 
statement." 

The MLB said that Bosch "is not controlled by us and is entitled to speak 
however he chooses about his interactions with Mr. Rodriguez." 
 