
Black Friday <https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday> continues to 
divide retailers into Christmas winners and losers, with Primark and Mothercare 
saying they picked up extra sales but Argos losing out from its own heavy 
discounting.

Home Retail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/homeretailgroup> Group boss 
John Walden said the promotional extravaganza had given shoppers a “discount 
mentality”, with demand for flatscreen TVs, tablets and games consoles petering 
out either side of the day.

“This year’s adoption of Black Friday promotional events generally by the UK 
market significantly impacted the shape of Argos’ sales over its peak trading 
period,” he said. “The draw of discounts affected trade both before and after 
that busy weekend as consumers satisfied their Christmas shopping lists with 
bargains.”

Sales at Argos jumped 45% on Black Friday as more than 13.5m people logged on 
to its websites, but like-for-like sales ended up flat over the 18 weeks to 3 
January compared with expectations of a 2% rise. At sister chain Homebase, 
like-for-like sales were 0.6% wide of the 4.1% rise pencilled in by analysts, 
and the shares lost 6% on Thursday to 199.1p despite the company reiterating 
that it expected annual profits to hit City expectations of £127m.

Primark, meanwhile, said it had taken market share and enjoyed underlying 
sales growth in the UK and Ireland over Christmas after it avoided discounting. 
“We did nothing for Black Friday, no special events, but we saw increased 
footfall on the high street and not surprisingly we gained from that,” said 
John Bason, finance director at parent companyAssociated British Foods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/associatedbritishfoods> (ABF). “In 
fashion retail, weather affects sales and so we didn’t want to discount. We are 
confident in the Primark proposition and long-term growth; we don’t kneejerk 
around short-term weather effects.”

Primark <https://www.theguardian.com/business/primark> sold out of Christmas 
jumpers, selling more than 1m, while childrenswear and even womenswear linked 
to the hit Disney film Frozen also sold well. While UK sales in October and 
November were affected by the balmy autumn, Bason said it only affected winter 
coats and knitwear, which make up a third of Primark’s product range so overall 
sales continued to rise.

Total sales at Primark, which is expanding in mainland Europe, were up 15% in 
the 16 weeks to 3 January. Despite warning investors of a sharp fall in profits 
at its sugar division, ABF’s shares closed up nearly 4% at £31.47.

Mothercare <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mothercare> chief executive 
Mark Newton-Jones was also able to provide a reassuring update on progress in 
turning around its struggling UK chain. Like-for-like sales rose 1.1% in the 13 
weeks to 10 January while, after years of decline, profit margins were also 
flat as it held off widespread discounts until Boxing Day.

“The last week of November and the first week of December have always been the 
best weeks of the year for online sales,” said Newton-Jones. “If you discount, 
you are doing that for people who are going to shop anyway. Black Friday was 
really hyped up this year but I think it is going to be muted next year. People 
will look at their figures and see they sold product at a discount that they 
could have sold at full price. We got the footfall and we didn’t discount, we 
grew sales and margin.”

Walden, who as an American is a veteran of Black Friday sales stunts, said 
that faced with volatile sales and rivals’ “aggressive promotions” it had 
chosen to bank profits. “It would be easy to get in a position where everything 
is on sale, and everything gets cherry-picked and you end up with a real profit 
problem,” he said.

The retailer did not try and match rivals promotions in areas such as toys as 
they would have delivered little extra profit, he said but conceded it 
misjudged demand for its jewellery ranges, which include the Kardashian 
Kollection, with sales falling over the key period.
 