 People are trying to kill her just for saying what she thinks. Last year, he 
was actually killed simply because he made a provocative work of art. Welcome 
to our brave new Europe, three centuries after the Enlightenment.
She is Ayaan Hirsi Ali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayaan-hirsi-ali>, 
the Somalian-Dutch politician and writer, who wrote the script for the film 
Submission. He was Theo van Gogh, the Dutch director of that film, who as a 
result was murdered on an Amsterdam street just over a year ago. After slitting 
Van Gogh's throat, the murderer pinned a letter to his chest with a butcher's 
knife. "Ayaan Hirsi Ali," it said, "you will break yourself to pieces on 
Islam." "You, oh Europe, will go down ... " this rant concluded, "you, oh 
Netherlands, will go down ... You, oh Hirsi Ali, will go down."

Last week I had a conversation with Ayaan Hirsi Ali at the Institute of 
Contemporary Arts in London, and caught a glimpse of what it's like to live 
with a 24-hour top-security guard, under permanent threat of death for 
exercising your right of free expression. Our conversation was preceded by the 
first public showing in Britain of Submission. It's a deliberately shocking 
short film, and not, I think, a particularly good one. (You can judge for 
yourself by viewing it on the internet atayaanhirsiali.web-log.nl/log/2292608 
<http://ayaanhirsiali.web-log.nl/log/2292608> - it takes only 11 minutes.) 
However, I have not a shadow of a doubt that Ali's script is trying to make an 
important point about the suffering of women oppressed in the name of Islam - 
suffering that Ali knows at first hand both from her own experience and from 
acting as an interpreter for other women from Muslim backgrounds in the 
Netherlands.

Ayaan Hirsi Ali is much more than just a voice for the voiceless oppressed. In 
person, she is a thoughtful, calm, clear, almost pedantic spokeswoman for the 
fundamental liberal values of the Enlightenment: individual rights, free 
speech, equality before the law. At dinner afterwards, she told me how these 
liberal individualist ideals were first quickened in her by reading English 
literature as a schoolgirl in Kenya, where her family had fled from Somalia. 
She loved the work of Charles Dickens and George Orwell. (As a young Muslim 
girl, she briefly thought the horrible behaviour of the pigs in Orwell's Animal 
Farm helped explain why Muslims don't eat pork.) Then, studying political 
science in the Netherlands, she discovered the classics of western liberalism. 
Two authors she particularly admires are John Stuart Mill and Karl Popper.

I find her critique of multiculturalism, in the name of Enlightenment 
liberalism, too sweeping. In my view, her support for the French ban on the 
hijab in schools and public offices amounts to advocating an unnecessary 
restriction of individual liberty in the name of individual liberty. But her 
central claim seems to me vital and irrefutable: if being a free country means 
anything at all, it must mean that people have the chance to criticise freely, 
and without fear of reprisal, Islam, Hinduism or Sikhism, as they now in 
practice have the chance to excoriate Christianity (despite Britain's 
ridiculous blasphemy laws), Judaism or, for that matter, Darwinism. To 
establish that claim, she is determined to go ahead and make Submission 2, 
which will treat the story from the men's side, and Submission 3, which will 
suggest a possible response from Allah. Whatever the merits of the resulting 
films, we must salute her courage and support her in every way we can. It's not 
just the rights of women from Muslim families she is fighting for; it's a basic 
right for us all.

This right to free speech, which is to an open society what oxygen is to human 
life, is under direct threat from people whose position is very simple: if you 
say that, we will kill you. And not just in the case of Islam. Remember that 
violent protests and death threats from extremists in Britain's Sikh community 
forced the playwright Gurpreet Kaur Bhatti into hiding, and her play Behzti off 
the stage in Birmingham.

How does our government react? By extending police protection to threatened 
individuals, to be sure, as it did for Salman Rushdie. By making the right 
noises about tolerance, peaceful protest and free speech. But also - 
shamefully, stupidly, cravenly - by itself proposing to restrict that right, in 
an ill-considered, ill-drafted bill to bar "incitement to religious hatred". 
Among the motives behind the reintroduction of this already once rejected bill 
in Labour's last election manifesto were appeasement of some self-appointed 
spokespersons of the Muslim community in Britain and transparent political 
opportunism - as the distinguished human-rights lawyer and Liberal Democrat 
peer Anthony Lester observes in an excellent book prepared by English PEN (Free 
Expression is No Offence, edited by Lisa Appignanesi); he says that the bill 
was introduced as "a targeted bid to woo British Muslim support for New Labour 
in marginal constituencies where hostility to the illegal invasion of Iraq had 
alienated many Muslim and other potential voters fromLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> to the Liberal Democrats".

The bill has now been radically amended by the House of Lords. These 
amendments, in the formulation of which Lester played a significant part, do 
three things to make a bad bill somewhat less bad. They confine the offence to 
genuinely "threatening", rather than merely "abusive" or "insulting", words or 
behaviour. They require that the prosecution proves clear intent to stir up 
religious hatred. Above all, they introduce a "protection of freedom of 
expression" clause that reads: "Nothing in this part shall be read or given 
effect in a way that prohibits or restricts discussion, criticism or 
expressions of antipathy, dislike, ridicule, insult or abuse of particular 
religions or the beliefs or practices of their adherents, or of any other 
belief system or the beliefs or practices of its adherents, or proselytising or 
urging adherents of a different religion or belief system to cease practising 
their religion or belief system."

It would be better for everyone concerned not to have this bloody bill at all, 
but I guess we can just about live with a law containing that rather splendidly 
worded safeguard. The question is, can the government? Negotiations continue. 
We may have the answer before Christmas.

Now here's what Tony Blair, the home secretary, the attorney general and the 
rest of the cabinet need to do. First, they should go back and read the 
magnificent pages in which John Stuart Mill explains why what he calls the 
"collision of opinions" is vital to the preservation of liberty, and why it is 
"obvious that law and authority have no business with restraining" attacks on 
either religion or what he calls "infidelity". (I know they are very busy 
people, so here's the exact reference: pages 58 to 61 in the Oxford World 
Classics edition of On Liberty. Private secretaries please photocopy and 
include in tomorrow's red boxes.) Then they should reflect on the example of a 
brave Somalian woman who, inspired by authors such as Mill, is risking her life 
every day to maintain our right to free speech. Then they should summon up the 
courage to risk just a little possible unpopularity from a small part of the 
electorate, and take forward the bill as amended. Is that too much to ask?

www.freeworldweb.net <http://www.freeworldweb.net>
 