
Highlights

Danny Boyle's face

Why is everyone soft on Slumdog Millionaire? Because it's a masterpiece? No. 
Because it's a landmark transnational co-production? Think again. It is (in 
part, at least) becauseDanny Boyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/danny-boyle> is such a sweetie. A month ago, 
few of us had a clue what he looked like; now we're all familiar with that open 
face, those unruly tufts, the warmth of that smile. On Sunday night he thanked 
the residents of Mumbai and the people who helped fix his dad's wiring. His own 
son then shouted out from the audience that he loved him. I think it was his 
son. It could have been anyone.

Mickey Rourke's libido

Wossy was a gummy, on-message bore, but Mickey Rourke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mickey-rourke> more than compensated. No 
messing about thanking a wife, or producers, nor even dead dogs, as he did at 
the Golden Globes. Nope, Rourke was 18-rated all the way. He began by chatting 
up the award itself ("Mmm, pretty statue ...") before thanking his publicist 
for telling him "where to go, what to eat, who to fuck". Then he praised his 
co-star Marisa Tomei for being so brave and taking "her clothes off all the 
time. I enjoyed looking at her!". Shambolic thesp lechery is traditional on 
this side of the pond; here was a Yank giving us a masterclass.

Mad blondes

Goldie Hawn forgot her lines, giggled and wore a necklace that looked as if 
she'd vomited diamonds. Sharon Stone muffed her intro and looked as if she'd 
just hopped off Gunther von Hagens' operating slab. But they were still less 
embarrassing than the ham sandwich of Patrick Stewart andIan McKellen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ian-mckellen>.

Lowlights

Kate Winslet's composure

Her frock may have mixed a fish tail and bat ears but Kate Winslet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/katewinslet> was disappointingly conservative 
in her acceptance speech. She didn't once blub, nor gather, not even when 
eulogising about her parents or dead friends. Maybe she was saving herself for 
the Oscars? It's not in the bag yet, love. Most damning was Mrs Winslet 
mouthing "perfect"s. When your mum says something's perfect, it's unlikely to 
make for classic YouTube.

Morbid camera angles

Rubbernecking was evidently the watchword in the production suite at this 
year's ceremony. No sooner had Heath Ledger's name been read out than - zoom - 
we got a screenful of Robert Downey Jr's upset eyes. The second Kristin Scott 
Thomas looked like she might still be grieving forAnthony Minghella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthonyminghella> - zip - there was a 
close-up of her tear ducts. The organisers were in on it too, scheduling the In 
Memorium montage to follow the best supporting actor prize, ensuring the 
audience was suitably primed.

Meta-comedy

Of the many unintentionally humourless moments at this year's ceremony, the 
prize clunker was undoubtedly the David Frost/Michael Sheen-as-David Frost 
double act. Not even the audience's appreciation of Sheen's skills, nor their 
indulgence of Frostie's advanced years, could conceal the general horror at 
this navel-gazing. Mick Jagger's industry in-jokes near the end of the show may 
have gone down a treat in the house, but all round the country viewers gagged 
at the celebrity roast.
 