 "The government patently have little time for parliament, seeing it as a 
tiresome irrelevance. The third way was always meant to take the politics out 
of politics in favour of a business-friendly consensus. Is it any wonder the 
public view our toothless and subservient politicians with disdain? People 
hunger for energy and passion in their politicians. All we have at present are 
weary bureacrats".
- Rory Bremner 
"People are clearly passionate about health, education, transport and other 
core policy issues. But they won't reward simplistic political promises and 
good-guy-bad-guy coverage with either votes or media loyalty. If the 
information on which people base their democratic choice is flawed as it is now 
- overspun and overhyped on both side of the political and journalistic divide 
- apathy is neither surprising nor wrong. Media and politics should hold a 
summit, call a truce, and re-draw the ethical lines of realistic political 
debate, and realistic political reporting".
- Julia Hobsbawm, Chief Executive of the public relations company HMC

"People are not bored with politics. What they are bored with is the tired way 
in which politics is too often presented to them by both the politicians and 
the media. The best political programmes have good, growing and appreciative 
audiences. The Observer, amongst other broadsheets, put on circulation during 
the last election, even though it was not one of the most stimulating or 
closely fought contests in recent times. And at the risk of sounding a slightly 
immodest note, there is a great appetite for reading about how we are governed. 
It is even possible to get a top ten best-seller, in both hardback and 
paperback, out of a book about government.

Politics succeeds in engaging people when the issues are vividly explored, the 
personalties are projected in a way which is compelling, and the dilemmas and 
dramas are made to matter.

It should not beyond the wit of the rich amount of talent there is in both 
politics and the media to switch people on again. Look at the great recent 
success of television series devoted to historical subjects. And what is 
history but the politics of dead people? If the dead can be made to come that 
alive for so many people, then we should be able to do it for the living".
- Andrew Rawnsley, Chief Political Correspondent, The Observer

"'Big P' Politics turns people off, but 'small p' politics doesn't. The trick 
is that people can be political, but disengage from 'Politics'. Much in the 
same way that friends reunited has re-connected people with people they used to 
know, someone needs to come up with an 'issues reunited' to link those seeking 
to be political - to protest, moan, or act - with others who might want to do 
the same. We must accept that this type of quick and sometimes dirty political 
engagement is much more likely to interest people than the life-times devotion 
to affairs of state which Politicians seem to want".
- James Crabtree, iSociety, The Industrial Society and Director, Voxpolitics

"Politics today seems so abstract that most young people fail to see a 
connection between their everyday lives and the suits stood bickering at the 
ballot box. If you want to get teenagers interested, make politics relevant; 
don't talk about the possible, highlight the actual. Champion clear and 
committed youth policies and stop using 'teenager' as another word for no good, 
socially dysfunctional layabout - they may not be eligible to vote now, but 
they will be one day. Follow the Yanks and enlist the help of stars to get 
young people listening. And pray that sometime soon a few impassioned 
politicians cut from the same cloth as Tony Benn come along and prove that not 
all MPs are in it for the perks and the glory".
 - Helen Bazuaye, Editor, J17 Magazine

"Politics has entered an era of near constant electioneering the shrill tone 
of so much political debate has nullified the message (if any). The reason 
people have lost interest is that the level of debate is consequently at an 
all-time low. Politicians (egged on by an agenda-inebriated media) are too busy 
scoring points to forward any solutions beyond hollow pledges on everything 
from the NHS to the trains - two subjects the coddled political classes are 
uniquely ill-equipped to debate".
- Bill Prince, Deputy Editor, GQ

"Politicians need to start addressing the issues people really care about - 
the environment, especially global warming, is near the top of the list. And 
the media have to stop portraying politics as men in suits squabbling in 
Westminster - nothing makes politics look less inspiring and motivating.

Increasingly politics isn't about governments and parties anyway; for many 
people, it's about corporate power. And while some people may be disillusioned 
with voting once every four years, many more are getting involved in another 
kind of politics - taking direct action to stop the corporations".
- Laura Yates, Greenpeace

"Politics is out of synch with a world which has radically changed over the 
past 20 years or so. People have had to become much more self-reliant, both at 
work and in our private lives. At work we are continually assessed and have to 
deliver. At play, the boot transfers to the other foot as Britain finally 
embraces a service culture and consumers make their voices heard when things 
are not up to expectation. But the world of politics still appears to live in 
the land of extreme overclaim and underdelivery.

Of course, running a country is a hugely complex and difficult task. But 
credibility problems arise when the issues behind a failure to deliver are 
glossed over, rather than properly addressed. This eats away at the perceived 
competence of government to do anything other than 'talk the talk.' Most of the 
electorate have lost faith in New Labour's ability to improve the nation's 
quality of life. The answer is not to set out even more taxing goals and 
ambitions, but to look at the underlying causes behind the prevailing mood; to 
find the confidence to own up to being human and to acknowledge properly that 
it is finding things much harder than they actually appeared in May 1997. The 
government has the talent to turn the situation around. The question is whether 
or not they have the honesty and humility."
 - Stef Calcraft, Director and founder, creative agency Mother

Preposterously, politicians pretend they'll fix everything. Predictably, they 
don't. Not because they don't try, nor because they're venal self-serving 
plutocrats; but because social problems are hard to fix. Consumer brands 
(despite their image in some quarters as the devil with a logo) are actually 
quite clever when it comes to promoting social change, and creating mass trust. 
They experiment. They listen. They respond to people's concerns. And crucially, 
they deliver what they promise: nothing more, nothing less. That has made 
brands the most trusted instutitutions in contemporary society. Forget 
"rebranding" politics; forget making the voting process easier - that's just an 
infantilisation of the electorate. Politics should learn from brands about 
trust.
 - Steve Hilton, partner at social marketing agency Good Business and former 
Tory campaigner.

"In a media society, debates about policies and ethical dilemmas only acquire 
a real existence when they appear on TV bulletins or in editorial pages. The 
media doesn't simply report on what our elected representatives do - it 
provides the spaces where citizens can scrutinise our representatives and hold 
them to account. If people are turning-off, the media is at least an equal 
culprit in the hollowing-out of our political culture.

But we have a shallow debate between those who think politics is boring and 
should be scaled back, and those who think it should be force-fed to a 
reluctant nation. The real problem is that covering politics as an inferior 
form of entertainment far removed from everyday lives, focusing on obscure 
personalities and Westminster wobbles rather than holding policies and 
decisions up to scrutiny and examining their impact on our lives.

Global issues are increasingly central to politics, yet foreign news suffers 
particularly at the hands of broadcasters. On one level, other countries seem 
to be on a different planet. In the age of the internet and cheap travel, 
programmes like "From our own correspondent" conjure up images of a white man 
on a voyage of discovery in the jungle. Yet foreign news also assumes 
specialist knowledge, and excludes those who don't already know about India's 
BJP or the political dilemmas facing President Megawati: it doesn't stop to 
explain why these issues matter.

Contrast the the innovative, informed coverage of science on television news. 
The discovery of the Human Genome was explained in well-thought out stages on 
peak-time national bulletins. Genes and DNA were couched in language an eight 
year old could understand; the medical applications were explored; the ethical 
dilemmas outlined. If journalists had reported in the style they usually 
reserve for politics, they would have focused solely on a horse-race between 
the US and UK research teams, complete with in-depth biographical information 
and a dash of incomprehensible scientific jargon".
- Mark Leonard, Director, The Foreign Policy Centre
 