
A 15-year-old boy has been charged with the murder of a school teacher stabbed 
to death in front of pupils in Leeds earlier this week.

The teenager, who cannot be named for legal reasons, was charged three days 
after being restrained by teachers at Corpus Christi Catholic College in the 
Halton Moor area of east Leeds.

He will appear in front of Leeds youth court on Thursday, the crown 
prosecution service said. The hearing will be closed to the public though 
journalists will be allowed to attend.

A statment from the CPS said: "A 15-year-old male was arrested in connection 
with this incident and has been interviewed under caution by police."

The boy has been charged with killing Ann Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire>, 61, a much-loved Spanish 
teacher at the school. Maguire was due to retire this summer after 40 years 
service at the school. She died in hospital on Monday after coming under attack 
in her own classroom, with horrified pupils raising the alarm.

On Wednesday police continued to question children who had witnessed the 
incident.

The pope offered sympathy to Maguire's friends and family and all those 
affected by the tragedy.

Archbishop Antonio Mennini, the Vatican's ambassador to Britain, on Wednesday 
asked for the message of "sincere sympathy" to be conveyed on behalf of himself 
and the pope.

In a letter to the apostolic administrator of the diocese, Monsignor John 
Wilson, Menni wrote: "I assure you of my prayers for the repose of the soul of 
Mrs Maguire and for the consolation and strengthening of all those persons 
close to her and all those who mourn her sudden death. May the Lord grant her 
eternal rest and the reward of her life of dedication and of service to young 
people and to education."

On Wednesday the school's head, Steve Mort, praised students as he viewed the 
mass of floral tributes which have accumulated since Maguire's death on Monday 
morning.

He said: "I am immensely proud to be headteacher at Corpus Christi.

"Our children have proven themselves to be great ambassadors for the school. 
And I want to pay particular tribute to them and to the professionalism and 
dedication demonstrated by our staff at this very difficult time."

It has emerged that Maguire, who was described as a "wonderful, dedicated 
teacher" by the school's chairman of governors, raised her two nephews 
following the death of her sister.

Maguire, who is understood to have two grown-up daughters of her own, brought 
up Andrew and Daniel from a young age after their mother, Eileen Poole, died 
from cancer.
 