
Initial euphoria about the Spanish bailout over the weekend had evaporated by 
the close of play, butBP was one company not to lose its early gains.

The oil giant added 5.85p to 414.9p on hopes that it could reach a settlement 
with the US Department of Justice over the Deepwater Horizon disaster. There 
was talk BP was hoping to settle from less than $15bn with the US authorities 
wanting $25bn. Even if BP paid the higher amount, any deal would be welcomed 
since it would draw a line under the issue. The Gulf is not the only problem 
facingBP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> of course, with continuing 
uncertainty over its position in Russia. Analyst Gordon Gray at Canaccord 
Genuity said:
 We recently raised our stance on BP from hold to buy. In our view, the two 
key risks holding back BP's shares are 1) the scale of potential fines for the 
Deepwater Horizon disaster and 2) uncertainty over TNK-BP. While both 
situations remain highly fluid, there is a possibility that both could be 
moving towards some form of resolution.

BP has currently only provisioned $3.5bn for [Deepwater Horizon] fines, so any 
settlement of the order of $15bn-$20bn would result in a significant profit and 
loss charge. However, we think this level of payment would still result in a 
positive share price move if it drew a line under the issue and removed a key 
investment risk.

[As for Russia], on 1 June BP announced that it had received unsolicited 
offers for its 50% stake in Russian joint venture TNK-BP. As well as removing a 
major risk factor from BP, we think an exit from its stake in TNK-BP at a 
reasonable price could allow BP to emerge from any potential settlement with 
the US DoJ in a far stronger financial position than many would have expected. 
Overall the FTSE 100 ended 2.71 points lower at 5432.37 having earlier jumped 
as high as 5536. As the day wore on, investors became increasingly concerned 
about where the €100bn for the Spanish bank bailout would come from, not to 
mention worries about the knock-on effects on other struggling eurozone 
countries such as Ireland, Italy and Greece. The Greek elections this coming 
weekend added an extra element of uncertainty.

Lloyds Banking Group edged higher, up 0.485p at 28.495p, while Barclays was 
0.2p better at 190.55p, helped by lingering hopes the Spanish bank deal would 
stick.

Tesco was steady at 302.8p after an in-line trading update, but Man fell 3.15p 
to 76.7p ahead of the hedge fund group's exit from the FTSE 100 at Friday 
night's close.

Reckitt Benckiser ended unchanged at £34.57 after Societe Generale issued a 
sell note on the Cillit Bang business, although it raised its price target from 
£29 to £31.

Miners were mixed despite some positive Chinese import figures. But Glencore 
added 5.75p to 363.55p as chief executive Ivan Glasenberg splashing out just 
over £10m to buy 2.83m shares for around 356p each on Friday. Glasenberg, who 
said he would spend some of his $110m dividend from the commodities trader, had 
already bought £10m worth of shares earlier last week. Glasenberg is already 
Glencore's biggest shareholder, and will own around 9% of the combined company 
when it merges with mining group Xstrata, a deal due to complete later this 
year.

Serco rose 6p to 546p after the support services group paid £55.5m for the UK 
public sector business of Vertex Data Science. The business being acquired 
provides outsourcing services to central and local government, including 
Westminster and Thurrock councils and Job Centre Plus. Robert Morton at 
Investec said:
 This acquisition bolsters Serco's existing BPO [business processing 
outsourcing] activities, bringing new sector skills and a strong business in 
the public sector. The acquisition will enhance earnings but, more importantly, 
strengthens the group's presence in a market that we believe has strong growth 
potential over the medium term. We reiterate our buy recommendation. 
International Airlines Group, the owner of British Airways and Iberia, dipped 
0.5p to 145.6p despite the Spanish bailout, thanks todownbeat comments from 
airline industry group Iata. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2012/jun/11/more-airlines-will-go-bust-iata>
 But Nomura issued a buy note on the group, saying:
 While the market is focused on the downside risks, we continue to see some 
useful industry developments. The capacity picture continues to improve for 
European carriers as the major players approach capacity expansion in a more 
rational manner and weaker players exit the market. Meanwhile, the 
consolidation process continues and we believe current valuations could offer 
certain players the opportunity for strategic stake purchases. 
Among the mid caps Aquarius Platinum dropped 8p to 65.5p after it announced it 
was suspending some of its operations in South Africa, due to the low prices 
currently commanded by the metal.

Aquarius and its partner Anglo Platinum are placing the Marikana operations on 
a care and maintenance basis, to preserve its ore reserves until the platinum 
price recovers and the site becomes economic once more. Analyst Dominic Okane 
at Liberum Capital said Marikana accounted for around 18% of the company's 
annual production, and its temporary closure would reduce 2013 earnings 
estimates by around 13%. He said:
 Further closures are likely - specifically Everest which is around 30% higher 
cost.

But Panmure Gordon kept its buy rating on the company, saying the Marikana 
move was a sensible one.

Lower down the market, struggling infrastructure group Mouchel lost more than 
a third of its remaining value after it warned a proposed restructuring would 
leave very little value for shareholders.

The company, which rejected a number of takeover approaches over the past two 
years before being hit by contract problems, said it hoped to announce a 
balance sheet restructuring before the end of July. It had already said in 
March an equity fundraising was one possible outcome but confirmed:
 All options being considered will result in their being only limited value 
for shareholders. 
So its shares slumped 2p to 3.8p, despite the company saying its underlying 
business was performing well and it had identified an extra £3m of overhead 
cost savings. Analyst Christopher Bamberry at Peel Hunt said:
 With only limited value for existing shareholders, Mouchel remains a sell. 
However post restructuring it should generate sensible returns. Once the 
balance sheet is restructured, it should be a much more interesting investment 
proposition. 
Finally Plethora Solutions put on 15% to 5.625p after it submitted PSD502, a 
new treatment for premature ejaculation, to the European Medicines Agency for 
approval. Analysts at Daniel Stewart said:
 The product successfully completed two phase III pivotal trials and has been 
tested on over 600 patients with a total of approximately 26,000 doses 
delivered. The substantial amount of data gathered on the treatment to date 
demonstrate that PSD502 is safe and highly effective. We expect the [European] 
agency to grant approval within 12 to 18 months.  