
BP was among the leading risers as the FTSE 100 soared more than 100 points 
higher for the first time since the start of January.

The oil group rose 16p to 470p, a 3.5% increase which added nearly 12 points 
to the leading index. Despite the continuing problems the company faces in 
resolving its dispute with TNK-BP in Russia, JP Morgan Cazenove put an 
overweight rating on its shares with a 575p price target. In a note on the oil 
sector, the bank said:
 One name stands out as being seriously under-priced – once again it is BP 
which trades on a 2011 PE of just 6.4 times. To match Shell's [rating] we must 
zero the value of BP's stake in TNK-BP and also raise the total Macondo [oil 
spill] related liabilities from $20bn to $58bn. 
BP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> also signed a new coalbed methane 
deal in Indonesia.

Overall the FTSE 100 finished 101.16 points higher at 6009.92, helped by a 
revival in banking shares and better than expected US job figures.

The results of the Irish stress tests and continuing talk that the forthcoming 
independent banking commission will not call for a break-up of the banks lifted
Lloyds Banking Group 2.91p to 61p, Barclays 11.9p to 289.45p and Royal Bank of 
Scotland 1.55p to 42.34p.

Bank of Ireland, which will be one of two "pillar" banks created under the new 
plans, jumped 41% to €0.31 and the other,Allied Irish Banks, rose 8% as its 
share suspension was lifted.Irish Life & Permanent, which up until now had 
survived without direct funding, fell 54% as it was revealed it needs a €4bn 
injection. Analysts at Killik & Co said:
 Overall the results of the stress tests are marginally positive for the UK 
banking names, especially for the UK banks with significant Irish operations.

Investors were also encouraged by signs of a healthy US economy after the 
monthly non-farm payroll numbers showed a rise of 216,000 jobs, higher than the 
190,000 forecast.

But 3i fell 13.1p to 285.8p after the investment group's trading update 
pointed to a weak performance in the UK, counterbalanced by strong growth in 
northern Europe. Bill Barnard at Evolution Securities said:
 While 3i's pre-close partially reflects the impact of recent market weakness 
on the net asset value, weaker than expected cash flow numbers imply that some 
of the exits/returns expected in 2010/11 will instead slip into 2011/12. While 
not a huge issue per se, the impact on wider sentiment could be marked as long 
as equity markets are erratic.
While 3i would appear to offer value, the risk is that sentiment remains weak 
towards it, and that the attractions elsewhere in the sector are much more 
compelling. 
In the food sector, Uniq - which sells desserts, sandwiches and salads to 
retailers across the UK - added 2.55p to 67p as it was effectively put up for 
sale by its pension trustee, which controls 90% of the company. Uniq said a 
number of third parties had already shown an interest in buying it or taking an 
interest.

Premier Foods rose 1.76p to 29.69p after Morgan Stanley moved from equal 
weight to overweight with a 40p price target. The bank said:
 Balance sheet issues are largely resolved (leverage in check, swaps portfolio 
de-risked, pension drain capped), and it now has an opportunity to lower 
interest costs through a final round of restructuring. Having spent four years 
integrating acquisitions, we think Premier is finally in a position to focus on 
delivering profitable growth.

The re-rating has started but, trading on less than 6 times current year 
earnings, the market remains sceptical that Premier has turned the corner. The 
environment is tough, with input costs rising and intense promotional activity, 
but Premier's guidance looks sufficiently conservative and the company has 
various self-help levers to offset these pressures. 
Comet owner Kesa Electricals fell 3p to 117.1p as JP Morgan Cazenove put an 
84p price target on the shares, saying:
 Electricals retailers are likely to suffer disproportionately in the current 
consumer environment due to the high ticket and discretionary nature of the 
purchase. While therefore we are negative on the UK retail sector we expect 
electrical to underperform the wider segment. 
But Dixons Retail, which slumped earlier this week on a profit warning, edged 
up 0.15p to 12.72p despite credit agency Moody's saying it might cut the 
retailer's rating.

Lower down the market 888 added 6.75p to 50p on talk that Ladbrokes, 1.1p 
lower at 131.4p, was considering raising its 70p a share offer for the online 
gaming company.

Cineworld climbed 3.75p to 211.25p following reports that the rival Odeon 
chain had been put up for sale at between £700m and £1bn. Evolution Securities 
said:
 [The report] serves to remind the market that Cineworld is undervalued, we 
believe. [Based on the suggested Odeon price] Cineworld would be worth 255p to 
360p, pre-synergies. 
In a buy note Alistair Macdonald at Espirito Santo said:
 Cineworld is ... clearly undervalued on peer comparison. The near term 
attraction with Cineworld is the turnaround in the UK advertising market. The 
advertising partnership between Cine, Odeon and now Vue, should provide further 
benefits on this aspect. Medium term opportunity is in the complete digital 
conversion of the Cineworld estate. This is expected by 2013 though could come 
as soon as early 2012. Digital operations should provide cost efficiencies on 
both personnel and screening. The peer valuations being considered by private 
equity gives an indication of the upside potential as these benefits start 
becoming visible.  