
The sound of crackling gunfire mingled with protesters' chants in the morning 
air of Mozambique's capital city, Maputo. A few blocks away on Avenida Julius 
Nyerere, police fired live rounds at crowds demonstrating against recent hikes 
in food and fuel prices. "The country is sick," said a smart and sombre office 
security guard.

The riots in Maputo made headlines throughout the world. But the security 
guard's assessment of the disturbances could be applied to a more general and 
largely unreported malaise affecting much of Mozambique. Despite being widely 
regarded in the development world as a success story, its health system is now 
crumbling in many areas, as a result of decades of neglect and underinvestment 
in staff, medicines, medical technologies and facilities.

As a result, access to even the most basic healthcare is beyond the reach of 
the majority of Mozambicans. Life expectancies have plunged in recent years, 
and nearly one in every seven children die before their fifth birthday.

A major reason for the population's poor health profile is the chronic 
shortage of frontline healthcare personnel. For every doctor in the country, 
there is an average of 40,000 patients – and, in remote rural areas, this 
number soars, as health professionals are concentrated in the cities.

According to Dr El Hadi Benzerroug, Mozambican representative of the World 
Health Organisation in Maputo, "One of the pillars of the health system is of 
course its health staff." He says the doctor-patient ratio in Mozambique is the 
fifth worst in the world.

In response to this human resources deficit, the Ministry of Health in Maputo 
has decided a cost-effective and innovative way of improving the population's 
overall health is to train and deploy thousands of auxiliary medical 
assistants, known locally as community health workers (CHWs).

CHWs have long existed throughout Mozambique and other parts of Africa. Mostly 
they have worked in an informal capacity alongside traditional, faith and 
complementary healers. But in the government's new plans, tasks normally 
performed by overburdened doctors and nurses will now be officially delegated 
to CHWs, who will be elected by their community to serve as a bridge between 
that community and health professionals. Their job is to help reduce mortality 
from preventable diseases like malaria, diarrhoea and tuberculosis.

In more serious cases, CHWs will act as gatekeepers to more specialised health 
services, whereby they refer patients to the district health authorities to 
seek assistance from more qualified health workers. In return, CHWs will 
receive a stipend.

The most optimistic Ministry of Health forecast sees the revamped CHW 
programme increasing the level of access to basic healthcare from its current 
baseline of 40% coverage of the population to 80%. But this aspiration has not 
been matched by the political will to implement the programme nationwide.

In practice, three years into ministry discussions of the programme, the 
situation for existing CHWs has not advanced. Nor have they produced the 
dramatic acceleration in improvements to the health system that had been hoped 
for.

Having grown disillusioned with broken government promises in delivering 
health services to the district, many CHWs feel abandoned by the authorities in 
Maputo. Fortunato Joaquin, 32, a government-trained CHW in the Homoine district 
of Inhambane province, 350km north-east of Maputo, says, "If we have to wait 
for the government to help patients, then people will die."

So in the absence of government assistance in tackling the district's health 
problems, CHWs in Homoine formed the Kulhaissa organisation to deliver vital 
care to their community members most in need. "We are from here, this is our 
place of origin," says Joaquin. "So one thing we asked ourselves is, 'Why can't 
we help each other?'"

During Mozambique's civil war, which commenced shortly after the country 
gained independence from Portugal in 1975, Renamo guerrillas attacked the 
country's infrastructure in an effort to destabilise the newly-elected Frelimo 
government. Renamo rebels kidnapped and killed health workers and destroyed 
medical facilities, equipment and supplies. Resourceful medical staff, however, 
would stash medicines in safe spots and hide during raids on health centres, 
returning at nightfall to treat the wounded.

The legacy of such resilience is evident to this day in the work of Kulhaissa, 
just one of hundreds of similar voluntary organisations that now dot the 
healthcare landscape across Mozambique. "We basically take care of each other," 
says Joaquin. "Although we won't be paid, still we save lives, and we're very 
proud of this. We are willing to help each other."

Joaquin picks up and fingers an official letter he received from the 
government. "This is to acknowledge our existence," he says. Beyond this, he 
claims the "government has done nothing to help". In the five years he's been 
working in Homoine, he has seen no real government involvement in the area. 
"What happens here," Joaquin insists, "is different from what they say in 
Maputo."

Co-ordinating NGO and government efforts

Malaria Consortium's headquarters in Maputo resemble those of any other modern 
office environment – except for the two brand-new Yamaha motocross bikes in the 
corridor. Kate Brownlow, country director of Malaria Consortium in Mozambique, 
explains: "The motorbikes are part of a project funded by the Bill & Melinda 
Gates Foundation to improve the community case management of childhood 
illnesses. They will be presented to the ministry in Inhambane province to help 
medical technicians carry out supervision and strengthen co-ordination and 
reporting to the district health facilities."

In the past, critics of international NGOs operating in Mozambique have 
claimed their work often undermined the government health system's broader goal 
of ensuring even national coverage of access to healthcare. Several NGOs, 
critics claimed, supported health interventions in favoured districts, and, 
with the lure of higher salaries, poached health staff from the ministry to 
work for their organisations. The resulting "brain drain", it was argued, left 
many government-funded health clinics understaffed, while the remaining health 
workers lacked motivation to continue their work.

In many ways, Malaria Consortium represents a new approach to NGO involvement 
in health delivery in Mozambique, assisting the ministry in an extensive 
programme intended to reduce the number of deaths from malaria, pneumonia and 
diarrhoea – the biggest child killers in the country.

Nevertheless, Brownlow says, "The ministry still feels some NGOs are not 
working closely enough with itself or its provincial authorities, and are not 
reporting properly on activities and resources used. Considerable effort by 
various committed organisations has been put into improving this over the last 
three years, however."

Community health in action

Laurinda Alfeu, 29, was selected by her community leaders in 2006 to work as 
its CHW. In the mornings, she works in the health clinic, a basic structure 
made of coconut branches. Apart from a government poster on the wall stating
Unidos na luta contra a pobreza ('united in the fight against poverty') the 
only other items in the clinic are a mat for patients to lie on, and a table 
for medication.

In the afternoons, Alfeu heads off on foot making home visits to patients 
unable to walk to her. On this occasion, she is at the house of a family she 
knows well. Alfeu does her best to spot symptoms of common diseases such as 
malaria. But, pointing her fingers at mosquitoes nesting in trees surrounding 
the family's house, she claims the best way to rid Homoine of malaria is to 
treat trees with the anti-mosquito insecticide. So far, the government has 
failed to spray the trees there.

Her role gives Alfeu a status she might otherwise not have. But, she says, the 
government's inadequate support frustrates her wish to help her ailing 
community members. "It is a big sacrifice. I now walk five kilometres to my 
next family. It would be nice if we could receive some support from the 
government."

David Ralph's assignment in Mozambique was hosted by Malaria Consortium
 