
When Marcelo Loffreda reports for his first day as a professional coach this 
morning he will wonder what sort of madhouse he is joining. There are currently 
more moustaches in theLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> dressing-room than at a 
Merv Hughes appreciation night and when Loffreda sees Andy Goode's ridiculous 
set of mutton-chop whiskers he may be tempted to book the first plane back to 
the sanity of Buenos Aires.

Goode, sporting not so much a handlebar moustache as the full bikeshed, is 
merely the fuzziest example of Leicester's latest fund-raising initiative for 
their paralysed former prop Matt Hampson. The squad, coaches and backroom staff 
have pledged to abandon their razors during November in support of the "Grow A 
Mo For Hambo" spinal injury campaign, taking the concept of bristling 
aggression to a whole new level.

Happily for Loffreda, once he looks beyond facial fungus and gets to know his 
posse of east Midlands banditos, he will find a serious rugby team in pretty 
good shape. The long-haired Tigers may have been flattered by their margin of 
victory on Saturday but they look certain to be formidable contenders when the 
Heineken Cup begins this weekend. With five internationals on the bench, the 
depth of talent at their disposal has never been greater and their World Cup 
representatives seem happy enough to be home.

Loffreda will also discover one or two fringe England candidates less than 
thrilled at the way they were erased from the pre-World Cup frame. The lock 
Louis Deacon was allegedly told by a senior England coach he would not be going 
because he did not exude any presence when he walked into a room, hardly the 
ideal way to console a disappointed young player.

As for the senior pros, there is a genuine whiff of the unknown about the new 
hombre riding into town. "We don't know, that's the exciting thing," shrugged 
Martin Corry, man of the match on his return to club duty. "When you get to my 
age it's nice to have things around the corner you can't predict, but we're 
going in with our eyes wide open. At least it's nice to know he can watch this 
game and see what kind of side we are."

The Cardiff coach Dai Young, who must now contend with several injury doubts 
for their first Heineken Cup fixture against Bristol next Sunday, did not see 
much to bother Loffreda as the Tigers roared out of sight in the third quarter 
after the Blues had been reduced to 14 men by the sin-binning of the hooker 
Gareth Williams. Despite the sweat of Xavier Rush, Martyn Williams, John Yapp 
and Ben Blair they could not muster 15 fit players by the end and had conceded 
a barbers' shop quartet of tries before an injury-time penalty try.

Nicky Robinson's thigh problem and Gareth Thomas's knee will require treatment 
this week and both wings are doubtful with shoulder injuries. Given Young's 
team currently sit atop the Celtic League this result will also have jolted the 
Blues' confidence, albeit on a ground where no Welsh club side has won for nine 
years. Maybe they should simply stop shaving.

Leicester G Murphy; Varndell, Hipkiss, Rabeni, A Tuilagi (J Murphy, h-t); 
Goode (Burke, 59), F Murphy (Laussucq, 75); Ayerza, Kayser (M Davies, 71), 
White (Castrogiovanni, 55), L Deacon, Kay (Hamilton, 75), Corry (capt), Moody 
(Abraham, 78), Crane.

Tries Varndell, J Murphy 2, Hipkiss, Penalty try. Cons Goode, Burke 3. Pens 
Goode 3.

Cardiff Blues Blair; Roberts, Shanklin, G Thomas (R Thomas 72), James (R 
Williams, 66); N Robinson (Flanagan, 32), Rees (Spice, 53); Yapp, G Williams, T 
Filise (Powell, 78), B Davies, Tito (Sidoli, 64), Molitika (Morgan, 64), M 
Williams, Rush (capt).

Tries Rush, Blair. Cons Blair 2. Pens Blair 2.

Sin-bin G Williams, 40.

Referee N Owens (Wales). Attendance 17,118.
 