
Tributes have been paid to director Antonia Bird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/antonia-bird>, who has died at the age of 62.

She was perhaps best known for her work with actor Robert Carlyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/robert-carlyle> on the 1994 film Priest, 
1997's Face, and Ravenous two years later. She also worked in TV, including 
contributions to Spooks, Cracker and the BBC's The Village.

Carlyle wrote on Twitter: "Such a sad day today … RIP Antonia Bird. Farewell 
my beautiful friend." And fellow actor John Simm, who worked with Bird on the 
Village, wrote: "Such terribly sad news yesterday re the untimely death of the 
wonderful Antonia Bird. A brilliant, inspiring, beautiful Soul. RIP Antonia."

Tribute was also paid by actor Nico Mirallegro, who starred in The Village 
portraying the son of Simm's character. The Spike Island actor wrote: "So 
awfully sad to hear about Antonia Bird. Beautifully talented lady. Thanks for 
everything. RIP."

He added: "I'm so pleased that I got the chance to learn from and work with 
such an inspirational person! Loved everything about her!"

Irvine Welsh, the Trainspotting writer with whom Bird set up the production 
company Four Way Pictures, wrote that he had lost a "great pal" in Bird, adding 
that she "made amazing films".

Their business partner Mark Cousins said: "So touching to see all the tributes 
to director Antonia Bird. The thing now is to make her work available and get 
it seen." British actress Marsha Thomason, who appeared in Bird's Priest and 
was also in US TV series Lost and 2 Broke Girls, said: "I'm so very saddened to 
hear about the passing of Antonia Bird. A sweetheart of a woman and a talented 
director."

And Andy Pryor, a former colleague, wrote: "So sad about the passing of 
Antonia Bird. One of the best directors I've worked with and her appreciation 
of actors was immense."

Bird began her career in theatre, before moving into TV. She made episodes of 
EastEnders and Casualty and later worked on The Bill, Inspector Morse and Peak 
Practice.

She won 10 awards in her career, including two Bafta TV awards for Best Single 
Drama; one for Safe in 1994, the other for Care in 2001, which dealt with 
sexual abuse in a children's home and also won her the Bafta Cymru award the 
same year. Bird won the Bafta children's award for Best Learning – Primary in 
2009.

Bird got the award for best film at the Berlin International Film Festival and 
the People's Choice Award at the Toronto International Film Festival; both of 
which were for Priest.

In an interview with the Guardian in 1999, she said that she preferred working 
with British actors to American because the former "arrive on the set and they 
have an idea of what they want to do in the scene. They've thought about it, 
they come and offer you something as a director".

She added: "Generally, to get a good performance out of an actor you go with 
that offer, because that's going to be truthful. This person has thought 
truthfully about what they're doing at this point and if you can make that work 
with your cameras, the lighting and all the other hoo-hah that's going on then 
you're gonna get a great performance.

"American actors arrive on the set a blank book – now that's fine, that's 
their tradition, but as a British director it's absolutely terrifying …"

• This article was amended on 28 October 2013. Antonia Bird died at the age of 
62, and not 54.
 