
Centrica <https://www.theguardian.com/business/centrica>, Britain's biggest 
domestic energy supplier, was engulfed in a leadership crisis last night after 
the head of its British Gas business announced plans to quit.

The departure of Chris Weston after just over a year in the job follows the 
resignation of the finance director, Nick Luff, who is set to be followed by 
the chief executive, Sam Laidlaw, though his exit has not been confirmed 
officially.

"Centrica is looking rudderless. This is dangerous in a world of increasingly 
choppy waters," said Martin Brough, an energy analyst at Deutsche Bank. John 
Musk, an analyst at RBC Capital Markets, told Reuters: "Centrica needs to admit 
Sam Laidlaw is leaving and announce a new chief executive as soon as possible 
to avoid leaving a bigger void."

The upheaval at the top of the business comes at a critical time for the 
industry, with all big six suppliers facing an investigation by the competition 
and markets authority and a huge loss of consumer trust. There has been 
speculation that a torrent of criticism against Centrica from senior 
politicians including energy secretary Ed Davey has convinced energy executives 
to find calmer sectors in which to work.

Weston is quitting to become the chief executive of Aggreko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aggreko>, a controversy-free FTSE 100 
company that provides power generating equipment to customers including the 
Glastonbury festival.

His predecessor, Phil Bentley, left to become head of telecoms business Cable 
& Wireless Communications in 2013 while Luff has agreed to become finance chief 
at Reed Elsevier, the scientific publisher.

Both Bentley and Weston are understood to have made clear their interest in 
taking over from Laidlaw when he stepped down. However, most observers believe 
that Iain Conn, a senior BP executive, is close to being formally offered the 
chief executive role at Centrica, although the final negotiations are being 
complicated by arguments over departure bonuses from BP. Conn, who runs BP's 
downstream operations which include refining, failed to win the top job at the 
oil company when Tony Hayward left in 2010 following the Deepwater Horizon 
accident.

But one City analyst, who asked not be named, said that while Conn knew the 
energy business and had worked hard to rebuild the BP brand in the wake of the 
Gulf of Mexico spill, it could be time to look at someone from a completely 
different sector: "You can see Conn would also know the politicians in the 
sector which is useful in today's atmosphere, the real challenge is to 
monetarise the British Gas brand name."

The Centrica subsidiary has around 20 million business and domestic customers, 
twice as much as its nearest rival SSE and four times as much as the likes of 
E.ON or Scottish Power.

SSE has also been through management changes at the highest level, with Ian 
Marchant leaving last year and heralding a new style from incoming chief 
executive, Alistair Phillips-Davies. He has frozen the company's prices until 
2016, while British Gas has more recently pledged to impose no rises at least 
till the end of this year, but said this is only as long as there are no market 
shocks.

Centrica said that Weston was subject to 12 months' notice and a further 
announcement will be made "in due course" regarding the timing of his departure 
and succession.

Laidlaw said: "Chris has made an important contribution to Centrica over 11 
years, leading a number of our businesses, in the UK and North America. We will 
be sorry to see him leave, but recognise that Aggreko offers a great 
opportunity for him."

Two senior women executives, Nina Bhatia, commercial director at British Gas, 
and Susan Hooper, boss of British Gas Services, are among those who are 
expected to put themselves forward for Weston's job when the time comes.
 