
A British man has been jailed for 20 years for helping try to set up a 
terrorist training camp in the US state of Oregon. Haroon Aswat had admitted 
doing so at the behest of the radical London imamAbu Hamza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza> al-Masri.

US district judge Katherine Forrest directed that Aswat’s sentence should 
include specialised psychiatric care after he said he had suffered from 
schizophrenia for the last 20 years. She also indicated she would support an 
application for the 41-year-old to serve his term in Britain.

Aswat pleaded guilty to charges of conspiracy and providing material support 
to al-Qaida last March. He has already spent 11 years in British and American 
custody, meaning that he could be released in about six years.

Prosecutors said that Aswat, a British citizen of Indian descent, and another 
man named Oussama Kassir went to Bly, in the north-western US state 16 years 
ago at the direction of Masri, who is accused of employing violent rhetoric. 
Kassir was convicted in New York in 2009 and sentenced to life in prison.

Aswat was supposed to provide religious training at the camp, which 
prosecutors said was set up to support the terrorist group. A ledger naming 
Aswat as an al-Qaida associate was said to have been found in 2002 in a 
Pakistan safehouse that prosecutors say was used by Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the 
accused architect of the 11 September terrorist attacks.


Aswat appeared in court on Friday dressed in a faded navy prison shirt with 
his long dark hair plaited into braids over his scalp and down his back.

In 2013, the European court of human rights blocked Aswat’s extradition 
because of his mental condition, for which he had received treatment in the UK. 
After assurances from the US that Aswat would receive adequate care, the 
British high court approved the extradition. He arrived in New York in October 
2014.

Aswat’s lawyer, Peter Quijano, had proposed a term of 12-and-a-half years’ 
imprisonment for Aswat, arguing that his client never condoned violence. But 
the assistant US attorney Shane Stansbury said that, “to paint this man as a 
pacifist is a complete distortion of the truth”.

Before his sentence was imposed, Aswat apologised. “I have chosen patience 
over retaliation, forgiveness over enmity and peace over violence,” he told 
Forrest.

Masri was convicted at trial in May 2014. Forrest sentenced him to a life term 
in January.
 