
London

From Wimbledon Common in the west to Rainham Marshes in the east, the capital 
is packed with excellent wildlife sites. The home of the Wombles is superb for 
woodland birds, mammals, and insects including stag beetles, while the RSPB 
reserve at Rainham attracts a wide range of breeding and wintering birds. 
Richmond Park and Bushy Park are home to herds of red and fallow deer while a 
more recent arrival, ring-necked parakeets, screech around their airspace. 
Check out the WWT's London Wetland Centre in Barnes for a wealth of birdlife, 
including wintering bitterns and summering peregrine falcons, kingfishers and 
sand martins. The river Thames can be excellent for birds, including little 
egrets, cormorants and great crested grebes, while dragonflies and damselflies 
are common in summer. In central London, keep an eye out for peregrines over 
the Barbican Centre and perching on Tate Modern on the South Bank.

Manchester
 Hen harrier hotograph: Alamy 
Manchester is perhaps not the best-known urban area for wildlife in the UK, 
although Moston Fairway, within the city boundaries, is a precious remnant of 
marshland. It is home to a wide range of wetland plants including southern 
marsh orchids, along with a wealth of bird and insect life. Outside the city 
centre, the Greater Manchester area extending north and west into Lancashire 
contains some truly excellent places to watch wildlife. To the west, Astley 
Moss is one of the last remaining areas of wet bog in the region, a haven for 
breeding curlews, whinchats and willow tits, along with wintering short-eared 
owls, hen harriers (pictured right) and merlins. Many other reserves in this 
area have been creatively developed from former industrial sites. Two of these 
lie alongside the M6 to the north and south of Manchester: Brockholes in 
Preston and Woolston Eyes near Warrington, both of which are home to a wide 
range of wetland birds.

Birmingham

Known for having more miles of canals than Venice, Birmingham's wildlife is 
often overlooked. Moseley Bog and Joy's Wood nature reserve to the south of the 
city centre is a great place to start. This childhood haunt of The Lord of the 
Rings author JRR Tolkien comprises an area of damp, boggy woodland with 
adjacent grassy areas. It is home to a wide range of breeding birds including 
several species of warbler from April onwards and a stunning display of 
bluebells from mid-April into May. On the eastern edge of the city, Park Hall 
is a mixture of woodland, farmland and wetland, with great crested newts, 
woodland and waterside plants in spring, and plenty of fungi in autumn. Rowley 
Hills is a new wildlife trust reserve, home to several species of grassland 
butterflies including marbled white, while Hill Hook in Sutton Coldfield and 
Moorcroft Wood in Moxley, Walsall are also well worth a visit.

Glasgow
 Mink Photograph: Darin Smith/PA 
Like so many British cities, Glasgow is built on a river – the Clyde – once 
ideal for creating an industrial powerhouse, and now excellent for wildlife. 
Kingfishers are regularly seen along the river, while farther downstream at 
Port Glasgow there are wintering waterbirds including divers, grebes and sea 
ducks. The city forefathers also created wildlife havens of their own, in the 
form of city parks. Pollok country park, three miles south of the city centre, 
was once a private estate, but is now open to all. Look out for a range of 
river creatures, including kingfishers, mink and even otters, though these are 
rarely seen during daylight hours. Perhaps the most surprising wildlife site of 
all is the Glasgow Necropolis, a fine Victorian cemetery on the hill east of St 
Mungo's Cathedral. As well as the usual foxes and grey squirrels, the cemetery 
is also home to small numbers of roe deer.
 Red squirrel Photograph: Alamy 
Belfast

Northern Ireland's capital is, like London, Cardiff and Edinburgh, ideally 
situated for a range of wildlife, being both bisected by the river Lagan and 
right next to the sea. Bog Meadows nature reserve is the largest natural area 
in the city centre, and supports waterbirds including grey herons and 
kingfishers. During the spring and summer there are breeding sedge warblers and 
sand martins and a wonderful display of marshland plants including ragged 
robin, early purple orchid, marsh marigold and lady's-smock. The bog is also 
excellent for dragonflies and damselflies. Just a few minutes' drive from the 
city centre, the RSPB reserve at Belfast harbour is a superb place to see 
wintering birds from Siberia and Scandinavia, including ducks, geese and 
waders, while the Belfast Hills above the city are home to peregrines. For a 
chance to see the most exciting city resident, the red squirrel, check out 
Colin Glen forest park on the city's western outskirts.

Newcastle
 Kittiwick with chicks on the Tyne bridge Photograph: Alamy 
England's northernmost city is also one of the best urban areas in the UK for 
wildlife. Right in the city centre, kittiwakes nest on the metal structure of 
Tyne bridge. This is the most inland breeding colony of the ocean-going gull in 
the world and a welcome reminder of the sea. The Tyne is also an excellent site 
for otters, especially after dark, as is the Big Waters reserve. Situated north 
of the city centre, the latter is a large, reed-fringed lake, also home to 
woodland and freshwater birds. Farther north, Plessey Woods country park 
supports a small population of red squirrels, just managing to hang on here on 
one of the southern edges of their range. Back in the city centre, check out 
Jesmond Dene, an oasis of peace and quiet, and home to three delightful 
waterbirds: kingfisher, dipper and grey wagtail. Or head south of the Tyne into 
Gateshead to see red kites soaring majestically above the Metro Centre.

Liverpool

The city of the Beatles and the Liver Birds is surprisingly good for wildlife. 
The lake in Sefton Park, a 235-acre oasis of green in the city centre, is home 
to waterbirds including great crested grebes and cormorants, while water voles 
can sometimes be seen around the streams that run into the lake. Court Hey Park 
is excellent for woodland birds, including nuthatch and a range of breeding 
warblers in spring and summer. The park is also home to the National Wildflower 
Centre, a great place to learn about our native plants and flowers. But the 
jewel in Liverpool's wildlife crown is without doubt the Mersey. Now that 
shipping traffic has declined, the river's estuary supports vast flocks of 
wintering waders and wildfowl and is internationally important for pintail, 
teal, wigeon, shelduck, redshank and dunlin. At the mouth of the estuary, 
Seaforth nature reserve regularly attracts scarce and rare birds, including 
Leach's petrels in autumn (usually after fierce north-westerly gales).

Edinburgh

Scotland's capital is famous for its annual festival, when crowds of visitors 
throng the streets, but it is also an excellent base for exploring a range of 
wildlife sites inside and outside the city. The Royal Botanic Garden is a good 
place to start, while south of Arthur's Seat, Duddingston Loch is home to a 
wide range of waterbirds including wintering goldeneye and goosander, and 
breeding grey heron and sedge warbler. Further east, the Water of Leith which 
snakes through the city has a 12-mile walkway running alongside it. You have a 
good chance of seeing herons and kingfishers here and, if you are very lucky, 
otters. If you have time, it's well worth taking a boat trip from South 
Queensferry out into the Firth of Forth, where, in spring and summer, you are 
likely to see seals, dolphins and a range of seabirds including puffins. You 
can also take a boat tour around the famous Bass Rock, one of the world's 
largest and most spectacular gannet colonies.
 Mountain hare in its summer coat Photograph: Alamy 
Sheffield

Sheffield is one of the greenest cities in Britain, with a range of excellent 
wildlife sites within the city and plenty of accessible places just outside its 
boundaries. Close to the centre, the Porter valley is a six-mile long wildlife 
corridor, passing through a range of locations including Endcliffe Park. Likely 
sightings include the riverine trio of grey wagtail, dipper and kingfisher, as 
well as a range of woodland birds including woodpeckers, nuthatch and 
treecreeper. To the south-west, Eccleshall Woods hosts a similar range of 
birds. Five miles south-east of the city, Orgreave Lakes, on the site of a 
former colliery, is a great site for waterbirds, especially wintering ducks. 
Sheffield is also on the very edge of one of the finest wilderness areas in 
central England, the Peak District. This national park is home to some scarce 
moorland species including mountain hare, short-eared owl, red grouse and 
hen harrier.

Bristol
 An urban fox in Bristol city centre Photograph: Ian Wade Photography/Getty 
Images/Flickr RF 
Home to the world-famous BBC Natural History Unit, it's perhaps not surprising 
that Bristol is arguably the best place in Britain to watch urban wildlife. 
Foxes can often be seen around the city's leafier suburbs such as Clifton, 
Redland and Cotham, while badgers are regular (if mainly nocturnal) visitors to 
parks and gardens in Stoke Bishop. Blaise Castle estate supports a wide range 
of woodland birds, plants and insects, as do Brandon Hill, closer to the city 
centre, and Leigh Woods and Ashton Court, just across Brunel's famous Clifton 
suspension bridge. But without doubt, the city's most treasured wildlife area 
is the magnificent Avon Gorge. This spectacular natural rock formation is home 
to breeding buzzards, ravens and peregrine falcons, the latter also regularly 
being seen perching on tall buildings in the city centre. The gorge also boasts 
some of Britain's rarest tree species, including up to 20 different species of 
whitebeam.

Cardiff

The Welsh capital has always been good for wildlife, thanks to its position on 
the coast and wide range of habitats. Pontcanna Fields and Bute Park offer a 
range of woodland and wetland walks, with all the usual bird species you would 
expect. The river Taff, one of Wales's largest rivers, runs right through the 
city centre before reaching the sea at Cardiff Bay, and is home to eels, sea 
trout and most exciting of all, Atlantic salmon, which can, in autumn, be seen 
leaping over Black weir in Bute Park. Two sites just outside the city are also 
worth a mention: to the west is Kenfig Dunes national nature reserve, near 
Porthcawl, with waterbirds including wintering bitterns. And to the east, the 
Newport Wetlands Reserve, which was created to mitigate environmental damage 
done by the Cardiff Bay development. The reserve is home to a wealth of 
wintering wildfowl and waders, including large numbers of wigeons, lapwings 
and dunlins.
 Starlings over Brighton Pier Photograph: Alamy 
Brighton & Hove

This coastal city (one of Britain's newest, created in 1997) is a wildlife 
haven, with a small but thriving population of badgers and the huge gathering 
of roosting starlings on Palace pier. This truly extraordinary spectacle occurs 
around dusk from November to March, and often attracts large crowds of tourists 
as well as birders. On a visit to Brighton marina keep an eye out for seabirds 
offshore: gannets, auks and skuas regularly pass by, especially during the peak 
migration seasons of spring and autumn. Being situated in the south-east of 
Britain, and close to the excellent wildlife habitat of the South Downs, it's 
hardly surprising that a wide range of breeding birds and butterflies can be 
found, including chalkland specialists such as Adonis, chalkhill and small 
blues. Their strongholds are just outside the city at Devil's Dyke and other 
downland sites, but they do sometimes wander inside the city limits.
 