
There's a school of thought in Labour circles which believes that the prime 
minister's behaviour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/feb/21/gordon-brown-abusive-treatment-staff>
 doesn't matter, that accusations of bullying are either unproven or 
­irrelevant, and that all anyone cares about is how well he does the job. I 
couldn't disagree more with each assertion. Gordon Brown's rages are well known 
among the small circle in which he operates, are deeply destructive to good 
governance, and are a key to understanding why this man's government has been 
so unco-ordinated, unhappy and ineffectual in so many ways.

Anyone who has worked alongside a bully knows how destabilising they can be. 
The tension and fright that a highly placed bully creates cascades down an 
organisation, as impotent subjects and witnesses relieve their own feelings by 
being sharp, tense or unfair to their colleagues or inferiors. Bad behaviour is 
legitimised, and anxiety gets in the way of good decision-making.

A man in a fury is a man who can't think straight. Brown's defenders, and the 
man himself, claim that what chiefly angers him is himself. That's why a cream 
leather seat-back in his official car is covered with black pen marks as the 
prime minister jabs furiously at it, and why Brown admits that he does throw 
things at the floor.

I can't think why these admissions are seen as innocuous. Imagine watching a 
man doing these things in public; say, while on a train. Such an inability to 
control one's emotions would look like madness. In a leader they are even more 
alarming, because a powerful man in a fury is not a concern only to himself; 
that display of ugly emotion prevents anyone else around him from being able to 
think or respond without some degree of panic or fear themselves. Whether they 
are drivers, secretaries or cabinet ministers, people's chief concern becomes 
how to avoid being the subject or instigator of a rage themselves. Making good 
decisions or challenging stupid ones becomes far less important than keeping 
out of the prime minister's range of fire. Collective fright makes government 
weak.

Last year I asked a cabinet minister why a reform of which he was particularly 
proud was taking so long to become a reality. He shrugged. Held up in Downing 
Street, he said, with the prime minister, who didn't like it, refusing to make 
a decision one way or another. Why didn't he demand some clarity, I asked. You 
can't do that with Gordon, he said. He won't talk to you if he doesn't want to, 
and you can't argue with him if you disagree with him; he just flies into a 
rage. So what is your department doing, I asked. Waiting, he said. Paralysed.

It isn't just Brown's frequent loss of temper that constitutes his bullying. 
He matches that with a deep distrust of anyone outside his inner circle, a 
catastrophic aversion to having his views questioned, a tendency to hold 
ferocious long-term grudges against anyone perceived to be not on his side, and 
a press briefing machine which has never hesitated to undermine anyone – 
chancellor, cabinet ministers, even the prime minister – currently thought to 
be a threat.

One of the many people who has witnessed Brown's tantrums is a man who spent a 
considerable time advising the government on one of its policies. He told me 
how he went to brief Brown, then chancellor, on the implications. The adviser – 
a sophisticated man, accustomed to professionalism and good manners even at 
times of stress – could not believe what happened next.

He'd had very few encounters with Brown in his life, and he was expecting to 
have a civilised, thoughtful discussion about the details and consequences of 
the proposal. Instead he encountered a glowering chancellor, puce with fury, 
who within minutes was picking up pieces of paper from his desk, rolling them 
into balls, and throwing them at the adviser's head, screaming: "You've fucked 
up my political career!" Even an outsider was not immune from being treated 
with complete contempt.

This was not a leader making a judgment about what's best for the country. 
This was a man behaving like a spoilt three-year-old, concerned only with 
getting what would further his own ambitions. And that is the truth about 
Brown, for all his claims about his good character and his tiresome references 
to what he learned from his clergyman father. His chief concern is, and always 
has been, the progression of his own career.

The atmosphere of nervousness, repression and uncertainty that a leader like 
this generates is the main reason why so many of the cabinet were, last summer, 
privately supportive of the idea thatAlan Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanjohnson> might be a good caretaker 
prime minister. No one thought Johnson either clever or charismatic. What 
ministers did say, with longing, was that with the good-natured Johnson in 
place they would at least be free to discuss policies and ideas without 
constraint, and that this would liberate them to think constructively about 
where government was going wrong and how they might change direction.

The party and the cabinet missed that opportunity. Now they have no choice but 
to stay publicly silent or to deny what they know to be true. TheLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party will be crossing its 
fingers in the hope that the voters believe them.
 