
Even avocado farmers agree that the price of avocados, a staple of brunch 
menus everywhere, has reached a ridiculous peak.

Ripe and ready: how ‘evil geniuses’ got us hooked on avocados
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/02/avocados-ripe-ready-evil-geniuses-hooked>
Customers are paying up to $6 per avocado in some stores, while the major 
supermarket chains, Coles and Woolworths, are selling them for just under $4 
each.

“The current pricing is a bit embarrassing,” Russell Delroy, owner of Delroy 
Orchards in Pemberton, Western Australia, said.

“You get a bit upset when you go into a store and find an avocado selling for 
$4.98. As growers, we don’t like to see customers pissed off.”

In order to keep Australians supplied with avocados year-round, production 
occurs in regions at different times of the year, according to where the 
weather and rainfall conditions best suit growing and harvesting.

From March, production will start to come out of Queensland. Currently, the 
bulk of avocado supply is coming from southern Western Australia, as well as 
from New Zealand. But heavy rainfall over the past fortnight has seen 
harvesting grind to a halt.

Delroy Orchards harvests 12m avocados each year, or 3,000 tonnes. The packing 
shed Delroy operates moves around 50m avocados – 99% of which supplied 
Australia, he said.

“No one in WA was able to harvest for four days last week because of the rain, 
which has really slowed supply, and supplies won’t reach the east coast markets 
again until mid-to-late next week,” Delroy said.

“The reason for the stop in harvest is the wet is because when the fruit is 
moist, the risk of a fungal disease called anthracnose increases. The spores of 
the fungus live on dead twigs inside the tree and to get into the fruit, it 
needs moisture and temperature above 16C on the surface of the fruit. If you 
then start harvesting and disrupting the spores they can get inside the fruit 
and that’s when you get rot.”

The recent bushfires in WA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/07/emergency-bushfire-alert-for-western-australia-town-of-waroona>
 also had a small impact on production, he said, with one grower seeing half of 
his orchard burned.

Avocado producers were already struggling to meet Australia’s appetite for the 
fruit before the rain and fires hit, Delroy said. He said 12 years ago, 
Australians ate about 1.4kg of the fruit per person each year, which has risen 
to 3.2 kg. The industry was aiming to boost that to 5kg within the next decade, 
he said.


The latest available figures from the WA Department of Agriculture and Food 
shows that in 2012-13, WA avocados injected an estimated $120m into the state’s 
economy.

“At the moment, we’re just not producing enough for summer demand, but a lot 
of planting is going on currently to prepare for the future,” Delroy said. “But 
it takes at least six years to get young trees into decent production, so if 
Australians give it five or six years they may start to see more stable supply 
and pricing.”

Forget the avocado, here are the foods we’ll love to hate in 2016 | Fay Schopen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/28/avocado-foods-love-hate-2016-seaweed-kombucha>
The chief executive of Avocados 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/avocados> Australia, John Tyas, 
agreed that extensive planting meant supply and pricing would improve, but not 
for a few years. In terms of the current shortage, he said supply would not 
reach normal levels until March, when large volumes of avocados started coming 
out of Queensland.

“The reason consumers get so frustrated by high prices is there isn’t really 
anything you can substitute for avocado in a recipe, there’s no food quite like 
it,” Tyas said.

“My tip to consumers at the moment is to make sure you buy them a little bit 
less ripe, as a lot of damage happens once they start to soften. So buy your 
fruit and ripen them at home on the kitchen bench, then pop them in the fridge. 
And buy several pieces at once so you can have your own supply chain going in 
your kitchen so you’re not always waiting for them to ripen.”
 