
George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> has 
announced the creation of what the government is describing as Britain's first 
garden city for almost 100 years, by the Thames Estuary at Ebbsfleet.

Speaking on the BBC's Andrew Marr show on Sunday 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03yx0sl>, the chancellor said that initially 
15,000 homes would be built on the site, which has been chosen partly because a 
high-speed rail connection puts it within 19 minutes of central London.

Osborne also said he would use his budget on Wednesday to extend one of the 
government's two Help to Buy schemes. He will pledge £6bn to extend the equity 
loan scheme to 2020, funding the construction of a further 120,000 homes.
 Ebbsfleet has been identified as a site for new housing development for at 
least a decade, but progress has been slow. 
The two initiatives would mean "more homes, more aspiration for families [and] 
more economic security and economic resilience", Osborne said.

Ebbsfleet has been identified as a site for new housing development for at 
least a decade, but progress has been slow and so far only around 150 homes 
have been built.

Osborne said he would accelerate the process by setting up an urban 
development corporation to get the project off the ground, with a mandate to 
build 15,000 homes providing accommodation for between 23,000 and 34,000 
residents.

Osborne said it would be a "proper garden city", the first since Welwyn Garden 
City was founded in 1920.

Asked why Ebbsfleet had been chosen as the location, Osborne told Marr: "[In] 
Ebbsfleet there is the land available, there is fantastic infrastructure, with 
a high-speed line. It's on the river, it's in the south-east of England, where 
a lot of the housing pressure has been, and, crucially, we've got local 
communities and local MPs who support the idea."

Last month, Centre for London, an independent thinkthank, published a review 
led by the Labour peer Andrew Adonis 
<http://centreforlondon.org/publication/go-east-unlocking-potential-thames-estuary/>
 calling for a new town to be built at Ebbsfleet.

Osborne also told Marr that the Help to Buy equity loan scheme, which was due 
to come to an end in 2016, will be extended in the budget until 2020.

This scheme, which involves the government lending prospective buyers up to 
20% of the cost of a home so that the buyer only needs a 5% deposit, covers 
only new-build homes, which has made it less controversial than the Help to Buy 
mortgage guarantee programme that can apply to any property worth up to 
£600,000.

The equity loan scheme has already helped to fund the purchase of 25,000 
homes. According to the Treasury, extending it from 2016 to 2020 will help 
another 120,000 people buy homes.

In the interview, Osborne said he would use his budget to argue that the 
coalition's economic plans were working but that the job was "very far from 
done". He said he would use his statement to announce the level of the cap he 
intends to impose on overall welfare spending.

He also hit back at Nigel Lawson, the Conservative former chancellor, who has 
complained that the coalition's focus on the raising the basic income tax 
allowance has come at the expense of "middling professionals", increasing 
numbers of whom are among the 15% of workers paying the 40p upper rate of tax.

Osborne, who is expected to announce a further increase in the personal 
allowance <http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/incometax/personal-allow.htm> (the amount of 
earning on which no income tax is levied) to at least £10,500, said there had 
been a "misconception" in this debate and that lifting the basic rate allowance 
helped all taxpayers, apart from the very rich.

"When you look at this debate, you would get the impression that somehow 
increasing the personal allowance only helps people on low incomes," he said.

In fact, it helped people earning £20,000 and those on £50,000, he said. The 
only workers who do not benefit were those earning more than £100,000,.

Ed Balls, the shadow chancellor, told BBC Radio 5 Live's Pienaar's Politics 
that extending Help to Buy was "a damp squib" and that Osborne should have done 
more to boost house building over the past three years.
 