
Burberry recovered from its recent weakness after it unveiled a joint venture 
in Saudi Arabia, and analysts said it could be a prime takeover target in the 
luxury goods sector.

The retailer, which lost nearly 6% in the week following the Japanese 
earthquake on worries about its exposure to the region, climbed 31p to £11.47. 
Analysts said the Japan fears had been overdone, while investors also welcomed 
news of a partnership with Saudi-based retailer Fawaz Abdulaziz Alhokair to 
market Burberry's goods in the country.

Meanwhile analysts at Exane BNP Paribas added Burberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/burberrygroup> to its list of possible 
takeover targets, in the wake of LVMH's recent purchase of Bulgari. They said:
 Although our positive view of the stock is based on operational arguments, we 
cannot ignore the recurring corporate activity rumours concerning Burberry. 
With a 100% free float, Burberry is the only luxury goods stock without a 
family as a majority shareholder.

Following the recent corporate activity within the space, and the increasing 
amount of cash in the industry, we would expect such rumours to continue to act 
as a downside support to the share price.

Burberry is working hard to shift its price and mix upwards. Our analysts 
suggest there is untapped potential in menswear and childrenswear and 
opportunities to improve the higher end offer. Similarly, a push in the leather 
goods category should provide support to profitability and we also see room to 
improve in footwear.

While the company is making good progress this process is far from over and we 
would expect that it could be optimised and accelerated within the context of a 
larger group. 
On a quiet day, the speculation helped made Burberry one of the biggest risers 
in theFTSE 100. In very thin trading volumes, the leading index drifted 3.73 
points higher to close at 5904.49 despite continuing concerns about a possible 
bail-out for Portugal, the continuing fighting in Libya, the unrest in the 
Middle East and the radiation leaks in Japan. Angela Merkel's defeat in a state 
election in Germany also added to the uncertainty.

A strong performance from the banking sector following positive notes on the 
sector from JP Morgan and BarCap outweighed weakness among mining shares on 
fears of weak demand from China. SoBarclays was 2.4p better at 292.4p but 
Kazakhmys closed 22p lower at £14.25.

Miners operating in Zimbabwe came under pressure after president Robert Mugabe 
said he would implement plans to sell up to 51% of foreign owned companies to 
local people.Aquarius Platinum - which said its subsidiary in the country was 
in talks about establishing a position which complied with the law but was also 
beneficial to stakeholders - fell 25.79p to 344.3p. Panmure Gordon said;.
 While this may be all old news in many ways, it once again brings into focus 
the very real political risk in Zimbabwe. 
Meanwhile, with a drop in platinum prices, South African miner Lonmin lost 29p 
to £16.59.

Elsewhere Cairn Energy climbed 7.6p to 455.1p after analysts at UBS upgraded 
from neutral to buy with a 510p target, saying they were encouraged by the 
detail the company provided recently about its exploration plans in Greenland. 
UBS said:
 [Our price target] is set at a 20% (85p) premium to net asset value for what 
we believe will be the likely risked value of the four prospects in Greenland 
Cairn plans to drill in the third quarter and will update on in May. We believe 
that Cairn India provides a solid base with limited downside. 
Cairn is still awaiting approval from the Indian government for its deal to 
sell 51% of its business in the country to Vedanta, and hopes this will be 
given by the middle of next month.

Oil rig specialist Lamprell jumped more than 5% following its full year 
figures and talk of acquisitions. The company said net profits more than 
doubled from $28.4m to $66.6m, helped by unexpected demand for more modern and 
efficient drilling units in the wake of the Macondo spillage in the Gulf of 
Mexico.

The strength in the oil price had also lead to what it called "unprecedented 
levels of enquiries and bid activity." With a strong cash position Lamprell is 
also on the lookout for acquisition opportunities in the Middle East.

Its shares added 17p to 331p, making it the biggest rise in the FTSE 250. 
Analysts at JP Morgan said:
 We upgrade our 2011 and 2012 revenue forecasts by 6%, and on the back of this 
up our EPS forecasts by 5% and 6% respectively. Even on these upgraded 
forecasts revenue visibility remains unusually high, and we anticipate any 
material contract awards this year driving further earnings upgrades. 
Chipmaker Arm added 13.5p to 558.5p as US investment group Capital Research 
and Management bought just over 2m shares to take its stake to 5.15%. Building 
materials groupWolseley climbed 8p to £20.89 despite reports its plan to sell 
its Bathstore retail business to private equity group Electra had fallen 
through.

But Capita, the outsourcing company, dropped 9.5p to 748.5p after Bank of 
America Merrill Lynch moved from buy to neutral, saying it needed to win new 
business to meet the City's profit expectations

Just before the market closed UK Mail announced that a disappointing 
performance in the third quarter had continued into the final three months of 
the year, with its parcels business in particular reporting lower than expected 
profits. Its shares fell 34.5p to 275p.

Finally Berkeley Mineral Resources added more than 5% to 7.325p as it 
confirmed an agreement to acquire lead and zinc stockpiles from the Kabwe Mine 
in Zambia. It has raised £3.125m for further acquisitions, and news of another 
deal in Zambia is awaited.
 