
"This is the very room in which Wings was formed."

Peter, the owner of Campbeltown's Argyll Arms Hotel, was showing me round the 
cocktail bar where, back in 1971, a pre-knighthood Paul McCartney sat at a 
corner table with Denny Laine – a man whose very name is a misspelt Beatles' 
song – to draw up their master plan for world domination. They could hardly 
have chosen a more out of the way spot in which to do so.
 The harbour at Cambeltown. Photograph: Dixe Wills 
Campbeltown is at the end of the world. Or near enough, anyway. It sits almost 
at the foot of the Kintyre peninsula, the lower two-thirds of a tranche of land 
that shears violently off the west coast of Scotland into the Irish Sea. 
Picking up a bus fromLochgilphead <http://www.lochgilphead.info/>, the last 
place that feels like the mainland, I sat back to enjoy one of the longer 
journeys on this trip, the 50-odd miles south to one of Argyll's largest, yet 
least visited, towns.

Loch Fyne, down whose west bank my fellow passengers and I began our journey, 
had already been going for more than 25 miles by the time we joined it. Like 
the rest of the natural features in this part of Scotland, the loch has so much 
room that it happily spreads itself out to dimensions unthinkable in crowded 
England. South of Tarbert – whose colourful houses, shops and hotels are 
squeezed very prettily around three sides of a small harbour – the scenery to 
our left was dominated by gentle hills speckled here and there by livestock, 
while on our right the view of the sea was interrupted only by the long 
exclamation mark that isGigha <http://www.gigha.org.uk/>, with the isle of Cara 
as its dot.

After mile upon mile of country undisturbed by anything more pressing than a 
hoof, Campbeltown came as something of a shock. I checked myself in at the 
Argyll Arms – a former hunting lodge built by the eponymous duke – did my spot 
of Seminal Moments in the History of Wings location bagging, and went out 
exploring this far flung outpost of civilisation. Nicknamed 'Wee Glasgow by the 
Sea', there is undeniably something of its much larger cousin about the town. I 
wandered along phenomenally wide roads; craned my neck taking in tall and 
rather stern-looking brick buildings; and, just when I began to wonder if the 
place had also inherited a whiff of Aberdonian austerity, found myself on a 
street whose every single establishment was a bar or a pub.

Once claiming to be the richest town in Britain (there were so many whisky 
distilleries here in the 19th century that fog-bound fishermen were apparently 
able to smell their way into the harbour), Campbeltown's days of wonder are 
noticeably behind it. That, of course, is a blessing since it means that it has 
largely escaped the attentions of chain stores, multi-nationals and 
money-grubbing developers and has thus retained a bit of character. Take its 
fabulous Mackintosh-style cinema, for example. With its cascading curves, The 
Wee Picture House is a little marvel, one of those creations from which one can 
imagine a Thunderbirds rocket emerging at any moment. At 95 years old, it's 
also the oldest working cinema in Scotland.
 Cave painting on Davaar. Photograph: Dixe Wills 
In Davaar <http://www.campbeltownonline.org.uk/davaar.html>, at the entrance 
to Loch Campbeltown, Campbeltown also sports a quirky little island that was 
once the focus of much frenzied speculation. In 1887, a painting of Christ's 
crucifixion appeared overnight in a cave on the isle. No one knew whose hand 
was behind it. Some of the more susceptible locals even wondered whether it had 
in some way "painted itself". Davaar is accessible for about six hours each day 
at low tide, so having checked the tide timetable the night before, I got up at 
dawn to investigate the affair. The three-mile hike – passing cavalcades of 
wild garlic before forging over a wide shell-strewn beach – whetted my appetite 
for the artistic and possibly supernatural feast that awaited me.

"Anti-clockwise, then it's the fourth cave you come to," everyone I had 
consulted on the matter had assured me. But what was a cave, and what was just 
a sort of big hole in the cliffs? The straggly sheep I encountered certainly 
weren't going to let me in on the secret. And just as I was beginning to think 
I had missed it, I entered yet another diminutive cavern, turned around, and 
there it was. Even if I hadn't enjoyed the rest of the walk, it would certainly 
have been worth the visit. The combination of the expertly executed crucifix, 
the pathetic straggle of votive offerings beneath it, and the air of mystery 
engendered by the setting sent more than one shiver up my spine.

The artist, I later discovered, was one Archibald Mackinnon. He kept everyone 
guessing about the painting until 1934 when, well into his eighties, he came 
clean, popped back across the causeway, and gave his masterwork a touch-up.

There was just time for a trip down to Southend 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Southend,_Kintyre>, a small village at the very 
bottom of the peninsula. The tiny bus turned round at an apparently random spot 
beyond the houses, dropping me off at the beach where, unlike its English 
namesake, there was nothing but sand, sea and oystercatchers. Around the shore 
I caught sight of the impressively bulky headland of the Mull of Kintyre. 
Perhaps it was because there was not a single other human being on the beach 
that I found myself singing, out loud and rather lustily: "Oh mist, rolling in 
from the sea/My desire is always to be here…" It was then that I knew I was at 
the end of the world.

Getting there

West Coast Motors <http://www.westcoastmotors.co.uk> (+44 (0)1586 552319) and 
City Link <http://www.citylink.co.uk/> (+44 (0)8705 50 50 50) run services 
between Lochgilphead and Campbeltown, the former cheekily timing all their 
buses to leave just before those of their competitor. West Coast Motors day 
return: adult £7.90, child £5.95. City Link day return £11.90, child £8.40. 
West Coast Motors return from Campbeltown to Southend: adult £3.05, child £1.50.

Argyll Arms Hotel 
<http://www.lodgingworld.com/accom.Argyll_Arms_Hotel.112704.html>: Doubles from 
£50; +44 (0)1586 553431.

· Dixe Wills is the author of Places to Hide in England, Scotland and Wales 
(Icon, £7.99)
 