
Business as usual is the unofficial Fifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> motto amid widespread accusations 
of corruption but the Confederation of African Football has taken the maxim a 
step further.

The CAF officials Slim Aloulou and Amadou Diakité were suspended from all 
football activities by Fifa's ethics committee last November for their part in 
the discredited 2018 and 2022 World Cup bidding process. Yet both appeared last 
month on the list of officials for CAF standing committees that has since been 
leaked to the Nigerian newspaper Next.

The journalist Osasu Obayiuwana was contacted by a senior CAF figure to alert 
him that it has named Aloulou as chairman of one of its committees, 
vice-chairman of another and a member of two more. Diakité also appears on one 
of CAF's standing committees.

The lists say officials' mandates run from June this year until June 2013 yet 
Aloulou's ban runs until November this year, and Diakité's until November 2012. 
Upon their Fifa bans both were suspended from the CAF executive committee, 
where they are seen as staunch allies of the CAF president, Issa Hayatou, but 
they seem still to be included on the junior committees.

A spokesman for CAF indicated that appeals were ongoing before the court of 
arbitration for sport (CAS). He added: "They have not been expelled from 
football, they have been suspended. During their period of suspension they have 
not attended any committee meetings."

CAS told Digger that although Diakité has filed a complaint, Aloulou has not 
appealed against his ban. Fifa says it is satisfied CAF understands the 
suspensions and it will request all future communications explain the men are 
banned. But as the suspended executive committee member Mohamed bin Hammam 
comes under its disciplinary spotlight on Friday, Fifa seems to have trouble 
ensuring compliance with ethics committee rulings.

The Blazer brigade

Apparently the American Chuck Blazer earned almost $2m in commissions and fees 
as general secretary of Concacaf, the governing body of football in North and 
Central America and the Caribbean, last year.The Concacaf document that 
attended Andrew Jennings's report on the subject 
<http://transparencyinsport.org/Lucky_Chuckie/blazer_takes_10_percent_on_sponser_deals.html>
 on Sunday makes for fascinating reading elsewhere, too. In it Daryll Warner, 
whose father, Jack, resigned as president of Concacaf last month while denying 
corruption accusations, is named as a technical development officer for Fifa. 
Sure enough Warner junior is – like his dad – a munificent distributor of 
football's largesse: he is listed on theFifa website 
<http://www.fifa.com/aboutfifa/footballdevelopment/developmentoffices/goalprogramme.html>
 as a regional officer of the Goal bureau that dispenses Fifa's development 
funds to member associations.

There are other interesting nuggets. Concacaf, which turned over more than 
$70m between 2009 and 2010, made much of the "expanded office in Miami Beach" 
where it hosted its 2010 congress. That was, of course, away from Concacaf's 
New York HQ. But despite the fact Concacaf has headquarters and regional 
offices in the US and the fact it denominates its revenues in US dollars, its 
auditor is not American. That honour lies with Kenny Rampersad & Co, an 
accountancy in Port of Spain that also audited the Trinidad & Tobago Football 
Federation accounts. Wonder if that will continue after Jack Warner's 
resignation.

Plymouth dilemma

Plymouth Argyle announced Peter Ridsdale's £1 takeover had been "given the 
green light" after meetings last Friday with the Football League and 
Professional Footballers' Association.

the League and PFA had "responded positively" to the meetings. It is hard even 
for club officials to interpret events at Home Park right now. Although threats 
to sack refusenik players who will not defer their wages have now been 
withdrawn, negotiations with the PFA are expected to continue for at least a 
fortnight. That would complicate matters for the League, which would have only 
one more week before next season starts to decide whether to approve Ridsdale's 
buyout. Choosing to overrule Ridsdale's proposal at that point would be a big 
risk for the League, since it would mean Argyle potentially playing fixtures 
while in the hands of a liquidator.

Awesome foursome

When the first ball is bowled at Lord's between England and India on Thursday, 
it will begin the 2,000th Test in the history of cricket. To commemorate this 
moment, the International Cricket Council held a web poll asking for the 
greatest team of all time. After more than 250,000 votes were counted, guess 
which of the two teams at Lord's provided four names to that XI 
<http://icc-cricket.yahoo.net/newsdetails.php?newsId=16318_1310985120>, and 
which gave none?
 