
Australia’s only crisis line for people with an eating disorder is in 
jeopardy, with no guaranteed federal government funding past June 2017.

The Butterfly Foundation, which supports people affected by eating disorders 
and negative body image, says its national “ED Hope” support line takes an 
average of 10,000 calls and web chats a year. An average phone call lasts 
between 17 and 19 minutes and an average web chat about 48 minutes.

Anorexia <https://www.theguardian.com/society/anorexia> nervosa is the most 
deadly of all psychiatric illnesses, with one in 10 people dying within 10 
years of the disease onset. Of these deaths, about 20% are suicides.

“I’m frustrated,” the foundation’s chief executive, Christine Morgan, told 
Guardian Australia.

“The government has committed funding until June 2017 for the support line but 
there has been no commitment after that. We still have too many Australians 
dying from eating disorders and they die because of the very elevated suicide 
risk and the very significant physical impairment due to the consequences of an 
eating disorder.

How not to talk to people with an eating disorder | Charlotte Samantha
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/06/how-not-talk-people-eating-disorder>
“An Australian in 2016 can’t access treatment easily and affordably, and that 
really frustrates me. What is also frustrating is the social stigma against 
those with eating disorders and the belief it is a lifestyle choice, despite 
science revealing a strong genetic component, and that the disease changes 
neural pathways in the brain.”

As of June 2017, all national crisis lines, including suicide support lines, 
will undergo a government review, as recommended by a report from Australia’s 
mental health commission. Duplicate services may be rolled into one.

Guardian Australia understands that because ED Hope is a specialised service, 
and because there are no similar services, it is likely to be saved. However, 
Morgan said the government had given her no assurance this would be the case 
and, in the meantime, it was difficult for the organisation to plan for the 
future or assure people of their continuing employment.

The chairman of the National Eating Disorders Collaboration, psychiatrist Prof 
Patrick McGorry, said no government had ever funded an eating disorders support 
service that was integrated with the health system.

“The state of eating disorder services across Australia is a disgrace,” he 
said.

“It is threadbare, it is disconnected from the mainstream health system, it is 
shocking. The government loves the rhetoric of early intervention and 
evidence-based care but they’re not investing in it or providing it. In fact, 
they’re diffusing resources across the community and dismantling the system.”

He pointed to limited continuing funding for headspace youth mental health 
services and funding cuts to the Early Psychosis Youth Services program as 
examples.

“This would be unacceptable in other areas, like cancer care,” he said. “But 
people with eating disorders and are seen as self-harmers who should pull 
themselves together. But it is an illness, and a very serious illness, and we 
have treatments which we are failing to make available to ordinary people.”

Morgan said the support line would need at least $1.5m a year in order to 
become a 24/7 support service. Currently, the support line is available between 
8am and 9pm, Australian eastern standard time, on Monday to Friday.

In a statement, the health minister, Sussan Ley, said the government had 
committed to funding the crisis line until June while a mental health “digital 
gateway” was developed. Once it was established, people seeking help would be 
able to call a single phone number to access the mental health phone and online 
services they needed, she said, and funding for those lines would be allocated.
“This single phone number will act as a triage service that will put them in 
touch with a specialist phone or online service that is best suited to their 
personal circumstances,” the statement said.
“For example, the triage service may determine a person would be best serviced 
by a specialist counselling service addressing LGBTIQ mental health or eating 
disorders, rather than a general service.

“The triage service is not designed to replace existing phone counselling 
services, but enhance access to them.

“Australians will still be able to call their preferred phone counselling 
service directly if they believe this is the best service to help them.”
She described the foundation’s claims that funding would be axed from June as 
“incorrect and misleading” .

There are currently just 37 adult hospital beds across the country for eating 
disorders, located in the state capitals, and no specialist services in 
regional areas.

I'm a man and I have an eating disorder. That's not a contradiction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/01/eating-disorder-men-wentworth-miller>
According to the Butterfly Foundation, women with an eating disorder are six 
times more likely to attempt suicide and one third of young people with 
anorexia nervosa and more than half with bulimia nervosa have considered 
suicide.

Morgan said it was critical primary health networks were funded to provide the 
necessary services and specialised staff to treat patients with eating 
disorders and ensure they were properly diagnosed, referred to specialists and 
treated.

“Treatment requires a multidisciplinary team,” she said.

“You need a GP, a psychologist, a psychiatrist, a dietitian, sometimes a 
paediatrician, and we don’t currently have Medicare-funded treatment paths that 
provide the level of treatment someone needs to recover. Under current 
arrangements you might get 10 to 12 sessions with a psychologist and that is 
woefully inadequate for someone with an eating disorder.”

• 1800 ED HOPE: <http://thebutterflyfoundation.org.au/national-edhope-line/> 
1800 33 4673. For further support callLifeline 
<http://%20www.lifeline.org.au/gethelp> 13 11 14, Suicide Call Back Service 
<http://%20www.suicidecallbackservice.org.au/> 1300 659 467, Kids Helpline 
<http://www.kidshelp.com.au/> 1800 55 1800, MensLine 
<http://%20www.mensline.org.au%20www.mensline.org.au/> 1300 78 99 78.
 