
Cable & Wireless Communications has been on the slide for some time.

As its demerged partner Cable & Wireless Worldwide saw its value boosted by a 
successful bid from Vodafone, CWC has fallen close to an all time low. But now 
the City believes it could be turning the corner. Not only is trading expected 
to improve, but it has the potential to sell businesses for more than its 
current beaten-down market capitalisation. Long term bear of the shares, 
analyst Wilton Fry of Bank of America/Merrill Lynch, has now become more 
optimistic, moving his recommendation from underperform to buy with a 40p price 
target. He said:
 We have been long-term bears of CWC based on our view of the underlying 
trading performance, particularly in the Caribbean. However, we believe the 
outlook is stabilising. With the share price near its all-time low, and 
expectations similarly depressed, we believe it is time to revisit the equity 
story.

He said after several years of poor performance in Jamaica, the company could 
now start to recover market share, while its Bahamas acquisition was settling 
in well.

Crucially, he believes it could sell its assets in Monaco and Macau for more 
than its total current value:
 Management has said the future of the group lies in the Panama/Caribbean 
region. We estimate Monaco is worth around $400m while Macau (using the 
transaction multiple from the recent sale of a minority stake) is worth around 
$525m. Together these two assets appear to us to be worth more than 115% of the 
entire market cap of CWC.

The positive analysis helped CWC climb 1.21p to 31.58p - a rise of nearly 4% - 
on another downbeat day for the market.

With disappointment that the US Federal Reserve had not hinted in its latest 
minutes at more aggressive action to boost the world's largest economy, an 
unexpected rate cut in South Korea and worries about the outlook for Spain and 
Italy, theFTSE 100 finished down 56.23 points at 5608.25. Even reasonable US 
weekly jobless claims could not improve sentiment. And there was also 
nervousness ahead of Friday's Chinese GDP figure.

David Jones, chief market strategist at IG Index, said:
 The usual safe havens are in demand once again, as investors opt to abandon 
equity markets, commodities and some currencies due to fears about slowing 
global growth. The general downbeat tone is unlikely to end any time soon. EU 
finance ministers might have opted to wait until September before embarking on 
real work on a banking union, but if progress is not made soon, the July-August 
period of 2012 could perhaps be as volatile as its equivalent in 2011.


The day's biggest faller in the leading index was Ashmore, the emerging 
markets fund manager. It dropped 22.2p to 307.8p after fourth quarter assets 
under management fell by 3.3% to $63.7bn - compared with $64.9bn forecast by 
Numis - with equities dropping by more than a fifth. Sarah Ing at Singer 
Capital Markets said:
 Consensus estimates have been trimmed as weak performance has reduced 
performance fee potential, but the shares lack any positive catalyst in the 
near term and we believe the shares could see further weakness as we see 
consensus for 2013 still too high with [our] estimates 8% lower. 
Mining shares subsided on worries about a poor GDP number from China, with 
Eurasian Natural Resources Corporation down 17.3p at 393.6p and Rio Tinto down 
107p at £29.26.

But BSkyB rose 4p to 688p after a boost from analysts at Nomura.

Ahead of the satellite broadcaster's fourth quarter results due at the end of 
the month, the bank's analyst Matthew Walker issued a buy note despite 
forecasting a dip in quarterly revenues compared to last year. He pointed out 
there was an extra week in 2011 as well as a David Haye pay per view boxing 
match, which together added an extra £110m in sales. He said:
 Sky provides a good balance of organic growth and cash returns. We would 
expect the company to indicate it will commence another sizeable buyback when 
the current one is finished given leverage is still not far from 1 times. While 
the 40% increase in football rights cost was unexpected and influences thinking 
about future auctions, we are confident Sky can contain TV competition from BT, 
many of whose Vision customers don't have much more than Freeview (or for a few 
Youview). 
Media shares were already in focus after Japan's Dentsu agreed to buy UK 
marketing groupAegis - up 73.1p at 235/3p - for £3.2bn, with the news lifting 
advertising giantWPP 1p to 785.5p.

Security group G4S fell 7.4p to 283p after the Guardian revealed it may not be 
able to deliver the number of staff it promised to guard the London Olympics 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2012/jul/11/army-reinforcements-olympics>.

Intercontinental Hotels lost 47p to £15.03 following downbeat comments about 
international markets from US peer Marriott. Numis cut its recommendation on 
Intercontinental from buy to add, but Investec said the company should report 
good half year figures in August:
 Despite some recent concerns over the US economy wavering and continued 
European weakness, industry data supports our view that the global hotels 
industry is recovering strongly, with almost no exceptions by territory. 
Despite second half headwinds in the form of economic uncertainty and tough 
comparisons, we think upside pressure on our IHG forecasts is hardening and we 
reiterate our buy stance. 
Elsewhere SuperGroup, the fashion retailer behind the Superdry brand, for once 
managed to avoid a profit warning alongside a trading update, and its shares 
jumped 50.5p to 385p.

Its full year results showed a 15% fall in underlying profits to £42.8m, in 
line with its most recent guidance. This is after three profit warnings in a 
year, however. It has suffered stock availability, problems with its new 
warehouse IT system and - the latest setback - "arithmetic errors." All of this 
has prompted a management shake-up and promises to communicate better with the 
City and investors. Chief executive officer Julian Dunkerton said:
 Despite the backdrop, the Superdry brand remains strong and I am encouraged 
by the potential for our 2013 ranges. We are now committed to growing the group 
in a controlled and measured way. 
Finally online gaming group 888 added 9p to 74p after an upbeat trading 
statement for the second quarter, with growth driven by its casino and poker 
businesses. It said earnings for the first half would be significantly higher 
than current expectations. The second half was expected to be hit slightly by 
the marketing costs of building up its Spanish poker offering and the rival 
attraction of the London Olympics. But the full year figures would still be 
higher than previously forecast. Simon Davies at Canaccord Genuity said:
 Momentum in both poker and casino has remained strong in the second quarter, 
with a strong poker launch in Spain (where it is number two) and casino boosted 
by the impact of the platform relaunch. Our 93p target price represents 43% 
potential upside. We stick at buy.  