
A range of initiatives led by the Fairtrade Foundation, the Rainforest 
Alliance, Utz Certified and the Soil Association have made huge strides in 
helping consumers support sustainable farming in developing economies.

But Cafédirect set out to see if it could take its own support for the 
Fairtrade campaign further and achieve a better balance between the economic, 
social and environmental pillars of sustainability.

Its work with São Tomé cocoa farmers is the latest example of this work in 
progress. Over the last two years it has worked with smallholders to create a 
sustainable supply chain, increasing their income for the crop by 500% and 
introducing a new range of high quality, ethically-sourced cocoa to the UK 
market.

With support from the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the UK 
Department for International Development, the São Tomé government and local 
NGOs it has helped farmers over the last two years to form a co-operative, 
learn how to dry and ferment their own cocoa rather than rely on local 
middlemen, achieve Fairtrade certification and sell directly to buyers.

The first shipment of cocoa was exported in February 2010 and Cafédirect's São 
Tomé instant cocoa made its first appearance in UK stores the following October.

Three key features set Cafédirect's approach apart from the standards set by 
other ethical labels. First, it helps growers to achieve the right 
certification and standards to get direct access to international markets.

Second, it's goes further in building long-term partnerships. Farmers are 
encouraged to become shareholders in Cafédirect and are represented on the 
board, while they are also actively helped to build links with other buyers.

Finally, Cafédirect invests 50% of its profits back into the businesses it 
trades with, but leaves the co-operatives to decide for themselves how that 
money is spent.

Simon Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 