
Cambridge has topped the Guardian University Guide league table for the second 
year running, while Oxford has come second and the London School of Economics 
has climbed a place to third.

St Andrews, rated third last year, is now in fourth place, while Warwick rises 
a place to fifth. University College London (UCL), Durham, Lancaster, Bath and 
Exeter make up the top 10.

The guide is accompanied by rankings showing how universities perform across 
the main subject areas, published in full on Tuesday. Cambridge dominates 
across the board, coming top in 16 out of 47 subjects including biosciences, 
chemical engineering, computer science, maths, medicine and veterinary science.

Oxford came top in seven subjects including business studies, chemistry, 
economics, law and physics.

In the subject tables, there was a strong performance by UCL, which ranked top 
in six subjects including archaeology, architecture and English. But UCL 
dropped a place in the overall table to sixth due to a poor ranking in 
mechanical engineering and a few other subjects.

Universities are ranked according to spending per student; their student/staff 
ratio; graduate career prospects; what grades applicants need; a value-added 
score that compares students' entry qualifications with their final degree 
results; and how happy final-year students are with their courses, based on the 
annualNational Student Survey <http://www.thestudentsurvey.com/>.

The tables are compiled by an independent consultancy, Intelligent Metrix.

Brian Oldham, a financial analyst at King's College London and a member of the 
review group for the tables, acknowledged that the NSS is subjective. He said: 
"Students at a university that generally has a high reputation may be more 
demanding in the quality of teaching they expect.

"On the other hand, students that are at a university that it is lower down in 
the pecking order may receive teaching that exceeds their prior expectations 
and give marks higher than would be achieved under any objective measure."

The use of entry grades implies that students with the strongest 
qualifications will go to the university that is best for their subject. It 
also means that some institutions with access programmes – admitting 
lower-performing candidates on the basis of potential – score less highly. The 
use of a value-added score, measuring the impact of teaching, offers a 
counterweight.

Most of the shifts in this year's league table are due to changing levels of 
student satisfaction. Sussex dropped to 27th place from 11th after students in 
English and geography became significantly less happy with their departments. 
Stirling dropped from 44th to 67th after value-added scores in business and law 
declined.

Aberystwyth fell in six subjects, with declines in all performance measures. 
It drops from 50th place to 81st.

Among the climbers is Brunel, up from 82nd to 44th, taking the top spot for 
social work. Chester went from 80th to 52nd, with student satisfaction results 
driving improved ratings in biosciences, history, law and psychology. The 
career prospects of its biosciences graduates also improved. Coventry rose from 
63rd to 46th, with student survey results a major factor.

Bolton, the University of Abertay, Dundee and London Met are the lowest ranked 
universities in the overall table. Bolton will charge a range of fees up to a 
maximum of £8,400.

Cambridge is not listed in the tables for physics or chemistry because it 
offers a natural sciences tripos, and the data could not be adequately split 
according to the constituent parts of this inter-disciplinary course.

All of the public English universities in the Guardian's top 20 will charge 
the maximum fee of £9,000 for new undergraduates from this September, except 
for the LSE, which will charge £8,500.

Dr Wendy Piatt, director general of the Russell Group, said: "Our universities 
do well in these and other tables but students should remember all league 
tables have their limitations and should look beyond rankings when choosing a 
degree course.

"Russell Group universities excel at research but even though this is not 
measured in these tables our universities have still performed well. Teaching 
is one of our top priorities and we believe the combination of world-class 
teaching and research excellence in our universities creates the ideal learning 
environment. Our universities offer a broad range of study options from Arabic 
to Zoology and Mechanical Engineering to Medicine.

"Our students work with their field's leading experts, have access to 
first-rate libraries and facilities, are part of a highly motivated and 
talented peer group and often engage in cutting-edge research themselves.

"Employability is particularly important to potential students in the current 
climate. Employers rank six Russell Group universities in the top 13 
universities in the world, and Russell Group graduates receive on average a 10 
per cent salary 'top-up' over those from other universities.

"Our universities have higher than average levels of student satisfaction and 
the lowest drop-out rates – and we are constantly working to improve the 
student experience."

There are 16 English universities in the top 20: Cambridge, Oxford, LSE, 
Warwick, UCL, Durham, Lancaster, Bath, Exeter, Loughborough, Surrey, Imperial 
College, Buckingham, York, Bristol and Leicester.

Buckingham is a private university, which will charge £22,500 for a two-year 
degree. Students eligible for a government-backed loan will be able to borrow 
up to £12,000 over the two years.TheGuardian University Guide 2013 league table 
of universities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/table/2012/may/21/university-league-table-2013>
 is published today. Subject tables will be available from Tuesday morning.

• For more details on the methodology used for the Guardian University Guide 
tables,please read our methodology guide 
<http://image.theguardian.com/sys-files/Guardian/documents/2012/05/21/TablesMethodology.doc>
. Individual queries should be sent to data@intelligentmetrix.co.uk
 