
Quotes of the day

Tony Abbott

Asked whether he wanted to emulate Margaret Thatcher, Ronald Reagan and John 
Howard, "given that Thatcher cut so deeply when she got into government," 
Abbott said:

They all left their countries, including Australia, stronger and prouder for 
their work in government. John Howard left our country stronger and more 
confident. Margaret Thatcher left Britain stronger and more confident. And 
Ronald Reagan, he won the cold war, helped to make the world much safer for 
democracy and for the universal decencies of humanity.

Kevin Rudd

"Just say you do lose this election," asked the inquisitive host on 2UE, "what 
is life after politics for Kevin Rudd?"

You know something, in my approach to this campaign for its remaining two 
weeks, I have one focus and one focus alone, and that is, my job is to make 
sure the jobs of all your listeners are as safe as they can be.

Tweet of the day

Wolf Cocklin @wolfcat on Tony Abbott's decision to "suspend" maritime 
management plans introduced by the Labor government to allow fishers back into 
those areas:
Wolf Cocklin (@wolfcat) 
Abbott to offer free indonesian fishing boats to all recreational fisher folk 
to fish in marine national parks.
 <https://twitter.com/wolfcat/statuses/371880507211927552> August 26, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/wolfcat/statuses/371880507211927552> 
Prop of the day: the Vegemite files

Mouse brain What thoughts cross the mind of a mouse? Cheese? Avoiding traps? 
Torture methods for cats? Abbott took a little dish of grey matter in his hands 
at the Clem Jones Centre at the University of Queensland to announce $9m for 
dementia research. We didn't hear a squeak out of him.

Candidate of the day

The candidates' award would have to go to the double act of Clive Palmer and 
Bob Katter, who appeared together at the National Press Club. The billionaire 
and the back country boy are increasingly looking like the Muppet Show men 
Statler and Waldorf, shouting at the major parties from the balcony. Palmer 
announced a slew of tax cuts and when asked whether they were costed, said his 
party officials had it nailed, along with his accountants in London, Paris and 
New York. Katter, on the other hand, admitted he had little money but "we will 
get it". Palmer warned the media not to write them off. "Journalists said we 
could not stand 150 candidates and we did it."

Stats of the day

1,748km There are 1,748km of rail corridors between Sydney, Melbourne and 
Canberra, which Labor promised to preserve in legislation for future high-speed 
rail.

40 years Abbott suggests he would rather provide infrastructure now than 
commit to Labor's plans to spend $100m in 40 years' time.
 