
The fight against the proposed Jackson reforms to litigation costs will go on, 
the former Labour MP leading the Access to Justice Action Group 
<http://www.accesstojusticeactiongroup.co.uk/home/> (Ajag) has vowed.

The group is running the most prominent campaign against the recommendations 
from the appeal court judge Sir Rupert Jackson, which have been largelytaken up 
by the government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/mar/30/no-win-no-fee-clampdown-implications>
.

Its email-based lobbying effort, aimed at MPs, mirrors the tactics 
successfully employed by those opposed to the forests sale earlier this year, 
and claims to have gained access to a good number of influential MPs. The likes 
of the former cabinet minister Hazel Blears, a former solicitor, are among 
those publicly supporting the campaign.

However, unlike the parallel movement against the government's legal aid 
reforms, the various claimant personal injury lobbying groups, representing the 
area most affected by the proposals, have so far been unable to find sufficient 
common ground to present a united front.

The problem is, coming up with an acceptable alternative. A couple of months 
ago, Ajag spearheaded an attempt to build a coalition of claimant interests 
behind a package that would limit, but not end, losing defendants' exposure to 
paying the claimant's success fee and after-the-event (ATE) insurance. But it 
was unable togarner enough support 
<http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/news/ambitious-plan-to-pull-together-major-anti-jackson-coalition-fails>
. Talk of reviving these efforts to find a consensus needs to come to fruition 
quickly.

According to the Ajag leader, Andrew Dismore – who was a claimant personal 
injury solicitor before entering parliament – a major speech on justice issues 
next month by David Cameron will herald publication of a bill by the Ministry 
of Justice that will take in both criminal and civil law reform. Sentencing and 
legal aid are likely to dominate the debate among MPs and peers, and Jackson 
campaigners will have to work very hard to be heard, even if access to justice 
is at the core of their argument.

The cost of litigation against the NHS is one area that does attract the 
attention of MPs, however, and Dismore estimates that the reforms will actually 
increase NHS costs, as opposed to cutting them by a third, as the government 
predicts. Figures provided by after-the-event insurers show how many claims 
against theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> they actually stop in 
their tracks by assessing the merits of the case, a brake that will be lost 
under the Jackson plans.

The judge also wanted his reforms to change the market for legal services. 
Making the client liable for some of the costs should introduce competition, 
and it is thought that for basic road traffic cases, success fees will rapidly 
fall to zero so that lawyers can continue to offer clients 100% of their 
compensation.

This will in turn put pressure on the referral fees solicitors pay claims 
companies for their cases, now around £600 to £800 for basic personal injury 
files.

Referral fees remain a contentious issue, and it appears that ministers have 
once again returned to the question of whether they could be banned. This is 
all tied up with fears about the so-called compensation culture – so-called 
because every piece of research, including from Lord Young in his 
Cameron-commissioned report last year, has found that it exists in perception 
only – and whether the activities of claims companies, largely paid for by 
referral fees, encourage people to chance their arm.

Aside from arguments that referral fees are simply marketing costs, the 
general consensus is that they would just go underground if banned. The Legal 
Services Board will shortly publish its conclusions on this issue for the 
Ministry of Justice to consider, and it is very likely to recommend greater 
transparency about the money changing hands, rather than a ban.

It is an argument that may well become moot anyway by 6 October, when 
alternative business structures (ABSs) are due to be launched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/mar/25/tesco-law-alternative-business-structures>
. Claims companies will just be able to bolt on a law firm, or vice versa, and 
conduct the whole claim, from capture to completion.

With many hundreds of thousands of cases a year, it is with good reason that 
personal injury has long been seen as one of the early targets of ABSs. An 
increasing number of these cases will be driven through a fixed-fee electronic 
portal that will require firms to adopt a process-driven business model, based 
on scale. External investment may be needed to create such a model.

Lawyers need to keep an eye on this bigger picture. Ultimately, it may be 
ABSs, rather than Lord Justice Jackson, that determine whether they have a 
future.

Neil Rose is the editor of legalfutures.co.uk <http://www.legalfutures.co.uk>
 