
Sole practitioners have been having a hard time in the wake of the Legal 
Services Act 2007, which opened the door foralternative business structures 
(ABSs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/jan/06/alternative-business-structures-solicitors>
). These new forms of legal practice have given household names like the Co-op 
and the AA the opportunity to expand their legal offerings to consumers and 
have allowed law firms to be managed and owned by non-lawyers.

The death knell had already sounded for many one-partner firms following cuts 
in legal aid. A significant challenge for the survivors is the burden of 
regulation. Roger Buston, sole practitioner and executive committee member of 
the Law Society's property section, believes there is too much regulation by the
Solicitors Regulation Authority <http://www.sra.org.uk> (SRA): "We are now 
faced with an ongoing burdensome fundamental regime based upon outcomes focused 
regulation from the SRA and continuing professional development from our own 
professional bodies," he says.

"Like most small businesses I do find some regulation excessive," says Susan 
Singleton. "Thankfully I employ no one and do not hold clients' money so that 
relieves me of much of it, but if I want to provide 30 minutes of advice to a 
client in Saudia Arabia or the USA by internet I need to spend at least as long 
obtaining original ID from them. It is disproportionate, off-putting to clients 
and not, as far as I know, something the government is even tackling in its 
supposed bonfire of the regulations."

The SRA's requirement for compliance officers for legal practice (COLP) and 
compliance officers for financial and administration (COFA) is an added 
administrative burden for law firms, but, says Singleton, "it is really easy in 
a firm of this size to be both the COLP and COFA. The rules are nothing like as 
complex as people - usually consultants selling things - want to make out."

Further problems for one-partner firms include securing affordable indemnity 
insurance and getting onto mortgage lenders' panels. Nicola Phillips was, until 
recently, a conveyancing sole practitioner in Horsham, but recently obtained an 
ABS licence and is now in partnership with her mother. "Sole practitioners have 
a hard time as the public generally think you will not have the same things in 
place as a large company," she says.

"Lots of lenders do not let sole practitioners on the panel. Getting PII 
insurance has been ok but the cost is high so you really need the work coming 
in and the lenders' panel restrictions means you have to have another solicitor 
act for the lender which has to be paid for by the firm." Being a two-partner 
firm has helped Phillips get on a number of mortgage lender panels and, she 
says, should help with joint referral schemes as these are often not open to 
sole practitioners.

Buston believes the difficulties sole practitioners face when they try to get 
on lenders' panels lie with lenders' misconceptions rather than inherent 
inadequacies of sole practitioners. "Some mortgage lenders labour under the 
mistaken impression that the size of a legal firm is the appropriate 
determinant for both its probity and its competence," he says. "Smaller firms 
are more likely to undertake a bespoke service built upon client 
recommendation. Simply having a different and more traditional set of standards 
and business model does not by itself suggest a lack of probity or competence."

Forward thinking sole practitioners are embracing new opportunities: the fact 
that they are able to be more flexible and to diversify more readily than 
larger firms can be an advantage and they may not be quite the casualty of ABS 
that naysayers predict. Niche sole practitioner firms, in particular, can be 
relatively secure: "I do not see ABSs as a threat at all. Very few people even 
in larger firms have my experience in the specialist areas [competition law and 
intellectual property] in which I practice," says Singleton.

Phillips warns that for others longevity is less certain: "I do not think many 
sole practitioners will survive these times unless they really do their 
marketing and form good relationships with local papers and networking groups 
and those in areas who can refer work."
 