
A daily dose of aspirin can reduce the risk of cancer and prevent the disease 
from spreading,studies show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/mar/20/cancer-drugs?INTCMP=SRCH>. But 
the drug has side effects that are serious in some patients, and health 
officials do not yet recommend it for healthy people.

What is aspirin?

Aspirin <https://www.theguardian.com/science/aspirin> (acetylsalicylic acid) 
is an anti-inflammatory drug first used as a painkiller more than a century 
ago. The drug is given to people at risk of heart attacks and strokes, and 
patients with vascular disease. It belongs to a group of medicines known as 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).

How does it work?

Beyond its painkilling effects, aspirin prevents blood platelets sticking 
together and so thins the blood. This reduces the risk of blood clots that can 
cause heart attacks and stroke.

What cancer does aspirin reduce?

A small, 75mg daily dose of aspirin, taken over 10 years or so, reduces the 
risk of around half of cancers forming, including colorectal and oesophageal 
cancer, with a smaller reduction in prostate cancer and adenocarcinoma, a form 
of lung cancer. There seems to be no effect on kidney, bladder and lung cancers 
common in smokers. Aspirin taken over long periods reduced the spread of cancer 
through metastasis by around 50%.

How does aspirin stop cancer?

Nobody knows for sure. The drug might prevent cancer through its 
anti-inflammatory effects, but it may also slow the build up of mutations that 
ultimately lead to the cancer. The drug seems to slow the spread of disease by 
preventing cancer cells from being carried around the body on blood platelets.

Should everyone take aspirin?

The most serious side effect of aspirin is internal bleeding, caused when the 
drug damages the stomach lining. Internal bleeds can be fatal, especially in 
those aged 70 and older. Around 10 to 15% of people who start taking daily 
aspirin stop because of heartburn and other complaints, but of those who can 
tolerate the drug, the risk of dying from a stomach bleed is lower than normal. 
Peter Rothwell, whose studies at Oxford University revealed aspirin's effect on 
cancer, says healthy people might start taking the drug in their mid 40s, 
because the risk of dying from cancer goes up steeply from the early 50s. A 
cancer can take 10 years to progress from tiny cellular changes to a diagnosis 
or death from the disease. Rothwell, who has taken 75mg aspirin a day for the 
past three years, advises anyone thinking of taking aspirin to discuss it with 
their GP first.

How much longer might a person live if they take aspirin?

Aspirin prevented around one in 30 deaths from cancer in a group that had a 
daily dose of aspirin for five or six years during a 20-year period. "If people 
took aspirin for 20 years, it would probably prolong their life by around six 
months on average," says Rothwell.

Can aspirin help people with cancer?

Aspirin appears to slow the spread of cancer, but doctors need to do studies 
on patients to confirm how effective the drug is. "If you have a new diagnosis 
of cancer then, with the exception of children, I think no matter what age you 
are, it's worth thinking about. The drugs you are already taking are much more 
dangerous than aspirin," Rothwell said.

When was aspirin's anticancer effect discovered?

Studies in mice in the 1960s showed that aspirin slowed the spread of cancer, 
but the research never made it into clinics, partly because aspirin was off 
patent, so companies had little to gain from funding trials.
 