
Buoyed by the Occupy movement, America's squeezed and politically valuable 
middle class is beginning to pipe up: and college costs are high on the list of 
gripes. "There is growing concern, particularly among middle income families," 
says Terry Hartle who specialises in student aid and higher education finance 
at the American Council on Education. "As the election campaign heats up, Obama 
is visiting lots of families and what he is hearing is worries about paying for 
college because regardless of federal funding to student aid, tuition [fees] 
goes up."

Earlier this month President Obama held a White House round-table discussion 
with college presidents to specifically talk about college affordability, the 
first time the topic has ever been the subject of such a meeting, according to 
Hartle. Likewise, US secretary of education Arne Duncan told the annual federal 
student aid conference in Las Vegas: "There is ... little doubt that for too 
many students and families, the cost of college is a serious problem."

Now the University of California, Berkeley has become the first public 
institution in the US to tackle the issue head on. Last week it launched a new 
permanent financial aid program called the Berkeley Middle ClassAccess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/access> Plan (MCAP) aimed 
at helping middle-class families pay for the cost of a UC Berkeley 
undergraduate degree. It also aims to keep Berkeley competitive with elite 
private institutions who can lure top students with large scholarships.

The plan, beginning in the 2012-13 academic year, extends financial aid to 
Californian households earning $80,000 to $140,000 (£51,500 to £90,200) per 
year. It caps the contribution parents make towards the total annual cost of an 
eligible student's education at 15% of their earnings and is expected to save 
them between $3,000 and $12,000 annually on the total current cost which stands 
at $32,634 (£21,000) per year for Californian students covering $12,834 
(£8,260) in tuition and fees as well as expenses such as a room, board and 
books. The plan is expected to cost UC Berkeley between $10 to $12m, financed 
by a combination of philanthropic donations and the higher fees collected from 
out-of-state and international students. Residents of others states will also 
be eligible, though only up to the equivalent cost for Californians.

"Our financial aid system works marvellously well for low income families 
[and] we are now extending that," said chancellor Robert Birgeneau.

The programme is intended to buffer the effect of increased tuition fees, says 
vice-chancellor Frank Yearly. The increase has put pressure on families for 
whom Berkeley has previously been much more affordable. The result has been 
that while numbers of students from lower and higher income families have 
increased, middle income student numbers have remained static – shrinking as a 
percentage of the student population: a problem for an institution which prides 
itself on both inclusiveness and affordability.

Berkeley hopes about 6000 will qualify.

But experts say the move has wider significance. It could encourage other US 
public universities – many of which have been increasing tuition fees to make 
up state funding shortfalls – to follow its example.

"Berkeley has really raised the stakes. It is a bold and dramatic plan that is 
really a very new development and I think it will change the discussion," says 
Hartle.

American public universities have historically offered relatively low tuition 
and low aid compared to private universities. But state cuts at public 
universities have changed this to a combination of higher tuition fees and low 
aid: "the worst of both worlds". Berkeley aims to increase the aid element.

"Many other universities will want to do the same thing though I am not 
certain how many will have the resources," Hartle says.

The challenge, he notes, will be ensuring it has the resources to continue to 
honour the commitment in future, even if the state further cuts funding for UC 
campuses.

The Berkeley initiative could be taken up in Britain, which is also facing 
severe cuts in funding and grants.

However, Barham Bekhradnia, director of the Higher Education Policy Institute, 
says it is difficult to compare US and UK financial support systems. In the US, 
for example, there is no cap on fees and they are paid up front compared to the 
UK where they are capped and deferred (spreading the cost across the graduate's 
earning lifetime which makes it more affordable while studying). In the UK, 
there has also been a trend towards merit based scholarships (which don't 
distinguish on need). "But it will be interesting to see whether the new fee 
regime shrinks the percentage of middle class students, as it has done at UC 
Berkeley."

"The only universities that could do what Berkeley has done would be Oxford 
and Cambridge," says Roger Brown, co-director for the centre of higher 
education research development at Liverpool Hope University, stressing he can't 
see anyone else having the resources.

Nicola Dandridge, chief executive of Universities UK, says that under the new 
fee regime from 2012, universities in England will spend more on financial 
support and outreach measures as a proportion of fee income. The majority of 
this kind of spending to date, however, has been targeted at students from the 
"very poorest" backgrounds, she says.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 