
It’s hard to imagine now, but just 15 years ago, the worldwide web was in its 
infancy in terms of consumer use: Google was only a year old and Facebook was 
four years away from being a status update in 15-year-old Mark Zuckerberg’s 
life.

So when in the first months of the 21st century former Tatler fashion editor 
Natalie Massenet <https://www.theguardian.com/business/natalie-massenet> 
launched her designer fashion e-boutique Net-a-Porter and Nick Robertson gave 
the world an early incarnation of Asos, few understood the potential of the 
online fashion marketplace. “The general consensus was that people want to 
touch and try clothes before they buy,” recalls Massenet. “But I believed we 
had a chance.”

Massenet and her burgeoning 2,500 staff have nurtured Net-a-Porter to global 
success,and is set to complete a merger of her business with Italian online 
fashion giant Yoox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/31/net-a-porter-founder-64m-payday-yoox-merger-natalie-massenet>
 later this year, with combined 2014 net revenues of £920m to become the most 
powerful fashion boutique on the planet. More importantly for the 
style-conscious shopper, she has spawned a generation of me-too startups 
desperate to ride the chic coat-tails of this standard-bearer for fashion 
e-commerce.

According to Euromonitor, the digital fashion and footwear marketplace in 
Britain was worth £9bn in 2014, and will grow to £10.8bn by 2019. Last week,Asos
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asos>, which aggregates high street 
brands and own-label stock in a vast, virtual department store, reported that 
active users rose by 11% to 9.7 million in the past year. One of the first 
retailers to launch an app on the Apple Watch, founder Robertson says he was 
initially sceptical about the potential of mobile commerce. “I didn’t believe 
customers would want to shop 75,000 products on [a mobile or watch], but they 
are, and in increasing number.”

Who is the real Anna Wintour?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/may/06/anna-wintour-who-is-the-real> 
This shift from desktop to portable device has seen an explosion in peripheral 
fashion sites that facilitate the discovery process, share style inspiration or 
streamline purchasing with universal checkouts. Among them, tech investor Chris 
Morton launchedLyst <https://www.lyst.co.uk/> four years ago, applying the 
Spotify model of music discovery to the fashion sector. Lyst users browse and 
discover 11,000 designer brands and premium boutiques in one portal, then make 
multiple purchases averaging £260 apiece in one quick transaction.

“The [kind of] algorithms that recommend tracks or artists based on your 
listening habits translate well for the emotionally driven fashion market,” 
explains Morton, who has seen Lyst grow 300% year-on-year for the past three 
years. “For true functionality we needed a vast inventory, so we have about 2.5 
million products online at any one time [to put that in perspective, the 
largest department stores have around 30,000], but we are a tech company, not a 
retailer. Our commercial partners do the fulfilment of the sale: we simply 
create an incredible shop window that becomes more and more bespoke as you 
create your personal profile.” Other user-driven sites have helped the 
exponential growth of digital fashion shopping: Pinterest and Instagram began 
as image-based inspiration sites, but brands now use them as powerful marketing 
tools. eBay spawned a new generation of savvy vintage shoppers, who now love 
sites such as Vestiaire Collective, Tradesy, Instantluxe, Hardlyeverwornit and 
more, while businesses including Yoox, Cocosa, Brand Alley and Gilt Group sell 
off-season items from designer houses. Meanwhile, Farfetch has created a global 
showcase for small independent designer boutiques, while Moda Operandi offers 
unprecedented access for the public to pre-order high-end garments, accessories 
and fine jewellery, guaranteeing early delivery of items they’ve coveted on the 
catwalk.

Online marketplaces such as Etsy, Folksy and Notonthehighstreet allow 
small-scale producers to offer varying levels of bespoke styles; niche 
e-tailers specialising in hosiery, sunglasses, Breton tops, swimwear, kaftans, 
Greek sandals and more are a viable proposition in the virtual marketplace, 
where the only prerequisites for trading are a PayPal account, a mode of 
delivery and a method for potential customers to discover your wares.

Can hipsters save the world?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/08/can-hipsters-save-the-world> 
London is the beating heart of fashion’s e-commerce drive, with tech analyst 
Crunchbase estimating that about 60 digital fashion startups launched in the 
capital in the past five years with new features regularly wheeled out.

Last month, Ivailo Jordanov expanded his Styloko fashion site with the 
addition of the WantList app, widely described as a Tinder for fashionistas. 
“Swiping is the quickest and simplest way for consumers to like or dislike 
something, and we then glean that data instantly. The more items they swipe, 
the more we can analyse preferences and hone their WantList to their personal 
style,” he says.

Styloko CEO Shannon Edwards says they “have a vision of eliminating Google in 
fashion, because with traditional search engines you are beholden to 
descriptions and key words that match the retailer’s or the brand’s, which is 
too much of a gamble. That doesn’t replicate how we shop, because we are 
enticed visually by details, so this process refines the online fashion 
discovery process in a similar way.”

The ultimate desire of the digital fashion world is, of course, image 
recognition software, allowing users to scan a TV screen, photo or person on 
the street and identify their outfit or find a similar one.

This coveted “Shazam for fashion” facility would make the entire world 
shoppable and substantially shorten the path from picture to purchase, and the 
significant levels of investment in the arena shows how lucrative it could be 
for retailers and investors if it works.

But thus far, no algorithm has been developed to mimic brain processing in 
terms of subtle but critical differences in colour, texture, cut, drape and the 
like. The day that a programmer can account for the nuances of taste will, 
without any doubt, change the landscape of fashion commerce for ever.

 * This article was corrected on the 10 July 2015 to clarify the position of 
Net-a-Porter’s merger with Yoox.
 