
Q I am a one-parent family with a child at senior school. I have just 
completed an access course and I am now going to attend Wimbledon School of 
Art. I have applied for a loan and because of this am told that I will not 
receive income support. I thought the idea of a loan was for course material - 
for example for books, canvas and paint.

If I do not take the loan I can continue to receive income support. I attended 
the benefits advice desk and they said to me that it would not be wise for me 
to go to university. I am 40 years old - is there any way I can do the course 
and yet not end up living in debt and on the breadline?

W L-W

A It is essential that you talk to the office that pays your benefits before 
you accept a Career Development Loan (CDL) because receiving a loan for study 
may affect your benefit entitlement. A spokeswoman for the Department for Work 
and Pensions says: "If you are claiming state benefits or want to do so while 
you are studying then you need to check with your local office before you put 
in your application. If you decide to take on a loan, you may need to make sure 
it covers your living expenses too."

A CDL will allow you to borrow between £300 and £8,000 to help fund up to two 
years of learning. It sounds as though you need to go back to the Benefits 
Office and talk it through with them.

One course of action may be to continue to receive benefits and to find 
alternative ways of buying your course material. Some charitable foundations 
offer help to mature students and single parents who want to go back to college.

The Elizabeth Nuffield Educational Fund, for example, gives financial help to 
women with children who want to return to education. You could also ask your 
local Citizens Advice Bureau for help on tracking down charitable trusts and 
grant-making bodies which aim to support women in further education.

You can find more information about how to apply at: 
www.nuffieldfoundation.org/grants/enef/overview.asp 
<http://www.nuffieldfoundation.org/grants/enef/overview.asp>
 