
This year's Cannes will begin and end in ways to make us meditate on the 
themes of property and theft. Ridley Scott's new Robin Hood film will launch 
the festival with what we all hope will be a beefy and resounding twang; the 
closing film will be Oliver Stone's Wall Street 2.

Both are out of competition, emphasising the Cannes habit of showcasing 
Hollywood movies in this relaxingly non-judgmental way. Glitzy American 
pictures will bring in the star-names and red-carpet glamour, but my first 
recognition has to go Stephen Frears's Tamara Drewe based on a graphic novel by 
Posy Simmonds.

Mike Leigh is a great British auteur and former Palme D'Or winner, back with a 
new ensemble drama, Another Year, starring Lesley Manville and Jim Broadbent. 
Leigh's relationship with Cannes has been chequered. The festival famously 
turned down his 2005 film Vera Drake – Leigh took it to Venice where he won the 
Golden Lion and thumbed his nose at the French.

There is a strong Asian and Russian presence with films from Im Sang-soo, Lee 
Chang-dong and Nikita Mikhalkov – the latter returns with Burnt By The Sun 2, a 
follow-up to his most popular film.

The French presence looks interestingly low-key. Veteran film-maker Bertrand 
Tavernier presents his period costume drama The Princess of Montpensier, and 
the actor and recent Bond villain Mathieu Amalric makes his directorial debut 
(in the main competition, no less) with Tournée, about American burlesque girls 
on tour inFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>.

Abbas Kiarostami is the Iranian director with impregnable status and esteem 
and respect will be paid to his new film Certified Copy starring Juliette 
Binoche, his first made outside Iran.

Perhaps my favourite director in this year's lineup is the visionary Thai 
artist and film-maker Apichatpong "Joe" Weerasethakul who returns with his 
intriguing sounding Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives. Mexican 
director Alejandro Gonzalez Inarritureturns with another drama of chance 
encounters and fate: Biutiful, starring Javier Bardem.

There is no doubt who is the biggest name. Fifty years after his first movie 
(Breathless, in 1960), the great man is back to put in a distinctively grizzled 
and inscrutable appearance. Jean-Luc Godard comes to Cannes in the Un Certain 
Regard sidebar, with a contribution to the portmanteau film Socialism. It will 
be a hot ticket. And the legendary Portuguese director, Manoel De Oliveira, at 
101 years old, has made a new film, The Strange Case of Angelica.

A list with big names and well-established egos: as ever, the fascination is 
in seeing who will triumph and which upstaged by the always unguessable tide of 
younger talent.
 