
It beat a host of big names and blockbusters to clinch the prestigious Palme 
d'Or at the Cannes film festival earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/may/23/cannes-film-festival-apichatpong-weerasethakul>
. But now the fantastical Thai film Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives 
is being turned on by Parisian critics, who have dismissed it as pointless, 
obscure and excruciatingly boring.

The laboriously titled film by Apichatpong Weerasethakul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/apichatpong-weerasethakul>, which was plucked 
from relative obscurity by the Cannes jury in May, has been greeted by some 
international reviewers as a mesmerising and mystical insight into love, death 
and life itself.

To many French critics, however, it's just dull.

"I have seen it twice; I was bored twice," wrote Eric Libiot for L'Express 
magazine. "I am not one of those rhapsodising about this 'splendid epic' and 
this 'rare and extreme experience'. On the contrary, I consider it to be a work 
that never goes beyond the theoretical intentions of the director and which 
uses dramatic arbitrariness as an artistic posture."

While the highbrow left-leaning papers Le Monde and Libération have given the 
film positive reviews, theirs are lone voices. "Uncle Boonmee claims to be a 
sort of sensorial experience that, now and then, brings back memories of the 
worst films of the 1970s," remarked Olivier Delcroix in today's Figaroscope.

Giving the film the worst of four ratings – captioned "to be avoided" – he 
added: "Between the apparition of a gorilla stricken by myxomatosis and the 
orgasm of a princess giving into the assaults of an enterprising catfish, one 
no longer knows what to do. Boredom sets in."

The francophone censure has not been limited to France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, with Brussels also piling in. 
"Uncle Boonmee is hopelessly slow, and the actors whisper their dialogue in an 
… atmosphere conducive to unavoidable somnolence for the audience," said Hugues 
Dayez in his review for Belgian radio.

There is, however, one point of relief. Bemoaning the absence of any 
conventional plot and the sequence of "very long, often static" episodes 
involving, among other things, a buffalo in a forest and a simian spirit, the 
critic for Ouest France offered some consolation.

"For he who cannot let himself be carried away with this experimental and 
abstruse experience … there is still a long love scene – intense and surprising 
– between a princess and a catfish."
 