
As the world’s Mad Men descend on the south of France for a wine-swilling week 
pursuing awards glory, there is a growing sense of change in the air.Cannes 
Lions <https://www.canneslions.com/>, the annual festival at the epicentre of a 
$540bn global ad industry laser-focused on consumerism, has had an attack of 
the ethics.

Amidst the usual star-studded campaigns featuring Lionel Messi and LeBron 
James, and squeezed around seminars adorned with seat fillers including 
Entourage’s Adrian Grenier and singer-actor Natalie Imbruglia, it seems that 
marketing for good causes is the new black.

The wave includes hotly-tipped LikeAGirl 
<http://always.com/en-us/about-us/our-epic-battle-like-a-girl>, the campaign 
that showed doing something “like a girl” is not an insult, for feminine brand 
Always; Australian telecoms firmOptus’ shark-averting buoys 
<https://cleverbuoy.com.au/>; and Four Weddings and a Funeral writer Richard 
Curtis’s bid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/15/richard-curtis-radio-stations-unite-campaign>
 to get media owners globally to get together to reach “7 billion people in 7 
days” to promote a new United Nations bill of rights to end extreme poverty.

There’s more: Al Gore gets the Cannes LionHeart award for being an 
eco-warrior, and theALS ice bucket challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/may/30/als-after-the-ice-bucket-challenge>
, a global social phenomenon so big even George W Bush couldn’t resist, is a 
shoo-in for the Grand Prix for Good created purely for charity entrants. There 
is even a new award, the Glass Lion for work challenging gender sterotypes in 
advertising, inspired by Facebook chief operating officer Sheryl Sandberg.

Dave Buonaguidi, chief creative officer at agency CP&B London, is sceptical 
about the motivations of the admen jumping on the good cause bandwagon.

“My instinct is that it’s a washing away of dirt exercise,” he says. “The ‘do 
good’ thing is fascinating, to have a missionary stance in a very mercenary 
business is very on-trend right now. Cannes is still steeped in the superficial 
and ego-driven side of the business. If it really cared, then spend the huge 
sums that are used to enter awards and put on lavish parties on doing good. A 
principle is only a principle when it costs you money.”

A bit of napkin maths illustrates how lucrative the Cannes machine, which is 
part-owned by the Guardian publisher GMG, has become. This year there were a 
record 40,133 entries; at an average cost of almost €700 each (plus 20% VAT if 
you happen to be a UK agency), that’s a crisp £20m.

A record 13,500 delegates have stumped up as much as €5,640 to €6,800 for 
four- to nine-day packages - all sold, and probably worth another £40m-£50m.

And that’s without the huge sums agencies and media companies spend securing 
coveted seminar slots, usually with high-priced guest names, hotels and 
corporate entertaining. Attractions this year include Jamie Cullum and Boy 
George.

Paul Frampton, chief executive of Havas Media, warns that many brands simply 
see an opportunity to piggy-back on the latest trend that shifts product.

“For many companies it is definitely a badging exercise,” he says. “There is 
too much short termisim designed to get a gong. You don’t change things on a 
good cause or community level unless a brand commits over the long term, a lot 
of this is short term [sales] spike stuff.”

Much of this desire to piggy-back derives from the bona fide success of a few 
early trailblazers, such as Unilever’s transformative “campaign for real 
beauty” for Dove.

Keith Weed, who handles Unilever’s €7.2bn global marketing budget, believes 
that authenticity is critical as a new generation of hyper-critical consumers 
emerges.

“As people become more aware and engaged around [issues such as] climate 
change and societal inequality, they are increasingly holding businesses and 
brands who aren’t part of the solution to account,” he says. “I expect to see 
this trend continue to increase especially in the age of social media. Brands 
need to have more depth and breadth to engage consumers. Connecting purpose to 
purchase.”

Money-making notwithstanding, Cannes has transcended its roots in old-school 
adland, attracting the cream of a new generation of global brands fromFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> and Google to SnapChat, 
Buzzfeed and Spotify.

And a glance at the seminar list shows that for every gratuitous Kim 
Kardashian West <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kim-kardashian> and 
ubiquitous Will.i.am session, there are talks on weighty issues such as 
Google’s policies and legal chiefs discussing how to “wield our most creative 
impulses for good in a world of Isis and Charlie Hebdo”.

Nelli Lähteenmäki, 30, founder of the Jamie Oliver-backed wellbeing app 
You-app, is one of the new breed of tech entrepreneurs gravitating to Cannes to 
build their business and cause-related marketing is a big part of that.

“I represent both a consumer interested in the true values of brands as well 
as an entrepreneur building an app that aims to create positive, sustainable 
behaviour change at scale,” she says. “I truly believe the trend of caring is 
here to stay – more conscious, genuinely good-willing businesses will be 
upvoted by consumers. Even if there is some money to be made out of it, the 
bigger picture is if the message is strong it is worth doing.”
 