
The period from mid-November to Christmas Day is not only the season of 
goodwill, it’s the time of unadulterated online shopping. While an SME cannot 
compete with John Lewis on television, there is no reason why it cannot look to 
social media to get noticed by current and new fans.

The newly launched Facebook Live is increasingly being used by SMEs and 
according to Brid O’Connell, Group Social Media Manager at Thomas Cook 
Airlines, it makes good sense particularly for retail businesses. The airline 
has recently been experimenting with Facebook Live and expects to use it over 
the festive season to promote flash sales for promoted destinations. But what 
can a small business learn from a brand as huge as Thomas Cook?

“Facebook Live is going to be everywhere this Christmas” says O’Connell, “but 
the good news for smaller companies is that the evidence suggests it doesn’t 
have to be a highly polished, expensive video”.

“The beauty is that because it’s new, Facebook is promoting it on users’ feeds 
and so you’re far more likely to get noticed and shared, even after you’ve 
finished filming. We estimate the average post from a brand gets exposed to 
around 10% of its followers whereas Facebook Live will reach around 30% to 50%.”

Get on board the right hashtags

While Facebook Live may be the new kid on the block to get attention this 
festive season, the tried and tested formulas are still highly recommended. 
Moses Velasco, Chief Strategist ofSocialbakers <https://www.socialbakers.com/>, 
which measures effectiveness of social media, points out that smart use of 
hashtags and seasonal content and promotions are always key ingredients to 
success, as was the case with one of their clients last year,Meantime Brewing 
<https://www.meantimebrewing.com/>.

“It saw a record week of sales in the run up to Christmas 2015 through 
seasonal content which positioned its beer as the perfect gift and ideal 
accompaniment to Christmas merrymaking.

Should I invest in growth or focus on profit?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/hiscox-partner-zone/2016/nov/30/should-i-invest-in-growth-or-focus-on-profit>
“On Twitter, the company’s use of #MeantimeXmas had a significant impact. 
During the month of December 2015, when using #MeantimeXmas, the SME saw four 
times the growth in followers versus its average month, almost 9 times higher 
engagement and 6 times more user mentions. And this translated into sales – the 
company reported that it smashed previous record sales by over 20%, selling 
over 3% of its annual volume in just one week.”

Reach out to influencers

While growing fan bases of potential customers through smart use of hashtags 
is an obvious way to succeed at Christmas, another is to think beyond a 
company’s own following and work on a Christmas campaign with social 
influencers who have impact in a part of the business you are looking to grow.

Continuing last year’s tradition, fulfilment firm Parcel Hero 
<http://www.parcelhero.com/> has launched a project which sees craft bloggers 
given boxes to decorate. When combined, these boxes form an advent calendar 
which is auctioned for charity. The resulting coverage on craft and charity 
accounts gave the brand a major festive boost last year in a key market, says 
Dave Jinks, Head of Consumer Research at the company reveals.

“The project undoubtedly helped raise our profile amongst craft businesses who 
are a group of people who ship items regularly and are therefore a great target 
audience for us.”

Get in Instagram’s ‘loop’

Partnerships are a very clever way of coming up with prizes and offers that 
will help several SMEs combine their reach for free, says Alison Battisby, 
Founder of marketing agency,Avocado Social <http://avocadosocial.com/>. In 
addition to running daily Christmas promotions on their feeds, smart SMEs will 
think about “loop” giveaways on Instagram, she advises.

Competition online for customer attention is likely to be fiercer than ever

“A loop giveaway involves partnering up with other small businesses, 
particularly ones selling products that compliment yours,” she explains.

“So, if you sell candles, why not find a chocolate maker, a soap producer and 
a sock company to create a snuggly festive prize? You all post the same photo 
of the prizes on your Instagram accounts at the same time, but just tag in one 
other business in the competition. This way your entrants visit each business 
in a loop, and are instructed to follow and like each business to enter.”

Budget helps you get noticed

While Jess Bailey, Senior Account Manager at digital marketing agency, Chase 
<http://www.catchdigital.com/>, agrees Facebook Live and social partnerships 
are a huge opportunity, there is an inconvenient truth. It’s a fact of life 
that is even more evident at Christmas when brands post more regularly to gain 
the attention of the social public.

“If you want to cut-through multiple posts from thousands of companies you 
have to accept you may well need to promote posts, particularly at Christmas,” 
she says. But it’s not just throwing money into the unknown, “you can target 
people who are of the right demographic, have bought related products or are 
interested in your niche. With some you can even upload your email database and 
find a ‘lookalike’ audience to target. Everyone’s going to be vying for 
attention so promoting posts is the best way of ensuring you get noticed by the 
right people.”

This is expected to be particularly true of this year as more SMEs tune in to 
the appeal of social. In its latest annual report,DNA of an Entrepreneur 
<https://www.hiscox.co.uk/dna-of-an-entrepreneur/>, Hiscox found that more than 
a third of small business owners (36%) see no barrier to using social media to 
promote their business. This means competition for attention is likely to be 
fiercer than ever and so SMEs who can use hashtags smartly to build effective 
festive promotions will do well, often with the help of social influencers and 
partners. Many will have to be realistic, however, and heed the warning from 
experts that social media success is now as much about advertising as it is 
free reach.

Content on this page is paid for and produced to a brief agreed with Hiscox 
<https://www.hiscox.co.uk/>, sponsor of the Adventures in Business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/series/adventures-in-business>
 hub on the Guardian Small Business Network.
 