
When Andrew Strauss swapped the commentary box for the role of England’s 
director of cricket in May 2015, among his first moves – along with shoring up 
the position of a then-wobblingAlastair Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> – was to relieve Ian Bell of 
the Test vice-captaincy and hand it to Joe Root, thus a putting a long-term 
succession plan in place.

Fast forward 18 months, with England 2-0 down to India, looking worryingly 
ill-equipped to square the series and a year away from their defence of the 
Ashes in Australia, the question of when this button will be pushed is starting 
to cross minds, not least since Cook, who will turn 32 on Christmas Day, began 
openly talking of a desire to return to the playing ranks before his eventual 
retirement.

Andrew Strauss says Alastair Cook not finished yet as England Test captain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/16/andrew-strauss-alastair-cook-england-captain>
Is the current team, one that beat Australia in 2015 and then won in South 
Africa but now sit two defeats away from equalling a record eight losses in a 
calendar year (matching 1984, 1986 and 1993), still progressing under Cook? It 
is something Cook and Strauss continue to discuss on a series-by-series basis.

With a home Test summer against a resurgent South Africa and a perhaps 
less-threatening West Indies side, any change to the arrangement would 
logically need to occur after either the current tour or the 2017-18 Ashes, 
given Root would need a run-up to tackling such a winter.

Australia is a tour that Cook himself may well eye as a swansong in the role 
giventhe 5-0 defeat suffered last time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/05/ashes-2013-14-australia-england--whitewash>
. He would likely have a side better equipped, you would think, to compete 
there than on the subcontinent, too.

His captaincy, after an England-record 57 Tests, continues to attract 
criticism for “conservatism” – the third day in Mohali the most recent example 
– but with holes in the batting and only one spinner, Adil Rashid, fulfilling 
their role, not all of it should fall at his door.

Root, speaking before he and the majority of the squad flew to Dubai for a 
mid-tour rest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/29/england-dubai-tests-india-break-alastair-cook>
 before the fourth Test in Mumbai on 8 December, has unsurprisingly stated his 
preference for Cook to carry on for some time. “I think he is pretty set on 
captaining for a few years and I hope he does because I think he is a brilliant 
leader and I’ve really enjoyed playing under him,” said the 25-year-old, who 
has only known life under Cook since making his debut in 2012. “I’m quite happy 
with the role I’m playing at the moment and you want to do what is right for 
England and the side.

“And genuinely, honestly, I think he is the right man. Hopefully, we get these 
results we want in the last two games and we can put right what has been quite 
a frustrating last couple of weeks.”

Cook stated after the defeat in Mohali that the team’s mini-break is certainly 
needed amid their epic seven-Test pre-Christmas schedule and while a six-month 
hiatus will follow in the new year, this is understandable on a personal level 
with the five days in Dubai seeing him reunited with his family and the 
daughter with whom he has spent only the 18 hours after her birth before flying 
out to join the team in Bangladesh.

Root has been unaware of this having had any effect on his leadership, 
however, with blame for the current dormie scoreline in his eyes resting 
squarely on the jumbled batting lineup that, after racking up 537 first-up in 
the draw in Rajkot, failed to pass 300 in their first innings during the 
defeats in Visakhapatnam and Mohali.

“I think he is coping all right,” said Root. “He’s very professional and you 
don’t really get much from him in that respect. I imagine it must be quite 
tough being away from a new child and family and everything. You could put a 
lot of blame on Cooky but actually it is the responsibility of the batters to 
make those big scores. You can blame whoever you want, but we have to take 
responsibility for our own games.”

Root was certainly one of the guilty men during both, having run out his 
partner Haseeb Hameed and been caught in the deep during the second-day 
collapse in Vizag, and the swipe across the line against Jayant Yadav – the 
first ball after drinks on the opening morning – saw him trapped lbw for 15 and 
England falter again in Mohali.

Greater disgust with himself would come in the second innings, however, when 
on 78 he was caught at slip off the left-armer Ravi Jadeja to end a stand of 45 
with the injured Hameed at No8 that he felt may have given England a puncher’s 
chance of bowling out India had it continued.

Hameed, who has returned home this week for surgery on his broken little 
finger and will be replaced byDurham’s uncapped left-hander Keaton Jennings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/30/england-call-up-keaton-jennings-liam-dawson-india-tests-cricket>
 (who celebrated his England call-up with an unbeaten century as Lions captain 
in their eight-wicket win over United Arab Emirates in Dubai), has made an 
impression on Root, who in his role as a senior player has spoken to the 
19-year-old on how best to approach his cricket for Lancashire before the South 
Africa series in July.

“The only advice I gave was make sure you don’t go back to county cricket at 
the start of the summer and rest on your laurels and think: ‘I’m a Test 
cricketer now,’” Root said.

“It’s an opportunity to prove to everyone in county cricket that you are there 
for a reason. You have opportunities to make some really big scores, keep 
learning and improving, put the good work he has done here into his game and 
continue to develop the way he has done.

“He will have different expectations in the future and that might be a 
different challenge but he has got a very good head on his shoulders and he 
should be proud of what he has done so far. Now it is about managing those 
expectations and being realistic – it’s going to take time to keep developing 
and it might not always go how he wants. But I’m sure that if he does have some 
hard times, he’ll get through it.”

Sound advice from the second best batsman in the world Test rankings. India’s 
Virat Kolhi jumped into a career high third after Mohali, having begun the 
series in 15th, and with Australia’s Steve Smith top and New Zealand’s Kane 
Williamson fourth it means Root is the only one among this recognised elitewho 
is not captain of his national side. When this changes remains to be seen.
 