
The Cardiff Blues <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cardiffblues> demolished 
Gloucester in the EDF Energy Cup final at Twickenham to win their first piece 
of silverware as a region.

The Blues raced into a 22-5 half-time lead with two tries from Wales winger 
Leigh Halfpenny and a third from Tom James asGloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> crumbled under Cardiff's 
power and panache.

Cardiff wrapped up an emphatic victory with two second-half tries from Ben 
Blair and a breakaway score from Ceri Sweeney before Tom Shanklin's converted 
effort brought up the half-century.

Victory at Twickenham completed a memorable week for the Blues, who last 
weekend beat French giants Toulouse to reach the Heineken Cup semi-finals for 
the first time in their history in any guise.

Among the most satisfied onlookers at Twickenham will have been Lions head 
coach Ian McGeechan and his assistant Shaun Edwards.

The Lions management will meet on Monday to finalise their tour squad for 
South Africa and Cardiff were carried to victory by a number of immense 
performances from key contenders.

Halfpenny proved his qualities as an electric finisher and Shanklin produced 
another top-class performance but it was lung-bursting performance from man of 
the match Martyn Williams who epitomised the difference between the two sides.

The one black mark on the afternoon was an injury - reported to be a fractured 
arm - to scrum-half to Jason Spice after just two minutes which threatens to 
rule him out of the Heineken Cup semi-final against Leicester.

Gloucester managed a first-half try from Mark Foster and a late penalty try 
but they were a distant second in every area of the game as they slipped to a 
fourth consecutive Twickenham defeat.

The Cherry and Whites' half-hearted performance will have done little to 
convince critics that they do not deserve the "chokers" tag which is so often 
applied to them.

Gloucester have now lost their last four Twickenham visits, a run which 
includes two Premiership Grand Finals and a Wild Card play-off.

Cardiff head coach Dai Young named an unchanged squad from the Toulouse 
triumph and far from looking jaded by their European exploits, the Blues 
started at a rip-roaring pace.

The loss of Spice did little to disrupt Cardiff's momentum as they proceeded 
to puncture the Gloucester defence with a blend of powerful running and slick 
handling.

The Cherry and Whites survived an early attack as Anthony Allen bundled 
Shanklin into touch just short of the line but they had no answer to Nicky 
Robinson's carving break through the middle.

The Gloucester-bound fly-half slipped the ball to Williams and Halfpenny then 
exchanged two neat passes with Spice's replacement Richard Rees to dart over 
for the opening try.

Blair slotted the simple conversion and then extended Cardiff's lead with a 
penalty before the Blues punctured Gloucester's defence again.

The ubiquitous Williams raced onto an offload from Shanklin and then found 
Halfpenny with a lofted pass and the Blues winger accelerated away from Will 
James and Ryan Lamb to score his second try of the afternoon.

Gloucester mounted a swift response and spread the ball wide via captain 
Gareth Delve to Mark Foster, who wriggled through Halfpenny's attempted tackle 
to stretch over in the corner.

But Lamb missed the conversion and it proved only temporary respite for 
Gloucester as the Blues struck again just before half-time to open a 22-5 lead.

Robinson released Tom James on the angled run and the winger fended off Lamb's 
attempted tackle long enough to twist and touch down in the corner for a try 
confirmed by the television official.

The second half began with now familiar and frustrating bouts of kick-tennis 
that have dominated this season under the ELVs before Cardiff stepped up the 
pace again.

The Blues wasted a golden opportunity to score when Robinson decided to slide 
a grubber kick in behind the Gloucester defence instead of feeding Blair on his 
shoulder.

But they cut loose in the closing minutes, with Gethin Jenkins' bulldozing run 
scattering the Gloucester defence and his neat pass released Blair to score 
under the posts.

Replacement Sweeney regathered his own kick after the ball had taken a wicked 
bounce to raced clear before Williams provided another scoring pass to give 
Blair his second try.

And Shanklin, another of Cardiff's potential Lions, finished the afternoon off 
in style with a well-deserved try after Paul Tito's pass as the Blues knocked 
Gloucester for 50.
 