
Russell Wilson threw a career-high five touchdown passes, including two TDs to 
Doug Baldwin in the final 8:12, and the Seattle Seahawks held on for a wild 
39-30 win over thePittsburgh Steelers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pittsburgh-steelers> and Ben Roethlisberger 
on Sunday.

Wilson threw three touchdowns to Baldwin, including an 80-yard catch-and-run 
score with 2:01 left after Pittsburgh had trimmed Seattle’s lead to 32-30.

NFL round-up: Washington edge Giants while Vikings move ahead in NFC North
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/29/nfl-round-up-washington-edge-giants-as-vikings-move-ahead-in-nfc-north>
Baldwin caught a crossing route on third-and-10 at the 20, broke two tackles 
and raced for the clinching score. Baldwin caught a 30-yard TD midway through 
the fourth quarter after Pittsburgh had taken a 27-26 lead.

Wilson also threw two touchdowns to Jermaine Kearse and Seattle (6-5) picked 
up a huge victory in its hopes of getting back to the postseason. Seattle’s 
victory was tempered by news that tight end Jimmy Graham will miss the rest of 
the season aftersuffering a torn patellar tendon in the fourth quarter 
<http://www.nfl.com/news/story/0ap3000000590879/article/jimmy-graham-carted-off-with-right-knee-injury>
. He will have surgery on the injury in due course.

Roethlisberger threw for 456 yards — the most ever against the Seahawks — but 
was pulled with two minutes left and taken to the locker room for concussion 
protocol. The Steelers (6-5) had a two-game win streak end.

Roethlisberger was intercepted twice, including Richard Sherman’s first of the 
season, and Landry Jones’ attempt at a late rally ended on Kam Chancellor’s 
pick at the Seattle 6 with 1:37 left.

Elsewhere, Carson Palmer and the Arizona Cardinals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arizona-cardinals> had to squeak one out in 
ugly fashion at San Francisco to keep their winning streak alive.

Palmer ran for a go-ahead eight-yard touchdown with 2:28 left and tumbled 
after spiking the ball in a telling story of his day, and the Cardinals topped 
the 49ers 19-13 for their fifth straight win and first road victory in the 
series since September 2008.

Moments earlier, Palmer fell backward as he released the ball and completed a 
34-yard pass to JJ Nelson to put Arizona on the one-yard line. Chandler 
Catanzaro missed the extra-point try, giving Blaine Gabbert and the 49ers (3-8) 
one more chance with 2:21 left. Anquan Boldin caught an 18-yard pass on 
fourth-and-20 to clinch the win for Arizona.

It certainly wasn’t pretty for the NFL’s top-ranked offense as San Francisco 
outgained Arizona 368-337. Coach Bruce Arians’ bunch will take it nonetheless.

David Johnson ran for a one-yard touchdown in the third for the Cardinals 
(9-2), who have nine wins in their first 11 games in consecutive seasons for 
the first time in franchise history and fifth time overall.

Larry Fitzgerald had 10 catches for 66 yards, surpassing Hall of Famer Steve 
Largent for 16th place on the career list for yards receiving and moving him 
into 12th place for receptions past Randy Moss.

A diving Fitzgerald dropped the ball in the end zone with 4:04 left in the 
first quarter, and Arizona settled for Catanzaro’s 26-yard field goal. He added 
a 41-yarder early in the second. San Francisco committed 13 penalties for 81 
yards to help the Cardinals’ cause.

Boldin finished with eight catches for 93 yards against his old team as the 
49ers were eliminated from the NFC West race in yet another mistake-filled 
performance.

San Francisco had two penalties on one play with 7:13 to go, including a 
15-yard unsportsmanlike conduct by wideout Torrey Smith with the defense on the 
field when he made contact with the side referee.

Palmer completed a 48-yard pass to John Brown on the second snap of the third 
quarter, and then took advantage of five penalties — four pass interference 
calls and an illegal hands to the face — as Arizona finally scored a touchdown.

Gabbert was 25 of 36 for 318 yards and an eight-yard touchdown pass to Vance 
McDonald in the third. Gabbert hit Smith for a 41-yard completion and had far 
more success than predecessor Colin Kaepernick did in a four-interception day 
back in a 47-7 loss at Arizona in Week 3.

Phil Dawson kicked a 53-yard field goal as the first half expired and a tying 
33-yarder in the third for his 18th straight made kick.

Arizona earned its first win on San Francisco’s home field since 2008, at 
Candlestick Park, snapping a six-game skid. Only three current Cardinals had 
won previously at San Francisco: Calais Campbell, Fitzgerald and Lyle Sendlein.

McDonald made six catches for 71 yards after fellow tight end Garrett Celek 
was carted off with 3:46 left in the first quarter with a left ankle injury and 
didn’t return.
 