
Changing career may be the best thing you ever do – or it could turn out to be 
a big disappointment. Here, four careers experts reveal the biggest mistakes 
people make when overhauling their working lives, and give their top tips for 
getting it right.

Is it really your career you need to change?

"If you are really desperately unhappy in your job, people sometimes throw the 
baby out with the bathwater," says Ros Toynbee, director ofThe Career Coach 
<http://www.thecareercoach.co.uk/>. Analyse exactly why you're so keen on 
revamping your career before you press ahead – is it really just your current 
position that's dragging you down?

"It might be that you've got a horrible manager who has undermined your 
confidence in your ability to do your job," suggests Corinne Mills, managing 
director ofPersonal Career Management <http://www.personalcareermanagement.com/>
. "In which case, don't embark on a career change as a knee-jerk reaction."

Start from the right place 

Career changers often come up with answers before asking themselves the most 
important questions, says Jo Orgill,The Clarity Coach <http://www.joorgill.com/>
.

"They start with solutions, like 'I'd love to be a graphic designer', rather 
than going back a stage and considering what that career would really give 
them," she says.

"Many people begin by looking at their CV and education," adds Richard 
Alderson, founder orCareershifters <http://www.careershifters.org/>. "They 
think, 'This is what I've done in the past, therefore this is what I can do in 
future' – but their past is what's got them to where they are now, and that's 
what they want to change."

"Ask yourself: 'what really makes me tick?'" he says. Begin by looking at 
yourself as an individual, instead of basing your decisions on how you come 
across on paper.

Face your fears 

It takes determination to retrain and launch yourself into a new profession. 
According to Alderson, wannabe career changers often hold themselves back by 
getting caught up on the "four F-words". These are finances, failure, friends 
and family.

"If you're going to make a change, you need to overcome your fears," he says. 
"But just being aware of them is a really good starting point."

Toynbee suggests talking your plans through with somebody neutral such as a 
coach or trusted mentor. "While friends and family might support you, they are 
not impartial," she says.

Orgill says: "People can talk about changing careers for years and never do 
it. When you commit to somebody else, you are more likely to move forwards."

Know the job market 

If you know what you're up against and you're still raring to retrain, ensure 
you choose a good course, says Toynbee.

"Don't just think that you can go off and do a qualification and it will get 
you a job. Not all courses are equal and many don't lead to jobs. Find out 
about the course's employability rate before you apply."

"You've got to be sensible, otherwise you could be setting yourself up for 
failure."

Understand exactly what's involved

Career changers often fail to find out what their new career choice will 
actually involve. Mills recalls one client who spent three years of his life, 
and a good deal of money, completing a specialist course in sound engineering, 
only to discover that the job wasn't compatible with his lifestyle.

"What he hadn't realised was that the work was mostly freelance. It involved 
traveling around and very little job security – it just didn't fit in with his 
financial and family needs," she says.

People who decide to set up their own business can also miss the point, says 
Mills. Becoming your own boss can be wonderful, but it's financially risky and 
involves constantly having to sell yourself, she warns. Know the reality before 
you do it.

Be careful how you label yourself

"Don't present yourself as a career changer, present yourself as somebody who 
has already arrived – label yourself as a multimedia editor or a web designer, 
whatever your chosen career is," advises Mills.

Also consider the format of your CV – you don't necessarily need the first 
focus to be your employment history, which may or may not be relevant. "Design 
your CV so that it starts with your relevant skills and experience – even if it 
wasn't paid – then go into your career history on the second page," says Mills.

Knock on the right doors

"It's a very risk averse job market," says Mills. "Employers want somebody who 
has done the job before – and they can get those people."

Alderson's advice to those who are new to a profession is simple: "Don't look 
for jobs – look for people in the field."

"Go to them and speak to them about their job, find out what it involves, ask 
them if they know of opportunities."

Approach people and ask to take them for a coffee, says Orgill. "You'll find 
that people are surprisingly happy to talk about their jobs and how they got to 
where they are."

Be prepared to take small steps

"Take small actions to move forwards in directions that interest you," says 
Alderson. "Sometimes these small steps may not make sense when you're making 
them as you don't know where they're leading, but you can connect the dots when 
you look back."

One job might not suit all your needs and you may need to consider how you 
arrange your working life. Orgill adds: "Your career solution might be a 
combination of being employed, but freelancing or having a business on the 
side," she says.

Holding on to your current job can be a good idea, agrees Toynbee. It may even 
give you the financial freedom that will enable you to excel at something you 
truly love.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly Careers update <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 