
Carolina’s bid for an undefeated season ended Sunday when Julio Jones’ 
dramatic 70-yard touchdown reception powered theAtlanta Falcons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atlanta-falcons> to a 20-13 victory over Cam 
Newton and the Panthers.

Carolina (14-1) got the ball with 90 seconds left and no timeouts remaining. 
Newton completed a 19-yard pass to Corey Brown on first down but fumbled when 
stripped by Vic Beasley Jr. on the following play. Adrian Clayborn recovered 
for the Falcons, wrapping up the win.

Matt Ryan threw for 306 yards and one touchdown for the Falcons (8-7), and 
Devonta Freeman ran for 73 yards with a touchdown.

Newton threw for 142 yards and ran for 46 yards, including an 8-yard scoring 
run to cap the Panthers’ opening drive.

New England 20-26 New York Jets (OT)

Eric Decker’s 6-yard touchdown catch on the first drive of overtime – after 
New England chose to kick off – lifted the Jets to a 26-20 victory Sunday that 
put New York in position to make the playoffs.

A win next week at Buffalo gives the Jets a wild-card berth.

New England (12-3) won the OT coin toss and surprisingly elected to give the 
ball to the Jets (10-5). New York used a career-long 48-yard reception by 
Quincy Enunwa and a 20-yard pass to Brandon Marshall to move into scoring 
position. And then, Ryan Fitzpatrick hit Decker on a fade behind Super Bowl 
hero Malcolm Butler for New York’s fifth straight victory.

Marshall had two touchdown catches and also became the first NFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> player with 100 receptions in six 
seasons. Fitzpatrick tied a franchise record with 29 TD throws this season.

Tom Brady hit James White for a 9-yard score with 1:55 to go, forcing OT.

Cleveland 13-17 Kansas City

Alex Smith threw two touchdown passes for Kansas City, and the game clock 
finally stopped Johnny Manziel as the Chiefs held on to beat the Cleveland 
Browns 17-13 on Sunday for their franchise record-tying ninth consecutive 
victory.

Smith threw for 125 yards while running for 54, helping Kansas City (10-5) 
clinch a playoff berth when Pittsburgh lost to Baltimore moments after his own 
game ended.

The Chiefs jumped out to a 17-3 halftime lead Sunday, but their offense became 
listless over the final two quarters, just as Manziel was pumping some life 
into the Browns (3-12).

The former Heisman Trophy winner led Cleveland to 10 straight points, then 
took over at his 30 with 1:52 left and no timeouts. The Browns picked up three 
first downs, and Manziel hit Darius Jennings on fourth-and-10 from the Chiefs 
32. But time expired before Manziel could get another snap off.

He spiked his helmet in frustration as the Chiefs poured onto the field.

Dallas 6-16 Buffalo

Buffalo rookie Mike Gillislee ran 50 yards for a touchdown with 2:25 remaining 
to secure a 16-6 win for the Bills over the Dallas Cowboys on Sunday.

Gillislee finished with 93 yards rushing and led a ground attack that combined 
for 236 yards rushing. Karlos Williams scored on a 1-yard run as the Bills 
overcame an injury-depleted offense playing without running back LeSean McCoy.

Rookie linebacker AJ Tarpley had an interception and sealed the win by forcing 
Lucky Whitehead to fumble on the kickoff return that followed Gillislee’s 
touchdown.

Buffalo (7-8) snapped a two-game skid and won for just the second time in six 
games.

The Cowboys (4-11) lost in quarterback Kellen Moore’s first career start. 
Moore went 13 of 31 for 186 yards and an interception. Dan Bailey had two field 
goals for Dallas.

Houston 34-6 Tennessee

Brandon Weeden scored his first career rushing touchdown and threw for two 
more as the Houston Texans took a big step toward clinching the AFC South title 
by routing the hapless Tennessee Titans 34-6 on Sunday.

Houston (8-7), which wraps up the regular season by hosting Jacksonville, 
couldn’t clinch outright with Indianapolis beating Miami 18-12.

The Texans have won seven of the last eight against the Titans. They forced 
four turnovers and turned them into 17 points. Quintin Demps returned a fumble 
33 yards for a touchdown less than two minutes into the game, putting Houston 
ahead to stay.

The Texans scored a season high in points despite starting their fourth 
different quarterback this season.

The Titans (3-12) did nothing to hurt their chances at the No1 pick in the 
draft, turning the ball over twice in the first quarter.

Indianapolis 18-12 Miami

Third-string quarterback Charlie Whitehurst came off the bench again for the 
Indianapolis Colts, who made a last-minute defensive stand to keep alive their 
faint playoff hopes Sunday, beating the Miami Dolphins 18-12.

The Dolphins had a first-and-goal at the 5 with 40 seconds left, but after 
three consecutive incompletions, rookie center Jamil Douglas appeared to snap 
the ball prematurely, and Tannehill was sacked by three Colts.

Indy backup quarterback Matt Hasselbeck departed with an injury for the fourth 
game in a row, and Whitehurst did just enough after entering in the second 
quarter, completing two scoring drives.

The Colts (7-8) would have been eliminated from the playoff race with a loss. 
The Dolphins (5-10) were eliminated two weeks ago.

Chicago 26-21 Tampa Bay

Ka’Deem Carey caught a touchdown pass from Jay Cutler and the third-string 
running back also scored on a 1-yard run to help the Chicago Bears end a 
three-game losing streak with a 26-21 victory over the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.

Carey’s 1-yard scoring reception put the Bears (6-9) ahead for good early in 
the fourth quarter. The second-year pro teamed with Matt Forte and Jeremy 
Langford to spearhead a rushing attack that produced 174 yards and kept Jameis 
Winston off the field for long stretches.

The victory was only the second in the past six games for the Bears. Tampa Bay 
(6-9) has lost four of five, including three straight after rebounding from a 
slow start.

Winston completed 15 of 29 passes for 295 yards with one interception for the 
Bucs. He threw for two TDs, including a 43-yard Hail Mary toss to Austin 
Seferian-Jenkins with 1 second remaining.

San Francisco 17-32 Detroit

Matthew Stafford threw for two touchdowns, including one to Calvin Johnson 
early in the fourth quarter, and the Detroit Lions beat the San Francisco 49ers 
32-17 on Sunday.

The Lions (6-9) have won five of their last seven games, perhaps giving coach 
Jim Caldwell a chance to keep his job for a third season.

The 49ers (4-11) have lost three straight and five of six under first-year 
coach Jim Tomsula.

Detroit took advantage of several mistakes for San Francisco’s defense and 
special teams.

Stafford’s 1-yard TD pass to Johnson gave Detroit a 12-point lead one play 
after Tramaine Brock was called for pass interference in the end zone. During 
the drive, the 49ers were flagged for being offside or in the neutral zone for 
the seventh time to set a single-game high by an NFL team this year, according 
to STATS.

Pittsburgh 17-20 Baltimore

Ryan Mallet threw for a career-high 274 yards in his first start with 
Baltimore and led the Ravens to a 20-17 win over the Pittsburgh Steelers on 
Sunday in one of the biggest upsets of this contentious rivalry.

The Ravens (5-10) had lost three straight, the last two by a combined 69-20 
score. In this one, however, they turned back a team riding a three-game 
winning streak and striving for a playoff berth.

Although it’s been a disappointing season for the injury-plagued Ravens, they 
managed to sweep Pittsburgh (9-6) for the first time since 2011. The Steelers 
remained in playoff contention.

Making his seventh career start, Mallett went 28 for 41 with a touchdown and 
no interceptions. Signed by the Ravens on Dec. 15, he was the fourth 
quarterback to start for Baltimore in a span of six weeks.

Steelers quarterback Ben Roethlisberger threw two interceptions and was sacked 
three times.
 