
Catholic worshippers in Edinburgh <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/edinburgh> 
and St Andrews will soon be able to use an app to locate their nearest mass.

The Catholic App will tell users where the nearest or soonest service is and 
use GPS to direct them to the church.


The first “confession finder” app is part of a growing trend for churches to 
use technology to attract and assist congregations.

The app will be launched early next year by the archdiocese of St Andrews and 
Edinburgh, with another five dioceses inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> said to be interested in purchasing 
the technology from developers Musemantik.

App for being a better parent works, Oxford University study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/18/app-for-being-a-better-parent-works-oxford-university-study-finds>
St Andrews and Edinburgh covers an area of about 2,000 sq miles, containing 
more than 110 parishes. The app will provide data on the timings and locations 
of masses and other events.

Unveiling the app at the Vatican, where he is leading a pilgrimage, the Most 
Rev Leo Cushley, archbishop of St Andrews and Edinburgh, said: “This is a 
little bit of smart technology that could make a big impact on how the Catholic 
church brings the mercy of God and the joy of the gospel to our contemporary 
world.”


The app was expected to be popular, said Fr Jamie Boyle of St Francis Xavier, 
Falkirk, who was also in Rome.


“During the jubilee year of mercy, there was a discernible upturn in the 
number of people keen to return to confession but not sure where or when to 
find it. This app will really help people to answer both those questions.”


Some people preferred confessing to a priest not known to them, he added: 
“This app makes it much easier to find that anonymity in another parish if you 
so choose.”


Musemantik, a Scottish technology company, said it hoped Catholic dioceses 
around the world would buy the app. Maciej Zurawski, its founder, said: 
“Websites are losing popularity – what is needed to engage with the mobile 
generation is an app that is smart and personal, an app that is like a 
companion, a friend that takes the initiative to inspire you – that’s the 
vision behind the Catholic App.”
 