
If this represented the simple part of Group E for Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic>, their supporters must have real 
concerns about what lies in wait when Manchester United and Villarreal arrive. 
Aalborg's semi-stubborn resistance was sufficient to rebuff Gordon Strachan's 
side, the Danish team even surviving the closing 11 minutes with 10 men.

The visitors harboured a genuine grievance after Michael Beauchamp was 
sent-off in a glaring case of mistaken identity. Claiming a point at a venue 
where more illustrious sides have struggled should placate them for now.

Celtic, for whom Barry Robson squandered a first-half penalty, were strangely 
sluggish. "Our first half particularly was below the standard we have set 
ourselves," admitted Strachan. "It becomes more imperative now that we go and 
win a game away from home."

Celtic's problems should not overshadow a memorable night for Bruce Rioch, the 
Aalborg manager, who retains aspirations of returning to Britain when his 
contract expires in December. "We were fantastic," said the coach once revered 
at Middlesbrough, adding with a smile: "I don't know about Celtic, but we were 
under par tonight as well."

Aalborg gave anything but the impression they were in awe of the surroundings 
in the early stages. Michael Jakobsen worried Artur Boruc with a fierce 
free-kick, then Jeppe Curth failed to control his shot when clean through. 
Celtic's penalty was fortuitous. Not only had they hardly been seen as an 
attacking threat before Steve Olfers tripped Shaun Maloney, but Maloney also 
appeared to handle the ball.

Celtic's attacking endeavours in the first five minutes of the second half 
amounted to more than they had conjured up in the previous 45. Scott Brown even 
had the ball in the net but was denied by a highly dubious offside flag. 
Further controversy followed, with Beauchamp wrongly dismissed. Shunsuke 
Nakamura's subsequent free-kick was clawed away. A match-winning moment of 
magic would have been out of context in any case.
 