
Gary Caldwell said Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> only 
have themselves to blame after their European campaign ended with a humiliating 
defeat. The visitors had an unlikely chance of a place in the competition's 
last 16 when they took a second-half lead through Barry Robson and were assured 
of a place in the Uefa Cup had they won.

But Caca levelled with a drive that deflected in off Stephen McManus before 
Caldwell put through his own net three minutes from full-time. Condemned to 
finish bottom of Group E, Celtic have now managed just one draw in their last 
18 European away games.

"Having got in a position to win the game and thrown it away like that, [it 
was] very disappointing," said Caldwell. "I think we did enough to win the game 
but football's not like that. You've got to score goals, you've got to do more 
than that.

"We didn't see the game off when it mattered and we didn't take the chances 
when it mattered either."

Caldwell added: "I think we should be better than Aalborg. I think we've done 
enough at certain times but you have to be better than that away from home in 
Europe. We've been in the last 16 for the last two years. We know how good it 
is. We've paid the price for some sloppy performances."

Celtic's manager Gordon Strachan was convinced his side were about to record 
their first everChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> away win when they took 
the lead.

"At 1-0 I thought, 'Tonight's the night - we're going to get this away 
victory.' I couldn't see any threat at all. And then a deflection and an 
own-goal - the game's crazy," he said.

"I just walked past Morten Olsen, the Danish national coach, and he said 'The 
game can be terrible' - and it is terrible for us. I just hope it's a bad 
dream, to come here and have so many players playing well."

Having watched his side surrender a draw against Villarreal and a win against 
Manchester United after the concession of late goals, Strachan admitted his 
players had contributed to their own downfall. "[We do not have] the ability to 
stop goals going in the back of the net, simple as that," he said.PA
 