
From the moment Chantelle Houghton was introduced to the nation, the "fake" 
celebrity in the Celebrity Big Brother house who then proceeded to win the 
show, she has always seemed to me not so much an actual human being but rather 
a character from a heavy-handed satire about the celebrity culture. As she 
proceeded to date her way through the celebrity C-list, handing out gobbets of 
her personal life to slavering tabloid reporters and eventually having a child 
with the ex-husband of Katie Price, Alex Reid, who himself won CelebrityBig 
Brother <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/big-brother>, it was hard to 
fathom whether Houghton was manipulating the celebrity culture, or vice-versa.

Just as she launched her career by being a fake celebrity, a parody of a 
celebrity, so she has always stayed. Houghton belongs to a certain subset of 
British celebrities – which can also count among its numbers Kerry Katona, 
Peter Andre and Reid – who are famous purely for talking about themselves and 
their average lives. They appear on magazine covers on a weekly basis by 
flogging their lives as if they were soap operas, providing intimate updates 
about their romantic travails, their quarrels with their ex-partners. They 
would not have a job without these magazines and these magazines (OK, Now, New, 
etc) would not exist without them. It's an intriguingly self-perpetuating 
cycle, like drinking one's own urine.

Today, though, Chantelle went off-message. Mid-morning, she broke the number 
two Twitter rule: don't tweet when angry (the number one rule, of course, is 
don't tweet when drunk). She thenwent on a veritable rampage against Reid 
<https://twitter.com/chantellehought>, accusing him of all manner of grievous 
crimes, the most attention-grabbing one being thathe turned her house "into a 
sex dungeon" <https://twitter.com/chantellehought/status/263248128864579584> 
when she was eight months pregnant.
chantelle houghton (@chantellehought) 
Whenever he wants to. Oh and yes when I was 8 months pregnant Alex turned my 
house into a sex dungeon and I slept on my flat floor for days
 <https://twitter.com/chantellehought/status/263248128864579584> October 30, 
2012 <https://twitter.com/chantellehought/status/263248128864579584> 
According to a tabloid, Reid replied on Twitter, asking Chantelle not to 
discuss their private business, which would take hypocrisy to a heretofore 
unknown level, even in the z-list celebrity world.

Now, there are several ways of looking at this. First, one can see this as 
merely a continuation of Houghton's modus operandi, vomitting up the most 
personal details of her life in order to gain attention, although it has to be 
said that these details are especially humiliating and she is presumably not 
getting any financial compensation for sharing them as she may or may not do 
when it comes to magazines.

Or one can say that this proves that all the time Houghton really was the 
young innocent who wandered into Satan's feast, who thought she knew the rules 
but didn't. Among her many tweets this morning she admitted she believed Reid 
when he told her his cross-dressing was a "publicity stunt" when this turned 
out to be not entirely true. Thus, she has now stepped out of the screen, like
Jeff Daniels in The Purple Rose of Cairo 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bp6YDZVVbj0>, and into the real world, eager to 
show the masses the shallowness she left behind.

Or one can move, quickly, away from the distressing spectacle of Houghton 
specifically and look at some issues surrounding this, namely, the ultimately 
dead-end nature of a career based on self-revelation, and whether this is any 
different to the culture of self-revelation encouraged by social media. If 
Houghton is a parody of a celebrity, she is also an exaggeration of the basest 
elements of the modern age – the shallowness, the celebrity worship, the 
narcissism, the lack of filter – and the rest of us can only look after her, 
shaking our heads, and wondering what, exactly, is a sex dungeon.
 