
Channel 4 has scrapped the position of channel controller, affecting 
high-profile figures including More4's Hamish Mykura and E4'sAngela Jain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/angela-jain>, and boosted its programming 
budget by £50m as TV advertising revenues continue to recover.

The boost in budget, which will take Channel 4's programming clout back to 
£550m, follows a series of cuts aimed at protecting the broadcaster's 
profitability. The increase follows a blistering performance in terms of TV ad 
sales withChannel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> recording 
double-digit year-on-year increases in ad revenue each month so far in 2010.

Separately, the Channel 4 chief executive, David Abraham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/david-abraham>, has announced that the 
broadcaster's channel controllers will be removed.

As predicted by MediaGuardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jun/28/channel-4-janey-walker-leaves>, 
the shakeup creates a method of organising television output favoured by US 
channels, and one Abraham experienced when working for Discovery.

The decision most notably affects Angela Jain, the well-regarded controller of 
E4 and overseeer of Big Brother, currently on maternity leave, and Hamish 
Mykura of More4. It is understood that Channel 4 is keen to keep Jain, who is 
considered to have done a solid job with E4, and is in discussions about 
offering her a new, larger role when she returns to work.

Mykura, who is married to Janey Walker, Channel 4's outgoing managing editor – 
who takes redundancy next month – stays in his post as head of documentaries.

The main Channel 4 will be run in future by its current scheduler, Jules 
Oldroyd. The channel managers will all report to Rosemary Newell, the head of 
channel management, a former BBC scheduler brought to Channel 4 by Michael 
Jackson in the late 1990s.

In the new structure, Stuart Cosgrove, Channel 4's long-serving head of 
nations and regions who is partly based in Glasgow, assumes a new and extended 
role as director of creative diversity, adding to nations and regions a brief 
for cultural diversity (previously run by Oona King, now on unpaid leave as she 
prepares to run for Labour's nomination as mayor of London), disability, and 
the Paralympics.

The other commissioners are unchanged, with Dorothy Byrne as head of news; 
Camilla Campbell, drama; Shane Allen, comedy; Justin Gorman, entertainment; Sue 
Murphy, features and factual entertainment; Ralph Lee, specialist factual; and 
Helen Warner, daytime.

They all report to the chief creative officer, currently Julian Bellamy, the 
former head of Channel 4. However, Bellamy has not been confirmed in his post. 
Interviews for the job are expected to take place shortly, following an 
advertisement which closed on 16 July. The BBC3 controller, Danny Cohen, has 
ruled himself out, saying he is happy at the corporation.

Last month, Abraham announced he was cutting 24 senior posts at the company, 
whose management had become too top heavy after slimming down during 2009.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 