
The petunias and irises are in full, creamy flower, the rhododendrons are 
blossoming, and the roses and phlox look splendid. But the exhibitors, planters 
and garden designers putting final touches to their creations for next week's
Chelsea flower show <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/chelseaflowershow>
 are split as seldom before. The traditionally humourless Royal Horticultural 
Society (RHS) has temporarily lifted its 100-year ban on "brightly-coloured 
mythical creatures", and war between the landscape snobs who want them kept out 
and the oiks who love them may be imminent.

"Pssst, want to see one?" says Sue Robinson of Hillier nursery, bringing out 
"Woodland Wilf", a fluorescent pink, pointy-headed chappie with two lurid 
orange buckets. Wilf, possibly the first garden gnome in 100 years to 
legitimately show his face at Chelsea, looked as if he wanted to hide in a 
massive display of delphiniums, but Robinson was having none of it, thrusting 
him into the bright light and sweet smells of the main marquee. "We haven't 
decided where Wilf will sit. Probably beneath that tree."

Next week, the RHS will unveil over 100 gnomes, painted for charity by 
celebrities. Elton John has reportedly garnished his with glitter and given him 
sunglasses, but those of Dolly Parton, Dames Maggie Smith and Judi Dench, Rob 
Brydon and others will not be seen until the royal family and the garden 
grandees who have so long opposed the gnomes' introduction have had a look on 
Monday.

But Chelsea's attempt to reflect the tastes of ordinary folk may prove 
popular. A wholly unscientific poll of 15 exhibitors and gardeners at Chelsea 
by the Guardian on Friday found strong approval for the permanent presence of 
the little people. "About time, too. What's wrong with them? Yes, they're naff, 
but I've secretly got three myself," admitted one eminent garden designer who 
asked not to be named.

"I'm sitting on the gnomic fence," said Jinny Blom, who has designed a 
sentimental garden of forget-me-nots and baby's tears plants for Prince Harry's 
Lesotho children's charity, Sentebale. "It's a debacle. Chelsea is quite 
divided. Some people here really, really hate them. Others think it's all a bit 
of a laugh and quite OK." She expects Harry to rappel down into her garden from 
the plane trees in the Royal Hospital grounds. "I sent the design to Camp 
Bastion. He said he wanted to dig the garden but he couldn't get away."

"This is definitely a gnome-free garden," says Steve Marsh of the Woodland 
Trust at the Food and Environment Research Agency (Fera) garden, funded by the 
environment department, Forestry Commission and Welsh and Scottish governments, 
with the idea of not just stimulating the senses but scaring the 200,000 people 
expected to visit the sold-out show next week.

The exhibition is possibly the only one in a century to not just plant dead 
trees but to call itself "ugly". An avenue of eight 25ft tall leafless willows 
stand above a sinister black pool to make the point that British woods and 
gardens face a host of new killer pests and diseases such as ash dieback. 
Fringed by horse chestnut, sycamore and maple trees – which conservationists 
say could succumb in future – the garden is dark and shocking amid the 
frivolous yellows and pinks of most of Chelsea's other exhibits.

"We say they are not dead trees, but lifeless," says the ever-optimistic 
Marsh. "The trees actually died naturally and were removed by the Forestry 
Commission. We want to tell people that if we don't take notice of what is out 
there, there won't be any gardens in future."

In fact, half of Chelsea's attractions this year are centred round very 
expensive bits of dead trees. The £6bn garden industry sells plants but also 
£20,000 wooden statues of horses and panthers, £10,000 gateposts and sheds, as 
well as beehives, bird boxes and driftwood sculptures. "The plants are just a 
small part of the business these days. The money is in the objects," says Rob 
Francis, a Dorset garden centre manager in London this weekend in order to spot 
trends.

"It's been a real struggle to grow the plants this year, what with the cold 
weather," said Ruth Gooch of Thorncroft nursery in Norfolk, tying up a display 
of Polish-bred clematises. "We've been holding some back from flowering and 
encouraging others. The flowers are quite giddy – they have been brought inside 
and taken outside so many times to make sure they bloom on time."

She shows how to stimulate the buds by gently rolling them between her 
fingers. "Do it too early and they are distorted. The iris people are amazing. 
They use hairdryers, but we don't."

On Friday, neither the Garden Gnome Liberation Front 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garden_gnome_liberationists>, nor the supposedly 
less militantGarden Gnome Emancipation Movement 
<http://www.nthposition.com/gnomeliberation.php> – which take gnomes from 
gardens to "free them" <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/1437439.stm>
from "enslavement" in flower beds, lawns, gardens and centres – could be 
contacted. But a spokeswoman for the RHS said the gnomes were safe and 
well-guarded in their offices.
 