
While it's great for British cinema that we're making decent horror movies 
again, the impact on our already sluggish property market has been 
catastrophic. With every successful regional chiller, thousands are wiped off 
house prices, and buying a home is now less like Monopoly than postcode russian 
roulette. This week, terror strikes London's cosy Muswell Hill in Cherry Tree 
Lane, in which urban youth descend on a white middle-class household and 
subject it to violence, humiliation and grime-related ringtones. The map's 
filling in all the time, to the extent that the government might as well 
replace Hips with Hoodie Information Packs. Until then, the only option for 
first-time buyers is to watch every horror movie made in Britain. Is nowhere 
safe? Read our guide and find out…

Cornwall

PUBLIC IMAGE Rick Stein's Seafood Odyssey meets Britain's answer to Baywatch.

RUINED BY Straw Dogs <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/83410/straw-dogs>
: in which Dustin Hoffman seeks a quiet place to do maths with his Cornish 
wife, until the locals get all Peckinpah on him.

WHAT THE EXPERTS SAY "Dazzling blue seas, golden beaches and mile after mile 
of breathtaking scenery … Cornwall's appeal is as enduring as its rugged 
landscape." (lillicrapchilcott.com)

WHAT THE MOVIE SAYS By "rugged", we mean the locals might be rapists and 
paedophiles who'll lob bricks through your window and hang your cat.

SAMPLE PROPERTY Detached "traditional cottage" in need of modernisation in 
Praa Sands, £450,000. Perfect for Hoffman-like fixer-uppers.

WHERE TO HANG OUT The village pub. If it's anything like the one in Straw 
Dogs, though, you'll be snidely mocked and regaled with songs about bestiality. 
Best thing on the menu: the cigarettes.

NEW TOURIST SLOGAN Come meet our Cornish nasties!

The Peak District

PUBLIC IMAGE Jane Austen meets Peak Practice, with lashings of Bakewell tart.

RUINED BY Dead Man's Shoes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/oct/03/philipfrench>: in which 
post-combat maniac Paddy Considine hunts down his brother's abusers across 
Derbyshire with an axe.

WHAT THE EXPERTS SAY "Many are leaving behind the hustle and bustle of a city 
life and moving to the countryside." (peakdistrictproperties.co.uk)

WHAT THE MOVIE SAYS The countryside is full of squatter-friendly derelict 
farmhouses, while Considine's unhinged ex-serviceman roams the town breaking, 
entering and brutally punishing folks without raising so much as a curtain 
twitch.

SAMPLE PROPERTY Two-bedroom mid-terrace in Chesterfield, £65,000. Ideal for 
first-time buyers, though there's a risk you'll become a last-time buyer.

WHERE TO HANG OUT The social club. Stare into a pint of the local beer with 
some lonely old men.

NEW TOURIST SLOGAN Come pop your clogs in Dead Man's Shoes country!

Buckinghamshire

PUBLIC IMAGE Midsomer Murders, without the murders.

RUINED BY Eden Lake <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/sep/12/horror>: in 
which two Londoners take a weekend break at an idyllic hidden lakeside, soon to 
be turned into a gated community, but are pestered to death by a pack of feral 
local teens.

WHAT THE EXPERTS SAY "The varied scenery offers many opportunities to discover 
wildlife." (Buckinghamshire County Council)

WHAT THE MOVIE SAYS You're gonna wish you hadn't discovered this wildlife. The 
juveniles defend their territory with knives, dogs, aggressive hip-hop and 
homicidal happy slapping. And the adults are worse.

SAMPLE PROPERTY Five-bed barn conversion in a gated community close to Black 
Park Lake (AKA Eden Lake), £695,000.

HANG OUT AT There's the hostile greasy spoon in town. You'll get tea but no 
sympathy.

NEW TOURIST SLOGAN Deliverance on your doorstep!

Hertfordshire

PUBLIC IMAGE Plucky 1940s war film meets Bridget Jones's family home.

RUINED BY Village Of The Damned <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3MBresWP9MY>, 
in which the women of Midwich simultaneously give birth to scary Aryan children 
with mind-control powers.

WHAT THE EXPERTS SAY "Away from the main roads many old villages remain 
unspoiled with thatched cottages and leafy lanes." (aboutbritain.com)

WHAT THE MOVIE SAYS It's every parent's nightmare: a child who doesn't love 
you and a village full of precocious tykes all competing for the same school 
places.

SAMPLE PROPERTY Detached three-bedroom house in Back Lane, Letchmore Heath 
(AKA Midwich in the movie), £749,500; a safe distance from the school.

WHERE TO HANG OUT Down at the Three Horseshoes, where you'll find the menfolk 
smoking, and waiting for their wives to all give birth at the same time.

NEW TOURIST SLOGAN My parents went to Midwich and all I got was this blonde 
bob and glazed expression.

Thamesmead

PUBLIC IMAGE Misfits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jun/17/misfits-christmas-special-channel-4>
. Relatively speaking, the teen series gives a good impression of the place.

RUINED BY A Clockwork Orange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/75644/clockwork.orange>: in which nasty 
gangs of uniformed droogs wreak ultraviolence on the cowering lewdies of future 
Britain.

WHAT THE EXPERTS SAY "Despite its history, Thamesmead benefits from the most 
desirable natural asset in London – the Thames." (mouseprice.com)

WHAT THE MOVIE SAYS Nothing natural going on here. A deserted warren of 
soulless 1960s brutalism on the outside; a Dulux showroom acid-trip on the 
inside.

SAMPLE PROPERTY Three-bedroom concrete townhouse overlooking Binsey Walk (AKA 
A Clockwork Orange's "Flat Block Marina"), £132,500.

WHERE TO HANG OUT The Korova Milk Bar is an oasis of pop-fetish styling in the 
land that taste forgot. Try the drencrom.

NEW TOURIST SLOGAN Come and get one in the yarbles, you eunuch jelly thou!

Elephant & Castle

PUBLIC IMAGE You're kidding.

RUINED BY Where to start? This is the place where Britain got broken: see 
Harry Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/nov/13/harry-brown-review>, 
The Disappeared, Children Of Men etc. It makes Escape From New York look like 
In The Night Garden.

WHAT THE EXPERTS SAY "On the Northern and Bakerloo underground lines, and 
within easy reach of both the City and the West End, it is shaking off its 
former seedy image." (buyassociation.co.uk)

WHAT THE MOVIES SAY The entire area is one gigantic, labyrinthine housing 
estate – all graffiti-covered walls, underlit walkways and boarded-up windows. 
Oh, and it's patrolled by gangs of vicious hoodie monsters. Don't even think 
about hugging them!

SAMPLE PROPERTY The Heygate Estate is about to be demolished, but you can get 
a two-bedroom ex-local authority flat nearby for £170,000.

WHERE TO HANG OUT Um, there's the underpasses. Did we tell you about the 
graffiti?

NEW TOURIST SLOGAN Tomorrow's dystopia today!

Notting Hill

PUBLIC IMAGE Lily Allen skanking with David Cameron at the carnival, then 
popping into Space NK for a facial.

RUINED BY Er, Notting Hill: in which the neighbourhood is ravaged by Richard 
Curtis and his coven of media vampire types. All the black people mysteriously 
disappear, property prices go through the roof and a plague of terminal 
smugness paralyses a once-vibrant area.

WHAT THE EXPERTS SAY"Once a shabby backwater whose crumbling terraces were 
overcrowded with immigrants, Notting Hill is now one of the capital's most 
fashionable areas." (property-go.co.uk)

WHAT THE MOVIE SAYS It's basically like Shaun Of The Dead with less blood and 
posher shops.

SAMPLE PROPERTY A three-bed house on Westbourne Park Road, a bit like Hugh 
Grant's, £2,695,000. You'd have to run a small travel bookshop to be able to 
afford that.

WHERE TO HANG OUT Other friends' nice houses for dinner parties. They're such 
a hoot.

NEW TOURIST SLOGAN N to the H, yah.
 