
You can buy free range eggs, Fairtrade coffee and carrots carrying the Soil 
Association logo – but what label do you look for on a wooden table or bed if 
you want reassurance about its origins?

This was the dilemma that Kim Corbett, Mark Higham and Jason Delf confronted 
when they took over Chest of Drawers, a small, independent furniture shop in 
Islington in April 2000.

They had read Not on the Label, journalist Felicity Lawrence's analysis of the 
food industry, but when they began asking their own suppliers what they were 
doing about the environment they were met with blank looks.

Quite simply there was no equivalent to the organic stamp of approval for a 
bookshelf or indeed anything you might want to sleep in, sit on or work at.

The Forest Stewardship Council and non-governmental organisations were dealing 
with some aspects of the production process, but no-one was joining up the 
different parts together.

What's more, the furniture industry was highly traditional and a long way from 
addressing all the environmental issues thrown up by a product's journey from 
forest to front room.

So Chest of Drawers set out to devise its own label. Kim, Mark and Jason 
consulted Greenpeace and the World Land Trust and went to conferences to 
immerse themselves in the arguments and complexities. None of them had 
professional experience of the issues, but all were personally committed. Then 
they set about scrutinising their supply chain so they could put information 
"on the label" and in the process force standards up.

Their mission was to educate customers and put pressure on suppliers to 
improve. In July 2010 they unveiled their scheme – the Environmental Rating 
System.

It is the first of its kind in the industry and works on two levels. It 
reassures the furniture buyer who cares about sustainability and it provides a 
workable model for other furniture suppliers and retailers.

It was also designed to be easy to understand. A product earns up to 10 stars 
according to where raw materials come from, workshop conditions, the impact of 
transport and a supplier's commitment to sustainability.

"Chest of Drawers is tackling the whole supply chain from beginning to end, 
including the little addressed consumer end" – The Guardian judging panel

For now, the scheme is unique to Chest of Drawers, but the directors are 
determined to widen its scope.

Delf says, "We have had discussions with other retailers and students of 
environmental issues, but we don't see our scheme as being something that would 
simply be adopted outright. We hope it will inspire others to look at their 
supply chains too and perhaps devise a way of being transparent that works for 
their businesses.

"As is often the case, the motivation for change will probably come from 
consumer pressure."

Chest of Drawers was originally a single shop in Upper Street, Islington, but 
there are now two more stores in Chiswick and Kingston, as well as online 
sales. The range includes contemporary furniture from Scandinavia, traditional 
French, antique Chinese or the best of British. The company works with up to 20 
suppliers worldwide.

More than 40% of the timber is recycled – pine from Yorkshire, teak from 
Indonesia, walnut from Asia. New timber comes only from sources certified by 
the PEFC, the world's largest forest certification organisation, or the Forest 
Stewardship Council.

The business also supports Fairtrade and community projects and donates a 
percentage of each sale to the World Land Trust.

All three directors approach other aspects of their business differently too. 
They pay staff to pursue creative or family activities and promote flexible 
hours and sabbaticals. Much of the furniture carries lifetime guarantees 
because they believe furniture should be made to last.

"We see ourselves not just as business people but as fellow citizens," Delf 
says. "As individuals we are not divided up into business people, public 
service users or consumers – we are all of them, and need to act accordingly."

The Guardian judges were impressed by this project because it tackled "the 
whole supply chain from beginning to end, including the little addressed 
consumer end."

Judge Jane Bevis said: "As a small to medium-sized enterprise it could have 
felt managing the supply chain and communicating what they found with customers 
was too difficult. But they didn't and that's the inspirational element."

All the judges felt the approach pioneered by Chest of Drawers could be 
adopted by organisations of different sizes.

"Occasionally we can also give too much information to customers, and forget 
they need to get home for tea rather than listen to our theories on the 
environment!" – Jason Delf, Chest of Drawers

The company has been picking up awards since 2008, when Corbett won a green 
champion award for her environmental work. The same year, the company won 
Archant Publishing's London's environmental business of the year, coming second 
the year after.

The plaudits are hard won, though, and Chest of Drawers is still learning. 
Delf explains: "In the beginning it was very hard to get suppliers to take our 
questions seriously, but this has now changed for the better.

These questions are the foundations of the grading scheme and are grouped into 
three major areas of concern in the industry. In each category, the supplier 
can earn up to three stars:

The first is timber supply, where questions include, "where is the wood from? 
Is there any danger of it being illegally harvested? Is it certified as 
sustainable by an independent body?"

Next comes workshop conditions, and questions include: "what are the 
supplier's conditions like? Is there any danger of illegal labour? Does the 
supplier act as a good employer?"

The third, and critical category, the company says, is transportation. Chest 
of Drawers asks suppliers: "How many miles do the goods travel to get to our 
customers' homes? By what method? What carbon does this produce, and is it 
carbon balanced?"

Finally, if a supplier proves an outstanding commitment to the environment 
outside these categories, through initiatives like recycling, it can earn a 
10th star. At least one of the directors visits each supplier as part of the 
assessment.

The scheme has had a positive effect on the supply chain. One supplier has 
spent a considerable amount on achieving FSC certification for their timber due 
to pressure from Chest of Drawers, while another is in the process of doing so. 
One is improving the working conditions of staff.

Chest of Drawers mean to stick rigidly to the standards they set and the 
company stopped doing business with a large supplier that made no effort to 
make environmental improvements.

Jackie Wills is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 