
The last time I went back to my family home, I found my school jotter from 
1998. It was squirrelled away in the back of my sock-and-knicker drawer. Below 
the date Tuesday 3 February is a note in handwriting so determined that the pen 
has at several points punctured the page: “One day I will be pretty then no one 
can hurt me.”

I was a fat 13-year-old girl with a high-pitched voice and an 
as-yet-undiagnosed condition (they knew something was wrong with me; they just 
didn’t know what) that would later place me firmly on theautistic spectrum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/autism>.

These factors, alongside my desperate desire to make friends, made me a 
perfect target for bullies. Often they imitated my voice. Sometimes they 
commented on my weight. Most cruelly, they pretended to make friends with me. 
“Come and sit with us, Hope. Would you like us to teach you to flirt? OK – 
well, if you make your eyes very big, like this and pout …” Then they’d fall 
about laughing.

At these times my one friend, Kirsty who was also bullied, but savvier than I, 
tried to save me. “Don’t go to them,” she’d say. “They don’t want to be your 
friend, they want to make you look ridiculous.” To the bullies I was their toy, 
free entertainment for when they got bored – which was often.

Children bullied by peers ‘at greater mental health risk’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/28/bullied-children-have-greater-mental-health-risks-maltreated-by-adults>
It was brutal and unremitting – a toxic combination of my social naivety and 
their cruelty. The girls may not have realised it, but their treatment almost 
killed me.

I was not surprised to read of a study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/28/bullied-children-have-greater-mental-health-risks-maltreated-by-adults>
 published in the journal Lancet Psychiatry that suggests that bullied children 
are at risk of mental health problems that will remain with them throughout 
their lives. Unlike children who are maltreated at home, the report argues, 
children bullied at school do not have advocacy groups and lobbyists on side. 
They are right: bullying is all too insidious, and too readily accepted.

As I was never maltreated at home, I cannot comment on whether the impact of 
bullying is, as the report argues, five times worse than that of cruelty in the 
home. I know that for me, having a safe place to return to, where I knew I was 
loved, was what kept me from killing myself.

However, unlike maltreatment from adults, bullying by peers is often 
normalised even while in plain sight. It is seen as “part of a normal 
childhood” – that old cliche “character-building”, even – rather than as 
something that will tear you down, bit by bit.

There can be a degree of victim-blaming in bullying. A male friend of mine 
told me how he was physically bullied by older boys and felt it was pointless 
to tell a teacher, as the attitude was usually that he should grow a backbone. 
Surely, in this day and age, such antediluvian attitudes have no place in our 
schools.

My teachers were kind but overstretched, and there was a weariness to their 
reactions to bullying, a masked but nevertheless apparent attitude that to some 
degree I was culpable – that if I wasn’t so bloody weird it wouldn’t happen. 
All I had to do was fit in; but that was all I couldn’t do.

It’s tempting to turn a blind eye to what appears to be a silly spat between 
teenagers

At 15 I developed anorexia <https://www.theguardian.com/society/anorexia>. It 
was, I suppose, inevitable. As I shrank, the bullying became less, and the 
concern of teachers became acute – my physical deterioration far more 
terrifying to them than the psychological torment I had previously tried to 
articulate. I was glad that I’d finally got them worried – that at last there 
was an acknowledgement of the hell I was going through daily at school. It felt 
good, except I couldn’t stop.

I was lucky I lived. I was even luckier that I recovered fully (aside from 
some weird rituals with food). But even now, I go through stretches of deep 
depression and an overwhelming feeling of being utterly crap. I think much of 
this reaches back to those formative years, when I was told every day by my 
peers that I was rubbish.

I hope this report forces authority figures to be less dismissive of peer 
bullying and its long-term ill effects. I know it must be difficult when you 
have a lot of kids to deal with, and it’s tempting to turn a blind eye to what 
appears to be a silly spat between teenagers. But the trauma and isolation felt 
by bullied children is real, and it is time that it was properly acknowledged 
as a political issue.

It is also important, however, that this is done without detriment to the 
children who are maltreated at home. Crucially, this report should not divide 
children who are maltreated at home and children who are bullied by peers. Both 
suffer terrible trauma and deserve to be taken seriously. Comparing two 
terrible situations with one another will achieve nothing.
 