
Chinese island-building efforts “may undermine peace, security and stability” 
in the disputed SouthChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Sea, 
leaders of southeast Asian nations said in a statement ahead of a summit on 
Monday.


The statement, yet to be publicly released, was prepared on behalf of leaders 
gathering for the annual meeting of the 10-member Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations (Asean) inMalaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia>.

“We share the serious concerns expressed by some leaders on the land 
reclamation being undertaken in the South China Sea, which has eroded trust and 
confidence and may undermine peace, security and stability,” it said.

Monday’s summit in Kuala Lumpur opens under a cloud caused by fresh evidence 
in the form of recently released satellite photosshowing the scale of Chinese 
land reclamation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/10/obama-says-china-bullying-smaller-nations-in-south-china-sea-row>
.

They depict flotillas of Chinese vessels heaping huge amounts of sand on 
fragile coral reefs also claimed by the Philippines.

Vietnam, the Philippines, Malaysia and Brunei claim parts of the sea, which is 
rich in energy reserves, fishery resources, and is a vital conduit for much of 
world trade.

But Beijing claims nearly all of it, and its increasingly bold actions to 
underline those claims have caused fears of Chinese dominance of the waterway 
and potential armed conflict.

The chairman’s statement by Malaysia – which holds the rotating chair of Asean 
this year – instructs the region’s foreign ministers to “urgently address this 
matter” under dialogue mechanisms set up between the bloc and China.

The Philippines on Sunday challenged fellow Asean members to “finally stand 
up” to Beijing and demand an end to reclamation works.

Philippine foreign secretary Albert del Rosario warned his regional peers in a 
precursor meeting that China was poised to take “de facto control” of the 
strategic seaway.

But his Malaysian counterpart Anifah Aman had later brushed aside any 
expectations of an especially bold Asean final statement.

Despite its rhetoric of a united Asean community, the regional grouping has a 
history of failing to respond in a robust manner to Beijing due to China’s 
immense trade and diplomatic leverage and because not all Asean states have a 
stake in the maritime disputes.
 