
China has accused the Philippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> of violating a 13-year-old 
informal code of conduct in the South China Sea by building on disputed islets, 
a move that comes after repeated criticism of China’s construction work.

China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and the 10-member Association 
of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) signed an agreement in 2002 to refrain from 
occupying and building new structures on uninhabited reefs and shoals in the 
sea.

 In a statement released on Monday, China’s foreign ministry urged the 
Philippines to stop its “malicious hyping and provocation” on the dispute, 
whose basis, it said, was Manila’s illegal occupation of certain Chinese 
islands.

 “The Philippines side has conducted large-scale construction of military and 
civil facilities including airports, ports and barracks on those islands for 
many years,” the ministry said.

 The Philippines foreign ministry said China had previously violated the code 
with its construction, and was accusing Manila to justify and provide cover for 
Chinese reclamation work.

 “China has never, ever taken actions that may complicate and deteriorate the 
disputes or affect regional peace and stability,” the Chinese ministry said, 
urging Manila to stop all building work and evacuate its people.

 Disputes over how to tackle an increasingly assertive stance by China – an 
ally of several Southeast Asian states – in the strategic South China Sea are 
the region’s biggest potential military flashpoint.

Last week China accused Vietnam, the Philippines and others of carrying out 
their own illegal building work.

 China claims 90% of the South China Sea, which is believed to be rich in oil 
and gas, however there are overlapping claims from Brunei, Malaysia, the 
Philippines, Vietnam and Taiwan.

 Recent satellite images show China has made rapid progress in building an 
airstrip suitable for military use in the disputed Spratly Islands, and may be 
planning another.

 Those moves, along with other reclamations, have caused alarm around the 
region and in Washington too.
 