
China has blocked access to HSBC’s banking portal and possibly thousands of 
other websites inwhat appears to be a new censorship campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/18/china-blocks-access-websites-before-hosting-world-internet-conference>
 days before it hosts a major internet industry conference.

Greatfire.org, a group that researches Chinese internet censorship, said on 
TuesdayHSBC <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hsbcholdings> had been caught 
up in a crackdown against so-called mirror sites which let users access 
censored sites such as YouTube.

Greatfire.org said Beijing had shut access to HSBCnet and EdgeCast, one of the 
world’s biggest content delivery networks (CDN) in order to block a pathway to 
forbidden sites.

“This was a deliberate attack on the websites that we have mirrored,” Charlie 
Smith, the pseudonym of a Greatfire.org co-founder, told the Guardian via 
email. He said it was “startling” that authorities would disrupt commerce, and 
risk infuriating its own internet users, to block access to forbidden sites 
which received relatively light traffic.

Greatfire.org set up what it termed “collateral freedom mirror sites 
<https://en.greatfire.org/blog/2014/nov/china-just-blocked-thousands-websites>” 
on the global cloud infrastructure knowing that censors who operate the 
so-called Great Firewall of China could not distinguish traffic to mirror sites 
and other traffic to the cloud provider.


It was a gamble that China would not risk major disruption by blocking global 
CDNs – a gamble that Greatfire.org concedes it has now lost, resulting, it 
said, in “collateral damage” of blocking of sites such as Sony Mobile’s global 
and Chinese sites and the back-end frameworkdrupal.org <http://drupal.org/>.

The group said it amounted to an attempt to cut China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> off from the global internet.

“I think that it is quite revealing,” said Smith. “I think it also reveals a 
fundamental lack of understanding of how connected China truly is to the global 
internet.”


HSBC, one of the world’s biggest banks, makes two-thirds of its profits in 
Asia, notably Hong Kong. EdgeCast, a subsidiary of the US telecommunications 
company Verizon, delivers content and services for web companies, including the 
Atlantic magazine and Mozilla, the Firefox browser, as well as cloud service to 
sites and apps in China.

The attacks came in the lead-up to the World Internet Conference which is due 
to open in eastern Zhejiang province on Wednesday, showcasing China’s 
burgeoning role in technology and internet governance issues. Organised by 
China’s newly formed Cyberspace Administration, it is expected to draw 
policymakers and senior industry figures, including the chief executives of 
Alibaba and and Baidu.

EdgeCast, which is based in Los Angeles, said in a blogpost 
<http://blog.edgecast.com> that its operations had been disrupted. “This week 
we’ve seen the filtering escalate with an increasing number of popular web 
properties impacted and even one of our many domains being partially blocked … 
with no rhyme or reason as to why.”

It said it was trying to mitigate the filtering but warned it would be “an 
ongoing issue” and sympathised with frustrated customers. “We share your 
frustration, as does the whole content delivery and hosting industry.”

Chinese authorities shut HSBC’s banking portal last month, Greatfire.org 
reported, in the process of blocking access to Akamai, a CDN which it used to 
host mirror websites. HSBC uses an Akamai domain reserved for encrypted 
websites.

The bank posted a notice on its site acknowledging the problem but gave no 
details, saying only it was “working with local providers to deliver a prompt 
resolution”.The notice subsequently disappeared 
<https://en.greatfire.org/blog/2014/nov/hsbc-corporate-banking-blocked-china-and-outbound-finance-impacted>
.

A US-based spokesman for the bank declined to comment, saying he was “looking 
into the matter”.

Greatfire.org said authorities were willing to stifle commerce to plug a small 
leak comprising tens of thousands of visits to forbidden sites – a tiny 
fraction of overall traffic, said Smith. “If the authorities think they can 
block the dissemination of information by continuing to cut off access to 
global CDNs, then they will be in for a big surprise when their own netizens 
stand up and express their discontent.”

Smith said the web conference was a coincidence of timing but hoped it would 
compel the authorities to explain the censorship. The conference aims to 
“promote the development of (the) internet to be the global shared resource for 
human solidarity and economic progress”.

Organisers have sent accredited journalists a warning about restrictions: “If 
the conference has not arranged an interactive session, please do not ask 
questions or interview at the scene. During the meeting please do not walk 
about at will within the venue.”

William Nee, a China researcher at Amnesty International, warned that the 
event underlined China’s goal of promoting its domestic internet rules as a 
model for global regulation.

“This should send a chill down the spine of anyone that values online freedom 
<http:// 
http://www.amnesty.org/en/news/internet-freedom-faces-new-attack-china-seeks-shape-global-web-rules-2014-11-18>
. China’s internet model is one of extreme control and suppression. The 
authorities use an army of censors to target individuals and imprison many 
activists solely for exercising their right to free expression online.”
 