
China has urged Apec member states to speed up free trade talks to spur 
growth, in a move widely seen as bolstering output in the world’s most populous 
country and acting as a bulwark againstUS foreign policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-foreign-policy> in the region.

Speaking at Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in Beijing on Tuesday, 
China’s president,Xi Jinping <https://www.theguardian.com/world/xi-jinping>, 
warned that a deal to lower trade tariffs, making trade easier and cheaper, was 
needed offset a weak global economic recovery.

Xi said the 21-member forum had agreed that economic integration was the 
“driving force” behind sustained strong growth and Apec “should continue to 
play a leading and coordinating role in pushing forward this process”.

Apec member states, which include the US, China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, Japan, South Korea, Indonesia and 
Canada, account for 40% of the world’s population, 54% of its economic output 
and 44% of trade.

Xi urged members to speed up talks on a trade liberalisation framework – 
called the Free Trade Area of the Asia Pacific (FTAAP) – being pushed by 
Beijing. Apec had approved work towards the establishment of FTAAP, which Xi 
said was a “historic step”.

He said: “The global economic recovery still faces many unstable and uncertain 
factors. Facing the new situation, we should further promote regional economic 
integration and create a pattern of opening up that is conducive to long-term 
development.

“We should vigorously promote the Asia-Pacific free trade zone, setting the 
goal, direction and roadmap and turn the vision into reality as soon as 
possible.”

Xi also laid the foundation stone for a separate trade deal with his US 
counterpart, Barak Obama, covering hundreds of IT products. Conducted under the 
umbrella of the World Trade Organisaton, the talks could lead to the first 
significant changes to the Information Technology Agreement (ITA) in 17 years, 
officials said.

The ITA first went into effect in 1997, but moves to update it have failed as 
both Washington and Beijing sought to protect their domestic IT industries.

“It was Apec’s work that led to the Information Technology Agreement, which we 
are now negotiating to expand,” said Obama during an plenary session in 
Beijing. “It is fitting that we are here with our Apec colleagues to share the 
news that the United States and China have reached an understanding that we 
hope will contribute to a rapid conclusion of the broader negotiations in 
Geneva.”

China has pursued trade deals over recent years across the Asia region, 
leaving rivals Japan and South Korea in its wake. Until recently many of those 
were bilateral agreements, often to prevent Chinese factories from suffering at 
the hands of more technologically savvy foreign rivals.

But the FTAAP plan, which will be presented to Apec leaders for approval at a 
future date, is more comprehensive and is seen not only as a route to faster 
growth, but also as a way to divert attention from the 12-nation Trans-Pacific 
Partnership (TPP) trade agreement backed by the US.

Analysts have argued that China, which is not part of the TPP, has campaigned 
for the FTAAP to draw regional powers away from Washington’s embrace.

Beijing fears that the TPP is being used by Obama to either force China to 
open markets by signing up or to isolate it from other regional economies as 
trade is diverted to TPP signatories.

Xi has appeared conciliatory in public, telling the state news agency Xinhua 
on Monday that the new trade liberalisation plan “does not go against existing 
free trade arrangements which are potential pathways to realise FTAAP’s goals”.

The Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe, welcomed China’s efforts this year on 
crafting a roadmap for the FTAAP scheme.

“Looking beyond TPP, we also have in sight the realisation of FTAAP that will 
create an even bigger market,” he told a news conference. “At thisApec summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/apec-summit>, we were able to create a 
roadmap for that.”
 