
Stand on a particular crossroads near the top of Antwerp's Nationalestraat and 
you will, in one 360-degree sweep, take in the gilt-edged riches of Dries Van 
Noten's Modepaleis store, the sharp whiff of solvent from a gas-mask-wearing 
spray-can artist decorating the streetwear supermarket Fish n'Chips, a distant 
stripe of the vast Yohji Yamamoto shop, the discreet lines of Swedish 
high-street stylist Filippa K and flashes of windows showing everything from 
locally made jewellery to Paul Smith suits.

What distinguishes Antwerp as a shopping destination is the sheer variety of 
stuff on offer in its compact city centre. That, and the dramatic seasonal 
sales. Because Belgian regulations forbid promotional discounts outside January 
and July, the pressure is on stores to clear un-sold stock as fast as they can.

"From January 3 we will start reductions at 30% and then three to five days 
later drop to 50%," explains Axel Somers, buyer for the hip Princess Blue 
boutique. "By the middle of the month we go to 70% off, and it tends to stay 
like this until the end of January." Somers admits that it's been a slow 
season, particularly for directional collections. Even taking the exchange rate 
into consideration, for devotees of labels like Marc Jacobs, Alexander McQueen 
and Chloe, it's an opportunity to pick up pieces at less than half the ticket 
price.

Boutiques and brands tend to huddle in tribal clusters on Antwerp's shopping 
streets. Walk from the station down to the grand, paved Meir and you'll find 
familiar high street brands and hip young stores. It's also home to the 
Princess department stores; the main branch has more traditional high-end 
brands, while down the street, Princess Blue has younger, more directional 
collections, including Hussein Chalayan and Kitsuné.

Turn left at the end on to Nationalestraat and you'll enter the city's fashion 
district. So low-key as to be almost invisible, outlets for Antwerp's famous 
designers are strung out between laundromats, army surplus stores and shops 
selling sausage rolls. Dries Van Noten's corner site looks like a costume 
fantasy from the 19th century, while Yohji Yamamoto's store, which abuts the 
MoMu fashion museum, is his largest, stocking all his lines as well as that of 
his daughter Limi Feu.

Walter Van Beirendonck's store is worth visiting for the spectacular setting 
alone. In a former mechanic's garage, works by young and less established 
designers that are hung in wooden cabanas spread around like fairground stalls. 
There's usually an installation of some kind - at one point the floor was 
occupied by an 8m teddy bear. More spectacular interiors can be found at 
Annemie Verbeke, a Brussels-based designer whose shop is like a mirrored 
jewellery box.

If Belgian designer gems are out of reach even at sale time, but you're still 
longing, there's little Labels Inc, just around the corner, which sells left 
over-stock and limited edition pieces, arranged according to label.

On the way down the fashion district, take lunch at the Biologisch-Dynamische 
Bakkerij on Volkstraat 17, an unpretentious organic cafe favoured by the area's 
health-conscious style set. Real fashion nerds can play spot-the-designer over 
their courgette soup.

At the bottom end of the fashion district is Ann Demeulemeester's town house 
opposite the museum of fine arts. The incense-laden air surrounds 
Demeulemeester's design totems: white feathers, charms and enchanting 
tailoring. Local wisdom dictates that every woman should own an Ann 
Demeulemeester suit - partly for the rock attitude, partly because they're so 
damned flattering. Fans of the style will be delighted by a guesthouse called 
Boulevard Leopold, set in a decadent chic 19th-century mansion in the old 
Jewish quarter. Owners Vincent and Bert wanted it to feel like the home of a 
beloved grandmother, and have kept prices low (from €95) to keep snotty divas 
at bay.

Opening a B&B alongside your business became something of a fad in Antwerp 
during the last decade - for a while it seemed as though every cafe and store 
had rooms for rent on its upper floors. Two that survive in the central strip 
around the top of Nationalestraat are Room National and m0851. The former was 
created by designers Violetta and Vera Pepa, who at the time had a shop on the 
ground floor. The boutique went, but the rooms remain under different, less 
chaotic, management. The top-floor room is particularly lovely - it has the 
best view and most light as well as a bathroom with a wooden Japanese-style 
tub. M0851, opposite, is run by the owners of the bag shop of the same name, 
and is a soothing, rather grown-up establishment with classic, sophisticated 
decor that reflects the accessories collection downstairs.

Over by the cathedral is the recently opened Linnen, a sleek B&B in an 
18th-century building renovated and run by the owners of neighbouring lounge 
bar, Cocktails at Nine. The view from the breakfast room catches the morning 
light and opens out on to the cathedral roof. Be warned that accommodation gets 
booked up weeks in advance.

Antwerp's compelling buzz is due in part to the fact that it's a living, 
hard-working city, with the second biggest port in Europe and a large student 
population. The university area is to the north of the Meir, where you will 
find skateboard shops, cheap CDs and exotic sneakers around Lange Klarenstraat 
and Lange Nieuwestraat, as well as Mekanik, one of Europe's best comic shops, 
along with graphic art galleries, around the corner at Sint-Jacobsmarkt 73.

A larger strip of streetwear stores is on Kammenstraat, where the clothing 
shops are interspersed with tattoo parlours. Local favourite Fish & Chips is 
spread out over three floors, and has a slide down to the sneaker department in 
the basement.

Louis might justifiably be called the shop that started the Flemish fashion 
scene - certainly its founders had a hand in supporting the work of the 
designers who came to be known as the Antwerp 6. These days it stocks men's and 
women's collections from Raf Simons, AF Vandervorst and Maison Martin Margiela.

Dedicated locals also buy works by Antwerp designers at the twice-yearly stock 
sales in offices and warehouses around the city. The atmosphere is frenetic, 
and changing facilities basic, but you can pick up recent pieces by Ann 
Demeulemeester, Dries Van Noten or Veronique Branquinho for knock-down prices. 
Times and dates vary for each design house, but there is usually one round of 
sales in early November the other in April - check the Flanders Fashion 
Institute website for details. At the ModeNatie (Nationalestraat 28) you can 
also buy a shopping map for €1.50, and Jesse Brouns' excellent book of fashion 
walks for €10 (ffi.be <http://www.ffi.be>). Happy shopping!

Shopping directory

Princess (Meir 51-55, princess.eu <http://www.princess.eu>) high-end fashion 
labels, and Princess Blue (Schrijnwerkersstraat 7).

Dries Van Noten (Nationalestraat 16, driesvannoten.be 
<http://www.driesvannoten.be>).

Yohji Yamamoto (Nationalestraat 32). 

Walter store (St Antoniusstraat, 12, waltervanbeirendonck.com 
<http://www.waltervanbeirendonck.com>).

Annemie Verbeke (Nationalestraat 76-78, annemieverbeke.be 
<http://www.annemieverbeke.be>), feminine label contrasting colour and texture: 
rusty tweeds with acid yellow, satin against fur.

Ann Demeulemeester (Verlatstraat 38, anndemeulemeester.be 
<http://www.anndemeulemeester.be>). 

Labels Inc (Aalmoezenierstraat 4, labelsinc.be <http://www.labelsinc.be>).

Fish & Chips, (Kammenstraat 36-38, fishandchips.be <http://www.fishandchips.be>
).

Louis (Lombardenvest 2). 

Also look out for

Veronique Branquinho (Nationalestraat 73, veroniquebranquinho.be 
<http://www.veroniquebranquinho.be>), young designer famous for immaculate 
tailoring.

Garde-robe Nationale (Nationalestraat 72) Nordic-influenced womenswear 
boutique.

Baby Beluga (Volkstraat 1), designer jeans, colourful accessories, foxy 
underwear.

Rue Blanche (Leopoldstraat 10) beautifully made vintage-with-an-edge style 
womenswear.

Coccodrillo (Schuttershofstraat 9, coccodrillo.be <http://www.coccodrillo.be>) 
for designer footwear, from Chloe to Jil Sander, and pieces by the city's 
big-name designers that you won't find in their own stores.

Verso (Langegasthuisstraat 11) Antwerp's answer to Harvey Nichols, housed in a 
marble-lined palace.

Where to stay

boulevard-leopold.be <http://www.boulevard-leopold.be>, rooms from €100 per 
night

m0851.be <http://www.m0851.be> from €140

roomnational.com <http://www.roomnational.com>,€95

Linnen (cocktailsatnine.be <http://www.cocktailsatnine.be>) €130

For more B&Bs, visit gastenkamersantwerpen.be 
<http://www.gastenkamersantwerpen.be>
 