
Forget stocks and shares, the FT and the London Stock Exchange: the truly 
savvy investor is buying up classic cars, reading Octane Magazine and hanging 
out at Goodwood racetrack. And if you are up for a flutter – in investment 
terms – then go straight for those red cars made in Italy. Classic Ferrari 
values are accelerating faster than the heroic driver Fangio ever did.

In the last 12 months alone the cost of top-end vintage Ferraris has risen by 
55%, thrashing competition from Mercedes Benz (a mere 24% increase) andPorsche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/porsche> (13%), according to the Historic 
Automobile Group, which tracks and publishes prices.

Dietrich Hatlapa, a former investment banker and founder of the Historic 
Automobile Group, said the soaring value of Ferraris and other classic names 
cannot easily be explained by any one factor. "It's a cocktail of things: 
rarity, technical sophistication, racing pedigree and continuing competitive 
success. But what you can say is everyone who buys one of these cars is 
passionate about them."

The supremacy of the Italian marque was underlined three weeks ago when a 1967 
Ferrari 275 Spyder sold for $27.5m (£17.5m) at an auction in California – the 
highest price ever recorded at a US public sale.

That is climbing towards what is believed to be the highest sum paid for any 
car, the $35m paid last year for another Ferrari – the 1962 GTO 250 made 
originally for British racing legend Sir Stirling Moss.

But it is not just the most rare and expensive Ferraris or Bugattis that are 
soaring in value, it is a whole range of cars all the way down to mass-produced 
volume sports cars of the past such as E Type Jags, the best of which can now 
fetch £80,000 apiece.

All the figures from the Historic Automobile Group are fed into an index and 
then compared with other investment "asset classes" and published as a Wealth 
Report by upmarket London estate agent Knight Frank.

This shows that in the 12 months to the end of June the value of classic cars 
as a whole was up by 28%, which compared with a rise of 12% for the FTSE-100 
index of leading shares and a 23% slump in the price of gold.

Measured over 10 years the performance of automobiles is even more stunning, 
with their value up by 430% compared with 55% for the FTSE and 273% for gold – 
the latter always regarded as a safe haven in turbulent financial times.

Hatlapa believes that classic cars can sooth the furrowed brow of an investor 
in bad times. "When there is a financial crisis some worry that their stocks 
and shares may become worthless. It is reassuring to see that tangible [car] 
investment in the garage. It brings a smile to your face and if you choose you 
can go out and drive it. There is the fun factor."

Although you are likely to see pictures in the media of very famous or very 
rich car enthusiasts – think Rod Stewart, Pink Floyd drummer Nick Mason or JCB 
magnate Sir Anthony Bamford – Hatlapa denies that classic-car buying is an 
elitist activity.

"It's very much a mass phenomenon with a huge rise in events. If you really 
want to get involved, as many do, you can pick up a vintage model, even a 
Hillman Imp or something, and do it up in your own garage. If you go to the 
Goodwood Revival race meeting next weekend you will find thousands of ordinary 
people have brought their own [vintage] cars."

The Goodwood Revival, described by organiser Lord March as the Glastonbury of 
the motor-racing world, is already sold out and follows on from the Goodwood 
Festival of Speed earlier this year, when nearly 200,000 people turned up.

But it is the modern Formula One race tracks elsewhere that also help build 
values for historic cars. The continuing success of Ferrari at the top level of 
motor sport is considered to help keep prices up. Rarity helps too – fewer than 
50 vehicles were made of some versions of the Spyder. The figures on car values 
speak for themselves, although there have been some reports that volumes being 
sold at auction have been in decline.

But cars are not the only alternative investment going up in price. The Knight 
Frank Wealth Report also shows antique stamps rose 7% for the 12 months to the 
end of June and have risen by 60% over the last five years and 255% over the 
last decade.

Coins were up by 9% over the last year and have shot up by 225% over the last 
10 years.

Antique furniture is down in value 3% over the year and nearly 20% on 10 years 
ago, while fine art is down 6% on the year but up 183% over the decade.

Why these changes? Andrew Shirley, editor of the Wealth Report, notes that 
both wine (up 3% on the year) and art are historically more volatile even than 
stocks and shares.

"This is not only due to economic conditions, but also to changing trends and 
fashions within the luxury collectibles market that can quickly create and 
deflate bubbles. This means index results for an asset class may not 
necessarily reflect the performance of individual pieces or works of art," he 
explains.

• This article was amended on 10 September 2013 to correct the name of the 
Historic Automobile Group from Historic Motor Group as the original said.
 