
Earlier this month American Ballet Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/american-ballet-theatre> opened its spring 
season in New York with a programme of works by three of the country's most 
celebrated choreographers. Twyla Tharp, Paul Taylor and Mark Morris would head 
any company's wish list. Yet while ABT must be congratulating themselves on the 
prime showcase they have acquired for their smart dancers, one gloriously 
gossip-worthy consequence of putting a trio of megastar choreographers in the 
same show has been the necessary juggling of three mega egos.

There is a famous story in ballet that dates back to 1845, when four of the 
great ballerinas of the day were signed up to appear in the same work, Perrot's 
Pas de Quatre. The order of appearance was everything and the four women 
squabbled viciously over it. Likewise there was huge trouble at ABT when Tharp 
was shifted from the coveted final place in the programme to the less 
prestigious opening slot. ABT's director Kevin McKenzie gave the closing 
position to Morris, an act of courage given that Tharp is not on speaking terms 
with Morris. Tharp threw a tantrum and swore she'd never work with ABT again.

Tharp was wrong to feel slighted, for her Brahms-Haydn Variations is a perfect 
programme opener; her signature fierce, glossy athleticism can galvanise the 
doziest audience. In this work, Tharp transforms the opulence of 19th-century 
classicism into electricity and light.

Brahms's music (Variations on a Theme by Haydn) is grand, poignant and playful 
and Tharp employs three principal couples to articulate its themes. Her pas de 
deux flip ballet's best effects into audacious tricks of balance and 
coordination. In this restless piece the number of dancers on stage is 
constantly changing, the main couples constantly reabsorbed into the surging 
currents of the corps.

Within a brief passage Tharp can set different dancers pirouetting on such 
different counts that the effect seems as random as wind ruffling water. Then a 
sudden geometry hits the eye, like birds flocking. It's the kind of brainy 
computing that Tharp does so well. What makes it beautiful is a gentle 
sensuality quite rare for her, a dipping of the head, a skimming of the feet 
that to an English viewer is reminiscent of Frederick Ashton.

Despite her celebrity as a creator of modern dance, Tharp has been 
choreographing ballets for years, so this love letter to classicism is not 
surprising. But ABT's programme has been themed around modern dance-makers 
working in ballet, and Paul Taylor's Black Tuesday looks more like a piece he 
would create for his own company. There is no pointe work, and only some 
concessions to the long, lean symmetries of ballet.

Taylor is in entertainment mode in this piece, assembling a group of 
ragamuffins and setting them dancing to Depression classics such as Underneath 
the Arches. There is a Broadway feel to the choreography, yet it remains just 
the right side of slick, and Taylor's evident affection for the dance forms of 
this period gives the piece heart. Ethan Steifel's solo, to Brother, Can You 
Spare a Dime, is truly affecting, the ragged energy of the dancing capturing a 
pulse of tragedy without being mawkish.

Mark Morris <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/markmorris> cheerfully crosses 
between modern and classical dancers (this is the second work he has made for 
ABT), but in Gong he takes both company and audience beyond their usual limits. 
Colin McPhee's score Tabuh-Tabuhan thrillingly transplants south-east Asian 
music to a western orchestra, creating a sound world that hovers between 
gamelan and 20th-century dissonance. Inside it, Morris has found a bizarre 
fantasy that is peculiarly hard to analyse.

The surface of the piece looks simple - ballet steps realigned by deep 
oriental flexings of limbs and proud profile turns of the head. The structure 
too has an apparently basic logic, with its austere lines building intensity 
through repetition. Yet the piece presents two arguments that work at startling 
loggerheads. At points Morris dismantles his moves into comically crude 
elements - a ballerina's lift reduced to a series of bumpy hops. At other 
points he layers his components into dance of ravishing complexity. The men in 
gold trimmed unitards sometimes sweep across the stage like piratical gods; the 
women in postmodern tutus are glamorous, then regally remote.

This is both pure ritual and surreal comedy and on the opening night some of 
the audience were clearly discomfited by having to make the leap. But one good 
reason why a ballet company should hire a choreographer from the rebellious 
world of modern dance is to stir up the mix. And Morris has given value for 
money.
 