
When colleagues and students at the University of Brighton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofbrighton> see the sign on my 
door – senior lecturer in the school of pharmacy and biomolecular sciences – 
they probably assume that the route I took to get here was the traditional one.

By this, I mean that I sailed my way through undergraduate and postgraduate 
education, carried out a few postdoctoral positions in top research groups, 
until the moons aligned and the sun came out to reveal the perfect academic job 
with my name written on it. As others will know all too well for themselves, 
it's never that simple and my journey has been up and down to say the least.

It's this time of year that I reflect on how far (and from where) I have come. 
Like hundreds of students across the country, I did not get the sufficient 
A-level grades to get a confirmed position at the university of my choice and 
had to enter what I think is still known as the 'dreaded clearing' process.

It definitely felt dreadful: my pride and self-esteem knocked by having messed 
up my exams just when I had to try and sell myself to a faceless admissions 
tutor on the phone. Emotions are running incredibly high but you have to 
contain that sense of failure to secure a spot on a course. How do you make 
that telephone call?

Well, back in 1998, mine was to the same university that I now work in as an 
academic. And and it was not as nerve-racking as anticipated. As you come to 
learn when you're on the other side of the fence,, nobody loves clearing – not 
staff and certainly not students – but admission tutors are there to help and 
guide you towards the right course, be it theirs or someone else's.

Brighton offered me a place through clearing and with it the hint that messing 
up another set of exams was not an option. With newfound confidence and 
guidance, I worked out how to turn my passion for science into good grades and 
it didn't take long for the penny to drop that my passion could become my 
career. I was soon on the way to getting my PhD atImperial College London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/imperialcollegelondon>.

Since then, things have pretty much been on the up with fellowships that 
allowed me to travel the world, meeting and work alongside some excellent 
scientists as I applied my trade. It was not long before I ended up full circle 
back at Brighton in my current position. Of course, there were further career 
wobbles – trying to secure an academic post when you feel your window of 
opportunity based on experience is running out can be stressful. I know many 
researchers who have experienced the same rollercoaster: some make it, some 
don't, and some are content to stick in postdoctoral positions.

But as I mentioned, this time of year is special to me. I know there are 
talented and gifted students out there who will also need the clearing process 
to obtain a place at university and who could go on and even better my journey. 
That journey has certainly helped me become more focused and determined as a 
scientist to take all the opportunities that come my way – it's well known that 
a kick-back can be as good as a win in the long term.

In the high pressure of clearing, we academics don't always take the time to 
step back and encourage those students who may just have messed up. And don't 
we all do that somewhere along the line? Yes, grades matter, but, in my mind, 
passion for your subject is the true motivator. When the inevitable obstacles 
of academia and the research process block your path or knock you down, it's 
those with passion who have the drive to push on through – or clamber clumsily 
but successfully over them.

Bhavik Anil Patel is a senior lecturer in the school of pharmacy and 
biomolecular sciences at the University of Brighton – follow him on Twitter
@BhavikAnilPatel <http://twitter.com/bhavikanilpatel>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member of theHigher Education Network 
<https://register.guardian.co.uk/higher-education/>.
 