
With A-level results day fast approaching, universities across the UK are 
gearing up for the chaotic scramble to fill university places. Last year, more 
than 300 institutions and more than 55,700 students matched their places in
Clearing <https://www.theguardian.com/education/clearing> – 4,600 more than in 
2011 – the highest recorded to date. Academics and administrators alike are 
busily clearing the way for the 2013 process. Our only guarantee: we are not 
quite sure what to expect.

This year represents my sixteenth anniversary of involvement with Clearing. It 
will also be my busiest thanks to the changing landscape of higher education, 
created as a result of both higher fees and the government's core and margin 
policy to restrict and manage the number of students being recruited.

At Birmingham City University, preparation for Clearing started around three 
months ago, not least because the process of accepting or confirming students 
on places for undergraduate courses begins in earnest some months earlier than 
August.

There is a long-standing public misconception that Clearing is solely for 
A-level students and as such begins on A-level results day. The official UCAS 
process itself begins at the start of July and runs until September. It is true 
that the majority of those entering university hold A-levels, however the 
proportion of the population entering holding A-levels actually fell in 2012, 
while that of UK 18-year olds entering with BTECs increased and has risen by 
80% since 2008.

Research published in 2011 showed that more than half of 20- to 30-year-olds 
going on to higher education are BTEC students. Similarly, numbers studying the 
international baccalaureate have been steadily rising. Results for the 
multitude of qualifications now accepted within entry requirements come out 
from as early as May onwards, enabling their recipients to confirm their places 
– as a number who attended our recent June open day chose to do.

Clearing last year was described as a "bloodbath". It was definitely a 
watershed moment: universities fell short of recruitment targets by almost 
30,000 representing millions of pounds in lost fee income and a number of 
Russell Group universities were forced to enter Clearing for the first time, 
hit hardest by the reduction of AAB students. At this, I stifle a wry smile, 
having worked in three post-92 universities that have always relied on 
Clearing. We saw a ripple effect throughout the pecking order, though at BCU we 
managed to recruit one more student through the process than in 2011.

There can be no doubt that lessons were learned; all universities have treated 
their recruitment for 2013 with a little caution and a lot more attention. At 
BCU, we are working harder than ever to ensure prospective students (and 
parents) recognise the benefits of what we have to offer as a university 
focused on creative and professional education and research. Our popularity 
continues with UCAS applications bucking national trends – up 13 compared to 
3%. Whether those applications will convert to students sufficient to meet our 
targets remains to be seen.

Members of staff in education liaison, admissions and the academic faculties 
have already been liaising with our feeder schools and colleges to help secure 
places for those wanting to come to university in September. Meanwhile, large 
numbers of staff have been contributing to the preparation for the huge 
logistical operation that kicks in when universities receive A-level results 
the weekend before results day.

Like their counterparts up and down the country, our admissions staff will be 
working over this weekend in readiness for the communication to confirm places 
to students who have met their offers and do not need to enter the Clearing 
process.

For those who have not secured or are seeking to change places, we open our 
Clearing hotline first thing on 15 August as well as hosting Clearing TV on our 
website. We will be sending staff on to site at five local colleges in 
Birmingham to make on-the-spot offers to eligible students, and also running a 
dedicated open day the following weekend targeted at students seeking to gain 
entry in September 2013.

Last year, the university received almost 4,000 calls to the hotline and our 
course enquiries line on results day, while our central switchboard took 2,600 
calls. This year we have taken the unprecedented step of recruiting and 
training more than 40 staff from across the university to support marketing 
staff who have traditionally manned the lines.

Today's Guardian report suggests "elite universities" are gearing up for 
Clearing too 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2013/jul/22/russell-group-universities-in-clearing>
. Some have already taken the unusual (some might say risky) step of making 
unconditional offers based on predicted grades, while others are reportedly 
dropping their entry requirements substantially to ensure they recover student 
numbers.

This effectively means that the ripple effect we saw during Clearing in 2012 
may have started already – without many universities realising. Which students 
will be available in Clearing and holding what grades is still a mystery. 
Hotlines could turn out to be surprisingly quiet.

Kathryn Jones is director of marketing and communications at Birmingham City 
University <http://www.bcu.ac.uk/> – follow it on Twitter @MyBCU 
<http://twitter.com/MyBCU> and @KathrynJinHE <http://twitter.com/KathrynJinHE>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member of theHigher Education Network 
<https://register.guardian.co.uk/higher-education/>.
 