
Cloud computing is gaining ground in commercial and government circles; only 
last month, the Cabinet Office had to extend the deadline for suppliers to join 
the government's G-Cloud framework because of high demand. Organisations moving 
to the cloud – where IT services are delivered remotely using an internet 
connection – are doing so because the shared infrastructure is cheaper and more 
flexible than conventional forms of technology.

So could cloud computing play a larger role in academia? Sharing information 
technology is well established among universities and research institutes; from 
the British government-funded education computer network, Janet (UK), to small 
research clusters, they have been pooling resources since computers first went 
online. Many academics predict cloud computing could take this collaboration to 
another level, but in what areas does it offer the greatest potential for 
higher education?

Leading experts in technology and higher education recently gathered at a 
Guardian roundtable to discuss the issue. The debate, supported by Jisc, the 
higher education IT body, was held under Chatham House rule, which means 
comments are reported without attribution to encourage a frank exchange of 
views.

The roundtable acknowledged that cloud computing removes much of the fixed 
cost of setting up IT infrastructure, which allows organisations to expand or 
scale back computing facilities very quickly. As a result, cloud computing has 
already found some favour in academia, especially for small scale research 
projects. Many universities, such as Portsmouth, have started to use 
commercial, off-the-shelf cloud services from organisations such as Microsoft, 
Amazon and Google. According to many participants, going to an external 
provider saves money and removes the need for complex, sometimes lengthy IT 
acquisition processes. As one contributor said: "Universities are moving to the 
cloud to improve the services they deliver and it is helping to promote best 
practice."

Compatibility

Despite recognising the potential of the cloud, the roundtable heard that 
academia has not rushed to fully adopt the technology. Barriers include 
universities' autonomous structures and the desire of academic staff to remain 
independent. Nor are the systems always designed for compatibility. On the 
administrative side, software is often bespoke or highly customised, making it 
less suitable for use by others. The roundtable heard how research teams have 
legitimate concerns about sharing sensitive data and storing it on shared 
systems. In teaching, there are worries that this will lead to homogeneous 
course materials and universities being less able to differentiate themselves. 
"We don't see a lot of collaboration around learning, as that is one of the 
distinguishing features of a university's offering," said one participant.

Another, with a background in IT, pointed out that university systems are 
designed more with a view to internal, rather than external, collaboration. 
High speed links exist between universities and research organisations, but 
there are fewer connections between the academic networks and cloud service 
providers.

Establishing these physical links, suggested one contributor, is a 
prerequisite for cloud computing to succeed in an academic setting. Another is 
to reconfigure universities' local area networks so they work better with 
services delivered over the public internet. Organisations such as Janet and 
Jisc are helping universities to do this, the roundtable was told.

Technical hurdles, though, may be secondary to cultural ones, pointed out a 
contributor. Further and higher education colleges, with smaller budgets and 
fewer IT staff, may be more open to sharing administrative services than larger 
universities.

University staff also have concerns about data security. "Universities are 
building data centres because they don't want data leaving the campus," said 
one participant.

Concern about a lack of control over data, software and hardware is holding 
back the use of cloud in research, the roundtable was told. Some research teams 
have made successful use of cloud-based services – such as storage and 
computational systems, especially for short bursts of processing-intensive 
computing – but others prefer to have the data, and the systems, close at hand. 
As one contributor said, that may mean keeping the systems in the lab or even 
under a desk.

There was concern among participants that cloud providers may struggle to 
provide the level of customisation needed for some areas of academic research, 
as cloud technology is perceived to achieve its economies of scale through a 
"one size fits all" approach to technical specifications and service levels.

"Centralised services are moving to the cloud, but systems within departments 
are very different," said one contributor. "How can they move their teaching 
systems, or systems that support research groups, to the cloud?" However, 
others suggested researchers could use shared services, especially if there are 
additional safeguards over security and service levels.

The roundtable heard how research projects sometimes duplicate IT resources, 
spending money on hardware and software that could be devoted to research. 
Participants agreed that computing power provided by a cloud service and 
managed full-time by IT professionals should be more effective. They also 
agreed that a tendency to create "vanity clusters" of IT systems, as part of 
research proposals, wastes time and funds.

It was suggested alterations to university funding, as well as improvements in 
cloud technology, could change that. As one participant said, in the past, 
universities had relatively easy access to capital, either from internal 
resources or as part of research funding. This tended to push them towards 
spending on hardware. "Universities had capital funding and changes in [ICT] 
hardware coincided with the next capital grant," said one contributor. "It is 
the flow of money into the institution that is the trigger."

A move to more revenue-based funding is likely to push institutions towards 
service, or cloud-based, models by which IT is paid for from operating 
expenses, said one contributor. Rising fuel costs – and increased expenses 
attributed to data centre and the energy and cooling systems required for 
computers – are also likely to prompt universities to look for more efficient 
ways of buying and running IT. As one participant said: "There is a green 
angle; energy is becoming more expensive."

Contributors agreed that cloud computing is likely to find favour in research 
because it costs less, overall, than other ways of buying computing power. 
"There is research that doesn't get done because the obstacles are too high," 
said one participant. "It may cost £5 of computer time, but you can't get 
started because the costs are too high." Cloud services would allow research 
groups to buy that £5 of computer time without large setup costs.

The roundtable was told research teams, such as those driven by Jisc and the 
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, are being prompted to look 
more closely at the cloud to improve collaboration within and between 
institutions. Universities, and the inter-university technology organisations, 
have created pilots "to help research groups to understand the costs and 
benefits", said one contributor.

Service models

Academic groups are also looking at governance models and controls around 
cloud computing, the roundtable heard. One way the sector is driving this 
forward is by looking at whether the academic community can collectively 
negotiate terms with providers. Developing standardised service models, as well 
as scrutinising contractual terms, should allow institutions to bring cloud 
services on board more quickly, said one participant.

Currently, university purchasing, legal or IT teams are likely to insist on 
doing their own due diligence. Negotiating as a group would remove the need for 
many of these checks, at least for more common services. "Framework contracts 
will reduce a lot of duplication," said one participant.

More immediately, it was suggested universities could benefit by moving 
generic, or less critical, services to the cloud. As one contributor said: 
"Student email is a lower-risk option for moving to the cloud than ERP 
[enterprise resource planning]." One participant suggested that moving student, 
learning and teaching systems to the cloud has other potential advantages 
because higher education then becomes less centred around the physical campus. 
Cloud-based systems can ease access to key systems, including learning 
environments, for students who are remote from the university. The Open 
University, for instance, may soon deploy cloud services such as Google Apps or 
Microsoft Live@edu.

Many contributors suggested their organisations would be looking more closely 
at moving administrative systems to the cloud when they need updating or when 
institutions combine or share systems. Several pointed out that applications 
such as IT helpdesk and HR systems have already been moved to the cloud.

Although universities are looking at more standardised systems for 
administration, the roundtable agreed the end goal is to share services and 
infrastructure, despite the concerns universities have about data security. 
Cloud computing is not a prerequisite for such work, but it was agreed it can 
help by reducing costs and providing an alternative to hosting workloads on 
institutions' servers.

But the view among participants was that the transition to cloud services 
could be made easier through more shared buying of services, greater 
standardisation of terms and conditions, and by technical standards that make 
it easier to switch applications from one cloud vendor's environment to 
another. "It is starting to be recognised, across the sector, that some 
requirements are similar and that we need to work together on shared standards 
and systems," said one contributor.

The higher education IT community has started work in this area, including 
looking at whether universities can standardise the pre-contractual scrutiny of 
cloud offerings and provide cloud infrastructure and services tailored to 
academic research or higher education administration.

In a tough funding environment, the roundtable agreed such initiatives can 
only become more commonplace. And cloud computing is likely to be one of the 
main beneficiaries, as universities strive to do more with less. As one 
contributor put it: "It frees up a person's time to do something more useful."

At the table

Mark Say (chair), former editor, Government Computing Network, The Guardian

Matt Johnson, head of research and development, Eduserv

Malcolm Read, executive secretary, Jisc

Simon Parker, director, Knowledge Transfer Centre, Cardiff University School 
of Engineering

Mike Day, director of information systems, Nottingham Trent University

Peter Tinson, executive secretary, UCISA

Chris Chant, director, G-Cloud programme, Cabinet Office

Rachel Bruce, innovation director, digital infrastructure, Jisc

Chris Cobb, chief operating officer, University of London

Stephen Butcher, head of procurement and shared services, Hefce

Peter Pietzuch, senior lecturer, Imperial College London

Paul de Vrieze, lecturer in web systems and technology, Bournemouth University

Dan Perry, head of strategy, Janet (UK)

Roundtable report commissioned by Seven Plus and controlled by the Guardian.

Discussion hosted to a brief agreed with Jisc.

Funding Supported by Jisc (www.jisc.ac.uk <>)

Contact Sarah Russell 020-3353 4866.

For information on roundtables, visit: theguardian.com/sponsored-content

JISC's work in shared services and the cloud 
<http://www.jisc.ac.uk/publications/briefingpapers/2012/umf>

How to move to the cloud - one day conference run by Janet (UK)  
<http://www.jisc.ac.uk/events/2012/02/preparingforcloud.aspx>
 