
If you're looking for a green investment, how about putting some money into a 
"one stop shop" for all things tree and wood-related? A not-for-profit 
organisation that specialises in tree surgery, woodland management and green 
solutions to wood waste, is inviting people to back the venture by buying 
shares. It estimates it will be able to pay a return of 5%.

Greater Manchester TreeStation <http://www.treestation.co.uk/> is one of a 
growing number of community initiatives open to small investors who sympathise 
with the cause, but are also looking for a return on their money. And there was 
good news this week for others thinking about setting up a community-owned 
business, or who are looking for funding.

The Co-operative Group <http://www.co-operative.coop/> has launched a scheme 
that will underwrite community share issues. If it likes the look of what is 
being proposed, the new fund will provide backing to the tune of up to £50,000.

According to the Co-operative Group, the UK is witnessing a "resurgence" in 
enterprises set up and run for the benefit of the community – from bookshops 
and renewable energy projects, to pubs and post offices. The number of UK 
co-operative enterprises rose from 5,450 in 2010 to 5,933 in 2011.

Often there is an opportunity for people who back a venture's aims to become a 
member by buying shares, and that's the case with Greater Manchester 
TreeStation, based in West Gorton, which acts as a hub for a wide range of 
wood-related activities.

It does a lot of work for local councils, and hopes to build up its business, 
supplying woodchip for heating. The company was set up in 2008 and recently 
changed its constitution to become a "society for the benefit of the community" 
– a type of Industrial and Provident Society.

Nick Torr, one of the team at the society, says: "For me, what the TreeStation 
is working towards is a no-brainer – we have this valuable local timber 
resource all around us, even in our urban environment, which needs to be 
responsibly managed to help create the sustainable future our children deserve.

"Surprising quantities of wood are still being wasted, or poorly utilised. Our 
aim is to 'upcycle' as far as possible. Timber from our own activities, and 
other contractors, is used to make sawn timber for joinery, firewood, and 
woodchip for biomass boilers. Nothing is wasted, as anything left over is in 
demand for composting locally or use on allotments and by gardeners."

The organisation wants to secure more contracts for supplying woodchip and to 
expand its firewood and tree surgery operations, so it has launched a share 
issue to raise £140,000.

The minimum investment is £200, and the society says that each year the 
directors will recommend what interest rate should be paid. The share offer 
document states it is currently intended it will be set at 5%, though that may 
be changed by the board.

It also warns that the share offer is exempt from regulation and therefore, 
"if the business fails you have no right of complaint to theFinancial Ombudsman 
[Service] <http://www.financial-ombudsman.org.uk/> or the Financial Services 
Compensation Scheme <http://www.fscs.org.uk/>".

Meanwhile, the new fund has been set up specifically to support 
community-owned enterprises looking to raise money via a share issue. Backed by 
the Co-operative Group and theCo-operative Loan Fund 
<http://www.co-operativeloanfund.co.uk/>, and operated by Co-operative & 
Community Finance <http://www.coopfinance.coop/>, its main aims are to boost 
investor confidence, while improving access to capital by underwriting a share 
issue by up to £50,000.

However, the reassurance provided by its confidence in a project may mean the 
share issue hits its target without this investment.

Applications from all kinds of community-owned ventures will be welcomed. 
However, it will only invest in Industrial and Provident Societies.
 