
Veteran banker Richard Pym has been appointed chairman of Allied Irish Bank, 
the lender that received a €21bn (£16.7bn) bailout from the Irish taxpayer.

Pym will take up his duties on 13 October, while the current AIB chairman 
David Hodgkinson, is due to retire in December. Pym, a seasoned operator witha 
reputation for steadying banks in trouble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/aug/19/banking.banks>, will stand 
down as chairman of the Co-op Bank on 1 October, having announced his departure 
in May.

Pym arrived at the Co-op Bank in June 2013 to calm the waters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jun/05/cooperative-bank-chairman-finance-director>
, after its debt was demoted to junk status and its chief executive quit. He is 
said to believe that his work is done and takes the view that the Co-op Bank's 
corporate governance has greatly improved.

"It has been a privilege to be part of the team involved in the rescue and 
turnaround of the Co-operative Bank," he said in a statement. "There are only a 
handful of institutions which hold a special place in British society and which 
stand worthy of the type of exceptional measures that have been undertaken at 
this bank."

Pym trained as an accountant and has decades of experience in banking. He was 
a well-regarded chief executive of Alliance & Leicester and went on to chair 
Bradford & Bingley bank after its share price collapsed at the height of the 
financial crisis. This experience made him an obvious choice to chair UK Asset 
Resolution, the government-owned bad bank that holds the toxic assets of 
Northern Rock and Bradford & Bingley, a role that he will retain once he starts 
at AIB.

With a reputation for careful decision-making, he began his career in retail, 
spending time at the Burton Group in the 1980s working with Sir Stuart Rose. He 
has also chaired Halfords and the British Land Company. Ireland's finance 
minister, Michael Noonan, welcomed Pym's appointment to AIB in what he said was 
an important time for the bank as it continues on the road to recovery.

"Mr Pym has a wealth of experience in the UK banking sector and I am confident 
that he we will prove to be a strong Chairman of AIB Group plc," Noonan said.

Pym said: "I look forward to contributing to the progress that has already 
been made in rebuilding a strong bank. Irish taxpayers have made considerable 
sacrifices in supporting the banking system and I am very conscious of my 
responsibilities in that regard."

The Co-Op Bank has yet to find a replacement for Pym, but said the search was 
underway. Dennis Holt, the bank's senior independent director, is ready to 
stand in as interim chair when Pym stands down in October.
 