
The surprise departure of Jenny Beck, the managing partner at leading legal 
aid firm TV Edwards, and two colleagues to set up theCo-op's family law division
 
<http://www.tvedwards.com/the-co-operative-legal-services-jenny-beck-and-christina-blacklaws-to-launch-family-law-service/>
 could be the sector's "Wapping moment 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wapping_dispute>", according to the chair of 
Resolution <http://www.resolution.org.uk/>'s legal aid committee.

David Emmerson from Resolution (formerly the Solicitors Family Law 
Association) welcomes the news as good for clients: "It's a very sharp move – 
but clearly the service will be a threat to every single high street law firm 
that undertakes privately funded family work."

The shake up in family law following Co-operative Legal Service's entrance 
into the market could be as great as when News International exited Fleet 
Street in 1986 for a little known area of east London, he adds. Life for family 
practitioners may never be the same again.

The Co-op has around 5 million members and claims to have an outlet in every 
postcode in the country. It plans to expand its operations (which include 
supermarkets, insurance, banking and funerals) to include legal services as 
soon as legislative changes – dubbed Tesco law — come into force.

It aims to offer a fixed price family law service, delivered electronically as 
well as face to face – designed to embrace those who no longer qualify for 
legal aid.

Beck says the decision to jump ship from TV Edwards, where she has spent most 
of her professional life, was the hardest of her career.

Beck, who has been managing partner for 10 years, is credited with putting the 
firm on a stable financial footing, and in the past three years has stewarded 
it through eight, apparently successful, mergers. (Ironically, TV Edwards' 
expansion policy was designed to enable it to compete in the changing legal 
market.)

Also making the move to CLS are TV Edwards head of business development, Chris 
May, and partner Christina Blacklaws, who joined the firm as a result of a 
merger in May 2011. Blacklaws is also an influential family lawyer, who chairs 
the Law Society's legal affairs and policy board and is chief assessor of its 
children panel.

Beck denies her decision was motivated by money, but accepts she will face 
criticism from some quarters, particularly as she is co-chair of theLegal Aid 
Practitioners Group <http://www.lapg.co.uk/> (whose members will be among those 
most likely to lose out).

What swung it was the potential for the new venture to increase access to 
justice, she says. "If you were a legal aid lawyer 10 years ago you would have 
been helping infinitely more people than now.

"The same people need the same help – it's just that they won't qualify for 
legal aid any more."

A Co-op member herself, who shops in their stores, Beck was also swayed by its 
mutual status. "The Co-op stands for what I stand for. The Co-op is about 
quality and integrity; it's about an 'arms around' approach".

If it had been, say, Tesco or another organisation driven only by profit, Beck 
says her response would have been very different.

The Co-op service will be lawyer led and lawyer delivered and the intention is 
to apply for a Legal Services Commission contract so that legal aid clients can 
also be catered for.

Although its aim is to make family law accessible, Beck stresses it will be 
delivered in a suitably professional environment .

One of the tasks Beck is most looking forward to is creating a CLS academy. 
Students doing their vocational course will be offered work placements and 
given intensive training before being offered a training contract at CLS.

The aim is for the service to be operational from the middle of 2102. As well 
as trainees, CLS will also be recruiting across the board – from caseworkers to 
senior family lawyers.

Beck is unable to say how many recruits will be needed but it seems unlikely 
she will find any shortage of CVs arriving on her desk.
 