
To some Richard Cockerill may be only keeping the head coach's seat warm but, 
when Marcelo Loffreda arrives at Leicester this week, he will inherit a team 
sitting handily in the Premiership and in fine fettle to launch their Heineken 
Cup campaign. Forget Saturday, says Cockerill,Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> may have lost the first 
game in defence of their Anglo-Welsh title but it was part of a more important 
game plan.

"I've got the bigger picture to look at," said the former England hooker after 
seeing his gamble on a below-strength side go down. "Today wasn't the bigger 
picture." Next weekend against Cardiff, his last match in charge before 
returning to the job of coaching the forwards, Cockerill will put out the 
strongest side available, hoping not only to redress Saturday's defeat but, 
more importantly, to give the dozen internationals returning from the World Cup 
a game before Leicester visit Leinster.

"I've got to make sure we're right for Europe and make sure the World Cup guys 
are ready and fresh for the rest of the season," said Cockerill, who formally 
hands over to Argentina's World Cup coach during the build-up for Dublin.

"I don't want to devalue this competition because it's a good competition and 
we won it last year, but I have to manage the squad and Europe's a massive 
prize."

"Managing" Saturday's squad involved making 10 changes to the side that beat 
Bath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> in the league on the second 
weekend of the season. It included playing two young props against a former 
England Test loose-head and a Romanian last spotted giving Scotland's front row 
a hard time last month. It was a non-contest.

By the time Dave Young, making his third start in two years, and Dan Cole, 
called back from Bedford to make his debut, were hauled off in the 44th minute 
much damage had been done. David Flatman celebrated his return to fitness by 
lasting the full 80 minutes and Paulica Ion showed enough power and general 
cussedness to suggest he could be one of the finds of the World Cup.

Almost Young's and Cole's final act, before making way for the Argentinian 
Test pair of Maros Ayerza and Alex Moreno, was to concede a penalty try. It was 
a cumulative affair, with Ashley Rowden finally losing patience, and it 
cancelled out Sam Vesty's clever score in the 26th minute, the full-back having 
picked the precise line to wrong-foot Bath's cover. "It was a risk in 
selection," admitted Cockerill, "but I'll live with it."

Bath went to the break with a two-point lead and, although Ian Humphreys eased 
Leicester back in front with a penalty in the 41st minute, those were their 
final points. The game was settled when Alex Crockett eased off his right foot 
to go under the Leicester posts in the 69th minute.

Nevertheless Cockerill left Bath content and feeling that with his World Cup 
dozen, plus Harry Ellis, now available Leicester are in fine shape after his 
time in control.

Bath Abendanon; Higgins, Crockett, Cheeseman, Stephenson (Banahan, 59); Davis 
(Berne, 52), Claasens; Flatman, Hawkins, Ion, Borthwick (capt), Short, Beattie, 
Scaysbrook (Faamatuainu, 57).

Tries Penalty try, Crockett. Cons Davis, Berhne. Pens Davis 2.

Leicester Vesty; J Murphy, Erinle, Cornwell (T Youngs, 44), Varndell; 
Humphreys, F Murphy; Cole (Ayerza, 44) Davies (capt), Young (Moreno, 44), 
Wentzel, Blaze, Croft, Abraham, Crane.

Try Vesty. Pens Humphreys 3.

Referee A Rowden (Berkshire). Attendance 10,555.
 