
Cohabiting couples are for the first time as likely to have children as those 
who marry, according to a report on changing family relationships in the UK 
published on Thursday.

Cohabitation <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/cohabitation> is 
increasingly seen as an alternative for long-term relationships and raising 
children, rather than as a "trial run" before marriage, the study commissioned 
by the Co-operative's new family law service suggests.

A significant proportion of those who have not married, however, are unaware 
of their rights because the law has failed to keep up with social change, 
Christina Blacklaws, of the Co-operative Legal Services, warns.

The evidence of shifting parenting patterns emerges in data extracted from the 
2001 and 2011 censuses. It has been assembled by Dr Esmée Hanna and Dr David 
Grainger, both of Leeds University, who specialise in family relationship 
changes over time.

Their research reveals a 34% increase in the number of cohabiting couples with 
dependent children in the 10 years to 2011. Over that period, the total number 
of cohabiting families with dependent children – those aged under 18 – 
increased by 292,000, while the number of married couples with dependent 
children fell by 319,000.

Last year, 38% of cohabiting couples were parents – the same percentage as 
married couples with children. Of live births in 2010, 31% were to women 
cohabiting with but not married to their partner – up from 25% in 2001. There 
are still more married couples with children than cohabiting couples with 
children in the UK.

The rapid changes are reflected in a survey commissioned for the report 
showing that 52% believe marriage is not important providing that parents are 
in a committed relationship. Only 27%, according to the survey of more than 
2,000 adults carried out by YouGov, take the more traditional view that couples 
should be married before having children.

Despite increasing social acceptance, the report acknowledges that cohabiting 
couple families continue to be less stable than married couple families. A 
higher proportion of all family breakdowns involve young children from 
unmarried parents, the research reveals.

There is also substantial confusion over the legal rights of cohabiting 
couples as compared to married couples. Of adults questioned, over a quarter, 
26%, believe cohabiting couples have the same rights as married couples when it 
comes to child custody, 22% when it comes to property and 21% when it comes to 
finances.

Hanna and Grainger commented: "Part of the decline in marriage in recent years 
can perhaps be explained by the increase in cohabitation as a family format, 
with ever more couples choosing to live together. And as the number of 
cohabiting couples increases, they are increasingly seen as a socially 
legitimate family environment for childbearing."

Blacklaws, who is director of family law at the Co-operative Legal Services, 
said: "Although many people still believe they have rights as common-law 
spouses, there is no such status in law. As a result, some cohabiting families 
may find themselves facing real difficulties should they split up, particularly 
when there are children involved.

"It is clear that this area of family law is in urgent need of an overhaul. 
However, in the meantime, people need to think carefully about how they protect 
themselves and their families – preferably by reaching and signing agreements 
about what would happen if you did split up. This could save a huge amount of 
cost and heartache if the worst happens."
 