
Srey Mom recalls: "My father burnt the house down one evening, and after that 
me and my brother slept in the forest. I was so scared I couldn't sleep and he 
would cry all night because he was hungry." Srey Mom's father was a violent 
alcoholic, unable to pay the rent, and her mother, who was addicted to 
gambling, attempted suicide many times. With her family left homeless and 
hungry, Srey Mom joined almost 2,000 working children who spend their days and 
nights on the streets and beaches of Sihanoukville, Cambodia's growing resort 
town.

Over 36% of Cambodians live below the poverty line and families have been 
drawn to Sihanoukville by the economic promise of a growing tourist trade and 
work in the country's only deep-water port. In reality, the average income of a 
family of four living in the town's slums is $2 a day. With families who are 
unable or unwilling to support them, children work on the town's streets, 
beaches and slums both day and night, and are vulnerable to physical and sexual 
abuse, and discrimination.

It was cases such as Srey Mom's that persuaded the director and co-founder of 
M'Lop Tapang, Eve Sao Sarin, to help set up the organisation with his partner 
Maggie Eno back in 2004. M'Lop Tapang is one of six small organisations in Asia 
partnered by the NGO International Childcare Trust.

 "We believed we had to commit to these children, find them a safe place and 
learn their needs. We also wanted to resolve issues within their families. 
There are many problems in their homes due to poverty, domestic violence and 
drug abuse," Sarin explains.

M'Lop Tapang offers a chance for street children to get an education and to 
change behaviour such as drug abuse and crime, but without the support of their 
families this is very difficult. As a result the organisation collaborates with 
the children to deal with their issues at home, setting up services such as 
alcoholics' counselling and vocational training for their relatives.

Srey Mom has managed to rebuild her home and family with the help of M'Lop 
Tapang. Srey Mom's father is surprisingly candid. "I drank rice wine so I could 
forget," he says. "When I was drunk no one else mattered, that is why I could 
beat my wife and burn my home." He was introduced to an alcoholics' counselling 
course and is now a skilled builder, earning a stable wage. Similar efforts to 
build up communities through dedicated social work have been very successful, 
with every street-living or working child in the town using M'Lop Tapang's 
services, albeit to varying degrees.

Many of Sihanoukville's social problems can be attributed to Cambodia's recent 
history. From 1970 to 1975 Cambodia was immersed in a costly civil war, which 
displaced nearly half the population and killed more than 1 million people. In 
1975 the communist movement, the Khmer Rouge, seized power and set about 
creating a peasant revolution. The majority of the population was forcibly 
moved to the countryside; healthcare and money were banned and those with an 
education were executed. In 1979 the regime was toppled, but the war continued 
and much of the population was displaced. Finally, democratic elections took 
place in 1993.

For Sarin, the community is "like the basket that breaks. No one trusts each 
other any more." Children under the age of 18 make up more than 50% of the 
country's population and Sarin believes that many are still affected by the 
past.

"Children suffer indirectly from the war, most of their parents lost beloveds, 
they are depressed and frightened, and Cambodian culture doesn't encourage any 
show of weakness. They deal with these problems with gambling, drinking and 
violence."

Vannthy is a social worker with M'Lop Tapang, co-ordinating a network of 
former street children, who now work in their communities. He is adamant that 
"young people are the ones that change things. They come up with solutions I 
would never have thought of." This network has built homes for evicted 
families, cleared the slums of rubbish and set up awareness programmes on 
issues such as drug abuse. Its members have also painted and repaired beds at 
the town hospital and volunteered to teach the English they have learnt at 
M'Lop Tapang. The Youth Volunteering Network also includes middle-class youth 
who attend community college and university. These youths volunteer their time 
at M'Lop Tapang, educate their families and peers on issues such as 
environment, poverty and social work and encourage social responsibility. The 
most dedicated volunteers are provided with the opportunity of employment at 
M'Lop Tapang.

While decades of violence and conflict have affected communities in Cambodia, 
they have also had an impact on the country's institutions and infrastructure. 
Andrew Mace is the British ambassador to Cambodia and he has seen weaknesses in 
the police force and other parts of the public sector. "It is a historical 
problem," he explains. "The whole of government was essentially destroyed. For 
example they lost the whole of the judiciary in that period and having lost 
them it takes a long time to get back that capacity." As a result a new 
structure of law enforcement was hurriedly created and in some cases recruits 
were given inadequate training.

Another problem is lack of funding. Social issues receive less attention from 
international donors than topical concerns such as health and education. Vou 
Savin, a welfare officer for the Ministry of Social Affairs, is the only 
government social worker responsible for over 130,000 people living in 
Sihanoukville and the surrounding countryside. He admits that there is a limit 
to what he can achieve "Our job is to help vulnerable people, but we have so 
little money in our department that we need to partner with other 
organisations."

People coming in from the outside exploit these vulnerabilities to prey on 
children. Paedophiles see the country as a "safe destination." However, the 
government is alert to these unwelcome visitors and has forged strong 
relationships with the NGO community. One such example is Action Pour Les 
Enfants, an investigation agency working against sex offenders in Cambodia, 
which has trained up the local police force in areas such as interrogation 
techniques and forensic evidence. Efforts have also been made to educate law 
enforcement officials on children's rights and protection against child abuse.

 M'Lop Tapang is teaching the children themselves to be aware of the dangers 
on the streets and to protect one another. They have already trained 40 street 
children in how to recognise suspicious behaviour and what to do if they see 
cases of abuse or discrimination. This network then filters the information 
back to other children. They also act as a safety net for children who are new 
to the streets. M'Lop Tapang has established a ChildSafe network in 
Sihanoukville, training local restaurants, bars, hotels and taxi owners to 
recognise signs and cases of child abuse and report them to its 24-hour 
ChildSafe hotline.

For Srey Mom, street living is now a thing of the past. She sits calmly 
surrounded by her family in their small stilted house and although the 
torrential monsoon rain beats against the tin roof, they remain leak free. She 
has a stable income working as a manager at the local M'Lop Tapang shop and is 
a testament to what a street child in Cambodia can achieve.

*Some names have been changed
 