
Britain's most successful serial confidence trickster, Achilleas Kallakis, 
faces up to 10 years in jail after being found guilty of duping banks out of 
more than £750m.

Kallakis and his co-fraudster, Alex Williams, will appear at Southwark crown 
court on Thursday to receive their sentence for orchestrating Britain's biggest 
ever mortgage fraud. The former Croydon travel agent tricked a series of 
bankers into believing he was a super-rich Mayfair property baron and convinced 
them to lend him millions to fund lucrative deals.

The sentencing comes almost 18 years after the two men previously stood 
alongside one another – at the same court – pleading guilty to a forgery scheme 
involving the sale of bogus manorial titles to unsuspecting Americans.Reports 
of these earlier convictions 
<http://www.sfgate.com/entertainment/article/Selling-Fake-Titles-A-Most-Ignoble-Crime-3035024.php>
 were not picked up by banks because Kallakis and Williams had changed their 
names.

Far from being deterred by their initial brush with the courts, the two set 
about hatching an even more elaborate scheme – this time targeting bank loans. 
Stephan Kollakis and Martin Lewis were reinvented as Achilleas Kallakis (with 
an "a") and Alex Williams.

With the help of William's forgery skills, and an allegedly corrupt Swiss 
lawyer, Kallakis quickly had a handful of banks financing a string of trophy 
property acquisitions between 2003 and 2008.

Using his helicopter and private jet to shuttle between offices in Mayfair and 
a super-yacht in Monaco, Kallakis appeared to have all the trappings of a 
successful tycoon. He was well known too on the casino circuit, gambling large 
sums on backgammon andpoker <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R4afwDorzHU>.

With loan financing often higher than the value of properties he targeted, 
Kallakis snapped up some of the most sought-after houses in Mayfair and 
Knightsbridge as well as landmark commercial properties such as Home Office 
buildings in Croydon and the Telegraph Media Group's headquarters in Victoria, 
acquired from the Barclay brothers.

But to keep up the sham, Kallakis and his inner circle had to work tirelessly, 
deploying actors, secretive offshore trusts, fictional backing from an overseas 
shipping empire and string of bogus references, to stay one step ahead of 
suspicion.

Cursory checks would have guided the curious to entries In Debrett's or 
Marquis Who's Who, where readerscan still see 
<http://www.debretts.com/people/biographies/browse/k/19870/Achilleas%20Michalis+KALLAKIS.aspx>
 Kallakis listed as an "ambassador for the Republic of San Marino", author of 
The Wonders of Italy (1996) and a member of the development board of the 
National Portrait Gallery – all bogus claims.

Kallakis and his helpers were able to conceal the truth for more than five 
years, wining and dining gullible bankers. The biggest victim of Kallakis had 
been AIB, which had advanced in excess of £700m and ultimately reported a £56m 
loss on the deals. A second count was tied to a loan from Bank of Scotland, now 
part ofLloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group>.

Other lenders who were taken in included Barclays, Bristol & West and GE 
Capital. HMRC was also duped. Tax officials conducted an inquiry into 
Kallakis's affairs in 2005, but was eventually satisfied that all the paperwork 
relating to his complex offshore empire appeared to be in order.

The conviction brings to an end a lengthy prosecution brought by the Serious 
Fraud Office <https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office>, which saw 
an initial attempt to try Kallakis thwarted when his co-defendant, Williams, 
attempted suicide. The first trial was also marred by a suspected attempt to 
nobble the jury, which is still the subject of a police inquiry.

At the heart of the Kallakis confidence trick were purported financial 
guarantees from a large Hong Kong investor. The only catch, banks were told, 
was that the guarantees would fall apart if the investor –Sun Hung Kai 
Properties <http://www.shkp.com/en-US/> (SHKP) – was contacted directly.

This explanation was accepted by the bankers who were desperate to lend to 
Mayfair tycoons such as Kallakis. Years later, however, they were to learn the 
SHKP paperwork had been forged by Williams. Those who had sought to question 
the rationale for SHKP's guarantees were subjected to angry tirades of abuse.

Nevertheless, there were some within AIB who had their doubts and it was not 
until the bankers started making arrangements to fly toHong Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong> and seek a meeting directly with 
SHKP that Kallakis agreed he would broker some contact.

Jonathan Lee cut an impressive figure to the two men from AIB's property team 
in March 2007. A director in the treasury department from an Asian property 
giant – SHKP – he had agreed to stop off, on his way to Hong Kong from New 
York, for the brief meeting at Kallakis's Mayfair offices.

Lee impressed the two bankers although, in retrospect, they found it strange 
that he had no business cards. The SHKP man appeared to have a good knowledge 
of Kallakis's loans and asked informed questions. It was the comfort they 
craved. Any doubts about the financial guarantee's underpinning Kallakis's 
property empire had been well and truly put to bed.

As they later discovered, however, SHKP never employed a "Jonathan Lee". It 
did not even have a treasury department. It had never been involved in rental 
guarantees. And SHKP bosses AIB believed had signed the paperwork had never 
heard of Achilleas Kallakis.

When fraud investigators tried to track him down over a year later they found 
no trace. The only clues were two files on the private computer server of 
Williams, titled "List of Common Chinese Names" and "Background info for J 
Lee". When the net was finally closing in 2008, Williams ordered the server be 
destroyed – but the command was never carried out.

AIB felt they had little reason to doubt Kallakis. They had been overwhelmed 
with bogus references from sources ranging from Credit Suisse to the economist 
Lord Harris of High Cross, all purporting to confirm the credentials of 
Kallakis. But in evidence Harris's widow said she knew nothing of the family 
friendship Kallakis claimed.

In his defence, Kallakis expressed incredulity at evidence of forgery and 
clung desperately to claims that his connections to establishment figures were 
genuine. His lawyers showed the jury a picture of the fraudster with Lady 
Thatcher that had appeared in a magazine produced by the American Chamber of 
Commerce in the UK.

Kallakis had an altogether more ordinary background. His father worked as a 
port captain and ran an unsuccessful Liverpool nightclub. Educated at 
University of Buckingham, where he met Williams, Kallakis went on to work in a 
travel agency while living with his parents in Ealing.

Williams was very much the back-office boy who said little and would 
occasionally eat a Pot Noodle at his desk, according to colleagues. Asked to 
explain his use of false passports in the 1990s – for which he was convicted – 
Williams explained they had been for a girlfriend who could not return to China.

The two went into business after college in various ventures, including 
looking at the purchase of a lobster farm. His outward demeanour at court was 
calm, but he claims to have received death threats against his family once the 
allegations of fraud emerged.

On one occasion he said he put his wife and daughter on a plane to the 
Philippines, fearing for their safety. The jury were not told that he had 
attempted to take his own life during the first trial.

The undoing of Kallakis's scam came in 2008 when AIB had sought to sell on 
some of its loans to other banks to spread the risk. One of those it 
approached, the German bank Helaba, conducted some checks into the property 
tycoon's background and hired a private investigator who quickly began to peel 
back the fraudulent facade. They took their findings to horrified counterparts 
at AIB just as they were invited by Kallakis to his lavish 40th birthday party 
in Mykonos.
 