
Harlequins' director of rugby Conor O'Shea has rejected the tag of favourites 
ahead of Sunday's LV Cup final againstSale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> at Sixways, as his side look to 
secure the first of a potential hat-trick] of trophies.

The defending Premiership champions are currently second in the table as they 
seek to retain their league crown and are also in the last eight of the 
Heineken Cup. The London club have already shown their final pedigree after 
securing Amlin Challenge Cup glory in 2011 and beating Leicester at Twickenham 
to lift the league title last May.

Sale, meanwhile, were bottom of the Premiership until London Welsh were docked 
five points for fielding an ineligible player – a decision the Exiles have 
appealed. They have also lost their past six meetings with Quins.

But O'Shea believes league positions will have no bearing on who lifts the 
season's first silverware. He toldHarlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru> TV: "It's not about 
favourites, they have got some energy from the London Welsh decision and they 
have some outstanding players. They have players like Andy Powell, James 
Gaskell, Johnny Leota in the centre – and Sam Tuitupou is coming back – and 
they play a style that is good to watch."

O'Shea wants his side to focus on their performance and let the result take 
care of itself. "We say to the players that it's not just about winning," he 
said. "We want to win – we are not stupid in that sense – and we are judged on 
results. But we know what gets results, and that's our performances. So we want 
to enjoy, put our game out there and see where it takes us."

O'Shea has rewarded the XV who saw off Bath 31-23 in last weekend's 
semi-finals by sticking with the same starting lineup. Sale, playing in their 
first major final since 2006, move Nick Macleod to full-back as Will Addison 
comes into the centre. Nathan Fowles gets the nod at scrum-half, while Alasdair 
Dickinson, Marc Jones and Tony Buckley start in the front row.
 