
• A counter-factual to raise Tory delegates' blood pressure. Who did Margaret 
Thatcher <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> ask to rescue 
her faltering campaign to remain PM after Michael Heseltine wounded her in 
November 1990? Me, Ken Clarke told the conference fringe on Monday. That may be 
news to her then-campaign manager, wily John Wakeham, but is why Clarke was the 
first cabinet minister to be summoned the night before she quit. No point, he 
said. That'sdefeatist, she replied. No, you'll be defeated, Ken countered.

• "There's no such thing as a free lunch," George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> reminds voters. As 
distinct from the chancellor's free opera tickets for Wagner. Yet the 
conference fringe is so competitive that most now provide crisps, fruit, 
baguettes, biscuits, even demon drink. Monday's "sustainable transport 
dialogue" even offered unsustainable sea bass.

• Some things don't change. When the wealthy Vestey family was found to have 
paid zilch tax for 60 years they were not once reproached at the 1980 Tory 
conference. For all their trumpeting of honest taxation for the rich, neither 
Osborne nor colleagues have yet found time at their 2012 bash to praise the 
financier David Harding. Who he? He paid 39% of his £84m income in tax last 
year without complaint.

• Given their hostility to coalition cuts ("Say Hullo to Dave, Say Goodbye to 
your police service", says another eye-catching conference poster), it was 
decent of the West Midlands force to lend their football pitch for their annual 
MPs vs Press match without first strewing glass. The MPs won 4-2 despite Jeremy 
(Own Goal) Hunt being a linesman.

• After that abortion gaffe, Hunt is busy cuddling the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>. On Monday the new health secretary 
raised morale among delegates with a chilly quote from epic Antarctic explorer 
Ernest Shackleton. "Men wanted for hazardous journey. Small wages. Bitter cold. 
Long months of complete darkness. Constant danger. Safe return doubtful. Honour 
and recognition in case of success." Thanks, Jezza, most encouraging.

• Good day: Margaret Thatcher: A one-second on-screen glimpse of her image 
generated the loudest applause of the conference so far.

• Bad day: Ann Widdecombe: She may now be a Catholic, but says she'd "die in 
the ditch" to save the CoE even though she'd not find many Anglican bishops in 
the ditch beside her. Then she remembered ex-Archbishop George Carey was 
sitting next to her. I didn't mean you, George. Of course not.
 