
Alastair Cook is confident Jimmy Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jimmy-anderson> will continue to be a force 
for England over the next two years after the fast bowler was ruled out of the 
fifth Test with India on fitness grounds.

Anderson, 34, has chiefly had an injury-free international career since making 
his debut in 2003 but with what Cook described as “body soreness” resulting in 
England’s record wicket-taker missing what would be his eighth Test out of the 
past 23, there is a sense time may be catching up on him.

England’s Ben Stokes: flare-ups are all part of cricket’s theatre | Ali Martin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/14/ben-stokes-england-india-fifth-test-chennai>
Cook, who is hopeful Stuart Broad will return to the side after missing the 
last two Tests with a foot tendon problem, admitted Anderson will need to have 
his workload managed more in the autumn of his career, with the stress fracture 
to his right shoulder blade that dogged his summer just one of the reasons for 
his latest omission.

“Unfortunately Jimmy’s been ruled out,” said Cook, whose side are 3-0 down 
going into Friday’s series finale. “He’s picked up some body soreness from the 
last game so he’s not going to be risked. It’s not worth the risk with him, 
especially with his past six months or so. When he’s been in this situation and 
we’ve played him he has picked up injuries, so this isn’t the right time to 
play him now.”

Asked if Anderson could get through the next couple of years, including seven 
Tests in eight weeks next summer against South Africa and West Indies, as well 
as the Ashes tour in the winter, Cook replied: “I’m very confident. And it’s 
not just about getting through, he can make a big contribution to English 
cricket over the next couple of years.

“I think we’re certainly going to have to manage him more than we have managed 
him in Test matches. That’s not in terms of when he plays but he might miss a 
couple more Test matches as a precaution just from what’s happened over the 
last six months.

“He’s a very athletic guy and he’s light on his body as a bowler. He’s not 
Andrew Flintoff. No disrespect, but he pounded his body when bowling. Jimmy’s 
obviously a lot lighter and he does have a lot less wear and tear. But over the 
last couple of months he’s picked up a niggle here and there and his shoulder 
put him out for a while.”

Selection has been made harder for this Test, with England having been unable 
to net at the Chepauk Stadium in the lead-up due to the practice pitches being 
damaged by the cyclone that hit the city on Monday.

The playing surface itself is largely unaffected, however, with Cook expecting 
it to turn and thus Liam Dawson, the left-arm spin-bowling all-rounder, could 
be in line for a debut. If Broad returns for Anderson, the seamer Chris Woakes 
may make way.

The England captain added: “This will be my 140th cap and I’ve never played in 
a Test when we haven’t had nets before. But you do have to remember what 
happened in the cyclone, when people lost their lives.

“So a net session the day before doesn’t seem quite as important after what 
people have gone through. Driving around you can see the devastation and it’s a 
real reminder of how lucky we are.”
 