
Last month, the Queen opened a handsome court complex on Fetter Lane in 
London. The Rolls Building houses a number of pre-existing courts dealing with 
chancery and construction cases and the like, making it, the Ministry of 
Justice says, "the largest specialist centre for the resolution of financial, 
business and property litigation anywhere in the world". Russian oligarchs 
Boris Berezovsky and Roman Abramovich are embroiled in a £5bn case there. If, 
as the MoJ hopes, other wealthy parties decide to thrash out their differences 
under English law, lawyers and the court should reap rich rewards.

Making London a desirable place for litigation is not in itself an unworthy 
aim, especially in austere times. But those seeking to resolve disputes of 
lesser moment – recovering unpaid wages, or persuading a landlord to fix a 
leaky roof – are about to find the process more costly, too. The justice 
minister wants to increase combined issue and hearing fees to between £400 and 
£1,500, regardless of the complainant's means. He intends to withdraw legal aid 
for a swath of civil cases, including alleged cases of clinical negligence 
involving children, a cut that even Lord Tebbit finds problematic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/dec/22/conflict-over-legal-aid-bill-lords>
. Magistrates courts are being merged, increasing the cost of getting to court 
(and magistrates' travel expenses). On top of this, the Ministry of Justice 
publisheda study 
<http://www.justice.gov.uk/publications/policy/moj/post-legislative-scrutiny-foi.htm>
 last month recommending that Freedom of Information requests should attract a 
fee: a small blow to the principle of openness.

The justice secretary rightly points out that most cases are better settled 
out of court, and says he wants to support Citizens Advice bureaux – though 
their long-term funding is uncertain. Pro bono helps, but take-up of 
frustrating and less glamorous work can be low, especially when lawyers work 
long hours. How else to fill the gap? The MoJ has great hopes for the 
deregulation of the legal profession (so-called "Tesco law" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/mar/25/tesco-law-alternative-business-structures>
), which should drive down the cost of a consulting a lawyer. The Bar Council 
is keen on "contingent legal aid funds": a funding pool into which successful 
claimants would pay back some of their awards, with lawyers paid no matter who 
won. Who would manage the pool and decide which cases deserved to go to court? 
Some City firms will spot an opportunity, but they favour big business over 
individuals. The fact that until 1968 it was a criminal offence for 
disinterested parties to try to profit from funding others' litigation is a 
warning. But not-for-profit funds could help. If his bill goes through, Ken 
Clarke should stop implying that lawyers act purely out of self-interest and 
listen to their ideas for helping non-oligarchs to secure justice.
 