
Is it possible to paint a formica worktop? Our kitchen worktop is a 
granite-effect design on formica. Is there anything I can use to paint or cover 
it rather than going to the expense of replacing it?
Karen Gibson

The simple answer is yes, you can paint it, but it won't be hardwearing and 
may scratch or flake off in time. If you wish to go ahead you must first 
thoroughly clean the surface with a water-soluble cleaner. Next, give the 
surface a key by rubbing it down with an abrasive paper or wire wool. Clean off 
all the dust, and then paint with either an alkyd resin, polyurethane or 
epoxide resin paint. But if you think this doesn't sound like the most lovely 
surface to be preparing food on, you'd be right. In my mind money saved on 
painting this work surface does not justify introducing toxic chemicals into a 
food preparation area. For affordable timber work surfaces see
www.worktops.uk.com <http://www.worktops.uk.com>.

I need to fit a mantelpiece between a modern gas fire and a modern flat-screen 
TV. The main reason for the mantelpiece is to deflect the rising heat from the 
fire away from the TV. Birch is the preferred option to match the room decor, 
but would it survive the heat? Would it be possible to protect the underneath 
with metal? And if so, could the metal be concealed?
Graham Rogers

As a trained fire-eater I learnt to my peril that one shouldn't take issues of 
heat and flame lightly. Happily my hair has now grown back, but you should be 
aware of the manufacturer's temperature operating limits for your widescreen, 
and carefully measure the temperature in the location you plan to hang it. 
Fitting a metallic back plate to the fire may help kick more of the heat 
forward, but a metal sheet fixed to the soffit of your mantel may just scorch 
the timber as metal conducts heat so readily. My advice would be to consider a 
plaster or stone mantel (seewww.theplasterwarehouse.co.uk 
<http://www.theplasterwarehouse.co.uk> for a wide selection) which will act as 
a heat sink, and won't burn, scorch or melt. Then just sit back and enjoy the 
widescreen without it slowly becoming a molten sticky mess.

· If you have a decorating/design question for Oliver, email 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
 