
The combination of murder and libraries – such a cliche of detective fiction 
thatAgatha Christie <https://www.theguardian.com/books/agathachristie> has a 
character declare: “bodies are always being found in libraries in books” – 
continues to tighten its grip on the nation’s library-goers, with all but one 
of the top 10 most borrowed books last year a murder mystery.

Lee Child’s peripatetic hero Jack Reacher is on the hunt for a killer who has 
taken a shot at the French president in Personal, the year’s most borrowed 
title, new figures from Public Lending Right (PLR) reveal. In Never Go Back, 
the second most popular book for the UK’s library-goers, Reacher is accused of 
a historical homicide. A mix of death and destruction from authors including 
Peter Robinson, Robert Galbraith – the pseudonym for JK Rowling – andJames 
Patterson <https://www.theguardian.com/books/james-patterson> help fill out 
PLR’s top 10 most borrowed titles.
100 most borrowed tables chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1A8usgOIbDhMdaxEv2luFoD6itvMqNitticxCsQglGoM>
Gillian Flynn’s tale of a darkly dysfunctional marriage, Gone Girl, is in 
seventh place, with the first non-crime novel to appear, Jeff Kinney’s comic 
children’s novel Diary of a Wimpy Kid, in 10th. When only adult titles are 
considered, all of the top 10 are crime and thrillers, with Ian Rankin’s Saints 
of the Shadow Bible now finding a place.

“Overall, crime fiction and thrillers are hugely popular with UK library 
borrowers,” said PLR, which tracks borrowing around the UK. Established by act 
of parliament in 1979, PLR gives authors the right to payment from the 
government each time their books are loaned through the public system.

According to PLR, in the year to June 2015, American thriller writer Patterson 
was the most-borrowed author from UK libraries overall, with an astonishing 10 
novels in PLR’s top 100 most borrowed titles list. This marks Patterson’s ninth 
year running in the top spot. MC Beaton, author of the Agatha Raisin crime 
novels, was in fifth, and Child in ninth.

Agatha Christie herself also makes PLR’s list as the third most borrowed 
classic author, behind Roald Dahl in first place, and Enid Blyton in second. 
The queen of crime’s most popular novel was not, disappointingly, The Body in 
the Library, in which a corpse is found in the library of Colonel and Mrs 
Bantry. Instead, borrowers plumped for Hercule Poirot and the Greenshore Folly.

Along with the UK’s predilection for thrillers, the new PLR figures reveal the 
popularity of children’s fiction in libraries, with five children’s writers in 
the list of the top 10 most borrowed authors. Julia Donaldson, author of The 
Gruffalo, is in second place overall, behind Patterson, with Rainbow Magic 
brand Daisy Meadows in third, and Horrid Henry creator Francesca Simon in 
fourth. All four saw their books loaned more than 1m times in the year ending 
June 2015.

Comedian and children’s author David Walliams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-walliams> has also shot up the 
charts, now the 41st most borrowed author, up from 157th place in 2012. PLR 
noted that his book Awful Auntie was the most borrowed title in libraries in 
Northern Ireland.

“What fantastic taste the children of Northern Ireland have,” said Walliams in 
response to the news. “I am beyond delighted.Libraries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/libraries> are vital for children and adults 
to discover a wide variety of books. Long may they live.”

The PLR figures reveal intriguing regional variations: the nation’s favourite 
cookery book was Jamie Oliver’s Save With Jamie – except for Northern Ireland, 
where borrowers plumped forMary Berry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/mary-berry> Cooks the Perfect. Berry was 
also the nation’s most borrowed non-fiction author overall.

When it came to books about the home, Andy Blackwell’s Home Plumbing Manual 
proved popular in Scotland and the south east, while in the south west and 
eastern regions, borrowers were taking out Ian Rock’s Home Extension Manual.

And although the most borrowed humour title overall was Matt Groening’s Bart 
Simpson: Big Shot!, borrowers in the south east went for Jeremy Clarkson’s Is 
It Really Too Much To Ask? while Welsh library visitors preferred Richard 
Porter’s Top Gear Epic Failures.

This year’s lending figures also included audiobooks for the first time, with 
Lesley Pearse’s saga Without a Trace in top spot, ahead of a number of 
children’s titles, from Rowling’s Harry Potter audiobooks to Walliams’s Demon 
Dentist and Ratburger.

Funded by the Department for Culture, Media and Sport through the British 
Library, Public Lending Right will this month pay out £6m to 22,347 authors, 
illustrators, photographers, editors and narrators, at a rate of 7.67 pence per 
loan. Authors can receive a maximum of £6,600 from PLR, with 202 authors making 
that amount this year.

Despite the popularity of crime, Catherine Cookson remains the UK’s most 
borrowed author over the last 20 years, according to PLR, with her books 
borrowed more than 32m times between 1995 and 2015. Danielle Steel is in second 
place in the 20-year list, and Patterson in third.
 