
 Think of an artist, and you'll probably think of someone working in just one 
genre: a musician, perhaps, or a sculptor. Arts lovers often categorise 
themselves in the same way: they might be interested in opera, but not the 
visual arts; dance, but not film. However, the arts are broader than that: 
artists use their talents in a variety of ways within one discipline, but also 
engage in collaborations with others.

One popular collaborative combination is between visual and performance 
artists. Choreographer Michael Clarke worked with artist Sarah Lucas on staging 
his new dance Before and After: The Fall, which was performed at Sadler's Wells 
in October. The celebrity of these two artists ensured press coverage, but less 
well publicised was a collaborative project between Jerwood Award-winning 
choreographer Carol Brown and installation artist Esther Rolinson.

Their piece, Machine for Living, was performed in November at the Greenwich 
Dance Agency, a charity whose motto is "bringing dance into the community". 
Conceived from the outset as installation theatre, the piece is designed for a 
mobile audience, who are invited to move at will around the central floor-level 
"stage", which gives the audience greater visual and emotional access to the 
performance.

Rolinson's installation, consisting of 13 variously sized panels of punched 
steel - a material that will be familiar to anyone waiting for a train who has 
observed the metal seating on the railway platform - stretches from floor to 
ceiling, intermittently obscuring and framing the five dancers. "Machine for 
Living is about human architecture," says Rolinson, "how a person buffs against 
a structure and how that structure breaks the body."

Installation art is perfectly suited to the descriptive function it plays for 
performance art, complementing and augmenting a theme. It also becomes more 
accessible to an audience who may be left cold by an installation in an art 
gallery.

For Brown and Rolinson, collaboration means that their own understanding of 
different modes of expression is broadened. "Esther and I make each other think 
differently about space," says Brown. "I fill a space but Esther thinks about 
clearing it. We ask how we want people to feel watching the performance and try 
to represent the polarities between stillness and movement."

Installation artists are not normally associated with non-visual media, but 
complete dissolution of the boundaries between performance and the visual arts 
can be achieved. The collaboration of the late Juan Muñoz - whose Double Blind 
installation is currently in the Turbine Hall at Tate Modern - and British 
composer Gavin Bryars in 1992 resulted in A Man in a Room Gambling. Inspired by 
the BBC Radio 4 shipping forecasts, it consists of a series of 10 musical 
interludes, written to be broadcast on radio in five-minute sections. Muñoz's 
voice becomes part of the score as he describes how to cheat at cards, thus 
linking to his own visual medium.

Bryars's collaborations with artists are not always so oblique. The function 
of his work with the painter James Hugonin, for example, is to mirror the 
artist's aesthetic. He composes music to complement Hugonin's work, and has 
written The North Shore, The Island Chapel and From Mina Harker's Journal for 
his exhibitions. In these pieces, Bryars makes musical references to the 
subject matter and the subtle layers and shift of patterns in Hugonin's 
paintings, creating a symbiosis of the visual and aural.

The collaborative nature of the visual and performing arts is both natural 
and, in the case of stage performance, necessary. In turn, the stage provides 
both a literal and metaphorical platform for the artist. David Hockney's 
designs for opera and ballet, with which he has been involved since the 1970s, 
are well known and Hockney's iconography has become available to theatre 
audiences who may not have otherwise been exposed to his oeuvre. Paradoxically, 
this stream of his work has now completed full circle, re-entering his home 
turf of the formal art gallery in an exhibition, Stages, currently at Salts 
Mill in Yorkshire.

Eight of the operas and ballets with which Hockney has been involved are 
represented in the exhibition. There are designs for stage and costume, while 
four of the opera sets have been recreated. One of them is Erik Satie's Parade 
(Metropolitan Opera House, New York, 1981), a ballet which itself has an 
impressive cross-genre collaborative lineage. Diaghilev commissioned it from 
Jean Cocteau in 1917, and Cocteau enlisted the talents of two of his friends, 
Satie and Picasso, for the score and staging.

Cocteau was one of the great polymaths of the 20th century, and is best known 
for his films, which include La Belle et la Bête and Orphée. A medium that has 
assumed growing importance in the 20th century, film is now arguably the most 
widely accessible art form. From the beginning, artists and writers famous in 
their own right have been hired to work in the movies, reaching new audiences. 
Salvador Dali created the designs for the dream sequences in Hitchcock's 1945 
psychological thriller Spellbound, while writers involved on film scripts 
include luminaries such as PG Wodehouse, William Faulkner and Raymond Chandler.

Just as artists and theatre directors began to work in film as technology 
evolved, so film directors are now working in other art forms. Danish radical 
movie-maker Lars von Trier, director of Breaking the Waves, The Idiots and 
Dancer in the Dark, will stage Wagner's epic Ring Cycle at the Bayreuth 
Festival in 2006, following in the filmmaker-turned-impresario footsteps of his 
hero, Werner Herzog.

Many filmmakers, of course, start life in theatre and continue to adapt their 
talents to both media. British all-rounder Sam Mendes and Australian Baz 
Luhrmann are two contemporary examples. Luhrmann, director of the film Moulin 
Rouge, is staging La Bohème on Broadway in Spring 2002, a decade after he first 
mounted it at the Australian Opera in Sydney. His Broadway producers are in no 
doubt that he will repeat his earlier stage success and introduce opera to a 
new young audience, just as he did in Sydney and again in his 1995 film version 
of Puccini's classic.

This cross-fertilisation bodes well for opera, but classical music needs 
inventive marketing to appeal to a high-speed soundbite generation. Classical 
record companies need the young audience and are trying to popularise their 
artists through collaboration and crossover. The acclaimed countertenor Andreas 
Scholl has just released an album of folksongs, Wayfaring Stranger, while 
classical violinist Kennedy has recorded Hendrix and Doors covers. Elvis 
Costello has produced an album with mezzo Sofie von Otter, while Freddy 
Mercury's Barcelona, the theme tune of the 1992 Barcelona Olympics, brought 
opera diva Montserrat Caballe to a new audience.

The more you look, the more one thing becomes clear: the classification that 
separates the arts is a flimsy wall, as easy to dismantle as a painted stage 
prop at the end of a performance.
 