
Would you help pay for a book to be published that features tales from mums 
caring for children with life-limiting conditions? This is one of thousands of 
crowdfunding projects seeking funds. Lives Worth Living is asking for £7,500 on 
website Crowdfunder to cover costs. In return, you receive a copy of the book 
or even a page dedication, depending on the amount.

The phenomenon of crowdfunding is booming. You can stake from just £10 to 
emulate the likes of Duncan Bannatyne by becoming a "mini-dragon", backing an 
ever-expanding range of ventures from theatre productions to electronic gizmos. 
A musical production of The Wind in the Willows is among thousands of projects 
taking part in the trend, raising £1m earlier this year.

But as this craze gains momentum, what are the risks? A wide range of websites 
have sprung up bringing investors together with projects seeking a cash 
injection.

The Crowdfunding <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/crowdfunding> Centre 
said more than £3,500 per hour is being raised in the UK. Since the beginning 
of 2014, more than 6,561 projects have been launched.

In return for your investment you may be offered a tangible "reward", such as 
tickets to a gig or a T-shirt, an equity stake in the business – or even a 
share in a buy-to-let.

Typically, crowdfunding websites benefit by taking a percentage commission of 
money raised, at an average of 5%, alongside – sometimes – a slice of returns 
paid to investors. So check the fine print.

The House Crowd says its participants can put from £1,000 down on a buy-to-let 
property to receive a guaranteed 6% net return per year plus a share of profits 
on sale. Alternatively, they can opt for a fixed return of 7.5% net a year with 
no equity in the property. A typical property currently listed is a two-bedroom 
terrace house in Moston, Manchester, valued at £68,000 after refurbishment.

Experts warn that investors should check crowdfunding site credentials 
carefully. Property expert Henry Pryor says: "There are many new opportunities 
and the vast majority will be bonefide operations but potential investors 
should check just who or what they are before they hand over their money.

"I fear that we are going to find a significant number of hooky sites that 
will promise you the world, take your money and leave you feeling very stupid."

The majority of the sites offer warnings stating that investors risk losing 
their cash if new ventures fail, typically via an online questionnaire. 
However, some check enterprises more extensively than others.

Since April, the sector has been regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority. 
It says this should stop crowdfunding websites running off with your cash, but 
it won't prevent a small business you've backed from failing. Christopher 
Woolard, director of policy, risk and research at the FCA, says: "We want to 
ensure that consumers are appropriately protected – but not prevented from 
investing. The rules provide consumer protection while allowing businesses to 
continue to have access to this innovative method of funding."

Here we look at some of the projects on offer.

Music, art and films 

Kickstarter, which originated in the US, offers a massive range of 
reward-based projects. It opened its doors to British investors in October 2012.

The Observer found a staggering 3,381 projects seeking funding, ranging from 
mobile phone apps and circus performances, to an "eco" magazine for kids. It 
lists the percentage of the total amount sought that has been pledged so far, 
and how many days there are left to invest.

A project has to reach its goal before the deadline, or no money changes 
hands, and less than 50% make it. The minimum pledge is usually £1 or $1. 
However, beware that the site "does not investigate a creator's ability to 
complete their project".

Among those projects listed as successfully funded is a truck offering "Good & 
Proper" tea to Londoners. This asked for £10 or more in return for a bag of 
tea, to free hire of the van for a party or wedding if you could stretch to 
£1,000. It sought a total of £10,000, and successfully raised £14,682.

Energy

Among the sites that target green–energy are Trillion Fund and Abundance. 
Trillion Fund launched a new crowdfunding platform last week that enables 
people to lend directly to renewable energy projects from £50, in return for an 
income. Typical returns on the site range from 3%-9%, with terms ranging from 
three to 20 years. Rebecca O'Connor of Trillion Fund says: "Loan-based 
renewable energy crowdfunds have more in common with bonds than with equity 
crowdfunds, because they can come with fixed interest rates over a few years."

"Buying an equity stake in an early stage start-up is considered more risky 
than lending against an operational wind project, for example, because, with 
the latter, there is historical performance and revenue data. The amount of 
energy – and therefore revenue – that solar panels and wind turbines generate 
is relatively predictable, which means funders have a sensible idea of what 
their returns will be."

Abundance has crowdfunded £6m of projects so far, with a mix of wind and solar 
energy in the UK. You can invest as little as £5. You buy debentures, similar 
to IOUs and, in return, you are paid a share of the profits from generating 
green energy. The site has three projects open for investment offering a range 
of fixed and variable returns over 20 years of between 6.75% and 9%.

For example, Engynious Schools is seeking £1m to share ownership and returns 
with private investors from solar panels it owns on 19 schools across the UK. 
On average, an investor places about £5,800 across three or more projects, 
according to founder Bruce Davis.

Small businesses/start-ups 

There is a large range of sites.InvestingZone was launched in May 2013, and 
offers a stake in some early-stage companies. It says it only allows people to 
invest if they understand the risks.

SyndicateRoom, another newer entrant, offers users the chance to "top up" 
large stakes in a business that have been bought by established investors.

Seedrs and Crowdcube are among the well-established, both offering a minimum 
investment of £10. Seedrs rasies an average of £1m each month for start-ups 
that are struggling to get off the ground, and says it is up to the investor 
whether they are happy to take the risk on a business they hope will succeed.

Some high-profile figures are joining the crowdfunding throng. Fund manager 
Nicola Horlick attracted £150,000 in just one day last year through Seedrs 
towards fund management firm Glentham Capital. This success prompted her to 
launch Money&Co, a crowdfunding website with risk ratings for each business 
seeking funding.

Among other sites, Peoplefund.itand Crowdfunder feature creative enterprises 
seeking backing in return for rewards. On Indiegogo, you can put money towards 
political campaigns, humanitarian projects and technology start-ups. Buzzbnk 
and CrowdBnk also include a variety of projects, from charities to many other 
businesses.

Some sites are more niche. For example, unbound is a crowdfunding website and 
a publisher, while MoolaHoop exclusively lists business ventures from female 
entrepreneurs.
 