
We’ve all heard about the obvious mistakes which you’re told not to make on 
your CV, such as spelling or grammar, but there are some other things which can 
lead to the door closing before you’ve even put your foot in.Here’s a list of 
what to avoid:

Listing objectives and what you’re looking for

Here’s the type of thing many people write in their CV:


“As an experienced X I’m looking for a job which gives me a challenge and will 
allow me to further my career”.


Stating this is all well and good. However, by applying for the job you’re 
explicitly stating your interest in the role. There is no need to write such a 
statement, because it can actually have the opposite effect. What if the 
manager thinks that the role isn’t particularly challenging? Or the job doesn’t 
allow for career progression? You’re ruling yourself out of the job by default 
with such statements. Instead, write about what makes you fantastic because 
that’s what the hiring manager is going to want to read.


Paragraphs (other than in the opening profile)

There should be no paragraphs in your CV. Managers scan CVs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/cv> before actually deciding to read them. 
Time is of the essence for any hiring manager – they don’t want to trawl 
through a CV where the career history looks like the world’s most underwhelming 
autobiography. They want the information quick and fast. So don’t write an 
eight line paragraph about your job – instead break up it up into bullet 
points, with each one being no more than two lines long.


Separate responsibilities and achievement headings in career history

Remember managers hate reading CVs just as much as you hate writing them. So 
now imagine a manager scanning through your résumé – if they see the 
achievements section their eyes are automatically going to be drawn to it. Now 
you might think that’s a good thing, isn’t it? I’m sorry to be the bearer of 
bad news, but it isn’t. That’s because they’re just going to be focusing on 
your achievements without grasping the correct context in which they were made.

'Results-driven thought leader' – the top CV cliches to avoid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/feb/18/a-results-driven-thought-leader-the-cliches-that-kill-your-cv>
For example, say your achievement was to turnaround a small business within a 
market which was on the decline and managed to generate £100,000 annual net 
profit. If the manager doesn’t understand the context, to them it might not 
seem like an impressive achievement. It’s important for the employer to know 
the full picture in order to appreciate the value of your achievement.


Therefore don’t separate these sections within your career history, instead 
merge them. A sub-heading called “responsibilities and achievements” will do. 
This allows the reader to get a better understanding of the correct context of 
what you achieved and how amazing it was.


Including full references

No one is going to contact your referees prior to you being offered the job. 
Unless it’s someone from a recruitment agency fishing for leads from your 
former boss. So just put “references available on request”.


Stating salary or reason for leaving

If you’re stating your salary you’re putting yourself in a more difficult 
negotiation position, because they know that you’d happily move for less. While 
previously they were willing to offer up to £5,000, now they’re thinking: “We 
can just offer £1,000 to £2,000” and you’ll accept.

With reason for leaving it’s similar. You’re bringing up an issue that doesn’t 
need bringing up. It’s a bit like pointing out that you dropped mayonnaise on 
your white shirt in the office, even though no one noticed. If they want to 
know the reason, let them bring it up – your job is to ensure your CV focuses 
on the positives and not things which could possibly have a negative impact.

Farhan Raja is a trainer and career coach <http://jobinterviewology.com/>

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 