
There are moments during the Hartpury Festival of Dressage 
<http://www.hartpury.ac.uk/dressage/> when the horses look as if they are 
genuinely dancing. With their tightly plaited manes and long ballerina necks, 
they perform tightly controlled pirouettes and piaffes with impressive finesse; 
they float across the arena with a silken stride that is like a horsey grand 
jeté.

There are moments, too, during this Gloucestershire event, when the 
relationship between the animals and their riders seems as intimately and 
rhythmically attuned as a human pas de deux. But I'm disappointed to discover 
that competition dressage doesn't include the most dancerly of the moves – the 
showy caprioles and levades ("airs above the ground") that are the trademark of 
outfits such as the Spanish Riding School in Vienna. And while I can appreciate 
the nuances of gait, rhythm and floor pattern that these horses and riders have 
to master, to my untutored eye, one competing pair starts to look very like 
another.

Except, that is, in the para-equestrian freestyle event. This category can 
include riders with cerebral palsy, blindness, or those who have lost one or 
even both legs: and the compensating ways in which they handle their horses 
bring as much physical expression to the event as the music to which their 
dressage moves have been choreographed.

James Dwyer is a stocky Irishman, whose leg was amputated after he developed 
cancer: and when he rides he has to use his torso vey dynamically, leaning 
sideways or backwards to recalibrate his balance.

Sophie Wells <http://www.sophiewells.com/>, 22, is one of Britain's most 
successful para competitors. She was born withAmniotic Band Syndrome 
<http://amnioticbandsyndrome.com/>, which left her with extensive nerve damage 
in her lower legs, loss of feeling and movement in her feet, and several 
fingers missing – disabilities that ought to make a rider's co-ordination and 
balance very difficult. Yet Wells, for whom London will be a first Paralympics, 
says she has felt an affinity with horses since she was a child: "They're so 
intelligent and sensitive."

She was two when she first got on a pony; seven when she had her first riding 
lesson. But Wells found it difficult to make progress: "Because I couldn't hold 
the reins properly, when I started jumping fences I kept falling off."

Dressage, which she started aged 10, proved the ideal alternative. She could 
use special looped reins that hooked over one finger, and careful training at 
the gym allowed her to develop compensatory core strength. She's good enough 
now to compete in able-bodied events. But what's tough for Wells is the 
unpredictable nature of her condition. On bad days, the damage in her legs can 
trigger such cramps and loss of power that she can't walk. And while she can 
depend on her horses to look after her – "they're amazing, they can sense what 
mood you're in as soon as you get on" – she's not permitted any change in the 
classification of her disability: Wells has to remain at level four (the most 
able-bodied) even when her condition ought to place her in competition with 
less able-bodied riders.

But while winning matters, performing is as important. "In freestyle," Wells 
explains, "when you've got the right music and you're in rhythm with your 
horse, it's great. Yyou really do feel as though you're dancing. For most 
paras, riding is a way of expressing yourself, and the journey you've been on 
to overcome your disability. It's wonderful to be on a horse: to feel so free, 
and be good at something other people can't do."Sophie Wells's cultural life

Films: "I hate anything violent, or bad. So I prefer so rom-coms and re-runs 
of Friends."

Books: Too tired to read anything but dressage books.

Music: Ed Sheeran and Hans Zimmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jul/29/inception-soundtrack-edith-piaf>
, a film composer whose music Wells frequently uses in her freestyle routines.
 