
Dawn Airey started at ITV on Monday. Did you send flowers? She's been on 
gardening leave so long she's probably sick of the sight of them.

There was no fanfare over the arrival of ITV's new director of global content, 
who in April quit new media venture Iostar in only her first week there. Maybe 
ITV wanted to wait until Dawn's first week was over before shouting about it.

Since she started on Monday, we've been distracted by ITV ownership issues. 
But Airey's arrival and bulging in-tray are a vital part of the future shape of 
ITV.

Having her as cheerleader for ITV Productions will boost morale and, ITV 
hopes, revenue. She has a £200m war chest to shore up ITV's content through 
acquisitions - which executive chairman Michael Grade recognises is key to the 
network.

It seems like only yesterday the world and his dog wanted ITV Productions 
flogged off. But imagine if ITV didn't own Coronation Street or Emmerdale in 
the world of digital switchover and web television. Grade realises production 
and owning content is a crucial part of ITV's future.

ITV insiders are expecting reshuffles and departures and a new development 
unit to coincide with Airey's arrival.

When it comes to acquisitions, the rumours are flying as to which independent 
producers ITV has on its wish list.

Harry Hill's TV Burp producer Avalon is one name being bandied around. So is 
Optomen, producer of Kitchen Nightmares and Mary Queen of Shops.

Midsomer Murders's ultimate owner All3Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media> is another - though it is likely 
to be too pricey: it was valued last year at £320m including debt. ITV is 
thought to be looking at companies more around the £10m to £50m mark.

However, the fact that All3Media chairman Sir Bob Phillis stepped down 
yesterday from the ITV board over a potential conflict of interest has prompted 
more speculation.

Of course the conflict of interest could be that ITV is be looking at some of 
the same acquisitions as All3Media.

Another dampener on speculation about All3Media is what would happen to the 
company's shows on other channels - such as Objective's Peep Show and Company's 
Shameless and Skins?

In practice it works fine for ITV Productions to have customers outside the 
network - Granada made The Royle Family for the BBC, after all - but rival 
channels still balk at having their shows made by rivals.

But it would make great copy if All3Media - or part of it - did get snapped up 
by ITV - giving the last laugh to the company's founders: former ITV and 
Granada executives Steve Morrison, Jules Burns and David Liddiment.
 