
Deborah Rogers, who has died aged 76, was widely considered to be one of the 
most influential literary agents of her generation. A month before her death, 
on being given the 2014 London Book Fair lifetime achievement award, which 
singled out her talent for identifying, developing and supporting authors, she 
responded, "It's been a lifetime of indulgence. I've done what I've loved."

The list of her clients reads like a history of English-language fiction from 
the 1970s to the present day: fromAngela Carter 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/obituaries/5899665/Angela-Carter.html> to 
Bruce Chatwin, Salman Rushdie to Peter Carey, Ian McEwan to Kazuo Ishiguro, AS 
Byatt to Thomas Keneally, JG Farrell to Anita Desai, David Malouf toMordecai 
Richler <https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/jul/05/guardianobituaries.books>
. It was her taste and judgment that helped define the writing of the era. The 
start of her agenting career almost exactly coincided with the launch of the 
Booker (now Man Booker) prize in 1969. In the four decades that followed, she 
witnessed her authors carry off the prize on six occasions, more winners than 
via any other agent.

Although she was to represent historians and biographers (among them Jenny 
Uglow, David Kynaston, Orlando Figes and, at the very beginning, Michael 
Glenny, translator of Bulgakov's The Master and Margarita), fiction was to 
become her calling card. Publishers on both sides of the Atlantic, notably Tom 
Maschler, of Jonathan Cape, and, in New York, Bob Gottlieb, later of Knopf and 
the New Yorker, were quick to recognise her talent for bringing only the best 
authors to their attention.

Rogers was one of six children of Guy Rogers and his second wife Stella, an 
actor. Although Deborah was born at her parents' London home in Thurloe Square, 
South Kensington, the Rogers bought a farm in Knighton in the Welsh Marches and 
in later years Deborah had a cottage there, where she kept sheep. (One of 
Deborah's sisters, Sue, also worked as an agent and married Michael Bond, the 
creator of Paddington Bear.) She was educated at Hatherop Castle school, near 
Cirencester, and then at the Triangle secretarial college in London. Her first 
job was as a secretary at the Institute of Brewing.

Her publishing career began in New York with Sterling Lord, agent to Jack 
Kerouac. Back in London she struck lucky by landing a job with the eponymous 
literary agency run by Peter Janson-Smith, whose authors included Eric Ambler, 
Gavin Maxwell, Ian Fleming andAnthony Burgess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthonyburgess>. In 1967 she launched 
Deborah Rogers Ltd with Burgess as one of her first clients. In his memoirs, 
Burgess recalled her as: "A young woman of good family and considerable blonde 
beauty."

Her time in New York paid off as she began to represent American agents in 
London, including such distinguished names as Lynn Nesbit,Candida Donadio 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2001/01/25/arts/candida-donadio-71-agent-who-handled-catch-22-dies.html>
, Maxine Groffsky, Melanie Jackson and the New York agency ICM. This brought 
her into contact with some of the great American novelists of the period, 
Thomas Pynchon and Joseph Heller among them, whose books she sold in Britain. 
At the time she was also not shy of lower-brow offerings, including tie-ins 
with the television drama Upstairs, Downstairs and a series of "Confession" 
novels – of a Window Cleaner, of a Driving Instructor etc – by Christopher Wood 
(writing as Timothy Lea).

In the 80s she had to rethink her business when a number of authors (including 
Rushdie and Chatwin) quit, attracted by Andrew Wylie, whose New York agency was 
proving a magnet. Persuading Gill Coleridge to join her from the Anthony Sheil 
agency, she renamed the firmRogers, Coleridge and White 
<http://www.rcwlitagency.com> (Pat White was an early colleague) and returned 
to doing what she knew best, representing her authors. At the time of winning 
the lifetime achievement award it was her writers she singled out. "Those who 
have entrusted their work to us over the years will never know the intense 
pride that they have brought, and the anticipation and excitement that greets 
each new manuscript never palls. I have them to thank most of all."

Visitors to her office, where manuscripts were stacked untidily on every 
surface, marvelled that she could ever find anything. She could be judgmental, 
once memorably describing a publisher as being "as useful as a moist paper 
bag", but her keen sense of humour helped, she said, in dealing with authors 
and editors. She believed passionately in her clients; her interest not ending 
simply with making a deal. She would fight their corner, always determined to 
keep publishers up to scratch.

For many years she was on the Man Booker prize advisory committee, in 
particular helping to guide it towards the setting up of the international 
prize, inaugurated in 2005, for an author's long-term achievement. She had no 
time for those who complained one year when a Booker judge was criticised for 
wanting "readability" and novels that "zip along". The phrasing, she said, may 
have been unfortunate, but readability was important and the shortlist for the 
year in question also introduced her to writers hitherto unknown to her.

Ishiguro, who presented Rogers with the lifetime achievement award last month, 
and who was her client for 34 years, mentioned a delightful "eccentric quality" 
in her makeup. Ishiguro recalled Carter telling him that Deborah loved kitsch. 
"Even now," he said, "I never walk past a junk shop without thinking of 
Deborah, and Angela's advice," he said.

In 1979 she married the composer Michael Berkeley (now Lord Berkeley of 
Knighton). He survives her, along with their daughter, Jessica.

• Deborah Jane Rogers, literary agent, born 6 April 1938; died 30 April 2014
 