
Monkey goes to the What the Papers Say Awards
Presenter of ITV1's The Sunday Edition and Observer columnist Andrew Rawnsley 
needs to brush up on his popular culture. Andrew was master of ceremonies at 
the 50th What The Papers Say Awards but obviously hasn't been watching enough 
ITV1 shows. Talking about I'm a Celebrity, Get Me Out of Here! star David Gest, 
Andrew pronounced his surname 'Jest'. Monkey wouldn't mind, but I'm a Celebrity 
did average around 7.9 million viewers, only about 40 times more viewers than 
The Sunday Edition.

With friends like these
Host Rawnsley added some suggestions for new awards categories. They included 
wallchart of the year and DVD of the year. Referring to guest speaker, former 
Liberal Democrat leaderCharles Kennedy, he told him to "relax and unwind ... 
you're among friends". But he disproved that point a few minutes later during a 
story about the News of the World's scoop about Lib Dem MP Mark Oaten and rent 
boys. Rawnsley recalled that Oaten's response to a rent boy saying he had seen 
him on the TV was: "I must have a double." Andrew added: "They were just the 
sort of words that got Charles into trouble." Oooh, Monkey's sides.

We've got that on film
Boris "pyramid of piffle" Johnson drew one of the biggest laughs of the awards 
with his contribution to a short film to mark the 50th anniversary of the 
awards. "If you dish it out, you've got to take it", declared Boris. "Happy 
Christmas!"

Desmond spells it out
Perhaps Richard Desmond should have employed some of his over-worked 
sub-editors to proof the Northern & Shell official Christmas card. Featuring a 
grinning Rupert the Bear on the front, it also boasts a list of all the 
charities the company has helped this year - one of the longest lists you will 
ever see crammed onto one piece of card. But it is littered with spelling 
errors and some are mentioned more than once. The Al Fayed Charitable 
Foundation is listed, along with Al-Fayed [sic] Charitable Foundation. The 
Gentleman's night out [sic] Ltd gets a mention, as does Gentlemens Night Out 
(Monkey doesn't know what it does either). Other glaring errors include: 
Leukemia Research Fund; Multiple Solerosis Children's Appeal; Lets Face It; 
Community Securiy Trust; Rainbow Family Trust Millenium Account; and The 
holocast educational trust. The list reads like an NCTJ subbing test. But the 
worst offender must surely be the spelling of the Muscular Dystropy Campain.

Loving Standard
The Evening Standard brought a whole new dimension to the story of the 
government's £275,000 campaign to teach Bulgarians and Romanians how to get 
legal jobs in the UK. The paper'swebsite 
<http://www.thisislondon.co.uk/news/article-23378335-details/Government+spends+£275%2C000+on+campaign+to+teach+migrants+how+to+get+legal+jobs/article.do>
 quoted one Home Office official explaining: 'We want to alert them to what 
they can expect. Wages may be higher here, but so are the costs of loving.' 
Tell us about it.

Starkey reality
Is Dr David Starkey a good choice as permanent chairman of More4's The Last 
Word - now retitled Starkey's Last Word? Some have noted the former LSE 
lecturer's tendency to treat his guests as undergraduates (occasionally bright 
though, naturally, not as bright as he), often adopting the raised arm and 
pointed finger when picking out a guest, a technique reminiscent of the lecture 
hall. He is also capable of a savage donnish putdown as when he told Mail on 
Sunday columnist Peter Hitchens (University of York as against Starkey's 
Cambridge): "As someone who is half-educated, don't patronise me - it's 
annoying." Hitchens, for once, was left speechless. Should the show be renamed 
"Starkey's First Word - and Last Word".

Party line
BBC staffers should keep an eye on TV news supremo Peter Horrocks at their 
Christmas party at the Hayward Gallery tonight. Horrocks has sent out a 
three-line whip to senior news executives that they will be expected to attend 
and, even more, get into the party spirit. His email states: "They [junior 
staff] especially like it if we [senior staff] make a fool of ourselves. I 
intend to be leading the way."

Bland commentary
Michael Grade's defection to ITV won the admiration of one of his predecessors 
as BBC chairman,Sir Christopher Bland, who described it at the time as "an 
inspired appointment". "Michael has only another month to do as chairman of the 
BBC, which is a great job," he added. Thereafter, on 1 January, he was about to 
become chairman of the trust - a much less interesting job which frankly 
wouldn't have suited his temperament at all." Now it seems Sir Christopher is 
less impressed with Grade's move, telling the Independent: "I think to leave 
before the licence fee has been settled and when you're just about to take on a 
job as chairman of the BBC Trust, which you've negotiated - I mean he's left 
that job before he started - I think that's unfortunate. And the BBC plainly 
feels bruised. I don't think he's left very elegantly."

Christmas Airey
Monkey would have thought the last people outgoing Sky Networks boss Dawn Airey
 would want to see at her Christmas party was the Daily Mail's showbiz 
department. Having been monstered by the Mail in the past she can't have been 
too delighted to find the hacks holding their Christmas party next door to hers 
at Chiswick's High Road Brasserie. But Dawn entered into the Christmas spirit 
and introduced herself to the Mail crew. She even offered to buy the Associated 
gang drinks, which, amazingly, they declined.

Political hacks go to the polls
Got a post-Christmas party hangover? Looking for something to do in a bid to 
stave off having to work? Then vote for the political journalist of the year in 
a poll organised by political commentatorIain Dale in his blog Iain Dale's Diary
 
<http://poll.pollhost.com/aWFpbmRhbGUJMTE2NjAxMDI3MQkwMDAwODgJRkZGRkZGCUFyaWFsCUFzc29ydGVkCTA/>
. Andrew Neil was streets ahead earlier this week with 30% of the votes. But 
there's been a late flurry of support for BBC political editor Nick Robinson, 
who's now on 19%, just behind Neil's 20%. Who will win? Will Nick beat Andrew? 
Will Michael Crick come up on the outside? Will...oh you've gone.

Swedish message
And now for a bit of branding. After enduring years of ridicule, the 
inhabitants of the Swedish village ofFjuckby have handed in an application to 
Swedish authorities to have the hamlet's name changed to Fjukeby.


Thursday December 14

 So where's the BBC top brass Christmas party this year? In years gone by, it 
has been a lavish lunch at Sketch or an ice-skating party - Monkey recalls 
fondly images of Greg Dyke and Alan Yentob promenading hand-in-hand on the rink 
at Somerset House. But there's none of that money-splashing malarkey this year. 
With no licence fee settlement yet, director general Mark Thompson is 
demonstrating things are tight by holding his top team's dinner at pizza 
restaurant Kettners. Despite the grand piano and chandeliers, the Soho eatery 
is renowned for its reasonably-priced nosh. In fact, the average meal there 
costs £25 a head. Which is good, as Monkey hears the limit for the BBC bigwigs 
is £38, plus VAT. Come on Gordon Brown, what more does the BBC have to do to 
prove it's tightening the purse strings?

Comfort food
More on the media moguls lunching at The Ivy yesterday. Our man with the large 
expense account points out that talent queen Anita Land was lunching client
Jeremy Paxman. Monkey fans will know we've been tracking poor old Paxo's depths 
of misery when he signs off Newsnight, with the all-new Monkey 
Miserable-O-Meter. Yesterday, Land was obviously bringing a bit of Christmas 
cheer to Paxman as he was looking thoroughly chuffed. On a scale of one to 10 
(10 being the most miserable) he scored a resounding zero. Newsnight editor 
Peter Barron, take note - the way to Paxo's heart is through pies, not podcasts.

Party hard
Ooh that Michael Grade, he's a one. Today - read it and weep - is the last 
meeting of the governors before they're replaced by the BBC Trust. Last night, 
the BBC held a party at Broadcasting House for the departing governors. It was 
originally supposed to be hosted by Michael, but following his scarpering to 
ITV, vice-chairman Anthony Salz took over. However, the ex-BBC chairman was 
still invited and duly turned up ... wearing a hard hat. Keep the hat Michael, 
you might need it at ITV over the coming months. Along with a scythe.

Meet'n'greet by the pick'n'mix
The Sun's TV editor Sara Nathan and Julia Francis from the paper's TV guide 
are the latest staffers to mix with the real world - sent to work in a 
Woolworths branch in Croydon. Wearing fetching lime green t-shirts, the two 
hacks were deployed for the day in a bid to get to know the paper's readers. 
Previously, staffers have worked at Asda in Romford while editor Rebekah Wade 
will flip burgers in McDonalds. Monkey can only guess the excitement back at 
Wapping when the hacks revealed what proportion of the paper's readers choose 
pick n' mix over a nice packet of Werthers Original.

Freebie plea
Has Loaded magazine's marketing department run out of ideas? Monkey only asks 
after the not entirely office-friendly Loaded MySpace page issueda shameless 
appeal for readers' help 
<http://blog.myspace.com/index.cfm?fuseaction=blog.listAll&friendID=90215110&startID=201209352&StartPostedDate=2006-12-03%2019:03:00&next=1&page=1&Mytoken=2176E193-D97D-4C9A-81FD6DDE5884392E19329872>
. "You might have noticed that every once in a while we stick something fancy 
on the front of the magazine. Sometimes it's a sexy DVD, and once we even gave 
out free wagon wheels and condoms!" it says. "But we need some new ideas, so we 
want you to email us telling us what kind of free gift stuck on the front of 
Loaded would make you want to buy it even more." Monkey's suggestion: a copy of 
FHM. No, we're kidding. Carry on. "What about a pair of sunglasses? A wallet? 
How about a nice posh washbag for weekends away? Ipod cases?" Crikey, they 
sound desperate. The best ideas win £100, a Loaded T-shirt and a year's 
subscription to Loaded. Monkey doesn't want to stereotype Loaded readers - 
perish the thought - but we imagine most of them could do with a girlfriend 
stuck on the cover.

Kelvin's newsroom nightmares
Monkey often wonders, when watching its favourite cookery programmes, why 
restaurateurs are so stupid as to allow Gordon Ramsay into their eateries to 
swear at them and treat them like shit. Now Press Gazette says that Granada 
Television wants to do the same to the regional newspaper business with former 
Sun editorKelvin MacKenzie. Monkey presumes that the Liverpool Post won't be 
one of the papers contemplating inviting Kelvin in to shout at them. Although 
Kelvin doesn't seem to have set his heart on the idea either: "When asked by 
Press Gazette to comment on the new show, MacKenzie would only say that lots of 
TV companies come to him with ideas and that most never see the light of day."

Monkey goes to the British Comedy Awards
To the British Comedy Awards, where the spectre of Michael Grade hung heavy 
over the event, even more than the giant screen which beamed in the face of 
Ricky Gervais live from the US. Ant and Dec, who broke their duck for the night 
with the people's choice award, said he was a "legend". It turns out the new 
ITV executive chairman was at Channel 4 when the pair went there from the BBC 
in 1996. "We cannot wait to talk with him. We are at ITV for another year, who 
knows after that?" said Dec. Another year? Who knows? Quick, Mike, get the 
cheque book out!More 
<http://media.theguardian.com/news/story/0,,1972012,00.html>

Royal titles
According to the Telegraph, Princes William and Harry were subtitled when a 
recorded interview with them talking about the concert in memory of their 
mother was shown on US television. CBS used the subtitles because station 
officials thought viewers wouldn't be able to understand what they were saying. 
"They speak so quickly," CBS is reported to have said.


Wednesday December 13

Channel 4 nails Christmas
A masseuse, dry ice, a chocolate fountain ... no, not the ingredients for 
Channel 4's Wank Week, but just some of the delights on offer at the 
broadcaster's staff Christmas party last night. It was, appropriately, held at 
Gilgamesh - a bar fashioned in the style of a Baylonian temple in, er, Camden. 
Just in case things weren't exciting enough there was also a nail bar on offer. 
Wahoo! Monkey is sure the legion of consultants which has descended on the 
channel to help Ofcom's review of its output and funding were suitably 
impressed.

Guess who's coming to dinner
It seems that most of London medialand has decided to bust the expenses budget 
before Christmas, judging by the reservations roll-call atThe Ivy. Monkey 
rubbed shoulders today with, in alphabetical order, outgoing Sky Networks boss 
Dawn Airey, TV impresario Bea Ballard, ad guru Trevor Beattie, News of the 
World editor Andy Coulson, Talkback Thames chief executive Lorraine Heggessey, 
talent queen Anita Land, former Tory party leader Michael Howard, former ITV 
controller Nigel Pickard, and Tiger Aspect chief executive Andrew Zein.

Family business
New ITV chairman Michael Grade could be having a few interesting conversations 
around the dinner table with his daughter Alison and niece, Lesley Land. Alison 
followed her dad into telly and works as business development executive for 
Hotbed Media, which has produced such hit shows as BBC1's Star Portraits with 
Rolf Harris. She's now been elected to the council of producers' alliance Pact, 
which is currently campaigning to stop which channel cutting its children's 
shows? You guessed it, ITV. Monkey remembers it was Alison who persuaded her 
dad to move Neighbours to an afternoon slot when he was at the Beeb. Can she 
work her magic again? Meanwhile Lesley, the daughter of Michael's sister and 
agent Anita, was handed the Doctor Who brief when it was outsourced to PR 
company Taylor Herring earlier this year. Grade famously axed Doctor Who when 
he was in charge of BBC1 in the 80s. Monkey doesn't doubt that Land will have 
more commitment to the show than her uncle did.

Merry XXXmas
The ITV Christmas party last night turned out to be a somewhat bawdy affair, 
and not because Simon Shaps decided to let his metaphorical hair down. Party 
planners had booked a "burlesque dancer" to go with a Moulin Rouge theme, but 
it seems someone failed to vet her performance beforehand. The dancer had 
assured concerned ITV bosses that she would "keep her underwear on" - 
presumably her turn was scheduled before the watershed - but failed to explain, 
however, that the garment in question offered less coverage than Freeview in 
the Highlands of Scotland. Cue red faces all round, and a spot of post-party 
finger-pointing. Who could have been responsible for the X-rated shocker? 
Surely, it couldn't have been the straight-laced ITV human resources boss, 
Philippa "Thora" Hird?

Marching banned
Moscow city hall has refused to allow a march to pay tribute to all Russian 
journalists who have been murdered over the past decade. The organisers of the 
march - a group of Moscow-based hacks - said the killing of Anna Politkovskaya 
in October had prompted them to organise the event in memory of prominent 
Russian journalists who have been shot, stabbed or blown up while investigating 
local organised crime, drug trafficking and official corruption over the past 
10 years. Moscow officials refused permission for the march because they said 
it would disrupt traffic. They obviously haven't heard of traffic cones.

Radio silence
Staying in Russia, and it's not often Monkey gets to say that, mysterious 
goings on at theBBC Russian service, which has been off air in Moscow since 
November 24. Strange because this is the day after the death of former Russian 
spy Alexander Litvinenko from radiation poisoning. Apparently technical 
difficulties are to blame, but conspiracy theorists might wonder if something 
different has hit the service, which broadcast producer Yevgeny Kanevsky's 
interview with Litvinenko in which he was described as being in "very bad 
shape" after a "serious poisoning". The Russian service was first interrupted 
on November 21 and went off air in St Petersburg for more than two weeks 
because of storm damage to an antennae.

Cold comfort
What's the colour of the sky in Hefferland? Monkey only asks after the Daily 
Telegraph columnistSimon Heffer offered readers a particularly sympathetic take 
on the Ipswich murders today, referring to the prostitutes as "tarts".

Five festivities
Channel Five may have moved its Christmas bash for hacks from the evening to a 
lunchtime date, but that doesn't mean any less booze was consumed. By the look 
of some of the red faces yesterday, the reverse may be the case. Five's do at 
the historic Punch Tavern in Ludgate Circus was also memorable for the unlikely 
vision of a bunch of balloons hovering halfway between the ceiling and the 
floor, held in place by a shoe belonging to Sun telly hack Emma Cox. We can 
only hope she got it back and didn't have to hop to a cab.

Dour diary
In the first of an occasional series, Monkey presents the all-new Jeremy Paxman
 Miserable-O-Meter, in which we record the depths of misery plumbed by the 
Newsnight man when he signs off the BBC2 show every night. Readers may remember 
a couple of weeks back when Paxo suggested his colleague Martha Kearney was 
being "punished for some offence in a previous life" for presenting the 
following night's programme, and bemoaned his editor Peter Barron's "pathetic 
pleas for you to send in some of your old bits of home movie so we can become 
the BBC's version of Animals Do the Funniest Things."Click here 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/theeditors/2006/12/warning_moronfree_zone_1.html> 
to read Barron's blog about it. Anyway, last night Paxman was at it again. 
"There is apparently still plenty of time - all of Christmas if you want to 
refuge from the broken toys and squabbling - to vote for your favourite Oh My 
Newsnight entry. These are the homemade films solicited by my editor for 
reasons I still don't understand. At least the animal entries have now been 
weeded out. There are 13 on the shortlist on bbc.co.uk/newsnight. The winners 
get an airing on the show in the new year. That is something really to look 
forward to." On a scale of one to 10 (10 being the most miserable), we give 
that an eight.

Clicking about
Ah, the wonder of new media that is Google. Pranksters at a posh school in 
Stockton on Tees secretly drew a huge "willy" on top of one of the school 
buildings that was only discovered when the image was zoomed in on using Google 
Earth. Said appendage has since been removed - although it is still viewable 
using Google's satellite mapping program - with one ex-pupil saying the 
pranksters "also burnt a manhood into the grass". Pictures of this were not 
available.


Tuesday December 12

Blake's 7 back on the launch pad
Twenty-five years after they were last seen going down in a hail of bullets on 
BBC1,Blake's 7 are back. Yes, really. Not only that, Supreme Commander Servalan 
- you remember, always seemed to have a bit of a thing for S&M - is being 
played by This Life star Daniela Nardini, in a top notch cast that also 
includes Colin Salmon and Monkey's second favourite Robin Hood, Michael Praed. 
The bad news is it's not coming back to TV - it will instead be available in 36 
five-minute podcasts next year. If you insist on being old fashioned about it, 
you will also be able to buy them on a CD. Producer B7 Productions - do you see 
what they've done there? - promises a radical new interpretation. Well, it 
would have to be radical seeing as the last Monkey saw of them they all 
appeared to be dead apart from Avon, and it wasn't looking very good for him 
either. Quick! To the Liberator! Computer is making porridge and he's forgotten 
the recipe.

Beach battle ahead
BBC1 is to schedule its main weekly Castaway programme in a Sunday early 
evening slot in direct competition with Channel 4'sShipwrecked, which will air 
at 6pm on a Sunday. Both will air from February and both are set in the South 
Pacific in a bid to bring a little sunshine into the lives of British viewers 
struggling through winter. However, Monkey predicts that as well as the sun 
there will also be a lot of storms coupled with, in Shipwrecked's case at 
least, a distinct lack of clothes.

Dear Santa...
From Heat magazine's handy cut-out-and-keep Christmas gift guide. "For a yummy 
mummy: Cardio Wave cardio machine, from £6,051." Right, thanks Heat. I think 
I'll stick with the scented candles.

Sky's no-limits news
Sky News has always been a pioneer of good taste in broadcast news. This 
morning, as the hunt for a serial killer in the Ipswich area gathers pace, Sky 
is treating us to live shoots of frogmen combing a Suffolk stream, shown in 
split-screen with the "Skycopter" overhead view of a white tarpaulin. Let's 
hope there's a delay on the footage so we're not forced to watch the moment 
when the police make their next discovery. A bit of decorum, please.

Gone to the dogs
Monkey's excuse of the week. A call comes in to the Channel 4 viewers' 
inquiries team. "Hello there. Can I have a new application form forDeal or No 
Deal please? The dog ate mine." As school playground excuses go, that takes the 
dog biscuit. The mutt is clearly not a Noel Edmonds fan.

Naked truth
Talking of Noel Edmonds, the Deal or No Deal man was in a particularly frisky 
mood when he was interviewed for this week's edition of Heat magazine. Asked 
what he would like for Christmas, Edmonds jokes: "You couldn't print what I 
want!" Steady, Noel. He then says he has a "very nice lady" in his life, only 
he "hasn't told her yet!" Ooh, Monkey's sides! The bearded wonder then reveals 
he would rather do a half-naked edition of the Channel 4 show than a celebrity 
edition. "We have a production team version, and they're not scantily clad, 
they're naked." Monkey's off for a lie down.

Gervais targets Arnie
The Daily Mirror reports that Ricky Gervais is planning a third series of 
Extras that he hopes will be packed to the gunwales with veteran American 
celebrities. Top of his wish list is Arnold "The Governator" Schwarzenegger, 
but other "icons" Gervais is after include Dick van Dyke, Mickey Rooney, Bruce 
WIllis and Meryl Streep.


Monday December 11

Never mind the shuttlecocks
Today's Ofcom broadcast bulletin swear-count - one "fucking", two "bollocks", 
a "smartarse" and, bizarrely, "shuttlecocks". One viewer complained after a 
rogue "fucking" slipped into Hell's Kitchen USA (it's a Gordon Ramsay show - 
what were they expecting?). ITV2 apologised, saying the episode had already had 
30 swear words removed and unfortunately this one slipped through the net. 
ITV1's PokerFace was found to not have been in breach over two occasions of 
"bollocks" being expressed on the show as it is considered "mild swearing". 
However, someone also complained about the use of "smartarse" (these people 
really do exist) while someone else was offended by "word play involving the 
word shuttlecocks". Maybe the complainant had a particularly bad aversion to a 
game of badminton.

Kicking off
Footballers stand by your beds. And make sure it is your own while you're at 
it. Monkey hears the creator ofHoly Moly is eyeing up a new project, doing for 
our nation's sporting heroes what the gossip website did for Hollywood actors, 
D-list celebrities and reality TV stars. "There is so much football gossip out 
there but it doesn't really sit well on the Holy Moly website," Monkey is told. 
"Footballers don't have the same media training as musicians and film stars. 
They are the new celebrities in terms of readership, popularity - and 
stupidity." Expect the fun to start some time in the new year.

Batting for the Beeb
While the BBC waits to find out just how small the licence fee rise is going 
to be, the corporation has come up with an ingenious way to help fund its Ashes 
coverage. Readers may remember that 5 Live reporterColin Patterson won the 
Daily Telegraph's fantasy cricket competition to watch England take on the 
Aussies down under. What the Telegraph might not have expected was that 
Patterson has used the trip to file copious reports on the cricket for the BBC. 
When Telegraph editor Will Lewis says he wants to be a multiplatform operation, 
we're not sure this is entirely what he meant.

Bigmouth strikes again
Monkey's new book of the month is The Gospel According to Chris Moyles, the 
most attractive feature of which is that it can be read in under an hour. Never 
let it be said that the saviour of Radio 1 isn't a delight to work with. Oh no. 
In the space of 300 double-spaced pages Moyles has a "massive argument" with 
Nicky Campbell, gets off on the wrong foot with John Peel ("he made a comment 
about me being like DLT-in-waiting"), has a spectacular falling out with Kevin 
Greening ("seriously, he just ignored me for weeks"), calls the wife of "Mark 
Goodyear" (sic) ugly and takes mortal offence when Neil Fox calls him "shock 
jock", "tubby" and - worst of all - "Desperate Dan". "Desperate Fucking Dan? Go 
fuck yourself you fucking fuckhead." Truly a wordsmith for the digital 
generation.

Glowing prizes
To the Women in Film and Television awards on Friday, where the third prize in 
the raffle was lunch at the Millennium Hotel in London's Grosvenor Square. Top 
prize was presumably dinner at the Itsu sushi restaurant.

Out to lunch
It's that time of year again. The Independent charity auction has begun, in 
which various treats are offered to the highest bidder. The most exciting lot, 
better than a ramble in the Yorkshire Dales with Janet Street-Porter, better 
even than a quiz night hosted by Jeremy Beadle, is lunch with the paper's agony 
aunt, Virginia Ironside. "Nursing a secret trauma? Do your relationships seem 
doomed to follow the same pattern? The doyenne of agony columns will take you 
out to dinner, talk through your problems and revivify your broken heart." Not 
now, Virginia. For some reason we've just lost our appetite.

Unlucky break
Casualty corner: spare a thought for Sky One controller Richard Woolfe, who 
made an unfortunate exit from the climax to his channel's celebrity reality 
fest, Cirque de Celebrité, by falling down a hole outside the big top on 
London's Woolwich Common and breaking his foot. In two places. Even worse, 
Woolfe wasn't sure what he had done until visiting the doctor the next day. And 
we thought it was the celebrities who were meant to be taking the risks. "There 
was no need to put his foot in a cast," reports our Sky man. "Which 
unfortunately means we are not able to write insults on it."

Hymns for hacks
Former Sunday Telegraph editor Sarah Sands, ex-Channel Five boss David Elstein 
and Sky News head John Ryley will be among the speakers at thejournalists' 
carol service at St Bride's church, Fleet Street on December 20. The service at 
6.30pm is in aid of the Maggie's Centres London appeal, offering support to 
people affected by cancer. For tickets (minimum £10 donation requested, 
under-16s free), emailcharity@luther.co.uk <mailto:charity@luther.co.uk> or 
call Louise Baskin on 020-7618 9100. For more information on the appeal visit
www.maggiescentres.org.uk. <http://www.maggiescentres.org.uk.>

Getting the message across
The Sun reports that the government has revealed a devastating new weapon in 
the war to beat the Taliban in Afghanistan -text messages. Apparently 
intelligence chiefs find out the numbers of the enemy's mobile phones and send 
them "waves of messages to confuse them and destroy morale". Text messages 
range from "We know who you are, give up" to "Go home, you'll never beat us".
 