
The relationship between levels of public expenditure and participation is 
influenced by many things, and government policies have not always responded to 
the fact that artistic habits can change (for instance, with video, DVD and the 
subsequent impact on cinema attendance).

The Nordic social welfare approach, for example, emphasises the need for an 
extensive network of public cultural institutions. Finland, in particular, 
invested heavily in the cultural infrastructure in the 1980s. The result is one 
of the best library networks in the world and one of the highest ratios of 
museums to people - some 900 museums in a population less than the size of 
London.

In Sweden, a key policy since 1974 has been to develop opportunities for 
everyone, especially young people, to participate as both consumers and 
creators of culture. This approach is supported by high per capita spending on 
the arts for Sweden's 8.85m inhabitants. Attendance at music events, theatre, 
museums and exhibitions has been growing in popularity, and about half the 
population takes part in artistic activity. On the other hand, although almost 
two-thirds of the population still goes to the cinema at least once a year, the 
total number of visits has fallen by 36% over 20 years. The largest amount of 
cultural spending (38%) goes to the public library service: there are about 
1,600 libraries in the country.

Not every European country continues to focus on its cultural infrastructure. 
The Dutch government for one has shifted its attitude from its previous policy 
of providing organisations with across-the-board funding, to offering financial 
incentives instead. This approach seeks to promote self-sufficiency and 
demand-led provision. The cinema remains the most popular form of art and 
culture: 44% of the population visit cinemas regularly. However, there has also 
been an upsurge of public interest in archaeology, which has not been fuelled 
by public sector investment. Characteristically, the Dutch are doing their own 
thing.

As for France, we need only think of Mitterrand's "grands projets" to 
appreciate the unique relationship between the French government and the 
cultural sector. The government's high level of involvement is supported by 
political commitment and resourcing. Since 1982, the target, uncontested by 
political opponents, has been to spend around 1% of the state budget on the 
cultural sector, and expenditure now approaches the FF20bn mark.

One might expect that such resources, together with a vibrant cultural sector 
and active cultural education policy would have inspired uniform enthusiasm. 
True, almost half the French population over 15 engage in some form of cultural 
activity. Attendance at arts facilities has increased over the past 25 years, 
in part due to policies such as free entry days for certain museums and 
monuments, and reduced ticket prices at the cinema and selected theatres. 
However, while the significant increase in library membership has been a 
notable success story, a study in the late 1990s revealed that more than a 
quarter of the French population have not read a single book in the past 12 
months. Provision, we find, does not always guarantee participation.
 