
The Odeon, Leicester Square, 1960. The red-carpet premiere of a film that will 
change the story of British film and British society. The lights are killed, 
the crowd falls silent. The roar of industrial machinery thrums from the 
speakers. And over the noise comes the voice of the hero, a Brylcreemed 
lathe-operator with greasy overalls and insolent good looks. "Don't let the 
bastards grind you down," says Dirk Bogarde, and with those words, Saturday 
Night and Sunday Morning and its star give instant definition to the new decade.

In some fairly proximate parallel universe, this is how the 1960s might have 
begun. It could have happened here, too, if the owner of Pinewood studios had 
not been born into Methodism. To J Arthur Rank, Saturday Night and Sunday 
Morning was a book about beer and adultery, and he wasn't keen on either – 
particularly in a vehicle for the last big star held under contract by his 
tottering film outfit. So he returned the movie rights, no questions asked, to 
the novel's author,Alan Sillitoe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alan-sillitoe>. They were picked up by a 
brash new company founded by Tony Richardson and John Osborne, the lions of the 
Royal Court theatre, who cast a bright-eyed young Shakespearean called Albert 
Finney in the leading role – and the star of Doctor in the House was obliged to 
look for another project with which to destroy his wholesome reputation.

Bogarde died in the last year of the last century. He would have been 90 years 
old on Monday. For the last two decades of his life, however, cinema commanded 
very little of his attention. Instead, he became a prolific producer of witty 
but not particularly reliable memoirs – bestsellers in which he romanticised 
his childhood in a verdant swathe of the Thames Valley, gave a dubious account 
of his wartime experiences and poured gentle scorn on his former life as a 
matinee idol.

His film career, however, is in no danger of slipping from our cultural 
memory. That pretty-boy psychopath who guns down PC Jack Warner in The Blue 
Lamp; the sleekly charming Simon Sparrow in all those Doctor comedies; his 
angsty Sydney Carton, soulful before the guillotine in A Tale of Two Cities; 
the sweatily menacing butler in The Servant, crushing James Fox into 
submission; the mournful sadist who lays hands on Charlotte Rampling in The 
Night Porter. They live on. Not just as individual performances, but as 
evidence of a remarkable – and often troubled – life in the movies.

The story of Dirk Bogarde's war against himself is one of the great narratives 
of British cinema. It's the tale of a gifted young actor who became trapped in 
the smooth screen persona prescribed for him by his employers, and how he broke 
from it by embracing controversy, art and Europe. The killer blow came in 1960 
when he joined the cast of a campaigning picture called Victim. ("I wanted him! 
I wanted him!" Bogarde declares, in the film's best-remembered scene, as his 
lawyer hero confesses his desire for a teenage runaway called Boy Barrett.) And 
when the credits rolled, so the story goes, all the girls who had swooned over 
him in the Doctor pictures and fantasised about being taken out by him for a 
drink at a Home Counties golf club, quietly took down their Dr Sparrow posters 
and redirected their desires towards Cliff Richard. It's an engaging story. And 
it's almost true.

A new box set of some of Bogarde's less well-regarded films is released next 
week; a present their star might not have received with good grace. For me, its 
contents demonstrate that taking the lead role in Saturday Night and Sunday 
Morning would hardly have taken Dirk Bogarde off in some new and unexpected 
direction. The frustration and the fury of the sort that rose from the stage of 
the Royal Court in the late 50s had been burning inside Bogarde for years. You 
can feel it as early as the 1949 picture Once a Jolly Swagman, in which he 
plays a figure who is often assumed to be a discovery of the kitchen-sink 
generation – a young production-line worker tormented by his aspirations, who 
pursues a disastrous sexual relationship with a more experienced woman.

Bogarde's Austerity Britain version of the Angry Young Man works in a 
lightbulb factory somewhere in south London. He sits listlessly under a vast 
mechanical carousel, from which hot balloons of glass are piped. He's supposed 
to prove each one with a tap from a metal rod, but the sports pages – and his 
dream of becoming a speedway racer – prevent him from applying himself too 
assiduously to that task. The dirt track, presided over by the gloriously 
untrustworthy Sid James, proves a road to ruin. The story is as much a 
cautionary tale about the exploitation of working-class athletes as This 
Sporting Life, but it's the attitude of Bogarde's biker that seems so 
prescient; the violent, unfocused nature of his disaffection. "Some people are 
never satisfied," he is warned. "They're always looking for trouble."

Once you've seen the tinge of anger in the Bogarde of 1949, it's hard not to 
detect it in his performances of any vintage – even in those pictures from the 
years in which he felt most imprisoned by his contract with the Rank 
Organisation. In Simba, for instance, he plays a white farmer in Kenya whose 
brother has been killed in the Mau Mau insurgency. In one extraordinary scene, 
he rounds on a Kikuyu doctor (Earl Cameron), whom he believes is implicated in 
the atrocities. Slicked with sweat, a sardonic smile twisting the left side of 
his mouth, Bogarde's farmer tells Cameron that whether he is guilty or not, it 
would probably be a good idea to have him put up against a wall and shot. 
Cameron rips open his doctor's coat to reveal that he possesses none of the 
ritual scars that would identify him as a member of the rebel group. Bogarde's 
eyes move unwillingly down. His lips quiver. But before his humiliation can 
truly flower, a group of British officers march briskly into the room. It is a 
typical Bogarde moment – predicated upon rage, the uneasy exchange of power, 
and the sense of something faintly sexual.

So what did Bogarde do, in the absence of Arthur Seaton? He went to 
Torremolinos to make a lavish western about a love-triangle between a 
15-year-old French girl, an Irish priest and a bad, bad Mexican bandit called 
The Singer Not the Song. The star was keener on the project – partly because he 
was under the impression that Richard Burton or Peter Finch would be wearing 
the cassock, partly because it would allow him to appear on screen in a pair of 
tightly tailored leather trousers. When Rank foisted John Mills on the 
production, Bogarde became a spirit of vengeance. "I will make life unbearable 
for everyone concerned," he said. He was as good as his word.

The pain continued long after the crew had packed up and returned to Pinewood. 
At the post-screening lunch, critics sniggered loudly at those leather trousers 
and went home to write reviews that wondered whether The Singer Not the Song 
was about "the love that dare not speak its name". It now seems a film of such 
telegraphic queerness that it's hard to believe some of those schoolgirls' 
posters weren't unpinned months before Victim reached the cinemas. The Rank 
publicity department ballyhooed it, somewhat desperately, as "a new and 
powerfully different kind of motion picture story". But the monopoly on novelty 
and power had already been claimed by a picture that opened just weeks earlier 
– the picture that Rank had rejected on moral grounds.

Despite his turn in The Servant, Bogarde never became the pre-eminent face of 
the British new wave. Perhaps he was just too old. Or perhaps he boiled with 
the wrong kind of anger. The fury he committed to the screen was rarely the 
righteous kind. It is usually a product of something deeply felt but morally 
murky. In A Tale of Two Cities, he plays a man whose self-disgust is cured by a 
sharp metal blade and an act of moral self-sacrifice. His teenage gangster in 
The Blue Lamp despises authority, but, as he plays a gun across his 
girlfriend's face, seems to hate her more. In Simba, his hero hates Dr Karanja 
because he is a black man wearing a white coat. A line like "don't let the 
bastards grind you down" would not have spilled easily from his mouth. And this 
is one of the reasons why his work remains compelling. Even when he was playing 
the hero, Bogarde was usually one of the bastards.

Six Dirk Bogarde films – The Singer Not the Song, So Long at the Fair, Simba, 
Once a Jolly Swagman, The Spanish Gardener and Esther Waters – are out now on 
DVD.
 