
The search for life outside our solar system has been brought to our cosmic 
doorstep with the discovery of an apparently rocky planet orbiting the nearest 
star to our sun.

Thought to be at least 1.3 times the mass of the Earth, the planet lies within 
the so-called “habitable zone” of the star Proxima Centauri, meaning that 
liquid water could potentially exist on the newly discovered world.

Proxima b will be our prime laboratory in the search for extraterrestrial life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/24/proxima-b-will-be-our-prime-laboratory-in-the-search-for-extraterrestrial-life>
Named Proxima b, the new planet has sparked a flurry of excitement among 
astrophysicists, with the tantalising possibility that it might be similar in 
crucial respects to Earth.


“There is a reasonable expectation that this planet might be able to host 
life, yes,” said Guillem Anglada-Escudé, co-author of the research from Queen 
Mary, University of London.

Eamonn Kerins, an astrophysicist at Jodrell Bank Centre for Astrophysics 
<http://www.jb.man.ac.uk/>, was among those enthusiastic about the discovery. 
“Finding out that the nearest star to the sun hosts not just a planet, not just 
an Earth-sized planet, but one which is in the right location that itcould 
support life - and there are a lot of caveats there - really underscores that 
not only are planets very common in our galaxy, but potentially habitable 
planets are common,” he said.

Proxima b may be the closest of the thousands of exoplanets - which are 
planets orbiting stars outside our solar system - discovered to date, but at 
4.2 light years away the prospect of a quick visit to find any Proximese aliens 
is still remote. Based on spacecraft today, a probe launched now would take 
around 70,000 years to reach the new planet.
Proxima b - Earth’s new neighbour 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/08/proxima-b/giv-31075LRHMg1Sz6tup>
Writing in the journal Nature,  
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature19106>an international team of 
researchers describe how they discovered the planet after scrutinising data 
based on the light emitted by Proxima Centauri, collected using instruments at 
theEuropean Southern Observatory <http://www.eso.org/public/> in Chile. 


“What we basically do is measure how the star is moving,” said Anglada-Escudé. 
“If you have a planet around a star, the planet is also pulling the star a bit 
so you see the star is moving. It is going towards you and away from you, 
periodically.”

This movement affects the colour of light detected from the star - as it the 
star moves slightly towards us we see the light as being slightly bluer - as it 
moves away the light appears a little redder. The frequency of this motion 
relates to the duration of the planet’s orbit, and hence its distance from the 
star, while the magnitude of the motion provides information about the planet’s 
mass.

While analysis of data collected before 2016 hinted at the presence of a 
planet, it took a further intense round of data collection earlier this year 
before the discovery could be confirmed.


Taking 11.2 days to travel around Proxima Centauri, the planet orbits at just 
5% of the distance separating the Earth and the sun. But, researchers say, the 
planet is still within the habitable zone of its star because Proxima Centauri 
is a type of red dwarf known as an M dwarf - a smaller, cooler, dimmer type of 
star than our yellow dwarf sun.

Whether the planet could harbour life, however, is matter of debate. 


Red dwarfs are generally very active stars, emitting powerful solar flares, 
with Proxima b receiving greater doses of high-energy radiation than reaches 
Earth from our sun. “Because they tend to have a lot of these flares and things 
like that, it makes it very difficult for [planets] to keep an atmosphere - 
these flares just blow the atmosphere away,” said Don Pollacco, professor of 
astrophysics at the University of Warwick, who was not involved in the 
research. But, he adds, Proxima Centauri is only a moderately active red dwarf, 
potentially making its environment less hostile than other such stars. Whether 
the star’s activity when it was younger could have stripped Proxima b of an 
atmosphere remains to be discovered, while it is also unknown if the planet has 
a magnetic field which could potentially protect it from such radiation.


Proxima Centauri planet could tell us about alien life in the universe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2016/aug/24/proxima-centauri-planet-could-tell-us-about-alien-life-in-the-universe-exoplanet-proxima-b>
The planet has other characteristics that could affect its potential to host 
life.


The research reveals that if the planet’s temperature were down to its sun 
alone, its surface would be, on average, a chilly -40C. “It seems cold, but 
then if you look at the same numbers for Earth you would get minus 20, minus 
30C,” says Anglada-Escudé. “What keeps Earth warm is basically that it has an 
atmosphere and an ocean,” he adds, pointing out that should the newly 
discovered world also boast an atmosphere, its temperature would likewise be 
higher.

And there’s more. It is very likely that the new world is tidally locked to 
Proxima Centauri (just as our own moon is to Earth) with only one side of the 
planet ever catching the star’s rays.

“If you are standing [on the side] looking at the star, you are quite warm,” 
said Pollacco. “If you are on the other side it is bloody cold - continual 
night.”

Anglada-Escudé is sanguine. If the planet has an atmosphere or an ocean, he 
says, the redistribution of heat could be possible. “Even if you have tidal 
lock, you have a lot of circulation - it is like jet streams on Earth.”

But Pollacco believes discussion about the habitability of the new planet is 
somewhat premature, “These observations tell you nothing about the planet 
itself, it is important to realise that,” he said, pointing out that there is 
no evidence that the planet has an atmosphere, or any water.

Anglada-Escudé admits that there is plenty to be unpicked about the new world. 
While its mass is thought to be at least 1.3 times that of the Earth, its size, 
and hence density, is unknown, meaning that scientists can only make an 
educated guess that it is likely to be rocky based on the types of exoplanets 
that have previously been detected around other small stars.

And there are other mysteries to solve. The planet’s location is also puzzling 
scientists, who say it is unlikely that the planet formed in its current 
location given that there would have been little planet-forming material 
available so close to the star. “What we suspect is that the planet forms 
somewhere else, or the raw materials, the dust or the rocks or the ice, 
condense somewhere else and then ended up there through some migration 
process,” said Anglada-Escudé. He points out that if the planet formed farther 
away from the star and migrated to its current position, it is likely to be a 
“water-world”, whereas if it formed in its current location from dust that 
migrated, it is likely to be very dry unless water was later delivered to the 
planet by a comet or other body.

While Pollacco describes the new discovery as symbolic, he believes the 
planet’s potential for hosting life could remain a mystery for many years to 
come, not least because the chances of seeing the planet pass in front of its 
star - an observation, known as a transit, that is crucial to unravelling the 
planet’s size and make-up - are low.

Anglada-Escudé is rather more optimistic. Even if a transit cannot be seen, he 
believes other techniques could shed light on the nature of the planet. “There 
are reasonable expectations that this planet can be detected with direct 
imaging within the next 10 years,” he said, adding that it might also be 
possible to design a space telescope to orbit around the Earth and look at the 
new world.

And with Proxima b just an interstellar stone’s throw away, he believes the 
new discovery could inspire a wave of creativity in designing approaches for 
probing the planet further.

“Just the discovery, the sense of exploration, of finding something so close, 
I think it is what makes [it] very exciting,” he said.

 * This article was amended on 24 August 2016. The planet orbits at 5% of the 
distance separating the Earth and the sun, not a fifth as an earlier version 
said.
 