
They have little brains, a dismal work rate, and pay no attention to 
architects' plans. Rather than looking to humans for inspiration, scientists 
designing robot bricklayers have learned from termites.

The researchers, at Harvard University, have shown off their first gang of 
robotic brickies by having them build a small castle. The feat took some time, 
but marks a leap forward in the design of robots that work together in an 
ever-changing environment.

Though small, slow and simple, the robots can work without plans to build 
pre-designed structures. Instead of talking to one another, they all follow the 
same simple rules drawn up by a computer beforehand.

Autonomous groups of robots that can erect pre-designed buildings could find 
plentiful work in dangerous places, for example setting up shelters in regions 
struck by earthquakes, building habitats under the sea, or on distant planets 
before human missions arrive. They could even stack sandbags to provide flood 
defences, the US researchers said.
 Gangs of robot bricklayers could build habitats under the sea or on distant 
planets. Photograph: Eliza Grinnell/Harvard School of Engineering and Applied 
Sciences 
"The long-term aim is to build structures autonomously where you cannot easily 
send people, because the work is either too dirty, too dangerous or too dull," 
saidJustin Werfel <http://people.seas.harvard.edu/~jkwerfel/> at the Wyss 
Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering <http://wyss.harvard.edu/> at 
Harvard. "The robots move very slowly and that's on purpose. They are being 
very careful about what they do."

Instead of providing all the robots with a plan of the desired building, and 
appointing a mechanical foreman to direct them, each is given the same set of 
rules that tells it when to move itself or a nearby brick. The robots – which 
have wheels and are the size of a toy remote-controlled car – can trundle 
around, clamber up and down bricks, and lift and lay them. Simple sensors tell 
the robots when they are next to a brick or another robot.

Central to the work is a computer program that can take the shape of a 
finished building and turn it into a set of "traffic" rules that are sent to 
each robot before the job begins. From these rules alone, the robot gangs will 
move around and place bricks until the structure is complete. Details of the 
work appear in the journalScience <http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1245842>.

The work has impressed other scientists because it shows how teams of robots 
can be made to work together without having to follow a plan or pass signals 
between each other. If one robot breaks down, the others will simply work 
around it. And if an extra robot is added to the team, it joins the effort 
seamlessly.

The research was inspired by the behaviour of termites, which have minuscule 
brains but are able to build huge mounds, complete with intricate air-cooling 
channels. None of the termites has a detailed plan of the mound they are 
building. Instead they take cues from each other and their surroundings to 
decide where to lay the next lump of mud.

The rules the robots follow are essentially one-way signs that tell them which 
direction they must move in. One crucial aspect of the rules ensures that the 
robots can get on and off the building site without walling themselves in.

In an accompanying article, Judith Korb at the University of Freiburg in 
Germany, calls the work "extremely elegant". "Humans build houses according to 
a blueprint, and the construction process is centrally guided by this plan. In 
contrast, social insects such as termites build in a decentralised, 
self-organised manner."

The latest work "allows the autonomous construction of any predefined 
structures with simple robots", she adds.
 