
I'm 51 and going through the menopause. I am chronically tired, putting on 
weight very quickly and my thinking/memory is fuzzy. I also have slightly 
raised blood pressure and cholesterol. Can you advise me on how I can get some 
energy back? Don't tell me to exercise more – I haven't got the energy!
Please, I think you should see your doctor. It is only too easy to blame your 
symptoms on the menopause when there could be other, unconnected causes. 
Your doctor will want to take a full history, examine you, and take further 
tests. You may have, for example, an underactive thyroid. That causes 
tiredness, weight gain and slowness in thinking and physical activities, all of 
which you have. If it does turn out to be a thyroid problem, treatment is 
easy and the improvement in your health will be almost instantaneous.

I have heard that aspirin can help prevent heart attacks and strokes. 
My mother died last year from strokes and dementia. Now I'm over 50, would a 
daily aspirin be beneficial?
The three main factors raising the risk of heart attacks and strokes are 
uncontrolled high blood pressure, smoking and a high blood cholesterol level. 
Presumably you have had these checked. If you have none of these, you have no 
need to take aspirin.

There are also three subsidiary risks: poorly controlled diabetes, obesity and 
lack of exercise. The best way of reducing them is to address them directly – 
people with diabetes should strive to keep it under good control (there is 
firm evidence that aspirin helps them), and the overweight should lose the 
excess by exercising more and eating less.

Your mother's strokes indicate that she was suffering from circulation 
problems, and in this case aspirin would have helped, but if you don't possess 
these risk factors, you don't need to take it. Her illnesses may well have been 
linked more to her lifestyle (smoking, say) than to any inheritable cause.. For 
example did she smoke? Presumably you don't.

doctordoctor@theguardian.com <mailto:doctordoctor@theguardian.com>
 