
Aspirin <https://www.theguardian.com/science/aspirin> should no longer be used 
to try to prevent strokes in people with a common heart rhythm disorder as it 
is ineffective and has acted as a "smokescreen", preventing people from getting 
the right treatment, government experts say.

The advice, published on Wednesday, affects 100,000 people with atrial 
fibrillation 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/Atrial-fibrillation/Pages/Introduction.aspx>, 
which causes the heart to beat irregularly and sometimes too fast, and who are 
taking aspirin. They have been advised by the National Institute for Health and 
Care Excellence (Nice) to see their GP to discuss alternative medication.

The experts say the majority of people with atrial fibrillation, which is 
believed to affect more than a million people in Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jan/11/heart-atrial-fibrillation-stroke-risk>
 – about a quarter of them undiagnosed – and is a condition that increases the 
risk of stroke fivefold, should be given anticoagulants. This overridesprevious 
advice, issued in 2006 <http://guidance.nice.org.uk/CG36>, which approved 
antiplatelets such as aspirin.

Campbell Cowan, chair of the group that drew up the health guidance, said: 
"Aspirin has been a little bit of a smokescreen to anticoagulation. We now know 
that aspirin is not safer and it is questionable whether it has any effect at 
all, so aspirin is no longer recommended for stroke prevention."

Nice said that strokes among people with atrial fibrillation were "highly 
preventable" and 7,000 a year could be averted if treated with anticoagulants, 
as well as 2,000 premature deaths.

The now superseded 2006 guideline on atrial fibrillation was the only one in 
which Nice recommended use of aspirin in primary prevention. It still 
recommends the drug for management of patients with a combination of heart 
failure and coronary heart disease and those who have suffered a transient 
ischaemic attack, or mini-stroke.

Only half of those who should be on anticoagulants are getting them at 
present, according to the experts. "Any stroke occurring in a patient with 
atrial fibrillation is a tragedy because it was preventable," said Cowan.

Because of the risk of bleeding, the guidance group does not recommend 
anticoagulants for people at low risk of stroke or with a high risk of 
bleeding, both of which can be calculated using new tools published by Nice. 
Cowan said that only about 6% of people with atrial fibrillation would not get 
anticoagulants under the new guidelines. The risk of bleeding is believed to be 
one reason why manyGPs <https://www.theguardian.com/society/gps> have favoured 
aspirin, which has been given to people with atrial fibrillation for 20 years, 
but the guidance group found that aspirin carried an increased chance of 
bleeding.

Despite the findings, Cowan warned patients against any knee-jerk reaction as 
they might have been given aspirin for another reason, such as coronary heart 
disease. "They need to continue on aspirin," he said. "They can't assume they 
are taking aspirin for their atrial fibrillation so they should consult with 
the doctor."

The low uptake of anticoagulants in the past has also been attributed to the 
fact that the most common variety, warfarin, requires regular monitoring and 
dose adjustments to ensure it works properly, making it unsuitable for elderly 
patients who have mobility problems or are housebound.

The Nice experts recommend increased uptake of a new generation of oral 
anticoagulants, which are more expensive than warfarin but require less regular 
monitoring and dose adjustments.

The experts say that the drugs should be made available not just to those at 
risk not currently on anticoagulants but to those on warfarin who have poor 
monitoring, estimated to be a third of the total taking the drug.

Stephen Whitehead, chief executive of the Association of the British 
Pharmaceutical Industry, welcomed Nice's guidance but said Britain was lagging 
behind Europe when it came to uptake of new oral anticoagulants. He called on 
clinicians to "ensure that they do not prevent patients, who would benefit from 
these medicines, having access to them".
 