
Submitting your application for university can be great motivation to get you 
through revision or AS exams in the coming months.


But with surging demand for courses – last year the proportion of British 
18-year-olds applying to university hit a record high – you need to devote a 
large chunk of time and effort to your university application in order to give 
yourself the best chance of getting into your top-choice course.

Hopefully by now you will have researched and picked a few courses that you’re 
passionate about and you will be ready to apply (for degrees and HNDs) through 
the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service (Ucas).

Applicants to Oxbridge, medicine and vet courses have to apply by next week – 
15 October – for most others, the deadline is 15 January, but check the 
timeline below.

Your Ucas application will include your personal details, academic record, a 
reference – usually from a teacher – and your personal statement. The latter 
will take the most time.


It should describe your achievements and motivations, evidence of your skills 
or situations where you have overcome problems to achieve goals, and why you’d 
be an asset to a university.

Ensure it really is personal, and check it for spelling or grammar errors. 
Think of it as packaging yourself like a product. You want to make tutors 
think: “I want that person in my classes.”

You can submit your application online, through the Ucas website and can 
choose up to five different courses. Once you’ve submitted your application you 
can track its progress through the Track pages of the Ucas website.

Now it’s a waiting game: you’ll hear back from institutions as and when they 
make a decision about your application. Some might invite you for an interview, 
or audition, depending on the course you’ve applied for: if they do, prepare as 
if you were applying for a job, with lots of thought into what you might be 
asked.

If you don’t receive the offers you hoped for, don’t worry – there are lots of 
other options. You can apply toUcas Extra 
<http://www.ucas.com/how-it-all-works/undergraduate/tracking-your-application/adding-extra-choices>
 – for those who have not received any offers or have declined all of them – or 
enter Clearing after receiving A-level results in August.

Clearing is like a matchmaking service between universites that have spare 
course places, and students who missed out on their first choice, or have 
changed their mind about what they want to study.

Many universities offer courses that begin in January as well as Autumn, so 
you might not have to wait another 12 months if you want to reapply. Or you 
could even consider embarking on an apprenticeship, foundation course, or 
work-based learning before submitting another application.

Timeline for the application process

15 October: Deadline for applications to Oxford, Cambridge and most courses in 
medicine, dentistry and veterinary science.

December-January: Interviews for Oxford and Cambridge. 

15 January 2015: Deadline for the vast majority of courses (the exception is a 
few arts courses – see below). Make sure your completed application includes a 
reference and that you’ve paid your application fee.


If you do apply after January 15 deadline, the individual institution can 
decide whether it wants to accept your application if made before 30 June – but 
it’s not guaranteed. It’s best to contact the institution to find out.

25 February to 2 July: If you have not received any offers or declined all 
offers, you can apply for other courses through Ucas Extra.

24 March: Today is the application deadline for most art and design courses – 
except those with a deadline of 15th January.

31 March: Universities and colleges will make final decisions for applications 
received by 15 January, some can take longer.


6 May: If you received your decision letters by 31 March, then today is your 
deadline to either accept or reject the offers (unless you’re applying through 
Extra).

If you have an unconditional offer you can select it now to confirm your 
place. But if your offers are conditional on exam results or other 
requirements, you can pick two so you have an extra one – called an insurance – 
as a back-up. Be sure you do respond – if Ucas don’t hear back from you, it can 
decline all the offers on your behalf.

30 June: This is the last date that late applications can be made to UCAS – 
after this, any applications will be entered into Clearing.


13 August: A-level results day – firm offers accepted. Clearing opens, 
matching up students who need course places with institutions that have 
availability. Adjustment – for anyone who’s met and exceeded conditions for 
your firm choice and wants to swap where they’re studying - opens too.


31 August: Adjustment closes



 