
Lawyers intimidate. That is not criticism: it is after all what we pay them to 
do. Even with the most consensual divorce, or a conveyancing transaction, we 
know there is another person involved whose interests differ from ours and we 
need to be reassured that, if we end up in battle, our weapon will be scarier 
than theirs. The power to intimidate, in most cases carefully disguised, is a 
key part of a lawyer's armoury.

But from a customer point of view, that veiled sense of power, however useful, 
carries the threat that it could be turned against us. And, as a recent piece of
YouGov research 
<http://www.legalombudsman.org.uk/aboutus/Research_and_survey_findings.html> 
commissioned by theLegal Ombudsman <http://www.legalombudsman.org.uk/> and 
Legal Services Board Consumer Panel shows 
<http://www.legalservicesconsumerpanel.org.uk/>, that threat is one of the 
central reasons why lawyers have been so slow to adapt their practice to modern 
customer demands.

The sense of powerlessness and - yes - fear, which lawyers engender in their 
clients, means that they choke off a key element of customer feedback: 
complaints.

Complaints has been a vexed and unhappy question in the legal profession for 
years. The palpable failure to command consumer confidence on the part of 
successive complaints organisations run by the Law Society resulted in 
parliament using the Legal Services Act to set up the Legal Ombudsman, an 
independent, statutory complaints scheme, which opened for business in October 
2010. Critically, the scheme put an end to the unedifying spectacle of lawyers 
judging complaints about lawyers.

The statutory powers given to the Ombudsman - the ability to command 
co-operation of lawyers and remedies including compensation of up £30,000 – 
have proved key to avoiding the sorts of impasses which bedevilled the previous 
arrangements. But whereas in other areas of professional life the introduction 
of a genuinely independent Ombudsman scheme led to a significant rise in the 
number of customers complaining, there was no such increase with lawyers. While 
over 73,000 complaints received in just under two years is not a shabby figure, 
it is nothing beside the million or more complaints handled every year about 
the financial services sector.

Partly, it's the economy, stupid. As the housing market has collapsed, so has 
the conveyancing market, previously by some margin the most common cause of 
complaints. The cuts to legal aid which are now beginning to bite and the 
simple reduction in the available cash to pay for divorce and family law also 
depress legal transactions and therefore complaints.

However, the YouGov research showed that the biggest brake on complaints was 
customer fear. In some cases, that was merely fear of looking a fool. Law is a 
mysterious business with its own language and traditions, not easily accessible 
to the layperson (as a lay Ombudsman I am very much aware of that), but many 
complainants feared that the response from the lawyer would be less than 
helpful and indeed, we have had many instances where lawyers have responded to 
complaints by dropping the case in midstream, or threatening legal action 
against their client. We have even had lawyers charging clients for the 
privilege of responding to complaints about overcharging.

What lawyers need to remember is that good complaints handling is good for 
business. In law, it remains the case that most clients come via personal 
recommendation and keeping customers happy is essential to future income. Over 
the next few months, we'll be working with regulators in the industry, such as 
the Legal Services Board and theSolicitors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/solicitors> Regulation Authority, to help them 
address issues around complaint handling, but we also need to look at what we 
have learned from the research.

The YouGov report 
<http://www.legalombudsman.org.uk/aboutus/Research_and_survey_findings.html> 
points up the need for us to be clearer about what we do and build awareness of 
our existence. For an Ombudsman scheme, this is a difficult issue. The legal 
profession pays for our scheme and would doubtless take a dim view of us 
advertising for business, but we've been reviewing our website to make it more 
accessible, canvassing the views of under-represented minority groups to see 
what more can be done to reach them, and talking to our fellow Ombudsmen about 
what can be done to build understanding of what an Ombudsman is and does. We 
have also updated ourguides for making complaints and good complaints handling. 
<http://www.legalombudsman.org.uk/aboutus/publications.html>

Ultimately, however, the obligation is on lawyers to deal with complaints 
properly themselves and to signpost customers to us if they can't resolve the 
issue. With big brands poised to enter the legal market, now is not the time 
for lawyers to retrench into old behaviours. The likes of the Co-op, Saga and 
the AA did not grow to their current size by ignoring the views of their 
customers. Law is a service industry and, ultimately, the customer will decide.
 