
It’s September, which means – exciting! – it’s fashion Groundhog Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/07/groundhog-day-perfect-comedy-for-ever>
 again. This consists of fashion weeks starting up, followed swiftly by the 
announcement of a political initiative to protect women against this evil on 
the catwalk. (Another feature of fashion Groundhog Day, incidentally, is a slew 
of articles by male columnists expressing bafflement at why the models are so 
thin, which can be summed up as: “I don’t find this sexy, so why?!” However 
would we know how to look without men telling us what turns them on?)

Anyway, the latest initiative comes courtesy of the Women’s Equality party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/womens-equality-party>, which has 
launched a campaign demanding, among other things,that British designers and 
retailers stop using size zero clothes in shows and photoshoots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/04/minimum-bmi-checks-uk-models-womens-equality-party>
. This, the WEP claims, “will tackle negative body image issues and eating 
disorders”.

I’m going to ignore the all-too-predictable connection between fashion models 
and eating disorders here, because I’ve written enough for this lifetime about 
how absurdly reductive it is to suggest that a mental illness is caused by 
Vogue. Instead, I’ll say this: the WEP is perfectly within its rights to 
address this issue, but – spoiler alert – it will not make a blind bit of 
difference. There have been efforts to legislate against fashion’s obsession 
with skinniness in the past; these laws, wherever they’re passed, always get a 
lot of play, because the media love a story that allows them to run a photo of 
a skinny model at least as much as the fashion industry likes the skinny model 
herself.

So it would be understandable if you were confused as to why things haven’t 
changed. The problem is not only that the laws are rarely enforced, but also 
that they are the equivalent of rearranging the Titanic’s deck chairs. For a 
start, fashion is too international for one country’s legislation to make a 
difference – especially, I’m sorry to say, when it’s this country doing the 
legislating. With the exception of Burberry, British-based fashion companies 
simply do not spend enough on international advertising for any laws to have an 
effect; the rest of the world won’t even see the photographs. Slapping 
legislation on a tiny British brand will not change the aesthetic if Chanel and 
Prada can carry on as before.

Don't like Hillary Clinton? You need to watch Parks And Recreation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/aug/13/hillary-clinton-parks-and-recreation-hadley-freeman>
While fashion represents the connection between skinniness and perfection in 
its purest form, it is also the end point. By the time a woman is looking at 
fashion photography, she’ll have gone through years of indoctrination that the 
less of her there is, the better. It’s there in all the children’s books and 
films, in which the evil women are plump and the nice ones are slender (Roald 
Dahl <https://www.theguardian.com/books/roalddahl> is especially bad on this). 
It’s there in pretty much every film ever made (the only person I’ve 
interviewed with an evident eating disorder was not a model but an actress). 
And it’s there in the general atmosphere of being female today, the things you 
grow up hearing the adult women around you saying about their bodies, the way 
they decline dessert. According toa report just published by the Children’s 
Society 
<http://www.childrenssociety.org.uk/what-we-do/research/the-good-childhood-report>
, teenage girls are unhappier than ever, especially with their bodies, which 
they compare unfavourably with those of their friends and celebrities.

This masochistic tendency towards self‑erasure is a complicated issue, 
something a well‑meaning but overly simplistic campaign against thinness in 
fashion can’t fix. The WEP has also suggested including body-image lessons as 
part of the school curriculum, which is a better idea (and, tellingly, it has 
had less pick-up, what with it lacking the vital excuse for a photograph of a 
model). But instead of fussing about the meaningless phrase “size zero”, or 
conflating thinness with anorexia, the WEP would be more effective if it looked 
at the prevalence of eating disorders in the fashion industry and exposed this. 
Instead of pretending it can tell fashion editors what to put in their 
magazines, the WEP could talk to them to get a more realistic sense of the 
problem, and get them on side.

If we really want to end the association between female skinniness and female 
aspiration, women need to be doing this on an individual, focused level, not 
leaving it to politicians to act on an amorphous, collective one. Look at the 
way you talk about your body and what you eat, especially in front of young 
girls. Call out publications that condescend to larger women and feature 
photographs only of slim ones. Remind your female friends and your daughters 
that their jeans size is not a measurement of their personal value.

It is easy to damn the fashion industry for promoting skinny as the feminine 
ideal. It’s harder to admit that it is only echoing back too many of our own 
darkest thoughts, our own self-loathing.
 