
 Accessibility is a buzzword in Blairite Britain. The very concept of access 
for all has become a kind of political mantra, even though its meaning can vary 
from introducing free admission to museums to improving disabled facilities.

But not everyone is convinced that the quest for accessibility is necessarily 
positive. "It's fine to lower prices, but not to lower expectations," says 
George Walden, author of The New Elites. "Everything depends on the merit of 
the art, and that's what we should care about. Instead our approach is too 
socially conscious. Too often, when the elites talk about accessibility, they 
mean lowering expectations for people whom they think are less smart than 
themselves."

There is certainly a fear among some that New Labour's "philistine populism" 
is more concerned with accessibility targets than excellence. "Just because 
something is popular doesn't mean that it's good," adds Walden. "And it is 
worth looking outside this island of ours. How it is that countries like 
France, which I would say has a far higher general level of aesthetic education 
than ours, charge for museums? I'm not sure it makes us morally superior to 
other countries that we have free admission."

Professor Anthony O'Hear, a philosopher and former government education 
adviser, agrees. He is also concerned that the stress on accessibility may lead 
to a "dumbing down" within the art world. "I think there are some works which 
demand attention and respect, and to pretend that they're not difficult, in the 
service of accessibility, destroys their meaning," he says.

Others point at Classic FM and events like the Proms in the Park which they 
criticise for concentrating on so-called "greatest hits" classics or playing 
excerpts from symphonies. Meanwhile Trevor Nunn was sorely censured for putting 
on the musicals Oklahoma and My Fair Lady during his period of tenure at the 
National Theatre.

"What one craves from the National is some alternative to a musical-dominated 
commercial culture rather than a duplication of it," wrote Guardian theatre 
critic Michael Billington.

"I'm not negative about musicals," says George Walden. "Some, like West Side 
Story, are much better than certain plays. But, as with all arts, it's the 
quality that counts. People can emphasise the success of Tate Modern, but I 
would say that the new Tate actually has a very thin collection. As for 
Salford's Lowry arts centre, I just don't think it's very good. Lowry's a small 
provincial artist."

Those who point to the importance of greater and more diverse audiences are 
not helped by the furore that surrounds each year's Turner Prize. To many, it 
appears that while claiming to broaden accessibility by encouraging a wide 
variety of artistic genres, it actually results in something that is more PR 
hype than high quality. Last year, for example, a photographer beat, 
collectively, an embroiderer, a painter who had been accused of plagiarism and 
an artist whose exhibit was, literally, a pile of rubbish.

"The Turner Prize has no artistic value," says Professor O'Hear. "It's beyond 
vulgar, simply an attempt to gain media coverage. Much of it isn't art, as is 
the case with other examples, like graffiti. This emphasis on accessibility is 
compromising the seriousness with which things can be appreciated."

Graham Sheffield, artistic director of the Barbican, admits that the concept 
of access is not always popular.

"It's assumed to be pejorative," he says. "Access should mean getting in, but 
it's acquired this strange connotation, which is a pity. It shouldn't mean 
compromise and it shouldn't mean dumbing down. Access should mean mixing 
cultures. It might be used as a catch-all phrase these days, but what it needs 
to do is simply concentrate on quality, presentation and integrity."
 