
One is the story of starched collars, tea trays and the last days of the 
stately homes of England. The other tells of the bleak descent into hell of an 
unassuming chemistry teacher who becomes a drugs baron in New Mexico. While 
ITV'sDownton Abbey offers solace and shimmering evening dresses, AMC's Breaking 
Bad confronts us with a contemporary underworld of vacant-eyed addicts.

These two hit series represent opposite poles of a thriving television culture 
on both sides of the Atlantic. Each has reached big and loyal audiences by 
taking wildly different approaches to drama. But on Sunday night the shows will 
be up against each other in the battle for an Emmy at the annual television 
awards show staged in Los Angeles.

The popularity of Downton Abbey in America has been put down to a nostalgic 
appetite for the imagined certainties and glamour of a bygone age, and is also 
credited with a growth in interest in everything English among Americans, 
encompassing not just our actors but our royals.

Yet pundits suspect this may not be enough to ensure Downton Abbey wins the 
top prize for outstanding drama series. For it is not a simple choice between 
cocktails at six in Downton's drawing room or crystal meth at midnight in 
Albuquerque; the field is unusually strong across the board.Homeland is in 
contention, alongsideHouse of Cards, the enduring quality of Mad Men and the 
outlandish spectacle of HBO'sGame of Thrones.

American TV critics are placing bets on Game of Thrones, which also has 15 
award nominations in other categories. Some others are backing Showtime's
Homeland over Breaking Bad, although reviews of the second series of the 
terrorism drama starringDamian Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/damian-lewis> and Clare Danes generally 
rated it less powerful than their first outing.Breaking Bad has already been 
nominated four times during its history, whileMad Men boasts more victories 
than any other show.

The new kudos of the small screen means that across the Emmy awards lineup 
there are more established heavyweight theatre and film names – from David 
Mamet to Tom Stoppard, andKevin Spacey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kevinspacey> to Diana Rigg – in contention 
than ever.

Host Neil Patrick Harris, who stars in CBS's How I Met Your Mother, will be 
looking out over a Nokia Theatre audience of stars to rival Oscar night. And 
with so many shows available to British viewers just after being aired in 
America, the event is now of greater relevance here, with or without a long 
list of British awards contenders.

Netflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix>, a web-only channel, made 
Emmy history this year with three shows nominated:Arrested Development, Hemlock 
Groveand House of Cards.

Scottish comic writer Armando Iannucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/armando-iannucci> is up for best comedy with 
Veep, starring Julia Louis-Dreyfus as a US vice-president, but he must fend off 
Lena Dunham's daring showGirls, as well as Modern Family, 30 Rock, Louie and 
The Big Bang Theory. Downton's Michelle Dockery is in the running for a lead 
actress prize but must beat two women who have dominated screens this year; 
Clare Danes andMad Men star Elisabeth Moss. Downton is also in with a chance 
for lead actor, with Hugh Bonneville up against fellow Brit Damian Lewis.

For a British triumph, Hollywood stars Jeff Daniels and Kevin Spacey would 
have to be defeated, to say nothing ofMad Men's Jon Hamm and the evil chemistry 
teacher Walter White fromBreaking Bad, Bryan Cranston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/bryan-cranston>.

The British talents nominated this year face fierce opposition from 
Hollywood's big guns. Al Pacino is nominated for his role inPhil Spector, and 
Matt Damon andMichael Douglas <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-douglas>
 for the Liberace film,Behind the Candelabra.

And in a twist that further emphasises the growing power of television drama, 
the Emmys has its own ratings challenge: it is pitted against the penultimate 
episode ofBreaking Bad on a rival channel.
 