
The dream of harnessing the mighty Congo with the world's largest set of dams 
has moved closer, with the World Bank and other financial institutions expected 
to offer finance and SouthAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> 
agreeing to buy half of the power generated.

In the past 60 years French, Belgian, Chinese, Brazilian and African engineers 
have all hoped to dam the river.

But decades of civil war, corruption, and the Democratic Republic of Congo's 
(DRC) reputation as a failed state have limited the hydropower developments at 
the country's Inga Falls to two relatively small dams, built in 1972 and 1982. 
These, known as Inga 1 and 2, have a theoretical capacity of 1,400 megawatts 
but produce about half that.

A new $20bn (£13.2bn) development to generate a further 4,800MW was announced 
over the weekend in Paris, with work planned to start in October 2015. 
According to the DRC government, working with European and other consultants, 
five further stages at Inga Falls could eventually have a capacity of 40,000MW 
– equivalent to more than 20 large nuclear power stations.

This would make the complete Grand Inga development the largest hydro project 
in the world, generating twice as much as the Three Gorges dam in China. In 
theory, say its backers, it could provide 40% of Africa's electricity needs.

The attraction of developing hydropower on the Congo, says the government, is 
that unlike most of the world's great dam projects, it would not require tens 
of thousands of people to be relocated, nor would it block the river and result 
in significant environmental consequences. Because the Congo River around Inga 
is so vast and falls nearly 100 metres over a short distance, water can be 
diverted to create a massive new lake without disturbing its main flow.

"The impact on land use is very limited. The development can be progressive 
and carried out in a series of further phases, eventually providing 40,000MW of 
power," says the technical data for the proposed development.

The African Development Bank, World Bank, French Development Agency, European 
Investment Bank and Development Bank of South Africa have all shown interest in 
financing the next stage of the project. No developer has been chosen but 
Chinese, Korean and Spanish companies are said to be in the forefront.

Key to the project is South Africa's commitment this week to buy 2,500MW of 
capacity. "We have affirmed our commitment to the project by already 
provisioning for this purchase in our budgetary plan," said a South Africa 
ministry of energy official, Garrith Bezuidenhoudt.

But the prospect of local people getting power from Inga in the next 20 years 
is remote. Less than 10% of the population has electricity, with nearly all 
Inga 1 and 2 power going directly to multinational mining companies in the 
Katanga "copper belt". It is expected most Inga 3 power would travel 1,500 
miles to power-hungry South Africa or large mines in DRC.

Giant hydropower schemes in Africa have a poor track record. "Projects such as 
Inga 1 and 2 have not unleashed economic development, but have been major 
contributors to African countries' unsustainable debt burden," said the 
US-based InternationalRivers <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/rivers> 
network, which has led opposition to major dams around the world for 20 years.

In a letter last week to the World Bank president, Jim Yong Kim 
<http://www.internationalrivers.org/resources/ngo-letter-on-the-world-bank-s-return-to-mega-dams-in-africa-7973>
, the International Rivers and 18 other civil society organisations and 
networks from Africa, Europe and the US said the reality of large-scale dams 
seldom matched their expectations, mostly adding to debt problems and allowing 
powerful companies to cheaply exploit and export Africa's vast natural 
resources.

According to the groups, the International Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Agency (IEA) has found that 
because of the continent's low population density, grid-based electrification – 
including through large hydropower projects – is not cost-effective for much of 
rural Sub-Saharan Africa.

The letter said: "Renewable energy solutions such as wind, solar and micro 
hydropower projects are much more effective at reaching the rural poor.

"According to the IEA report 
<http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/resources/energydevelopment/energyforallfinancingaccessforthepoor/>
, 70% of the world's unelectrified rural areas are best served through 
mini-grids or off-grid solutions.

"In the DRC, the World Bank and other financiers have invested billions… in 
the construction and rehabilitation of the Inga 1 and 2 hydropower projects and 
associated transmission lines over the past 40 years.

"After all this investment, 85% of the electricity in the DRC is consumed by 
high-voltage users, while only 6-9% of the population has access to 
electricity. We are concerned that the bank's proposed focus on large 
hydropower projects will write off electricity access for the majority of 
Africa's poor."
 