
Time was when a roof over your head, food on the table and occasional bouts of 
sexual activity were the hallmarks of a successful marriage. Not any more. 
According to a US psychologist, the modern marriage must fulfil far deeper 
demands, and most couples are struggling to cope.

Eli Finkel, director of social psychology at Northwestern University in 
Illinois, said couples today looked to their marriages to help them "grow as 
individuals", and support them through "voyages of self-discovery". But their 
expectations are rarely met, he said, because of the investment of time and 
effort involved.

Finkel claims that persistent high divorce rates and low levels of marital 
satisfaction are a direct result of couples being unable to meet the 
psychological expectations of their partners. While overall demands on 
marriages have not changed much over time, he said, the nature of the demands 
has shifted and they require more time and effort to satisfy.

"In the past, you married someone who helped you meet your basic needs, but 
over time, love increasingly conquered marriage. Now people are looking to 
their spouses to help them discover who they are, and to achieve the best 
version of themselves," Finkel said.

Speaking at the American Association for the Advancement of Science annual 
meeting in Chicago <http://meetings.aaas.org>, Finkel said that most couples 
struggle because the change in demands calls for more investment in marriage in 
an age when many people have less time on their hands.

"People used to marry for basic things like food and shelter. In the 1800s, 
you didn't have to have profound insight into your partner's core essence to 
tend to the chickens or build a sound physical structure against the snow," 
Finkel said. "Back then, the idea of marrying for love was ludicrous."

"In 2014, you are really hoping that your partner can help you on a voyage of 
discovery and personal growth, but your partner cannot do that unless he or she 
really knows who you are, and really understands your core essence. That 
requires much greater investment of time and psychological resources," he said.

A blissful minority are in marriages that fulfil these deeper demands, and 
those marriages are better than the best marriages of yesteryear, Finkel 
claims. But the average marriage falls short because the time and effort 
required were impossible for most to meet.

Finkel arrived at his theory – which has not met with universal approval – 
after reviewing studies on the psychology, history and sociology of marriage. 
He said marriage had gone through a series of distinct transitions as countries 
and individuals grew wealthier and cultural transformations played out. Since 
the 1850s, marriage had become less about basic needs and more about love and 
companionship.

In the 1960s, love and companionship remained central to marriage, but these 
were joined by other factors, including the personal growth of the couple. In 
modern marriages, people look to their partners "to help them find themselves, 
and to pursue careers and other activities that facilitate the expression of 
their core self", he said.

Despite naming his theory the "suffocation model of marriage", Finkel 
maintains he is optimistic about the institution. He said couples could improve 
the quality of their marriages by allowing them to breathe, for example by 
lowering their demands on the relationship in hard times, such as when the 
couple had young children or faced work or money problems. "Some people will 
realise they are asking a lot of their marriage given the 30 minutes a week 
they spend talking to their wife," he said. "The irony is that asking less of 
the marriage when resources are scarce will actually make the marriage 
stronger."

Lynne Jamieson, who studies the sociology of families and relationships at 
Edinburgh University, said that the demands on marriages vary hugely over time 
and between people from different social and economic backgrounds. "The 
argument that we now spend less time on relationships is not so clearcut," she 
said.

Scores of factors come into play. While couples tended to have more children 
in the past, she said, more households now have two working parents. Both are a 
demand on time. People today live longer, which also adds to the pressure in 
marriages. In the past, more families would lose a parent while children were 
still growing up.

Having a deeper understanding of each other might not be the whole story, 
Jamieson suggested. "Making somebody a cup of tea as a gesture, especially 
first thing in morning, is very important to people. Those little gestures can 
be as important as profound conversation," she said. "Sometimes actions do 
speak louder than words."
 