
The death of Duke Ellington's beloved mother in 1935 drew from the great 
composer a work that provided the first serious indication that his gifts could 
not be confined to the glittering multifaceted miniatures with which he had 
made his name.

Reminiscing in Tempo, 12 minutes long, reflected the state of contemplative 
melancholy into which Ellington, then aged 36, had fallen following his 
bereavement. Given the technical limitations of the day, it had to be spread 
over all four sides of a pair of 10-inch 78rpm discs, and perhaps the 
inevitable discontinuity of the listening experience lay behind the mixed 
critical response it provoked in usually sympathetic quarters. With the benefit 
of subsequent developments, we can, of course, listen to it as a single 
unbroken piece and can therefore appreciate the subtle fluctuations of mood as 
it flows gently, and with a purposeful absence of rhetorical flourishes, 
through a sequence of carefully supported solos by Ellington's great soloists, 
including the trumpeter Rex Stewart, the trombonist Joe "Tricky Sam" Nanton, 
the clarinetist Barney Bigard, the alto saxophonist Johnny Hodges and the 
baritone saxophonist Harry Carney.

Ellington was on the road, undertaking a series of one-nighters, when he heard 
the news of his mother's demise, and he stayed up all night in his Pullman car, 
"all caught up in the rhythm and motion of the train dashing through the 
south", to lay the foundations of his musical tribute. The interlude for 
Ellington's unaccompanied piano allows the composer to evoke the sensation of a 
mind gently slipping in and out of grief. With this piece, he articulated the 
extent of an ambition that ranged far beyond his reputation as the leader of a 
popular big band.

On his arrival in New York from Washington DC a dozen years earlier, the young 
Edward Kennedy Ellington – nicknamed "Duke" by a childhood friend – had begun 
collecting musicians; in 1927 they opened at Harlem's Cotton Club, playing to a 
white, high-society audience in a long engagement that became one of the 
landmarks of jazz history. Soon he was known as the composer of such 
distinctive pieces as Mood Indigo, Black and Tan Fantasy, East St Louis 
Toodle-oo, Creole Love Call, Sophisticated Lady and In a Sentimental Mood. He 
ventured on to Broadway with the band in Florenz Ziegfeld's Show Girl. They 
became a regular feature of Hollywood movies such as Check and Double Check, 
Belle of the Nineties and Murder at the Vanities (in 1937, Duke would provide 
music for the Marx Brothers' A Day at the Races). When they toured the south, 
the band avoided segregated accommodation while emphasising their status by 
travelling by rail in two Pullman cars with their name on the side, in which 
they slept at night. In 1933, they visited Europe, playing the London Palladium 
and the Trocadero, Elephant and Castle, as well as venues in Liverpool, 
Glasgow, Hastings, Harrogate and Blackpool.

At the Palladium, as one of 13 acts on the bill, they were restricted to a 
mere eight short numbers, with Mood Indigo as the encore. But Reminiscing in 
Tempo showed that Ellington was more than capable of stretching himself beyond 
the conventional three-minute form and creating jazz on a scale hitherto 
unimagined. The output of brilliant miniatures – Jack the Bear, Ko-Ko, A 
Portrait of Bert Williams, Prelude to a Kiss, Concerto for Cootie – continued 
as he entered the 1940s with perhaps the greatest line-up he ever assembled, 
and in 1941 his first full-length Broadway show, Jump for Joy, introduced Just 
Squeeze Me and I Got It Bad and That Ain't Good.

But soon the urge to compose in extended forms began to assert itself, first 
with Black, Brown and Beige, a symphony with which he inaugurated his annual 
series of Carnegie Hall concerts in 1941. It was followed by the Perfume Suite 
(1945), the Liberian Suite (1947), the NewportJazz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jazz> Festival Suite (1956), his resplendent 
exploration of themes from Shakespeare under the title Such Sweet Thunder 
(1957) and, in 1958, the Queen's Suite, dedicated to Elizabeth II, to whom he 
had been presented during an earlier visit and who promptly received what was, 
for many years, the only copy of the work in recorded form. Later, there would 
be the New Orleans Suite, Afro-Eurasian Eclipse, the Far East Suite, the Latin 
American Suite and the music for the sacred concerts to which he devoted a 
considerable amount of energy in the years before his death in 1974, at the age 
of 75.

Although occasionally disparaged, Ellington's extended compositions contained 
some of his finest music and demonstrated to those who followed him that the 
music did not need to be constrained by the artificial boundaries originally 
imposed by the playing time of a 10-inch shellac disc: a momentous breakthrough.
 