
It was rumored to have been a noble death, and that brought mild comfort into 
the hearts of the bereaved mourners that stood in huddled groups, watching 
through tear-veiled eyes as the gilded casket was ceremoniously interred in the 
mausoleum.

It was also a tragedy. That a man as beloved and respected as Albus 
Dumbledore, who had defeated the dark wizard, Grindenwald, could be destroyed 
so suddenly by but a mere handful of enemies was inconceivable. . .

How could something so horrific be allowed to happen? That was the question 
that people demanded of the heavens and of each other; as they nursed their 
guilt-ridden hearts. Any would have willingly given their own lives in place of 
his.

"If only I had been there." was the common phrase, amongst the 
self-flagellating hordes.

In the manner of wounded dogs, that bite the hand that attempts to salve the 
wound, they rounded, teeth bared, on the person whom they perceived as a failed 
hero. He who had been with Dumbledore, but had been unable to save him.

" Why didn't you save him?" They demanded, closing in on their prey. 

When Albus Dumbledore had been disarmed, captured, and tortured by the 
villainous Deatheaters, where had his pet spy been? There to save him with 
brave flourishes and self-sacrifice? Not as they saw it.

How could he explain to them what those last minutes had been like? He had 
stood by, helpless, as Dumbledore was questioned, then when faced with the 
possibility of the truth serum, which would have endangered them all, 
Dumbledore had whispered his last request into Snape's mind.

" For the sake of Merlin, Severus, let me have your wand." even his mental 
voice had been pain-laced, and weary.

So careful, that it looked like an accident, he, Snape, had edged closer to 
the bound figure, so that Dumbledore's hand, which had somehow escaped it's 
bonds, could seize the implement from him.

Before any of the Deatheaters could respond, Dumbledore had turned the wand on 
himself, offering only a brief and inconspicuous nod of dignified gratitude to 
his saviour. His last words echoed still through Snape's mind;

"AVADA KEDAVRA!"

" How did he die?" The people demanded of Snape, later at the trial.

And Snape answered;

" I killed him."

Jayme Goodman
 