
This is the most famous equation in the history of equations. It has been 
printed on countless T-shirts and posters, starred in films and, even if you've 
never appreciated the beauty or utility of equations, you'll know this one. And 
you probably also know who came up with it – physicist and Nobel laureateAlbert 
Einstein <https://www.theguardian.com/science/alberteinstein>.

The ideas that led to the equation were set down by Einstein in 1905, in a 
paper submitted to theAnnalen der Physik called "Does the Inertia of a Body 
Depend Upon Its Energy Content?". The relationship between energy and mass came 
out of another of Einstein's ideas, special relativity, which was a radical new 
way to relate the motions of objects in the universe.

At one level, the equation is devastatingly simple. It says that the energy 
(E) in a system (an atom, a person, the solar system) is equal to its total 
mass (m) multiplied by the square of the speed of light (c, equal to 186,000 
miles per second). Like all good equations, though, its simplicity is a 
rabbit-hole into something profound about nature: energy and mass are not just 
mathematically related, they are different ways to measure the same thing. 
Before Einstein, scientists defined energy as the stuff that allows objects and 
fields to interact or move in some way – kinetic energy is associated with 
movement, thermal energy involves heating and electromagnetic fields contain 
energy that is transmitted as waves. All these types of energy can be 
transformed from one to another, but nothing can ever be created or destroyed.

In relativity theory, Einstein introduced mass as a new type of energy to the 
mix. Beforehand, the mass of something in kilograms was just a measure of how 
much stuff was present and how resistant it was to being moved around. In 
Einstein's new world, mass became a way to measure the total energy present in 
an object, even when it was not being heated, moved or irradiated or whatever 
else. Mass is just a super-concentrated form of energy and, moreover, these 
things can turn from one form to the other and back again. Nuclear power 
stations exploit this idea inside their reactors where subatomic particles, 
called neutrons, are fired at the nuclei of uranium atoms, which causes the 
uranium to split into smaller atoms. The process of fission releases energy and 
further neutrons that can go on to split more uranium atoms. If you made very 
precise measurements of all the particles before and after the process, you 
would find that the total mass of the latter was very slightly smaller than the 
former, a difference known as the "mass defect". That missing matter has been 
converted to energy and you can calculate how much using Einstein's equation.

Despite the tiny discrepancy in mass between the uranium atom and its 
products, the amount of energy released is big and the reason why is obvious 
when you look at the c² term in the equation – the speed of light is a huge 
number by itself and its square is therefore enormous. There is a lot of energy 
condensed into matter — 1kg of "stuff" contains around 9 x 10^16 joules, if you 
could somehow transform all of it into energy. That is the equivalent of more 
than 40 megatons of TNT. More practically, it is the amount of energy that 
would come out of a 1 gigawatt power plant, big enough to run 10 million homes 
for at least three years. A 100kg person, therefore, has enough energy locked 
up inside them to run that many homes for 300 years.

Unlocking that energy is no easy task, however. Nuclear fission is one of 
several ways to release a tiny bit of an atom's mass, but most of the stuff 
remains in the form of familiar protons, neutrons and electrons. One way to 
turn an entire block of material into pure energy would be to bring it together 
with antimatter. Particles of matter and antimatter are the same, except for an 
opposite electrical charge. Bring them together, though, and they will 
annihilate each other into pure energy. Unfortunately, given that we don't know 
any natural sources of antimatter, the only way to produce it is in particle 
accelerators and it would take 10 million years to produce a kilogram of it.

Particle accelerators studying fundamental physics are another place where 
Einstein's equation becomes useful. Special relativity says that the faster 
something moves, the more massive it becomes. In a particle accelerator, 
protons are accelerated to almost the speed of light and smashed into each 
other. The high energy of these collisions allows the formation of new, more 
massive particles than protons – such as theHiggs boson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/higgs-boson> – that physicists might want 
to study. Which particles might be formed and how much mass they have can all 
be calculated using Einstein's equation.

It would be nice to think that Einstein's equation became famous simply 
because of its fundamental importance in making us understand how different the 
world really is to how we perceived it a century ago. But its fame is mostly 
because of its association with one of the most devastating weapons produced by 
humans – the atomic bomb. The equation appeared in the report, prepared for the 
US government by physicist Henry DeWolf Smyth in 1945, on the Allied efforts to 
make an atomic bomb during the Manhattan project. The result of that project 
led to the death of hundreds of thousands of Japanese citizens in Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki.

Einstein himself had encouraged the US government to fund research into atomic 
energy during the second world war but his own involvement in the Manhattan 
project was limited because of his lack of security clearances. It is unlikely 
that Einstein's equation was much use in designing the bomb, beyond making 
scientists and military leaders realise that such a thing would be 
theoretically possible, but the association has stuck.

This article has been amended to correct an equation
 