
The use of antibiotics in young children may alter the natural populations of 
gut microbes in a way that leaves them predisposed to weight gain and asthma in 
later childhood, according to new research.

The study of 236 children aged between two and seven, with a median age of 
five, backs earlier research on mice and children indicating the negative 
consequences of early antibiotic use.Antibiotics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/antibiotics> are the most commonly used 
drugs in childhood populations of western countries.

Researchers at the university of Helsinki said the use of antibiotics is 
associated with a long-lasting shift in microbiota – clusters of bacteria from 
different regions of the body – and metabolism.

Humans and other animals are home to vast populations of microbes that live on 
the skin and in the gut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/aug/14/antibiotics-babies-toddlers-obesity-fat>
. Humans carry around 100 trillion bacteria – meaning microbes outnumber human 
cells by 10 to one. But rather than causing us harm, studies suggest that a 
healthy “microbiome” is crucial for our wellbeing.

“Among the children who received macrolides (a class of antibiotic) in early 
life, we find a positive correlation between overall lifetime antibiotic use 
and body mass index (BMI), as well as an increased risk of asthma, suggesting 
that macrolide use may alter the microbiota in infants in a way that 
predisposes to antibiotic-associated weight gain and asthma in later 
childhood,” said thestudy published in Nature Communications 
<http://www.nature.com/ncomms/2016/160126/ncomms10410/full/ncomms10410.html>.

Previous research on mice suggested that antibiotics are not directly to blame 
for weight gain later in life. Instead, the problem arose when antibiotics 
wiped out some types of gut bacteria but allowed hardier ones to thrive. This 
change in composition of the microbiome had a long-term impact on metabolism 
that persisted even when the population of gut microbes had returned to normal 
several weeks later.

'Almost too late': fears of global superbug crisis in wake of antibiotic misuse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/22/almost-too-late-fears-of-global-superbug-crisis-in-wake-of-antibiotic-misuse>
The Finnish researchers said their results confirm corresponding patterns in 
human children:

“The children with heavy early-life use of antibiotics but no antibiotics for 
at least two years before sample donation had a microbiota similar with those 
with low lifetime antibiotic use. Nevertheless, early life use of macrolides 
predisposed to overweight and asthma. These results suggest that even transient 
microbiome disturbance in early life may have long-term effects on the 
metabolic and immunological health of the child.”

As for asthma, the researchers said their study suggested that macrolide 
alters the microbiota in a way that disrupts the healthy immune development 
system. This is in line with with previous large international studies that 
have found an association between asthma and early use of antibiotics.

“Our results confirm and extend previous results from mouse experiments and 
indicate that macrolide use may have undesired effects on the developing 
microbiota of children, which may compromise the development of a healthy 
immune system and metabolism.”
 