
Scientists have found that introducing babies to peanuts, eggs and other 
potentially allergy-causing foods at an early age could prevent serious 
reactions later in life.

The study for the Food Standards Agency (FSA) found that children who were 
introduced to peanut and egg-white proteins from the age of three months had a 
lower chance of developing food allergies than those who were only introduced 
to them at six months old – but only if the recommended quantity of allergenic 
food was consumed.


Scientists found that weekly consumption of the equivalent of approximately 
one-and-a-half teaspoons of peanut butter and one small boiled egg would lead 
to the prevention of an allergy to those food substances.

The research compared those infants who were breastfed and consumed allergenic 
foods from three months with those solely breastfed and given foods at six 
months.

'He has to have a life, we have to take that risk': children living extreme 
allergies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/19/children-living-extreme-allergies>
Dubbed Eat <http://www.eatstudy.co.uk/> (Enquiring About Tolerance), the study 
– published in theNew England Journal of Medicine <http://www.nejm.org/> – 
involved 1,303 three-month-old children from England and Wales who were 
randomly split into two groups.


Mothers of children in the first group were asked to comply with current 
guidelines, which recommend that mothers breastfeed their children for the 
first six months of their lives before introducing them to allergenic foods if 
they so choose.

After testing their children for existing allergies, mothers of children in 
the second group were asked, in addition to breastfeeding, to introduce their 
offspring to six types of allergenic foods – cooked eggs, milk, wheat, peanuts, 
fish and sesame – from the age of three months. Both groups were then tracked 
over the next three years to see if they developed any allergies to those foods 
between the ages of one and three years old.

When the scientists looked at those mothers who had stuck strictly to the 
early introduction regime, the relative risk of developing a food allergy was 
67% lower than for children who had just been breastfed to six months.

More specifically, the results reveal that prevalence of egg allergies was far 
lower, with just 1.4% of those exposed to them from the age of three months 
developing an egg-allergy, compared with 5.5% of those who were breastfed to 
six months.

For peanuts the effect was even greater: none of the 310 children in the early 
introduction group developed a peanut allergy, versus 13 of the 525 children 
who developed an allergy having been introduced to them from the age of six 
months.

While this study will be of interest to parents, we would advise them to 
continue to follow existing ​​government advice
Guy Poppy, chief scientific adviser at the FSA 
However, early introduction to such foods only helped to avoid allergies later 
in life if the children were exposed to a sufficient amount of the potentially 
allergy-causing food. The authors conclude that a mean weekly consumption of 2g 
of peanut or egg-white protein was associated with the prevention of these two 
respective food allergies.

“Our study was looking at the introduction of multiple allergenic foods to 
infants recruited from the general population,” explained Dr Michael Perkin, 
one of the study’s authors. “This is about what’s the best way of introducing 
allergenic foods to all infants, not just a very selected subgroup. And that is 
absolutely unique. No one has done anything remotely like this.”

The study – which was run by researchers from St George’s University of 
London, King’s College London and Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS foundation trust – 
builds on the earlier findings of the team’s Learning Early About Peanut 
Allergy (Leap) trial, which involved a cohort of infants at high-risk of 
developing peanut allergies. In that study, thescientists discovered that 
exposing such children to peanut protein in their first 11 months reduced the 
chance of them developing a peanut allergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/23/feed-babies-peanuts-reverse-allergy-rise>
 by the time they reached five years of age.

“Leap was formed of a very focused group of children who were at really high 
risk of allergic reaction and was limited to peanuts,” said Dr Andrew Clark, a 
children’s allergy specialist at Cambridge University hospitals.

“The improvements in this study are that it is on a much wider spectrum of the 
general population. And the exciting finding is that they did find that early 
introduction of allergenic foods works in that it seems to reduce the 
prevalence of food allergies, tested at three years.”

Scientists link allergies to hyperactive immune cells in babies' cord blood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/14/scientists-link-allergies-to-hyperactive-immune-cells-in-babies-cord-blood>
However, the study does have limitations, he added. “It didn’t show an effect 
in the majority of children that they studied – it seems to show an effect only 
in those people who were really engaged with the process of introducing the 
foods early,” said Clark. “What we need to look at now is ways of identifying 
people for whom the early introduction is going to work best.”

Guy Poppy, chief scientific adviser at the FSA, said: “The FSA has an 
important role to play in helping consumers manage food allergies and this 
includes expanding our knowledge about how allergies develop. This research is 
an important part of that work. These findings will add to the body of 
scientific evidence that helps us inform public health policies and guidelines 
on infant feeding.

 “While this study will be of interest to parents, we would advise them to 
continue to follow existing government infant feeding advice. It should also be 
emphasised that this research was carried out under guidance of allergy 
professionals.”
 