
The EDF Energy Cup will be downgraded when its contract comes up for renewal 
at the end of next season. Ireland's leading provinces have expressed an 
interest at becoming involved in a revised version of the event.

The Anglo-Welsh tournament, which is in its third year, is currently played 
outside international periods. From the 2009-10 season the Guinness Premiership 
clubs want it to occupy the weekends in November, February and March when 
internationals are played during the autumn internationals and the Six Nations 
Championship.

The EDF is financially lucrative, with the 12 Premiership clubs sharing £4m a 
year, thanks largely to the television deal agreed with BBC Wales. Premier 
Rugby accepts it will receive less money if it moves the group stage of the 
tournament to parts of the season when the game enjoys saturation television 
coverage and when key players will be away from their clubs.

"Our priority when negotiating the agreement with the Rugby Football Union 
over the management of elite players was to protect the Premiership," said the 
Premier Rugby chief executive, Mark McCafferty, yesterday. "What we will be 
doing is moving two or three league weekends out of the international windows 
and they will occupy slots currently taken up by the EDF.

"We have to rethink the future of the EDF at the end of its current life and 
we are currently talking to the Welsh about it. There is definitely a place for 
a third competition, but it will have to have more of a development feel to it 
because, certainly in the group stage, matches will be played when Test players 
are absent.

"We appreciate we will take a hit financially, but the Irish provinces have 
expressed an interest in taking part in the tournament. It is important that 
clubs continue to have fixtures during the three months of the year when 
internationals are played and the EDF has an important role to play as a 
platform for emerging players."

This weekend marks the final round of group matches in the current edition of 
the cross-border tournament. Newcastle visit Wasps tomorrow and, with Jonny 
Wilkinson and Toby Flood fit again at fly-half and inside centre, move Mathew 
Tait to full-back, the position where many believe his international future 
lies.

"Mathew will give us a bit more balance there with his pace and his kicking 
game, which is very under-rated by some people outside this club," said the 
Falcons director of rugby, John Fletcher. The All Black prop Carl Hayman is on 
the bench.

The England World Cup-winning wing Ben Cohen, who after leaving Northampton 
will make his first appearance of the season tomorrow when he comes off the 
Barbarians bench against South Africa, is close to signing for a new club. The 
29-year-old had hoped to move to Leicester in October, but they would have 
breached the salary cap had they signed him.

"I hope to be with a new club before the end of the year and I will not have 
to move house," said Cohen, which suggests Leicester, Saracens or Worcester as 
the most likely destinations. "I have decided on the club and it is just a 
matter of dotting i's and crossing t's."
 