
"I'm always amazed by the way that professional planning fails people," Mikey 
Tomkins says, as we stand beneath a 17 storey block of flats called Welshpool 
House, near Hackney's Broadway Market. Even on a bright, sunny afternoon in 
August, the area is not particularly inviting: people have congregated around a 
bench on the far side of the road, but the concrete terrace beneath the 
building and the three adjoining areas of fenced-off grass, are empty.

Tomkins, who is an expert on urban agriculture and a bee-keeper with hives on 
the roof of a nearby building, is incensed by the sight of so much wasted 
space. Last year, he produced a map calledEdible Hackney 
<http://www.mikeytomkins.co.uk/work/edible-maps/>, which imagines how the 
streets and estates of a small area of E8 could be turned to food production. 
He drew beehives on the roof of the 17-storey building and placed raised beds 
of vegetables and fruit trees around its base. The garages on the far side of 
the road became mushroom farms, and London Fields was the venue for an annual 
festival of local produce.

The map offers a beguiling vision of a district recently ravaged by riots, and 
yet it isn't entirely wishful thinking. When Tomkins had greeted our small 
group half an hour before with a pot of his London Fields honey, he had 
explained that the tour we were about to embark on would not only take in the 
places where food might be produced, but the places where it was already in 
production.

Our first stop was a garden that Tomkins described as an oasis, at the back of 
a low-rise block of flats on the Warburton and Darcy Estate, between Mare 
Street and London Fields. It is overlooked on three sides by windows, but 
sunflowers the size of the satellite dishes bloom in the flowerbeds around its 
edges, and elsewhere, there are beans, tomatoes, spinach, artichokes, potatoes, 
and a wide variety of herbs. Weeks before, the plum trees beside the gate had 
been dripping fruit.
 A vegetable patch off Teale Street, Hackney. Photograph: Mikey Tomkins 
Elsewhere, residents of Hackney's estates have attempted to gain control of 
their environment by making what Tomkins called "incremental changes" to the 
places they live. There are runner beans and green beans entwined in the 
railings on the edges of Pritchard's Road, and beds of vegetables have been 
planted in the narrow strip of earth beneath the windows of the ground-floor 
flats. Tomkins pointed out that there was no easy access to the land - the 
gardens fringing the estate were apparently only meant for show, but the 
residents had colonised the land, and the council had tolerated their 
initiative by mowing around the edges of the expanding plots. Other people had 
created ever more elaborate miniature gardens - the luxuriant fronds of a 
pumpkin called a dodi had grown so thickly around a frame beside the front door 
of a flat on Teale Street that it formed a shady veranda.

Such sights are becoming increasingly common in Hackney, and elsewhere in 
British cities. Urban agriculture - also known as "food gardening" – is 
becoming an increasingly popular way of addressing rising food prices, and 
providing an alternative to industrialised methods of food production. The 
Capital Growth campaign, which aims to provide support for 2,012 new food 
growing "spaces" in London by the end of 2012, is more than halfway to its 
total. Londoners have even begun producing their own wine - theUrban Wine 
Company <http://www.urbanwineco.com/> enlists the help of dozens of local 
growers, who deliver grapes in exchange for bottles of the finished product, 
and Tomkins had pointed out a heavily laden vine spilling over a south-facing 
wall in the centre of an estate called Orwell Court.

In total, Tomkins has counted 26 different kinds of fruit and vegetable within 
the area defined by his map, though he doesn't claim that it's possible, or 
desirable, for Hackney's residents to become entirely self-sufficient. "You'd 
still want some trade for cereals, staples, long-season crops," he says: "The 
instant, short-season crop are the ones you'd want to do here, which might, in 
the end, be only 15% of your diet. But it's the really energy-intensive stuff."

The Hackney-based collective, Growing Communities 
<http://www.growingcommunities.org/>, who produce veg boxes from Hackney-grown 
produce, is a perfect example of the practice that Tomkins would like to 
encourage, for it specialises in the kind of salads and leafy greens that are 
best produced "close to market". And yet Tomkins does not rule out other forms 
of food production: we have had to grow a higher proportion of food in the city 
in times of crisis, such as the second world war, and wemight have to again 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/damian-carrington-blog/2011/aug/31/food-security-prices-conflict>
.
 Vegetable gardens, Teale Street, Hackney. Photograph: Mikey Tomkins 
What's more, granting locals residents an interest in food production is a way 
of combating the alienation that inspired the riots, and as we walked through 
London Fields, Tomkins indicated the people sitting on low mounds in the 
southern end of the park, and began to fantasise again: "This would be a lovely 
area for dwarf apple trees," he said. Since each tree produces 40 kilos of 
fruit, 20 trees would produce a harvest of 800kg: "It wouldn't feed many 
people, but it would be quite fun," Tomkins says. "And besides, why not?"

More and more people are asking the same question. In Dalston, an enterprising 
design partnership has set up a project called Farm: Shop which, as the name 
implies, is an attempt to turn a shop into a farm, and elsewhere, there are 
many less ambitious scenes that encourage public participation. Two people on 
the walk worked in a building with a rooftop garden called the Dalston Roof 
Park, which has a bar surrounded by beds of vegetables and flowers - its 
organisers are offering live music events and film screenings, while hoping to 
encourage "young people from the local community to engage in the management of 
the garden" and its produce. The Capital Growth campaign runs training courses 
at the Allotment Garden in Regent's Park, and provides "Edible Estates" walking 
tours, which take in such sites as the Strawberry Fields Urban Orchards and the 
Rocky Park Urban Growers – other collectives who are advancing Mikey Tomkin's 
aim of greening the city, and correcting the failures of professional planners.
 