
A batch of "lost and forgotten" British films, made more than 30 years ago by 
many of the industry's leading figures, including Ken Russell, Stephen Frears 
and Albert Finney, is to be screened at this year'sEdinburgh film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/edinburghfilmfestival>.

The retrospective of 16 rarely seen British-made and directed films from 
between 1967 and 1979, which have been rediscovered after more than a year's 
detective work by the event's staff, is expected to be a highlight of the 
festival, which opens in two weeks.

Some are being shown for the first time in decades, as many of the films, 
including Savage Messiah made by Ken Russell in 1972 and starring Helen Mirren, 
the children's detective story What Next, and the original cut of Robert 
Fuest's The Final Programme, starring Jon Finch, have never been released on 
video or DVD.

The mini-season, called Retrospective: After the Wave, also features three 
classic films from the publicly funded Children's Film Foundation, including 
The Boy Who Turned Yellow from 1972 by Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger, 
and Glitterball from 1977, starring a painted ping-pong ball as an alien silver 
orb from outer space, which has been likened to an early ET.

Hannah Gill, the festival's artistic director, said: "I think this is a 
fantastic retrospective. I think it's particularly interesting, at a time which 
is quite difficult for retrospectives because people have huge access to past 
movies, finding a set of films that people genuinely can't get hold of.

"We were interested in the fact there was a lag in iconic British cinema 
between the "new wave" [of the 1960s] and the art cinema of the 1980s. There's 
a mysterious period; people see it as a period which was largely about James 
Bond and Carry On films, which was slightly trashy, but there were directors 
interested in serious and important work."

The strand makes up one of several themes in this year's 64th film festival. 
After watching 1,500 feature films and 2,500 short films, Gill and her 
colleagues have chosen a programme of 133 features from 34 countries which will 
include 22 world premieres, nine European premieres and 63 UK premieres.

Among the highest-profile events will be the UK premiere of Sylvain Chomet's 
animation The Illusionist, based inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> from a script by Jacques Tati, a 
special gala screening of Sir Sean Connery's favourite movie, The Man Who Would 
Be King, and the closing night gala, Third Star, the first feature-length film 
by the Bafta-winning short film-maker Hattie Dalton.

Also listed are films by Werner Herzog, Koji Wakamatsu, Juan José Campanella, 
Steven Soderbergh and Rafi Pitts, while films from France, Canada, Mexico, 
Taiwan and Japan are being featured.

The Shakespearan actor turned Star Trek leading man Sir Patrick Stewart is 
chairing this year's Michael Powell award jury and is the focus of the Bafta 
Scotland interview.

Gill said the lost and forgotten series dovetailed neatly with the festival's 
other goal of finding and promoting new and young British film-makers; an 
antidote to the focus on star-studded "red carpet" events which dominate many 
festivals.

The festival will feature 21 new British films, most of which do not have 
distribution deals and are made by undiscovered directors.

"It will be really interesting to have these new young directors around with 
Mike [Hodges], Stephen [Frears] and Sean Connery. So it's different generations 
of British cinema.

"I'm really pleased by our building up of the number of first and second-time 
film-makers, which was really important for us when we rebranded ourselves as 
the festival of discovery.

"We do find there are wee gems that no one has picked up on."

Niall Greig Fulton, one of the curators of the retrospective, said there were 
numerous films of historical and critical importance. Pressure (1976), is the 
first British film made by a black director, Horace Ové, while the early 
feature by Michael Apted, The Squeeze (1977), starring Stacy Keach, was "the 
grittiest British thriller ever made", and Savage Messiah (1972) was Russell's 
"most subtle and, to me, his best film," Fulton said.

He added: "They're all films that deserve to be seen by a new audience and 
hopefully included in that will be a new generation of film-makers."

Tickets go on sale at noon on Thursday. www.edfilmfest.org.uk 
<http://www.edfilmfest.org.uk/> 

Lost and forgotten

Glitterball: Made by the Children's Film Foundation in 1977, this low-budget 
precursor to ET features an alien silver orb (a painted ping pong ball) 
befriended by two young boys. It can eat through anything and is coveted by a 
local thief

The Hard Way: Directed by Michael Dryhurst in 1979, it stars Patrick McGoohan 
as a rural hitman hired by an American financier, Lee Van Cleef. A "minimalist" 
thriller, it has a soundtrack by Brian Eno.

Gumshoe: The first feature by Stephen Frears, made in 1971, it stars Albert 
Finney <https://www.theguardian.com/film/albert-finney> as a Liverpool private 
eye in a "postmodern dismantling of the American detective genre", with Billie 
Whitelaw and Frank Finlay co-starring. It has a score by Andrew Lloyd Webber.

The Rise and Rise of Michael Rimmer: Directed by Kevin Billington, this 1970s 
satire stars Peter Cook, supported by Denholm Elliott and Arthur Lowe, as a 
conman who bluffs his way to power, eventually becoming prime minister.
 