
A senior Egyptian mediator will today present to the Israeli government a new 
ceasefire proposal agreed with the Hamas Islamist movement that could halt the 
conflict inGaza <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gaza> and begin to resolve 
the mounting economic crisis that has engulfed the strip.

Omar Suleiman, the head of Egyptian intelligence, is due to meet Israeli 
officials with the proposal after weeks of talks with Hamas and other 
Palestinian militant groups. The prospect of an initiative that might start to 
alleviate the economic blockade on Gaza comes two days before George Bush is 
due to meet Israeli and Palestinian leaders to discuss the flagging peace talks 
in the region.

Mahmoud Zahar, the most senior Hamas leader in Gaza, told the Guardian that 
his movement had agreed to the proposal in order to end the economic crisis. He 
said it had agreed that the Rafah border crossing between Gaza andEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> could open and function with the 
involvement of representatives of Hamas's rival, the Palestinian president 
Mahmoud Abbas, who is based in the West Bank. This amounts to a small but 
important concession from Hamas.

"For how long are we going to suffer from the Israeli policy of this strict 
sanction?" Zahar said in a rare interview in his office in Gaza City. "For this 
reason we can accept this Rafah crossing to be open all the time and we are 
ready to cooperate with the Egyptian side and the other Palestinian side to run 
the administration." Rafah has been closed to nearly all Palestinians for 
months, but was temporarily opened on Saturday to allow out the seriously ill 
and Palestinians with foreign passports.

Since Hamas won the Palestinian elections two years ago, Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> has imposed and gradually tightened 
an economic blockade in Gaza, which it now calls a "hostile territory". All 
exports are prevented and imports are heavily restricted, including fuel. A 
shortage of industrial diesel forced Gaza's sole power plant to reduce 
production over the weekend, leaving much of Gaza City without power for 
several hours at a time.

The economic blockade has brought the private business sector to collapse and 
is broadly felt across Gaza, home to 1.5 million Palestinians, more than half 
of whom are children. It has been condemned by many, including the UN secretary 
general, Ban Ki-moon. as "collective punishment".

"The preoccupation of every single civilian person in the Gaza Strip is to 
survive at the moment at a very basic level," said John Ging, director of 
operations in Gaza for the UN Relief and Works Agency, which supports 
Palestinian refugees.

"They are struggling to know where the water's coming from, where the food is 
coming from, how they are going to get their child to school, how they are 
going to get some sick patient to the clinic. That's what's preoccupying the 
people here, not the politics."

Zahar said he believed all the armed groups in Gaza, including Islamic Jihad, 
which is more hardline than Hamas, supported the ceasefire plan. It would run 
at first for six months and would cover only Gaza. In the past Hamas has pushed 
for a ceasefire to include the West Bank, but Zahar said the proposal was 
restricted to Gaza at the prompting of the Egyptians.

Hamas is demanding that Israel reopen all the crossing points into Gaza, but 
Zahar said his group would also accept a compromise under which there is a 
ceasefire but only the crossing at Rafah is reopened.

European monitors would, as before, be allowed to observe and monitor the 
crossing but Zahar said they should not have the right to order it closed. In 
the past, Israel could effectively close Rafah at any time since it could 
determine whether it was secure enough for European monitors to be present at 
Rafah. When they were not present the crossing was closed. Asked about the role 
of European monitors now, Zahar said: "We have no objection. They have the full 
right to observe and monitor but not to close or open the gate."

Israel would retain some influence since it still has control of the 
Palestinian population registry, which determines who can cross into Gaza 
through Rafah. Otherwise the proposal is broadly in line with a 2005 agreement 
on Gaza's crossings negotiated by the US secretary of state, Condoleezza Rice. 
It is not clear what happens to Rafah if Israel rejects the ceasefire proposal.

Israel has not admitted it is involved in negotiations about a ceasefire. 
However, it is thought unlikely that Suleiman would travel to Israel without a 
serious proposal. "Suleiman will come and we will listen to him. We'll talk and 
we'll see what he is recommending," Israel's deputy defense minister, Matan 
Vilnai, told Army Radio. "Until this moment there is nothing on the table open 
for discussion."

At his weekly cabinet meeting yesterday, the Israeli prime minister, Ehud 
Olmert, said Hamas bore responsibility for all militant attacks as the 
controlling force in Gaza. "It is responsible and it will have to bear the 
consequences and full responsibility for this activity," Olmert said.

"We do not intend to countenance this ... The reality that prevails today must 
change. Either there is quiet or the state of Israel will take strong action 
that will ... in the end ... bring quiet."

Zahar, an English-speaker and a founder of Hamas, is regarded as a hardliner. 
Asked if he accepted a future Palestinian state in the borders of pre-1967 
Palestinian land, he said: "This is not the proper time to speak about this 
question."
 