
Today, 89% of global professionals believe that communicating with clarity 
directly impacts their career and income 
<http://www.distinction-services.com/dcoach/2013/03/05/results-from-distinctions-2013-presentation-impact-survey/>
, so with the high number of candidates vying for jobs, it is more important 
than ever to feel confident about sharing or pitching ideas – particularly in 
pressurised interview scenarios.

As you face the interview stage, it's increasingly likely that an employer 
will ask you to visualise your achievements and skill set in the form of a live 
presentation. Sales, marketing, public relations and teaching are just some of 
the careers which often request that candidates prepare a presentation to 
deliver live during the job interview. While you should not expect to give a 
presentation for entry-level jobs, they are becoming a staple in more senior 
roles across industries. If presenting and clear communication are part of the 
job role, there is a strong chance that you may be asked to provide a flavour 
of what you can do.

It is easy to feel overwhelmed by the prospect of presenting at a job 
interview, and even a little intimidated. Creating a dynamic and engaging 
presentation that effectively communicates your ideas is often easier said than 
done, and this is a frequent frustration shared by jobseekers when applying for 
roles. It is not just sales professionals that are required to update their CVs 
and make them more visually compelling and memorable. Presentations are 
necessary for a wide range of industries, including fashion, graphic design, 
education and financial services.

Regardless of the job you are applying for, candidates are keen to make their 
presentations both memorable and engaging. However, many often fall at the 
first hurdle and overdo it by creating an extraneous deck of long static 
slides. But don't fear – there is a wide range of alternatives now available 
that can help even those with limited technological skills get their point 
across and dazzle their interviewer.

Here are eight expert tips on how to make your ideas shine through preparing 
and delivering a world class presentation:

1. Brainstorm without borders

From the outset, it is important to set aside time for brainstorming. Running 
your ideas past a friend or partner is a useful way to gain a fresh 
perspective, but you may find you need some additional help from elsewhere 
along the way. Many cloud based presentation software packages allow real time 
collaboration between users online, so ideas can be shared instantly and 
inspiration can be gained from the work of others across the globe.

2. Choose the right technology

It is important that you choose a mode of presentation that you can operate 
with ease. You can make the ideas flow better by keeping the work in a platform 
or programme that guides the entire process, from preparation through to 
presentation. However, make sure you take care with appearances – there are a 
range of tools that are certain to impress more than the tried and tested 
traditional style of PowerPoint, and different programmes reflect different 
skills.

For example, PowToon is a free animated presentation software that may be best 
put to the test by animators or graphic designers. Another option is Prezi, an 
online tool which offers a 3D open canvas for presentations. For a more 
simplified version of PowerPoint, Google Drive Presentation allows multiple 
users to view or collaborate on the document online.

3. Have a clear structure

Structure can go a long way to boost your confidence and ensure you give a 
stellar performance. Make sure from the outset that you have a clear 
understanding of each of the relevant sections of the presentation. Each part 
of the presentation should naturally follow from the other. Introduce the 
subject: tell the audience what your presentation is about. Explain the points 
you wish to convey. End with a summary of your points.

4. Rehearse 

Rehearsing is essential to feeling energetic on the day. Find what works best 
for you: speaking out loud to yourself in the shower, snatching up presentation 
tactics from Ted videos or familiarising yourself with your presentation over 
and over. Keep it short and sweet. Remember to check with your interviewer if 
they'd prefer to keep the presentation open to questions anytime, or save them 
until the end.

5. Learn to channel nervous energy

Be wary of becoming too animated – waving hands can distract from your idea. 
The key is to relax but stay alert. Remaining calm, composed and confident in 
your delivery will help keep your audience's attention on the content.

6. Talk naturally

Reading words off static slides is nobody's idea of an exciting presentation. 
Prepare in advance and talk to your audience in a conversational (but not too 
chatty) tone. Even though the floor is yours, think of the presentation as a 
two-way conversation as your interviewer is following your chain of ideas.

7. Make eye contact

Connecting with your audience is essential to retain their interest. Once you 
start making eye contact, it will also make the presentation more comfortable 
for you – you can feel that you are truly part of an exchange of ideas.

8. Answer questions honestly and concisely

This is your chance to gauge the interest of your interviewer and explore 
knowledge and ideas that you could not fit into the presentation. However, if 
you don't know the answer to a question, it is perfectly fine and even 
appreciated to say so, and offer to provide further information at a later date.

The key to effectively communicating ideas is translating them into a 
narrative that captivates or persuades your audience. For inspiration, go 
online and learn from others who do this well. There is no harm in using online 
resources to collaborate on a global scale.

Drew Banks is head of international at Prezi <http://prezi.com/>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 