
BlinkBox <http://www.blinkbox.com> announced a major new deal with All3Media 
<http://www.all3media.com/> today; the web video service will be showing 
episodes of Peep Show, Shameless and How to Look Good Naked and more than a 
dozen other TV shows that will give the site a major advantage over rivals 
struggling to pull in big name programmes.

Launched in only April this year, the site is backed by three venture capital 
firms and employs 40 staff at its base in Farringdon, London. Chief executive 
and co-founder Michael Comish introduces BlinkBox.


Michael Comish

• Explain your business to my Mum.
"Hey Mum, sorry I haven't called - I've been busy. I've started up a website 
where you can watch and share the best film and TV online. It's great; not only 
can you watch clips and full length features of some of the greatest film and 
television, you can edit the clips to the bit you like, add a message, and send 
it to Dad's PC or mobile. We now have one of the world's largest legal 
catalogues with over 2,000 titles and 10,000 clips so there's plenty to keep 
you and Dad amused."

• How do you make money?
 Advertising, downloading and rental income, and mobile revenues. We have a 
pretty desirable audience and innovative ad products too. Best of all, we have 
some really top quality programming for brands to associate themselves with."

• What's your background?
 "I helped start AtomFilms back in 1998, which we eventually sold to Viacom. 
Later, I worked atChannel 4 and ran new media, their creative agency 4 Creativ
e, and a few other bits. I grew up in Canada, but moved to London straight 
after university, and somehow, never left."

• How many users do you have now, and what's your target within 12 months?
 "We had over 400,000 unique users in July and growing fast. In six months 
we'll be hopefully closing on one million, so who knows where we'll be in 12 
months.">

• How are personalisation and recommendation part of your business?
 "Imagine a world with 50,000 films and 200,000 TV shows on tap. If you can't 
help consumers get to the programming they want, quickly and intuitively, 
you're in trouble. We allow users to personalise their video sharing, their 
networking, their viewing, and supply all the information they need to make an 
informed choice about what to watch."

• What's your biggest challenge?
 "Currently, our biggest challenge is convincing producers and broadcasters 
that the best model for TV online is ad supported. Except for a few consumers 
downloading to their iPods, consumers won't pay for TV online. When that's 
done, convincing brands to value targeting and not just reach – targeted ads 
are far more effective, but by their very nature, you can't serve them to the 
whole UK."

• Name your closest competitors.
 "Kangaroo, when it launches, along with iTunes <http://www.apple.com/itunes/>
, andJoost <http://www.joost.com/>."

• Any weird business experiences so far?
 "I started the business with an Australian – need I say more?"

• Are we in the middle of a new dot com bubble?
 "I don't think so. Broadband has made the businesses economically viable. 
Just look at the latest advertising numbers; internet advertising set to 
overtake TV advertising in 2009. It's real."

• Which tech businesses or web thinkers are the ones to watch?
"Andrew Rasiej, and how he's using technology for positive purposes. He is a 
senior technology adviser for theSunlight Foundation 
<http://www.sunlightfoundation.com>, a Washington DC based organization that 
focuses on using technology to expose corruption in government and is the 
founder ofMouse <http://www.rasiej.com/www.mouse.org> (Making Opportunities for 
Upgrading Schools and Education), an educational non-profit organisation 
started in 1997 focused on providing technology support to state schools."

• Where do you want the company to be in five years?
 "I hope it's the destination for people who want to watch their favourite 
movies and TV, and also discover fantastic new programmes they can share with 
their friends. It's intuitive, innovative, playful, and it has the best 
programming on the internet ….and some really cheesy stuff that I don't tell my 
friends I love, but I do."

blinkbox.com <http://blinkbox.com>

What do you think about Blink box?

• How can the independent web TV services differentiate themselves?

• Should production firms be trying to distribute their work as widely as 
possible online, or stick with the mainstream broadcasters?

• And can advertising revenue really generate enough income for these services?
 