
So much for Katherine the Great. Katherine Garrett-Cox, the Alliance Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alliancetrust> chief executive, has 
capitulated at the eleventh hour to the agitators from Elliott Advisors. The US 
hedge fund, waving a 12% holding, wanted three new faces on the board. Alliance 
has allowed two, Anthony Brooke and Peter Macnamara, despite spending the last 
month describing the nominees as short-termists who couldn’t be trusted to act 
independently. This so-called compromise heavily favours Elliott: from its 
point of view, two out of three ain’t bad.

Alliance Trust strikes deal with Elliott Advisors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/28/alliance-trust-strikes-a-deal-with-elliott-advisors>
Alliance’s board crumbled, we must assume, because it knew tomorrow’s vote in 
Dundee would not produce the hoped-for display of loyalty from the small army 
of retail investors. The whisper says the vote on the trio of Elliott-nominated 
non-executives was too close to call. Thus a negotiated retreat, and cancelled 
resolutions, became the board’s least bad option.

The terms require Elliott to refrain from agitating against the board and 
management until after next year’s annual meeting. There are also “certain 
mutual non-disparagement undertakings”. Since the shareholders can’t be trusted 
to see this novel document, they’ll have to guess as to the contents. Alliance, 
presumably, is not allowed to refer to Elliott’s taste for seizing Argentinian 
naval ships in disputes over debt. And the hedge fund, let’s guess, can’t shout 
about the unfairness of Garrett-Cox regularly collecting £1m-plus a year 
despite Alliance’s middling investment performance.

Next May, battle will be allowed to resume. In effect, it seems, a 
127-year-old investment trust has given itself 12 months to demonstrate that it 
deserves to exist in current form. If not, the debate about outsourcing fund 
management to save costs will return with a bite. So, too, will be the idea of 
selling two subsidiaries.

Spare a thought for Alliance small shareholders. They thought they were being 
offered a real vote tomorrow and a chance to express an opinion on competing 
analyses. Instead, whether they like it or not, they must live with a 
settlement negotiated behind the scenes. Elliott’s nominees, they were told by 
the board, were merely yes men; but Brooke and Macnamara, who never uttered a 
word publicly to address the criticism, will be welcomed anyway.

At the weekend, Garrett-Cox was quoting Churchill and describing her 
confidence in victory. Ho, ho.
 