
The sports scientists who work alongside England’s players informed the 
coaches this week that, statistically, the squad have never been happier. Given 
England have won their past 12 games it hardly needed a wellbeing survey to 
reach that conclusion andEddie Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eddie-jones> has his own trusted method 
anyway. “I look at their faces in the morning. Then I look at the figures – if 
the face is no good and the figures are no good then we have a problem.”

Winners, in other words, tend to be grinners and Jones does not need the 
latest hydration readings to know who of his players to unleash against 
Argentina on Saturday. Elliot Daly and the recalled Jonny May, Mike Brown, 
George Kruis and Tom Wood are all busting to tackle the Pumas and Jones is 
smart enough to tap into this primal force. “Science gives you a base but rugby 
is not a scientific game,” he said after announcing a starting XV notable for 
their upbeat body language. “It is a feel game: 60% art, 40% science. Small 
margins are for cycling. We’re not cyclists, we’re rugby players.”

England players are warned to remain disciplined against Argentina
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/23/england-players-warned-remain-disciplined-argentina>
This partly explains why the versatile Daly will fill a wing role against 
Argentina, rather than Bath’s Semesa Rokoduguni,who scored two tries against 
Fiji 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/england-fiji-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 and might have anticipated another run. Jones, however, is all about balance 
and blend; he does not necessarily require a backline full of sidesteppers 
against Argentina but he does want pace, energy and work rate, particularly 
from wings in other areas of the field. While Rokoduguni has also been advised 
to work harder on his defence, it is Daly’s constant buzzing involvement that 
really attracts Jones: “I always like to have one wing with real, genuine pace 
and the other wing to have work rate. If the wing with work rate also has pace, 
then it’s bit of a bonanza.”

Whatever the number on his back, it is also clear England are finally 
recognising the rare talent at their disposal. Daly was a good enough cricketer 
to represent England Under-15s, runs like the wind, kicks goals from remote 
postcodes and absolutely loves winning. All he needed, in Jones’s view, was the 
mindset that natural talent still needs constant honing. “He’s been blessed 
with talent, hasn’t he?” said Jones, reflecting on his own school days 
alongside Australia’s precociously gifted Ella twins, Mark and Glen, in 
Sydney’s unfashionable Matraville. “He’s a public schoolboy, holds up the 
trophy, has beautiful manicured hair; he’s been one of those guys who’s done 
everything easily. He was probably a good cricketer, the sort who gets 50 
without blinking then gets a couple of wickets and takes a diving catch at 
first slip.

“We’ve all been to school with them. I went to school with the Ellas and they 
were the same. They could do anything. Then they get to an age when they have 
to say: ‘Right, I’m going to convert this to consistent performances’ or ‘I’m 
happy just being talented’. Mark decided he wanted to be good and Glen decided 
he wanted to be happy. Glen used to sit on the tackle bag and Mark used to 
tackle them.

“What I’m seeing from Elliot Daly now is he’s starting to tackle the tackle 
bags. We’ve given him a roving role but he’s also got a very good sense for the 
game. If you think back to the last England wing who was good like that it was 
a bloke called Jason Robinson. And he made England into one of the best 
attacking teams in the world because of his ability to attack from anywhere.”

Inside the squad Daly is also proving increasingly influential as the squad’s 
go-to source for the best local coffee shops – “He’s an entertaining 
character,” confirmed the captain, Dylan Hartley – but, according to Jones, he 
still has a way to go before he beats his fellow speed merchant May for 
maverick behaviour. “I don’t think he knows what he says half the time,” said a 
sighing Jones, who played long enough with David Campese to know his subject. 
“No, I’ll take that back, I’m convinced he doesn’t. I’d love to spend one day 
inside his head. It would be absolutely fascinating but he is a bloody good 
rugby player.”

George Kruis earns quick reward from England after rapid return to fitness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/23/george-kruis-reward-england-return-argentina>
One day, insists Jones, he will pick Daly at full-back but, for now, he is 
determined not to underestimate Argentina, whom he rated as the second best 
team in the Rugby Championship, ahead of South Africa and Australia. While the 
withdrawal of the injured fly-half Nicolás Sánchez is a major blow to the Pumas 
– Nathan Hughes is missing from England’s bench with an injured foot – Jones 
has not forgotten how theyruffled New Zealand in Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/all-blacks-pound-pumas-in-57-22-rugby-championship-revival>
 in September. “They out All-Blacked the All Blacks and to do that you have to 
be pretty good. Playing against Argentina is a test of your manhood … if they 
scent any sense of complacency in us they’ll be all over us like a rash.”

To keep winning, in short, England must keep working harder: “If you look at 
the record of English rugby since 2003 there’s only been one world-class player 
produced and that’s Jonny Wilkinson,” Jones said. “Now we have a number who 
want to be part of a great team and who want to be great players.”

England team v Argentina

Twickenham, 2.30pm Saturday Brown (Harlequins); May (Gloucester), Joseph 
(Bath), Farrell (Saracens), Daly (Wasps); Ford (Bath), B Youngs (Leicester); M 
Vunipola (Saracens), Hartley (Northampton, capt), Cole (Leicester), Kruis 
(Saracens), Lawes (Northampton), Robshaw (Harlequins), Wood (Northampton), B 
Vunipola (Saracens).Replacements George (Saracens), Marler (Harlequins), 
Sinckler (Harlequins), Ewels (Bath), Harrison (Northampton), Care (Harlequins), 
Te’o (Worcester), Slade (Exeter).
 