
Emma Harrison <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/emma-harrison>, founder of the 
welfare-to-work business A4e, has received a £1.375m windfall this year, 
despite the firm's failure to meet the government's minimum target for placing 
long-term unemployed people in work.

A former adviser to David Cameron on families, Harrison has been awarded the 
money in dividends, but is also paid as an employee of the firm, her husband 
disclosed. Figures issued on Monday showed that the firm, which makes nearly 
all of its money from public contracts, found permanent work for less than 4% 
of its unemployed clients – well short of the government target of 5.5%.

Harrison stood down as chair of the company in February amid widespread 
incredulity that the firm paid her £8.6m in dividends last year, but has 
retained 87% of the shares.

Margaret Hodge, chair of the Commons public accounts committee, said 
Harrison's payments are "outrageous". She added: "Given the appalling results 
published only last week for the work programme, this looks like an excessive 
reward for dismal failure. A4e make their living out of public money and they 
have yet to demonstrate they provide value. The figures make a nonsense out of 
the assertion from the company that Emma Harrison is no longer involved inA4e 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/a4e>."

Harrison's latest payments were disclosed by her husband, Jim, in response to 
queries last week. Asked about recent dividends, he said: "In 2011 a total 
dividend of £1.125m was paid from April of that year, which, with the £250,000 
from January 2012, makes a total of £1.375m for the financial year '11-'12." He 
said his wife was an employee of the firm and was paid dividends on her 
investments, on which she paid the full rate of tax.

Figures for the first year of the work programme showed that just two in every 
100 people who enrolled in the scheme had been employed for six months or more. 
According to the government's own calculations, 5% of long-term unemployed can 
be expected to find jobs for six months if left alone to do so. A4e, the second 
biggest contractor to the programme, with £438m of deals, was asked to find 
work for 108,750 unemployed people by this July. It found just 3,860 of them 
permanent jobs – a "success" rate of less than 3.6%.

A source close to Harrison said her dividend was justified because the success 
of the work programme cannot be measured in a single year: "Data published a 
year into a brand new programme that will run for years and deals with the most 
difficult-to-reach members of society is no benchmark for comments about 
failure or success."

Harrison set up A4e, originally called Action for Employment, in Sheffield in 
1991. She became a high-profile figure through reality TV programmes such asThe 
Fairy Jobmother. After the coalition government was formed, Cameron made 
Harrison his "families champion".

Harrison's troubles came to a head in February. Police confirmed they had 
launched a fraud investigation into the firm's Slough office and the Commons 
public accounts committee received allegations of fraud from whistleblowers. 
Amid pressure for the firm's contracts to be suspended, Harrison resigned as 
Cameron's adviser and quit as chair of the firm. Seven people have been 
arrested and bailed in connection with the Slough inquiry. Three years ago the
Observer revealed a fraud inquiry into the company's offices in Hull. Phillip 
Revell, a former A4e employee who had appeared inThe Fairy Jobmother, was 
convicted last year of forgery offences totalling £3,580. Recorder Simon 
Bourne-Arton QC said he was one of a number who were suspected of involvement 
in fraudulent practices in the Hull office.

A spokeswoman for A4e declined to comment on Harrison's dividends, saying she 
now has her own spokesperson. "As a private company, A4e's annual accounts will 
be filed with Companies House by the end of the year, according to standard 
practice," she said.
 