
The record company whose slogan was Form Is Temporary, Class Is Permanent is 
about to close its doors. Two months after the surprise announcement that 
founderAlan McGee <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alan-mcgee> was leaving, 
Creation Records, the label that spawned Oasis, has started to resemble a 
graveyard. Before Christmas, Creation's London office employed more than 40 
people. Now there are only four. "No one's here," says Creation's head of art, 
Simon Corkin. "We're drowning in empty boxes; posters are lying everywhere. 
It's horrible. You can almost hear a pin drop. There's no music playing or 
anything. Boxes of records are just lying around with nowhere to go. 
Everything's finished, basically."

If McGee's exit shocked the music industry, the speed of Creation's demise 
astounded staff who thought that the 17-year-old label, which had survived 
near-bankruptcy (not to mention the excesses of rockers like the Gallaghers), 
was nigh-immortal. "When I first I heard the news, I took it with a pinch of 
salt," says Corkin. "I never thought it would actually happen."

He and his colleagues had better start believing it. The bulk of Creation 
staff had been told that their jobs were secure until July, the end of the 
campaign for Oasis's forthcoming album, Standing on the Shoulder of Giants. But 
everything has been thrown into a tailspin by this month's news that Oasis are 
to form their own label, Big Brother - and that Big Brother will be releasing 
the new album. McGee claims the new label was not due to start trading until at 
least March, but a leak speeded everything up.

All this is highly embarrassing for McGee, not least because the end of 
Creation means that a lifelong socialist and confirmed enemy of unemployment is 
being held responsible for putting people on the dole. However, former 
employees have been given a generous payoff of three months' money, and McGee 
is adamant that he is not personally to blame. Within the next few weeks McGee 
and his partner Dick Green will sell their 51% stake in Creation to Sony, which 
already owns the rest of the company. He insists that final responsibility for 
closing the label rests with its future owner.

"I gave people jobs for 17 years," he pleads. "I'm not their dad. If Sony want 
to put 30 people on the dole, it's up to them. I left. Sony could have carried 
on. If I walk off the football pitch and Sony close the label, is that my 
fault?"

Curiously, according to McGee, the label could still survive the redundancies: 
Sony is apparently unsure what to do with it. He says he hopes Creation doesn't 
end up "like Motown after Berry Gordy left, a 'cool' imprint for rubbish boy 
bands".

While the caustic, charming McGee hasn't got where he is today without a grasp 
of PR nous, it's hard to disagree with his logic. For McGee, walking away from 
Creation is a professional statement from someone who has managed to combine 
being maverick, millionaire, punk rocker and friend of the prime minister. 
Having famously given up drugs, he has become tired of being dependant on 
airplay, sharing the charts with "commercialised muck like S Club 7", and is 
planning new adventures (partly using the internet) which will "shock and 
surprise" the old music industry left impotent by merger after merger. "How 
long before Microsoft buys EMI?" he asks.

"I have been very disillusioned," he admits of Creation. "I started a label 
with my friends in 1983 and by 1999 we had a team of corporate technicians 
running the record label. I want to go back to putting out records I love. In a 
way, I've kinda gone back to where I came from."

Indeed. McGee's sudden exit displays exactly the kind of radical gesture upon 
which his label was founded. Creation never revolutionised pop packaging (as 
did Factory) or independent distribution (like Rough Trade) but gave birth to 
some of the most revolutionary pop records of the modern era. Formed by McGee 
and pals Dick Green and Joe Foster with a £1,000 bank loan, Creation was 
founded on McGee's vision of combining punk attitude and psychedelic sounds. 
For a glorious period well into the 90s, this madcap label launched terrorist 
raids from the independent sector into mainstream pop culture.

Jesus and Mary Chain, My Bloody Valentine, The House of Love and Primal Scream 
(and later on Sugar, Ride and Teenage Fanclub) captured a mood of anarchic, 
youthful exhilaration that conjured up the wildest party in history. The label 
wasn't exactly lovey-dovey: "At Motown, Marvin Gaye hated Smokey Robinson and 
Diana Ross," explains Ed Ball, Creation's original record plugger and later one 
of its artistes. "At Creation everybody hated everybody." Still, a wild party 
wasn't far from the truth. "In those days, a lot revolved around drugs," admits 
Andy Saunders, Creation's former head of communications.

 After McGee's own coke habit escalated from one to seven grams a day and he 
almost died on a flight to Los Angeles, he spent eight months in rehab. 
Following his return, out went the office culture of wild parties and in came a 
new office staffed with corporate professionals, which coincided with the fact 
that his new signings - a bunch of surly Mancunians - had just hit number one. 
McGee was clean, Oasis had arrived. Life at Creation would never be the same 
again.

There was another critical development. After financial problems in 1991, 
McGee and Green had sold 49% of Creation to Sony. This Faustian pact saved the 
label from bankruptcy and meant they could invest heavily in Oasis but sowed 
the seeds of McGee's eventual disillusion.

Oasis's immediate global success changed the rules. Sure, there were triumphs 
that probably made McGee's wildest drug fantasies seem eminently respectable 
(Oasis at Knebworth, a £20m bank account, tea with the prime minister), but 
there was a price. As an indie, if Creation got a record into the top 40 it was 
a triumph. Now, anything less than top 10 was seen as a failure.

As Creation became part of the mainstream and Sony "demanded another 
superstar", McGee was increasingly chasing the market. He was signing boring 
bands and spending more and more money on them because the corporate marketing 
system demanded it. His last signing was disastrous. Kevin Rowland came back 
wearing a dress and sold a reported 500 or so copies, despite costing six 
figures. At least McGee went out in gloriously madcap style.

Already, rumours are spreading like wildfire, but McGee and associates are 
keen to stress that it really was McGee, not Sony, who decided that he should 
end his involvement with Creation.

"To be fair, they trusted Alan's judgment right till the end," says Saunders, 
who was made redundant on Christmas Eve but is now working with McGee on his 
new projects. "They always said 'Look, we never believed in five blokes from 
Manchester. We thought they were a dodgy Happy Mondays, and look what 
happened.' "

Ultimately, he says, the decision was not financial, and was as much of a 
shock to Sony as to anybody else.

In the next few months, McGee will make his next moves. Some Creation staff 
are going with him to his new internet label, Poptones. The rest ("major label 
people, nice people, but not my people") will have to fend for themselves. 
Primal Scream will stay contracted to Sony; McGee suspects Super Furry Animals 
will leave. The rest will probably fall by the wayside, but Creation is 
unlikely to be forgotten. "I hope people remember Creation as the truly great 
label it surely was," says Saunders. "I hope they don't think it was something 
really good that went crap."

"Ultimately," says McGee, "we failed. I wanted to be Motown or Stax; 
ultimately we were Stiff or something. Still, I think we will be remembered. We 
were the soundtrack to a lot of young people's lives."

As for Corkin, Creation's head of art for the past three years, he's "looking 
forward to not having to think about Oasis". This time next week, he signs on 
the dole.
 