
England have named George Kruis and Tom Wood in their pack for the penultimate 
autumn international against Argentina at Twickenham on Saturday.

England players are warned to remain disciplined against Argentina
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/23/england-players-warned-remain-disciplined-argentina>
Kruis is restored to the second row after completing his recovery from ankle 
surgery and replaces Joe Launchbury, who is serving a two-match ban for kicking 
an opponent in the 58-15 victory against Fiji last weekend.

Wood ousts Teimana Harrison at openside flanker, a role he performed in the 
series opener against South Africa with his Northampton team-mate dropping to 
the bench in place of Nathan Hughes.

In total there are four changes to the starting XV that routed Fiji, with Mike 
Brown preferred to Alex Goode at full-back and Jonny May displacing Semesa 
Rokoduguni on the right wing.

“Selection was interesting this week, but it shows how competitive and how 
much depth we are developing,” the head coach,Eddie Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eddie-jones>, said.

Kruis underwent surgery to correct a chronic ankle problem in mid-October and 
has made the quickest possible return, missing only the matches against South 
Africa and Fiji.

His comeback is well-timed given Launchbury’s two-week ban and he packs down 
alongside Courtney Lawes and will resume with line-out calling duties.

It is the greater stopping power in defence that has sealed Wood’s return 
because while Harrison’s work-rate was high against Fiji, he was over-powered 
at times.

“George has worked really hard after his injury,” Jones said. “He has been a 
fine player for us and with Joe Launchbury’s unfortunate but justified 
suspension, it’s a great opportunity for George to find his feet again. Tom is 
a lively, committed player and that is what we are going to need against a big 
Argentinian pack.”

England have explained the decision to drop Rokoduguni despite his two-try 
display against Fiji by highlighting flaws in his game that need addressing if 
he is to win a third cap.

“Roko has improved, we are really impressed with his progress, but there are 
areas of his game he needs to work on,” Jones said. “He needs to go back to 
Bath and work on those and if he does that he’ll get another opportunity.

“We feel May and Brown are best against Argentina. Brown is a strong player in 
the air, he is strong defensively, carries the ball back hard and we are 
anticipating it is going to be a tough contest. Jonny May has got great 
finishing skills and we believe that is going to be important against 
Argentina.”

England are targeting a 13th successive Test victory when Argentina visit 
Twickenham on Saturday.

Despite the Pumas finishing bottom in the recent Rugby Championship, Jones 
believes they are better than both Australia and South Africa.

The Grand Slam champions bring down the curtain on their autumn campaign 
against the Wallabies on December 3.

“This game against Argentina is a big step up for us as they were probably the 
second best team in the Rugby Championship. They played some exceptional 
rugby,” Jones said. “They are a quality team, have power in the forwards, speed 
and guile in the backs as well as great experience.

“We appreciate they have threats across the field and they have always been a 
physical, tough side. They still have their set-piece armoury in the scrum and 
line-outs so we’re looking forward to a great game of rugby against them.”
 