
Bronx-born actor Tony Curtis never delivered the famous movie line, 'Yonda 
lies da castle of my fodda.' We think he did because, like so many other 
actor-studs outfitted by Hollywood in leather skirts and breastplates, he 
looked so dumb in such period adventure flicks as The Prince who was a Thief, 
Son of Ali Baba, and The Vikings. Now we can add Colin Farrell inAlexander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexander> to that list.

Farrell is fairly convincing astride his massive steed Bucephalus, or 
professing his love to the gorgeous Jared Leto, but one disastrous decision 
undermines the Irish actor's performance as the fierce Macedonian conqueror. 
Writer-directorOliver Stone <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oliver-stone> 
insisted on making him blond. Or tried. Just tracking the futile attempts of 
Alexander's hair-and-make-up crew to bleach Farrell's signature black Irish 
mop, virile beard and bushy dark eyebrows blond is worth the price of admission.

Which just goes to prove that even a master auteur of Stone's calibre can be 
undone by the hazards of the sword-and-sandal epic. For every Oscar-win ning 
example of the genre, from Ben-Hur and Spartacus to Braveheart and Gladiator, 
there are a dozen awful ones. Cast your mind back to Clash of the Titans, Conan 
the Barbarian, The Beastmaster, King David or Red Sonja. In the wrong hands, 
these pictures all too easily turn ridiculous. So it's no wonder that several 
recent period epics inspired by Gladiator's £458 million global gross have 
fallen short.

Encouraged by the opportunities presented by cyber-extras - it is no longer 
dauntingly expensive to offer moviegoers a cast of thousands - filmmakers from 
Wolfgang Petersen (Troy) to Antoine Fuqua (King Arthur) have jumped into the 
fray, with mixed results. 'In Troy, and in overreaching, underachieving 
productions like it,' wrote Wall Street Journal critic Joe Morgenstern, 
'digital imagery is fast becoming both a Trojan horse and an Achilles heel.' 
Even veteran Peter O'Toole distanced himself from the movie, saying, 'At least 
I had one good scene.'

Not every film-maker is as adept at manipulating 'smart' pixel-soldiers on the 
battlefield as Gladiator's Ridley Scott or The Lord of the Rings's Peter 
Jackson. Stone, for one, was forced to delay the American release of Alexander 
by three weeks while he tried to get the hang of waging digital warfare.

But great battles couldn't save his movie. While many critics suggested that 
Stone failed to establish what drove Alexander to conquer in the first place, 
the movie's treatment of his sexuality stirred up the most controversy. Gore 
Vidal praised Alexander for its groundbreaking treatment of homosexuality. Some 
critics suggested that the film didn't go far enough (Farrell hugs, rather than 
kisses, his lover Hephaistion). Others, such as the syndicated conservative 
columnist Ben Shapiro, insisted that it went too far. 'A large part of 
Alexander's downfall is attributable to the moral distastefulness of the 
subject matter,' Shapiro wrote. 'This stuff doesn't go over well with most 
Americans. Finally, we don't want to hear about it and we're definitely not 
going to pay money to see it.'

It can be risky to stray from established mythology. Producer Jerry 
Bruckheimer intentionally embraced a revisionist view of King Arthur. 'We went 
back to the historic Arthur,' he says. 'It has nothing to do with the 
fantasised Arthur of Camelot, the Lady of the Lake or the Holy Grail. I wanted 
to see the Special Forces from Black Hawk Down kick ass in the 5th century.' 
Maitland McDonough's TV Guide review summed up the critical consensus on the 
film: 'An Arthurian tale minus everything the average person knows or cares 
about Arthur and his knights.'

One historic drama that hewed close to its source material was Mel Gibson's 
self-financed $30m The Passion of the Christ. Roundly denounced in many 
quarters, the movie cleaned up at the North American box office ($370m) and 
amassed $609m around the world.

Despite the critical drubbings suffered by The Passion, Troy, King Arthur and 
Alexander in North America, the global market has been more welcoming to these 
visually lush spectaculars. Troy, which starred naturally blond and buff Brad 
Pitt as Achilles versus brawny Eric Bana as Hector, grossed almost three times 
its domestic take of $133m in foreign territories, outperforming even 
Gladiator. King Arthur more than doubled its $51.9m North American gross, 
taking its worldwide earnings to $188.9m. But Alexander has eked out a 
disastrous $33.9m Stateside, grossing $41,000 on 232 screens over the Christmas 
holiday weekend, a per-screen average of just $177.

So far Alexander has performed somewhat better in such countries as Russia, 
Taiwan, Greece, Portugal, Mexico and Singapore, but it is unlikely to return 
its investment. Stone, who toiled for a decade on his Alexander script based on 
Robin Lane Fox's 1973 biography, raised foreign funding for the $155m epic from 
Intermedia. He took some comfort from the support outside his own country, 
saying, 'Europeans tend to see me a little differently than they do in the US.'

There are more historical epics still to come. In May 2005, Ridley Scott 
returns to the genre he rejuvenated, taking on the Crusades in the $130m 
Kingdom of Heaven, starring Orlando Bloom as a 12th-century Christian warrior 
protecting the holy city of Jerusalem from the Muslim hordes. (Scott is 
labouring to keep this all-too-timely tale within the bounds of political 
correctness.) Omar Sharif and Troy's O'Toole are reuniting in the biblical 
B-movie One Night with the King about Esther, the Jewish Queen of Persia.

At this point the genre seems to be returning to its old stomping grounds, on 
television. Inspired by the success of I, Claudius in the Seventies, BBC and 
two overseas channels have commissioned 12 episodes of the $100m co-production 
Rome, described as a 51BC version of Upstairs,Downstairs and shot on a 
five-acre $13m set at Cinecitta Studios. Ciaran Hinds (Persuasion) stars as 
Julius Caesar, who tangles with a host of familiar characters as he builds the 
Roman Empire: his lieutenant Mark Antony, his nephew and future emperor 
Octavan, his general Pompey, and of course, the mighty Cleopatra. The series 
will be unveiled in the autumn.

But the truth is, in the wake of lacklustre returns from the historic dramas 
Master & Commander: The Far Side of the World, Cold Mountain and The Alamo, 
Hollywood is already pulling back from some of these extravagantly budgeted 
productions. Baz Luhrmann's Alexander project starring Leonardo DiCaprio is in 
limbo according to his would-be co-star Nicole Kidman. There's no sign of Vin 
Diesel starring as the hard-driving conqueror Hannibal, nor George Clooney 
charging into the Battle of Thermopylae in Michael Mann's Gates of Heaven. Nor 
has any major actress been announced to star in Warner's long-in-the-works 
Kleopatra. With any genre cycle, it pays not to be the last studio to release a 
mega-budget epic when audiences have had their fill. Ask Twentieth Century-Fox, 
which nearly went bankrupt after it released the most expensive movie of all 
time, 1963's Cleopatra. That movie shut down the toga epic until 2000 when 
Gladiator brought it roaring back. At least for a time.

· Alexander opens on Friday.
 