
My father, Eric Mansfield, who has died aged 93, was an aeronautical engineer 
who won the Royal Medal of the Royal Society in 1994, “for his many fundamental 
and analytical contributions to our knowledge of advanced aeronautical 
structures, and more recently to the biological sciences”.

He was born in Croydon, Surrey, younger of two children of Grace (nee Pfundt) 
and Harold Mansfield. Within a year of Eric’s birth, his mother died. His 
father earned a living during the summer as a guide to travellers visiting 
mainland Europe; throughout the rest of the year, he toured the UK giving 
illustrated talks about his earlier foreign adventures, particularly in Canada 
(helping to map the Yukon boundary, working with “Buffalo” Bill Cody, joining 
the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, shooting the rapids, fur-trapping). Apart 
from leaving a garret for himself, he let out his home and used the income to 
fund the education of his children, Eric and Grace. Their childhood involved 
staying with various aunts when not at boarding school.

Eric went to Sexey’s school in Bruton, Somerset, and St Lawrence College, 
Ramsgate, Kent, and hoped to go on to university to study mathematics. However, 
since the second world war had begun, he was instructed to read mechanical 
sciences instead, and when he graduated from Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in 1943, 
he was allocated to work at the Royal Aircraft Establishment in Farnborough, 
Hampshire.

He remained there after the war, carrying out mathematical research into 
aerospace technology, and in 1980 becoming the RAE’s chief scientific officer. 
He was elected to fellowship of the Royal Aeronautical Society in 1960 and of 
the Royal Society in 1971. His book The Bending and Stretching of Plates (1964) 
remains seminal in the field.

After retirement in 1983, Eric spent six years as visiting professor at Surrey 
University, working on aspects of surface tension. A founder member of the 
Institute of Mathematics and its Applications, and the Royal Academy of 
Engineering, he also sat on the editorial advisory boards of the International 
Journal of Non-linear Mechanics and the International Journal of Mechanical 
Sciences.

Eric enjoyed playing bridge, camping, snorkelling and fossil-hunting. He was a 
UK winner (partnered by IT Minhinnick) in the 1951 World Par Bridge Olympiad, 
and his book Bridge: The Ultimate Limits (1986) was well received. He continued 
to play bridge until he was nearly 90, and is fondly remembered at his local 
bridge club in the Hampshire village of Beauworth. Another delight, especially 
latterly, was walking his dog, Poppy.

Eric is survived by his second wife, Eunice (nee Shuttleworth-Parker), whom he 
married in 1974, his three children, Peter, Susan and me, from his first 
marriage, to Ola (nee Douglas), which ended in divorce, and by his stepson, 
Mark, his sister, Grace, six grandchildren, two step-grandchildren and six 
great-grandchildren.
 