
If you like the sound of an ethical investment that helps disadvantaged people 
around the world and also provides a "modest" financial return – typically 2% a 
year – you might want to look atOikocredit <http://www.oikocredit.org/en/home>, 
an international co-operative trying to raise its UK profile.

Based in the Netherlands, Oikocredit began as a faith-based initiative – it 
was set up in 1975 to allow churches to lend money to marginalised people in 
developing countries – but says its church-based roots do not affect the 
investment decisions it makes.

Oikocredit lends its investors' money to microfinance institutions all over 
the world and, in turn, they dispense "life-changing" loans in countries such 
as Guatemala, India and Uganda, with an emphasis on rural areas and women. Your 
money could help someone become self-employed or expand their business, or it 
might finance a fair trade venture.

For example, Oikocredit supported the Cocovico women's market (pictured left) 
in Abidjan, Ivory Coast. This was established in 2008 by a group of women 
vendors, including those from Zuenoula village (right), as a venue to sell 
their produce without paying extortionate fees.

Oikocredit works with partner organisations in 70 countries, and has a UK 
office in Garstang, near Preston, Lancashire.

UK individuals and organisations such as charities can invest by buying 
"depository receipts". These give them the financial rights of an Oikocredit 
co-operative shareholder without direct membership.

Minimum investment is £150. There is no fixed term – you can request repayment 
of your money at any time, though the organisation hopes those who sign up will 
view it as a long-term investment.

There are risks associated with this type of investment, so you could end up 
getting back less than you paid in. However, shares in Oikocredit have held 
their value since it was founded, says a spokesman.

Crucially, Oikocredit is not regulated by the UK Financial Services Authority 
<http://www.fsa.gov.uk/>, and investments are not protected by any investor 
compensation scheme.

Investors get a maximum 2% dividend, paid once a year. This has been paid 
every year since 1989, bar two years when it was 1%.

A spokesman says: "The fact that we limit our dividend to this modest level 
enables us to charge reasonable interest rates on our loans and to 
extend credit to partners with a higher-than-average risk profile."

Click here for more information. <http://www.oikocredit.org/campaigns/uk/home>
 