
The EU is playing a key role in propping up the rule of Alexander Lukashenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-lukashenko>, widely seen as 
"Europe's last dictator", according to one of the country's leading opposition 
figures who spent a year in jail after challenging the leader for the 
presidency.

A policy paper has been delivered to all 28 EU foreign ministries this week, 
along with a letter calling on ministers to back a broadening of sanctions 
against Belarusian individuals and companies. It is signed by a number of NGOs 
and activists, including Andrei Sannikov, who stood for the presidency in 2010, 
in elections widely seen as rigged.

"Europe is again pursuing a policy of engagement," Sannikov said. "But the 
policy of engagement with dictators simply doesn't work."

Sannikov was beaten by police and arrested at a rally that turned violent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/dec/30/belarus-lukashenko-rivals-charged-over-protests?guni=Article:in%20body%20>
 following the 2010 vote, and later sentenced to five years in prison in May 
2011, for organising mass unrest. He was released about a year later, following 
international pressure. Sannikov claimed that sanctions are the only way to 
force the Belarusian regime to release its remaining political prisoners, and 
make much-needed concessions to civil society – Belarus is the only country in 
Europe to retain the death penalty, with Lukashenko running the economy and 
political system on neo-Soviet lines.

EU sanctions are already in place against some individuals and firms in Belarus
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus>, and are due for routine annual 
renewal at the end of the month. Sannikov and others claim they are 
ineffective, as they do not cover the main sources of income for Lukashenko and 
his regime.

The policy paper outlines a number of businessmen identified as Lukashenko's 
"bagmen" but who are not currently covered by the punitive sanctions. The paper 
identified Belarusian oligarchs whose businesses, it said, would be impossible 
without the "permission and deep involvement" of the regime. One, Yuri Chizh, 
is already present on the sanctions list, along with most of his companies, 
although three of his profitable firms were left off last year after lobbying 
fromLatvia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/latvia>.

The activists demand that these companies, as well as firms belonging to 
businessmen Nikolai Vorobei and Alexander Shakutin, are also included on the 
sanctions list.

Sannikov said he personally handed the letter to the minister for Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, David Lidington, earlier this 
week, and asked him to pass it on to the foreign secretary, William Hague.

In response to the claims, the Foreign Office said: "We continue to be very 
clear with the Belarusian government in public and in private. All EU member 
states agree that there can be no change in the EU's position, including 
sanctions, until we see the immediate release and rehabilitation of the [seven] 
remaining political prisoners. Absent any positive change in Belarus, sanctions 
will be rolled over in October.

"We regularly discuss the situation in Belarus with our EU partners, and have 
done so in recent weeks. The UK, along with all EU [members states], remains 
concerned about the situation in Belarus, the lack of respect for human rights 
and the rule of law."

Recent changes in the rules governing sanctions mean that in order for an 
individual or company to be included on the list, the EU merely has to be 
satisfied that it either benefits from, or supports, the regime.

"It is very difficult to prove that these companies give a percentage of their 
profits to the regime, but it is much easier to show that they are benefiting 
from it, because they clearly all get very beneficial agreements," said an 
international human rights lawyer who consulted on the paper.

The policy paper also demands that sanctions are extended to cover 
state-controlled oil and potash export companies.

In 2012, overall exports from Belarus to the EU totalled €12.9bn (£10.9bn), 
including transit fees, according to the report's authors. The real figures are 
often disguised amid the huge revenues that Belarus receives from both transit 
and re-export fees. Another loophole involves the re-registration of several 
Belarusian companies in Latvia, with thinly veiled attempts to hide their real 
owners to avoid sanctions.

"Sanctions exist on paper, and the EU thinks it is putting pressure on 
Belarus, but in reality they are not working any more," said Yuri Dzhibladze, 
one of the co-ordinators of the policy paper.

Sannikov put it more bluntly: "It is the EU that is propping up Lukashenko's 
repressive apparatus."

According to the authors, Lukashenko will be vulnerable to financial pressure 
ahead of the 2015 presidential election, as he tries to maintain salaries and 
pensions at artificially high levels. Financial analysts claim that the 
moderate well-being of most Belarusians has only been possible via huge 
subsidies from the Kremlin, which dried up when Moscow became irritated with 
Lukashenko's unwillingness to sell it key infrastructure.

"He does not care about resolutions," said Dzhibladze, pointing to dozens of 
resolutions by the UN Human Rights Council, the EU and other international 
bodies calling on Belarus to release political prisoners and improve rule of 
law. "We believe that targeted and smart sanctions are the only way to make 
Lukashenko act on his international commitments."

The activists' problem is that in order for sanctions to take effect, all 28 
EU members states have to agree, and the bloc has faced particular obstruction 
from Latvia and Slovenia over the inclusion of Belarusian oligarchs on the 
sanctions list. Any inclkusion would lose the countries significant revenue 
streams.

"Unfortunately, business interests often triumph over values," said Dzhibladze.
 