
The European commission has launched a public consultation on the development 
of three "core vocabularies" to be used for electronic public sector services. 
It is part of a project aimed at providing more consistency in how "fundamental 
entities" – such as people, vehicles, businesses and locations – are described 
in member states' government information systems.

The commission told Guardian Government Computing that, although there are 
hundreds of cross-border public services in the EU, citizens and businesses are 
still not receiving them in a "seamless and efficient way". When citizens of 
one member state receive services in another, the necessary exchange of data is 
often hampered by incompatible data standards and specifications.

In response, the European commission's Interoperability Solutions for European 
Public Administrations (ISA) <http://ec.europa.eu/isa/index_en.htm> programme 
has been working on a "core vocabulary", to be used in the development of 
public sector IT systems. It is defining the components of data entities to be 
used in IT systems, with the aim of making it easier to re-use and share data.

It could even be used as a starting point for developing new online government 
services.

A set of three vocabularies - core person, core business and core location - 
are open for a month long public review, organised by the ISA. The programme 
was set up to help create effective cross-border electronic collaboration 
between European public administrations.

The core person vocabulary will provide a model of specific features that 
could be used to catalogue and describe a person, including their date and 
place of birth and their gender. It is possible to add more detailed 
specifications, such as whether they are a voter, an employee, a passenger, or 
a patient. The other two vocabularies describe data entities in the domains of 
business and geographical location.

The core vocabularies have been developed over the past few months by three 
working groups within ISA.

The commission acknowledged that endorsement of these core vocabularies would 
not make them a legal obligation, but said it would give them "further 
exposure".

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For weekly updates on 
news, debate and best practice on public sector IT, join the Guardian 
Government Computing network here. 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing/start.php>
 