
Ayaan Hirsi Ali recently published an op-ed in the New York Times entitled 
Islam's silent moderates <http://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/07/opinion/07ali.html>
, wondering where were the Muslims speaking out against the Saudi rape tragedy, 
the Sudanese teddy bear fiasco, and the persecution of feminist writer Taslima 
Nasreen in India. Her article makes me think two things.

First, she clearly doesn't read leftwing magazines. Four days before her 
piece, Mahir Aliwrote in at Znet 
<http://www.zmag.org/content/showarticle.cfm?ItemID=14424> discussing Saudi 
Arabia, Sudan and India, and called the Muslim demagogues in each place 
"dimwits". He is just one example of a "moderate" Muslim speaking out, but it 
makes one wonder how many other condemnations Hirsi Ali ignored.

Second, her article is about more than condemnation. Her argument is that when 
Islamic dictates collide with a person's sense of "compassion and conscience", 
a Muslim should opt for the compassionate solution. She wants a compassionate 
interpretation ofIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> spread "more 
widely".

Putting aside Hirsi Ali's questionable political affiliation and history of 
appalling statements -Islam must be defeated 
<http://www.reason.com/news/printer/122457.html> - hers is a hopeful piece. It 
makes me wonder whether she has finally realised that not all people who adhere 
to Islam are prone to cruelty and violence. If the future Ms Ali is more like 
this, she might resonate in a community that matters most: Muslims. However, in 
order to do so, she will need to have a better grasp of how Muslims respond to 
injustice in the name of Islam.

When, in the name of Islam, something horrifying occurs - say a raped woman is 
punished, or a bombing occurs - there are, in fact, a vast number of average 
Muslims who find the situation unconscionable. Their usual reaction, as Ms Ali 
points out, is to say something like, "But Islam means peace!" or that "this is 
a hijacking by extremists!"

Now, Ms Ali thinks that such slogans are platitudes, and do not reflect actual 
opposition. Thus: her pessimism about the unlikelihood of a moderate Islam.

Yet, the fact that Muslims around the world insist "Islam means peace" is 
evidence that a vast number of Muslims do not think that Islam means violence. 
Given that Islamically sanctioned violence is the actual threat we are dealing 
with, this is a good thing. Further, when a Muslim does commit something nasty 
against fellow human beings, and other Muslims decry this person as an 
"extremist", this is evidence that a vast number of Muslims find brutish 
behaviour worth distancing themselves from. This too is a good thing. At the 
least, it shows that most Muslims share in the universal definitions of good 
and bad.

Secular humanists have a problem with the Muslim response. They find it 
evasive. They wonder: why don't Muslims just come out and admit that their book 
promotes misogyny, or their prophet was violent, or that their history has been 
marred by instances of violence? Secular humanists consider such 
acknowledgments the mark of true honesty. Everything else is just platitudes.

Yet, what is honesty to a secular humanist is psychological devastation to a 
believer. If a woman-respecting, non-violent, cool-headed Muslim says that he 
is a good person despite Islam, he would essentially be saying that Islam is 
irrelevant to his existence. A believer would never say that. He will chalk up 
his successes to his faith. He will insist that his faith galvanised every good 
thing in his life. If and when members of his faith engage in something 
detestable, he will say that "those extremists" got the faith wrong. This is 
why average Muslims insist that "Islam means peace" even though these days 
Islam has been linked to some pretty major instances of violence.

A good example comes to mind. Recently, I heard a devout, practising Muslim in 
the US give a lecture on the compatibility of Islam and democracy. His argument 
was that for more than 99% of the history of Islam, autocracy and sultanates 
have been the norm among Muslims; however, despite that, Islam is compatible 
with democracy because you can find verses in the Qur'an (he cited two), and 
occasions from the life of the prophet (he cited three), which suggest that 
democracy is Islamically palatable.

The question that went through my mind was: if you acknowledge that 99% of 
Islamic history, and even parts of Muhammad's rule, were not democratic, why 
cite to a few meagre examples and insist that Islam is, in fact, compatible 
with democracy? Why not simply say that Muslims need to welcome democracy in 
spite of Islam?

The answer is because a devout believer needs to take his faith along in 
everything he does. If he didn't, he wouldn't be devout (at least so he 
thinks). The Islam and democracy presenter had to know - and had to let 
everyone else know - that he was a democrat because of his religion, not in 
spite of it. This is the "piety" part of religiosity that a secular humanist or 
atheist neither acknowledges, nor finds particularly interesting. The more 
confrontational might even call it a handicap, a crutch, or a sickness.

So, back to Hirsi Ali. If she wants to see a compassionate version of Islam 
spread then she needs to be more in touch with how a practising Muslim 
conceives of compassion. They do so, within the context of their faith, not 
outside. I am not sure this has occurred to her quite yet.

Evidence: at the beginning of her op-ed 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/07/opinion/07ali.html> she cites a verse from 
the Qur'an related to flogging. She believes she is confronting Muslims with 
direct evidence that Quran extols harshness. Yet, present that verse to most 
Muslims and they would not concur.

Such Muslims will claim that the verse is not speaking to average people, but 
only to the state actor who is in charge of criminal justice. By distinguishing 
between individuals and the state, they will put the idea of "let no compassion 
move you" in a different context.

Muslims will, furthermore, cite certain instances from the time of Muhammad, 
in which he refused to carry out the prescribed flogging even after the 
adulterers themselves demanded it. Muslims are thus further able to demonstrate 
- conclusively they believe - that when it came to flogging, Muhammad was a 
compassionate and forgiving.

Finally, some Muslims (in the minority) will point out that the Arabic word "
zina" which is being translated as "adultery or fornication" relates to public 
obscenity and is not a directive related to a sex crime at all, meaning that 
those Muslims who think the Qur'an requires flogging adulterers are simply 
wrong.

Thus, in the hands of believers, the verse that Hirsi Ali thought was proof of 
Islamic harshness, became contextualised, neutralised, and dare I say, neutered.

If, knowing that Muslims treat injustice differently - but no less seriously - 
than her, Hirsi Ali continues to insist that Islam makes Muslims brutish, 
Muslims will tune her out. The fact that Hirsi Ali is now recognising the 
possibility of Muslim moderates is a good sign that she may be reconsidering 
her essentialist views.
 