
Evgeny Lebedev <https://www.theguardian.com/media/evgeny-lebedev>, the Russian 
oligarch’s son who owns the Evening Standard and the Independent website, made 
an offer to buy the Daily Telegraph from the Barclay brothers earlier this year.

The offer was rebuffed and the Telegraph is not thought to be up for sale 
despite speculation after a strategic review of the business by Deloitte 
earlier this year, following which a string of senior journalists were fired.

A spokesman for Sir David and Sir Frederick Barclay said: “There are no plans 
to sellTelegraph Media Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/telegraphmediagroup> or any part of it and 
there never have been.”

The Guardian, however, has confirmed a Financial Times report that Lebedev was 
one of two interested parties who have approached the Telegraph’s owners about 
buying the paper.

Richard Addis, a former Express and Newsweek editor, also said he was part of 
a consortium that had attempted to buy the paper earlier this year, but had 
been rebuffed by the Barclays. He told the FT: “There didn’t appear to be any 
appetite to sell. If that changes we would regroup.” Representatives of Lebedev 
declined to comment.

Lebedev and his father Alexander, a billionaire former KGB agent, bought a 
controlling share in the Evening Standard in 2009, with Lebedev senior 
promising to pump “tens of millions” of pounds into the paper over the next two 
years.

During the following year they paid £1 to buy the Independent and Independent 
on Sunday.

The pair have ploughed £111m into the Evening Standard, the Independent and 
London Live TV station since the acquisitions, but in February made the 
decision to sell the Independent spin-off newspaper the i and close the print 
editions of the Independent and its Sunday sister.

The possibility of the Barclays selling the Telegraph newspapers has been a 
topic of discussion at the titles and more widely for some time.

Earlier this year, a letter to all staff by Telegraph Media Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/telegraphmediagroup> chief executive Murdoch 
MacLennan referred to an “extensive strategic review of the business”. Some 
viewed it as the first stage in a sale of the group, although others feared it 
was the precursor to another round of sackings.

TMG was bought by the Barclay brothers in July 2004 for a reputed £665m from 
Hollinger, the company previously controlled by Conrad Black. Sir David 
Barclay’s son, Aidan, was appointed as chairman and he recruited MacLennan to 
be the group’s chief executive.


Two years later the newspapers moved from Canary Wharf to new offices near 
Victoria station in London with a much-vaunted “hub and spoke” newsroom to mark 
the papers’ embrace of the digital revolution. A high point came in 2009 when 
the Telegraph won praise for its agenda-setting revelations about MPs’ expenses.

Cutbacks and changes of direction have, however, been become a feature of life 
at the company. TheDaily Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> alone has had seven editors 
in 12 years.
 