
Britain's youngest media magnate has only just begun to talk when he gets 
distracted by his own fingers, and breaks off to sniff them. Inhaling 
delicately, he smiles to himself, and explains that he keeps a private library 
of 500 scented oils in an office, which he had been checking on before I 
arrived. "Professional perfumers tell me I've got a good nose, which I'm very 
proud about. I think smell is one of the most powerful things in the world. 
It's like a time machine. Most people don't realise that. If I smell lilacs, 
for example, I'm immediately transported back to my childhood, because there 
are a lot of lilacs inRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>."

I've never met a newspaper proprietor before, so for all I know this could be 
par for the course, but I doubt it. I was expectingEvgeny Lebedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/evgeny-lebedev> to be like a businessman. In 
2009 he bought the Evening Standard for £1, when circulation had slumped below 
250,000 and the paper was losing money. Today it is distributed for free to 
900,000 Londoners, and last year began turning a profit. The Independent was 
losing £20m when Lebedev bought it in 2010 – but having launched a hugely 
successful cheaper sister title, i, today he can claim combined daily sales of 
almost 400,000, which have reduced annual losses to nearer £5m. So obviously he 
must be a serious businessman.

But he's not a conventional capitalist, because when I ask if he couldn't have 
found a more lucrative way to invest £100m, he agrees. "There are certainly 
more profitable things. Definitely. But I can't honestly think of anything that 
could be more fun," he says. He's not an obviously political animal, either. 
His father, Alexander, is a former KGB spy turned billionaire oligarch and 
high-profile critic of Vladimir Putin's regime, but the 34-year-old is cagey on 
Kremlin politics. And although there has been talk of him running for mayor of 
London, he tells me: "To be honest with you, I find British politics quite 
boring." In fact, he is so unlike any recognisable professional type that the 
best way to think of Lebedev is probably as a character from an Evelyn Waugh 
novel.

We meet at the headquarters of the Independent and the Evening Standard in 
Kensington, in an office scented by a Jo Malone orange blossom candle, and 
groaning with contemporary art.He looks exactly like he always does in 
photographs, so flawlessly groomed as to look almost unreal, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/may/05/evgeny-lebedev-evening-standard-oligarch>
 and not like a newspaper man. He must cut an even more improbable figure in 
the offices of his father's newspaper in Moscow, which he describes as "very 
20th-century, everyone sitting in their own rooms drinking and smoking". But he 
says he loves his newspapers, and would like to correct recent reports that the 
Independent is for sale. "That's not quite the case. I mean, I think if 
somebody came and offered the right price, I would sell – but I think you could 
apply that to almost any newspaper in the world."

And in 16 days' time he will launch London's first television channel. London 
Live will go on air on 31 March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2014/jan/14/london-live-tv-channel-ident-video>
, broadcasting 18 hours of news and entertainment every day from the capital, 
and Lebedev can't wait. "London is the most exciting city in the world, there's 
so much here – culture, literature, art – so if any city in the world should 
have local TV, it's London. I'm just surprised it hasn't already existed."
 Evgeny Lebedev with Elton John Photograph: Richard Young/Rex 
Local TV has tended to bomb in Britain until now, but half of me thinks 
Lebedev must know what he's doing. He rescued the capital's evening paper from 
oblivion, after all, and, "We've put together avery dynamic team in London 
Live, young and fresh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/13/london-live-launch-31-march>. 
Everything looks very sleek, very contemporary, and we've got fantastic 
presenters." But the other half is silently screaming "No!" when it transpires 
that one of the channel's hot new stars will be Lebedev himself. He can't 
decide whether to host a series of interviews – "very serious, straightforward 
discussions, one-on-one with people of great accomplishment about their life 
and ideas", or go "in completely the opposite direction and do a comedy show. I 
would like to get my unserious side out a bit more. I think that would be fun 
to do."

And who can say no to the boss? Lebedev already writes a fortnightly column in 
the Standard, as well as articles about everything from ivory poaching to 
Helmand province, and I wouldn't be surprised if Lord Leveson was the first 
person ever to suggest to his face, during Lebedev's appearance before the 
inquiry, that his editors can hardly refuse to publish them. "Well, the only 
thing I would say to that," he retorts, "is that now I also write for other 
publications, like GQ and the Daily Mail, my editors complain about why am I 
not writing for them". His recent interview with Afghanistan's president Hamid 
Karzai in Kabul must have been an agony for the Standard's foreign 
correspondents, but when I say so he looks untroubled. "Let's put it this way, 
Karzai agreed to do it with me and not with other people."

But journalistic adventures are only one dimension, Lebedev says, of his 
extraordinary life. His other great passion is good taste – a quality he 
credits for distinguishing his family from the tacky ostentation of most 
Russian oligarchs, who rather embarrass Lebedev. "The Soviet Union 
systematically tried to eradicate taste and unique style or aesthetics, so a 
lot of people in Russia – I won't name names, but you know who they are – when 
they got great wealth it needed to be shown off. A bit like rap artists. If you 
suddenly become very wealthy, you want to have lots of things to show off. I 
think I was lucky because I came from a family who had a system of values, a 
very educated family, a sort of intelligentsia family. Of course, there was no 
real wealth in the Soviet Union, but most importantly both my grandparents were 
professors."

When the Soviet Union collapsed Lebedev was living in London, because his 
father had been posted to the embassy. He chose not to move back to Moscow with 
his family and stayed here at boarding school instead. Afterwards he took some 
art history classes at the Royal Academy, studied a bit more at Christie's, and 
gained a masters in history of art from the LSE. He adores English literature, 
and employs a voice coach with whom he enjoys reading Shakespeare's plays 
aloud. She has taught him how to read poetry, and he loves Larkin. "He's so 
beautifully explanatory of things I don't know if other people think about, but 
I think about, but just can't quite put into words. Everyday observations in 
the most beautiful rhyme." Why, he says, only the other weekend he visited 
Chichester and read Larkin's Arundel Tomb at Arundel's tomb "with Amol. That 
was fun." I realise he means Amol Rajan, the editor of the Independent, and 
struggle to picture Rupert Murdoch and Andy Coulson reading poetry together on 
the south coast.

Lebedev also co-owns a pub with Ian McKellen, "and, in fact, I read [Harold 
Pinter's] No Man's Land with him there before he went to do it on Broadway". 
When a theatre director friend from Moscow came to stay last weekend, the pair 
read Don Juan aloud together, "and that was fun". Other friends include Peter 
Mandelson, Hugh Grant and Elton John, whose elder son, Zachary, is Lebedev's 
godson. A few years ago, he bought Lord Byron's old country estate in Hampton 
Court, and by all accounts the refurbishments would make Versailles look modest.

It's hard to work out if Lebedev worries about whether people see him as a 
spoilt, rich dilettante. His watchfulness makes me think that maybe he does – 
but it could just be the default demeanour of any well known billionaire. It 
isn't hard to see why a lot of people think he is gay, but when I ask how he 
feels about that, he says: "I couldn't care, to be honest with you. I find 
those discussions quite funny. I actually find it flattering." Given current 
attitudes towardshomosexuality in Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/11/russia-law-banning-gay-propaganda>
, I'd imagine it would be quite difficult for Lebedev to come out if he were 
gay, but he says: "No, if I was, I'd come out."
 Evgeny Lebedev (right) with his father, Alexander, a former KGB spy turned 
billionaire oligarch. Photograph: Richard Young/Rex 
The west has got it all wrong, Lebedev says, about homophobia in Russia. 
"Russia is not a homophobic country. No. When the whole thing about Russia's 
gay laws blew up, andthere was talk of boycotting the Sochi Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/08/gay-sports-fans-torn-between-love-for-olympics-and-call-to-boycott-russia>
, I said that's absolutely the wrong thing to do, because isolating and 
ostracising a country is like isolating somebody who is going slightly mad. But 
you put them in a madness asylum they get madder and madder and completely lose 
their mind, whereas if you work with them, they get better." Every country has 
homophobes – the only difference, he says, is that in this country "idiots are 
usually isolated, they are not part of the mainstream, whereas in Russia idiots 
are allowed to be part of the mainstream, they are given airtime, they are 
listened to, they write articles".

According to Lebedev, the west has also misread the crisis in Crimea and 
Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/13/crimea-referendum-explainer-ukraine-russia>
. "A lot of very intelligent, liberal Russians who I've spoken to would say 
that the west has completely lost all sort of respect towards us. When the 
European foreign ministers came to Kiev beforeYanukovych fled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/27/viktor-yanukovych-russia-ukrainian-president-moscow>
, there were all these agreements signed, and none of them were respected. 
Plus, there are far-right individuals who are threatening Russian speakers in 
Crimea." Many Russians have always regarded Crimea as theirs, he says, and, 
"Until three weeks ago, I never even considered Ukraine to be a foreign 
country. Of course it is, I know, but you go on the train and cross the border 
easily. You land at the airport and you walk through. It's not like arriving in 
London with a Russian passport. It just felt like a very neighbourly 
relationship. So I think the whole Ukraine situation is very textured, there's 
no right or wrong, it's not east or west. There have been a lot of mistakes 
made on both sides."

His family owns a hotel empire in Crimea, so has an obvious interest in the 
crisis, but Lebedev goes on, "To be perfectly honest with you, I don't really 
care who it belongs to. It's never really bothered me. So it doesn't make 
a difference to me. Business-wise, the Ukrainian government was corrupt, so 
it's all pretty much the same in terms of business." His chief concern is "for 
there not to be a war", but he thinks one unlikely. "I just hope there's no 
shots fired that trigger a bigger conflict, which would be a terrible disaster. 
A lot of threats have been made, but as long as it's not gone too far, things 
can be reversed to avoid bloodshed. My approach always is to try to talk 
and resolve. It is resolvable."

I ask if he thinks Putin is a man the west can do business with and he smiles. 
"You're using Margaret Thatcher's words. I've never met him, actually. But he's 
the only one there is to do business with. I would say that policy of 
engagement is the right way."

As for his own political ambitions, he has decided that he doesn't want to be 
mayor of London. "Because I love my life. I have this fantastic job, but at the 
same time I can go and interview Hamid Karzai and go to Arundel tomb, and you 
can't do that if you're mayor of London. And also, it's a job that requires 
concentration on London policy. As much as I'm passionate about London," he 
offers drily, "I'm not passionate about London policy."

I rather wish he would run, just because it would be such fabulous fun to 
watch, like a Chekhov character wandering on to the set of EastEnders. Lebedev 
is no longer technically Russian, having became a British citizen four years 
ago, so I ask if he would have any ambivalence about loyalties were this 
country to find itself in military conflict with Russia.

He pours a glass of water, lets out a little smile, and eventually says: 
"Well, let's hope it never comes to that."

London Live TV launches 31 March
 