
Exeter's head coach Rob Baxter has told his players to enjoy the build-up to 
the biggest match in the club's history next Sunday, an LV= Cup final on their 
Sandy Park ground againstNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints>.

The Devon side achieved a 22-19 semi-final victory over Bath at the Recreation 
Ground , surviving a last-minute penalty by the home fly-half Tom Heathcote 
which would have taken the tie into extra time. The full-back, Luke Arscott, 
scored two of Exeter's tries and Tongan wing Fetu'u Vainikolo a spectacular 
third from his own half, while their fly-half, Henry Slade, kicked two 
conversions and a penalty.

Baxter said: "I'm not going to go around saying 'Oh, it's just another game, 
guys.' We're going to prepare like it's a massive cup game – because that's 
what it is. We're going to enjoy the week and getting ready for it. It's 
fantastic for our guys to be playing in cup finals. We said right from the 
start when we got into the Premiership, if we survived and worked hard there 
would be big games down the line, and this is one of them."

He added: "We'll keep our feet on the ground, though. There weren't masses of 
celebrations among the players. They realise they have got a very tough game 
against a very good Northampton side. We've scored plenty of tries against 
Northampton before at Sandy Park and that's what we've got to look to do. It 
makes us true to ourselves when we go after games and look to score tries."

Bath stunned Exeter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> with a try 
inside 30 seconds from the No8, Leroy Houston, and Baxter admitted it had been 
a "sucker punch". He said: "We took time to recover but gradually we worked our 
way back into the game. You could feel that when we turned up – to sunshine and 
a firm ground– the game was always going to be decided by great breaks. And it 
went our way today.

"In the end, we stayed composed enough to maximise a couple of opportunities. 
We gave away a fair bit of ball but we are a team that can score tries. The 
momentum shifted a few times. It started withBath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> and their try and shifted to us with 
Fetu'u Vainikolo's try which came a bit out of nowhere."

Jim Mallinder,Northampton's director of rugby, felt the winning streak that 
his side is on helped them come through their semi-final againstSaracens on 
Saturday. The 26-7 victory at Franklin's Gardens was Northampton's 13th win in 
a row in all competitions.

"Saracens could have easily scored another couple of tries, but we managed to 
keep them out and in the second half we improved," said Mallinder. "Momentum is 
important, it gives you belief and the players know how to win games. We were 
under the cosh in the first half and it was brilliant to come out in the second 
half believing we could win it, and ultimately doing it."

The Saracens' director of rugby, Mark McCall, said: "For the first 50 minutes 
we played really well and had three quite big opportunities but only converted 
one of them, and against a team like Northampton you have got to take those 
chances. They were very clinical, when they got into our 22 they always came 
away with something and the game just got away from us."
 