
For several decades, Stanley Kubrick was the most revered director working in 
the English language. British and US critics consistenly gave him the kind of 
awestruck deference they reserved for Yasujiro Ozu, for Ingmar Bergman, and 
other impenetrable but clearly brilliant foreigners. Only after Kubrick's death 
last year - and the subsequent release of his film Eyes Wide Shut - did the 
tide turn.

The critics' poor response to Eyes Wide Shut was only part of the reason for 
these waves of reassessment: they were hastened by what appeared to be a 
Kubrick bandwagon which Warner Bros, the Kubrick estate andSteven Spielberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevenspielberg> suddenly appeared to be 
riding into town.

Spielberg is adamant that he was Kubrick's valued confidant and ideas man. "In 
the 1980s, Stanley took me into his creative confidence to tell me an 
absolutely beautiful story that was impossible to forget," he says. "I think it 
was the careful blend of science and humanity that made me anxious for Stanley 
to tell it and, after he was gone, led me to want to tell it for him."

Spielberg omits to say that Kubrick's cleverness was very political, and that 
he entertained all manner of timewasters on the phone and in his country house, 
because that is what a director does to get money and to entice people to work 
for him. Perhaps Spielberg is not such a political director - though he never 
seems to want for money for his movies. Some say, in the context of AI: 
Artificial Intelligence, that Spielberg is unsuitable - because he is the 
"opposite" of Kubrick, naive and Rockwellesque rather than cynical and 
Kubrickian. Again I'm not sure: it takes a lot of cynicism, of a darker kind, 
to make McDonald's crowd-pleasers for the studios. There is cynicism in 
Spielberg's Duel and worse in 1941. We shall see, as the project Speilberg was 
talking about, AI: Artificial Intelligence, opens in Britain next week.

Kubrick's films don't seem in any way targeted at a British audience. A 
Clockwork Orange unleashed a celebrated controversy here but its appeal was 
international. Unusually, especially for American studio releases, they were 
marketed as if they possessed substantial intellectual gravity. They were the 
rarest thing: American art films.

Most US film directors dream of someday making a personal film - an art film - 
while spending their careers grinding out studio-dictated crap. Some of 
America's best directors - Coppola and Scorsese - have struggled to balance 
personal projects with the studios' demand for sequels and Robin Williams 
vehicles. Until the early 1960s, Kubrick looked set to meet the same fate as 
his peers. After working as a news photographer in New York, he made a 
low-budget war film, Fear and Desire. It was not well received: another young 
director, Curtis Harrington, recalled seeing Stanley in tears after the first 
screening. But Kubrick persisted and his next low-budget feature, Killer's 
Kiss, won favourable attention. Kubrick moved to LA and made a slick and clever 
thriller, The Killing, and a magnificently photographed anti-war film, Paths of 
Glory.

Marlon Brando hired him to direct a script Sam Peckinpah was working on for 
him - The Authentic Death of Hendry Jones. Kubrick made daily journeys to the 
Brando mansion for script meetings, at which Brando would bang a little gong. 
Brando fell out with the writer and sacked him; he then decided to direct the 
film, now called One-Eyed Jacks, himself. Reeling from that disaster, Kubrick 
took over from another sacked director, Anthony Mann, and completed a bland 
studio epic, Spartacus.

Myth has it that flying back from the shoot in Rome, Kubrick changed planes in 
London and said he'd had enough of aeroplanes and of the studio system, and was 
staying put. The story seems apocryphal (he still had months of editing 
awaiting him in Hollywood), but it points the way. In the States, Kubrick was 
viewed as an employable, journeyman director. If he was lucky, he could have a 
career like Anthony Mann, being manipulated, moved around, fired, and 
re-employed. If he was unlucky, he could be an independent, on the industrial 
periphery, like his friend Harrington.

Neither would have been an appealing prospect. So Kubrick, embarking on his 
next feature - an adaptation of Nabokov's Lolita - managed to convince the 
studio that while the story took place entirely in the US, it would be best to 
shoot in England. It was impeccable Kubrickian logic - the same logic that 
later made London's Docklands the "ideal" location for a deep south boot camp 
and the ravaged cities of Vietnam in Full Metal Jacket. It wasn't logical. It 
wasn't even a good idea.

With his move to England, Kubrick became an exile. He was not like Joseph 
Losey, blacklisted and forced to work in London and Paris; not like Fritz Lang, 
fleeing the Nazis; not like Bunuel, endlessly booted from pillar to post. 
Kubrick's exile was voluntary, aesthetic. He liked the English crews, it 
seemed, but more importantly he benefited from the physical distance between 
himself and his paymasters, the mental distance between himself and a set full 
of gorblimey limeys calling him "guv'nor". He was inventing himself, as people 
often do when they go abroad. And with the bit of mystery that distance 
conveyed, he became adept at the director's greatest skill - convincing people.

Clearly, Kubrick was a very clever man. And since he had grown to dislike 
planes, he didn't go to the location - he had the location brought to him. His 
next film, Dr Strangelove, took place in US military installations, hi-tech 
bunkers, and B-52s. Again, the logical place to shoot it all was in a British 
studio a few miles from home. This time his mad logic worked: the poorish 
back-projections of Lolita were replaced by sophisticated matte paintings; the 
designer, Ken Adam, found not constraints but opportunities; and an 
extraordinary film was made.

Dr Strangelove seems to say the same thing as Kubrick's later masterpiece, 
2001: that we humans can make aeroplanes and doomsday devices, but emotionally 
we are just children in the playground. Or apes. This is a pretty serious 
theme, worthy of a weighty treatise or a gritty, terrifying documentary that 
would be banned. Who but Kubrick would have thought of making a comedy out of 
it? Starring Peter Sellers? And got it past the studio executives?

For many years, influenced by the "Kubrick as God" school of film critics, I 
had believed the director capable of the most extraordinary acts of 
mind-control, or Machiavellian manipulation, on the basis of his having pulled 
off Dr Strangelove - the great, anarchist-pacifist comedy about thermonuclear 
war. So it was fascinating to read, in the US magazine Grand Street, a memoir 
by Terry Southern, Kubrick's co-screenwriter. Southern says that Dr Strangelove 
was made precisely because it was a comedy - starring Peter Sellers.

Kubrick's adversary on Dr Strangelove was one Mo Rothman, whom Columbia had 
sent over to England as executive producer. One day, while Kubrick was out of 
the office, Rothman insisted to Southern that "New York does not see anything 
funny about the end of the world!" But the studio could not have it both ways. 
One of Columbia's conditions for making the picture was the presence of Peter 
Sellers,whose presence reassured the studio that Dr Strangelove was going to be 
funny, especially if - as Columbia insisted - Sellers play four roles.

Sellers was supposed to portray the US president, the mad Dr Strangelove, the 
stiff-upper-lipped RAF officer, and the B-52 pilot Major "King" Kong. But just 
before the shoot began, Sellers had a crisis of confidence. Claiming he could 
never master the required Texas accent, he sent Kubrick a telegram refusing the 
play the role of Kong. If Sellers played three parts, not four, Kubrick would 
be in breach of contract with Columbia, who could pull the plug. Kubrick's 
solution was a hi-tech fix. He kitted Sellers out with the latest portable tape 
recorder, on which he could hear the voice of Terry Southern - a Texan - 
repeating Kong's dialogue. Sellers was mollified and all went well - until the 
second morning of production, when Sellers fell off one of the huge replica 
hydrogen bombs and broke his ankle.

At that point the bond company stepped in, taking the view that three roles 
was more than enough for Sellers, now in a wheelchair. Columbia was obliged to 
agree, too. When Kubrick went out to the actor who played Hoss on Bonanza - an 
inspired choice - Hoss's agent wired him back, "Sorry, but the material is too 
pinko for Dan [Blocker]. Or anyone else we know." Southern says Kubrick was 
genuinely surprised that Dr Strangelove was perceived as "pinko". Kubrick's 
anxiety seems to have intensified following Columbia's response to the finished 
film: predictably, they hated it. The studio's publicity department attacked Dr 
Strangelove, saying it was "just a zany novelty flick which does not reflect 
the views of the corporation in any way".

In despair, Kubrick discovered that his nemesis, Rothman, was a keen golfer. 
As Southern reports, in a trice the director phoned a sporting goods shop and 
purchased a "surprise gift" presentation of an electric golf cart, to be 
delivered to Mr Mo Rothman at his exclusive Westchester country club.

It was a terrible move. Rothman sent the bribe back, declaring it "bad form". 
Kubrick's little comedy about the end of the world received a limited initial 
release, and was unscreened until the 1980s, when nuclear war became an issue 
of depressing relevance, Dr Strangelove was rediscovered; the Library of 
Congress declared it should be preserved as one of the 50 greatest US films of 
all time.

A great American film-maker he may be, but Kubrick defiantly remained in 
Britain. Fed up with one studio, he had already signed up with another, MGM, to 
make a science ficton film called Journey Beyond the Stars. With a script by 
Arthur C Clarke - another self-made exile - the project became 2001: A Space 
Odyssey - the greatest science fiction movie of all time, maybe one of the best 
films ever, and the one which cemented Kubrick's reputation as an artist of 
exceptional ability.

Far from avoiding publicity during the making of 2001, Kubrick encouraged it - 
with good reason: as the costs and schedule grew, so did the mystique of the 
film, and its maker. I remember reading in one contemporary article that 
Kubrick had 20 blue blazers, 20 pairs of black slacks, and 20 white shirts, so 
that he would never have to waste time in the morning wondering what to wear. 
2001 is the first modern special-effects movie, dependent not on stars but on 
amazing, never-before seen visuals and speculation. In other words, dependent 
on the intellect of the director. And on its incredible, pessimistic message: 
that to achieve higher consciousness, to become human, means to kill.

While still in production on 2001, Kubrick was already giving interviews about 
his next project, Napoleon, which might star Ian Holm, or Jack Nicholson. He 
began to create a massive archive about the emperor and his cohorts, and, 
according to some, to imitate his habits. Even after Napoleon had been put on 
hold, Malcolm McDowell reported Kubrick following Napoleon's dining quirk of 
eating meat, then pudding, then meat, then pudding. This was during A Clockwork 
Orange - a damned good film about English mobbery, bad eating habits, and the 
thuggery of the state. And, at the time, the epitome of cinema screen violence, 
which laurels had previously been held by Straw Dogs, The Wild Bunch and Bonnie 
and Clyde. One tends to forget now that the 1970s were a liberal time, and that 
there was very little objection to A Clockwork Orange when it first came out. 
The philosophy of Clocky Orange, in contrast to 2001's, is fairly simple and 
unarguable (free will is risky but best); its real virtue was its aestheticised 
violence, especially if you were a teenager.

If we were making a film about the life of Kubrick, I think this is what we 
would call the "high point". After three (possibly four) great films in a row, 
Kubrick was now critically unassailable. He was compared, interestingly, not to 
the older pantheon of American directors (Ford, Huston, Welles) but to the 
international directorial elite - Kurosawa, Ophuls, Renoir, Bunuel. At this 
stage in a drama, of course, something has to go wrong. Yet what "went wrong" 
was in a way Kubrick's best work of all - Barry Lyndon.

Barry Lyndon had the largest budget he would ever work with, and an immensely 
long shoot. The trade papers were full of articles about the production - new 
lenses had supposedly been manufactured so that the director could shoot large 
interiors by candlelight. The only concession to commerce was the casting of 
Ryan O'Neal, and even he was good.

I found Barry Lyndon marvellous, powerful, beautiful and unexpected, and 
couldn't understand why my local ABC was playing it on the smallest screen in 
the tri-plex. Well, actually, I could. Here was an authentic recreation of an 
old book by somebody called Thackeray. Not much violence, no sex, very slow, 
very lovely. It was the opening day, and I was the only person in the cinema. 
The glowing reviews poured in, but the audience stayed away. And Kubrick, 
praised but failing to deliver at the box office, entered his Official Recluse 
Mode, as he embarked on the most difficult phase of his career.

In our fictional saga, the character of Stanley would now come up with another 
Clockwork Orange or The Killing at this point - low-budget, fast, violent, full 
of thrills - and return to the top of the popular heap. Instead, Kubrick 
returned to Napoleon, which would, of course, be even bigger and more expensive 
than Barry Lyndon and impossible to finance. Perhaps the challenge was the 
attraction; though it was becoming hard to say, since Kubrick was now reputed 
to be developing projects just to throw rival film-makers or reporters off the 
scent.

And we were used to waiting a goodly long time for the next Kubrick film. The 
wait had always been worth it. So it was a surprise when The Shining was 
announced as Kubrick's next project. The what? The Shining. One of those 
Stephen King novels. You know, like Children of the Corn and Pet Sematary. Oh. 
Yes. I know there is nothing wrong with popular fiction, by which I mean 
potboilers written according to a formula. I know bad books can make good 
movies. But was it necessary for Kubrick to make The Shining? Was there an 
intellectual message in the long-drawn-out display of Jack Nicholson acting 
increasingly nuts and axe-murdering Scatman Crothers? The Shining, after its 
extraordinary opening second-unit aerial sequence, settled into a not 
particularly good or interesting film - which is a terrible thing to say about 
a Kubrick picture.

Times had changed by the time he chose to make it. Directors' autonomy was 
increasingly restricted. Fewer films were being made as the independents were 
bought up, and the studio bosses decided to "shrink their inventory". And the 
critics of the 60s and 70s - Pauline Kael, Andrew Sarris, et al - were being 
sidelined by a newer generation of TV pundits who essentially acted as 
cheerleaders for American studio product. This new generation thought the sun 
shone out of Hollywood's arse, anyway: Kubrick's directing a "classy" potboiler 
ratified their own co-optation and the whole sad McDonald's production line.

So it was no surprise that after a Stephen King movie, Kubrick announced that 
he was going to make a Vietnam film. Of course! A genre even more well-worn 
than the last one! The Docklands-as-South-East-Asia switcheroo took place, a 
"director as genius" decision from which no film, unless a comedy, could 
recover. Apocalypse Now is a good film about the Vietnam war partially because 
it is shot in locations which resemble the actual, or imagined, place. Dog 
Soldiers/Who'll Stop the Rain is a good film about Vietnam because it is shot 
in the actual LA of its war profiteers and drug dealers.

Full Metal Jacket can't equal either film in vision, in cynicism, or 
verisimilitude. It is inferior not only to these two great films, but to any 
number of the Vietnam-genre movies . It is as if Kubrick, rather than watching 
and learning from earlier films, was content to drift into the hazy but 
comfortable nether regions of his own earlier work.

Full Metal Jacket returns to Dr Strangelove for the choreography of its battle 
sequence: the hand-held street-fight in Hue is almost shot-for-shot a copy of 
the attack on Burpleson air force base. It returns to Clockwork Orange for the 
character of the drill sergeant (for all Lee Ermey's sterling acting, it is a 
mere redux of the prison officer in Kubrick's earlier film). And it reaches all 
the way back to Fear and Desire to recreate its arch close-up monologues of 
exhausted men of war.

Why bother doing this? The laudatory reviews poured in, en masse, following a 
single Kubrick interview in the pages of Newsweek. Kubrick was great - but for 
the second time he had come up with a mediocre, less-than-successful film, and 
the media were letting him get away with it. The Shining and Full Metal Jacket 
did not remotely compare to the brilliance of the director's previous films. 
Why pretend they did?

I think now that a self-fulfilling prophecy had been fulfilled. The press, 
puzzled and intrigued by the undeniable brilliance of Kubrick's middle films 
and by the increasing reticence of their creator, had created The Legend of 
Stanley Kubrick. We have all read that article, heard those stories. The 
paranoid, the recluse, the man who drove at five miles per hour, the American 
who lived in an English country manor surrounded by security gates and 
computers, on the phone to Hollywood honchos at all hours, speaks to no one, 
the infallible mega- control-freak-genius.

I think Kubrick was complicit in the creation of this version of himself, a 
version which - by emphasising aloofness and intellectuality - left him 
culturally unclaimed by us, the Brits, who should have had him down the Palace 
and gonged years ago. "But he claimed not to live anywhere!" Kubrick the 
Cultural Asylum Seeker! Brilliant - or Bogus?

If this was our biopic of the man, the short third act would start with his 
next project, based on a story by another notable British science fiction 
writer, Brian Aldiss. The collaboration was first called Supertoys Last All 
Summer Long, then became Artificial Intelligence, then AI. Our fantasy film's 
plot goes like this: struggling Stan is abandoned long-distance by his American 
superagent, Mike Ovitz, who's off to head the world's most menacing media 
supercorporation, Disney. Mike: "Stanley, I love you but there's nothing I can 
do for you. You'll never getAI <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ai> on. Nobody 
could get that picture on but Spielberg. Take my advice and do this Tom and 
Nicole project - they're a lovely couple! You'll love 'em!"

And so on, into the closing minutes of our film. Another long shoot where an 
English studio tries to pretend it's New York. Like all his films, Eyes Wide 
Shut is remarkably cheap by contemporary standards - even when the director 
orders whole sequences to be reshot, and actors to return from LA and New York 
to do their work again. Two of them refuse. But Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman 
remain keen; they seem to enjoy playing the same scene 100 times. The film is 
reputed to be sexually provocative in the extreme. There is the threat of US 
censorship, and a ruck between Kubrick and the writer Frederic Raphael, with 
the director (as directors are all too often wont to do, and as this particular 
director had just done with Brian Aldiss) trying to secure sole screenwriting 
credit.

After Kubrick died, the bad news came fast. Eyes Wide Shut is rubbish! Kubrick 
makes bad film! Director Emperor Has No Clothes! And, of course, nowhere were 
the anti-kudos and the revisionism quite as fast and furious as in the 
recluse/genius/fraud director's beloved Britain.

The jury, for me, is still out on Eyes Wide Shut. It seems to be rubbish, but 
so what? The Emmanuelle films which it so resembles are rubbish, yet they have 
endured and are of considerable interest. And it is quite intriguing, light, 
and a little odd, after the dull certainties of his Stephen King and Vietnam 
excursions.

After the death of Akira Kurosawa, the Japanese director's family embarked on 
a possibly ill-advised scramble to get films based on his scripts into 
production, and to exploit his name. The Kubrick camp has behaved a tad more 
decorously. Just one three-hour documentary (broadcast here by the BBC), a 
re-edited American version of Eyes Wide Shut ("Stanley would have given it his 
blessing!"), and a re-release of A Clockwork Orange. Some thought the return of 
Clockwork to be over hasty, given the director's unease about the project. But 
who was he to say, anyway? Directors are not usually allowed to judge the worth 
of their product. It is very unusual for them to be handed control of 
distribution, especially to suppress their own films.

Kubrick wouldn't be the first person to be fooled by his own grandiloquence, 
or to take seriously a fool's estimation of his worth. Look at the way our 
politicos and royals behave. To be hoist with your own petard comes with the 
territory of being an artist, unless you are uniquely restrained, or ironic, or 
grounded.

Lolita, Dr Strangelove, 2001, A Clockwork Orange, Barry Lyndon - to have 
directed only one of them would have been a remarkable achievement. To have 
directed all five is grounds for cinematic sainthood, or at very least a huge 
and handsome bas-relief in the pantheon. What if their maker helped mythologise 
himself? He might have preferred the vision of the astute, icy control freak. 
But there is also Terry Southern's version of the anxious, insecure and fated 
film-maker who sent Mo Rothman a golf cart.

And Southern's version jibes with the one I encountered, second-hand, one 
afternoon a couple of years ago when one of Kubrick's assistants called me, out 
of the blue. Someone was taking advantage of Kubrick's reputation as the Man of 
Mystery, it seemed. A confidence trickster, aware of the mystique surrounding 
Kubrick (who was actually quite often photographed, and highly recognisable) 
was passing himself off as the great director, securing dinners, drinks and 
sexual favours. The police having proved unhelpful, Stanley had come up with a 
plan: he would commission a film to be made about the scoundrel, exposing him 
in his nefarious works.

It was potentially an interesting commission, if a bit navel-gazing. But I had 
heard that Kubrick was renowned for his reclusiveness and privacy. How would he 
feel about being portrayed as a character in this film? There was a pause as my 
question was relayed to someone off-instrument. Then Kubrick's man came back on 
the line. "Impossible! Stanley says neither his name nor likeness can appear in 
the film! He insists that he be fictionalised!" I said I thought that without 
Stanley Kubrick's moniker, the point of the film would be lost. They asked me 
to consider fictionalising Kubrick, and get back to them.But how do you 
fictionalise a fictionaliser who insists on being fictionalised?

Which brings us back to that other, younger, bearded American with a baseball 
cap, channelling this greater, lonelier director via his "Stanley Kubrick" 
movie. But is it Kubrick? Could Spielberg be Kubrick any more than that other, 
poor, false Kubrick, wangling dinners and sexual favours in the West End?

Kubrick was neither here nor there, neither American nor British, neither 
friend nor foe. Most film-makers do not attempt to make a comedy about Mutually 
Assured Destruction. Kubrick gave it a go. In the words of the general in the 
Bunker with the president: "Toe to toe with the Russkies, Mr President! Toe to 
Toe!"
 