
Whenever we went on holiday, my mother always took a first-aid kit packed with 
medicines, including cortisone injections, despite the fact that my father and 
I are only mildly allergic to bee stings. Our kitchen drawers at home in the 
Roman countryside resembled hospital cupboards: there were eight different 
aspirins from all over the world, 10 types of painkiller, bandages, antiseptic 
creams and adrenaline shots for the worst-case scenarios my mother feared. I 
thought it was over the top, but, looking back, my family’s obsession with 
ill-health saved my life.

I had been taking penicillin for throat viruses from the age of four, so when 
the dentist prescribed antibiotics for an aching dental implant in the summer 
of 2006, when I was 32, I had no reason to worry. Three days later, over 
breakfast, I went to take one of the pills. I hadn’t even swallowed it, just 
put it in my mouth, when I started sneezing, scratching everywhere – armpits, 
groin, the back of my hands and feet; my scalp felt as if it was on fire. I 
later learned that my body was rejecting the antibiotics and I had gone into 
anaphylactic shock.

My lips started swelling – I looked like a grouper – and my dad shouted, “Oh 
my God!” I rushed to the mirror and saw that my lips and eyes had puffed up. I 
knew what was happening, and told my mum to inject me with cortisone.

A week earlier, I had been out to dinner with my boyfriend and, even though he 
knew he is allergic to shrimps, he loves them too much not to eat them. He 
started to bloat like a balloon and told me to rush him to the hospital, where 
he was treated with a cortisone drip. Having seen his monstrous physical 
transformation, I recognised my own symptoms.

By the time my mum injected the cortisone vial, I was slipping into darkness. 
My hands were shaking and I could hear my heart beating in my ears. My tongue 
and throat inflated, and I was suffocating. The cortisone was still working its 
way into my system.

I have never been so scared. I clung on to my mum like a child, whispering, 
“I’m afraid, I’m afraid.” I saw the terror reflected in her eyes. I passed out 
for a split-second, falling on my knees and hitting my head on the cold, marble 
floor, which woke me up again. I opened my eyes, and it was like coming back 
from the grave. The cortisone had begun to work and I suddenly felt better. In 
the meantime, my dad had called an ambulance. A helicopter arrived, landing in 
a clear spot near my house. I knew I was out of danger, but the paramedics 
insisted on flying me to hospital.

Experience: I survived a midair collision
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/28/i-survived-a-midair-collision-experience>
Later, the doctors explained why the reaction had been so fast and violent: I 
had accidentally sniffed the powdery coating of the antibiotic pill when I 
opened the bottle, so the penicillin entered my bloodstream through my nostrils 
much more quickly than it would have done if I’d ingested the pill. They said 
that if the cortisone hadn’t been to hand, I might have died.

It took months to recover mentally. I stopped eating foods such as tomato 
sauce, chocolate and peanuts, scared I would react. At night, I’d wake with the 
feeling of suffocating. I had to see a psychiatrist, and had pharmacological 
tests to figure out which antibiotics I could safely take in future. Whenever I 
go out, I have four cortisone pills inside my purse.

Doctors have told me that I am more susceptible to anaphylactic shocks than 
other people, and I can’t know if a substance or food will trigger one until it 
happens. It’s like living with a sword of Damocles over my head. I’m scared to 
take a simple aspirin, or of having an accident and being given antibiotics 
while I am unconscious. But I can laugh at it a bit, thinking about my She-Hulk 
body transformation. And it has given me my nickname: Miss Grouper.

• As told to Silvia Marchetti

• Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com 
<mailto:experience@theguardian.com>
 