
Facebook has agreed to “pause” its plan to use data from UK users of messaging 
serviceWhatsApp <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/whatsapp> for 
advertising and product improvement purposes across the rest of its business, 
after an intervention from the UK information commissioner.

Elizabeth Denham wrote to Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> in September to express her 
concerns over a new plan to share more data between the social network and 
Whatsapp.

When it announced its plans back in August, Whatsapp said it wanted to explore 
ways for users to “communicate with businesses that matter to you too, while 
still giving you an experience without third-party banner ads and spam”.

The plans involved using the phone number associated with a WhatsApp account 
to aid Facebook in targeting adverts on the user’s main Facebook profile. But,
Denham wrote 
<https://iconewsblog.wordpress.com/2016/11/07/information-commissioner-updates-on-whatsapp-facebook-investigation/>
, she had concerns that consumers weren’t being properly protected, and that 
“it’s fair to say the enquiries my team have made haven’t changed that view.

WhatsApp asked by European regulators to pause sharing user data with Facebook
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/whatsapp-pause-sharing-user-data-facebook-european-privacy-regulators-yahoo>
“I don’t think users have been given enough information about what Facebook 
plans to do with their information, and I don’t think WhatsApp has got valid 
consent from users to share the information,” she wrote, adding she believes 
users should be given ongoing control over how their information is used, “not 
just a 30-day window”.

Facebook has agreed to pause the use of its data for advertising and product 
improvement purposes, although it will continue to share information for spam 
fighting. The company says it is holding back from promising any permanent 
changes for now, partly because of the pressure it faces over data sharing.

Facebook says it has received questions from many European data protection 
authorities, all with different interests and vary requests for information. It 
says it wants to avoid inappropriately agreeing specific resolutions with any 
one particular regulator. But it denies that it didn’t give enough information 
to users avoid how their data would be used.

In a statement Facebook said: “WhatsApp designed its privacy policy and terms 
update to give users a clear and simple explanation of how the service works, 
as well as choice over how their data is used. These updates comply with 
applicable law, and follow the latest guidance from the UK Information 
Commissioner’s Office.

We hope to continue our detailed conversations with the ICO and other data 
protection officials, and we remain open to working collaboratively to address 
their questions.”

Denham argues that the WhatsApp data-sharing case highlights a broader problem 
in the technology industry. “Our digital comings and goings create rich 
portraits of our lives, and vague terms of service when we sign up aren’t 
giving us the protection we need,” she said.

She wrote that she was particularly concerned that when companies merge vast 
amounts of customers’ personal data become an asset to be bought and sold.

“We’re seeing situations where companies are being bought primarily for this 
data, and when it is combined with information the purchasing company already 
holds, there’s a danger that consumers will have little control as datasets are 
matched and intrusive details revealed,” she added.
 