
• Diana Athill: 'It is possible to make use of failure, and forget it' <>
• Margaret Atwood: 'Get back on the horse that threw you' <>
• Julian Barnes: 'Success to one person can be failure to another' <>
• Ann Enright: 'Failure is what writers do. It is built in' <>
• Howard Jacobson: 'You have to see failure as an opportunity' <>
• Will Self: 'People say my writing is dreadful and pretentious' <>
• Lionel Shriver: 'No one wants to buy a book about disappointment' <>

Diana Athill
 Diana Athill. Photograph: David Levene 

From the age of 22 to that of about 39 I knew myself to be a failure. For many 
of those years I was not positively unhappy, because I was doing work I 
enjoyed, was fond of my friends and often had quite a good time; but if at any 
moment I stood back to look at my life and pass judgment on it, I saw that it 
was one of failure. That is not an exaggeration. I clearly remember specific 
moments when I did just that. They were bleak moments. But they did lead to a 
subdued kind of pride at having learned how to exist in this condition – 
indeed, at having become rather good at it.

The reason for it was banal. Having fallen in love when I was 15, and become 
engaged to marry the man I loved three years later, I had known exactly what my 
future was to be. As soon as I finished my education at Oxford (not before, 
because I was enjoying it so much) we would be married. I would join him 
wherever he happened to be stationed (he was an officer in the RAF) and my life 
as a wife would begin. I didn't doubt for a moment that it would be happy. My 
childhood and teenage years had been very happy so I was a young woman who 
expected the answer "Yes". And then, not suddenly, but with excruciating 
slowness, I got the answer "No".

He was stationed in Egypt. After three months he stopped answering my letters. 
His silence endured for month after month, reducing me to a swamp of 
incredulous misery, until at last a letter came, asking me to release him from 
our engagement because he was marrying someone else. Like, I am sure, most 
young women at that time, I had seen giving my life over to a man, living his 
life, as "happiness". Doing that was what, as a woman, I was for. And this I 
had failed to do. I did, of course, see that the man had behaved badly, cruelly 
in fact, in leaving me in limbo without any explanation for so long, until (I 
guessed) being advised that he ought to guard against me "making trouble". But 
I was so thoroughly the victim of current romantic attitudes that, in spite of 
that recognition, I was unable to withstand a sickening feeling that a woman 
worth her salt would have been too powerfully attractive to allow this disaster 
to happen. And I was not that woman.

I was saved from total loss of self-confidence by the solid happiness of my 
childhood and teens; but my sexual self-confidence was wiped out. For most of 
my 20s and 30s I equated love with pain, plunged into hopeless relationships 
and staggered out of them further reduced, so that I became almost invisible to 
men. Though presentable, my looks had never been those of a "trophy" woman, so 
I needed to make an impression in other ways – and I didn't do so. Many years 
that might have been good ones were turned grey, but they did force me into 
some very useful knowledge: I learned that it is perfectly possible for a woman 
to live her own life, not someone else's, her value does not, in fact, depend 
on how she is seen by a man. And the clearer this became to me, the more colour 
was restored to my life. Bit by bit, enjoyable sex crept back into it. 
A romantic commitment to passion never came back, but physical pleasure did, 
and then the reliable warmth of friendly love – and something else happened, 
just as important or perhaps even more so: I discovered that I could write.

It was the writing that really put an end to failure. In the early 1960s nine 
stories "happened" to me. I say "happened" because I did not decide to write 
them, but suddenly felt a peculiar sort of itch, which produced them. One of 
them won the Observer's short-story prize. I was told that I'd won it on my 
birthday, in December, and having submitted the story in March I had forgotten 
about it. The news was astounding, and became even more so when I went to 
collect my cheque and they kindly offered to show me the room in which all the 
entries were stored: two thousand of them. Two thousand stories, and mine had 
been judged the best! I understood at once what had happened, and it was by far 
the best part of a lovely experience: that dreary bedrock under the surface of 
my life was no longer there, and off I could go into happiness. Almost at once 
I started the most satisfying relationship of my life, which lasted for 40 
years until it was ended by the illness of the man I was living with. When 
sometimes during those years I stood back and passed judgment on my life, I saw 
it as happy. And that is still true, because when love-happiness faded out, 
writing-happiness took over. I had enjoyed writing three books during the 1960s 
and early 70s, and had then, with only mild regret, ceased to write. After 
retiring from my job as a publisher I started again, and the three books – 
plus a collection of letters that I have written and published since I was 80 
(I am now 95) – have gone surprisingly well, well enough to astonish me, and to 
please me a great deal. Success in old age, when things have stopped really 
mattering, has a frivolous sort of charm unlike anything one experiences in 
middle age. It feels like a deliciously surprising treat. Perhaps as one 
advances into second childhood one recovers something of first childhood's 
appetite for treats. Whatever the nature of the feeling, it allows me to state 
that it is possible to recover from failure: to digest it, make use of it and 
forget it. Which is something to remember if you happen to be experiencing it.

Margaret Atwood
 Margaret Atwood. Photograph: Mark Blinch/Reuters 

Failure is just another name for much of real life: much of what we set out 
to accomplish ends in failure, at least in our own eyes. Who set the bar so 
high that most of our attempts to sail gracefully over it on the viewless wings 
of Poesy end in an undignified scramble or a nasty fall into the mud? Who told 
us we had to succeed at any cost?

But my own personal failure list? It's a long one. Sewing failures, to begin 
with. The yellow shortie coat with the lopsided hem I crafted when I was 12? It 
made me look like a street waif, and caused my mother to hide her eyes every 
time I ventured out the door in it. Or maybe you'd prefer a few academic 
failures? My bad Latin mark in Grade 12, my 51 in Algebra? Or my failure to 
learn touch-typing: now that had consequences.

But such adolescent slippages come within the normal range. Something more 
epic, perhaps? A failed novel? Much time expended, many floor-pacings and 
scribblings, nothing achieved; or, as they say in Newfoundland, a wet arse and 
no fish caught.

There have been several of those. Let's take Blakeney, Norfolk, in the winter 
of 1983. We'd gone there to write and watch birds; the second activity was most 
successful, but the first was a washout. I had some complicated fictional 
scheme in mind, and was pursuing it in a cobblestone ex-fisherman's cottage 
with cold stone floors, a balky Aga, and a tiny, smoky fireplace I never did 
master. My plot involved various time layers and improbable interweavings of 
badly realised characters, and the digging up of Mayan eccentric flints – 
that's what they're called – in a part of Mesoamerica I knew little about. 
What had set me off on this track, a track that became narrower and narrower 
and finally petered out in a field bestrewn with burdocks and cow pats?

I soon gave up on the eccentric flints, but I had to put in the time somehow 
because I had such a lovely (though cold) workspace. So I would read through 
the accumulation of Jean Plaidy novels left by generations of summer visitors, 
thus adding to my already excessive stock of Tudor lore. Then I'd walk back to 
where we were living – a rectory haunted by nuns, allegedly – and put my 
chilled feet up on the fender, thus developing chilblains. Perhaps it was those 
six months of futile striving, tangled novelistic timelines, rotten Tudors, and 
chilblains that caused me to break through some invisible wall, because right 
after that I grasped the nettle I had been avoiding, and began to write The 
Handmaid's Tale 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/jan/20/handmaids-tale-margaret-atwood>'.

Get back on the horse that threw you, as they used to say. They also used to 
say: you learn as much from failure as you learn from success.

Julian Barnes
 Julian Barnes. Photograph: Richard Saker/Rex Features 

When I was growing up, failure presented itself as something clear and public: 
you failed an exam, you failed to clear the high-jump bar. And in the grown-up 
world, it was the same: marriages failed, your football team failed to gain 
promotion from what was then the Third Division (South). Later, I realised that 
failure could also be private and hidden: there was emotional, moral, sexual 
failure; the failure to understand another person, to make friends, to say what 
you meant. But even in these new areas, the binary system applied: win or lose, 
pass or fail. It took me a long time to understand the nuances of success 
and failure, to see how they are often intertwined, how success to one person 
is failure to another.

I was a tardy arrival in literary London – in my late 20s when I started 
freelancing, my early 30s when I got my first desk job. It was a largely 
male environment, and far more competitive than I had imagined from the 
outside. I looked around and fairly soon identified those I admired and those I 
didn't. I needed both role models and failure models: one sort to imitate, 
another as warning. There were a fair number of failure models on view: the 
drunk, the incompetent, the placemen and the pompous. I was astonished to find 
that it was possible to spend your life surrounded by great literature and 
remain (or become) paralysed by snobbery. One senior literary gent took me to 
his club for lunch, and on the steps afterwards, apropos of nothing except a 
display of his own worldliness, explained that one should never "pursue an 
illicit liaison" within the space "from the Embankment to the Euston Road, and 
from the Gray's Inn Road to Regent Street". It was for such advice, 
I reflected, that young men take up book reviewing.

I used to whisper to myself, "Don't fuck up like X, don't fuck up like Y." 
Early on, I knew that the primal sin of the artistic life was the sin against 
your own talent. There was a particular X whom I didn't want to fuck up like. 
He was a generation above me, and I probably took him as a counter-example 
because he too had been a scholarship boy and a Francophile. In his early years 
he had published very good poetry and some fiction; he was handsome and witty. 
By the time I met him, he was a just-about-functioning alcoholic, who used to 
say – the old drunkard's excuse – that life was simply more interesting when 
you drank; sobriety was boring. His prose remained elegant while his life 
became crumpled. His diet appeared to consist mainly of vodka, Special Brew and 
Gauloises. His marriage had "failed" – by now I was putting the verb in quotes, 
as some of my own contemporaries' marriages were already collapsing. He had 
two children, lived on his own in a council flat, and eked out a living from a 
weekly column. He could be charming company; he could be a pain in the arse to 
work with. Don't fuck up like X, I would repeat to myself.

Our ways parted. Occasionally he would telephone, usually when drunk, always 
for a trivial purpose – help with a crossword puzzle or competition clue – 
though also (I guessed) with the deeper purpose of combating loneliness. After 
one long, rambling, solipsistic intro, he finally asked me, "Why am I ringing 
you, love? Why am I ringing you?" Exasperatedly, I replied, "Because you've 
reached B in your address book."

More years passed. He got the sack from his weekly column. His byline appeared 
sporadically. I heard that he had quit the booze, and was trying to quit 
smoking. He was down to 17 a day, and to encourage self-discipline used to keep 
a note of each time he lit up. He had become increasingly hermetic, using any 
excuse not to leave his flat. Then there was silence; then I heard that he had 
died – alone of course. They worked out the probable hour of death from the 
last entry in his smoking log.

I went to the funeral. Some of his early, highly skilled poems were read out, 
and I was saddened again by the subsequent offence against his talent. Then 
others spoke. Finally, his son and daughter addressed the small gathering. They 
had turned out well; both were charming and intelligent. They spoke with proper 
roundedness and affection for their father; the daughter described how he had 
coached her to get into Cambridge, how patient and helpful he had been. It was 
very touching. And I had been wrong, or had only partly understood. As I left 
the crematorium for the wake, I was saying to myself – and to him – "No, you 
didn't fuck up after all."

Anne Enright
 Anne Enright. Photograph: Eamonn Mccabe 

I have no problem with failure - it is success that makes me sad. Failure is 
easy. I do it every day, I have been doing it for years. I have thrown out more 
sentences than I ever kept, I have dumped months of work, I have wasted whole 
years writing the wrong things for the wrong people. Even when I am pointed the 
right way and productive and finally published, I am not satisfied by the 
results. This is not an affectation, failure is what writers do. It is built 
in. Your immeasurable ambition is eked out through the many thousand individual 
words of your novel, each one of them written and rewritten several times, and 
this requires you to hold your nerve for a very long period of time – or forget 
about holding your nerve, forget about the wide world and all that anxiety 
and just do it, one word after the other. And then redo it, so it reads better. 
The writer's great and sustaining love is for the language they work with every 
day. It may not be what gets us to the desk but it is what keeps us there and, 
after 20 or 30 years, this love yields habit and pleasure and necessity.

So. All this is known. In the long run we are all dead, and none of us is 
Proust. You must recognise that failure is 90% emotion, 10% self-fulfilling 
reality, and the fact that we are haunted by it is neither here nor there.The 
zen of it is that success and failure are both an illusion, that these 
illusions will keep you from the desk, they will spoil your talent; they will 
eat away at your life and your sleep and the way you speak to the people you 
love.

The problem with this spiritual argument is that success and failure are also 
real. You can finish a real book and it can be published or not, sell or not, 
be reviewed or not. Each one of these real events makes it easier or harder to 
write, publish, sell the next book. And the next. And the one after that. If 
you keep going and stay on the right side of all this, you can be offered 
honours and awards, you can be recognised in the street, you can be recognised 
in the streets of several countries, some of which do not have English as a 
native language. You can get some grumpy fucker to say that your work is not 
just successful but important, or several grumpy fuckers, and they can say this 
before you are quite dead. And all this can happen, by the way, whether or not 
your work is actually good, or still good. Success may be material but is also 
an emotion – one that is felt, not by you, but by the crowd. This is why we 
yearn for it, and can not have it, quite. It is not ours to hold.

I am more comfortable with the personal feeling that is failure than with the 
exposure of success. I say this even though I am, Lord knows, ambitious and 
grabby, and I want to be up there with the rest of them. Up! There!

The sad thing is, when the flash bulbs do pop and fade, you are left, in the 
pulsing after-light, with a keen sense of how unhappy people can be with what 
they have achieved in life. Perfectly successful people. With perfectly good 
lives. And you come to appreciate the ones who have figured all that shit out. 
Meanwhile, and briefly, you are a "success", which is to say an object, whether 
of envy or acclaim. Some people like all that, but I, for reasons I have not 
yet figured out, find it difficult. I don't want to be an object. I find 
jealousy unpleasant (because it is unpleasant). I resist praise.

The writer's life is one of great privilege, so "Suck it up", you might say – 
there are more fans than trolls. But there are two, sometimes separate, 
ambitions here. One is to get known, make money perhaps and take a bow – to be 
acknowledged by that dangerous beast, the crowd. The other is to write a really 
good book.

And a book is not written for the crowd, but for one reader at a time. A novel 
is written (rather pathetically) not to be judged, but experienced. You want to 
meet people in their own heads – at least I do. I still have this big, stupid 
idea that if you are good enough and lucky enough you can make an object that 
insists on its own subjective truth, a personal thing, a book that shifts 
between its covers and will not stay easy on the page, a real novel, one that 
lives, talks, breathes, refuses to die. And in this, I am doomed to fail.

Howard Jacobson
 Howard Jacobson. Photograph: Murdo Macleod 

It starts early. You can come into the world smugly trailing clouds of glory, 
already sainted in the life before life, or you can enter it reluctantly and 
ashamed, helpless, naked, piping loud – Blake's baby not Wordsworth's, at 
the first sight of whom your mother groans, your father weeps. I was a Blake 
baby. I failed birth. I kept my mother waiting, arriving not just late but at a 
peculiar angle. I caused her pain and disappointed my father, who didn't weep 
exactly but would have liked his first child to have a more relaxed attitude to 
existence, though this was made plain to me only gradually, after years of his 
entering me in talent contests whenever we went on holiday to Morecambe, or 
pushing me up to join other kids on stage at the end of pantomimes, or shouting 
"Here!" and pointing to me when magicians asked for volunteers.

Success for him didn't mean making money or excelling at anything in 
particular – it simply meant being at home in the world and fearing nothing. So 
it wasn't because he wanted me to be a footballer or a cricketer that he 
objected to the notes my mother wrote every Wednesday, requesting I be excused 
from games. He would just have liked me to be everybody's friend, the way he 
was. And I failed him. I failed my mother too by taking far too precocious an 
interest in sex. And I failed myself by not knowing how to get any.

But you have to see failure as an opportunity. I took the route favoured by 
all worldly failures and became a spiritual success. That might be an inflated 
way of putting it, but failures are nothing if not grandiose. If the world 
doesn't value us, we won't value the world. We seek solace in books, 
in solitary and sometimes fantastical thinking, in doing with words what boys 
who please their fathers do with balls. We look down on what our fellows like, 
and make a point of liking what our fellows don't. We become special by virtue 
of not being special enough. I doubt many writers were made any other way.

Art is made by those who consider themselves to have failed at whatever isn't 
art. And of course it is loved as consolation, or a call to arms, by those who 
feel the same. One of the reasons there seem to be fewer readers for literature 
today than there were yesterday is that the concept of failure has been 
outlawed. If we are all beautiful, all clever, all happy, all successes in our 
way, what do we want with the language of the dispossessed?

But the nature of failure ensures that writers will go on writing no matter 
how many readers they have.You have to master the embarrassments and ignominies 
of life. And, paradoxically, one of the best ways of achieving this mastery 
over failure is not to drown it in alcohol, not to take pills or see a shrink, 
but to relive it, over and over, in words. It isn't that the words enable you 
to change the outcome and exact revenge – that invariably makes unsatisfactory 
reading. You can tell when writers are reinventing their experience 
vaingloriously. What writers at their best achieve is a saturation of shame, 
triumphing over it by excluding or extenuating nothing, possessing it as 
theirs, and handing it back again, depersonalised, in comedy of one sort or 
another.

The first novel I wrote had failure as a subject. My hero was failing to write 
a book about it. Had he succeeded in finishing I'd have had to write about 
success and I knew I never wanted to do that. It would have been a kind 
of sacrilege. Success as the worldly estimate it is, is rarely a subject for 
literature. Gatsby cannot possibly get Daisy. Dorothea Brooke cannot be allowed 
to change the world. Thus does art get its own back on those without the 
imagination to fail.

Will Self
 Will Self. Photograph: Murdo Macleod 

To attempt to write seriously is always, I feel, to fail – the disjunction 
between my beautifully sonorous, accurate and painfully affecting mental 
content, and the leaden, halting sentences on the page always seems a dreadful 
falling short. It is this failure – a ceaseless threnody keening through the 
writing mind – that dominates my working life, just as an overweening sense of 
not having loved with enough depth or recklessness or tenderness dominates my 
personal one. It follows that to continue writing is to accept failure 
as simply a part of the experience – it's often said that all political lives 
end in failure, but all writing ones begin there, endure there, and then 
collapse into senescent incoherence.

I prize this sense of failure – embrace it even. As a child I loved a John 
Glashan <http://www.johnglashan.com/> cartoon that showed a group of meths 
drinkers lying around on the floor of a squat. "Anyone can be a success," one 
of them was saying, "but it takes real guts to be a failure." Clearly I 
intuited what was coming. When anyone starts out to do something creative – 
especially if it seems a little unusual – they seek approval, often from those 
least inclined to give it. But a creative life cannot be sustained by approval, 
any more than it can be destroyed by criticism – you learn this as you go on.

People say my writing is dreadful, pretentious, self-seeking shit – they 
say it a lot. Other people say my writing is brilliant, beautifully crafted and 
freighted with the most sublime meaning. The criticism, no matter how virulent, 
has long since ceased to bother me, but the price of this is that the praise is 
equally meaningless. The positive and the negative are not so much 
self-cancelling as drowned out by that carping, hectoring internal voice that 
goads me on and slaps me down all day every day.

It follows, I'm afraid, that what we might call institutional success – 
prizes, fellowships, honours – also seems pretty irrelevant to me. I may think 
those who accept them gladly are being hopelessly infra dig, but I still envy 
them: to believe that worldly success is the great desideratum is, in one way 
at least, to be at home in the world – something I am not. And then there are 
those who both believe in the verdict of posterity, and also believe – somewhat 
paradoxically – that they have already achieved it. In the literary world this 
consists in having your works taught on school and university syllabuses, and 
a body of secondary critical literature beginning to coalesce around them. Some 
poor fools, at this point in their careers, get a pharaonic delusion that they 
are being interred in the canonical Cheops while they yet breathe. We've all 
seen the symptoms of this: a tendency to the oracular appears both in print and 
in person; the writer also is tempted to speak about themselves in the third 
person – or write memoirs in the second. An unavoidable sequel of the posterity 
delusion is the death of the writerly self, which depends too much on 
incoherence and inconsistency to remain pompous for long. And of course, the 
vast majority of today's mummified immortals are tomorrow's Ozymandiases.

No, this is the paradox for me: in failure alone is there any possibility of 
success. I don't think I'm alone in this – nor do I think it's an attitude that 
only prevails among people whose work is obviously "creative". On the contrary, 
it often occurs to me that since what successes I do manage are both 
experienced and felt entirely in solitude, there must be many others who are 
the same as me: people for whom life is a process to be experienced, not an 
object to be coveted. There may be, as Bob Dylan says, no success like failure, 
but far from failure being no success at all, in its very visceral intensity, 
it is perhaps the only success there is.

Lionel Shriver
 Lionel Shriver. Photograph: Eamonn Mccabe 

As if the story of the book itself were fated to duplicate the story inside 
the book, my sixth novel,Double Fault 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2006/may/27/featuresreviews.guardianreview13>, 
was purchased by Doubleday in 1997 with great fanfare, yet in hardback sold so 
poorly that no house bid for the paperback until many years later. At core, 
that book is about failure – a subject about which, as a struggling writer, I'd 
grown depressingly expert. Hungry for both fantasy and inspiration, readers 
crave protagonists who, after overcoming seemingly insurmountable obstacles, 
triumph at the end of the day. No one wanted to buy a book about disappointment.

Yet most people fail. In the big picture, few of our careers live up to the 
dreams we nursed when we were young. In fact, one underside of success is that 
it's nearly always penultimate, and so every accomplishment merely raises the 
bar. Each new success conjures new standards we can't meet, thereby inventing 
ingenious new ways to fail. I've not been awarded the Nobel Prize for 
Literature, and may never be. My latest novel missed the Times top 10 
bestseller list by 46 copies. Most of the reviews were good, but they weren'tall
 good. It's a doddle to locate a perspective from which I am still failing.

Even in the little picture, failure is commonplace. Our team loses the pub 
quiz, or we're slaughtered in a game of squash. A job interview goes badly, or 
we burn the lasagne. A joke falls flat. Letting ourselves down in some fashion 
is such an integral part of daily life that the paucity of literature on the 
subject is baffling. There are scads of self-help books on how to succeed, but 
I've never come across a single one on how to contend with not succeeding – 
which is more the form for practically everybody, right?

I'm fascinated by failure, a far more difficult experience to ride out with 
grace than victory, which tends to bring out the best in all but gloating 
arseholes: magnanimity, generosity, ease, confidence, joy, relaxation, energy, 
festivity, and a positive outlook. In contrast, failure naturally elicits 
bitterness, resentment, dolour, enervation, listlessness, pessimism and low 
self‑esteem – a pretty ugly package.

Yet, against the odds, it's possible to fail well – to rise above the 
unpleasant basket of emotions that come with the territory and to not allow 
disappointment to sour one's very soul. I am bowled over by the massive number 
of remarkable people who face down the fact that no, they are not going to be 
film directors, famous artists or billionaire entrepreneurs and still come out 
the other side as cheerful, decent, gracious human beings. As emotional 
achievements go, that is much more impressive than making a go of something and 
avoiding becoming a complete jerk.

The trajectory of my own career as a novelist is sometimes held up as an 
example of perseverance, since six commercial duds were finally followed by a
proper bestseller 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/may/17/lionel-shriver-we-need-talk-kevin>. 
Looking back, I'm torn on whether for a dozen years I "failed well". I was 
often glum, and I nursed my share of resentments. But I guess I still made my 
partner a decent dinner every night, and I wasn't relentlessly crap company. 
I kept writing books, even if no one bought them. Because my black years were 
artistically productive, it's tempting to romanticise them. That would be a 
mistake.

I do think that very early success is more bane than boon, and not having had 
my career handed to me on a plate must have been good for me, not only as a 
writer but as a person. Nevertheless, those were dark times – getting my hopes 
up for one manuscript after another and having them dashed. It wasn't 
ennobling. True, after having carved out a little place for myself in the 
world, I am probably a warmer woman with a lighter spirit, but that may not be 
to my credit. We celebrate success, hope for the best, and admire 
determination. So we shy from acknowledging that there's a point at which it's 
pretty clear that whatever it is we're so determined to achieve is not going to 
happen. In which case, why keep beating our heads against the wall? There's 
something to be said for giving up. Hell, maybe there's such a thing as "giving 
up well", too.
 