
The fan at Yankee Stadium who wound up with the ball that Alex Rodriguez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-rodriguez> launched for his 3,000th hit 
is holding on to the prized souvenir. For now, anyway.

“At first, I was 100% adamant about not giving the ball back,” Zack Hample 
told the Associated Press by telephone late Friday night. “Now, I’m thinking 
about it.

“I’m not making any definite decisions tonight and probably not tomorrow, 
either,” he said an hour after New York beat Detroit 7-2. “I want to enjoy the 
moment.”

Baseball team Orem Owlz cancel 'Caucasian Heritage Night' after backlash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/19/minor-league-baseball-club-orem-owlz-caucasian-heritage>
Rodriguez homered for his 3,000th career hit and the New York Yankees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-yankees> beat Detroit 7-2 on Friday 
night, the highlight in what has become a resurgent season for the disgraced 
slugger.


“A year ago today, I didn’t know if this day would come,” he said. “There were 
some really dark days. Sometimes, I never thought I’d get the uniform back on.”

Out of baseball last season while serving a drug suspension, Rodriguez wasted 
no time, connecting in the first inning on a first-pitch, 95mph fastball from 
Tigers ace Justin Verlander.

“I was happy to get it out of the way,” Rodriguez said.

The solo homer made him the 29th player in major league history to reach 3,000 
hits. He was the first to do it since Yankees great Derek Jeter homered from 
the same batter’s box in 2011.

“It’s a magical number,” Rodriguez said. “I’m very happy to be in the club.”

A-Rod turns 40 next month. The three-time AL MVP launched his 13th homer of 
the season and has enjoyed a productive year as a designated hitter after 
returning from his suspension. Rodriguez hit his 667th career home run after 
beginning the day with a .299 lifetime average in 21 seasons.

The 37-year-old Hample, meanwhile, has some experience in this area. He 
describes himself as a pro at catching home run balls, has written books about 
the art and has snagged a whopping 8,161 baseballs at stadiums around the 
country.

“Got 12 tonight. Got 11 in batting practice and one during the game by some 
guy,” he said, laughing.

Hample is a New Yorker and a Yankees season-ticket holder. He was in his 
favorite spot – section 103, row 12, seat 24 – in right field when Rodriguez 
connected for a solo shot off Justin Verlander in the first inning. Hample 
raised his Rawlings glove, but the crowd surge pushed him forward. Good fortune 
was on his side, however.

“I looked down and the ball was at my feet. It ricocheted, and it was almost 
touching my shoe,” he said.

Hample snapped up the ball and posted a picture of it on Twitter. Quickly, the 
Yankees visited him and tried to see what it would take to make a deal. It was 
not an easy negotiation, either.

A day earlier, Hample tweeted about Rodriguez: “That man deserves favours from 
no one, least of all a fan.”

After talking to the Yankees, Hample posted that he “told the Yankees I’m 
keeping it”.

Rodriguez later mentioned the fan who snared Derek Jeter’s home run ball for 
his 3,000th hit in 2011. That man was all too eager to return it to the former 
Yankees star.

St Louis Cardinals chairman blames hacking scandal on 'roguish behaviour'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/19/st-louis-cardinals-chairman-hacking-scandal-roguish-behaviour>
“Where’s Jeet’s guy? That’s the guy I needed,” Rodriguez said. “I wasn’t so 
lucky.”

In the late innings, it appeared to be a lost cause. Yankees spokesman Jason 
Zillo said efforts to have the man deal directly with team president Randy 
Levine didn’t work.

“As far as we’re concerned, we have done everything we could to engage this 
guy in some type of discussion about some type of exchange. He had none of 
anything we were saying. He wouldn’t engage at all,” Zillo said. “He is not 
intending to give it to us.

“This guy is pretty well-documented. A professional home run catcher,” Zillo 
said.

Hample has returned balls in the past. He said he gave back the first home 
runs hit by Mike Trout and Didi Gregorius, free of charge.

“This is something more special,” Hample said.

But Hample ended up watching the ninth inning with Levine and chief operating 
officer Lonn Trost, and said he was considering what to do.

“They were so nice, and that made me think about what I want to do,” Hample 
said. “There’s no right or wrong in this. We’ll just see.”
 