
Whichever way it was supposed to end, it was not supposed to end like this.

Alex Rodriguez announced at a joint press conference with the New York Yankees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-yankees> on Sunday that he would 
play his final game on Friday at Yankee Stadium, against the Tampa Bay Rays, 
and that after the game he would be given his unconditional release from the 
club – at which point he would sign a contract with the Yankees to return to 
the team as a special adviser and instructor through the 2017 season.

Alex Rodriguez to be released by Yankees, ending controversial career
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/07/alex-rodriguez-retirement-new-york-yankees-arod>
“We all want to keep playing forever,” said a tearful Rodriguez on Sunday. 
“But it doesn’t work that way. This is a tough day. I love this game and I love 
this team. And today I’m saying goodbye.”

The immediate ramification of this – the end of Rodriguez’s career as a 
baseball player – is not entirely unexpected. The writing has been on the wall 
for months now: after a miraculous 2015 season when the then-39 year old played 
in 151 games, hit 33 home runs and was pretty much the only reason to tune in 
to Yankees baseball in what was otherwise a lost season in the Bronx, Rodriguez 
has spent 2016 playing a young man’s game like he’s 40 years old. Already 
restricted to being a designated hitter, A-Rod’s ineffectiveness at the plate 
has seen him only start three games since July 21, and with New York having 
fully dispensed with the fiction of competing this year, there’s not going to 
be any last September hurrah for which his veteran presence might have been an 
asset.

Still, generally speaking players of Rodriguez’s caliber – guys who have been 
in the league for a couple decades, who draw massive fan interest (if not 
always support) and who have become essentially synonymous with their franchise 
– don’t retire in the middle of the year. They have their retirement tours and 
victory laps, they see all their old rivals’ stadiums one more time, then they 
have a nice event during the last homestand of the season. That’s nothing new 
to the Yankees; it feels like they’ve been conducting one retirement tour or 
another for some Bronx legend every year this decade. Announcing a press 
conference on a Saturday night in early August for the next morning, and then 
announcing in that press conference that the team’s most iconic remaining 
player will be retiring after the game on Friday is not how those scripts 
generally go.

In fact, that’s the sort of thing a team does when they’re trying to force a 
player out with a minimal loss of face for everyone involved – there is, after 
all, the important distinction that Rodriguez is going to be released before he 
retires, meaning he will collect the $21m he is due from the Yankees next year. 
New York has resigned itself to paying him that money, at this point; they 
tried to get out from under Rodriguez’s contract during the Biogenesis scandal 
and only managed to shave a year off of it. A-Rod’squotes from the press 
conference 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/08/sports/baseball/alex-rodriguez-to-be-released-and-join-yankees-as-an-adviser.html>
 – that he’d “have had an unbelievable, fun time” chasing milestones such as 
his 700th career home run, but that “those are not the cards I was dealt” – 
certainly suggest that this abrupt mid-August “retirement” was not wholly his 
idea.

And that too wouldn’t be a surprise, if not for the rider on the tail end of 
Rodriguez’s release: becoming an adviser for the same organization that tried, 
publicly and passionately, to get him banned from baseball for life. If you 
went back to 2013 and told anyone covering Biogenesis that A-Rod would end up 
as a roving adviser and instructor in the Yankees system by 2017, we’d have 
laughed in your face. The idea of the Yankees willingly putting Rodriguez 
around their prospects would’ve seemed farcical. Yet here we are.

What 2013’s baseball reporters would have missed in the intervening three 
years, of course, was the emergence of Rodriguez as one of the best clubhouse 
presences for young guys in the league.Part of this was image rehab 
<http://m.yesnetwork.com/news/article/2016/03/28/168871034> for A-Rod, for both 
his and the Yankees’ sake, but it merely highlighted something that he was 
already doing anyway. Anyone who’s watched him in spring training or during his 
minor league rehab stints knows how well Rodriguez gets along with the kids in 
the Yankees system, and the interest he has in mentoring them and helping them 
succeed. Whether he’ll be able to translate that enthusiasm into actual results 
has yet to be seen – Rodriguez is a generational talent, a wunderkind of 
hitting, and there are major components to that kind of greatness that just 
can’t be taught. But there’s no doubt that the temperament is there.

There will be time to relitigate A-Rod’s past – oh, will there be time to 
relitigate A-Rod’s past, especially as 2021 approaches – but as the book closes 
on his career, it closes amicably, and with an affirmation thatAlex Rodriguez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-rodriguez> is, was, and will always be 
a New York Yankee. And that’s the biggest surprise of them all.
 