
Magazine publishers see Thursday's ABC figures  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/13/good-housekeeping-popular-magazine-abc>
as a step forward. For the first time they managed to convince the bureau to 
add the circulation figures for their digital editions to the numbers for the 
paper editions of the same title. 

Anyone looking for evidence of readers migrating in an orderly fashion from 
paper to point-and-click will be disappointed. Themagazines with the most 
significant percentage of their sales on tablet or phone were in a relatively 
narrow band of predominantly male interest titles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/13/gadget-magazine-t3-popular-digital>
 – such as T3 (42.3%), Stuff (19.33%), GQ (9.58%), Top Gear (8.8%) and the 
Economist (5.72%) – and some of the other percentages hinted at less than 
transformational change.

Beyond the business class lounge neither readers nor advertisers seem to have 
a massive appetite for a new form of delivery. Vogue sells 192,763 print copies 
compared to 8,314 digital ones, Good Housekeeping 410,981 compared to 3,561. TV 
Times only sold 217 "copies" on digital compared to 254,376 on paper. It's not 
the only title that can't decide whether to stick or twist. Look at it from the 
publishers' point of view. Are they moving from one format to another or 
contemplating a future where the complexity increases but the revenue doesn't?

Into this cauldron of uncertainty comes Porter, the new six-issues-a-year 
glossy from the people atupmarket fashion site Net A Porter 
<http://www.net-a-porter.com/>, courageously priced at £5 for 284 pages against 
its rival Vogue's doormat-crushing 440 pages for a bargain £3.99. Porter is 
obviously accompanied by a tablet version, via which you can purchase expensive 
fashion items, as an increasing number of women like to do.

The incumbent titles are watching its arrival with the usual combination of 
dry indifference and sheer terror. Vogue editorAlexandra Shulman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alexandra-shulman> said it "sounded like a 
grand Sainsbury's magazine". What they're all no doubt thinking is, can there 
be enough upmarket advertising to go round?

I've always taken the view that the world of fashion simply didn't exist 
without the glossy magazines that served it. They defined it, sorted out its 
hierarchy, handed out its prizes, chronicled its most minute shifts and 
tantrums and were prepared to fawn over its stars in a way that would have made 
the most sycophantic Versailles courtier blanch. They also played a crucial 
role in making its products seem worth the money. A legendary piece of research 
showed people the same dress in a newspaper as they saw in a posh magazine. In 
the latter they thought it was worth £100 more. They called it "the presenter 
effect". In the past the mavens of Milan have bought into the same idea. 

The world has moved on. Once your sole window on Victoria Beckham was when she 
revealed some massively significant new haircut in the pages of Elle. It's 
difficult to properly emphasise how much social media has cooked that 
particular goose. It's also difficult to believe that we gawp in adoration at 
Porter star Uma Thurman quite as much as we did in days of yore, although 
anybody who can expect us to believe that they're stirring the stock pot while 
a small child sits at their feet, shod in Stella McCartney sandals (£540), has 
certainly got some neck.

Nevertheless, as the publishers have noted to their surprise, these 
advertisers still appear to believe in the charisma of paper. It doesn't much 
matter what any media commentator says about Carole Radziwill's underwhelming 
thoughts on mystique, the 18 pages of white lace for spring or whether there is 
anything that David Bailey hasn't already said about fame, the pages of Porter 
that really matter are the 26 between the cover and the first page of 
editorial, which are occupied by Chanel, Ralph Lauren, Gucci, Armani, Dolce & 
Gabbana and others in an order which has no doubt been the subject of much 
arm-wrestling.

The only thing that matters is how much those people have paid and whether 
they're minded to come back once their opening series deal has expired. For the 
moment they appear to support my theory that magazines still play an 
indispensable role in creating the mystique that sustains the fashion process.

Mind you, there was a time I would have said much the same about the music 
business and music magazines. In Britain, particularly, they were a key cog in 
what Joni Mitchell called "the star maker machinery behind the popular song". 
In recent years they've slid away to such an extent that theNME now sells less 
than 20,000 copies a week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/13/nme-sales-falling-off-charts-music-magazine-circulation>
and Q, which once sold over 200,000, is lucky to hit 50,000. Rock stars are 
still being created but I don't think it's mere nostalgia that tempts me to 
point out that there hasn't been a real star rock group since the decline of 
the rock press. Jake Bugg? I rest my case.
 