
Fasting for regular periods could help protect the brain against degenerative 
illnesses, according to US scientists.

Researchers at the National Institute on Ageing in Baltimore said they had 
found evidence which shows that periods of stopping virtually all food intake 
for one or two days a week could protect the brain against some of the worst 
effects ofAlzheimer's <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alzheimers>, 
Parkinson's and other ailments.

"Reducing your calorie intake could help your brain, but doing so by cutting 
your intake of food is not likely to be the best method of triggering this 
protection. It is likely to be better to go on intermittent bouts of fasting, 
in which you eat hardly anything at all, and then have periods when you eat as 
much as you want," said Professor Mark Mattson, head of the institute's 
laboratory of neurosciences.

"In other words, timing appears to be a crucial element to this process," 
Mattson told the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement 
of Science in Vancouver.

Cutting daily food intake to around 500 calories – which amounts to little 
more than a few vegetables and some tea – for two days out of seven had clear 
beneficial effects in their studies, claimed Mattson, who is also professor of 
neuroscience at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine in Baltimore.

Scientists have known for some time that a low-calorie diet is a recipe for 
longer life. Rats and mice reared on restricted amounts of food increase their 
lifespan by up to 40%. A similar effect has been noted in humans. But Mattson 
and his team have taken this notion further. They argue that starving yourself 
occasionally can stave off not just ill-health and early death but delay the 
onset of conditions affecting the brain, including strokes. "Our animal 
experiments clearly suggest this," said Mattson.

He and his colleagues have also worked out a specific mechanism by which the 
growth of neurones in the brain could be affected by reduced energy intakes. 
Amounts of two cellular messaging chemicals are boosted when calorie intake is 
sharply reduced, said Mattson. These chemical messengers play an important role 
in boosting the growth of neurones in the brain, a process that would 
counteract the impact of Alzheimer's and Parkinson's.

"The cells of the brain are put under mild stress that is analogous to the 
effects of exercise on muscle cells," said Mattson. "The overall effect is 
beneficial."

The link between reductions in energy intake and the boosting of cell growth 
in the brain might seem an unlikely one, but Mattson insisted that there were 
sound evolutionary reasons for believing it to be the case. "When resources 
became scarce, our ancestors would have had to scrounge for food," said 
Mattson. "Those whose brains responded best – who remembered where promising 
sources could be found or recalled how to avoid predators — would have been the 
ones who got the food. Thus a mechanism linking periods of starvation to neural 
growth would have evolved."

This model has been worked out using studies of fasting on humans and the 
resulting impact on their general health – even sufferers from asthma have 
shown benefits, said Mattson – and from experiments on the impact on the brains 
of animals affected by the rodent equivalent of Alzheimer's and Parkinson's. 
Now Mattson's team is preparing to study the impact of fasting on the brain by 
using MRI scans and other techniques.

If this final link can be established, Mattson said that a person could 
optimise his or her brain function by subjecting themselves to bouts of 
"intermittent energy restriction". In other words, they could cut their food 
intake to a bare minimum for two days a week, while indulging for the other 
five. "We have found that from a psychological point of view that works quite 
well. You can put up with having hardly any food for a day if you know that for 
the next five you can eat what you want."
 