
“They’re trying to kill me, if they kill me take care of my son.”

These were the last words of Faysal Ishak Ahmad before his death on Christmas 
Eve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/24/sudanese-refugee-dies-in-brisbane-hospital-after-medivac-from-manus>
. The Sudanese refugee uttered these words during his last visit to his friend 
Walid Sandal. This is not a scene from a tragic film or novel. This is the 
reality of the prison on Manus Island, hundreds of kilometres from Australia 
and in the middle of a silent ocean.

Faysal was born in Darfur, Sudan – a region associated with war, genocide and 
displacement. A symbol of affliction in western media. In other words, Faysal 
was born into war. In 2004, at the age of 13, his family was displaced and 
moved to the Kasab refugee camp north of Darfur, a camp managed by 
international organisations. No refugee from the camp had the right to work and 
once every few months the organisations would distribute food between the 
families. It is a place full of hardship, suffering and hunger.

Sudanese refugee dies in Brisbane hospital after medivac from Manus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/24/sudanese-refugee-dies-in-brisbane-hospital-after-medivac-from-manus>
In the month of July 2013, after nine years living in a camp for displaced 
people, Faysal left behind his nine-month-old son and wife destined for 
Australia. First he arrived in Egypt and then Indonesia. He spent two months 
displaced and hungry in Indonesia until, on 1 September 2013, Faysal travelled 
to Australia on a decaying boat with 90 other people.

The journey was difficult and dangerous and they encountered waves that may 
have destroyed the boat at any moment. However, after nine days Faysal arrived 
in the Australian city of Darwin.

In my interview with Omar Jack Giram – who was on the boat with Faysal – he 
told me:

After five days we had consumed all our water and food supplies. We were 
starving for four days and practically unconscious – as close to death as 
possible. Faysal vomited many times along the way, however he was mostly 
worried about his family and was always thinking of his son.

The boat was intercepted by the Australian navy, and without attending to the 
sick people the navy immediately transferred them by boat thousands of 
kilometres to the west of Australia, to Christmas Island – a trip that would 
take approximately five days and nights.

After roughly one month, Faysal was forced onto a plane and exiled to another 
island prison, a flight nine hours north of Australia. From a refugee camp in 
Darfur to Manus Island; from the western hemisphere to the eastern hemisphere 
in something like four months.

First, Faysal was taken to Delta prison together with his friend, Walid, and 
put in a small cage with dimensions of 70x70 meters. After three months he was 
transferred to Mike prison with a cage of 80x80 meters. The transfer to Mike 
marked the beginning of Faysal’s physical ailments. It was there that, for the 
first time, he became sick with stomach aches.

Walid shared with me the following: “He had severe stomach aches and the only 
medicine we received were pain relief tablets such as Panadol. He couldn’t 
sleep most nights because of the intensity of the pain.” When I asked Walid 
about the attacks on the prison by locals in February 2014 he replied:

That night Faysal and I didn’t leave our room and we secured the door using 
the bed. We heard the sound of shots fired and then everything went dark. 
That’s when Faysal hid under the bed for one hour – he was more afraid for his 
family than himself. The next day we found out that Reza Barati was killed by 
officers just meters away from us – it was a horrible night.

Faysal was lucky, this was the second time that he escaped death. But with the 
stomach pains he was now experiencing his life was to take a different turn. 
Faysal spent over two and a half years in Mike prison waiting in the queue to 
use the telephone, otherwise on his way to the medical centre to receive his 
pain relief tablets.

Regardless of this state of affairs, Walid tells me: “Faysal was a very warm 
and cheerful man. On most occasions he would make us laugh and/or he would 
analyse current news reports. He was so clever that we would call him ‘The 
Honourable Minister’.” It was in this very prison – Mike prison – that he would 
eventually receive a response to his asylum case.

His case was accepted, meaning that he was officially recognised as a refugee; 
a person who the government must treat as someone in need of protection.

In April 2016, the responsibility for asylum seekers who received positive 
assessments as refugees was transferred to Oscar and Delta prisons, and Faysal 
was moved to Oscar. In the same month, thePapua New Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/papua-new-guinea> courts ruled that Manus 
prison was illegal, which meant one step towards freedom.

But entering Oscar prison was marked by two terrible incidents in Faysal’s 
life. First, he lost his mother who was living in the same refugee camp he left 
in Sudan. And then Faysal began to experience severe heart problems. He was 
able to tolerate his stomach aches with pain relief tablets, but heart problems 
were a dangerous issue and he realised, quite rightly, that this time he needed 
to fight more seriously for his wellbeing.

For the next six months he would visit the medical centre every day and would 
stand in long and slow queues for medication. Walid recalls:

Faysal became unconscious and collapsed over and over again but every time he 
visited the medical centre the doctor would tell him he was fine. On every 
occasion he returned empty handed and angry.

For six months he wrote more than 20 letters to the medical centre but every 
time he received a patronising and dismissive response. This continued up to 
the point when even Walid asked Faysal to be honest and tell him if he was 
really sick or not. Faysal responded: “I swear to god I have pain in my chest 
(heart), I swear to God I’m sick, I’m not faking.”

In the face of all the indifference from the doctors he continued to write to 
them, he desperately begged them for assistance; he sought help from the 
medical centre but returned unsuccessful every time.

The judge who unmade Manus Island on why offshore detention has no future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/24/the-judge-who-unmade-manus-island-on-why-offshore-detention-has-no-future>
During his final encounter his situation was so critical that the other 
refugees wrote a collective letter to the doctors describing his crisis. There 
was no reply.

A few days later, Faysal collapsed for the last time. After 24 hours they 
finally transferred him to Australia. The next day, news of his death was 
published in the media.

He was a man whose life was full of pain; he spent more than half his life in 
refugee camps. Faysal’s brother Salih shared his feelings on the loss. Salih 
said:

When we were told that Faysal died we were shocked! Because Faysal was the 
only person we were counting on to transform our lives from the refugee camp to 
a safe world. We don’t actually know how he died and the only thing we know is 
he was sick. He told me so many times that he was sick but I have no idea how 
he injured his head.

On the day of Faysal’s death, a picture was shared on Facebook of the 
immigration minister and his smiling son. It was Christmas: a time to 
celebrate, a day to be merry.

Translated by Dr Omid Tofighian, Sydney University
 