
The FBI on Monday released surveillance tapes, photos and hundreds of pages of 
documents that shed new light on operation "Ghost Stories," the bureau's 
investigation ofa ring of Russian sleeper agents 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/jun/29/russian-spies-suburban-america> 
that ended after more than a decade in the biggest spy swap since the Cold War.

Called illegals because they took civilian jobs instead of operating inside 
Russian embassies and military missions, the spies, including New York real 
estate agentAnna Chapman <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-chapman>, 
mostly settled into quiet lives in middle-class neighbourhoods.

Their long-range assignment from Moscow: burrow deep into US society and 
cultivate contacts with academics, entrepreneurs and government policymakers on 
subjects from defence to finance.

The heavily-edited files provide a glimpse into the intensive surveillance the 
deep cover agents were under, in some cases for almost a decade, showing the 
middle-class spies with their children, shopping or in one case attending a 
graduation ceremony.

The code name Ghost Stories appears to refer to the ring's efforts to blend 
invisibly into the fabric of American society. An FBI spokesman said the 
decision to release the material on Halloween was coincidental.

FBI videos of the Russian agents show Chapman, whose role in the spy saga 
turned her into an international celebrity, and the other illegals 
surreptitiously passing information and money as part of their operations, 
which included the use of spy tools as old as invisible ink and as modern as 
cryptographic software that hides messages in digital images posted on the 
internet.

The linchpin in the case was Col Alexander Poteyev, a highly placed US mole in 
Russian foreign intelligence, who betrayed the spy ring even as he ran it. He 
abruptly fled Moscow just days before the FBI rolled up the deep cover 
operation on June 27, 2010. Poteyev's role in exposing the illegals program 
only emerged last June when a Russian military court convicted him in absentia 
for high treason and desertion.

The US swapped the 10 deep cover agents for four Russians imprisoned for 
spying for the West at a remote corner of a Vienna airport on 9 July, in a 
scene reminiscent of the carefully-choreographed exchange of spies at Berlin's 
Glienicke Bridge during the Cold War.

While freed Soviet spies typically kept a low profile after their return to 
Moscow, Chapman became a lingerie model, corporate spokeswoman and television 
personality. Donald Heathfield, whose real name is Andrey Bezrukov, lists 
himself as an adviser to the president of a major Russian oil company on his 
LinkedIn account. President Dmitry Medvedev awarded all 10 of the freed 
deep-cover operatives Russia's highest honors at a Kremlin ceremony.

The swap was Washington's idea, raised when US law enforcement officials told 
President Barack Obama it was time to start planning the arrests. Agents 
launched a series of raids across the northeast after a decade of intensive 
surveillance of the ring, which officials say never managed to steal any 
secrets.

The case was brought to a swift conclusion before it could complicate the 
president's campaign to "reset" US relations with Russia, strained by years of 
tensions overUS foreign policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-foreign-policy> and the 2008 
Russian-Georgian war. All 10 of the captured spies were charged with failing to 
register as foreign agents.

An 11th defendant, Christopher Metsos, who claimed to be a Canadian citizen 
and delivered money and equipment to the sleeper agents, vanished after a court 
in Cyprus freed him on bail.

Attorney General Eric Holder said the FBI decided to arrest the illegals 
because one of the spies was preparing to leave the US and there was concern 
that "we would not be able to get him back." Despite the ring's failure to 
gather any intelligence, Holder said they still posed a potential threat to the 
US.

Former Soviet intelligence officials now living in the West scratched their 
heads over the Ghost Stories saga.

"In my view this whole operation was a waste of human resources, money and 
just putRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> in a ridiculous 
situation," said Oleg Kalugin, a former KGB major general who spied against the 
US during the Soviet era, in an interview earlier this year. He now lives near 
Washington.

Alexander Vassiliev, a former KGB officer and journalist who has written 
extensively about Soviet spying in America, said the illegals were supposed to 
act as talent spotters and scouts, identifying Americans in positions of power 
who might be recruited to spill secrets for financial reasons or through 
blackmail. Spies with the protection of diplomatic credentials would handle the 
more delicate task of recruiting and handling the agents.

Moscow's ultimate aim, Vassiliev said, was probably to cultivate a source who 
could provide day-by-day intelligence on what the president's inner circle was 
thinking and planning in response to the latest international crisis. But he 
said there was no evidence the Kremlin made any progress toward that goal.

"How are you going to recruit someone like that, on what basis? That's quite a 
successful person. Why should he spy for the Russians? I can't see any reason."

He said Russia's intelligence services seem unable to shake their Soviet-era 
habits. "The current practice of the Russian espionage agency is based on the 
practices which existed before 1945," said Vassiliev, who now lives in London. 
"It's so outdated."

The 10 Russian illegals included:

— Chapman, the daughter of a Russian diplomat, who worked as a real estate 
agent in New York City. After she was caught, photos of the redhead's social 
life and travels were splashed all over the tabloids. Following her return to 
Russia, Chapman worked as a model, became the celebrity face of a Moscow bank 
and joined the leadership of the youth wing of the main pro-Kremlin party.

— Vicky Pelaez and Juan Lazaro, of Yonkers, New York. He briefly taught a 
class on Latin American and Caribbean politics at Baruch College. She wrote 
pieces highly critical of US policy in Latin America as a columnist for one of 
the United States' best-known Spanish-language newspapers, El Diario La Prensa.

— Michael Zottoli and Patricia Mills of Arlington, Virginia. He had worked at 
a telecommunications firm. The couple raised a young son and toddler in their 
high-rise apartment.

— Richard and Cynthia Murphy of Montclair, New Jersey. He mostly stayed home 
with their two pre-teen children while she worked for a lower Manhattan-based 
accounting firm that offered tax advice. As part of her job, she provided 
financial planning for a venture capitalist with close ties to Bill and Hillary 
Clinton.

— Donald Howard Heathfield and Tracey Lee Ann Foley of Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. He worked in sales for an international management consulting 
firm and peddled strategic planning software to US corporations. She was a real 
estate agent.

—Mikhail Semenko of Arlington, Virginia, who spoke Russian, English, Spanish, 
Chinese and Portuguese. He worked at the Travel All Russia travel agency, where 
co-workers described him as "clumsy" and "quirky."

In return for the return of the illegals, Moscow freed four Russians after 
they signed statements admitting to spying for the US or Britain.

The US spies included Alexander Zaporozhsky, a former colonel and deputy chief 
of Russian foreign intelligence's American section, who had retired in 1997 and 
moved to suburban Baltimore in 2001. He was arrested after he returned to 
Moscow for what he thought was a reunion with KGB colleagues and was sentenced 
in 2003 to 18 years in prison for espionage.

Zaporozhsky may have provided information leading to the capture of Robert 
Hanssen and Aldrich Ames, two of the most damaging spies ever caught in the US.

Gennady Vasilenko, a former KGB officer who worked in Washington and Latin 
America, was accused by Hansen of spying for the US. He was arrested in Havana 
in 1988, but released from Moscow's notorious Lefortovo prison after six months 
for lack of evidence. But suspicions lingered, and Vasilenko was arrested again 
in 2006 in Moscow and sentenced to three years in prison for illegal weapons 
possession and resistance to authorities.

Vasilenko now has a home in Leesburg, Virginia. He declined the Associated 
Press' request for an interview.

Arms control researcher Igor Sutyagin worked for what may have been a 
British-based CIA front, and he denies being a spy, saying he didn't pass along 
any information that wasn't available through open sources. He told reporters 
he signed a confession out of concern he would otherwise ruin the swap for the 
others — and for fear of abuse and misery in the three years remaining in his 
prison term.

The fourth was Sergei Skripal, a former colonel for Russian military 
intelligence, the GRU. He was sentenced in 2006 to 13 years in prison for 
passing the names of other Russian agents to British intelligence. Skripal, now 
about 60, is said to be suffering from diabetes. Both Skripal and Sutyagin went 
to Britain following their release.

US officials have not commented on the Poteyev case.
 