
FBI director James Comey says an agent impersonated an Associated Press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/associated-press> reporter during a 2007 
criminal investigation, a ruse the news organization says could undermine its 
credibility.

In a letter Thursday to the New York Times, Comey said the agent “portrayed 
himself as an employee of the Associated Press” to help catch a 15-year-old 
suspect accused of making bomb threats at a high school near Olympia, 
Washington. It was publicized last week that theFBI forged an AP story during 
its investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/oct/28/seattle-times-fbi-investigation-link-spy-suspect-outrage>
, but Comey’s letter revealed the agency went further and had an agent actually 
pretend to be a reporter for the wire service.

Comey said the agent posing as an AP reporter asked the suspect to review a 
fake AP article about threats and cyberattacks directed at the school, “to be 
sure that the anonymous suspect was portrayed fairly”.

The bogus article contained a software tool that could verify internet 
addresses. The suspect clicked on a link, revealing his computer’s location and 
internet address, which helped agents confirm his identity.

“That technique was proper and appropriate under Justice Department and FBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> guidelines at the time. Today, the 
use of such an unusual technique would probably require higher-level approvals 
than in 2007, but it would still be lawful and, in a rare case, appropriate,” 
Comey wrote.

Kathleen Carroll, executive editor of the AP, said the FBI’s actions were 
“unacceptable”.

“This latest revelation of how the FBI misappropriated the trusted name of the 
Associated Press doubles our concern and outrage, expressed earlier to attorney 
general Eric Holder, about how the agency’s unacceptable tactics undermine AP 
and the vital distinction between the government and the press,” Carroll said 
in a statement.

In a letter to the Justice Department last week, the AP requested Holder’s 
word that the DOJ would never again misrepresent itself as the AP and asked for 
policies to ensure the DOJ does not further impersonate news organizations.

In a letter Thursday to Comey and Holder, the Reporters Committee for Freedom 
of the Press asked the agency for full disclosure about the incident.

“The utilization of news media as a cover for delivery of electronic 
surveillance software is unacceptable,” the letter said. “This practice 
endangers the media’s credibility and creates the appearance that it is not 
independent of the government. It undermines media organizations’ ability to 
independently report on law enforcement.”

In his letter to the New York Times, Comey said all undercover operations 
involve deception, “which has long been a critical tool in fighting crime”.
 