
Central banks are in the spotlight once more, as investors optimistically hope 
for clarity from the US Federal Reserve about future plans for its bond buying 
programme.

On top of that, came talk that China may ease its policy by cutting the 
reserve requirement ratio - the amount of capital banks have to set aside in 
case of financial trouble - in the next day or so. New comments from Mario 
Draghi, the head of the European Central Bank, that it was "ready to act" where 
needed have also helped sentiment.

At Wednesday's Fed announcement, investors are hoping for clarification from 
chairman Ben Bernanke about its $85bn a month bond buying programme. Central 
bank action has been supporting the markets for months but since comments from 
Bernanke on 22 May seemed to suggest an end could be in sight, investors have 
taken fright. Ishaq Siddiqi, market strategist at ETX Capital said:
 After Bernanke's testimony and the Fed meeting minutes on May 22, risk assets 
have declined sharply while bond yields have spiked and volatility has shot 
through the roof. It's likely that Bernanke will spend most of the press 
conference downplaying market fears in a dovish manner and hopefully offering a 
time-line of when the Fed will start to scale back quantitative easing.

Overall the FTSE 100 has added 31.84 points to 6362.33, with Whitbread the top 
riser. The Costa Coffee and Premier Inn business is up 95p to £30.18 aftera 
well-received trading statement. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2013/jun/18/poor-british-weather-sales-whitbread-restaurants>

But Aggreko has dropped 41p to £17.50 as the temporary power supply company 
said it was on track to meet first half expectations although trading remained 
subdued. Last year the company issued two profit warnings, but now says 
forecasts for the year are unchanged with a pickup in the second half expected.

Security group G4S, where Bill Gates was recently revealed as a shareholder, 
has dipped 4.9p to 239.9p after Goldman Sachs issued a sell recommendation and 
cut its target price from 200p to 194p. The move was made to take into account 
recent movements in emerging market currencies, and has led to the bank 
reducing its earnings estimate forG4S <https://www.theguardian.com/business/g4s>
 by 3% for 2013.

But RSA Insurance has added 3.3p to 121.1p, lifted by news that Credit Suisse 
has moved from neutral to outperform and raised its price target from 125p to 
138p. The bank said:
 Having been a long-term neutral on RSA, our decision to turn more positive 
reflects our belief that earnings are poised to improve following what has been 
an extended period of stagnation. 
Easyjet is up 31p to £12.83 on news of an $11bn Airbus order. The deal needs 
shareholder approval but is likely to face opposition from founder Sir Stelios 
Haji-Ioannou.

Vodafone has added 1.5p to 184.2p despite US group Liberty Global making an 
offer for its bid target Kabel Deutschland, raising the prospect of a takeover 
battle.
 