
"Usually at screenings people ask questions which include a statement about 
what they believe, and then they don't bother listening to your answer," says 
Havana Marking. "What was great about the kids was that they actually wanted to 
know what you were going to say."

As the director of Afghan Star <http://www.afghanstardocumentary.com/> – a 
documentary about Afghanistan's version of Pop Idol and its eventual winner, 
21-year-old Rafi Naabzada – Marking is used to Q&As about her More 4-funded 
film. She has accompanied it around the world from Stockholm to Sundance and 
faced interrogation from audiences ranging from human rights workers to indie 
film buffs. Recently, however, her audience was 150 kids, aged 11 or 12, 
sprawled in the gym at St Augustine's School in Kilburn, north London, just 
before lunch hour.

"The most obvious difference was that every other screening has the audience 
asking you, as the mighty director, what happened to you or what you think," 
Marking says. "They'll ask if I was in danger as a woman, or what I think the 
solution to the Afghan situation is – which is dangerous as then people quote 
you. The kids didn't ask anything about me as a filmmaker. They were completely 
swept up in the characters – they asked how Setara felt, why she did things 
like take off her headscarf and dance, which is really the point. All the kids 
knew a bit about Afghanistan from the shouting voices that make the headlines, 
but didn't know anything about the 90% of the population who just want to get 
on with their lives. That's what's missing from British TV as well, which only 
seems interested in showing us people who live on our own street."

Afghan Star was screened at St Augustine's by Filmclub 
<http://www.filmclub.org/>, which was founded by the director Beeban Kidron and 
the journalist Lindsay Mackie to encourage teachers to set up film clubs in 
their schools. This year its Behind the Headlines series offers films about 
countries in the news, including Afghan Star, Iraq In Fragments, Hotel Rwanda, 
the Palestine/Israel drama Lemon Tree, Burma VJ (documenting the monks' 
uprising in 2007), and Persepolis, the coming-of-age story of an Iranian girl.

Pupils' responses suggested they had, as Marking believed, related these 
countries' stories to their own lives and experiences – although, perhaps, they 
would take time to frame them in perspective. After watching Persepolis, Liam, 
who is in year 8, said wryly: "I can relate that to my own school and the 
strict rules and the consequences of breaking them."

• This article was amended on 14 June 2010 to correct the name of the winner of
Afghan Star <https://www.theguardian.com/film/afghan-star> from Setara to Rafi 
Naabzada
 