
Look around an Elizabethan merchant house today and it is hard to see what is 
so special about it. Glass in the windows, a chimney in the roof, a staircase: 
you've spent your life surrounded by buildings like these. But that, of course, 
is exactly what's so special about it. Forget St Paul's – the greatest 
architectural creation of the Renaissance was the modern home.

And it owed more to merchants than geniuses. Trade flourished in the 16th 
century, creating wealth on a large scale, allowing the nobility to concentrate 
on living lavishly – and for everybody else to aspire to something better, too. 
This gave rise to a period often called the "great rebuilding", when the 
country embarked on an unprecedented wave of home improvements, adding things 
like glass and chimneys (and therefore extra storeys) which made comfortable 
living possible.

The social ramifications were enormous. Besides offering the benefits of 
lighter, cleaner homes, the new buildings also gave rise to the first 
high-density cities. And, of course, it created a recognisable Tudor style, 
with overhanging whitewashed walls on a frame of reclaimed ship's beams. This 
was Britain's first middle-class "look", and it can still be found in planning 
offices across the land.

1. Speke Hall, Liverpool

Built in stages throughout the 16th century, this timber-framed manor house 
was the home of the Catholic Norris family, and is filled with priest holes, 
eavesdrops and everything the secret papist needs.

2. Merchant's House, Plymouth

Home to William Parker, an Elizabethan privateer and later mayor of Plymouth, 
this mishmash of 16th- and 17th-century building styles contains many original 
features, including a Trelawney mantelpiece.

3. Parham House, Sussex

A grand manor house built by Robert Palmer in the 1570s on land confiscated 
from the Monastery of Westminster. It has been a family home ever since.

4. Sulgrave Manor, Oxfordshire

Besides being a fine, if humbler example of a 16th-century manor house, 
Sulgrave is also the ancestral home of the first American president, 
George Washington.

5. Gladstone's Land, Edinburgh

High-density living taken to the extreme. This spindly six-storey merchant 
house has been restored to reveal many period details, including painted 
ceilings.
 