
Ask people around the world to define an "English garden" and, if they 
cooperate, they will probably describe something from the 18th century. For not 
only did the first "landscape" gardeners represent the romantic stirrings of 
this era with their sinuous rills and manufactured ruins, but they also helped 
to create England's idea of itself as a "green and pleasant land".

At its root, the movement was based on a very simple notion: that gardens 
should not look like gardens. After all, as painters such as Poussin and Claude 
Lorrain had demonstrated, nature did not need clipping into octagons in order 
to be beautiful. So instead, tastes began to tend towards large-scale curving 
vistas – pleasantly arranged, of course, but with the designer's hand less 
obviously at work.

Nevertheless, these were status symbols too. So to add points of focus and 
mystery (and to show off wealth) many of the earlier gardens were also filled 
with cod-ancient monuments, often allegories for their owners' political 
allegiance. In the hands of the style's most famous practitioner Lancelot 
"Capability" Brown, however, the emphasis became more rural, creating idealised 
and domesticated visions of the English countryside, but on one's doorstep.

Literally so, in fact, because now the pasture on which the owner's livestock 
grazed would seem to stretch unbroken all the way up to the threshold of his 
neoclassical pile. It was an illusion, made possible by the use of hidden 
ditches called ha-has, which became one of the period's most distinctive 
features. And it was a style with a purpose, as it freed more land for pasture, 
thereby also saving money.

1. Harewood, Leeds, West Yorkshire

This mixture of landscape styles evolved from another of Brown's creations, 
and its current owners have kept up his high standards by being named 
Gardeners' World best garden for 2010. The large lake and surrounding woodland 
are still fine examples of the master's work.

2. Stowe Park, Buckinghamshire

Begun by William Kent, Capability Brown's mentor and the father of the English 
landscape garden, the size and splendour of these grounds is still 
extraordinary. You could spend a whole day exploring its temples, valleys, 
monuments and lakes and still not see them all.

3. Petworth, West Sussex

Another Brown project, and this time a gigantic one, which involved the 
shifting of more than 60,000 tons of earth to create and seal its lake, and a 
mile of underground brick plumbing to supply the water. The result was 
spectacular enough to keep artist JMW Turner coming back.

4. Croome Park, Worcestershire

The garden that established Capability Brown's reputation, and thus one of the 
most important in the world. The park, which centres on a large lake, is famous 
for its scattered buildings and eccentric "eye-catchers", such as St Mary 
Magdalene church.

5. Stourhead, Wiltshire

A perfect example from the landscape movement, and still perfectly preserved. 
A lake, two classical temples, a Pantheon and even a gothic ruin are all to be 
found around the grounds – either crazy or wonderful, when you think about it. 
Or both.
 