
Resurfacing on a budget

I need to resurface the ground floor of my home, but as ever have major budget 
restrictions. As a design snob, I hate the idea of using a cheap, plasticy 
laminate, and love real wood floors, but am worried about the expense over a 
large area. Do you have any suggestions?
 Sam

There is a terrible proliferation of MDF-backed laminate floors across the 
country (the property developer's dream, but owner's nightmare) - they contain 
toxic formaldehydes, which can off gas; they are often springy, as they are too 
thin, and have a life span of about two years. For a realistic budget solution, 
investigate engineered floors - a softwood base with a solid-wood top layer, 
available in any number of finishes. Tryflooringsupplies.co.uk 
<http://www.flooringsupplies.co.uk>, but make sure that they are sustainably 
sourced and FSC certified. If you're prepared to put in some hard graft, you 
could fit a reclaimed parquet floor (prices from £12 per sq m from 
architectural salvage companies) or reclaimed Victorian pine floorboards (from 
£20 per sq metre), which will be less work -woodrecycling.org.uk 
<http://www.woodrecycling.org.uk> is a treasure trove of reclaimed timbers and 
worth a look.

Galley transformation

I'm trying to think of ways to make the galley kitchen in my new London flat 
more homely. It is small and thin and a bit clinical. I'm sad that it's not 
possible to sit in the room, so I'm looking for ways to make up for that.
Janey Queens

Galley kitchens: beautifully functional, but not much of a space to enjoy 
cooking or being in. Warm the space up by using colour; natural paints are best 
in food-preparation areas, as they contain no toxins (earthbornpaints.co.uk 
<http://www.earthbornpaints.co.uk>). But if you don't fancy a kitchen so bright 
you need sunglasses while you cook, apply colour in smaller ways using stencils 
-stencil-library.co.uk <http://www.stencil-library.co.uk> has one for every 
conceivable style. Adding small or coloured side-lights on a high-level shelf 
(away from the sink!) or above the fridge will allow your kitchen to glow while 
not in full use. Lastly, why not consider a few nautical-style details such as 
a fold-down breakfast bar and stools:hafele.co.uk <http://www.hafele.co.uk> has 
the best range of brackets and fixings.

· If you have a decorating question for Oliver, email ask.oliver@observer.co.uk
 <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
 