
Australian producer Flume is leading the pack of the country’s musical talent 
with eight Aria nominations, it was revealed on Tuesday morning.

The 27th Aria award nominations, for awards to be presented in December, were 
announced amid praise for the local music industry, with 11 Australian albums 
reaching number one on the Aria charts – a level not seen since 2004.

Flume, aka Harley Streten, picked up eight nominations, including album of the 
year, breakthrough artist, best male artist, best dance release and best live 
act. His single Holdin’ On is also up for the publicly voted song of the year.

In the Aria artisan awards, also announced on Tuesday, Streten won producer of 
the year for his work as Flume.

Flume’s nominations are followed closely by psychedelic rock group Tame 
Impala, with seven category nominations including best album, best group, best 
rock album, and best live act, and both Birds of Tokyo and Nick Cave & the Bad 
Seeds – each with six nominations.

Birds of Tokyo’s number one album, March Fires, has seen them nominated for 
album of the year, best group, best rock album, best video and best live act. 
Their song Lanterns is also a contender for song of the year.

Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds, who also had a number one album with Push the Sky 
Away, are up for album of the year, best adult contemporary album, best group, 
best live act and best independent release.

Empire of the Sun and Guy Sebastian have five nominations each, four went to 
Matt Corby and Vance Joy, and three to Boy & Bear, San Cisco, the Drones and 
Paul Kelly.

Aria artwork has been designed by Australian artist and musician Reg Mombassa, 
an Aria hall of fame inductee with band Mental as Anything.

“In a day full of big announcements, we are very proud to have the legendary 
Reg Mombassa design the official 27thAria awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aria-awards> artwork for us this year,” said 
the Aria CEO, Dan Rosen.

“Reg is an iconic Australian artist and Aria hall of fame inductee who, 
through his art, portrays everything that is great about our country, much the 
same as the annual Aria awards, which have celebrated the very best music our 
country has to offer since 1987.”
 