
So Andy Farrell can play at fly-half after all. Those who hooted with derision 
when he was selected there for England in their World Cup pool match against 
South Africa should take note, for his arrival in the last quarter here 
considerably altered the complexion of this match.

It did not bring Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> 
victory, but it did ensure the bigger prize of qualification for the EDF Energy 
Cup semi-finals, their two bonus points for four tries and for finishing seven 
or fewer points behind the Scarlets leaving them a point ahead of their hosts 
at the top of Pool D.

Farrell appeared with his side 33-14 down but, crucially, with a howling gale 
at their backs. With a pack palpably stronger than the Welsh region's the 
elements needed to be utilised much more shrewdly. Farrell knew what to do.

"He showed us a lot of direction when he came on," said his director of rugby, 
Alan Gaffney. "We had to knock the ball into the corners and he did that. He is 
such a composed player and he has now shown that he is a genuine option at 
No10. He is in fine form. The difference is that now he can offload much better 
in the tackle. When he came from league one of his failings was that he went to 
ground too early."

We know Farrell has always been able to pass and kick. A lovely cut-out pass 
provided the wing Kameli Ratuvou with Saracens' third try and two late 
penalties, as well as a conversion, meant they were close enough at the final 
whistle.

"We've come a long way," said Gaffney, "We've got much more depth." That much 
was manifest when Gaffney revealed that he might have made seven changes up 
front if asked to name a full-strength side, as well as recalling Neil de Kock 
and Glen Jackson at half-back.

As for the Scarlets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets>, they have 
been experiencing such a rum old season that this four-try display of verve and 
vivacity will at least act as some sort of tonic for what lies ahead. They felt 
aggrieved to have conceded two penalty tries at scrummages, especially the 
second on 70 minutes when the Saracens No8, Ben Skirving, appeared to lose 
control of the ball as the scrum wheeled. "We just didn't feel that a try would 
definitely have been scored," said the home captain, Simon Easterby.

The Scarlets had only themselves to blame. They have problems up front and it 
was a mystery why no replacements were used, especially with the Wales No8 Alix 
Popham on the bench. For all the youthful promise of the full-back Morgan 
Stoddart, and centre Jon Davies, as well as a masterful display at fly-half 
from Stephen Jones, as a whole they missed too many tackles. They allowed the 
gargantuan prop Cencus Johnston to kick and chase 50 metres for the position 
from which came the second penalty try. Enough said, really.

Llanelli Scarlets Stoddart; M Jones, King, Davies, Evans; S Jones, Peel; I 
Thomas, Hayter, Manu, Eustace, Macleod, Easterby (capt), G Thomas, D Jones.

Tries Macleod, S Jones, Davies, Evans. Cons S Jones 2. Pens S Jones 4.

Sin-bin Easterby, 30.

Saracens Leonelli (Thrower, 53); Ratuvou, Sorrell (capt), Powell, Haughton; 
Ross (Farrell, 57), Rauluni (Dickens, 77); Yates, Ongaro (Kyriacou, 63), 
Visagie (Johnston, 57), Ryder, Fullarton, Gustard (Chesney, 49), Seymour, 
Skirving.

Tries Penalty tries 2, Powell, Ratuvou. Cons Ross 2, Farrell. Pens Farrell 2.

Referee D Pearson (England). Attendance 6,625.
 