
Dieters have been misled by the outdated system for assessing the calorie 
content of food for decades, according to research that could redefine how 
people attempt to lose weight.

People who eat high-fibre foods such as vegetables and muesli are consuming 
more calories than they think because the current food labels do not take into 
account the calories in fibre.

Meanwhile the system overestimates, by up to 20%, the content of some 
protein-rich foods such as tuna steak that can take more energy to digest than 
simple carbohydrates such as white bread.

The scientists behind the research also reveal that consumers could reduce 
their calorie intake by eating raw rather than cooked foods. They argue that 
the way calories are assigned to foods by manufacturers needs a significant 
overhaul because calories are currently both over and under estimated by up to 
25%.

"There is a lot of misinformation around calories, and it is crucial for the 
consumer, whether they are on a diet or not, to have the correct information 
about what they eat," saidProfessor Richard Wrangham, a primatologist at 
Harvard University <http://heb.fas.harvard.edu/labs.html>.

He said the public was being given "erroneous information about the energy 
value of many foods".

Wrangham convened a session to raise the issues around measurement of calories 
on Monday at the annual meeting in Boston of theAmerican Association for the 
Advancement of Science (AAAS) <http://www.aaas.org/meetings/2013/>. He believes 
the current system produces mistakes in calorie counts in both directions.

Apart from underestimating the calorific value of fibre, the standard system 
also does not take into account the way foods are prepared and eaten.

The calorie contribution from raw and cooked versions of the same food are 
different for example, but that is not reflected on food packaging.

For more than a century, the energy value in foods has been calculated using 
theAtwater system 
<http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=how-do-food-manufacturers>. 
"Nutritionists calculate the calorie values of individual foods by applying 
calorie conversion factors to each gramme of protein, fat, and carbohydrate 
analysed in foods," saidBritish nutritionist Geoffrey Livesey 
<http://www.acumentia.com/index.php?view=article&id=76>, who also spoke on the 
AAAS panel.

In general terms, this system means that a gramme of protein or carbohydrate 
provides four calories, while a gramme of fat provides nine calories. Food 
manufacturers work out how much protein, carbohydrates and fat there is in a 
food and multiply up using the Atwater factors to get the total calories.

"The Atwater Convention yields realistic values for foods that are highly 
digestible, such as white bread," said Wrangham. But the system leaves out 
fibre – assuming that this component of food has no energy value to the body, 
he said.

Raw foods, he added, were also systematically less energy-producing than the 
same foods cooked, but regulators that collate data from relevant laboratories 
did not reflect these differences. "There are two basic reasons why raw foods 
provide less calories than cooked foods – they are less digestible and also the 
bits that can be digested cost more to break down. We are talking at least a 
difference of between 10% to 30%. So eating raw food is a good way to lose 
weight, but you need to be careful about it long-term and it would not be 
advisable in children."

Professor Martin Wickham, head of nutrition at the independent analysts 
Leatherhead Food Research said: "I think it's very important, it's an urgent 
issue.

"The amount of calories of a particular food has implications not only to us 
as consumers because we like to be able to keep on top of the number of 
calories we're taking on board but if you take somebody who has diabetes, where 
the number of calories they take on board is vital to their wellbeing, it's 
very important. We are effectively reading information off the back of a pack 
which is incorrect. It's very misleading."

Catherine Collins, chief dietitian at the St George's Hospital Medical School 
in London was unsure if large-scale changes to food labelling were necessary or 
practical.

"We can't move to a situation where manufacturers can use evidence as to 
digestibility of their foods to determine whether it has the full calculable 
effect on our energy intake, as we are physiologically variant and it would be 
impossible to recommend, for example, a daily calorie goal based on this 
premise," she said.

A Department of Health spokesperson said: "We want to help all consumers make 
healthier choices based on a range of nutritional information, including the 
energy content of food.

"The way we calculate energy for labelling purposes has been agreed at 
European level and is set out in EU legislation.

"The difficulties of implementing a change to the current system of 
calculating energy content would far outweigh the minor gains in accuracy from 
such a change and would offer little practical assistance to consumers."
 