
Rémi Garde, Gilles Grimandi, Igors Stepanovs, Philippe Senderos, William 
Gallas, Johan Djourou, Sébastien Squillachi, Mikaël Silvestre; the list of 
centre-backs signed by Arsène Wenger for Arsenal is long and illustrious. And 
now, with blood in his eyes, bank notes in his nostrils and his club back where 
it belongs – intimating a title challenge before crumpling in a heap of 
miserable defending and gossamer nerve – he is hoping to addFabian Schär from 
Basel. Wikipedia teaches us that "Schär is a player who wants to make football 
a more beautiful game", and there is nothing more beautiful than risible 
failure, so expect him to turn down reported interest from Napoli and Juventus 
to play with Mesut Özil.

Relatedly, Moyes McGuinness will be on red alert after Andrés Iniesta rejected 
the offer of a new contract from Barcelona, its salary well below that which he 
considers acceptable. Moyes is once more excited to demonstrate the sheer force 
of his masculinity by rejecting another player in another league to those in 
his squad, on the basis that he already has the ethereal skill of Shinji Kagawa 
to not pick, plus the attacking verve of Marouane Fellaini, Ashley Young and 
Antonio Valencia. Perhaps Chelsea will buy him so he might be sportingly loaned 
to a club who might take points from their rivals and at which he will be 
forbidden from playing against them.

Another midfielder considering leaving Spain is Xabi Alonso; he is in the 
final year of his contract at Real Madrid, and with a new deal still not 
arranged,Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> Football 
Club Football Club are interested in re-signing him. Given that he was binned 
by them in order to not sign Gareth Barry, thus forcing him to the 
aforementioned Bernabéu backwater, and given the horror of how that worked out, 
he may be forced to pass up the honour; once devoured, infinitely petrified, as 
the saying goes. And Juventus are also interested – perhaps the two can share 
him.

In other Liverpool Football Club news, new signing Mamadou Sakho has earned 
early acceptance after snivelling throughan ostentatious leaving speech in Paris
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7GSDpLtrK_c> which showed that he really 
understands what it means to be part of something so special and unique as to 
be impenetrably unintelligible to all outsiders. However, he is already talking 
about returning there, and is therefore a disgusting disgrace with no 
conception of the manner in which fortune has smiled upon him, no better than 
any of the people than whom it is impossible to be worse.

In other Liverpool Football Club news, Glen Johnson will be offered a new 
contract, but at a reduced rate; he currently earns £110,000 a week. Put that 
in your day and smoke it.

Jiloan Hamad is also a lucky boy. An Azerbaijan-born Swedish winger who 
currently plays for Malmo and is out of contract in the summer, his signature 
is sought by three English clubs: he can either smash balls at Andy Carroll for 
West Ham, play in defence for Fulham, or live in Norwich.Caligula would have 
blushed. <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xRi8MYrtKYk>

Also looking to spend money are Spurs, attracted more by accordant attention 
than specifics. But they are considering allowingFábio Coentrão to understudy 
Danny Rose, an offer tempting enough for Jehovah,were it a halibut. 
<http://youtu.be/bDe9msExUK8?t=1m56s>

And finally for today, Sunderland's search for a new apprentice manager goes 
on. <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=08_AvmLSJLQ&feature=youtu.be&t=11s> With 
everyone they might want immediately distancing themselves from the job, plans 
are afoot to temptGianfranco Zola from Udinese Reserves with the promise of 
unspecified Italian reserves. But this is not their only option; given his 
appalling managerial record, they are also looking at the Blackpool manager 
Paul Ince, after which they will proceed down a modified copy of the electoral 
roll; one which contains the name of every citizen qualified to vote in the UK, 
save Stuart Pearce.
 