
Last year the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) set out its intention to 
shave 30-40% from its IT budget. With two highly significant reprocurements - 
Prism and Firecrest - expected out of the FCO in the coming weeks, alongside an 
ongoing overhaul of key network infrastructure, if the department is to deliver 
on its planned cost cutting, this could be its best chance to do so.

The tender for Firecrest, the desktop infrastructure that underpins the FCO's 
operations worldwide, was initially expected to be published in autumn 2011. 
However, it's still yet to appear.

"We're later than we intended to be, with that said, we have time on our side 
– there's no looming contractual deadlines that cause me any concern," the 
FCO's chief information officer (CIO) David Meyer told Guardian Government 
Computing.

Firecrest may be, according to Meyer, "not broken, but it can always be 
improved". Once the successor to the current Firecrest is in place, those 
improvements will begin: the FCO is hoping to deliver both a cut in the 
department's carbon footprint and improvements in functionality, including 
better mobile access, through the reprocurement.

However, the most important thing the FCO wants from the reprocurement is a 
continuity of service, Meyer says. "Given we don't have a burning platform, I 
want on day one of the new arrangement exactly what I had on last day of the 
predecessor contract."

Firecrest is, according to the FCO's ICT strategy 2011-2015 
<http://www.fco.gov.uk/resources/en/word/5029385/who-we-are/ict-strategy>, 
"generally providing a reliable service to users across the network", although 
"somewhat flaky in posts with telecommunications connections that are less than 
robust".

It is a situation that the strategy foresees will be tackled through better 
telecoms under Project Echo.

Project Echo, the telephony and WAN deal that went to Cable and Wireless 
Worldwide and which kicked off with pilot sites in Accra, Dublin and Freetown 
in January 2011, is still in the process of rolling out to FCO sites across the 
globe.

The rollout, however, is taking longer than planned. "On big IT projects for 
us, suppliers tend to find the world is slightly larger than they realised. Are 
we where we wanted to be? No, but we've got a good cutover rate at the moment," 
Meyer said, with about 12 sites a week.

Echo is shortly to hit its 100th site on the FCO's global network and it is, 
according to itsCIO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/government-computing-network/cio>, delivering 
savings in excess of those predicted in the ICT strategy.

"We're in a good position on this and I'm still very comfortable with the 
target savings, given level of flexibility we're prepared to introduce about 
how it's delivered," Meyer said – flexibility, that is, in terms of striking a 
"clearer balance between security and functionality".

"In updating our infrastructure we're willing to make changes that will reduce 
the total cost of ownership which some of my predecessors going back five to 10 
years would probably have been somewhat cagey about… [it's] just a willingness 
to look at other options, and to assess risk, and to be prepared to consider 
taking sensible risk opens up the opportunities for significant changes and 
significant savings."

This shift in attitude has been prompted by both the straightened economic 
times and a change in the technology-savviness of senior staff.

"There's a growing appreciation within Whitehall outside the ICT area that we 
have tended by default to be more conservative in this area than is actually 
justified.

"Why is it changing now? Partly because there's a generation of senior 
officials – by which I mean permanent secretaries – who I think are generally 
increasingly familiar with information technology from their own personal 
experience.

"In addition, we've got the challenge of new [departmental] settlements which 
mean we've got to eke out every penny we possibly can from infrastructure 
projects. That provides me with an incentive to go back and say 'well, you're 
giving me x per cent less than in the past, one of the key areas I need to make 
savings is in this and I believe it can be done safely, here's how I plan to do 
it'," he said.

Could the appetite for carefully considered risk one day take the FCO into 
'bring your own device' territory, and allow the department's staff to use 
their own hardware to carry out departmental tasks?

Under the current ICT strategy, which lasts until 2015, the FCO CIO imagines 
the majority of the department's hardware will be bought by the department 
itself, despite a line that hints "staff will be able to access information 
where and when they want including, towards the end of the period, on their own 
choice of devices".

Not a wholesale adoption of bring your own device, then, but rather a hint of 
a future where it might be the norm.

"I don't think bring your own device will be a foreign concept in five years' 
time. Take a tablet – I could not currently be sufficiently assured about the 
security aspect of connection into our network to allow people to use it but 
that changes on a monthly basis, if not weekly, or day by day."

Allowing staff to bring in tablets or smartphones of their choosing would 
represent a sea change at the FCO, which is only just moving its hardware 
estate over to BlackBerrys and laptops – the latter prompted by both a need to 
embrace mobile working to deal with disruption resulting from the Olympics and 
as a way of facilitating estate rationalisation.

But, with staff expecting a greater say in what technology they're given, it's 
a trend that will only gather pace.

Elsewhere in the FCO, staff are getting a greater say in their technology – 
the board in change of determining the shape of the department's ERP system, 
Prism, is headed up by the department's chief operating officer and has 
"serious engagement" from its senior management.

"It's a good position to be in – I think many CIOs would envy me," said Meyer.

Prism is currently based on Oracle e-Business Suite 11.5, and with extended 
support for the package set to run out in 2013, the FCO is getting its ERP 
ready for an overhaul - and one that might create new ways of working at the 
department.

"We are not ruling out significant change in business process as part of our 
review of ERP strategy," Meyer said.

"We've come up with a vision, and we're in process of adding details to that 
at the moment, which ultimately will lead us to a new blueprint. There's 
clearly going to be a connection to what we've done in past because we need a 
transition from old to new over time, but we're up for change on it," he added.

The aim of the ERP update is to improve transaction costs around the FCO's 
corporate service centre, and to improve support to central finance and HR.

The Prism overhaul could also see the FCO's foreign estate added to its ERP 
system for the first time - a task made significantly more complex by the 
different currencies, exchange rates, inflation rates and other variables that 
are brought to bear on its oversees network.

A greater level of inclusion is also likely to figure higher on the Prism 
agenda as the FCO seeks to build in the potential for other public sector 
bodies to use its ERP.

"DFID [Department for International Development] has an entirely separate 
enterprise resource planning support system from the Foreign Office and we're 
not planning within the reprocurement to change that except in one respect, 
which is that we will build into what we do for ourselves in this area the 
ability for key partners elsewhere in government to come and join us."

DFID, however, has already joined the FCO's technology infrastructure by using 
Echo. "The foreign secretary has made a clear priority that the Foreign Office 
should provide the platform of choice for UK government overseas – that's what 
we're seeking to do, we're seeking to make what we do for ourselves as well 
suited to what others want as possible. The choice of whether they join us is 
theirs."

Thanks to the concurrency of a number of reprocurements – a datacentre refresh 
is also on the agenda – the FCO's IT department will have its work cut out over 
the coming months.

"These projects are not big by wider government standards in terms of value 
but they're big to us given the global dispersion of the Foreign Office," said 
Meyer.

"We've got for each of the components a set of processes with which I'm 
comfortable. There is the recognition that this time around this is going to be 
something that the Foreign Office will run for itself rather than looking to 
the IT [department] community to do it for either them or, more worryingly 
perhaps, to them."

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For weekly updates on 
news, debate and best practice on public sector IT,join the Guardian Government 
Computing network here 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing/start.php>.
 