
In July 2013, a large, strangely shaped beetle emerged from the fabric of a 
wooden chair that had just been bought in the UK. The inch-long creature had 
developed inside the chair’s wooden frame before it ate its way to the surface 
and burst through the seat’s plastic covering – much to the alarm of its 
purchaser. Crucially, the furniture had been made in, and imported from, China.

Analysis by Fera Science, formerly the Food and Environment Research Agency, 
showed the beetle was a Japanese pine sawyer. Worse, the beetle was found to be 
infested with a second serious pest: the pinewood nematode worm. In 
combination, the beetle (Monochamus alternatus) and worm (Bursaphelenchus 
xylophilus) have been linked to widespread damage to pine forests in China and 
Japan. Now it is spreading through parts of Europe.

In this case, the invaders were destroyed after staff at Fera Science traced 
the chair and destroyed several other contaminated items of furniture from the 
same consignment. But the warning was clear. Britain and its trees are coming 
under increasing pressure from a range of foreign pathogens, a point underlined 
last week when scientists revealed that the horse chestnut tree was now being 
threatened by a different invader – the leaf miner moth, which has spread 
through England and Wales, and wasrecently discovered in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/03/conker-tree-parasite-scotland>
.

The leaf miner (Cameraria ohridella) does not kill conkers directly but leaves 
trees weakened, while their seeds are small and shrivelled. Younger trees are 
killed off, and mature trees are left susceptible to deadly diseases such as 
bleeding canker.

The threat to the British landscape is one of the worst since Dutch elm 
disease wiped out millions of trees in the 1970s. It includesash dieback 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ash-dieback> (Hymenoscyphus fraxineus
), which is caused by a fungus that quickly kills young ash trees, and older 
trees more slowly. Scientists have warned that the fungal spores spread so 
easily that the disease could eventually wipe out the UK’s estimated 80 million 
ashes, one of our commonest trees.

Scientists use people power to find disease-resistant ash trees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/14/scientists-people-power-find-disease-ash-resistant-trees>
The British tree is being ravaged as never before, it would seem. “There is no 
doubt that the threat from foreign pathogens to our trees is growing,” said 
Professor Rick Mumford, a scientist at Fera Science. “You can see a clear 
trend. More and more are appearing, and dealing with them is getting harder and 
harder.”

Climate change, which is warming Britain and making it more hospitable to many 
foreign insects and pests, is a factor. But Mumford was emphatic that the most 
common way invaders are getting into Britain and infecting our trees is through 
imported wood. This is often for packaging, and very frequently originates in 
China. “The volume of wood sent as packaging or as items such as furniture is 
vast,” he added.

One example of this dangerous influx is provided by several dozen trees that 
were found, in 2012, to be infested by the Asian longhorn beetle (Anoplophora 
glabripennis) in Paddock Wood, Kent. More than 250 live larvae were discovered. 
Crucially, Forestry Commission experts said they believed the beetles – a 
threat to sycamore, ash, birch, willow, poplar and some fruit trees – had 
emerged from wood packaging used to import slate from China to a site near the 
outbreak. Thousands of trees in Paddock Wood had to be cut down to contain the 
outbreak.

In that case, the wooden packaging, rather than the goods inside, was to 
blame. In the case of the Japanese pine sawyer beetle it was the product itself 
– a chair – that was infected.

Joe Ostojá-Starzewski of Fera, writing in an article “Imported furniture – a 
pathway for the introduction of plant pests” in the bulletin of the European 
and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organisation, said large volumes of chairs 
of a construction similar to those found to be infested with the beetle are now 
being brought into the UK. In 2012-13, 84,000 such chairs were imported. “This 
trade clearly offers a pathway with the potential for multiple and widespread 
introductions of wood inhabiting pests,” Ostoja-Starzewski wrote.

Mumford agreed. “Wood goods and packaging should be treated so they do not 
carry pathogens, but clearly this process is not being enforced as strictly as 
it should be in some cases,” he said.

With 90% of the UK’s ash trees about to be wiped out, could GM be the answer?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/31/ash-dieback-gm-genetic-modification-woodland-crisis>
This point was acknowledged by Nicola Spence, chief plant health officer of 
the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. “Increasing global 
trade does mean that our plants face increased threat from the spread of pests 
and diseases,” she said.

“We can’t eliminate all risks but we have stringent plans to deal with 
threats, and take prompt action should they be detected. We work closely with 
neighbouring countries, the wider international community as well as industry, 
NGOs, landowners and the public to reduce the risks of pests and diseases 
entering the country.

“We are also working to build the resilience of our trees and plants – this 
helps to mitigate the impact of pests that have already arrived. From 2012 to 
2019 we will have invested more than £37m into tree health research.”

Nor is the situation universally gloomy for already infected trees. In the 
case of ash dieback, some trees have been found to be resistant, with UK trees 
proving to be particularly resilient. “That does offer hope that we could one 
day regenerate the ash,” added Mumford.

KILLER INSECTS

■ The leaf miner moth (Cameraria ohridella) kills young conker trees and makes 
mature trees susceptible to deadly diseases such as bleeding canker.

■ Japanese pine sawyer beetle (Monochamus alternatus) and pinewood nematode (
Bursaphelenchus xylophilus) have caused widespread damage to Asian pine forests.

■ The Asian longhorn beetle (Anoplophora glabripennis) is a threat to 
sycamore, ash, birch, willow, poplar and some fruit trees.
 