
The problems of the legal education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/studying-law/roundup> and training system have 
been well documented on this website over recent months, dominated in 
particular by too many law students chasing too few jobs, the debt they 
accumulate in the process and the impact on diversity.

Help should finally be at hand. The legal education and training review 
<http://letr.org.uk/is> (LETR) billed as the most fundamental rethink since the 
Ormrod report of 1971. It is being run by the profession's three main 
regulators – the Solicitors Regulation Authority, Bar Standards Board and ILEX 
Professional Standards – under close observation from the Legal Services Board 
(LSB). A consortium of academics is currently undertaking research and the LETR 
should deliver recommendations to the regulators by the end of the year.

The LETR's remit is broad. It is examining regulated and non-regulated legal 
services, and all stages of legal education and training. The primary objective 
is to ensure that England and Wales has a legal education and training system 
which advances the regulatory objectives contained in theLegal Services Act 2007
 <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2007/29/contents>, and particularly the 
need to protect and promote the interests of consumers and to ensure an 
independent, strong, diverse and effective legal profession.

Until now, most of the work has gone on below the radar, but the LSB is 
currently running a series of seminars to throw a spotlight on some of the key 
debates, while the LETR has published its first discussion paper, giving an 
insight into some of the more radical options under consideration. LSB chairman 
David Edmonds for one believes this is the right direction, telling the first 
of its seminars that reform was long overdue and that he would be "extremely 
disappointed" if the review results in changes just on the margins.

So everything is up for grabs, such as: the possibility of national 
assessments at the point of entry to the profession; common training of 
would-be solicitors and barristers; replacing the training contract/pupillage 
with a more flexible period of "supervised practice"; fewer linear breaks and 
distinctions between vocational courses and work-based learning; and a new 
approach to post-qualification continuing professional development that focuses 
on ensuring ongoing competence than the current system of simply counting how 
many hours of courses lawyers have been on.

The discussion paper and much of the talk so far has been focused on 
solicitors and barristers, and there needs to be more recognition of the six 
other recognised professions, particularly Chartered Legal Executives, who 
already have the only route to becoming a fully qualified lawyer for those 
without a degree, and in terms of their profile are social mobility in action. 
It needs also to address the question of where paralegals fit into the 
regulatory framework.

Much of the LETR's work comes back to diversity and access. The discussion 
paper said "there is much work to be carried out to ensure that admission to 
the profession and to academic programmes is fair", with its own findings 
largely reinforcing widespread concerns over selection systems.

"Training partners at City firms have told us that they will mainly recruit 
from 'top universities', which means that there are many students training in 
universities around the country with expectations of a career that they are 
extremely unlikely to obtain," it said.

Further, the practice of recruiting third-year undergraduates on the basis of 
A-level results is likely only to "re-inscribe many of the inequalities of the 
school system into the labour market". It also raised the "very clear 
'hemispheric divide'" at legal practice course stage between those sponsored by 
City firms and those not.

It is too early to predict what will come out of the review but it seems 
likely to embrace the wider emerging trends in the regulation of lawyers.

So this means an end to the professional monopoly: the right to practise will 
be separated from having a title such as solicitor or barrister. That doesn't 
mean the titles will become unimportant but there will be multiple routes to 
becoming a "lawyer". As Professor Stephen Mayson of the Legal Services 
Institute put it at the first LSB seminar, it's not about title; "it's about 
what functions we want people to perform and what they need to be competent to 
do them".

Another trend is towards lawyers being authorised to perform specific legal 
activities, rather than having a general qualification that allows them to do 
anything. Further, modern regulation of lawyers focuses on outcomes rather than 
inputs, and so the ability to do the job will be of more importance than the 
route by which the skills and knowledge were acquired.

There are those who consider the LETR likely to have a more profound impact on 
the legal market than alternative business structures, and they are probably 
right. The cumulative effect could be immense. It will not help those 
struggling with the difficulties of the system right now, but in a few years' 
time, getting into and then staying in the legal profession could be very 
different.

Neil Rose is the editor of legalfutures.co.uk <http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/>
 