
A former senior executive of Leighton Holdings has given evidence about 
corruption inside the company he once worked for, saying he has been told by 
the corporate regulator that it plans to charge one of Leighton’s former 
finance chiefs over a suspect $15m payment to aDubai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/dubai> consultant in 2011.

The former executive, Stephen Sasse, also questioned the ability of the 
Australian federal police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-federal-police> 
investigating his claims of alleged foreign bribery, made in 2012, expressing 
his frustration that the investigation is ongoing – without anyone having been 
charged yet.

Senate could investigate foreign bribery claims against Australian corporations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/06/senate-could-investigate-foreign-bribery-claims-against-australian-corporations>
In critical testimony during a Senate hearing on foreign bribery on Friday, 
Sasse said officials from the Australian Securities and Investments Commission 
told him last month they plan to charge Peter Gregg – one of Australia’s most 
senior businessmen – with false accounting offences regarding a $15m payment to 
a Dubai consultant, Mahesh Khemka, made on Leighton’s behalf in 2011.

“They made that very clear,” Sasse told senators.

“I was told that, yep. That was the reason why they wished for me to sign the 
affidavit bringing the emails into evidence,” he said, referring to an 
affidavit he signed at the request of Asic as part of its continuing 
investigation into Gregg.

Gregg is now chief executive of a listed company called Primary Healthcare.

Sasse told the hearing that he raised concerns with former Leighton executives 
in 2012 about alleged corruption linked to their company’s foreign operations.

He said some of his information was “without question” handed to Leighton’s 
board at the time, but there seemed to be a “distinct lack of interest” to 
pursue the allegations with board members of subsidiary companies overseas.

“I was surprised at the lack of interest, the lack of support, and then 
eventually the fact that the whole investigative process was shut down,” Sasse 
told senators.

Allegations of alleged bribery linked to Leighton’s overseas operations first 
surfaced in 2012, with several former executives resigning in response.

It changed its name to CIMIC Group last year – standing for Construction, 
Infrastructure, Mining and Concessions – in a bid by its new Spanish owners to 
distance it from the bribery allegations.

Federal police and Asic are still investigating former Leighton executives 
over the company’s dealings between 2009 and 2011, with claims of alleged 
bribery linked to a multimillion-dollar oil pipeline in Iraq.

The evidence comes after Fairfax Media 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/mining-and-resources/leighton-holdings-former-executive-alleges-corruption-20160422-gock2o.html>
 reported it had been given a compulsory order from Asic to hand over files 
belonging to corrupt Monaco-based firm Unaoil as part of Asic’s investigation 
into Gregg.

The files reveal millions of dollars of offshore payments by Australian 
companies, including Leighton Holdings.

The Labor senator Sam Dastyari told Sasse that his evidence on Friday was 
remarkable.


“What you’re saying is sensational in that it outlines a culture of behaviour 
and conduct that goes beyond isolated incidences,” Dastyari said.

“It also looks like what you’re saying is at every point of time where you or 
others tried to raise concerns and address these issues, that you were removed 
from being able to do so.”

Sasse replied: “I agree. It’s grounds for concerns from a public policy 
perspective.”

The Senate inquiry into foreign bribery was established in June last year 
after Dastyari said he hadevidence to implicate a number of senior business 
figures in corrupt behaviour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/06/senate-could-investigate-foreign-bribery-claims-against-australian-corporations>
.
 