
A British-born al-Qaida operative turned government informant told a New York 
court how Osama Bin Laden had hugged him and wished him luck on his mission as 
he plotted to blow up a US passenger jet with convicted shoe bomber, Richard 
Reid.

Saajid Badat, the key prosecution witness in the trial of Abu Hamza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza> al-Masri, the radical Islamic 
cleric and former imam of Finsbury Park Mosque, also said that the Canary Wharf 
tower in London, the US embassy in London and Britain's Ministry of Defence 
were discussed as possible al-Qaida targets.


A jury heard Badat, 33, describe his journey from a Muslim teenager in 
Gloucester, to embracing a radical view of jihad, via training in Bosnia and 
the UK with a group of Islamic youths known as the “Tooting Circle”. It was a 
journey that took him to Afghanistan and Pakistan and to the heart of al-Qaida.

He told the jury that he met directly with Osama Bin Laden, two months after 
9/11, in Karachi, Pakistan, while planning the shoe-bomb plot. Bin Laden asked 
him if he knew the significance of the mission, Badat told the court.

Speaking via a live CCTV link from the UK, Badat said: “He said the American 
economy is like a chain, if you break one link it brings the whole thing down. 
My understanding was that link was the aviation authority.”

Bin Laden also told him, if he began to hesitate before he carried out his 
mission, he should recite a chapter of the Qur'an. He said there was nothing 
directly about jihad, but related to holding firm.

“He gave me a hug and wished me luck in my mission.” said Badat, who later 
backed out of the plot.


Prosecutors said in court papers that Badat would give evidence that he met 
another alleged al-Qaida sympathiser, Feroz Abbasi, at al-Qaida training camps 
in Afghanistan, and witnessed him talking to leaders about carrying out 
attacks, strengthening their case that Abbasi was sent there by Abu Hamza from 
London. Abassi, a Briton, was held at Guantánamo Bay for three years before 
being released without charge in2005.

It is the prosecution's case that Abu Hamza used the “cover of religion” to 
recruit terrorists, indoctrinate men and to export violence and terror around 
the world. The cleric is charged with creating an al-Qaida training camp in 
Bly, Oregon, helping kidnappers in a 1998 hostage taking in Yemen which left 
four people dead, and raising money to sent militants to Afghanistan.


Abu Hamza denies all the charges. 

Badat, 33, told the court he first heard Abu Hamza speak at the Finsbury Park 
mosque while he was in London in 1997 and had heard him speak twice.

He told the court how he met up with the “Tooting Circle” in London in the 
1990s; they were concerned with the situation for Muslims in Bosnia and 
discussed carrying out jihad. In the summer of 1998 he went to Bosnia to 
receive training, he said and then Afghanistan.

He said he met with another senior al-Qaida figure, Khalid Sheik Mohammed, the 
mastermind behind the 9/11 US attacks, who provided him with advice on how to 
plan the bombing of an aircraft.

Mohammed, currently at Guantánamo awaiting trial, had provided him and Reid 
with instructions on how to avoid detection in their plan to blow up a US 
aircraft, being careful to avoid internet timetables of flights, and instead 
use hard copies and to use swear words, in order to divert attention away from 
themselves as devout Muslims, he said.

“Khalid Sheik Mohammed spoke about 9/11” said Badat. “He brought out a book 
that looked like an almanac of the tallest buildings in the world.”

Badat said he crossed out two of them, the two towers of the World Trade 
Center, in New York. “He also spoke about a target in the UK. I believe Canary 
Wharf was mentioned.”

Under cross-examination by Abu Hamza's defence lawyer, Jeremy Schneider, the 
jury heard that, the Ministry of Defence and the US embassy in London were 
discussed as potential targets for an al-Qaida terror attack, as part of a 
brainstorming session attended by Badat in 2000.

Schneider asked Badat if, at the same session, before the USS Cole terror 
attack he also came up with the idea of putting explosives on a small boat to 
crash into a larger boat.

“Yes” Badat said.

In earlier testimony, Badat said in November 2001 he flew to Karachi in 
Pakistan and then Afghanistan with Reid and a group of Malaysians who wanted to 
mirror the 9/11 attacks by hijacking a plane and flying it into a building, but 
had problems accessing the cockpit of an aircraft. He then suggested they could 
have one of his shoe bombs as he had two. They then bought a pair of shoes 
identical to those of Badats so that they could use it, he said.

In December 2001, he left for the UK with the remaining shoe bomb but later 
backed out of the plan after his father talked him out of it when the two 
reconnected on his return.

“My father knew I had travelled to Afghanistan. My father sat me down and he 
said “I've heard about sleepers. If I find out you are one of those sleepers I 
will kill you.”

He told the court that, after initially declining to co-operate with British 
authorities, he decided to do so in 2007, as “revenge on those who were more 
senior to me in promoting” a view of violent jihad motivated by facist 
ideology.”

Badat pleaded guilty to plotting with Reid, a Briton, to blow up airplanes 
using shoe bombs in 2001, before backing out at the last minute. He agreed to 
work with the British authorities and is living under an assumed name after 
serving six years in prison.

Badat has testified via video link in two terrorism-related trials in the US, 
including against Osama bin Laden's son-in-law Suleiman Abu Ghaith, who was 
convicted of conspiring to kill Americans and other terror charges by a New 
York jury last month.

Badat testified via CCTV as he was afraid that he would be arrested by the 
authorities if he entered the US.
 