
Men with outwardly healthy hearts can cut the future risk of heart attacks by 
47 per cent if they take an aspirin every two days, a United States study 
claims today.

Advance word of its publication in the New England Journal of Medicine brought 
warnings from specialists about the danger to stomach linings of a rush to the 
aspirin bottle by either sex.

Work in Europe and the US over the past two years has commended aspirin as an 
anti-blood clotting agent for heart and stroke sufferers. Advice on dosage went 
as high as three tablets a day in a Finnish study in April.

The new study - the biggest of its kind - is the first to speak confidently of 
'an extreme beneficial effect' when apparently healthy people take the tablets.

More than 22,000 male physicians were tested by a team at Harvard medical 
school and a Boston hospital.

No detailed figures were released yesterday, but results showed a 47 per cent 
drop in heart attacks or strokes among people who had not suffered heart 
trouble when the research started and who took aspirins once every two days.

Dr Lawrence Cohen, of Yale medical school, said: 'There will be many thousands 
of people whose heart attacks will be prevented by this medical intervention.'

Dr Cohen said all men aged between 35 and 70 should take aspirin, regardless 
of their risk factors, as long as the drug did not cause gastro-intestinal 
upset or bleeding.

He said women should use aspirin if they had some risk factor for heart 
attack, like high blood pressure, high cholesterol, smoking, diabetes or a 
family history of heart attacks.

Dr William Castelli, director of the US Framingham Heart Study, said only men 
and women with heart risk should consider regular aspirin use.

Anybody who found the range of their blood pressure exceeded 90/140 or that 
their total cholesterol was much over 200 ought to think about taking an 
aspirin every other day, Dr Castelli said.

Dr Claude Lenfant, director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, 
agreed people with heart risk factors should be considered for aspirins, but 
said they should discuss use of the drug with their doctors
 