
Alf Ramsey



Feb 1963 France 5 England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> 2

Ramsey is widely regarded as England’s first proper manager. Following his 
appointment in October 1962, he demanded control over squad selection, which 
previously had been left up to committees. Ramsey caused a further stir by 
predicting England would win the 1966 World Cup. His first game was the second 
leg of a qualification round for the 1964 European Nations Cup against France, 
which ended in a 5-2 defeat but he got it right when it mattered three years 
later.

Don Revie



Oct 1974 England 3 Czechoslovakia 0

How do you go about following a World Cup-winning manager? That was the 
problem faced by Revie upon his appointment in July 1974, although Joe Mercer 
had been in caretaker charge of England following Ramsey’s sacking. A 
convincing win against a talented Czechoslovakia in a European Championship 
qualifier helped soothe immediate concerns, although the campaign turned sour 
after Revie’s first year.

Ron Greenwood



Sept 1977 England 0 Switzerland 0

After Revie’s tumultuous reign, the FA needed stability and turned to f, the 
general manager of West Ham, who had moved upstairs in 1974. He was appointed 
on a temporary basis and his first game was an insipid draw in a friendly at 
Wembley. The FA gave him the permanent role in December, despite the fact many 
considered Brian Clough “the people’s choice”.

Bobby Robson

Sept 1982 Denmark 2 England 2

Robson’s first move was to drop Kevin Keegan and his second was an uninspiring 
Euro 84 qualifier against an emerging Denmark side. Keegan reacted angrily: 
“What upset me is the way I heard about it. I mean a 10p phone call from the FA 
is not a lot to ask,” he said. The dispute with Keegan would rumble during a 
topsy-turvy eight-year tenure.

Graham Taylor



Sept 1990 England 1 Hungary 0

Questions were asked when the Aston Villa manager was appointed, given he had 
not won a major trophy, though he had taken Watford and Aston Villa to 
runners-up finishes in the top flight and the former to an FA Cup final. Got 
off to a flier with a friendly win and England lost only one of his first 23 
matches in charge. They reached Euro 92 but failure to qualify for the 1994 
World Cup led to his resignation.

Terry Venables

March 1994 England 1 Denmark 0

Controversy has a habit of stalking England managers and in Venables’ case it 
came from the start. He was appointed in January 1994 but amid lengthy legal 
battles with Alan Sugar and Tottenham over his dismissal as chief executive. 
Denmark were once again the new man’s first opponents, this time in a friendly. 
Venables fared a little better than Robson, the goal coming from David Platt.

Norway 0-1 England | Friendly international
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/may/26/norway-england-friendly-international>
Glenn Hoddle



Sept 1996 Moldova 0 England 3

Hoddle was thrown immediately into a World Cup qualifier. He successfully 
navigated the game, in which he gave a full debut to David Beckham, but had 
already upset his predecessor. Hoddle was announced as the man to take over 
from Venables while Venables was still in the job and he demanded to meet the 
players three months before taking charge. “I was stunned when he phoned and 
asked when he could arrange further visits,” Venables wrote in his 
autobiography. “To me that was so damned arrogant.”

Kevin Keegan

Mar 1999 England 3 Poland 1

Former Newcastle manager got off to a bright start in this Euro 2000 
qualifier, thanks to Paul Scholes’s hat-trick, although they finished a distant 
second in the group and needed a play-off to reach the finals.

Sven-Goran Eriksson



Feb 2001 England 3 Spain 0

Nick Barmby, Emile Heskey and Ugo Ehiogu scored the goals at Villa Park as 
Eriksson began brightly in this friendly. The appointment of England’s first 
foreign manager was not universally well received. The Daily Mail’s Jeff Powell 
wrote the FA had sold “our birthright down the fjord to a nation of seven 
million skiers and hammer-throwers who spend half their year living in total 
darkness”.

Steve McClaren



August 2006 England 4 Greece 0

McClaren’s ill-fated reign could not have got off to a better start – a 
confident, charismatic performance in a friendly at Old Trafford. However, it 
was common knowledge that McClaren was the FA’s second choice behind the 
Brazilian Luiz Felipe Scolari. This earned him the derogatory nickname 
“Second-choice Steve” – a label that would come back to haunt him.

Friendly international: England 4 - 0
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/aug/17/newsstory.england> 
Fabio Capello

Feb 2008 England 2 Switzerland 1

Capello, or ‘Postman Pat’ as the team sometimes referred to him behind his 
back, was England’s second foray into the foreign manager market. The Italian’s 
first game brought the Euro 2008 co-hosts to the newly rebuilt Wembley in a 
friendly won with goals from Jermaine Jenas and Shaun Wright-Phillips. The team 
would go on to win nine of their 10 qualifying games for the 2010 Fifa World 
Cup.

Roy Hodgson



May 2012 Norway 0 England 1

Hodgson turned out to be the master of the preamble, successfully guiding 
England to two tournaments with panache, before falling flat. His four-year 
tenure began in much the same vein overseeing England’s first victory over 
Norway in 30 years, in this friendly, thanks to Ashley Young’s strike. “It was 
a marvellous start to my career as national coach,” he said. The 2-1 Euro 2016 
defeat against Iceland in June provided a less than marvellous end.
 