
The only 90s we have known of up to now are the gay or naughty ones. “Gay” has 
changed its meaning and innocent wickedness is no more. We enter the 1990s 
sober, serious, aware of the existence of evil, not so sure what goodness is, 
cautiously optimistic, a little bewildered by changes that no fiction, however 
fantastic, would accept. As for what we expect, much depends on how old we are.

I shall almost certainly die before the 90s reach their end. I shall be lucky 
to see the close of the millennium, but I have a fair chance of sourly 
rejoicing in Britain’s joining the continent by dry land. I became a European 
21 years ago and was reviled by theDaily Mirror for deserting the old island. I 
was merely paving the way. The future of Britain concerns me less than the 
future of Europe, and about this latter I cannot yet make up my mind. If we are 
to regard Russia as part of Europe, how far then will Europe extend? To 
Vladivostok?

The old opposition was between the Free World, so-called, and the Communist 
world. But now Marxism is seen as an out-of-date philosophy based on 
nineteenth-century materialism, and the new Europe, which means the overseas 
Anglophone world as well as the polyglot Continent, will be, if not 
Judaeo-Christian, at least liberal and humanistic and nostalgic for some kind 
of faith. The opposition to this will not be atheistic Communism but 
fundamentalist Islam. Islam cannot be absorbed into the new comity. I foresee 
its becoming more and more intolerant and also militant. We are going back to 
the Middle Ages.

The reunification of Germany will take place in my lifetime, and there will be 
a resurgence of German patriotism, the need to revive old myths of Germany’s 
greatness, but I do not envisage the rise of a new Fuhrer. On the other hand, I 
am not too happy about the cult of personality which the Gorbachovian 
revolution represents. Watching on Italian television the meeting of a Slav 
statesman and a Slav pope, I wondered what the future would be if a mad 
cardinal drew out a pistol and eliminated them both. We will never be sure of 
the future of the Eastern bloc until a new liberal philosophy is enunciated, 
and not by Gorbachov alone. In other words, we want evidence of an irreversible 
continuity.The destruction of the environment will go on and the elephant 
kingdom be liquidated. The oceans will grow more filthy and the air less 
breathable. The problem of the planet is our true problem. The smashing of the 
Berlin Wall is nothing. The triumph of the completion of the Channel tunnel 
will be the child’s exultation at building a sandcastle while the tide is 
coming in.

I have learned, however, that it is dangerous to prophesy. In the late 70s, I 
published a post-Orwellian novella called1985 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/1985.html> which got the future hopelessly 
wrong. In it, I married off a Prince of Wales to a brunette, though I gave them 
a son called William. I imagined an England rechristened Tucland, with the 
unions in charge and the only law of the land that of the closed shop. A couple 
of years after publication Mrs Thatcher came along.

But in 1962 I produced a novel called A Clockwork Orange 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/clockwork-orange-5.html>, in which I 
prophesied a lot of juvenile violence. This came true, and to remind people of 
the relevance of the prophecy Ron Daniels and I are putting on a stage version 
of the book at the Barbican. What the book is about is man’s violent nature but 
also his capacity to choose between good and evil.

There is not going to be much of a moral change in the citizens of the 90s. 
Terrorism will continue and the fear of it will modify police behaviour and the 
workings of justice for the worse, as with the shameful case of the Guildford 
Four. I see that an atavistic instinct has made me turn from Europe to our own 
tight little island. (“Tight” is themot juste: Britain has become a country of 
drunkards.)

I fear an increase in selfishness and the inability of either our teachers or 
our pastors to inculcate a sense of morality. If there is to be a national 
philosophy at all, it will be one of hedonism, with a multitude of vulgar 
pleasures and a bewildering choice of fast foods. I do not look forward to this 
future. I will be better out of it.

More and more forests will be destroyed to produce useless periodicals and 
books, my books among them. I will carry on writing.

When I have done with writing I shall die and face the reality of what Winston 
Churchill called black velvet. And then other writers will prophesy ineptly 
about the 2000s.

This is an edited extract
 