
He should have run a studio. In a way he did - no one could discuss a creative 
idea withAnthony Minghella <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthonyminghella> 
without getting his full value and input. Although some of his friends feared 
for him taking the chairmanship of the British Film Institute, it was a natural 
venture for so deeply friendly and sympathetic a person. He would help others. 
He would offer thoughts on other people's films, just as he was always open to 
comments about his own. It was part of his way of working: Anthony did not 
believe in perfect films; rather, he loved collaboration, talk, the fusion of 
all arts and sciences that film has always allowed (even if as a mirage - the 
name of his production company). His death deprives us of the rest of his 
career - and I cannot think of another so likely to surprise us. It is up to us 
all to be more like Ant.

What was he about? Well, I think loss and separation were vital to him. In 
Truly Madly Deeply (maybe his closest to a perfect film), there is the uncommon 
pain of a youthful marriage interrupted. How does its conversation go on? In 
The English Patient, Anthony held to the principle that the great love stories 
are marked by loss and separation. Lovers apart feel more intensely. Cold 
Mountain has the same pattern, its separated lovers endlessly walking towards 
each other without quite meeting. I'm not sure that film worked, but never 
forget the plan to shoot in the Carolinas had to be abandoned and replaced with 
Romania. Anthony was very alert to place. He researched it endlessly, and I 
think Cold Mountain was subtly hurt by the change in location.

Then there was Breaking and Entering. He knew that film had problems. I recall 
a flurry of emails on it late in the day. But what was brilliant about it was 
the vision of London as the meeting ground for so many displaced persons. And 
Anthony saw himself as one of them. He ran the BFI in recent years. He was a 
wonderfully comic-elegant figure, bald and in black, able to speak in public or 
private with real eloquence. But he was a shy boy, too, a kid who sometimes 
felt lost. He was the son of an Italian ice-cream vendor on the Isle of Wight, 
who grew up feeling very different from British society. He went to the 
University of Hull to study and I remember him telling me, in hushed, 
half-ashamed tones: "And the first time I went to Hull, I had not even seen 
London."

That innocence or vulnerability never left him. It's something that informs 
the meeting of country mouse and city rat in the dazzling The Talented Mr 
Ripley. He observed the smart world and the big cities and the high life with 
the wonder and the abiding incredulity of a provincial.

In other words, he was a persistent outsider in whose eyes we could expect to 
see ourselves. I know he felt a little led astray by the epics he got into - 
only because he was so good and assured with them. I know he longed to get back 
to small, intimate, local subjects. Why not? Long before he went to the desert 
or to Russia, David Lean had done the best adaptations of Dickens we can expect 
to see.

People said Ant was like Lean - and certainly The English Patient had that 
broad sweep. It even had a desert. But don't forget that before that film 
existed, Anthony had taken a beautiful but very difficult novel, by Michael 
Ondaatje, and made an adaptation that was beyond praise or the dreams of 
Ondaatje himself. Lean never had that analytical intelligence. And I don't 
think Lean could have explained the very odd relationship between the two boys 
in Ripley. Ant was a dramatist and a writer first, and then he was an eye for 
seeing the world in story.

But still, I think the many people who loved him will feel for Truly Madly 
Deeply at this moment. We never guessed how closely it would be a prediction of 
sleepless nights and dreaming days left behind.
 