
Although it's mere coincidence that they are transmitted within 24 hours - and 
they concern very different subjects - two new documentaries make a double-bill 
that intriguingly reflects the history of television.

The Beauty of Anatomy (8.30pm, BBC4, Wednesday), in which Dr Adam Rutherford 
explores the influence of human dissection on art, also intriguingly touches on 
the origins of the artform in which Rutherford is working. The live 
entertainment industry grew out of the dead entertainment industry: in the 
early period of medicine, it was common for autopsies and operations to be 
watched by an audience, a tradition that survives in hospital terminology such 
as "operating theatre" and "performing" a procedure.

Indeed, some aspects of this pre-TV entertainment continue in the current 
industry, such as customer resistance to repeats ("I'm sure this is the same 
corpse they dragged out last time!") and regulatory censorship: the Romans 
banned autopsies.

Another deadly business that can be viewed as an ancestor of television is 
capital punishment, the subject of Executed (9pm, ITV, Tuesday). In this case 
as well, the roots of execution as a public entertainment are still visible 
today, in the "viewing room" in American prisons from which state officials and 
the relatives of victims observe the prisoner's final moments.

But judicial killing also has another televisual association because it was 
common in the first decades of the medium for critics of TV to suggest that 
prime-time executions would be the logical outcome of mass visual 
entertainment. This fear – in the past, a standard topic for school debating 
societies and newspaper opinion pages – is reflected in many science fiction 
dystopias, includingThe Hunger Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/01/lorde-appointed-hunger-games-music-supervisor-mockingjay-part-1>
.

However, in recent years, television's relationship with the ancient 
entertainments examined in The Beauty of Anatomy and Executed has developed in 
directions contrary to those predicted by most commentators.

The post-mortem has become a staple of fiction – in shows such as Silent 
Witness and CSI – and also of factual programming, from Jonathan Miller's BBC 
series The Body in Question (1978), which featured the first autopsy screened 
on TV, to shows such as Channel 4's Autopsy: Life and Death, in which 
human-taxidermist Gunther von Hagens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2002/mar/19/arts.highereducation> and 
pathologist John Lee carried out examinations of corpses. Due to the 
hat-wearing showmanship of the rather creepy von Hagens, the latter show 
returned dissection almost full circle to its origins in the public operating 
theatre.

Despite the popularity of von Hagens' work, many viewers and reviewers still 
feel uneasy about whether he and others should be allowed to satisfy the morbid 
curiosity of a section of the audience. And it's noticeable how cautious the 
BBC is with the exploration of a corpse shown in part one of The Beauty of 
Anatomy. A caption immediately appears on screen – "Dissection Carried Out 
Under Licence" – and the medical students featured are shown working only on an 
arm, avoiding one of the biggest ethical jeopardies of projects such as those 
of von Hagens', which is that a friend or relative may recognise the person 
being worked on.

But, if the public post-mortem creates a continuum between the pre-TV and TV 
eras, executions have never become the schedule-filler that the medium's 
detractors predicted. This is not because of any great change in taste – Death 
Row Live would get a huge audience if it were ever screened – but because 
broadcasters have come to the view that execution, whether judicial or 
quasi-judicial, is one of the few remaining visual taboos.

There is, for example, a stark difference between the images of the hanging of 
Saddam Hussein <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/dec/30/iraq.iraqtimeline>
 that were screened by mainstream western broadcasters and the images available 
online, and a similar distinction applies in the case of film of hostage 
murders released by terrorist organisations. And when, last year, Chinese state 
TV broadcast a special programme featuring the final hours of drug traffickers 
who had been condemned to death, the actual moment of death was not shown, 
possibly due to international protests when the nature of the programme became 
known.

And, on British TV, Tuesday's documentary on ITV is about as far as it's 
possible to get from ghoulish relish in execution. There is one morbid sequence 
in Executed, in which a prison historian walks and talks us through the 
procedure for a hanging, but these moments seem designed to illustrate a 
barbarism that should never be resumed.

Chris Malone's documentary, timed to mark this week's 50th anniversary of the 
final state executions in most of the UK (capital punishment remained in force 
in Northern Ireland until 1973), visits the elderly relatives of a succession 
of those, including Derek Bentley and Timothy Evans, who were killed for crimes 
that they had not committed. Even five or six decades on, the descendants of 
the executed still weep when they recall the final morning.

One of the incidental details in Executed is that hangings generally took 
place at 9am. If television had gone in the direction that some feared, it 
would have been 9pm to hit peak time. But, thankfully, what we have ended up 
with in that slot in 2014 is an intelligent documentary that, while 
acknowledging some public hunger for the restoration of capital punishment, 
shows why, apart from any moral argument, the risk of irredeemable mistakes 
makes the practice untenable.
 