
Alan Sillitoe's first novel, "Saturday Night and Sunday Morning," about 
working-class life in Nottingham, had something more than the faithful social 
observation which made it so likeable. Just below the surface of the writing 
there was a special strength, not easy to define exactly. A reviewer could 
fumble with words like insight and sympathy, admiring Sillitoe's ability to see 
his people in the round, to live their lives, without feeling that he (the 
reviewer) had got it quite right.

His second book, The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner (W. H. Allen, 12s 
6d), makes this special gift of his much clearer, and the best word for it is, 
perhaps, "vision." It can be seen in varying degrees in all nine stories which 
make up this book; it is what gives it unity.

The title-story, which takes up a third of the book, is about a 17-year-old 
borstal boy who has taken up long-distance running. It makes him feel good, it 
gives him a chance to do his deep thinking about life. He is a natural solitary 
and it seems to give him a fulfilment which he does not find elsewhere.

As he puffs round the lanes, training for the All England borstal 
championship, he gasps his thoughts at the reader in a Nottingham 
semi-vernacular whose tone and pitch Sillitoe has once again caught perfectly. 
He tells us that his kind of honesty is better than top people's kind of 
honesty, that he is going to lose the championship on purpose to show the 
governor that he won't be treated like a racehorse. It is a slight but most 
artistic study of the spirit of the outsider, the dissenter, the man apart.

The theme is taken up in the other stories. Sillitoe is interested in people's 
isolation and the odd ways in which this manifests itself - in the tragi-comic 
break-up of a marriage, a case of suicide, or in the story of a half-wit who 
leads the local schoolboys in their war games. They are all long-distance 
runners, each running his private race, eyes on the ground ahead. One or two of 
the stories are too clipped, with the moral made too neatly: but on the whole 
it is a beautiful piece of work, confirming Sillitoe as a writer of unusual 
spirit and great promise.

The Dharma Bums (Andre Deutsch, 15s), by Jack Kerouac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jackkerouac>, is another instalment of the 
Beat Generation joke. Two West Coast bohemians, who have added Zen Buddhism to 
their mixed rag-bag of philosophy, set out to look for truth with Zen to guide 
them. It seems to have comic intentions, but it is not easy to split one's 
sides about it.

In any more flexible society Kerouac and his disciples would not need to 
become sad eccentrics like this, putting straw in their hair in a book like 
this, to show they are aware of the madness of non-conformity, too. This story 
would fit aptly into Sillitoe's collection: an honest dissenter gone wrong.
 