
Despite markets continuing to move higher in the wake of the recent US debt 
deal,Royal Bank of Scotland was under the cosh once more.

Its shares fell 19.6p or 5% to 353.1p amid growing talk the government would 
split it into a good and bad bank, with many in the City believing this could 
be to the detriment of minority shareholders. On top of that, the banking 
sector came under pressure after JP Morgan reportedly made a tentative $13bn 
settlement relating to bad mortgage loans sold before the 2008 crisis. Others 
may have to follow suit. Nomura said:
 We think it is becoming more likely that the good bank/bad bank review will 
result in significant change for RBS. A decision is said to be imminent in the 
next few weeks and several options are being considered: 1) setting up a bad 
bank inside RBS to be run by an independent team; 2) setting up a bad bank 
inside RBS, in a model similar to that of UBS, which had more support from the 
central bank; 3) the final option would be the taxpayer-backed bad bank for the 
assets, similar to the solution from the Swedish government in the 1990s. We 
continue to believe that minority shareholders have much to lose from an 
unfavourable outcome of the review with the government maintaining considerable 
leverage over the minorities.


On the US mortgage securities, Nomura said there was a material risk for RBS:
 RBS was involved in the sale of around $32bn of the MBS securities under 
scrutiny (similar to JP Morgan's $33bn). The largest Federal Housing Finance 
Agency (FHFA) suit is in Connecticut courts rather than New York, where more of 
the harsher settlements have been imposed and losses on RBS portfolios 
experienced by the FHFA have been said to be lower. However, due to the legal 
uncertainties and the large settlements discussed by the press, we see this as 
a material tail risk to the group. Potential capital release from [the sale of 
US subsidiary] Citizens helps in this context to plug any holes, though we 
don't see it as a means to buy back shares.

Overall the FTSE 100 finished 31.62 points higher at 6654.20, ahead of 
Tuesday's US non-farm payroll numbers, delayed because of the US government 
shutdown. With uncertainty over the effect of the closure on the country's 
economy, most observers believe the US Federal Reserve will be reluctant to 
begin easing its $85bn a month bond buying programme in the immediate future. 
David Jones, chief market strategist at IG, said:
 It has been yet another positive day for the FTSE 100, which is not too 
surprising given the strong finish by the S&P 500 in the US on Friday, after it 
closed at another all-time high.

There was some caution among traders ahead of Tuesday's US unemployment 
numbers. Sentiment being what is at the moment, any stock market weakness 
following the release is likely to be seen as a buying opportunity. A good jobs 
number means the economy is fine; a bad number means the US Federal Reserve is 
likely to further delay withdrawing support. The net result is that so far 
shares have seldom stayed down for long as a result of the US unemployment 
levels. 
This was the eighth successive daily rise for the FTSE 100, the best 
performance since a 10 day winning streak in May.

Among the risers, G4S added 8.5p to 250.5p after weekend reports that private 
equity group Charterhouse Capital could be interested in buying the outsourcing 
company's cash solutions business for £1bn have sent its shares soaring 4%, up 
9.7p to 251.7p. The division transports cash in its high tech security vehicles 
and manages ATMs.

BAE Systems closed 9p higher at 453.9p and Rolls-Royce rose 31p to £11.23 
after positive comments from Citigroup.

Citi analysts kept their neutral rating on BAE but raised their target price 
from 350p to 460p along with their 2014 and 2015 forecasts. On Rolls, Citi 
raised its target price from 1200p to 1280p.

But Marks & Spencer lost 8p to 487.1p following news of another top level 
departure as the retailer struggles to improve its general merchandise sales. 
Gillian Ridley Whittle, development and buying director for womenswear, told M&S
she plans to leave to join Australian department store group Target. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/oct/20/marks-and-spencer-womenswear-executive-clothing-sales>

Royal Mail initially continued its relentless rise, with weekend reports 
suggesting a number of investment banks had valued it at around £5bn rather 
than the flotation price of £3.3bn. But after hitting 538.5p, the shares fell 
back to close 4.5p lower at 498p on profit taking.

Meanwhile, among the mid-caps, defence group Qinetiq jumped 8.9p to 202.8p 
following talk it had put its US business up for sale, which could leave the 
rest of the company vulnerable to a bid.

IT group Aveva added 15p to £25.95 on hopes it would benefit from the news of 
the go-ahead for a new nuclear power plant.

EDF has signed a deal with the UK government to build two reactors at Hinkley 
Point in Somerset 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/21/britain-nuclear-power-station-hinkley-edf>
, and analyst George O'Connor at Panmure Gordon said:
 EDF and the UK government's announcement that they have reached an agreement 
for an investment contract of the planned Hinkley Point C nuclear power station 
will lead to a revenue uptick for Aveva. On 7 November Aveva announced that EDF 
has expanded its investment in Aveva technology by implementing additional 
engineering software products from the Aveva Plant portfolio. EDF began working 
with Aveva in the 1980s.

Provident Financial put on 62p to £16.38 after Shore Capital raised its 
recommendation from hold to buy.

SuperGroup added 40p to £11.09 after Wayne Brown at Canaccord repeated his £15 
target for the retailer's shares. He said:
 Shares have been weak the past month under performing the FTSE 350 Retailers 
by around 10%. We feel this is overdone and offers a strong buying opportunity 
ahead of the group's second quarter trading update due on 7 November. Firstly 
the group is materially out-performing its broad fashion and apparel peer group 
on a like for like sales growth and wholesale order book basis. Despite this 
current run-rate of premium growth, 2013/14 is a year of investment and the 
group should see the benefits from its new distribution centre, enhanced design 
functions and improved online/omni-channel, next year. We expect the next 
trading update to be positive and highlight a continuation from the first 
quarter with wholesale order book growth of 26% and like for like sales up 
8.5%. We feel this provides confidence for more than 20% in wholesale growth in 
the first half of 2013/14 and sustainable like for like sales growth of 
mid-single digits. The recent interims from Ted Baker, should also point to 
market share gains from well invested strong brands.

Finally Karelian Diamond Resources closed nearly 14% higher at 1.025p after a 
positive exploration update from its Finnish sites. Chairman Richard Conroy 
said:
 Finland has the potential to host diamond deposits comparable to the world 
class diamond deposits found in similar geology across the border in Russia, 
and by utilising [data from] Rio Tinto...alongside our own, we are seeing 
encouraging signs that that potential may be realised. 
Meanwhile in a note on the sector, Citigroup said:
 Diamond prices are weaker than they were two years ago and demand is not yet 
strong enough for the limited mine supply to create a significant shortage. It 
is therefore likely that prices will stabilize at recent lower levels through 
2013 and 2014, but that the mine supply trend, the structural demand shift in 
China, and a slowly recovering global economy should see diamond shortages 
making their mark on prices in 2015-2020.
 