
Despite continuing concerns about radiation leaks in Japan, fighting in Libya, 
unrest in the Middle East and Portuguese debt, leading shares are edging 
higher, led by oil explorerCairn Energy.

Cairn has climbed 8.5p to 456p after analysts at UBS upgraded from neutral to 
buy with a 510p target, saying they were encouraged by the detail the company 
provided recently about its exploration plans in Greenland. UBS said:
 [Our price target] is set at a 20% (85p) premium to net asset value for what 
we believe will be the likely risked value of the four prospects in Greenland 
Cairn plans to drill in the third quarter and will update on in May. We believe 
that Cairn India provides a solid base with limited downside.
Cairn is still awaiting approval from the Indian government for its deal to 
sell 51% of its business in the country to Vedanta, and hopes this will be 
given by the middle of next month.
Overall the FTSE 100 is up 18.22 points to 5918.98, but on a quiet Monday 
morning trading volumes are pretty light. Later this week come key tests for 
Spanish and Irish banks, and the widely watched US non-farm payroll numbers on 
Friday.

AstraZeneca has been lifted 31.5p to 2905.5p after announcing an agreement 
with UK and US tax authorities which should boost its earnings per share in 
2011.

But mining shares are among the main fallers as base metals including copper 
drop back on fears about near-term demand from China, and worries about the 
current global instability.Kazakhmys is the biggest loser in the leading index 
so far, down 26p at £14.21, whileXstrata is down 10p at 1425.5p.

Miners operating in Zimbabwe are under pressure after president Robert Mugabe 
said he would implement plans to sell up to 51% of foreign owned companies to 
local people.Aquarius Platinum - which said its subsidiary in the country was 
in talks about establishing a position which complied with the law but was also 
beneficial to stakeholders - has lost 17.3p to 352.7p.

Meanwhile, with a drop in platinum prices, South African miner Lonmin is 16p 
lower at £16.72.
 