
On a day when the market was searching for direction, things were livened up 
by a spate of merger speculation.

After the $16bn bid for US bourbon maker Jim Beam by Japan's Suntory, analysts 
were suggesting thatDiageo or Pernod should step in to break up the party. 
Liberum's Pablo Zuanic said:
 Conventional wisdom has it that no rival bids will emerge for Beam. We 
disagree. The international premium spirits business is about brands first, and 
about building scale and distribution muscle for those brands. So if one of the 
two leading bourbon companies comes up for sale and one believes in the export 
potential of Americana, then Diageo and Pernod should bid (especially when the 
other leading bourbon brand is controlled by a family structure; not that Brown 
Forman would not sell some day). For Pernod a bid may be a stretch, but we 
think a Diageo-led consortium bid is quite possible.

For Diageo assuming 3% cost of debt and 10% cost synergies, a bid 10% above 
Suntory's, would be 12% earnings per share accretive if it were to buy all of 
Beam. But Diageo could end up only buying half of Beam (the bourbon lines; 
Teacher's due to its Latin American strength; and the tequila lines), and the 
bid partner could keep the bulk of the rest.

Diageo <https://www.theguardian.com/business/diageo> ended the day 7.5p higher 
at 2003.5p.

Meanwhile UBS suggested BSkyB, up 31.5p at 871p, could be a possible target 
for Rupert Murdoch's Fox, which still owns 39% in the wake of News 
Corporation's failed bid in 2011, derailed by the phone hacking scandal. 
Analyst Polo Tang said:
 Fox could revisit a merger of its European pay-TV assets to form Sky Europe. 
To overcome political resistance to a deal, BSkyB could remain listed but have 
its operating assets injected into Sky Europe in return for a majority stake in 
the larger entity.

Alternatively, the move to quad-play across Europe could also see BSkyB merge 
with either Vodafone UK or O2 UK. Such a deal could generate significant cost 
and revenue synergies that could be worth 248p-264p per share. Alternatively, 
Sky Europe could merge with either Vodafone or Telefonica to produce a European 
quad-play operator.

UBS moved its rating from neutral to buy and its price target from 880p to 
1100p, saying the outlook was positive:

Overall, the deal talk helped push the FTSE 100 9.71 points higher to 6766.86, 
its highest level for two and a half months. But it was a fairly erratic 
trading day with the leading index falling as low as 6694 and rising to 6772 at 
its peak.

Worries about the US Federal Reserve trimming its $75bn a month bond buying 
programme unsettled investors, although better than expected UK inflation 
figures provided some support.

Pharmaceutical companies were in demand after positive comments at a JP Morgan 
healthcare conference.

AstraZeneca added 92p to 3755.5p after it said it was likely to return to 
growth faster than analysts had expected. It has been suffering from a number 
of key drugs losing patent protection amid concerns about its future pipeline.

Meanwhile Shire, which said it expected 2013 earnings growth to be at the top 
end of forecasts, rose 80p to £29.91.

Hargreaves Lansdown ended 23p higher at £15.08 as Morgan Stanley issued a 
positive note on the investment management group, saying it should benefit from 
new rules on customers paying for financial advice, known as the retail 
distribution review. Morgan Stanley moved its recommendation from equal weight 
to overweight and its price target from £11.13 to £16.70, saying:
 We believe Hargreaves is winning a greater share of the opportunity presented 
by RDR [retail distribution review], with near-term risks from competition 
likely overstated. We upgrade to overweight on attractive risk/reward and 
further earnings upside risk with [our forecast] 5-10% above consensus.

In July, we argued the UK's RDR would create a £130bn opportunity as banks 
withdraw from the advice market. However, our analysis suggests:

Volume opportunity is bigger. We see Hargreaves doubling its share of UK 
mutual funds as bank advisers have fallen around 50% and competition is taking 
time to establish. Our base case now assumes 10% capture of this opportunity 
(versus 5% previously).

Pricing risks are less than feared. Our survey, competitor analysis and the 
experience of wealth managers to date suggests: (i) consumers are willing to 
pay 50-100 basis points for advice/platforms (i.e. more than anticipated) and; 
(ii) comparing providers will prove challenging, keeping churn rates low, with 
assets proving stickier than consensus expects.

But other financial groups were among the leading fallers, with Schroders down 
43p at £25.47 andAberdeen Asset Management 6.8p lower at 453.1p. The catalyst 
seemed to beAshmore, down 50.8p to 358p, which issued a disappointing trading 
statement, showing that clients withdrew $3.5bn more from its funds in the last 
three months of 2013 than they put in. The outflows came amid concerns about 
the US Federal Reserve's monetary policy and its effects on emerging markets, a 
core business forAshmore <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ashmoregroup>.

Intertek fell 76p to £29.93 after analysts at Natixis cut their recommendation 
on the testing equipment business from neutral to reduce and their target price 
from £33 to £28.

Among the mid-caps Qinetiq, the company spun out of the Ministry of Defence 
research department, rose 9.2p to 236.7p following talk that the company had 
sold $7.8m worth of Talon robots, unmanned ground vehicles used to track bombs 
and other explosives, to Pakistan.

Balfour Beatty added 4.5p to 294.5p after a positive trading statement.
 