
Worries about its US performance made InterContinental Hotels the biggest 
faller in the FTSE 100 on a day when the weather may have been stormy, but the 
markets were fairly calm.

The hotel group's shares fell 42p to £18.23 after it reported a September 
slowdown in US revenues. At an annual conference for American hotel owners, 
InterContinental said third quarter US revenue per available room rose 3.5% but 
the September figure was just 1.6%, due to the timing of certain holidays. It 
said current trading gave it confidence for the rest of the year. Panmure 
Gordon said:
 Third quarter trading is a bit below expectations with Americas revenue per 
available room up 3.7% and within that US 3.5%. However September was weak at 
2.1% in Americas and within that the US 1.6%. The culprit was Holiday Inn which 
was down 0.9% reflecting slower group business. Current trading trends give the 
group confidence for the rest of the year but we think revenue expectations may 
edge back a bit for the fourth quarter in both Americas and Greater China. 
Consensus forecasts are for $660m earnings before interest and tax and we think 
these may edge back. We reiterate our hold recommendation.

Overall the FTSE 100 finished 4.48 points higher at 6725.82, but volumes were 
thin thanks to the combined effects of travel disruption thanks to the stormy 
weather and the half term break. Investors were also reluctant to dip into the 
market ahead of this week's US Federal Reserve meeting, with the central bank 
widely expected to maintain its $85bn a month bond buying programme. Alastair 
McCaig, market analyst at IG, said:
 It is difficult to draw too many conclusions from such a disjointed day of 
trading, with the City's desks only half full for most of the day, but you 
suspect this will not be the case tomorrow. Tomorrow should offer traders the 
ability to chew through the after-market Apple figures and the sizable impact 
they will play on the Nasdaq and US investor sentiment.

Closer to home we will also see exactly where Lloyds stand after the 
inevitable political rhetoric over its demise and subsequent re-emergence from 
under the government's wing. In mainland Europe we have the reporting figures 
of UBS and Deutsche Bank to look forward to. 
Aggreko was the day's biggest riser in the leading index, up 91p at £16.08 
after the temporary power supply group said three month trading had been in 
line with expectations. Its local business should see revenues and margins 
ahead of the previous year, but power projects slightly lower. Traders said 
short sellers were being squeezed by the positive statement.

Insurers seemed relatively unfazed by the overnight storms, with RSA Insurance 
up 0.4p at 127.24p,Legal and General losing just 0.9p to 212p and Aviva off 
2.8p at 435.8p. Hari Sivakumaran at Oriel Securities said:
 It very early to say what the financial impact of the storm will be for UK 
insurers. We would note that the storm had been forecast well in advance and 
that preparations had been made prior to its arrival, which we expect will 
limit the potential damage it inflicts.

We would be surprised if the storm added more than 1-2 points to combined 
operating ratios. If significant flooding were to arise then we would expect 
the cost to become greater.

Year to date the UK weather losses have been benign and we expect will be 
contained within adverse weather budgets.

UK insurers likely to be impacted are Aviva, Direct Line, esure, Legal & 
General and RSA.

Security group G4S ended 1.3p lower at 257.2p after it rejected a £1.55bn bid 
from private equity group Charterhouse for its cash solutions business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/oct/28/g4s-rejects-charterhouse-offer-cash-transportation-arm>
.

Retail shares were mixed after a surprisingly weak high street survey for 
October from the CBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/oct/28/uk-retailers-sharp-slowdown-sales-cbi>
, where main sales balance came in at +2, down sharply from September's +34 and 
much lower than the +33 forecast. Many analysts said the result could be a 
blip, due to warmer than usual weather during the month hitting autumn clothing 
sales. Despite hopes of a pickup in sales in the run-up to Christmas,Marks & 
Spencerslipped 0.8p to 475p but Next added 10p to £52.15 and Dixons Retail rose 
0.69p to 48.03p.

Elsewhere Shire rose 38p to £28.14 as analysts issued positive recommendations 
in the wake of last week's trading update. In a buy note Goldman Sachs said:
 Post Shire's strong third quarter and earnings upgrade, we revise our Shire 
earnings per share estimates for 2013 by around 3% and 2014-2018 by 7%-10%. Our 
new estimates now imply a five year (2012-17) earnings per share compound 
annual growth rate of 16.5% versus 14%. Importantly, we continue to view Shire 
as a top line growth story, with revenue forecast to grow around 6% over the 
next five years on an organic basis. Consequently, despite the [recent] 9% 
share price move, we still view Shire as being significantly under valued in 
the context of its growth outlook. We believe consensus estimates do not 
reflect any optionality on Shire's ability to add to its robust organic growth 
outlook via M&A, business development.

Citigroup was also upbeat, raising its target price from £29 to £32, although 
it did add:
 With no near-term uptick in [skin substitute] Dermagraft revenues evident, we 
wonder why Shire does not divest this asset, or even stop manufacture and 
promotion of the product altogether. The regenerative medicines division lost 
around $90mn the first half of 2013, with additional losses recorded in third 
quarter. Dermagraft sales declined by around 50% in the first nine months of 
2013. 
But Vodafone fell 1.25p to 225.5p after Michael Clark of income fund Fidelity 
MoneyBuilder sold its stake in the mobile phone group.

Tullow Oil slid 21.5p to 957p after it temporarily suspended drilling 
operations in northern Kenya following demonstrations by local communities 
regarding concerns around employment in Turkana county.

Cairn Energy closed 2.1p lower at 278.9p as it agreed with US group Kosmos 
Energy and the Moroccan National Oil Company to take a 20% stake in an 
exploration block in the Atlantic. Drilling on the Cap Boujdour site off 
Morocco is due to start in the second half of 2014.

Finally Royal Mail fell 8.5p to 546.5p.
 