
After hitting a three year low on Monday, leading UK shares have made an 
attempted bounce back.

But some FTSE companies are missing out, notably chip designer Arm which is 
down 13p at £10.28 after German semiconductor group Dialog cut its sales 
forecasts. Meanwhile smaller rivalImagination Technologies is own nearly 6% at 
154p after it warned on profits, citing a slowdown in semiconductor and 
smartphone markets.

Earlier this week Morgan Stanley sales sales of Apple’s iPhone could fall 6% 
in 2016 due to higher prices in markets outside the US and near saturation in 
developed countries.Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> of 
course is a key customer for Arm and Imagination. Analysts at Liberum, long 
time sellers of Arm, said:

 Dialog which is a key supplier to Apple has warned. Dialog now expects fourth 
quarter revenue of $395m, 11% below previous guidance of $445m. This is the 
first warning from the Apple supply chain. Volume growth from Apple has been 
the key driver of many tech stocks. This is now slowing.

On Imagination, analyst Roger Phillips at Investec said:

Interims are very weak, with disappointment in all revenue lines and control 
over opex base growth a damage limitation exercise. Unit volume declines are 
alarming, but especially for MIPS. While the figures are particularly poor, 
Imagination is no stranger to reporting disappointing numbers, having done so 
for several years. However, at around 2.7 times enterprise value/sales versus a 
long term trend of 5 times, we remain buyers, given that the steps needed to 
run this IP-rich business in a financially disciplined way appear obvious – and 
a catalyst for change is evident.

In our view, the catalyst for change exists in the form of the new(ish) 
chairman, whose history suggests that the necessary changes will ultimately be 
made (Vestas Wind Systems).

Overall though the FTSE 100 has recovered 101.04 points to 5975.10, with broad 
based gains. Investors remain nervous however ahead ofthe Federal Reserve’s 
decision on US interest rates due on Wednesday. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/12/us-interest-rate-rise-heard-round-world-janet-yellen>
 US inflation inflation figures are due later, but ahead of that UK inflation 
data was in line with forecasts.

Oil has edged higher with Brent crude up 0.8% at $38.24 after flirting with 11 
year lows on Monday, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/14/ftse-three-year-low-oil-price-rattles-markets>
 so energy companies are moving ahead.Royal Dutch Shell A shares are up 42p at 
1460.5p whileBG, which it is proposing to acquire, is 27.5p better at 947p.

Meanwhile Tullow OIl has climbed 10.1p to 162.2p as it said it had found oil 
in northern Kenya. But Cantor Fitzgerald kept its sell recommendation. Analyst 
Sam Wahab said:

A reversal of fortunes with the drill-bit sees Tullow record encouraging 
initial results at the Etom-2 well in Block 13T in Kenya. Oil samples, sidewall 
cores and wire line logging all indicate the presence of high API oil in the 
best quality reservoir encountered in the South Lokichar Basin to date.

[But] with lower prevailing oil prices expected to continue into 2016 and 
little room for operational error at TEN [in Ghana], we believe the company’s 
financial position could be under considerable strain without asset sales or an 
issue of equity. A risk not worth taking, in our view. Our valuation attributes 
a core value of 109p, and 68p of risked exploration upside. We therefore retain 
our sell recommendation and our target price of 176p.

Elsewhere Glencore is up 4.48p to 84.48p as JP Morgan Cazenove raised its 
rating from neutral to overweight.


Sainsburys is 10.5p better at 247.4p as its sales rose 1.2% in the 12 weeks to 
the start of December, according to market research group Kantar Worldpanel.
Morrisons, up 6.2p at 146.4p, and Tesco, 4.9p better at 147.95, were also in 
demand despite subdued grocery sales overall.

Old Mutual continued to rebound on hopes that the third finance minister in a 
week in South Africa would provide some stability, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/14/south-africa-markets-rally-jacob-zuma-appoints-pravin-gordhan-finance-minister>
 up 8.7p at 166.5p.

Among the other fallers, Randgold Resources is down 51p at £39.91 and Mexican 
precious metals minerFresnillo has fallen 0.5p to 664.5p as gold and silver 
dipped.

Randgold was also hit by a downgrade by Credit Suisse, which cut its target 
price from £40.40 to £39.

Elsewhere IT group Aveva slumped after a planned tie-up with France’s 
Schneider Electric - announced in July - was scrapped as being too risky and 
costly. Julian Yates at Investec said:

Talks with Schneider have been terminated as it became apparent that the 
uplift in shareholder value originally anticipated was unlikely to be realised. 
This is disappointing as we thought the initial deal terms were attractive and 
the strategic rational appeared sensible considering Aveva’s current position. 
In our view, yesterday’s closing price of 2166p implied a near 18 times PE, 
accounting for the proposed near 950p cash return. After the initial fall this 
morning, we expect the shares to be volatile, but further M&A possibilities 
could lend some support.
 