
Leading shares have been buoyed by overnight comments from the US Federal 
Reserve saying it would be “patient” about raising interest rates.

Fed chair Janet Yellen said rises were unlikely for at least a couple of 
meetings, meaning April at the earliest. This assuaged fears that dearer 
borrowing in the US would hit global growth and knock back commodity prices, 
which gave Wall Street and Asian markets an overnight boost and also lifted 
European shares.

A rise in precious metal prices has pushed Randgold Resources 126p higher to 
£42.43.

Elsewhere chip designer Arm has added 27p to 957p after positive comments from 
Barclays analysts. In a note on rival Imagination Technologies, down 1p at 
229p, Barclays said:

We think Imagination’s valuation is now intrinsically overly expensive (36 
times/24times 2015/2016 PE for 30% compound annual growth rate, but also 
relative to peer Arm, whose growth drivers are more certain and which trades at 
only 28 times/22 times 2015/2016 PE for high 20s% compound annual growth rate. 
We therefore reiterate our underweight rating on Imagination and reiterate our 
overweight on Arm.

Meanwhile Andrew Dunn at RBC Capital Markets issued an upbeat note after 
talking to the company about China:

We hosted an investor call with Arm on the China smartphone market which 
highlighted the importance of this region (now the single largest smartphone 
market), the ability of the local ecosystem to deliver latest generation Arm 
technology at attractive price points, the transition to LTE (driving more 
advanced Arm intellectual property) and the rising uptake of higher royalty 
rate Arm v8 IP in smartphones.

We believe the application of advanced Arm IP into the high unit growth mid 
and entry level smartphone segments will both create a virtuous upgrade cycle 
and also raise Arm’s average smartphone royalty rate from around 1.5% to 3-4% 
by 2018.

Rising adoption of Arm’s more advanced IP (including v8) serves to raise 
royalty rates. An upgrade from a feature phone to a low end smartphone equals a 
4 times royalty increase while ongoing innovation and the trickle-down over 
time of advanced technology from high end to mid and entry level segments 
should help offset standard industry chip average selling price declines and 
keep [prices] flat within each segment. In addition, Arm’s Mali graphics IP has 
a particularly high penetration rate in China due we believe to its broad 
offering (from high to low end) and compatibility with Arm’s processor IP. This 
allows Arm to benefit from an additional 1% royalty rate. With 10% CAGR unit 
smartphone growth over the next 5 years but growth weighted to the lower end, 
we expect rising royalty rates combined with flat ASPs to enable Arm to grow 
smartphone royalty revenues at a healthy 20%.

Overall, with stronger than expected UK retail sales for November, the FTSE 100
 is currently up 51.25 points to 6387.73.

Petrofac has put on 29p to 729p as the oil services company - hit by weaker 
crude prices recently - recovered as Brent rose 1.7% to nearly $63 a barrel.

Shire has added 113p to £46.35 awaiting any news on its rumoured interest in 
US group NPS Pharmaceuticals.

United Utilities is down 13p at 905p as its shares went ex-dividend, while 
Coca Cola Hellenic Bottling has continued to slide, down another 13p at £12.29 
on worries about its operations in Greece - which is currently in an uncertain 
state politically - and Russia, where the rouble has suffered huge volatility 
this week.

Among the mid-caps, IT group Aveva has lost 99p or more than 7% to £12.30 
after Morgan Stanley moved from equal weight to underweight, and JP Morgan 
downgraded from overweight to underweight. The bank estimated 70% to 80% of the 
company’s revenues are directly or indirectly affected by the oil price.

Lower down the market Real Good Food has slipped 0.5p to 28.5p after a 1% fall 
in half year revenues and a loss of £3m, compared to a profit of £2.2m. The 
company was hit by a price dispute with British Sugar, but its distribution 
business Napier Brown has returned to profitability since October.

Its Renshaw ingredients business and Haydens Bakery are trading significantly 
ahead of the previous year, while the company is working on a number of 
corporate initiatives. Analyst Phil Carroll at its broker Shore Capital said:

[The first half] was always going to see a challenged financial performance 
due to the sugar price dispute with British Sugar and this has proved to be the 
case. However, it is pleasing to see that the company is seeing an improved 
financial performance in the second half and as a whole are said to be trading 
ahead of October and November last year.

Therefore, prospects for a good trading performance during the seasonally 
important Christmas period looks promising, in our view. We also note the new 
year could bring some news on the corporate front with the results highlighting 
ongoing work on a number of corporate initiatives although no further detail is 
given. At this stage, we leave our forecasts unchanged and therefore, Real Good 
Food shares are currently trading on a 2015 EV/EBITDA ratio of 8.4 times.
 