
After five days of falls on worries about emerging markets and US growth, 
leading shares managed to edge higher, although it was a bit of a struggle.

The FTSE 100 finished 8.62 points higher at 6457.89, with Tullow Oil leading 
the way on renewed bid speculation. The company's shares jumped 56p to 849.5p 
as traders heard talk of a possible 1400p a share bid, with Statoil mentioned 
as one possible predator. This is not the first time Statoil has been tipped as 
a bidder for Tullow, with a similar story doing the rounds last month.

Ahead of Thursday's Bank of England and European Central Bank meetings, 
investors remained nervous, worried about emerging market problems and a 
slowdown in growth in the US and China. The day's data - notably service sector 
surveys - were fairly positive, while US private sector jobs data from ADP was 
in line with expectations, easing some concerns about Friday's non-farm payroll 
numbers. Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets UK, said;
 A mixed day for European stocks today. Once again investors are weighing up 
concerns about the sustainability of current profits against a backdrop of a 
slowdown in the growth prospects from emerging markets, and any possible ripple 
effects into companies forward earnings.

This appears to be manifesting itself into a reluctance to commit to any large 
scale buying ahead of this week's US jobs report and as such is tempering the 
markets ability to rally with any conviction, which has resulted in equity 
markets switching in and out of positive territory throughout the afternoon 
session. 
RSA Insurance rose 4.6p to 103.6p following Tuesday's news that it had 
appointed former Royal Bank of Scotland boss Stephen Hester as its chief 
executive, prompting talk he would authorise a cash call to strengthen its 
balance sheet. Hester will take over as the insurer attempts to recover from an 
accounting scandal at its Irish business.

But investment manager Hargreaves Lansdown fell 152p to £13.45 after its half 
year figures came in slightly shy of expectations, despite a jump in client 
numbers attracted by the Royal Mail flotation.

Elsewhere Arm recovered 17.5p to 892.5p after Tuesday's negative reaction to 
its results. Analyst Julian Yates at Investec said:
 Now that foreign exchange and the near term royalty trajectory can be 
digested (we see a 5% consensus 2014 pretax profit downgrade), we believe the 
stock weakness offers a good entry point. In our view the key data point is the 
continued licence outperformance, which suggests a very compelling medium and 
long term royalty build (more than 20% growth) across a wide range of 
industries. This growth, along with likely continued licence strength, supports 
an attractive business outlook. Buy. 
Associated British Foods added 121p to £28.83 following comments on Tuesday 
from Morgan Stanley suggesting the market was undervaluing its Primark 
business, which could be worth more than the current value of the whole company.

Unilever was down 22p at £23.06 as its shares went ex-dividend, while Aggreko, 
the temporary power supplier, dropped 26p to £15.48 on talk that 5m shares were 
being placed in the market at £15.35 on behalf of an institutional investor.

GlaxoSmithKline closed 25.5p higher at 1579.5p following full year results, 
whileShire rose 59p to £30.75 after US investment bank Leerink put an 
outperform rating on the company.

Lower down the market French Connection issued an unexpected trading update, 
and for once unexpected did not mean disappointing. It said UK and European 
retail sales and margins were better than expected in December and January, and 
its loss for the full year will be a better than expected £4.7m. The retailer's 
shares, which jumped sharply just ahead of the statement, closed 7p higher at 
43p.
 