
After a failed attempt at a rally on Friday, leading shares fell for the sixth 
week in a row, the FTSE 100's worst run since June 2008.

The finger of blame was pointed firmly across the Atlantic, with investors 
increasingly nervous that the US Federal Reserve might begin trimming its $85bn 
a month bond buying programme at next week's meeting, earlier than previously 
thought. Growing evidence of a revival in the US economy could force the Fed's 
hand, particularly since it is due to be Ben Bernanke's last policy 
get-together before handing the chair over to Janet Yellen. An agreement last 
week over the US budget was another factor which could prompt the Fed to begin 
tapering its stimulus package, which has been one of the main factors behind 
the surge in global stock markets so far this year.

So the FTSE 100 finished at 6439.96, down 5.29 points on the day and 112 
points lower on the week. That marked its lowest level since 10 October.

RSA Insurance led the fallers, down 7.2p to 92.5p after its third recent 
profit warning and the departure of chief executive Simon Lee.

Aggreko dropped 34p to £15.16 ahead of an expected trading update from the 
temporary power supply business on Monday. In a sell note, Numis said:

Due to the lack of contract wins and a weaker dollar/pound we have reduced our 
forecasts to below the bottom end of the range for 2014. Despite the positive 
long term outlook we believe the shares are fully valued on 20 times our new 
2014 forecasts and we continue to see the shares under performing. We lower our 
target price to 1,234p from 1,400p.

Among the day's risers, chipmaker Arm added 29p to £10.01. It announced the 
acquisition of Geomerics, whose lighting technology has been used in 
best-selling computer games such as Battlefield 3 and 4, and Medal of Honor: 
Warfighter.Angle, the medical technology minnow, received £6.2m to account for 
its 31% stake in Geomerics and loans to the business. Angle ended 1.8% higher 
at 81p.

Also boosting Arm were reports that Google could be planning to design its own 
server processors using the company's technology 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-12-12/google-said-to-mull-designing-chips-in-threat-to-intel.html>
. But the news did not stop analyst Janardan Menon at Liberum repeating his 
sell recommendation:

[The Google report] is likely to be supportive for Arm's share price. In 
reality we do not think it makes a significant difference as there are a large 
number of chip vendors already making Arm-based server processors and trying to 
sell them to end customers like Google.

After Thursday's 12.5% plunge in the wake of disappointing profits and a 
cautious outlook,Sports Direct International recovered some ground, up 28p or 
more than 4% to 702p.

Elsewhere AstraZeneca added 60.5p to 3518.5p after positive news on its 
pipeline of drugs. A diabetes treatment developed by Astra and Bristol-Myers 
Squibb, dapagliflozin, has been recommended for approval by an advisory panel 
to the US Food and Drug Administration. The move comes two years after it was 
rejected by regulators on safety grounds, saying there was not enough clinical 
data.

Separately Astra announced positive results from a late stage clinical trial 
of an experimental gout drug, lesinurad. However it is awaiting results from 
three further trials before assessing its commercial potential.

Meanwhile Perform, the sports rights company which slumped on Thursday after 
it warned on earnings, added 35p to 215p.

Royal Mail, set to join the FTSE 100 on 23 December, closed up 4.5p at 589.5p.

On speculative front, Weir was lifted early in the week on talk the pumps 
group could be a bid target for the likes of General Electric or Swiss oilfield 
service and equipment company Weatherford. But on Friday it suffered some 
profit taking, and fell 19p to £20.56 after reaching £21.32 on Tuesday.

Finally TalkTalk Telecom, down 4.4p to 281.3p, has been mentioned in the past 
as a possible target forVodafone, 2p lower at 226.65p. But analysts at 
Berenberg poured could water on the idea. Their reasons included:

A move by Vodafone to buy TalkTalk would likely be a catalyst for the other 
fixed-line players to buy UK mobile operations. This would leaveVodafone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/vodafonegroup> with the weakest market 
position, given TalkTalk's inferior customer base, infrastructure position and 
content position. If anything, this could invite a greater threat to its mobile 
business.

TalkTalk <https://www.theguardian.com/business/talk-talk-telecom> would be a 
very pricey acquisition, for a structurally higher churning customer base and 
with far fewer synergy opportunities than Vodafone was able to justify with its 
Kabel Deutschland acquisition in Germany.

The final, and maybe most compelling, point is that we see AT&T as a far more 
likely acquirer of Vodafone than Vodafone as an acquirer of TalkTalk. In our 
recent Vodafone upgrade, we put the probability of an AT&T acquisition at two 
thirds, and this event would likely preclude any Vodafone move in the UK.
 