
With oil holding steady despite the weekend’s failure by oil producers to 
agree an output freeze, leading shares are moving higher again, with Primark 
ownerAssociated British Foods one of the big gainers following its latest 
figures.

The company reported a 3% rise in half year profits to a better than expected 
£486m, but the figures were sweetened by a revival in the sugar business, which 
recorded a small improvement after several years of decline. The business 
benefited from cost cutting which the company said was necessary with sugar 
prices low and the withdrawal of EU quotas expected next year.

ABF said movements in exchange rates had held back profits, but sterling’s 
recent weakness would benefit the business in the second half if the trend 
continued.

Indeed profits at Primark fell at actual exchange rates, and trading was also 
tough around Christmas due to the unseasonably warm weather. Like for like 
sales in the first half were down 1%, but it said the early trading at its US 
stores had been encouraging.

But the company warned of uncertainties over the EU referendum and the 
proposed sugar tax on soft drinks unveiled in the budget. In a buy note Liberum 
said|:

ABF offers investors compelling exposure to secular growth trends in retail. 
Primark’s brand of fast fashion at affordable prices coupled with a buzzy and 
trendy shopping experience resonates with a wide spread of consumers. ABF’s 
deliberate and considered expansion into Continental Europe demonstrates that 
the concept is portable. We expect similar results in the US as the group dips 
its toe into the market with 8 stores in the Northeast. We estimate that 
Primark can double sales and profits over the next 5 years boosted by the 
occasional store parcel. The shakeout in EU sugar should lead to industry 
consolidation, lower beet prices and cost savings boosting Sugar profits 
mid-term.

ABF’s shares have added 73p to £34.20, but other clothing retailers have 
slipped back on the comments about Primark’s first half trading.Marks and 
Spenceris down 4.1p at 438.4p while Next has fallen 25p to £54.05.

Overall the FTSE 100 is up 38.02 points to 6391.54, as Brent crude added 0.8% 
to $43.26. A strike in Kuwait is outweighing worries about the inability of 
Opec and other producers to take action to stem the supply glut.

Despite this, commodity companies are mixed. Royal Dutch Shell B shares have 
slipped 12.5p to 1792.5p whileRio Tinto is down 6.5p to £22.62 after its 
production update. ButAnglo American has added 15.4p to 709p. 

But Vodafone has added 4.4p to 232.75p after Goldman Sachs raised its target 
price from 246p to 260p late on Monday.
 