
As the UK market drifted ever closer to a record high - albeit in thin trading 
-BT was one company in the spotlight.

The telecoms group added 0.9p to 406.1p after analysts at Nomura issued a buy 
note and said its shares could reach 500p. Nomura's James Britton said there 
were several catalysts ahead that should improve its growth prospects:
 Easing regulation: This first step is now secure after Ofcom finalised its 
fixed access charge controls. The market is aware of an improving regulatory 
climate, but analyst estimates do not factor in the cumulative benefit of 
reducing regulatory headwinds (£300m by 2017).

Upselling mobile to enterprise: BT's launch is imminent. We believe the 
opportunity is substantial given BT's 50% share in small and medium sized 
enterprises fixed, its ability to discount mobile voice/messaging on data 
networks, and the precedent set by Meteor in Ireland. 15% market share should 
add £100m to cash flow, on our estimates.

Heading for 10m broadband subscribers: The strength of BT's recent broadband 
performance, backed by its dominance of fibre, may well be sustainable if the 
alternative operators do not promote fibre more actively. A 10m broadband base 
should drive additional cash flow of £100m.

A convincing mobile offer for the UK consumer: BT will not have a femtocell 
[low power cellular base station] capability on launch later this year, so we 
expect the proposition to be price-led, pushing family plans and pooled data. 
Penetrating 30% of BT homes could generate cash flow of £300m in the long term.

A reasonable Premier League outcome: We believe the market can digest 
higher-than- expected costs if there is a commensurate improvement in the 
quality of BT's acquired rights and certainty on the outcome removes the 
number-one risk factor putting investors off BT.

There will be some bumps on BT's journey – not least when significant employee 
options vest in August 2014 – but we think investors should latch on to such 
buying opportunities. We reiterate our conviction buy rating. 
Overall the FTSE 100 finished 16.79 points higher at 6875, just 55 points off 
its all time closing high reached on 30 December 1999, before the dotcom bubble 
burst.

Following last week's positive reaction to the European Central Bank's rate 
cut and US non-farm payroll data, there was some well-received trade figures 
from China, showing a 7% year on year rise in exports in May, as well as an 
upward revision to Japan's first quarter GDP.

With the Chinese news lifting commodity companies, Antofagasta added 8.5p to 
781p whileAnglo American was up 6.5p at 1471.5p and Randgold Resources rose 24p 
to £43.80.

On Randgold Barclays said:
 We hosted a day of investor meetings with Randgold chief financial officer 
Graham Shuttleworth last week. In our view, Randgold offers a combination of 
rising production driven by higher grades, declining capex, rising net cash and 
as a result strong dividend upside potential. The company should be in a 
position to fund its next 250,000-300,000 ounce per annum mine development and 
pay a double-digit medium term dividend yield based on our $1300 an ounce gold 
forecast. This compares extremely favourably to the UK precious metals peer 
group, while trading at a 47% PE discount to Fresnillo. Reiterate overweight.

Housebuilders were also in demand, boosted by hopes of further home 
construction to ease the housing shortage.Barratt Developments added 9.3p to 
375.9p whilePersimmon put on 15p to £13.11.

With the World Cup approaching, the expectation of strong sales of replica 
kits liftedSports Direct International - also trying to get a new share scheme  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/09/mike-ashley-bonus-sports-direct>
past shareholders - by 12p to 625p andJD Sports Fashion by 66p to £17.10.

But Lloyds Banking Group lost 1.33p to 78.82p after it priced the flotation of 
its TSB business at between 220p and 290p a share, below book value. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/09/tsb-flotation-lloyds>

A late faller was Babcock International, down 24p to £12.26 after it said it 
would not win any of the second tranche of defence estates contracts, having 
spoken to the Defence Infrastructure Organisation. This follows a legal 
challenge delaying the announcement of the outcome of the contracts, the 
company said.

Aggreko fell 8p to £16.79 as Panmure Gordon moved its rating on the temporary 
power supply business from buy to hold, following a visit last week to the 
company's operations in the Americas. Analyst Paul Jones said:
 This visit was positive in overall terms, with more optimistic news on local 
economies than we previously imagined and a sense that the business is setting 
the foundations for further growth with training programmes and efficiency 
drives which should enable it to drive deeper into existing sectors and also 
expand further into Latin America to take advantage of structural power 
shortages. However, until these potential prospects and opportunities translate 
to profits, we feel the shares look high enough after a recent run.

Finally, Aim-listed Leni Gas and Oil was lifted 22% to 3.69p by positive 
drilling news from a development well on the Goudron field in Trinidad.
 