
Given there seems little sign of an end to the current stock market 
volatility, with the FTSE 100 jumping 3% following Wednesday's 3% drop, it is 
no surprise that a company which benefits from the upheaval was doing well.

That company was Icap, the interdealer broker, which climbed 24.7p to 416p - a 
6% rise - as traders said the business would do well from heavy trading volumes 
as buyers and sellers used its trading platforms to bet on the direction of 
shares, interest rates and currencies. HelpingIcap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/icap> - whose chief executive is former 
Tory Treasurer Michael Spencer - was an overweight recommendation from Morgan 
Stanley, with a target price of 575p. The bank said:
 We view Icap as a capital light way to play heightened volatility, which is 
driving a strong near-term operating environment. With the stock...having 
underperformed [its] peer group by around 5% in the year to date, we think it 
an interesting time to take another look. 
Icap was among the leading gainers in the FTSE 100, which ended 155.67 points 
higher at 5162.83 having traded within a 230 point range. It was just a 
smidgeon short of recovering all of the 158 point decline from Wednesday. More 
rumours about France and its banking system spooked investors for much of the 
day, but an opening surge on Wall Street after better than expected jobless 
claims figures brought some optimism back into the market after its recent 
slump. Giles Watts, head of equities at City Index, said:
 Stock markets are at a point of indecision of late, which is why we are 
seeing trading becoming particularly choppy, with large price swings to both 
the upside and downside. On the one hand I get the sense that traders want to 
buy into stocks on speculation that they have become oversold and may therefore 
see higher prices. On the other hand however is the fact that traders remain 
highly sensitive to news and rumours, as proved by [Wednesday's] heavy falls in 
Europe on the back of somewhat sketchy concerns over France and its banks. As 
long as this indecision continues, stocks are likely to remain bouncing quite 
violently like a cork in a bath. 
Banks regained some of their poise after overcoming another spate of worries 
about Societe Generale and other French financial stocks. Talk of a short 
selling ban in Europe also seemed to help investor sentiment.Barclays finished 
as the biggest riser in the leading index, up 14.15p to 177.85p having fallen 
as low as 159.05p.Royal Bank of Scotland rose 0.98p to 25.27p while Lloyds 
Banking Group added 1.36p to 32.205p.

Essar Energy closed 20.8p higher at 282.9p, following its falls on Wednesday 
after Goldman Sachs removed the Indian power company from its conviction buy 
list.

Miners were also wanted, in the main, with Xstrata adding 52.5p to 1052.5p and 
Anglo American 72p better at £23.86.

International Consolidated Airlines Group - the merged British Airways and 
Iberia - climbed 7.7p to 185p following a buy note from UBS. The bank said:
 Year to date the shares have fallen by 35% despite the positive progress 
being made on the merger and [US] anti-trust immunity. We thought the second 
quarter results were slightly better than expected with IAG continuing to 
outperform its competitors (premium traffic continues to come through) in terms 
of yield and the most in terms of cost cutting. 
But the only faller in the FTSE 100 was Randgold Resources, down 200p at 
£61.85 on profit taking as gold fell $35 an ounce from its record highs by the 
time London closed.

Among the mid-caps Premier Foods put on 0.5p to 13.55p after news that its new 
chief executive - former Kraft Foods Europe boss Michael Clarke - will start 
his new job next Tuesday, two weeks ahead of schedule. But in a new note 
Investec analyst Martin Deboo cut his price target on the Bisto and Hovis group 
from 20p to 15p. He said:
 Despite the ostensibly in-line first half results, the shares have shipped 
further water in the face of renewed speculation on the balance sheet and 
market turmoil. Premier now need to navigate the second half intact and new 
chief executive Clarke needs to take some quick decisions on the way forward.

We think Premier is unlikely to go bust and may be able to avoid an equity 
raise. But we also think the shares are effectively 'un-investable' in the 
current climate. 
Charter climbed 21.5p to 679.5p as the Takeover Panel gave predator Melrose, 
down 1p at 306p, until September 6 to decide whether to make a firm 840p a 
share bid. Melrose wants to do due diligence before making an offer, butCharter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/charter> has so far refused to open its 
books.

Aquarius Platinum added 18.7p to 235.6p after it reported a 40% rise in 
underlying profits, although there was a net loss of $10.4m after it took a 
$159m charge relating to the suspension of production at its Blue Ridge mine. 
Louise Collinge at Evolution Securities said:
 We reiterate our add recommendation and our 312p target price. We continue to 
believe that the platinum group metals sector is not out of the woods yet. 
However, for the long term investor, Aquarius is the right platinum company to 
hold.  