
The European Central Bank’s higher than expected €1.14tn bond buying programme 
sent UK shares to their best level for four months.

The FTSE 100 finished up 68.59 points or 1.02% at 6796.63, its highest since 
19 September last year. European markets also gained ground, while the euro 
fell sharply as the ECB turned on the money taps. Chris Beauchamp, market 
analyst at IG, said:

Overall, the ECB has got away with it today, but with Greek elections looming 
there is still a big risk that the European rally in stock markets has run its 
course for now.

Among the risers Royal Mail gained 15.3p to 445.8p after a good Christmas 
performance from its parcels business, whileTullow Oil added 3.8p to 388.3p 
after reasonable results from exploration wells in Kenya, with exploration 
director Angus McCoss calling the news “highly encouraging.” Oriel said:


It is good to see that the appraisal of the two major discoveries in Kenya is 
going well, underpinning the already discovered gross 600m barrels of 
contingent resources and their potential development.

RSA Insurance rose 15p to 466.8p as Credit Suisse upgraded its recommendation 
from neutral to outperform.


Imperial Tobacco recovered from early losses following news the UK government 
intended to introduce a law forcing cigarette firms to use plain packets 
without branding, in an attempt to improve health and cut smoking. It closed 
14p better at £30.20.

Wolseley climbed 106p to £39.45 after it said it was looking at options to 
exit its remaining building materials businesses in France. In the most recent 
figures to July last year, the businesses involved made trading profits of £7m 
on revenues of £577m. In a buy note Liberum said:

Net assets have already been written down to £130m so further write-offs 
should be manageable. Not big news either way, but improves the quality of the 
group.

But Associated British Foods dipped 13p to £29.85 after last week’s update. In 
a hold note, analyst Charles Pick at Numis said:

At the time of the November finals and AGM on 5 December guidance was that 
earnings before interest and tax this full year would be lower due to sharply 
reduced sugar profits offsetting advances elsewhere but with this negated by 
lower finance and tax charges leading to small-scale growth in earnings per 
share.

Revised guidance is that a marginal decline in adjusted earnings per share is 
expected. The swing factor is the strength of sterling – despite some offset 
via the dollar, this is set to cost £15m. Pretax profits projections for this 
full year and next have been reduced by 4.9% and 4.1% respectively, with the 
change this full year mainly due to a materially lowered earnings before 
interest and tax estimate for sugar. Earnings per share reductions are 4.1% and 
then 3.4% due to lower assumed tax rates.

SSE slipped 14p to £14.90 as its shares went ex-dividend, while Compass was 
down 5p at £11.30 for the same reason.


Lower down the market a hefty profit warning from Oxford Instruments saw its 
shares close 305p lower at 795p.

MySale, the online fashion retailer backed by Sir Philip Green and Mike Ashley 
which warned on profits before Christmas, slipped 1.5p to 61p. It said revenues 
accelerated in December so first half sales would be 8% higher in the first 
half of the financial year. But it also plans to close its websites in the US 
and South Korea, to focus on its key markets of Australia, New Zealand, 
south-east Asia and the UK.
 