
And the volatility continues, with leading shares bouncing back from 
Wednesday's losses thanks to a revival in banking and mining shares.

After the rout in the banking sector following talk of problems at French bank 
Societe Generale, which was forced to put out a statement denying it was in 
trouble, there is a recovery of sorts so far.Barclays is 2p better at 165.7p 
whileLloyds Banking Group has been lifted 0.475p to 31.32p. Royal Bank of 
Scotland has risen 0.49p to 24.78p.

Overall the FTSE 100 is up 93.70 points at 5100.86, but the mood is still 
fragile as Eurozone doubts continue ahead of Italy's austerity budget and, 
closer to home, a statement from George Osborne on the UK economy. Later come 
US weekly jobless claims, with forecasts of an increase from 400,000 to 405,000.

And it is worth pointing out the leading index has not recovered all of 
Wednesday's falls. Indeed, the market rose initially then too, but later 
collapsed as rumours circulated about France being in danger of losing its 
Triple A credit rating - subsequently denied by the ratings agencies. David 
Jones at IG Index said:
 The UK stock market seems to be in "wait and see" mode after sharply positive 
open. I think it will be choppy until US open unless there are any more French 
dramas.

Among the miners - hard hit recently on worries about falling demand due to a 
slowdown in the global economy -Kazakhmys has climbed 32p to 950p, while 
Aquarius Platinum has added 16.6p to 233.5p after it reported a 40% rise in 
underlying profits, although there was a net loss of $10.4m after it took a 
$159m charge relating to the suspension of production at its Blue Ridge mine. 
Louise Collinge at Evolution Securities said: The impairment of Blue Ridge 
represents a fitting conclusion to what must have been two long years of 
battling with this mine. That aside, we believe that these results reflect the 
fact that Aquarius has had a solid year given the tough operating environment. 
Strategically, the transactions which the group has announced during the course 
of the year have increased the group's resources by 50%, which we view as very 
positive.

We reiterate our add recommendation and our 312p target price. We continue to 
believe that the platinum group metals sector is not out of the woods yet. 
However, for the long term investor, Aquarius is the right platinum company to 
hold.  