
US telecoms group AT&T has been the City's favourite to bid for Vodafone for a 
while now - ever since the UK group announced the sale of its stake in its US 
joint venture Verizon Wireless.

But now traders are hearing talk AT&T may have its eyes on another UK target. 
Cable & Wireless Communications closed up 1.77p or nearly 4% at 49p on 
speculation it could be in the sights of a number of bidders, AT&T among them. 
The company has been selling off unwanted parts of its disparate portfolio of 
assets to concentrate on its Caribbean and Central American businesses, and has 
raised some $1.4bn from disposals.

Overall, after four days of decline, the FTSE 100 started the week on a 
positive note, up 82.24 points at 6522.20. There is nervousness the US Federal 
Reserve will begin switching off the money taps at this week's meeting, given 
the continuing positive economic data and the recent agreement over the US 
budget. But investors are increasingly willing to bet the Fed will put off any 
move until next year. With some US merger activity lifting Wall Street, 
European shares shook off early lethargy to move sharply higher despite poor 
Chinese figures and a mixed picture in Europe. Michael Hewson, chief market 
analyst at CMC Markets, said:
 A much more positive start to the week in Europe today, after the declines of 
the past two weeks, despite some disappointing Chinese manufacturing PMI's and 
a worrying continued deterioration in French economic data that points to a 
return to recession for Europe's second biggest economy.

The main focus this week remains on Wednesday's Fed rate decision which is 
expected to see the Fed keep policy unchanged despite a continued improvement 
in US economic data as shown by a much better than expected print from November 
industrial production. A rise of 1.1% points to a continued improvement in the 
US economy, but concerns about low inflation, it is suggested could well stay 
the Fed's hand, along with concerns about low liquidity as we head into the 
Christmas break. 
Mining groups regained some ground, with Vedanta Resources rising 22p to 797p 
andAnglo American 24p better at 1293.5p.

Temporary power supplier Aggreko - which was under pressure on Friday - jumped 
129p to £16.45 after saying it expected its 2013 performance to be slightly 
ahead of expectations.

But RSA Insurance lost 2.4p to 90.10p, the biggest faller in the leading 
index. Sinceits profit warning on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/13/rsa-insurance-chief-quits-profit-warning>
 - the third in a row - and the subsequent departure of its chief executive, 
investors have started to worry about the insurer's credit rating. The insurer 
- which has been hit by severe problems at its Irish business - is expected to 
hold meetings to try and avoid a downgrade from A which could put further 
pressure on the business. Meanwhile analysts have been unveiling their own 
downgrades, with Canaccord Genuity cutting its target price from 100p to 85p 
with a sell rating.

Also heading lower was Aberdeen Asset Management, down 3p at 453.1p following 
a report that the market was worried about its purchase of Scottish Widows and 
the uncertainty of integrating the business. 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/cbd88bf6-633b-11e3-a87d-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2nd1bpj5I>

Among the mid-caps, UBM dropped 25p to 650p after the media and exhibitions 
group issued a disappointing outlook for next year.

In a trading update, the group said 2013 revenues were likely to be in line 
with expectations at around £800m. But in 2014 it warned that margins in its 
events business would fall to 30%, below forecasts, and also pointed to adverse 
exchange rate effects given that 85% of its revenues are generated in 
currencies other than the strengthening pound.

But Synergy Healthcare, a healthcare support services specialist, climbed 77p 
to £11.10 following news of six contract wins in the US. Canaccord Genuity said:
 Synergy has announced a number of contracts in the US totalling the addition 
of £230m to the order book, which now stands at £1.1bn. The 6 contracts 
announced (two hospital sterilisation contracts, two reusuable surgical 
solutions contracts and two applied sterilisation contracts) spread across the 
whole of the Synergy offering in the US. We expect the majority of the increase 
to the order book to come from a 15-year HSS service contract to service 20 
hospitals and ambulatory care centres. Given the increased visibility of 
revenues, we increase our target price to 979p [from 891p] and raise our 
recommendation to hold from sell.

But Analysts at Jefferies said:
 In our view, the share price reaction today seems exaggerated with continued 
pressure in the Dutch linen business and prospects of subdued growth on a group 
level also in 2015.  