
Following six days of decline, the UK market bounced back strongly on Thursday 
despite the continuing nuclear problems in Japan and further unrest in Libya 
and Bahrain.

Recently battered sectors such as miners and insurance companies were in 
demand as investors searched for bargains among the wreckage, buoyed by talk of 
possible G7 intervention to stabilise the currency markets. With a similarly 
positive mood on Wall Street - up around 150 points by the time London closed 
despite slightly worse than expected US inflation and industrial production 
figures - theFTSE 100 finished 97.88 points higher at 5696.11.

Base metals like copper, which had been hit by concerns that Japan's problems 
could hamper global economic growth, recovered some ground, benefitting the 
miners. SoAntofagasta rose 55p to £13.47 and Eurasian Natural Resources 
Corporation closed 39p better at 899p. Xstrata added 49p to £13.78 as analysts 
pointed to the possible benefits for its coal production operations from any 
move away from nuclear power.

Oil jumped more than $3 a barrel to nearly $114 on the continuing troubles in 
the middle east and Libya, liftingRoyal Dutch Shell B shares 61.5p to 2111.5p

Among the insurers, Aviva added 15.8p to 437p while Prudential, named by UBS 
as one of 20 stocks which had fallen too far in the wake of the Japanese 
earthquake, put on 16.5p to 690p. ButLegal and General lost 0.4p to 110.7p as 
its full year figures disappointed, despite the company saying it was likely to 
benefit from the retrenchment of the welfare state.

Elsewhere Kingfisher climbed 6.7p to 237.1p ahead of its results next week 
after German DIY group Hornbach, where it owns 21%, issued an upbeat trading 
statement. It said sales growth gained tempo from quarter to quarter, with 
consumers feeling positive about the outlook.

Vodafone rose 4.35p to 171.45p following a well received open day for analysts 
on Wednesday. Steve Malcolm at Evolution Securities said:
 We attended presentations from the German, Italian, UK and Dutch management 
teams. Having endured some lean times, UK and Dutch operations are in the midst 
of an impressive turnaround, while Italian and German management teams wrestle 
with the challenges of being an incumbent. The UK, especially, is taking 
advantage of the merger travails of "Everything Everywhere" and winning back 
market share. The Italian management team were impressive, but face a far 
tougher market backdrop, while German management's appraisal of its market 
opportunity was the least convincing, despite healthy market trends.

While we retain fundamental concerns over Vodafone's profitability in the long 
term, one could say the same of most companies in most industries in the short 
term. Relative to others, Vodafone should be relatively unaffected by supply 
chain problems (fewer handsets may even reduce churn), has few inflation 
worries and is a beneficiary of recent euro strength.

Among the mid-caps, Heritage Oil added 23.8p to 313.5p on reports it had 
rejected an informal 425p a share offer from an unnamed Abu Dhabi company. 
Insulation and roofing specialistSIG climbed 9.4p to 130.5p after a 3% rise in 
full year profits to £62.5m and news it would start paying a dividend again in 
2011.

But Aveva fell 61p to £15.18 on fears the group, which suppliers software to 
design nuclear power stations, could be hit by any delays or cancellations to 
nuclear programmes. However George O'Connor at Panmure Gordon said:
 We make two points: nuclear is less than 5% of Aveva revenue; and, secondly, 
in the aftermath of the Japanese disaster, technologies which make the process 
more transparent (like AvevaNet) will be of greater importance.

Finally investors in Cheerful Scout had little to be happy about. The 
Aim-listed multi-media group dropped 24% to 8.875p after it said full year 
results would be below expectations due to the cancellation of a 
telecommunications commission. 