
As Samsung finally launches its Galaxy S4 in competition with Apple, Cambridge 
basedArm - whose chip designs are used in the iPhone - shrugged off early 
worries about its future prospects.

Arm has been moving into the server market to boost growth, but there are 
concerns it may struggle to succeed at the same time as it faces growing 
competition in its key smartphone and tablet sector. Comments from US software 
group VMWare that Intel's hold on the server market could be hard to break were 
picked up by analysts, with Janardan Menon at Liberum Capital saying:
 At VMware's analyst day, the chief executive of the company stated that he 
was sceptical that chips outside of Intel and AMD's x86 architecture will find 
much uptake outside of niche use cases in the server market. One reason for 
Arm's share price strength has been the view that it will take market share 
from Intel in the server market which Intel currently dominates, but VMware's 
comments run contrary to this. Our view is that the size of the smartphone and 
tablet markets is significantly bigger than Arm's addressable market in servers 
and over 70% of Arms' royalties are from smartphones and tablets. Intel is 
beginning to take share here and the negative impact of any loss of share here 
will be significantly bigger than the impact of any gains in the server market. 
It is also worth keeping in mind that there was a lot of expectation in past 
years regarding Arm taking share from Intel in the Windows market for tablets 
and notebooks, but the launch of Windows RT on Arm has proved to be highly 
unsuccessful in the past five months. We believe Arm will see slowing revenues 
on the back of slowing sales of smartphones and losses of share to Intel. 
Arm shares reversed an early fall to end 2.5p higher at 922.5p.

Overall the FTSE 100 ended 47.91 points higher at 6529.41, a new five year 
high, helped by better than expected US weekly jobless claims, a day after 
positive American retail sales numbers. Angus Campbell, head of market analysis 
at Capital Spreads, said:
 Any retracement is met by a wall of buyers, as demonstrated once again and 
even though things look decidedly patchy for the UK from an economic 
standpoint, those globally exposed stocks are still well placed to generate 
good earnings for investors and pay them back with increasing dividend payments.

Another major factor that is putting investors' minds at rest is the eurozone. 
Today sees European leaders meet in Brussels for their two day EU summit and 
for once the pressure seems to have really eased. For now the single currency 
looks safe which means that equity markets will remain well supported.

The biggest rise in the leading index was Aggreko - which issued two profits 
warnings last year - which added 126p to £19.65. The company unveiled details 
of a deal to supply power to Electricidade de Mocambique in Mozambique and 
NamPower in Namibia. Analysts said the contract could be worth some $200m in 
revenues.

Vodafone rose 2.3p to 184.55p despite a sell note from Societe Generale with a 
100p price target. The bank saidVodafone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/vodafonegroup> could face a capital gains 
tax bill of up to £30bn if it sold its 45% stake in US joint venture Verizon 
Wireless. An alternative suggestion being bandied around the City is for 
Vodafone's US partner Verizon to buy the UK company outright. But SocGen said 
this could be wishful thinking:
 A merger may eliminate capital gains tax from the equation but Verizon's 
shareholders would ask what is in it for them. Indeed, they would be paying 
around £70bn for the rump (i.e. Vodafone excluding Verizon Wireless) and may 
find themselves unable to dispose it either to private equity (given its size) 
or to competitors (due to regulatory hurdles). 
These comments follow a blast from hedge fund Bronte Capital 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2013/mar/13/vodafone-verizon-hedge-fund-boss>
 which urged Vodafone not to sell its Verizon Wireless stake because of the tax 
position, and called for a takeover by Verizon.

Meanwhile Liberum analyst Lawrence Sugarman issued a buy note on Vodafone 
following Wednesday's announcement the company was partnering Orange to roll 
out fibre option across 50 cities in Spain:
 Vodafone has been clear that it needs to be able to offer a converged service 
to compete with the incumbents but it has stressed that it has options as to 
how it will go about achieving this strategy and that the approach is likely to 
vary from market to market. More bearish commentators have been concerned that 
Vodafone has been set to embark on a significant acquisition splurge that was 
set to destroy value. We have argued that this was unlikely but that selective 
acquisitions were quite possible. We had believed that Spain was a market where 
M&A was relatively likely. It seems that Vodafone has concluded that an organic 
approach makes more sense and we believe that this will be positive for 
investor sentiment. Developments around the Verizon Wireless stake are likely 
to continue to dominate sentiment and on this subject we remain optimistic that 
there will be change.

The day's speculative bid rumour surrounded Marks & Spencer, up 12.6p to 
371.6p on heavy volumes on talk it could be in the sights of private equity 
with a 500p a share price mentioned.

Cruise operator Carnival sank 55p to £24.30 after problems with another of its 
ships. Carnival Dream was stuck in port at St Maarten in the Caribbean with 
equipment trouble. This comes a month after theCarnival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/carnival> Triumph was crippled by fire in 
the Gulf of Mexico, with raw sewage flowing into passenger cabins. Last year 
its Costa Concordia ran aground off the coast of Italy with 32 people killed.

Miners were also a drag on the market as metal prices slipped on worries about 
Chinese demand.Rio Tinto lost 66p to £33.11 while Fresnillo fell 27p to £14.57.

Morrisons added 4.6p to 276.2p after it said it would launch an online food 
offering by next January, as profits fell by £34m to £901m for the year, the 
first decline for six years. It said it was in talks with online grocerOcado, 
up 32.6p at 170p, about some form of partnership.Ocado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ocado> itself reported a 14.4% rise in 
sales in the 12 weeks to the end of February.

Home Retail was also ringing up some impressive gains after a better than 
expected trading update and revived talk of possible private equity interest.

The Homebase and Argos owner raised its annual profit forecast for the second 
time this year, and now expects the figure to be £90m. In January it expected 
£83m, itself a £10m increase on previous predictions.

Argos was the star performer, with like for like sales up 5.2% in the eight 
weeks to the start of March. Homebase sales fell 1.5% but this was better than 
City expectations of a 2.8% decline. For the year underlying sales at Argos 
climbed 2.1% while Homebase dropped 4.9%.

Its shares finished 16p higher at 148.9p.

Upmarket estate agency Savills climbed 39.5p to 595p after it beat profit 
expectations thanks to continuing overseas demand for London home and office 
properties and a strong performance in Asia.

Revenues rose 12% to £806.4m and profits jumped 21% to £60.8m, with a strong 
end to the year in the final quarter. In Asia, its commercial business 
benefited from buyer demand after governments attempted to cool the housing 
market. Chairman Peter Smith said the company had started 2013 more strongly 
than it did last year.

Centamin was steady at 53.5p after the Egyptian gold miner forecast production 
of 320,000 ounces for 2013 from its Sukari project, up 22% on the previous 
year. But despite the increase, this was lower than the 367,000 originally 
expected. The company ran into political problems last year leading to delays 
at Sukari but resumed gold exports after they were halted by the authorities.

Finally Bullabulling Gold, the owner of a project in Western Australia, fell 
nearly 3% to 4.125p after it announced it was issuing 151m new shares at 3.5p 
each to raise around £5m. The cash will be used to complete a definitive 
feasibility study on the project to identify cost savings and ways of 
increasing gold production. Analyst Yuen Low at Shore Capital said:
 In our view, the results from the Pre-Feasibility Study released in early 
February 2013 were not pretty. We do not currently envisage any improvement 
initiatives making a material change for the better – we believe the optimised 
project is still likely to be relatively high in capital and operating 
expenditure.  