
Leading shares are ending the week on a strong note, with investors buoyed by 
continuing hopes that the US Federal Reserve will refrain from raising interest 
rates this year.

The FTSE 100 is up 39.15 points at 6377.82, but is still on course for a 
slight loss over the whole weak (currently down 0.6%). Weak US consumer price 
figures added to the feeling there would not be a rate rise this year, while a 
fall in jobless claims also suggested the country’s economy was not slowing 
down too dramatically.

Industrial production and consumer confidence figures later could give more 
clues about how the US economy is progressing.

But Primark owner Associated British Foods is missing out on the rally, down 
20p at £32.76 as Societe General reduced its recommendation from buy to hold on 
valuation grounds and some slight concerns about its US expansion. Analyst 
Warren Ackerman said:

Yesterday, ABF’s chief financial officer John Bason, and head of Primark Paul 
Marchant, hosted an analyst trip to Madrid, ahead of the opening of Primark’s 
flagship store in Spain. Primark has been in Spain for a decade (its first 
European location) yet it is only now that it has opened in a prestigious high 
street location in Spain, illustrating just how much runway Primark still has 
in Continental Europe. Located on Gran Via - the Oxford Street of Madrid – it 
is situated next door to H&M. At 132,000sq ft, it is the second largest store 
in the entire Primark estate and is the 41st in Spain and 6th in Madrid. 
Primark has been a huge success story in Spain with a 9% volume share (more 
than 300 basis points more than #2 player) in a very fragmented market. 
Cannibalisation could be a short term issue in Spain (as it has been recently 
in Germany and Holland) but it’s not something we consider to be a fundamental 
concern.

We are downgrading on valuation as it has hit our £33 target price. ABF trades 
on 33 times 2016 PE which implies around 40 times for Primark and 20 times 
EBITDA implied in our sum of the parts. We continue to think Primark will 
compound with like for like growth averaging 2-3% per annum and double digit 
space growth, but this is now fairly reflected in valuation. We also confess to 
being a little nervous about its US debut. Inevitably there will be many 
lessons to learn as the Primark brand is not known in the US and it will take 
time to gain traction. We see the potential in North East US and Primark’s 
‘pull model’ means its learns quickly, but we think the roll-out programme 
beyond its initial 8 US locations is likely to be slow and steady. Early 
comments that it has been a little surprised by customer shopping patterns 
(Sundays busier than Saturdays) and the uniqueness of every location suggests 
it’s very much in learning mode. This isn’t in anyway a surprise, but does 
suggest there could be some ‘growing pains’ in the US. ABF will update on its 
debut in the US at its 2015 results in November.

In terms of LFL growth, at its last trading statement it was confirmed that 
2015 like for like will be 1% but with a strong final quarter up 2-3%. Comps 
are undemanding in the first quarter of 2016 so we would expect a further 
acceleration in like for like growth in the short term but currency remains a 
very significant headwind across the business and the key reason that 2016 is 
likely to see little earnings per share growth. Belatedly marking to market for 
foreign exchange, we downgrade 2016 earnings per share estimates by 4% which 
means waiting to 2017 until we see a meaningful earnings bounce-back, assuming 
foreign exchange headwinds don’t get in the way again. We continue to like the 
fundamental story but 33 times PE for 2017 earnings per share recovery and some 
risk in Primark US means that the risk-reward is more balanced from here (in 
our view).

Mining shares are among the gainers with Glencore up 3.5p at 121.25p and Anglo 
American adding 3.5p to 680.5p. Rio Tinto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/rio-tinto> has risen 11p to £25.24 as a 
strong performance in iron ore lifted its third quarter results. Bernstein 
analysts said:

 * Rio unsurprisingly reported record high levels of iron ore shipments in the 
third quarter. Rio’s competitive position remains unbeaten in iron ore due to 
the world-class quality of its assets, especially in the current price 
environment. 
 * 

 * The picture looks quite different in copper. Production fell as much as 24% 
year on year in the third quarter despite the ramp up at Oyu Tolgoi. Moreover, 
Rio has revised downwards its production guidance for this year to 510kt, from 
a range of 500-535kt previously. We think that the current copper prices should 
encourage all producers, even the low-cost miners, to curtail the highest-cost 
portion of their production. 
 * 

 * Overall, operational results were broadly in line with our expectations. We 
reiterate our outperform rating on the stock. 
 * 

But with gold and silver edging back as investors turn away from supposedly 
safer assets again, Mexican precious metals minerFresnillo has fallen 6p to 
754.7p andRandgold Resources is down 6p at £44.88.

Among the mid-caps Icap <https://www.theguardian.com/business/icap> is down 3% 
to 448p as Barclays downgraded the inter-dealer broker from buy to equal 
weight. According to Thomson Reuters, no analyst covering the stock now has a 
buy rating. Barclays said:

The Icap share was a strong outperformer between January and May but since 
then has come off and is now only up 1% year to date (versus FTSE Allshare down 
3%). Our analysis of Icap’s electronic volumes shows weakening trends in recent 
months contributing to this. Volume comparisons get tougher from September 2015 
onwards and the European Investment banks are continuing to shrink their FICC 
[Fixed Income, Currencies and Commodities] divisions. With Icap management 
suggesting its cost response is likely to be limited to support function 
rationalisation and slowly lowering comp. ratios, we believe the earnings per 
share recovery story is stalling. We cut our rating to equal weight and target 
price to 500p [from 600p], reflecting lower earnings per share estimates and 
raised discount rate to 10.5%.
 