
A week dominated by US debt problems and, latterly, the Royal Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail> flotation, ended in 
optimistic fashion.

The FTSE 100 finished at a two week high of 6487.19 on Friday, up 56.70 points 
on the day and 34 points on the week. There were some bumps along the way, 
notably the continuing brinkmanship in America between Republicans and 
Democrats over the US budget deficit and the looming debt ceiling deadline of 
17 October, when the country will be unable to pay its bills. The lack of any 
resolution on the budget impasse saw the US government shut down for the second 
week.

A downgrade of the global economy from 3.2% to 2.9% by the International 
Monetary Fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/oct/08/imf-cuts-global-economic-growth-forecasts-weo>
 as it met in Washington also unsettled investors. But news that President 
Obama had nominated the dovish Janet Yellen to replace Federal Reserve chairman 
Ben Bernanke was taken positively, prompting hopes that the central bank's 
measures to support the economy would continue smoothly under the new regime.

By the end of the week there were even signs of progress in the US political 
deadlock, with talk of a possible six week extension to the debt ceiling 
deadline. But with the government still shut down, companies trading in the US 
began to feel the pinch, particularly in the defence sector.

Chemring warned on Friday its full year profits would be £8m lower than 
expected, partly due to the US problems. It said:

The full impact of the US government shutdown is not yet known but it will 
impact the October order intake and deliveries to the US Department of Defense 
in the remaining few weeks of the financial year.

On top of that the company has been hit by production and quality problems at 
its decoy making plant in Kilgore, Tennessee, and adverse movements in the 
dollar exchange rate. Chris Dyett at Investec said:

Chemring's update is a disappointment, but more widely reflects the extremely 
difficult conditions in the US market, which are unlikely to be fully resolved 
any time soon, and the shorter cycle structure of the group. We downgrade 2013 
and 2014 materially and reduce our sector PE-based price target to 260p (from 
340p). With share price weakness expected today, we move to hold (from add).

Chemring shares lost 64.4p or 23% to 220p, making it the biggest faller in the 
FTSE 250 index.

Fellow defence business BAE Systems - which said on Thursday that 1,200 of its 
US staff had been told not to come into work because of the shutdown - was also 
under pressure, down 14.4p at 436.3p. Aerospace and defence groupMeggitt lost 
5p to 541p.

Closer to home, the building sector was boosted by the launch of the next 
stage of the governments Help to Buy scheme, as well as positive notes from 
Goldman Sachs and Deutsche Bank.

Persimmon added 2p to £11.87 on Friday but over the week the housebuilder put 
on 110p.Barratt Developments was 5.2p better at 331.8p on Friday, while Taylor 
Wimpey rose 1.9p to 109p.

Builders merchant Travis Perkins was caught up in the boom, up 53p to £16.78 
after analysts at Liberum Capital raised their target price from £18.90 to £19.

Among retailers Marks & Spencer came under pressure during the week as Credit 
Suisse, Bernstein and Deutsche Bank all issued downbeat notes ahead of its 
first half results on 5 November. The analysts - at Credit Suisse in particular 
- were concerned Marks' clothing sales were slower than expected in the second 
quarter, with the latest autumn and winter range unlikely to do much to 
transform its fortunes. Not everyone was negative, with Nomura saying:

We are bullish on UK retail, with M&S like for like sales highly correlated to 
consumer confidence, which has been rising sharply in recent months. We also 
believe M&S is substantially under-earning in margin terms with GM gross 
margins 51% vs. 57–60% for peers. The current strategy to improve product 
availability and reduce markdown issues in our opinion will significantly 
narrow [the gap between Marks' clothing margins and those of its rivals).

Marks' shares added 4.7p to 477.7p but lost 3% on the week.

Elsewhere Ocado fell 12p to 434.9p as profit takers moved in after it hit an 
all time high of 469p on Tuesday. The impetus was a note from Goldman Sachs, 
one of the banks involved in the online grocer's flotation, which said the 
shares could reach 545p in two years, in the wake of its tie-up withMorrisons, 
up 0.6p at 275.6p.

Ladbrokes, which came under pressure recently after yet another profit 
warning, added 5.7p to 190.7p on Friday on talk that a near 3% stake had 
changed hands, prompting renewed bid speculation.

Broker recommendations had an effect. Standard Life added 9.1p to 355.5p after 
an upbeat note from JP Morgan Cazenove, but temporary power supply groupAggreko 
dropped 13p to £14.77 after Canaccord Genuity advised clients to sell.

Lloyds Banking Group ended 1.1p higher at 76.02p after yesterday's news it was 
selling its Australian operations to Westpac for more than £850m. Ian Gordon at 
Investec said:

Australia was probably the worse example of "adverse asset selection" in the 
entire ill-fated HBOS international debacle, generating cumulative losses of 
over £3bn despite Australia's generally resilient performance. We welcome 
today's exit.

Finally, yesterday really belonged to the Royal Mail. Its shares made a 
stunning debut as conditional trading began, soaring from the 330p offer price 
to close at 455p with 229m shares traded.
 