
Leading shares hit their highest level for nearly seven months on a 
combination of optimism about Greece, rising oil prices and China acting to 
prevent a hard landing for its economy.

With no influence from Wall Street, closed for the Presidents Day holiday, the 
FTSE 100 finished 40.18 points higher at 5945.25, its highest level since 8 
July last year.

As Iran announced it had stopped selling oil to British and French companies, 
the price of Brent crude rose nearly 0.5% to just over $120 a barrel and helped 
pushBP 10.3p higher to 499.25p.

The company's shares were also supported by news that Mitsui, which held a 10% 
stake in the disastrous Macondo well in the Gulf of Mexico, had reached a 
settlement with US authorities. This prompted hopes thatBP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> might come to a deal before a court 
case which is due to start on 27 February. Andrew Whittock at Liberum Capital 
said:
 Mitsui subsidiary Moex is to pay just $45m in civil penalties, $25m to 5 Gulf 
of Mexico states and $20m for land preservation projects. The settlement does 
not affect claims against other companies involved in the disaster but looks 
very modest in terms of the potential fines. Moex was a passive investor in the 
Macondo well and had no operational role. So this may not herald similarly 
modest settlements with BP and others. The non-jury trial is scheduled to 
commence in New Orleans on 27 February.

BP has made provision for $3.5bn clean water act fines; a finding of gross 
negligence could increase that to almost $20bn. BP has made very clear that it 
will settle before the trial if the terms are reasonable. We believe almost any 
settlement would be good news for the shares as it should enable BP to return 
to normal business operations in North America including the development of its 
significant Gulf of Mexico discoveries. 
Mining shares were supported by the rise in crude and news that China's 
central bank had cut its reserve requirements ratio over the weekend, in an 
attempt to maintain economic growth while preventing overheating.BHP Billiton 
closed 54.5p better at 2077.5p whileVedanta Resources rose 46p to £13.58.

Banks were better on hopes of a resolution - finally - to the Greek crisis as 
EU finance ministers met in Brussels to consider approving the latest €130bn 
bailout package.

Ahead of their results later in the week Royal Bank of Scotland added 0.88p to 
28.48p andLloyds Banking Group closed 0.89p higher at 36.345p.

Aviva added 12.6p to 382.6p as the insurer was given an overweight rating by 
analysts at JP Morgan Cazenove.

But utilities were unwanted as investors moved away from safe havens. Severn 
Trent fell 11p to £15.40 and United Utilities 4p to 604.5p.

Satellite operator Inmarsat slipped 5.5p to 477.1p after its troubled US 
partner LightSquared failed to make a due payment.

LightSquared is currently trying to build a US mobile broadband service using 
Inmarsat's spectrum, and should have made a $56.25m milestone payment, but this 
has not been received. SoInmarsat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/immarsat> has issued a notice of default, 
giving LightSquared 60 days to come up with the cash or face measures such as 
terminating the agreement. The US Federal Communications Commission recently 
said it planned to revoke permission for LightSquared's proposed network after 
tests showed it could interfere with GPS services used by airlines and the 
military.

CSR, the chipmaker whose customers include Apple, Samsung and Sony, reported a 
fourth quarter loss, but the company softened the blow by raising its dividend 
and announcing a $50m share buyback. So its shares closed 47.3p higher at 275p.

Elsewhere JJB Sports jumped 15% to 11.5p after an improving sales picture. The 
sportswear retailer said like-for-like sales in the second half fell by 7.6% 
but this was an improvement on the 17.9% decline seen in the first six months. 
Chief executive Keith Jones said:
 Weaker UK employment numbers and the ongoing credit squeeze on consumers 
create a tough environment. However, we are continuing to implement our 
turnaround aware of the importance of the key trading opportunities offered by 
the European football championships and London Olympics. 
Philip Dorgan at Panmure Gordon said:
 This is a solid performance, in the circumstances, given the fact that most 
clothing retailers have had a tough start to the calendar year. JJB is 
performing well on a cash profit basis and second half sales growth has been 
much better than first half's. This year, it has the benefit of two major 
tournaments and still has considerable self help opportunities, as well as 
continuing supplier support. We are not changing our forecasts on this 
statement and we are maintaining our hold recommendation. However, for the 
first time for quite some time, it is possible that there could be some upside 
to our forecasts. 
But Freddie George at Seymour Pierce kept his sell rating on JJB:
 For the time being, we are retaining our forecast of a 2012 pre-tax loss of 
£60m and our sell recommendation. We are, however, becoming more confident on 
the outlook. At present, we do not expect the company to break-even until 2014. 
We still need convincing though that the company has a clear strategy to turn 
around the business. The company needs to find a niche and a format, which is 
differentiated from its competitors, to take advantage of the forthcoming 
sporting events. In the meantime, competition is intensifying, the cash 
position is a concern and the economic outlook does not look any better for the 
company's core customers. 
Aveva fell 19p to £16.80 after UBS cut its rating on the IT systems group from 
neutral to sell. The bank said:
 Aveva enjoys the highest returns on capital of our coverage list and has an 
inherently cash-generative business model, with two thirds of revenues coming 
from recurring sources. Nonetheless, we think the business' fundamentals are 
more than adequately discounted. We raise our 2013 estimates by 3% given the 
better economic data of late together with a slightly more benign currency 
environment than previously modelled, and we are comfortable sitting 6% ahead 
of consensus. However, we move to a sell rating with a view that 2012 is 
unlikely to provide enough upside surprises to sustain momentum. 
But Misys rose 20.5p to 330.1p after the IT group revealed a takeover approach 
from US firm Vista Equity Partners. Vista said it was considering a possible 
cash offer, which would scupper the proposed all share merger betweenMisys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/misys> and Swiss rival Temenos.

Still with possible takeovers, Cove Energy climbed 7.75p to 156.75p on hopes 
of an offer north of 200p a share. MeanwhileMax Petroleum rose 3.25p to 14.25p 
on bid speculation, although investors are also anticipating drilling results 
from its deep well in Kazakhstan, expected in April.
 