
Leading shares moved higher on more good economic data from China and hopes of 
a resolution to the Syrian dispute.

But GlaxoSmithKline missed out on the gains, falling 41.5p to 1598.5p on the 
prospective arrival of generic copies of its lung treatment Advair in the US, 
after draft guidance from regulators set out requirements for competitors.

Savvas Neophytou at Panmure Gordon said Glaxo's prospects were still dependent 
on Advair, which accounted for around 18% of revenues and 25% of profits. He 
said:
 Following the investigation on selling practices in China and the failed 
trial on cancer candidate MAGE-A3 last week, the group's risk profile is 
increased with news overnight that the FDA had published draft guidance for the 
development of substitutable generic copies of combination inhaled drugs. This 
may result in increased competition to Glaxo's biggest selling product Advair. 
In recent years, the risk of a directly substitutable generic in the US had 
subsided, with a number of draft recommendations withdrawn. To boot, GSK's 
management has been more confident in dismissing the risk as relatively low 
probability.

Clearly generics will have to still undertake some sort of clinical trial (the 
length of which is yet to be determined) and that is onerous in the case of 
many generic manufacturers. Thus, in a worst case scenario, more competitors 
may enter the market but this is unlikely to become an 80%-90% discount generic 
market which is often the case when multiple generics are launched in 
pharmaceutical markets.

He kept his buy recommendation and £18.50 target:
 Although not the cheapest, the company has been through the majority of its 
patent expiries, big liability settlements and boasts a strong balance sheet 
and very little M&A risk. With shareholder returns remaining strong, we remain 
buyers.

Reckitt Benckiser rose 81p to £44.45 despite a sell note from Liberum on 
worries about competition for its suboxone heroin substitute. Liberum said:
 Orexo's Zubsolv tablets, competition for Reckitt's Suboxone film, will start 
retailing on September 16 with list prices as much as 25% below the price of 
Suboxone. We think consensus is wrong to assume no impact on Suboxone film 
earnings by 2014. 
Overall the FTSE 100 finished 53.25 points higher at 6583.99, a near four week 
high, helped by Chinese industrial production hitting a 17 month high in August 
and signs of a possible compromise to defuse the prospect of an imminent US 
attack on Syria. The other major concern troubling the market - when the US 
Federal Reserve might end its bond buying programme - could become clearer 
after next week's Fed meeting.

Airlines benefited from the relaxation of Syrian tensions, as the oil price 
dipped. British Airways ownerInternational Airlines Group climbed 14.3p to 
319.8p whileeasyJet jumped 81p to £13.58.

A fall in precious metal prices - a traditional haven in times of worry - saw 
Randgold Resources lose 225p to £46.89 and Mexican miner Fresnillo fall 44p to 
£12.25.

But Glencore Xstrata added 7.45p to 328o.75p after revealing higher than 
expected cost savings from its recent merger.

Glencore <https://www.theguardian.com/business/glencore> finally completed its 
$46bn takeover of Xstrata four months ago and promised last year the deal would 
provide $500m of synergies, partly through selling Xstrata's minerals and 
metals through Glencore's marketing outlets. In a presentation to the City, the 
company said the savings would be quadrupled to $2bn. Not only will it cut 
costs, it will shelve risky projects and reduce capital expenditure.

Elsewhere Whitbread dropped 78p to £31.38 after investors took profits 
following signs of a slowdown at its Costa Coffee chain.

BG continued to slide after Monday's production warning which accompanied a 
City presentation. Its shares fell another 12p to £12.05, and Neill Morton at 
Investec said:
 This interesting seminar essentially expanded on themes set out in BG's 
recent strategy presentation in May. As such, there was little to change our 
earnings forecasts. Unfortunately, the 'new news' on the day was the production 
warning for 2014 (Egypt, Norway, US) with possible knock-on effects into 2015. 
We lower our earnings forecasts by around 4% and expect BG's latest warning to 
cast a cloud over near-term share price performance.

Among the mid-caps fund management group Ashmore was 19.3p better at 382.2p 
after full year profits rose 6% to a better than expected £257.6m. Chip designer
Imagination Technologies rose 14.9p to 302p ahead of the launch of the new 
Apple iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/sep/10/iphone-5s-and-iphone-5c-launch-ios-7-live-mbm>
while larger rivalArm added 23.5p to 941p.
 