
As markets struggled for direction in the wake of the US government shutdown, 
easyJet was flying high.

The budget airline added 40p or 3% to £13.18, making it the biggest riser in 
the leading index, as analysts issued upbeat statements ahead of a third 
quarter trading update on Thursday. Gert Zonneveld at Panmure Gordon said:
 Revenue prospects remain excellent, predominantly driven by moderate capacity 
growth, active route management and allocated seating revenues. Fuel is largely 
hedged for this year and next, and excluding regulated airport cost increases, 
unit costs should remain fairly stable. We retain our buy recommendation and 
£15 target price.

The potential for significant and sustained profit growth remains excellent, 
with the brand becoming stronger and more mainstream across Europe. 
Furthermore, on-going capacity discipline might suggest that the risk profile 
of easyJet has improved.

Citigroup was also positive:
 We expect easyJet to say that pretax profit for the year ending September 
2013 will be at the upper end of its previous guidance (given in late July) of 
£450m-£480m. Our expectation is £474m (11.2% margin) and consensus is £471m 
(11.2% margin, source: Reuters). Expected pretax profit could therefore be 
around 50% higher than £317m (8.2% margin) reported for 2012.

easyJet used its pre-close statement in 2011 to announce a special dividend 
(around 35p a share). A repeat is possible this year given its growing net cash 
position but we do not expect one. Our ordinary dividend per share expectation 
for 2013 is 36p versus 32p for 2013.

We maintain our buy rating and target price of £16.00. The share price has 
fallen by around 10% from its August high but is up 10% from Ryanair's warning. 
Next year's estimated PE of 12 to 13.5 times is not that demanding.


Overall the FTSE 100 finished 2.21 points lower at 6460.01, with investors 
relatively calm about the US budget impasse. The index came off its worst 
levels after news from Italy suggesting opposition parties would back the 
government in Wednesday's scheduled vote of confidence, including members of 
Silvio Berlusconi's centre right party. Berlusconi prompted the current 
uncertainty by resigning from the coalition, but his rebellion now faces its 
own rebellion.

Gold and silver fell sharply, sending precious metal miners lower. Fresnillo 
fell 48.5p to 924.5p whileRandgold Resources lost 113p to £43.38.

Unilever lost 82p to £23.58 after Monday's late warning of an emerging market 
slowdown. It said third quarter underlying sales growth would be 3% to 3.5%, 
compared to a 5% rise in the previous quarter and expectations of around 4.5%. 
Pablo Zuanic at Liberum Capital said;
 We do not plan to downgrade the buy stance in Unilever as we still think the 
company offers compelling value as it continues to be valued as a European food 
stock while its emerging market-heavy home and personal care business (nothing 
wrong with the medium term, no) is undervalued versus comparisons.

But Oriel Securities moved from hold to sell, saying:
 The value risk from Unilever's growth dependence on emerging markets (57% of 
its sales) over mature markets is implicit in this warning. Our preference 
remains for stocks that grow in mature markets too.

Signs of a slowdown in developing markets also hit Aggreko, down 63p to 
£15.41, andSABMiller, 88.5p lower at £30.55. The brewing group was also hit by 
reports of a strike at its South African subsidiary, although Numis kept its 
buy recommendation:
 Last night's profit warning from Unilever serves to underscore the slowdown 
in emerging markets consumer demand and also the negative impact of currency 
translation for current year earnings. SABMiller generates around 75% of its 
earnings before interest and tax in emerging markets and will be impacted by 
weakness in currencies including, for SAB, movements in the rand and Australian 
dollar against the US dollar.

We believe the fundamental medium term attractions of the business are 
unchanged and would consider any material weakness on the back of the Unilever 
warning to be a buying opportunity. 
Among the risers are building materials group Wolseley, up 99p to £32.96 after 
an 11% rise in full year profits and a plan to return £300m to shareholders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/oct/01/wolseley-profits-soar-us-growth>
.

Experian added 10p to £11.87 following news of the acquisition of US web fraud 
detection group 41st Parameter for $324m. There were some concerns about the 
price paid for a business losing up to $4m and Jefferies said:
 EBITA needs to increase from a $3m-$4m loss to a $30m profit to create value 
for shareholders. Limited information has been provided about 41st Parameter's 
cost structure but, given the nature of its business, gross margins are likely 
to be high. Assuming 80% gross margins and strong discipline [on selling, 
general and administrative expenses], turnover will need to treble to $75m-$80m 
in order to cover the transaction's cost of capital. Rolling out services to 
all of Experian's top 25 accounts would achieve this.

Vodafone edged up 2p to 218p as analysts at HSBC punted the mobile phone group 
as a possible takeover target, in the wake of the sale of its US joint venture 
to Verizon.

Not for the first time, the supposed predator was US giant AT&T, which is 
known to be acquisitive but has few opportunities for expansion in its home 
market. Even ifVodafone <https://www.theguardian.com/business/vodafonegroup> 
remained independent, HSBC said the company would be well place for a 
turnaround in Europe. The bank kept its overweight rating but raised its price 
target from 230p to 255p.

Lower down the market Iomart lost 14.25p to 276p as three directors of the 
cloud computing group raised nearly £12m between them by selling shares at 275p 
each. The bulk of the proceeds - £10m - went to chief executive Angus MacSween. 
The company also issued an in-line trading update and the £23m cash and share 
acquisition of Leeds based cloud and disaster recovery specialist Backup 
Technology.

Finally Blur Group, which operates an online marketplace for companies to buy 
and sell services from advertising to legal help, jumped 16.5p to 440p, as it 
announced a new non-executive director in the form of Microgen chief executive 
David Sherriff.

Analysts at house broker N+1 Singer said:
 Blur continues to build and strengthen its operational and management 
structure to support its strong growth, ensuring it remains well positioned to 
build on its positive momentum and first mover advantage. We expect the group 
to announce its third quarter 2013 metrics on 8 October and expect this to 
confirm continuing strong trajectory.  