
Energy shares weighed down a market already troubled by the Greek situation 
and the prospect of a US rate rise in the middle of this year.

The slump in the crude price is hitting the spending plans of major oil 
companies, withRoyal Dutch Shell the latest to unveil cutbacks. The company’s B 
shares slid 110p to £21.38 after it unveiled a $15bn cut in investment over the 
next three years. RivalBP lost 8.1p to 424.85p and BG dropped 16.9p to 880.9p.

Soco International, the mid-cap producer focused on Vietnam and Africa, also 
announced a 60% cut in its investment budget this year, leaving its shares 15p 
lower at 265p.

Overall the FTSE 100 finished down 15.34 points at 6810.60.

Investors were nervous about the outlook for Greece’s finances if the new 
government fails to reach a compromise with its European creditors, while 
Wednesday’s statement from the US Federal Reserve was positive enough about the 
country’s economy to raise the prospect of an earlier than expected increase in 
borrowing costs. The US market was mixed, rising almost 50 points by the time 
London closed after better than expected weekly jobless claims but weak home 
sales figures.

But easyJet flew 109p higher to £18.76 after Barclays’ analysts raised their 
recommendation from equalweight to overweight and their price target from 
£18.50 to £21.50,

Sky’s move into mobile phones with a deal with O2 failed to lift its shares, 
which slipped 4p to 934p. Analysts believe the tie-up could seeVodafone, up 
0.4p at 237.65p, look for its own link up , perhaps with Virgin Media-owner 
Liberty.


Meanwhile India’s government said it would not appeal a ruling in Vodafone’s 
favour over a tax dispute.

GKN edged up 0.4p to 369.5p a positive response from analysts to its Driveline 
business in Birmingham. Andy Chambers at Cantor Fitzgerald said:


A trip to GKN’s UK Driveline facility confirmed the growth that has been seen 
in UK automotive production in recent years. Sales in the current year should 
have doubled from the lows of 2009, largely driven by continuing growth of 
major UK car manufacturers, notably Jaguar Land Rover which now accounts for 
around 58% of sales and Nissan (around 23% of sales). Weaker sterling and a 
lower fuel price should help to stimulate both domestic and export demand for 
manufacturers, although foreign exchange is less favourable in Europe and a few 
end markets such as Russia are forecast to weaken. Overall Birmingham is 
expecting around 6% growth in top-line this year for its range of CVJ side 
shafts and prop shafts. As less than 10% of total divisional sales this is just 
one of the global growth stories with NAFTA and China expected to continue to 
provide the ongoing impetus to global car production as well this year, withGKN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gkn> Driveline expected to continue to 
outperform due to sales mix and already embedded share increases.

Despite the recent rally the shares are trading on only 12 times 2016 
consensus earnings per share. Given continued growth in Automotive and a likely 
increase in Aerospace profits, backed by more favourable foreign exchange, we 
feel 2015 could see a more positive trend for forecasts. We believe GKN should 
trade on a 2016 multiple of 12.8 times. We maintain our buy recommendation and 
target price of 410p.

Liberum also issued a buy note:


[Wednesday’s] site visit to GKN’s Driveline plant in Birmingham confirmed 
positive UK auto momentum, highlighted a culture of continuous operational 
improvement and re-affirmed GKN’s dominant standing with global auto original 
equipment manufacturers.

Diageo <https://www.theguardian.com/business/diageo> added 60.5p to 2022.5p 
despite the drinks giant reporting slightly lower than expected half year sales 
of £5.9bn, compared to forecasts of £6bn, and a profit rise of just 1%. Its 
figures were hit by foreign exchange movements, and discounts on vodka sales in 
the US, where the spirit is falling out of favour. Analysts at Charles Stanley 
said:


Diageo has released a weak set of interim results, which were towards the 
lower end of market expectations. Reported results were heavily impacted by a 
£268m hit from the weakness of key emerging market currencies against sterling. 
The underlying performance at constant currencies was resilient, with a solid 
performance in developed markets and mixed conditions in emerging markets. 
Outlook comments were cautiously optimistic, with financial performance 
expected to improve in the second half of the year. We anticipate a small 
downgrade to our full year earnings per share estimate, but the recommendation 
is maintained at Accumulate.

Canaccord Genuity’s analyst Eddy Hargreaves said:


We expect 2015 earnings per share consensus, which has already dropped 18% 
since this time last year, to fall further today reflecting the heavier foreign 
exchange impact.

Pubs group Mitchells & Butlers ended 1.5p higher at 423.5p after saying sales 
for the 17 weeks to 24 January were up 1.7%, a slowdown on the 2.4% growth in 
the first eight weeks of the period. Food sales jumped 2.8% helped by good 
festive sales, with more than 200,000 meals sold on Christmas Day. But margins 
were stretched as it cut prices to compete with rivals, and integrated the 2014 
acquisition of Orchid pubs.

Mark Brumby at Langton Capital said:

This is perhaps a so-so trading update. Growth is better than it was last full 
year – against reasonably tough comps – but growth over the whole 17 weeks 
under review is slower than it had been in the first 8 weeks and, as Christmas 
was strong, this implies that the rest of December and January to date have not 
been good.

M&B suggests that comparisons will remain tough (there wasn’t much of a winter 
last year) and says that margins will be down. This is in line with our 
understanding of what is going on regarding discounting (check 
vouchercodes.co.uk) but may be perhaps a little disappointing overall.

There is unlikely to be much upward pressure on forecasts as a result of 
today’s update.

Whilst acknowledging the latent strength of M&B’s business and accepting that 
its shares are now cheap, we do not see M&B as a share that you must have and 
we would still be tempted to look for value elsewhere.

But Oriel said: 


While the shares have shown some recent recovery from depressed levels, the 
rating is undemanding. The group should generate strong earnings growth, partly 
as the Orchid transaction becomes increasingly earnings accretive. Accordingly 
the shares have good medium term upside.

Online grocer Ocado <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ocado> added 2p to 
416p as it unveiled plans for a fourth distribution centre, in Erith in south 
east London. Although planning consent had not been received yet, it expected 
the centre to begin operations in 2017. Funding of £98.8m for the project will 
come from real estate investment trust Tritax Big Box.


Ocado has two warehouses open, with a third due to come on stream at the end 
of this year.


FInally, online fashion retailer Asos lost 112p to £25.13 after chief 
executive Nick Robertson sold around £20m worth of shares, reportedly for tax 
purposes.

 