
Fund manager Mark Coombs has become one of the richest men in the City after 
cashing in £170m-worth of shares in hisAshmore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ashmoregroup> asset management business, 
still leaving him with shares valued at £600m.

Mr Coombs and the 50 or so employees of the emerging markets specialist sold a 
quarter of their holding when it floated yesterday. They have promised to keep 
their remaining stakes for three years.

Jon Moulton, head of private equity firm Alchemy, had backed the company and 
sold shares worth about £20m.

Ashmore - which Mr Coombs, 46, has run since he bought it from Australian bank 
ANZ in 1999 - is expected to join the FTSE 250 index. The price he paid for the 
business in 1999 was not disclosed but is thought to be negligible. Yesterday 
its value was more than £1.3bn.

The shares had been expected to sell for between 142p and 170p but when they 
started to trade on the grey market - where banks can informally trade them 
before they are officially listed on October 17 - they rose to more than 190p.

Mr Coombs, who refused to be interviewed yesterday, has developed Ashmore from 
managing assets worth $500m in 1999 to more than $21bn (£11.3bn) now. It 
invests for big institutions and pension funds, among them speciality chemicals 
firm ICI and the Houston police force.

An intensely private man, Mr Coombs lives with his wife in Wimbledon, south 
London, but otherwise he bears comparison with Michael Spencer, the colourful 
businessman who built Icap from a small operation into the world's biggest 
money broker in the past 15 years.

Jim Pettigrew, who joined Ashmore in July as chief operating and financial 
officer after a career with Mr Spencer, said there were similarities between 
the businesses which were run by "passionate business leaders who know their 
space". "Mark is a driven man who wants to grow the business. He has created a 
wonderful team spirit," he said, to counter fears his motivation may wane after 
the sale.

The stock market listing was designed to increase the credibility of the 
business with prospective clients, Mr Pettigrew said, rather than signalling 
the beginning of an acquisition spree.
 