
What do the Co-op, the AA, Saga, Direct Line and BT have in common? All of 
them are, in one way or another, looking to expand their businesses in the law 
sector.

Until recently, the legal market has been bereft of brands. But no more – as 
in every other corner of commercial life, the big brands will not be denied. 
Even the best-known legal brand in the US, an online legal document service 
called LegalZoom, is coming over here, as is a rival US service called Rocket 
Lawyer that has financial backing from Google. We may not always like big 
brands, but that doesn't stop us using them. No wonder theLaw Society 
<http://www.lawsociety.org.uk> is currently engaged in a national advertising 
campaign urging the public to use their local solicitor.

The catalyst is the introduction of alternative business structures (ABSs) 
under the 2007 Legal Services Act. This for the first time allows non-lawyers 
to own or invest in law firms, subject to regulatory approval granted by either 
theSolicitors Regulation Authority  <http://www.sra.org.uk>(SRA) or the Council 
for Licensed Conveyancers <http://www.conveyancer.org.uk>. The latter has 
licensed seven ABSs since the new regime began on 6 October 2011, while the SRA 
has granted 29 licences since January.

This might not seem like many – but the approval process is lengthy and there 
are something like 100 more applications making their way through. Of the five 
brands listed above, only the Co-op has an ABS licence, while Direct Line has 
not even submitted its application yet. It was never going to be an overnight 
revolution.

There have also been many other initiatives – such as the network of law firms 
under the QualitySolicitors brand – structured in such a way that they do not 
require an ABS licence. Almost more important than ABSs themselves is the mood 
music they have created, encouraging innovation and change (not necessarily for 
the better, in the view of many lawyers). And change there has already been – 
many of these new entrants are shunning the idea of charging by the hour and 
instead instigating fixed fees, for example.

It is not necessarily change on a grand scale. Several ABSs are actually 
small, traditional, law firms that simply want to bring in a non-lawyer partner 
– in some cases a spouse, in others a valued member of staff – but look back 
ten years and the notion of having a non-lawyer partner in a law firm was 
unthinkable.

More eye-catching is the possibility of external investment. We have already 
seen a private equity firm (Duke Street) invest in a law firm (Plexus Law, part 
of the Parabis Group) and a listed company – in fact the world's first listed 
law firm, Slater & Gordon, based in Australia – has bought up major UK practice 
Russell Jones & Walker. Even James Caan, formerly a Dragon's Den investor, is 
putting money into a law firm in Stoke.

Most remarkable of all was the launch of Stobart Barristers, part of the 
logistics company famous for its lorries, offering consumers the option of 
cutting out solicitors and going straight to barristers with their legal 
problems.

Put it all together and actually a remarkable amount has happened in a short 
period of time. The pioneer of the newbies is Co-operative Legal Services, 
which has actually being going since 2006 and is already one of the 100 largest 
law firms in the UK by turnover. Earlier this year it announced plans to grow 
its 500-strong workforce by a further 3,000 over the next five years.

There is panic among some lawyers at what the future holds for them. Others 
hold onto the belief that the personal service of a small law firm embedded in 
its community will trump the telephone or web-based advice of many of their new 
competitors. Some argue that companies with their eye constantly on the bottom 
line are not imbued with the professional ethos of putting the client first but 
whether that is actually true of all solicitors, and indeed of non-solicitors, 
is questionable.

QualitySolicitors is an attempt to bridge the gap, by bringing together local 
law firms into what is essentially a marketing collective with the financial 
muscle to take out TV advertising spots. Even that has attracted the ire of 
other solicitors, particularly at what they see as the attempt to appropriate 
the notion of 'quality' legal advice.

Notwithstanding the success of the Co-op, it is too early to tell whether the 
way people buy legal services is changing. ABSs are meant to stimulate 
competition and more consumer choice and alongside their introduction 
regulation of the legal profession is moving towards ensuring whoever is 
providing a particular service is able and competent to do so. It may be a 
difficult time to be a lawyer, but – at least in theory – it should be a better 
time to be a client.

Neil Rose is the editor of legalfutures.co.uk <http://www.legalfutures.co.uk>
 