
The opportunity for suppliers to join the government's £60m G-Cloud framework 
is drawing to a close, according to Mark O'Neill, proposition director for 
innovation and delivery at theGovernment Digital Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/government-digital-service> (GDS).

The government plans to launch the first tranche of the G-Cloud catalogue in 
February, O'Neill told the Cloud Expo event in London.

The G-Cloud procurement process was extended last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/government-computing-network/2011/dec/07/g-cloud-framework-deadline-extended>
 to give more suppliers the opportunity to participate. At the end of December 
2011 there had been in excess of 500 expressions of interest in joining the 
framework from suppliers offering more than 1,600 cloud services.

"The billions which we spend on IT is fundamentally changing because too much 
goes on systems that are unacceptable," said O'Neill. "Cloud can disaggregate 
systems and to do things differently and dramatically cheaper."

O'Neill has first hand experience of cloud computing: the GDS rolled out cloud 
desktop services to 125 of its users in October. Over the last four months, the 
cloud software has worked out 80 per cent cheaper than a traditional on-premise 
desktop set up, he said.

"At the moment that is for the cost of the desktop services that we use," he 
told GGC. "So that is for email, collaboration and standard services where we 
are paying 80% less than equivalent users."

O'Neill said he would never purchase software for email, collaboration, 
instant messaging, databases, file storage and printers outright again. "I have 
not printed out anything for six months," he told the audience.

While issues with security, management and ownership are common reasons for a 
failure to adopt cloud, O'Neill asked delegates if they knew where their 
medical records were, noting we often do not know who runs such servers.

Ultimately, O'Neill said, "we either grab the opportunity, or we give up."

• This story was updated on 30 January with the correct date for the release 
of the first part of the G-Cloud catalogue.

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For weekly updates on 
news, debate and best practice on public sector IT, join the Government 
Computing Network here. <http:// 
http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing/start.php>
 