
Scientists have managed to reconstruct the route by which HIV/Aids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/aids-and-hiv> arrived in the US – 
exonerating once and for all the man long blamed for the ensuing pandemic in 
the west.

Using sophisticated genetic techniques, an international team of researchers 
have revealed that the virus emerged from a pre-existing epidemic in the 
Caribbean, arrived in New York by the early 1970s and then spread westwards 
across the US.

The research also confirms that Gaétan Dugas, a French-Canadian flight 
attendant, was not the first person in the US to be infected, despite being 
dubbed “Patient zero” in a study of gay men with Aids in 1984. Based on that 
study, author Randy Shilts named Dugas in 1987 and wrote that “there’s no doubt 
that Gaëtan played a key role in spreading the new virus from one end of the 
United States to the other.”

Characterised by Shilts as promiscuous and irresponsible, Dugas – who died of 
Aids in 1984 after assisting with studies into whether it was caused by a 
sexually transmitted agent – was widely vilified.

However, analysis of Dugas’s HIV genome from a blood sample shows that it was 
typical of strains of the virus within the US at the time and was not the root 
from which the virus diversified in North America.

The findings, the authors say, tie in with a large body of evidence that shows 
that Dugas was not the source of the pandemic in North America, and that the 
mistake may have been the result of a typing error in the original study that 
referred to Dugas as “Patient 0” – a term now widely used to mean the first 
case of an outbreak – instead of “Patient O”, the capital letter, which merely 
indicated that he lived outside California.


“The current study provides further evidence that patient 57, the individual 
identified both by the letter O and the number 0, was not patient zero of the 
North American epidemic,” said Richard McKay, historian and co-author of the 
study from the University of Cambridge, adding that the authors of the original 
study had already pointed out he was unlikely to be the source. He said a 
“trail of error and hype” had led to Dugas being branded with the “Patient 
Zero” title.


“Gaétan Dugas is one of the most demonised patients in history, and one of a 
long line of individuals and groups vilified in the belief that they somehow 
fuelled epidemics with malicious intent,” said McKay.

“In many ways the historical evidence has been pointing to the fallacy of this 
particular notion of patient zero for decades,” said McKay. “This individual 
was simply one of thousands infected before HIV/Aids was recognised.”

Writing in the journal Nature 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature19827>, researchers from the US, 
UK and Belgium describe how they developed a new technique to unpick the 
history of HIV-1 group M subgroup B, the subtype of HIV that is most prevalent 
in the western world.
HIV chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-26T16:59:10/embed.html>
Called “RNA jackhammering”, the technique tackles the problem that the genetic 
material of HIV, which exists in the form of a single-stranded molecule known 
as RNA, breaks down rapidly over time, making it difficult to extract and piece 
together. RNA jackhammering allows scientists to selectively copy tiny 
fragments of the virus’s RNA and stitch them together.

Using the new approach, a technique the team say took around four years to 
develop, the scientists turned to serum samples that had been collected in 1978 
and 1979 from men who had sex with men in New York and San Francisco - samples 
collected before what became known as Aids was first reported in 1981.

That they were able to painstakingly assemble the complete HIV genome from 
eight of the oldest-known samples, allowed the team to place them on a sort of 
“family tree” of the virus. Even though the number of genomes is small, the 
team say the eight samples not only enabled them to explore the genetic 
diversity of the virus in North America in the late 1970s but also chart its 
history, revealing the importance of New York City in the chain of events.

The level of genetic diversity, they say, shows that the virus was circulating 
in the US for a decade before what eventually became known as Aids was 
recognised.

According to the team’s reconstruction, based on the new findings as well as 
previous data, after jumpingfrom non-human primates to humans in Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/oct/02/hiv-aids-pandemic-kinshasa-africa>
, HIV spread to Caribbean countries by around 1967, with the subtype arriving 
in New York by 1971 and reaching San Francisco by 1976. The conclusions, they 
add, are also supported by the prevalence of the HIV virus among the collection 
of serum samples and the spread and timing of later patient cases.


“New York City looks geographically like the key turning point for the 
emergence of this subtype, and New York City acts as this hub from which the 
virus moves to the west coast somewhat later and eventually to western Europe 
and Australia and Japan and South America and all sorts of other places,” said 
Michael Worobey, co-author of the research from the University of Arizona.

The results back up previous work by the Worobey and others, who have spent 
years using a variety of approaches to trace the route of the HIV/Aids epidemic 
and emphasises that the virus travelled from the Caribbean to the US, not vice 
versa. But Worobey is quick to point out that the idea of culpability is 
misplaced.

“No-one should be blamed for the spread of a virus that no-one even knew 
about,” he said. “How the virus moved from the Caribbean to the US and New York 
City in the 1970s is an open question - it could have been a person of any 
nationality, it could have even been blood products.”

The mistaken emphasis placed on Dugas that saw him placed as a key link 
between the spread of HIV/Aids between the east and west coasts of the US in 
the 1984 study, he said, was likely down to Dugas’s efforts to help researchers.


“Probably what happened here was a case of a guy who was unusually helpful to 
investigators providing lots and lots of names of sexual contacts,” said 
Worobey. “He’s just one of many people who is highly sexual active and in this 
network of people who are popping up as early Aids cases but he ended up 
looking up as this central character almost certainly just because of how 
helpful he was.”

The case, adds McKay, also highlights the problems with trying to pinpoint the 
first person to be infected in an epidemic. “One of the dangers of focus on a 
single patient zero when discussing the early stages of an epidemic is that we 
risk obscuring important structural factors that might contribute to its 
development - poverty, legal and cultural inequalities, barriers to healthcare 
and education,” he said.

As well as donating blood plasma for analysis for the original study, Dugas 
had provided researchers with the names of 72 of the roughly 750 partners he 
had had a sexual relationship with in the previous three years.

“The fact that Dugas provided the most names, and had a more memorable name 
himself, likely contributed to his perceived centrality in this sexual 
network,” Dr McKay added.

Gkikas Magiorkinis, a clinical and evolutionary virologist at the University 
of Oxford, said that the research highlights the power of such genetic 
techniques in shedding light on how a virus spreads among a population. “They 
managed to get full sequences of viruses from old samples, and that has been 
very difficult up until now,” he said. That, he adds, could prove valuable for 
probing the history of many other viruses, includinghepatitis C, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/hepatitis-c> and for designing better 
interventions. “If we want to know how we are going to stop an epidemic we need 
to know who infected who and how this happened, so it will have important 
applications with respect to controlling epidemics,” he said.
 