
Video game suppliers have come to the rescue of struggling retailer Game 
Group, striking a backroom deal to allow the firm to secure revised terms with 
its lending banks.

However, the banks are still exerting considerable influence over the business 
– continuing to press, in particular, for a sale of Game's overseas stores. As 
a result, the board has agreed to submit a planned strategic update to the 
lenders for approval. In addition, Game will take an unspecified cut to its 
lending facility.

New terms with suppliers and banks were broadly welcomed by analysts, despite 
a lack of detail. Shares in the group, which were trading at close to 170p in 
the autumn of 2010, yesterday closed up 1.31p at 6.64p.

Analysts were quick to warn that Friday's deal was likely to represent only a 
temporary reprieve for Game because the business needs substantial working 
capital in the runup to next Christmas. "Ability to trade through December 2012 
will depend upon revision of facilities back to their full levels," said 
Gillian Hilditch at JP Morgan Cazenove.

Game chief executive Ian Shepherd said: "We're pleased to reach agreement with 
our lenders, but should be under no illusions about the challenges in our 
market or the hard work that is required to deliver our strategic plan."

Game's appeal for support from its suppliers echoed a similar arrangement 
between struggling HMV and its major music and film suppliers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jan/20/hmv-strikes-deal-with-suppliers>
 agreed last month. Like Game, HMV was able to use supplier concessions to gain 
revised terms from its lenders – in its case Royal Bank of Scotland and Lloyds 
Banking Group. HMV chief executive Simon Fox has made clear the group, like 
Game, is also under pressure to make further disposals.

Despite analysts believing Game this week finished its financial year with a 
net cash surplus, the business had nevertheless been heading for a breach of 
its borrowing covenants at the end of this month. Christmas trading had been 
poor – with comparable sales down 15.2%  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jan/10/game-shares-slump-christmas-sales?INTCMP=SRCH>
– and had been quickly followed by a large rent bill at the end of the calender 
year. On Friday the group said it expected to report an underlying pretax loss 
of £18m for the year to 31 January when it reports full-year results.

The company, which operates 1,274 stores around the world, including 610 in 
the UK, said that unspecified "stakeholders" have now stepped in to offer vital 
support. This is believed to be a reference to concessions from major 
suppliers, many of whom are desperate to stop Game going to the wall. Despite 
the rapid migration of many video game sales to internet and mobile devices, 
Game is still an important high street showcase for software products.

Last published accounts show Game owed £295m to suppliers at the end of 
January last year, normally settling its bills within 30 days. It is thought 
that suppliers have assisted Game through generous rebate payments, easing 
short-term pressure on the retailer's finances.

However, supplier concessions were not enough to assuage Game's banks 
entirely. These lenders – consisting ofRoyal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup>, Barclays, 
HSBC, Caixa, Allied Irish Bank and Bank of Ireland – have demanded approval on 
certain elements of strategy, thought to include the possible sale of overseas 
stores.

A number of new games consoles are due for release in the coming months, 
including,this month, the PlayStation Vita 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/oct/19/playstation-vita-launch-february-2012?INTCMP=SRCH>
. Later in the year Nintendo is launching its new Wii U. These are expected to 
provide a much needed boost to the sector, though some analysts suggest much of 
the benefit might go to supermarkets and online retailers.
 