
When it was founded 20 years ago, Garden Organic Ryton (formerly the Henry 
Doubleday Research Association) was ahead of its time, extolling the virtues of 
growing and eating food without the use of chemicals. The concept is, of 
course, quite familiar these days, but when it comes to the practice, we still 
have lots to learn.

Ryton has 30 demonstration gardens where the ethos is simply to cultivate in 
harmony with nature. They include a wild flower meadow and cornfield, herb 
gardens with seas of lavender and roses, and even a garden demonstrating which 
plants attract bees.

Education is key over these 10 acres, from companion planting to how to make 
good compost. A recent addition is the biodynamic garden, considered one of the 
most sustainable organic approaches.

In simplistic terms, the belief is that all life, including the planet's, is 
connected. The heart of the biodynamic garden is the compost heap, which is 
meticulously tended using plant-based concoctions. Planting, cultivating and 
harvesting are carried out on auspicious days, as dictated by phases of the 
moon; beauty and artistic harmony are also important, though, so this is not 
some haphazard vegetable plot but a superbly designed and executed space. (Open 
all year, 024-7630 3517,gardenorganic.org.uk <http://gardenorganic.org.uk>.) 
Calamagrostis x acutiflora 'Karl Foerster' is one of the most fashionable 
ornamental grasses, proving that organic gardens can have a design edge. The 
seedheads turn brown in late summer and provide food for birds Perovskia, 
Russian sage, is a sub-shrub that creates a haze of soft purple-blue over 
silver-grey leaves and associates well with grasses. The flowers are loved by 
bees in the same way as lavender

Biodiversity is important partly because a monoculture can harbour pests and 
disease. Different plants also encourage different beneficial insects. The 
flowers on the phormium are a draw for hoverflies

Asters come in an enormous range of heights, sizes and colours, but some are 
plagued by powdery mildew. The organic approach is to select species - A. 
'Little Carlow', for example - that are disease-resistant Anaphalis, or pearly 
everlasting, so-called because of the length of time it holds its flowers, is a 
fairly weedy perennial, but if you have enough space, it makes good ground 
cover, often visited by butterflies
 