
The director of GCHQ has apologised for historic prejudice against gay people 
by the agency and the “horrifying” treatment ofAlan Turing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alan-turing>.

Robert Hannigan said the secret service failed to learn from its mistaken 
treatment of the genius, and archaic attitudes had persisted for decades, 
stifling the careers of brilliant minds.

It included a ban on gay people joining the organisation that remained in 
place into the 1990s, causing long-lasting psychological damage to those who 
found themselves outed, interrogated and ostracised over their sexuality.

In a rare public appearance at a conference hosted by Stonewall, the digital 
espionage chief said a former spy, “Ian”, who was forced out of the service on 
suspicion of being gay in the 1960s, had urged him to apologise for his 
treatment.

Hannigan said: “I am happy to do so today and to say how sorry I am that he 
and so many others were treated in this way, right up until the 1990s, when the 
policy was rightly changed.

“The fact that it was common practice for decades reflected the intolerance of 
the times and the pressures of the cold war, but it does not make it any less 
wrong and we should apologise for it.

“Their suffering was our loss and it was the nation’s loss too because we 
cannot know what Ian and others who were dismissed would have gone on to do and 
achieve. We did not learn our lesson from Turing.”

Known as the father of the modern computer, Turing led the famous Bletchley 
Park codebreakers who cracked Enigma, an encryption device used by the Nazis.

Despite his ground-breaking work that is now recognised to have shortened the 
second world war, he was hounded from the secret service over his sexuality.

Turing faced a criminal charge of indecency over his relationship with another 
man and after conviction in 1952 was ordered to undergo chemical castration.

In 1954 he took his own life by eating an apple laced with cyanide. In 2013 he 
received a royal pardon, although the story of how the war hero’s life ended 
had become “sadly famous”, Hannigan said.

“In the horrifying story of his treatment, a small ray of light is that he was 
not abandoned by all of his colleagues atGCHQ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/gchq>. Many stood by him.”

More than half a century later, GCHQ now relies on those who “dare to think 
differently and be different”, he said.

It included hiring spies on the autistic spectrum, with Asperger’s or other 
syndromes, whom he described as “precious assets” in protecting national 
security.

Hannigan told the Stonewall workplace conference in London that GCHQ supported 
the charity in “defending and promoting tolerance and acceptance without 
exception”.
 