
I hear "the feminists" are out to get me. They want to frame me for 
harassment; they want the right to breastfeed in my car; they want to toast my 
goolies before ragingSapphic <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sappho> fires. Never 
mind that some of my fellow men would pay good money to have that last thing 
done to them, there is plainly a monstrous regiment prosecuting a ruthless sex 
war at we gentlemen's expense, and it is winning. We have been forced on the 
defensive. The ladies will not be appeased.

I present these random extracts from the The Seething Classes' Book Of Male 
Resentments to indicate both the strength of resistance to women's uneven but 
inexorable advancebeyond the domestic realm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/awomansplace> and the sheer 
silliness of much of it. Yes, I know sins are committed in female liberation's 
name and all sorts of daft attitudes struck. Women do sometimes abuse power at 
men's expense and cite powerlessness as justification. I get narked when women 
assume that I hate shopping and don't know where the oven gloves are kept 
because I'd gladly squander an afternoon on retail therapy if I had an 
afternoon to squander, because the sight of my souffles rising would make them 
go weak at the knees, and because sex war cliches are, in fact, our common enemy

But that's humankind for you. And the point is that the best and wisest 
feminist ideals – the sort that don't interest the media - have things to offer 
men too. Women moving onto the ground ofpolitics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/jul/07/women> and the 
professions, gaining autonomy and attaining enhanced cultural presence as a 
result has presented challenges for men and masculinity, but also certain 
opportunities.

Feminism has become a dirty word in the mouths of some its enemies, so let's 
recall one of its basic ambitions – the release of women from the constraints 
of gender custom and practice. It insists – or should insist – that the 
blurring of boundaries between men's domain and women's, between traits we call 
masculine and those we call feminine, is not a dangerous assault on some sacred 
natural order but an advance for social justice. It's about fair play, freedom 
of choice and enhancing human happiness.

Men should embrace these principles too, not only for women's sake but also 
for their own. All else being equal, to be born male is to inherit legacies of 
entitlement that continue to outweigh those bestowed on those born female. Yet 
the state of maleness carries its own burden of expectations and constraints. 
Contemporarystudies of boyhood 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Young-Masculinities-Understanding-Contemporary-Society/dp/0333779231>
 shed light on what we've always known – what I still remember vividly from my 
own boyhood – about the disabling and limiting influence of male behaviour 
conventions, homophobia and general "gender policing" on men in the making and 
the huge anxieties that inform them.

This is the baggage men drag with them through their lives; the pressure 
imposed both from without and from within to appear hard and never soft, to 
make a performance of rejecting anything that smacks of domesticity or 
femininity, notwithstanding the metrosexual and "new man". Even men who seem to 
embody and thrive on this stereotype can feel like slaves to it, and are often
undone 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/1930904/Paul-Gascoigne-checks-into-rehab-after-'threatening-to-kill-himself'.html>
 by it.

Sensible, grown up, non-sectarian feminism recognises 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Slow-Motion-Changing-Masculinities-Men/dp/186049305X> 
all of this and seeks ways for men to combat it. This is not a matter of asking 
men to forgo every traditional bond and pursuit in favour of their "feminine 
side" but of inviting them to see that such distinctions are limiting and very 
largely artificial. It's not a matter either of unmanning the alleged essential 
male, but about men flourishing and developing in all areas of their lives, 
including as parents and in the home. It's about making modern, dual-earner, 
heterosexual relationships work better; more democratically. It's about a chap 
discovering that he too can be a nurse in the nursery, a cook in the kitchen 
and a lover in the bedroom and also, should he be so inclined, wrestle grizzly 
bears and grout the bathroom tiles as well – and be happy for women to enjoy 
such freedoms, too.
 