
A social landlord that generates 28 tonnes of rubbish a day could save more 
than £470,000 a year with its zero waste to landfill policy.

Gentoo Group is a social landlord that builds, manages and rents homes in 
Sunderland. In 2006, waste represented 44% of its carbon emissions and cost 
£1,288 a day alone in landfill tax.

Zero waste to landfill is being achieved through new technologies, design, 
staff training, and by reusing and recycling materials. The group appointed two 
waste co-ordinators and attributes its success to working with construction 
site companies and depots.

It already recycles 92% of its waste and is investigating how to divert the 
remaining 8% – mainly mattresses, carpets, textiles and sofas from empty 
properties.

Several building sites have 100% recycling. Waste is sorted into three 
categories: gypsum, hazardous, or general. Gypsum is recycled, the hazardous 
waste is treated in accordance with legal requirements and general waste is 
segregated at the waste contractor's transfer station.

A mixed recycling scheme for offices recycled 100 tonnes in the first year.

Much of the group's success comes from identifying waste facilities that are 
able to recycle, reuse or recover polystyrene, plastics, paper and cardboard, 
green, gypsum, inert waste, metals, tyres, timber, batteries, toners and 
cartridges and fluorescent lighting.

Food waste collection starts in April 2012 and textiles and household items 
will go to Oxfam.

It is exploring insulation recycling, the feasibility of returning reusable 
packaging to suppliers and recovering energy from the things it clears out of 
empty properties.

At the start of its waste policy in 2009 Gentoo recycled 51% of its waste. In 
January 2011 recycling rates had jumped by 41%. Gentoo also aims to minimise 
production of waste by educating staff and tenants, arguing that savings from 
waste can be spent on helping tenants out of fuel poverty.

Jackie Wills is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 