
Much of the British architecture created between the late 17th century and the 
late 18th century was driven by one ambitious idea: to recreate the ancient 
classical world.

The Italian Renaissance's idealisation of classical culture had entered 
Britain during the 16th century; by the early 18th century, not to be a 
classicist was almost an act of blasphemy. Classicism was seen as divine: it 
reflected the building blocks of God's creation and the harmonies of nature.

But in the late 17th century, the circumstances for accurate recreation 
weren't promising. Little archaeological evidence was available for study, and 
much of what was still standing wasn't properly understood. There was only one 
available ancient text, the Roman architect Vitruvius's enigmatic Ten Books on
Architecture <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture>, and too 
much was drawn from the much-publicised but mistaken efforts of Italian 
Renaissance architects.

In addition, in Britain's cities at least, much architecture was created not 
by altruistic visionaries or enlightened patrons but by jobbing builders and 
small-estate owners. This meant that throughout the Georgian period, most urban 
building was essentially a money-making exercise with houses erected as cheaply 
and quickly as possible. Most city buildings were intended to last no longer 
than the length of the building lease, usually around 80 years by the late 18th 
century.

So it is truly remarkable that we ended up with architecture that was so much 
more than just speculative dross. The cities and urban quarters created during 
the period – much of Bath and late 18th- and early 19th-century Bloomsbury in 
London, for example – are still models of harmonious urban living.

This was largely the result of continuity of craftsmanship. The gothic 
tradition, with its belief in sound and sensible construction, was still in the 
blood of British masons. Wander our surviving early 18th-century streets and 
look at the finely wrought brick window arches, the mellow brick and precise 
pointing or the well-cut stone, and the erudite door surrounds, the miniature 
porticoes leading into the sacred environs of the home.

The success of speculative urban developments was also due to the design of 
individual houses and to the wisdom of town planning principles. Houses now had 
a public and a private function. By the 1720s it was established that the 
design of individual houses should be subservient to the design of urban 
compositions as a whole, resulting in the type of palace front that John Wood 
gave to the north side of Queen Square, Bath in the late 1720s, where seven 
individual houses – built by different speculators – look like a single 
pedimented palace. In contrast with this public theatrical grandeur, the 
private interior world of the terrace house had a most practical, adaptable 
plan that made the best use of the available space and light and allowed a wide 
variety of uses.

Ideas about construction and design theory were spread through a welter 
of pattern books and manuals that appeared in ever growing numbers after 1720 
as publishing became cheaper and demand boomed. The increasing literacy of the 
building trade did much to promote the visually restrained, proportion-based 
Palladian school of design that dominated British architecture from the mid 
1720s to the early 1750s.

Palladian dominance produced an architecture that, while beautiful, had by 
mid-century assumed a certain repetitive blandness. But after 1750, discoveries 
about the ancient and primitive world, combined with the sensibilities of the 
Enlightenment, reinvigorated classical design.

New information about Greek and Roman architecture fed into the building world 
and – along with novel theories about the picturesque, the sublime and the 
beautiful – brought about a neoclassical revolution in taste. The first 
expression had been the landscape gardens of the 1730s and 40s, in which nature 
was no longer dragooned into formal designs but made to look as natural as 
possible, with meandering lakes rather than rectilinear canals, undulating 
glades and clumps of trees. In architecture, romantic evocations of the gothic 
past became fashionable from the 1740s – notably Horace Walpole's monkish 
creation of Strawberry Hill, Twickenham. Freed from the bondage of symmetry, 
buildings could now be wayward and wilful. Virtually all the old dogmas were 
being rethought, so that by the 1780s and 90s architects such as John Soane 
were able to virtually reinvent the language of classicism.

Thus was set the stage for the final flowering of Georgian architecture. In 
the early 19th century, erudition vied with wit to create a playful and 
eclectic architecture that pillaged the history of the world in search of 
novelty and surprise. "Hindoo", combined with Greek, Roman, Chinese, Gothick or 
Mughal forms – rendered in brick, stone, playful stucco or newfangled cast iron 
– were used to create previously unknown wonders such as John Nash's Brighton 
Royal Pavilion of 1815-21.

Sadly, it couldn't last. Victorian morality was soon to transform architecture 
by insisting there was an ethically right and wrong way to build and that the 
great Christian empire of Britain must adopt gothic architecture as its 
national style because it was not only the native style but also Christian in 
origin. The game was up for eclectic and amoral Georgian invention.

• Dan Cruickshank's most recent book is The Secret History of Georgian London: 
How the Wages of Sin Shaped the Capital
 