
The failure of successive governments to invest in infrastructure has meant 
that the British people have longer commutes, higher energy bills and can’t 
afford to be homeowners,George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> has said.

Launching his national infrastructure commission, the chancellor promised that 
infrastructure investment would be at the heart of November’s spending review 
and that the new independent body would think “dispassionately and 
independently” about Britain’s infrastructure needs.

“We haven’t done enough of that in our country in the past,” the chancellor 
said. “And as a result British people have to spend longer than they should 
getting to work; they pay more than they should in energy bills; they can’t buy 
the homes they want, all because of the failure of successive governments – and 
the societies that elected those governments – to think long term.

“That has started to change. New railway lines are being laid, new roads are 
being built, new broadband is being installed. Britain has rediscovered its 
ambition and we are thinking big again.”

It was announced during the Conservative party’s autumn conference that the 
former Labour transport secretary Andrew Adonis wouldresign his party’s whip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/05/lord-adonis-to-resign-labour-whip-and-chair-george-osbornes-infrastructure-body>
 to chair the commission, a move that was interpreted as a bid for the centre 
ground on the part of the chancellor.

Speaking at the National Railway Museum in York on Friday, Osborne said the 
commission would also include the former Conservative deputy prime minister 
Michael Heseltine and Prof Tim Besley, a former member of the Bank of England’s 
rate-setting monetary policy committee.

The commission, which will oversee a promised £100bn of infrastructure 
spending by 2020, will have the initial priorities of examining connections 
between the big northern cities, London’s transport system and energy 
infrastructure. It will produce a report at the beginning of each parliament 
with recommendations for spending on infrastructure projects, though 
politicians will have the final say.

Osborne, who has overseen a 5.4% fall in infrastructure investment since he 
took office in 2010, will use the spending review to announce a suite of asset 
sales which the Treasury expects to raise billions of pounds to be ploughed 
back into projects.

“The task for the national infrastructure commission will be to think 
dispassionately and independently about Britain’s long-term infrastructure 
needs in areas like transport, energy, communication, flood defence and the 
like,” said Osborne.

“It will collect the evidence, listen to the arguments and will report on what 
we need to do to build for our future. That will create the kernel around which 
the national consensus will be created that will guide our democratic decisions 
and then they will hold us to account for those decisions, hold our feet to the 
fire.”

Speaking to the BBC’s World at One, the shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, 
said he supported the establishment of a commission but it would be ineffective 
unless the government committed the necessary funds to infrastructure projects.

“I do [support the idea of a commission] because it was a Labour idea in the 
first instance,” McDonnell said, describing the appointment ofAndrew Adonis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-adonis> as “a good choice”.

“But the reality is … you can set up these commissions but, unless you commit 
to the financing of the projects themselves, they’ll simply produce reports 
that gain dust on ministers’ shelves.

“That’s the problem. Under George Osborne, infrastructure spending has 
declined every year and his currentCharter for Budget Responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/14/george-osborne-fiscal-charter-labour-jeremy-corbyn-rebellion>
 is to decline even further. And we are just not matching our European 
competitors, which means in the long run we will not be able to compete in a 
global market.”
 