
Until the later 18th century, the source for all classical architecture in 
Britain was ancient Rome, rediscovered in the Renaissance and transported 
north. Rather liberal interpretations of Renaissance classical forms were often 
used in 16th-century Britain, though applied with more care by 17th- century 
courtier and architect Inigo Jones. The baroque movement from the late 17th 
century again took more liberties.

From the early 1700s, however, there was an intellectual movement towards 
rationality, and away from imaginative interpretation. As better scholarship 
and a deeper understanding of archaeology grew, theorists in Britain and in 
France began to reject what they deemed to be the highly subjective Renaissance 
interpretations of Roman architecture. At the same time, they renounced the 
decadence and decoration of the baroque, favouring instead the perceived purity 
of ancient Greek forms. By the end of the 18th century, as knowledge of ancient 
Greece improved, architects were turning to the Greek "orders" – a kind of 
architectural grammar, first developed in Greek architecture then adapted and 
extended by the Romans.

Before the mid-18th century, knowledge of Greek architecture was sketchy, 
because most of what had been ancient Greece was part of the Ottoman empire and 
few had actually studied the sites at first hand. 

But in 1751 the English architects James Stuart and Nicholas Revett travelled 
to Athens to make detailed studies of its relics, and, in 1762, published their 
findings in the hugely influential The Antiquities of Athens. Their French 
counterpart Julien-David Le Roy had published the first accurate drawings of 
the Acropolis a few years prior, and thus an accurate body of knowledge of 
classical Greek architecture began to grow. So it was that the Greek orders – 
the Doric, Ionic and Corinthian – came to be seen as the purer and more natural 
forms.

The Greek Doric columns are squatter and more massive than the Roman versions 
– the "entasis" or swelling of the column is often more pronounced, and the 
capital is larger, projecting further over the shaft. They are without a base, 
placed instead directly on the "stylobate" – the top step of the colonnade's 
platform. The Greek Doric shares with its Roman counterpart a frieze, made up 
of grooved triglyphs (three vertical bands) and metopes (rectangular blocks), 
and a plain, unadorned capital. The column is usually cut with flutes, much as 
in the Roman Doric, but is sometimes found unfluted. The Doric revival was an 
important element of neoclassicism, when the primitive aspect of the order was 
celebrated rather than denigrated as crude.

The Greek Ionic order, which originated in the mid-sixth century BC in Asia 
Minor, is, much like the Roman Ionic, elegant and pretty. The columns are 
slender and almost always fluted, with fillets or flat plain bands between the 
flutes; in Hellenistic buildings, columns are often found with a plain or 
faceted, but not fluted, lower section of the shaft. The characteristic 
elements of the order are, as in the Roman Ionic, the scrolled capital and the 
dentilated cornice (one which sports a row of dentils or small blocks 
underneath), while, in Hellenistic buildings, the frieze is frequently omitted.

The Greek Corinthian order originated in Athens in the fifth century BC, and 
differs only slightly from the Ionic – the primary distinction being the two 
rows of acanthus leaves that sprout from its capital. The frieze is often 
lavishly sculpted and surmounted by a dentilated cornice. The columns are 
invariably fluted, with fillets running between the flutes.

In their 1762 treatise, Stuart and Revett published drawings of particularly 
elegant Corinthian capitals they had studied in Athens, on a small monument 
near the Acropolis dating back to 334BC, the Choragic Monument of Lysicrates. 
Taller and more ornate than most other versions of the Greek Corinthian, this 
Lysicrates capital was often copied in 18th-century Britain. It comprises a 
lower band of sprouting leaf shapes, surmounted by a larger band of lush 
acanthus leaves interspersed with flowers and topped with large volutes 
(scrolls) below the abacus (the topmost section of the capital, a flat 
four-sided slab). The abacus is moulded with a sculpted anthemion – a leafy 
motif – in the middle of each side. This voluptuous decoration embodies the 
beauty and grandeur that the Corinthian order has always symbolised.
 