


1. Houghton Hall, Norfolk <http://www.houghtonhall.com>

Houghton Hall, a grand Palladian mansion of silver-white stone, was built to 
be the country seat of Robert Walpole, Britain's first prime minister. The 
elegant exterior, by Colen Campbell and James Gibbs (whose contributions 
include the domed corner towers), conceals sumptuous interiors by William Kent. 
Completed in 1735, the hall sits in 350 acres of parkland, home to a herd of 
white fallow deer. Landscaped by Charles Bridgeman, the grounds also house 
recent art by James Turrell and Richard Long.

01485 528569



2. Royal Pavilion, Brighton <http://www.royalpavilion.org.uk>

Even in a city that prides itself on its flamboyance, the Royal Pavilion 
stands out. Outside is a riot of minarets, towers and domes; inside the most 
sumptuous chinoiserie anywhere in Britain. The exteriors are the work of John 
Nash, who transformed Henry Holland's neoclassical building with the help of a 
cast-iron framework. Sadly, Nash's practical skills did not always match his 
artistic vision: by 1830, just seven years after the building was complete, the 
roof was starting to leak and dry rot was appearing. Restoration work has been 
going on since the mid-19th century.

03000 290900



3. Kedleston Hall, Derbyshire 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/main/w-kedlestonhall>

A few kilometres from Derby, the neoclassical Kedleston Hall is  the seat of 
the Curzon family, whose local connection dates back to the 12th century. Its 
interiors, which have changed little since its completion in the 1760s, are one 
of the best examples of Robert Adam's work. As for the building itself, Adam 
was the last and most influential of three architects who worked on it, the 
others being Matthew Brettingham and James Paine. His hand can best be seen in 
the south front, with its four-column triumphal arch and sweeping double 
staircase. The grounds were also Adam's work.

01332 842191



4. Pulteney Bridge, Bath

Robert Adam's 1773 bridge across the Avon is one of few in the world to be 
fully lined with shops, and was partly inspired by Andrea Palladio's rejected 
design for the Ponte de Rialto in Venice. Commercially unsuccessful, it was 
insensitively redeveloped almost immediately after Adam's death. Largely 
restored for the 1951 Festival of Britain, and again for 1975's European 
Architectural Heritage Year, it is now Grade I-listed and one of Bath's 
best-loved structures.



5. House of Correction, Littledean, Gloucestershire 
<http://www.littledeanjail.com>

Designed by William Blackburn, Littledean's 1791 House of Correction is the 
best preserved of the jails commissioned by the reform-minded George 
Onesiphorus Paul. Airy and light (for an 18th-century prison), it is now a 
family home and privately run museum, its sandstone facade containing assorted 
torture and execution equipment, a model of the jail in 56,000 matchsticks, 
Britain's largest private collection of police memorabilia and a Dalek.

01594 826659



6. Royal Scottish Academy, Edinburgh <http://www.royalscottishacademy.org>

Opened in the 1820s as the Royal Institution, and enlarged just a few years 
later, William Playfair's Royal Scottish Academy building was almost crowned 
with a statue of Pallas Athena, the Greek goddess of wisdom. In the end, the 
Athens of the North got Queen Victoria. The academy is still one of the city's 
most impressive buildings, a fitting companion to its neighbour on the Mound, 
Playfair's National Gallery of Scotland.

0131-225 6671



7. Boodle's, St James's, London <http://www.boodles.org>

No 28 St James's Street, home of the private members' club Boodle's, was 
originally the Savoir-Vivre club house. Influenced by the work of Robert Adam, 
this handsome building was designed in 1775 by John Crunden, best known as the 
author of pattern books for those wishing to construct Palladianesque 
buildings. The club hoped to attract high-rolling gamblers and was reportedly 
"furnished in a style beyond any preceding club: classical pictures, sofas and 
chairs covered with satin, etc."

020-7930 7166



8. Pagoda, Kew Gardens, Surrey <http://www.kew.org>

Built by William Chambers in 1762, when Britain was in love with all things 
Chinese, the 50m-high pagoda was intended as a surprise for Kew's grande dame, 
Princess Augusta. Not everyone appreciated it; during construction, Horace 
Walpole, who lived nearby, harrumphed, "In a fortnight you will be able to see 
it in Yorkshire." A slight exaggeration, perhaps, but for some time the 
pagoda's 10 storeys made it the tallest Chinese-style building in Europe.

External viewing only. 020 8332 5655



9. Sir John Soane's Museum, Holborn, London <http://www.soane.org>

Once the home, studio and testing ground of neoclassical architect John Soane, 
13 Lincoln's Inn Fields now houses drawings and models of his commissions, as 
well as his collection of art, antiquities and curios. The building itself, 
which he rebuilt in two phases (1808-9 and 1812), provides a masterclass in the 
use of light and mirrors.

020-7405 2107



10. Royal Crescent, Bath <http://www.bath-preservation-trust.org.uk>

This curved street of 30 houses, completed in 1774, is "architecture on a 
truly palatial scale", in the words of travel writer Jan Morris. It's also 
a remarkable combination of conformity and disorder. Facing the public is an 
elegant three-storey Georgian facade, designed by John Wood the Younger; behind 
is a hodge-podge of heights and influences. The first residents simply bought a 
stretch of frontage and hired their own architects to fill in at the back. A 
museum in No 1 shows how they lived.

01225 428126
 