
Andrés Iniesta has backed Barcelona's appointment of Gerardo Martino 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/jul/22/barcelona-gerardo-martino> as 
their coach. The Spanish champions confirmed on Tuesday that they had reached 
an agreement for Martino to take over at the Camp Nou on a two-year deal.

The 50-year-old Argentinian succeeds Tito Vilanova, who stepped down from the 
role last Friday 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/jul/19/barcelona-press-conference-tito-vilanova>
 after one season in charge as he continues his battle with cancer.

Martino has a reputation as an attack-minded coach and Iniesta believes he 
will fit in with Barcelona's philosophy. "Whatever the club decide is the best 
for Barça. I think he will fit in with our model," the Spain midfielder told 
Marca while at a promotional event. "If the club have decided on him, then he's 
the ideal coach for us."

While Martino spent a short spell with the Spanish side Tenerife as a player, 
he has never before coached a European side but he has had some notable 
achievements during a 15-year career as a manager in South America.

He led Newell's Old Boys to last season's Argentinian Clausura title, while he 
also won various trophies with Club Libertad and Cerro Porteno in Paraguay.

He also enjoyed a hugely successful four-year spell in charge of Paraguay, 
guiding them to the quarter-finals of the 2010 World Cup and the final of the 
2011 Copa América. Paraguay had never before gone beyond the last 16 of the 
World Cup while the last time they made the Copa América final was in 1979.

Paraguay's run at the 2010 World Cup was halted by the winners, Spain – in a 
match Iniesta played in. "It's a good decision. I know him from the match in 
the World Cup in South Africa. He seems a good coach.

"The club wouldn't have gone for a coach who doesn't fit in as they have clear 
ideas about that they want. Every season we have to have high hopes of winning 
titles."

A host of coaches were linked to the vacant position, including Luis Enrique, 
André Villas-Boas, Marcelo Bielsa, Michael Laudrup and Guus Hiddink, who on 
Monday resigned as the coach of the Russian side Anzhi Makhachkala.

Martino, a former Argentina midfielder, emerged as the favourite over the 
weekend. The news of his impending arrival is sure to go down well with Barça 
talisman Lionel Messi, who has spoken in glowing terms about his compatriot. 
They both hail from Rosario and, speaking a year ago, Messi told Diario Ole: "I 
like Tata Martino. He is a great coach. He gets his teams playing well and we 
all respect him."

Martino, who as a player represented his local club Newell's in three 
different spells while also turning out for Lanus in his homeland,Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> SC in Ecuador and O'Higgins in 
Chile, becomes the fourth Argentinian to coach Barça, following Helenio 
Herrera, Roque Olsen and César Luis Menotti.
 