
Media in Algeria have hailed their team as heroes after they pushed Germany to 
extra-time in a brilliant attacking last-16 game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/30/germany-algeria-world-cup-last-16-match-report>
 – and a petition has been started to persuade Vahid Halilhodzic to stay on as 
coach.

The Algerian coach is set to leave his position after the tournament, having 
endured a long-running battle with some sections of the media. But after 
Tuesday’s performance there was only respect and admiration for him and his 
players.

The headline in Le Soir d’Algerie said simply “Thank you for everything” under 
a picture of the disconsolate players. A front page editorial said: “Algeria 
left the World Cup with a new aureole on its head. They fought like lions and 
deserve all our congratulations. Now, we must strengthen the ranks of the 
heroic 11 and continue to offer it all means. It was a greatWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> for us.”

Le Buteur, which had run the headline “Tactical bankruptcy by Vahid!” , after 
the defeat by Belgium in their opening World cup game, revealed that 37,000 
people had signed a petition to persuade Halilhodzic to remain as coach within 
hours of the game finishing, and was fulsome in its respect for the Serbian. 
“The national coach, like his players, was shot at the final whistle,’ they 
wrote. “Halilhodzic could not hold back his tears and looked completely 
destroyed following this defeat, having believed firmly in the ability of his 
team to turn things around and take the Germans to a shootout. The most moving 
moment at the end of the match was undoubtedly the scene where almost all the 
players came to greet their coach and thank him for everything. Although 
dejected, Halilhodzic nevertheless paid tribute to the public warmly greeting 
before returning to the locker room. Obviously, the Algerian fans did not stop 
chanting the name Vahid.”

Liberté said the Algeria players were brilliant but they were undone by the 
wealth of experience in Joachim Löw’s side and the “cold realism” that Germany 
are always victorious in the end. Their report began: “‘Football is a game of 
11 against 11 and in the end the Germans always win,’ the Englishman Gary 
Lineker said in a quote that has become legendary. The sentence applied in 
Porto Alegre yesterday when Algeria vGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany> illustrated the beautiful but 
cruel uncertainty of sport. Algeria deserved a better fate than an exit which 
inevitably will leave big regrets that they missed out on something monumental 
or unreal, but the national team left the Brazilian World Cup with sword in 
hand and head high.”

In Germany most of the media were just thankful they had progressed. Berliner 
Zeitung said: ‘You play [the] German [way]: Bad defence. A giant in goal and 
somehow the ball goes in. 2-1. Main thing: we’re through.”

Süddeutsche Zeitung suggested Germany were rescued by André Schürrle’s clever 
finish, with the headline: ‘Salvation by backheel’. While Stuttgarter 
Nachrichten wrote simply “Danke, André”.
 