
 There were more than a few eyebrows raised when Martin Creed's installation, 
The Lights Going On and Off, was unveiled at this year's Turner Prize show at 
Tate Britain. The museum's curator of communications, Simon Williams, declared 
that the work signified "the movement towards the dematerialisation of art 
since the 60s", but most of the general public seemed to reckon that an empty 
room with a light flicking on and off was a pretentious conceit. Yet even those 
who loathed the piece still tried to engage with it as a work of art.

Twenty-five years ago we tended to take a very different view. Art meant high 
art. If it wasn't a Mozart opera, a Shakespeare play or a Rembrandt painting, 
then it wasn't art: it was popular culture. Today the distinctions have become 
increasingly blurred. Circus skills, pop music, even TV soaps, are now all 
recognised as legitimate art forms. There are still some who mutter darkly 
about the perils of dumbing down, but the upside is that many more people are 
gaining the confidence to appreciate works they might previously have 
considered dull or incomprehensible. Six years ago, millions of viewers were 
transfixed by the TV adaptation of Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice and the 
early signs are that Anthony Trollope's The Way We Live Now, which is currently 
being screened, could well deliver a similar audience.

You might have thought that it was the education system that had inspired this 
latter-day cultural revolution. But even though there has been a lot of talk 
coming out of government about creativity in schools, since Tony Blair 
discovered that the creative economy was worth billions of pounds per year to 
the British economy, little more than window dressing has emerged. A recent 
survey published by Artworks, the National Children's Art Awards, revealed that 
average yearly spending on art materials in English and Welsh schools had 
fallen from an already dangerously low figure to a derisory one. Five- to 
seven-year olds were allocated a mere £1.18 per head, while 11- to 18-year-olds 
fared little better with an average annual budget of £2.68.

"I don't believe you can really teach the full programme of study for £2.68 
per pupil," says John Steers, director of the National Society for Education 
and Design. "Craft activities often get bypassed in favour of painting and 
drawing, and some of the computer equipment is prohibitively expensive. But 
because the subject is never tested, schools don't worry too much as they are 
far more concerned with literacy and numeracy. No school is going to be deemed 
to be failing on the basis of its arts teaching."

Unsurprisingly, then, because art counts for nothing in the performance league 
tables, schools have largely washed their hands of the subject and in the 
process a generation of schoolchildren have had their access, both to practical 
artistic experience and to a wider appreciation of aesthetics, severely 
compromised. But where the schools have failed, arts organisations, museums, 
galleries and the media have tried to step in.

If you went into a museum or gallery back in the 1970s, you would have found a 
dusty regime run by an elite for an elite. A curator would have gathered a 
collection of artifacts or pictures into a gallery, and unless the visitor was 
steeped in art history, he or she would have little idea of why any particular 
group of objects had been grouped together in the same room, as there was no 
explanation or interpretation on offer. There is still a minority of curators 
and critics who believe that the art should stand alone and speak for itself, 
but most now recognise that museums have a duty to inform, as our national 
treasures belong to all of us.

A case in point is the newly reopened British Galleries, housing a collection 
of objects from 1500-1900, at the Victoria & Albert Museum in London. In many 
museums, the education team is brought in as an afterthought to tidy up after 
the curator and the designer have decided on the exhibits and the layout. But 
for the British Galleries, the education team was in on the act from the off. 
"We wanted to be clear about what the galleries were trying to say about the 
history of art and design and to ensure we catered for our target audiences," 
says Christopher Wilk, chief curator of the British Galleries. "Art galleries 
have tended to appeal to the analytical learner who likes to absorb information 
from a plaque, but we have gone out of our way to arrange exhibits in a variety 
of ways so that the galleries can be understood and absorbed by everyone."

Museums outside London often have to fight harder for recognition and in many 
ways have an even greater part to play in the cultural fabric of the community 
than their grander counterparts. The National Museum of Photography Film & 
Television in Bradford is a case in point. Situated in the second poorest ward 
in the country, it has become a focal point for the north-east. "We have 
succeeded in one of the most challenging areas in Britain," says Amanda Nevill, 
the museum's head. "We attract people from all sections of the community, and a 
number of people who had got into trouble locally are now using our facilities 
to make their own film. We've also recently opened Insight, a new purpose-built 
facility to house our reserve collection in such a way that it is accessible to 
everyone. Given 24 hours notice, we can tailor a selection of exhibits to a 
school or individual's interests. Moreover the curators don't just spend their 
time engaged in academic research; they also give guided tours so they can 
communicate with the public and hear their responses."

While painting, film and theatre may have opened up to a wider public, there 
are still some art forms, such as opera, that are still regarded in some 
quarters as inaccessible. But this too is changing. The Royal Opera House has 
taken to providing a running English translation of its foreign language works, 
but more importantly there are a number of small opera groups, such as English 
Pocket Opera (EPO), which are dedicated to making the art form more accessible.

"In countries such as Italy and France, opera has always been a popular 
musical form," says Mark Tinkler, EPO's artistic director. "It's only in the US 
and the UK that it has been branded elitist. We believe it is something that 
should be available to everyone so, as well as providing workshops in schools, 
we perform in places such as Hemel Hempstead and Thames Ditton where opera is 
seldom, if ever, staged."

Arts organisations can't take all the credit for the growth of interest in the 
arts. A lot is also down to the motivation of individuals who have gone out of 
their way to provide themselves with the education they never got at school and 
to indulge their passions in ways that suit them.

Alexander Booth is an advertising copywriter in his mid-30s. For the last 10 
years or so he has played footie, got drunk and generally hung out with a group 
of male friends. About a year ago, they decided to form their own reading 
group. "We meet up once a month to discuss a particular book and to choose the 
next one," he says. "We've read all sorts from modern-day middlebrow, such as 
Nick Hornby, to 17th-century novelists. We're quite democratic about the 
process, but I'm not sure how much anyone actually learns. We've all got strong 
opinions and there can be a fair bit of shouting. But at the very least we've 
all read a book we might not have got round to."

But for all the good news on offer, a note of caution is also required. Even 
in times of prosperity, arts budgets are tight and in times of recession they 
are often slashed. Arts organisations are fighting for every penny and many are 
struggling on a shoestring to continue to offer a first-rate programme; no one 
can take their survival for granted.

At its best, art represents the highest form of human achievement; at its 
worst, it is tame, unchallenging and hollow. To engage or not to engage? Now, 
more than ever, the choice is ours.
 