
Manchester City's extraordinary penchant for self-destruction endured as Mark 
Hughes's side found themselves clasped by winter's icily lingering grip in 
northern Denmark last night. With their hopes of embracing an Istanbul spring 
placed very much on hold by the concession of two late goals which sent the tie 
into extra-time, City experienced the nerviest of finales, eventually 
prevailing 4-3 on penalties.

On an evening when the red-booted Robinho once again disappointed, Hughes had 
his dependable goalkeeper Shay Given to thank for pulling off a great escape 
courtesy of two shoot-out saves from first Thomas Augustinussen and then, 
decisively, the former Sheffield United striker Luton Shelton. Minutes 
afterwards an ashen-faced Garry Cook, City's chief executive and generally a 
non-smoker, was seen clutching a nerve-assuaging cigarette well aware he had 
just witnessed a considerable reprieve. Shelton's 85th-minute chesting down of 
a long ball and ensuing low shot ­beyond Given and a 90th-minute penalty 
converted by Michael Jakobsen after Ched Evans handled a flick on in the area, 
had earlier combined to leave Hughes incandescent and his team's fans 
emotionally wrung out.

Perhaps already dreaming of May's ­final by the Bosphorus, City's 
concentration wandered and they threw away their 2-0 first-leg advantage. 
Fragile and careless in equal measure City failed convincingly to defend balls 
into the box.

Sighing deeply, the Welshman admitted: "We don't do things easily. We were in 
control for an hour but Aalborg played very well in the second half and put 
some dangerous balls into our box.

"When Aalborg equalised I did start to scratch my head and wonder how it had 
happened. But knowing Shay was between the sticks gave me and the lads 
confidence. Shay's made crucial saves for us." Hughes also singled out Stephen 
Ireland – the night's best individual – for special praise. "Stephen is an 
example to every one of my players," he said.

Ominously it transpired that Ireland had suffered an achilles injury in the 
match and later limped off on crutches.

Unwisely complacent, City were not in a mood to inflict much and failed to 
raise any sort of tempo during an almost ­embarrassingly cagey opening half. 
­Indeed, as temperatures dropped to ­minus three, it was the 25th minute before 
we saw some goalmouth action, namely a cross from Anders Due which seemed to 
have dropped invitingly for Shelton before Nedum Onuoha nipped adroitly in 
front of the centre-forward to divert the danger for the game's first corner.

As Robinho – a lacklustre participant in the warm-up stages of City's training 
session here last night – rather feebly pulled out of a routine challenge 
Hughes began pacing his technical area and screamed "Robi, Robi." But at least 
the Brazilian – replaced in extra-time – did muster the first of two first-half 
shots, dodging Kasper Bogelund on the byline before unleashing a ridiculously 
ambitious angled strike, tipped to safety by Karim Zaza. Shortly afterwards 
Zabaleta curled an effort narrowly wide as City, with Ireland impressing, 
belatedly roused themselves a little.

Unfortunately for their fans's serenity and, possibly Hughes's job security, 
the excitement quotient was upped appreciably in the second period.

Aalborg emerged from their shell and, after a Caca shot flew fractionally 
wide, the Danes should really have been awarded a penalty following substitute 
Javier Garrido's hacking down of Andreas Johansson. Clearly let off, City 
failed to heed this warning and the subsequent one signified by Given's 
brilliant save from Shelton's close-range shot.

Granted Robinho shot against the underside of the bar after connecting with 
Ireland's cut back but Shelton's goal, Evans's handball and Jokobsen's penalty 
conversion ensured it was almost an extremely costly miss. As Hughes later 
reflected: "We're happy and relieved to be through."
 