
Delusional silent-movie star Norma Desmond has “haunted” Glenn Close 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/glenn-close> since she first played her. But 
the opportunity to reprise the role two decades later – in what will be her 
West End debut – is a gift, the actor said.

Close played the faded movie diva in Andrew Lloyd Webber’s Sunset Boulevard, 
first in Los Angeles and then New York in the early 1990s, with the musical 
dominating the 1994 Tony awards.

Next year, British audiences will for the first time see Close play Desmond in 
a semi-staged production co-produced bythe English National Opera at the 
Coliseum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/28/we-have-turned-the-page-insist-english-national-opera-mark-wigglesworth>
.

At a press briefing in London, Close said she was thrilled but it will be a 
different performance. “When I was approached to do this I thought it was 
actually a gift,” she said. “To be able to come back to the same character 20 
years later.

“It is going to be another exploration for me because I’ve had 20 years of 
life, I’ve had 20 years of my craft. She won’t be the same and I’m not sure of 
what she will be like. She’s been in my psyche, when you play a great character 
like that she becomes part of the fabric of your being. She haunted me after I 
left her.”

Glenn Close returns to London stage in classic Sunset Boulevard role
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/22/glenn-close-returns-to-london-stage-in-classic-sunset-boulevard-role-eno-coliseum>
Close recalled being persuaded to audition for the role by Christopher 
Hampton, who co-wrote the book and lyrics with Don Black. Close had starred in 
the film Dangerous Liaisons, based on Hampton’s play. “It was daunting and 
exciting and something that you never dreamed was going to happen and I’m 
eternally grateful.”

She flew to London and auditioned in front of Lord Lloyd-Webber and the 
director Trevor Nunn at the composer’s house in Eaton Square. She sang two 
songs. “I can’t say I had them in my voice at that moment but I remember him 
leaping up and saying ‘she has it in her voice!’ I knew it went well because I 
was invited to have dinner with him afterwards.”

The Los Angeles production was so good that Lloyd Webber closed the London 
show to model it on the new version. Close is best known for her film and TV 
work such as Fatal Attraction, Damages and The Shield , but had performed in a 
number of musicals prior to Sunset Boulevard, including Barnum and Miss Saigon.

But it was in Sunset Boulevard where she really learned to sing, she said on 
Monday. “We had an amazing ensemble for that show, I always felt I was the 
weakest singer and I knew I had a lot to learn. I don’t have the kind of freaky 
fabulous voice that Elaine Paige or Betty Buckley have.”

Close has been given a tour of the Coliseum – the largest theatre in London 
with its daunting 2,359 seats – where Sunset Boulevard will run for 43 
performances over five weeks.

The embattled ENO will be hoping that the musical will be a moneyspinner. The 
company was the biggest loser in last year’s Arts Council England funding 
round, losing £5m, or a third of its public funding. It has also lost its 
chairman, executive director, artistic directorand its place in ACE’s national 
portfolio in the last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/12/english-national-opera-funding-arts-council-england-special-measures>
.

The production is part of a partnership with west end impresarios Michael 
Grade and Michael Linnit, which saw the ENO host Sweeney Todd with Emma 
Thompson and Bryn Terfel earlier this year. That was directed by Lonny Price 
who will direct the new production, based on the Billy Wilder film of the same 
name.

The musical contains a scene where Desmond is cradling the corpse of her dead 
pet chimp. Close said she still had the original monkey, although wrapped in 
tape. “I’d be very happy to bring the monkey … his fur will have to be fluffed.”

Sunset Boulevard is at the Coliseum 1 April-7 May 2016
 