
The chief executive of a Muslim charity has stepped down as new concerns were 
raised about the organisation’s alleged links to extremism.

Rizwan Hussain has stepped down from the east London-based Global Aid Trust 
(GAT) education charity, ahead of the broadcast of an undercover TV 
investigation which looked into whether the organisation was promoting 
extremism.

The Charity Commission, which has already opened a case against the GAT, has 
been told of footage obtained by ITV’s Exposure:Charities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/charities> Behaving Badly documentary. It 
found an invited speaker at a GAT event appearing to make antisemitic remarks 
and offer jihadis his blessing.

A Charity Commission spokesman said they were “already aware that there were 
concerns of a similar nature” regarding “allegations of links to extremism” 
against GAT.

He said the new evidence will be added to its current case, noting: “The claim 
is that they had invited external speakers to events without doing proper 
checks on the individuals or as to what they would be saying at the event.

“Certainly the film evidence is of someone who has been invited to an event 
and it is clear that a young lad has no steer about what he should be checking 
or asking of that person.”

Rizwan Hussain, who is also a television presenter for the Islam Channel and a 
barrister, told Third Sector magazine that he had left the charity “in 
connection with the documentary”.

GAT describes itself as an independent charity which aims to promote education 
among the underprivileged and to help orphans achieve their full potential.

The Charity Commission said it had visited and inspected GAT’s premises in 
November 2014 after “concerns” were identified regarding one of GAT’s events in 
May that year.

In the programme the undercover reporter, posing as a volunteer, is introduced 
to a GAT worker called Shaffiq Shabbar who tells him of his admiration for the 
late hate preacherAnwar al-Awlaki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/21/us-release-memo-anwar-al-awlaki-drone-killing>
, who was believed to have inspired a string of terror attacks.

Shabbar tells the reporter: “They spread loads of lies about him … He’s a 
scholar and basically he was imprisoned and after he came out of prison he 
started to incite hatred and telling the western Muslims to bomb. He incited 
bombings basically. Bruv, he was a brilliant guy though.”

The documentary also shows preacher Dawah Man speaking at an event in which he 
makes a series of antisemitic comments, telling those gathered: “America, 
European countries, whatever you call it, these countries are controlled by 
Zionists.

“If you look at the biggest bankers in the world, that fund these countries, 
they are Zionists, and Zionists run Israel. So we can safely say that at any 
time there was an American, or English or whatever, invasion of the Muslim 
lands, it is all a problem coming back to the Children of Israel.”

In the programme GAT said it “firmly condemns and reject comments” made by 
Shabbar and the external speakers. It adds: “We express our great regret at 
these incidents, which were the result of a process failure in the 
organisation.”

It confirms that Hussain left GAT in December 2014. They claimed that a due 
diligence form regarding the content of what the speaker might say was not 
provided when he was booked and that the staff member responsible was suspended 
and later resigned.

ITV’s Exposure: Charities Behaving Badly is on ITV at 10.40pm on Wednesday
 