
Match-winning fly-halves are not all whippet-thin boy wonders with 
rocket-propelled acceleration. Even in the modern game the canny tortoise can 
still catch the hare napping and it was the under-rated Andy Goode rather than 
the electric Danny Cipriani who seized the day in Cardiff to improve 
Leicester's prospects of retaining the EDF Energy Cup at Twickenham next month.

Cipriani may be the buzzing new wunderkind of the English game and Shaun 
Edwards the most sought-after defensive expert but neither could prevent Goode 
from steering the Tigers to a convincing victory that should give their season 
fresh impetus. If nothing else, a confident 19-point contribution was a timely 
injection for Goode's career prospects amid fresh speculation that Argentina's 
Juan Martín Hernández is on his way to Welford Road this summer.

The Leicester coach, Marcello Loffreda, would not be drawn on the Hernández 
situation, claiming he had not spoken to his compatriot "for four or five 
months" and suggesting it would be "disrespectful" to the current squad to 
elaborate. With more than 1,700 points already in the bag forLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers>, however, Goode has seen 
off any number of potential rivals and is not about to concede the No10 jersey 
meekly. "If he turns up he turns up, if he doesn't he doesn't," said the 
27-year-old with a shrug. "There's not a lot I can do about it."

Loffreda, for his part, even reckons the fly-half could do a useful job on 
England's tour to New Zealand this summer, a view shared by Goode's former 
club-mate Austin Healey. "If he keeps playing at that level consistently, he 
could certainly be part of the England squad," said Loffreda. With Cipriani, 
Jonny Wilkinson, Charlie Hodgson and Shane Geraghty also in the frame, that 
might prove wishful thinking but Goode's thumping right boot is far from the 
solitary weapon in his locker.

Even Cipriani would have struggled to improve on the beautifully judged chip 
and slick inside pass which set up Dan Hipkiss's second-half score and, having 
cut inside to register his side's first try, it was Goode's smartly taken tap 
which instigated his team's psychologically important score four minutes after 
half-time.

Any team running in four tries against Leicester in a cup tie would normally 
expect to win comfortably butWasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> could make little headway up 
front in the absence of the injured Simon Shaw and Joe Worsley. For all the 
trickery of Cipriani, who scored two glorious tries himself and made Paul 
Sackey's second with an eye-catching overhead flick, the Tigers enjoyed the 
lion's share of possession and capitalised more often than not.

The result also leaves Wasps fighting on a narrow front. They had viewed this 
competition as a potential short cut into Europe next year but that avenue is 
now blocked. They still have seven games to play in the Guinness Premiership 
but it is by no means certain they will finish in the top four and feature in 
the end-of-season play-offs, an uncomfortable prospect for last year's Heineken 
Cup champions who are desperate to wave off the retiring Lawrence Dallaglio in 
a fitting manner.

They have made a virtue of stepping up a gear over the closing months of the 
domestic season but Leicester are now showing signs of doing something similar. 
Their lineout is working well and the return to form and fitness of Dan Hipkiss 
and Harry Ellis is encouraging news for club and country alike. There is also a 
noticeable spring in the step of Martin Castrogiovanni, the Italian prop 
responsible for the most painful-looking try celebration of the season. The 
sight of 19st 2lb of Argentina-born beef executing a leaping, twisting 
belly-flop in the in-goal area would normally attract a significant 
dressing-room fine but his captain Martin Corry was prepared to forgive and 
forget. "I'm never going to give a prop stick for scoring a try," said Corry, 
now keen to secure a second sweet victory over his long-time adversary 
Dallaglio in the clubs' Premiership rematch this weekend. If Goode comes good 
for a second successive Saturday it will be seriously bad news for Wasps.

Leicester J Murphy; Varndell, Rabeni, Hipkiss, Tuilagi; Goode ((Vesty, 76), 
Ellis; Stankovich (Ayerza, 44), Chuter (Kayser, 74), Castrogiovanni (White, 
72), L Deacon, Kay, Croft, Herring, Corry (capt).

Tries Goode, Rabeni, Hipkiss, Castrogiovanni. Cons Goode 4. Pens Goode 2.

Wasps Lewsey; Sackey, Waters (Waldouck, 66), Flutey, Doherty (Walder, 57); 
Cipriani, Reddan (McMillan, 72); Payne, Ibanez, Vickery (French, 73), 
Skivington, Palmer (Birkett, 73), Hart (Leo, 62), Haskell, Dallaglio (capt).

Tries Cipriani 2, Sackey 2. Cons Cipriani, Walder.
 