
'I don't feel trashed," says Andrew Rawnsley after two days of heavy 
bombardment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/feb/23/brown-bullying-claims-sarah-defence-pm>
 from the Labour establishment. But there is an uncharacteristic hesitation in 
his voice. The author who dared accuse Gordon Brown of bad temper and bullying 
has had his own integrity and accuracy questioned in a media firefight 
reminiscent of New Labour's heyday. "The problem is him," a glowering John 
Prescott told Newsnight viewers this week, an ­encounter that took the 
political and made it ferociously personal.

"I think it tells you something illumi­nating about the crazy logic of 
­elements of the Brown attack machine," says Rawnsley the next morning, "that 
they thought the best person to defend the prime minister was John Prescott, a 
man who gets up furious and goes to bed even angrier . . . Oh yes, and a man 
who once hit a voter."

The End of the Party 
<http://www.penguin.co.uk/nf/Book/BookDisplay/0,,9780670918515,00.html?strSrchSql=Andrew+Rawnsley%2A/The_End_of_the_Party_Andrew_Rawnsley>
, currently being serialised in the Guardian's sister paperthe Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/feb/21/gordon-brown-rage-despair>, 
is Rawnsley's bookend to New Labour rule. It takes on from 2001 a story begun 
in Servants of the People that is one part politics and two parts family 
psycho-drama – "The Simpsons and The Sopranos all in one".

"The psychology of the men at the top has mattered more than in any [previous] 
government," he says, ­detailing a world of love and loathing where policy has 
sometimes taken ­second place to extraordinary rages from the man who will lead 
Labour into the election. Other figures get walk-on parts. But it is the 
revelations about Brown's "dark Gormenghast side" that have filled the front 
pages.

If anything, Rawnsley says, his book underplays the reality of what went on. 
"There were lots of things I nearly knew about," he says. "There is a 
difference between 'everybody knows' as conjecture and getting to a point where 
you are sure enough to put it into print. It is an important difference between 
bunging up a bit of scuttlebutt on a website, and putting something down on 
pages of a national newspaper."

The timing, of course, could not be worse for Labour. Brown's brooding temper 
may be notorious, but the part-time monster who surfaces has never before been 
described in such extended detail. Rawnsley stands accused of ­digging up dirt 
in a way that can only help Conservative chances on polling day – a final stab 
in the back, Brown might well think, from a journalist who was close to Tony 
Blair.

Rawnsley is having none of it: "So I am the mastermind of a vast ­conspiracy 
spearheaded by this book, a conspiracy that has tentacles ­stretching 
everywhere? It's a ­ Cameronite-renegade-Blairite-BBCite plot against the 
glorious leader. The masons are also involved. And the Moonies. I'm afraid this 
is an example of the terrible paranoia that I uncovered when researching this 
book. Our duty [as political correspondents] is to lay before the public the 
full character of people who aspire to lead us, and then they can make their 
verdict. There is no more appropriate time to publish."

But Prescott's Newsnight attack clearly stung Rawnsley. "I do hope we are not 
going to hear any more risible bluster from the likes of John Prescott about 
other people wanting to sell books," he says. "Here's a man who cashed in on 
his time in power by ­yukking up his own trashy memoir while his party was 
still in office. Only the other week, his wife published ­another book, hanging 
out more of the dirty linen about her husband's adultery. The Prescotts flogged 
the serial of that to the Mail on Sunday, not perhaps the friendliest paper to 
the Labour party. Are the Prescotts sending the proceeds to charity, or 
spending it on more mock-Tudor beams for their house in Hull?"

"But there's a bigger point here. We've also been treated to the memoirs of 
Cherie and the diaries of Alastair Campbell and the rest – and all their books 
have just one uncorroborated source. I've talked to hundreds of ­witnesses for
The End of the Party <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/the-end-of-the-party>
. I haven't known all along what was true and not true. I have been 
interviewing over three years. There has been plenty of gossip but it doesn't 
become a fact until it has been ­ruthlessly interrogated."

That last claim, of course, is where Downing Street and Rawnsley are at war. 
The government is, in effect, ­accusing the journalist of making things up. 
First there was a pre-emptive leak that suggested Rawnsley's book would say the 
prime minister had hit someone – it doesn't, although the author does not rule 
out having putting such claims to Downing Street during the research. "If No 10 
really did plant stuff in the Mail on Sunday, someone is living in an episode 
of The Thick of It. The idea you would plant stuff damaging to the prime 
minister in a rightwing tabloid in the hope of pre-empting a book whose 
contents you are not really sure of is bonkers."

Then came the battle over the bullying. It began last Sunday with Rawnsley's 
report that the cabinet secretary, Gus O'Donnell, had been forced to ­issue the 
prime minister an "unprecedented reprimand" over his treatment of Downing 
Street staff. "This is no way to get things done," his book records O'Donnell 
saying in a "pep talk".

That charge of civil service involvement went way beyond the usual chatter 
about hurled Coke cans and staplers. It has also been denied in four different 
ways by both the men involved. A measure of Downing Street's alarm is the fact 
that Brown's allies Peter ­Mandelson, Ed Balls and his wife Sarah have all come 
forward to dismiss it. "I have known Gordon Brown for 20 years. At no point has 
it ever occurred to me thatGordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> is, or has ever been, a 
bully," said Balls yesterday.

Some may find that comment ­surprising, but Rawnsley is now under great 
pressure to prove the truth of his story. "I stand by it absolutely," he says, 
once again insisting that his source is "24-carat". By saying this, some have 
concluded that O'Donnell spoke to him directly. But doesn't his book rely too 
much on claims such as this, based on private conversations that no reader can 
verify? In his defence, Rawnsley flicks through 70 pages of references at the 
back of the book, many listing senior political and civil service figures who 
have spoken to him on the record. "The denials have moved about. It is classic 
Downing Street," he says.

On Monday night, the stakes climbed when the prime minister told the Economist 
that the story was "completely wrong". "The cabinet ­secretary has made it 
clear that he's had no inquiries, there's been no ­reprimand, there's been no 
private message to me," Brown said.

That obviously contradicts Rawnsley's claim. So is the prime minister lying, 
or is Rawnsley wrong? "We're now on the fourth different denial from No 10 in 
four days. Unlike them, I don't scream 'liar' at everyone who ­disagrees with 
me. But we all recall," he says with heavy irony, "that when he cancelled the 
election he had been planning in 2007, Gordon Brown swore that had nothing to 
do with the opinion polls moving against him."

He distances himself from the separate row over the claim by the head of an 
anti-bullying charity that Downing Street staff had called its helpline. "It 
was news to me. That is a dispute between Mrs Pratt and No 10. I am not going 
to go into it." But of course, if Rawnsley had not made his charge, she would 
not have spoken out.

'Things have gone wrong'


In many ways, the battle over the book is a microcosm of the wider story of 
New Labour. A storm over spin and personal behaviour has eclipsed the 
substantial achievements of a government that Rawnsley stresses has lasted 
longer than any non-Tory administration since 1762. Isn't he being unkind to a 
man credited with saving the world from financial calamity – a theme that only 
gets one chapter? Brown is "not completely illegitimately aspiring to get 
credit for softening recession," says Rawnsley, with faint praise, but "you 
can't take away the fact that Brown's indecision, his difficulties with working 
with colleagues have caused the ­government all sorts of problems.

"That's the really important stuff, not that he might throw something in 
frustration because things have gone wrong. It is not an accident that in less 
than three years there have been three attempts to topple this prime minister. 
Some of that is to do with unpopularity, but a lot is to do with the fear 
aroused among some colleagues by his conduct and the conduct of those around 
him."

The central thesis of the book – which stretches to 816 pages – is that Brown 
threw away his chances by arriving at No 10 arrogantly unprepared despite a 
decade's warning that the job was likely to be his. "There was a little voice 
nagging in Gordon's ear all the time; it was Tony saying, 'If you want to be 
successful you've got to be like me.' But Brown never got his own head around 
the extent he wanted a rupture with Blair and a continuation," argues Rawnsley. 
He says the success of Brown's first weeks in office hid the absence of any 
plan for power. "He just had to wade around in wellies and people said he was a 
demi-god."

The cancelled election of 2007 was the tipping point. After that, the prime 
minister "entered a very dark place". There was the rewriting of Alistair 
­Darling's pre-budget report, and then the row over the 10p tax. "One of his 
oldest friends came to Brown and said people are going to lose out, the Labour 
party is in revolt and the budget is going to go down. He couldn't face up to 
it. It was very hard for him to acknowledge a terrible mistake.

"There was this sense of this of ­absolute physical breakdown. Aides said to 
me they were pinning their hopes on a holiday. He went to Southwold – which was 
Sarah Brown's idea. They put him on a fitness regime. They tried to put systems 
in place to stop him ­seeing people, but close ministers and advisers like Ed 
Balls and Shriti Vadera kept coming up to have councils of war. It wasn't a 
holiday he needed, but a sense of purpose, and the financial ­crisis gave him 
the purpose."

So why did it all go wrong again for Brown after the crisis had eased? "As far 
as I can discover, he got some self-respect," Rawnsley says. "The tragedy of 
the rest of his premiership is that as the months went on, he was unable to 
translate that into language that people understood."

As the polls tighten, Brown is getting a last chance to fight back. His recent 
tearful television appearance was an attempt to answer the character issue: 
"People flatter me by saying I forced the prime minister to go on Piers 
­Morgan," says Rawnsley. "I think it has done him some good, but I really 
didn't think it was him."

Yet he concedes that Brown seems to have come through the worst, with 
Mandelson's return having helped ­restore New Labour's equilibrium. "Their 
relationship is a thread that weaves through book. It opens in 2001, when there 
was a titanic feud between them. Now I don't think Gordon minds Peter plotting, 
as long as he is plotting for Brown. Maybe at root the ideological differences 
weren't that fundamental" – which surely only increases the shame on all those 
involved.

Time and time again he returns to the impact of anonymous briefing. ­Darling 
was one victim. "People in No 10 belatedly realised he is the only politician 
who has a reasonable reputation for telling it as it is. All this badmouthing 
by people around the prime minister only improved his standing."

Rawnsley paints a picture of an ­anxious administration, taking its ­character 
from the man at the top. That is why, in the end, he believes character 
matters. But then, surely, journalists should have told us more about this at 
the time? "You have to do a lot of work to get this sort of thing right. 
Colleagues on the daily Westminster beat find it quite hard to do this sort of 
depth of investigation, so I don't criticise them."

How, though, will Brown respond to what he has done? "He hasn't been on the 
phone. I expect he is quite cross." And what of Lord Mandelson, who has been 
leading attacks on the book? "I think Peter will read it and say, 'Yes – you 
don't know the half of it, Andrew.'"
 