
I don't know what the chances are of a prime minister meeting his Armageddon 
because of an encounter with an elderly widow leaving her home in Rochdale to 
buy a loaf of bread, but they are probably about the same as his chances of 
winning the jackpot in the national lottery. For this rotten piece of luck, we 
can feel sorry forGordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown>.

Until he met Gillian Duffy <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gillian-duffy>
, his new "strategy of risk" in talking to ordinary people on the streets had 
seemed to be going quite well. Only one day earlier, a New York Times 
journalist accompanying him on a train journey to Southampton quoted a man who 
had met Brown at the station there as saying that, contrary to expectations, he 
had not found him at all shifty or ill-at-ease. "In the flesh, he's much 
warmer, much more friendly," said David Stokes, 49. "If people could meet him, 
they'd say, 'This man is 100% genuine.'"

It was precisely in order to convince people of this (and to give the lie to 
Andrew Rawnsley <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewrawnsley> and others 
who had portrayed him as a two-faced and paranoid) that he had embarked on this 
particular campaign strategy. As the American journalist, Sarah Lyall, also 
reported, he had emphasised at every turn during this campaign trip that he was 
"a plain-spoken man, better on substance than on style". And he even seemed to 
have persuaded Mrs Duffy of this until she learned that, having told her in 
public that she was "a good woman", he had immediately afterwards condemned her 
as "bigoted" in what he had imagined to be the privacy of his government 
limousine.

I am not quite clear why Brown had been so upset by his encounter with Mrs 
Duffy. She was, it is true, a little hectoring, and she didn't give him much 
time to answer any of her questions before asking him another one; but he had 
handled her pretty well, and they had parted on friendly terms. He might have 
taken personally her opening remark that, although a lifelongLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> supporter, she now felt 
"absolutely ashamed of saying I'm Labour". But he seemed to win her round, and 
she even ended by congratulating him on his efforts to increase the number of 
young people going to university.

The disaster for Brown lay in the fact that he was virtually alone in his 
negative assessment of Mrs Duffy. Hardly anybody watching the encounter on 
television concluded she was a bigot, for she gave no evidence of it (apart, 
some suggest, from her use of the word "flocking" to describe the migration of 
eastern Europeans to Britain). It seems most likely that Brown decided she was 
of flawed character only because (in his view) he had come badly out of their 
confrontation, while she seems to possess the very qualities of which he less 
plausibly boasts – plain-speaking and indifference to appearances. She wasn't 
even impressed or intimidated by the attention of the media (though I'm a 
little disappointed to learn that she now enjoys the services of a PR company 
and I will be utterly disillusioned if she sells her story to the Sun).

It was in an article in the Guardian 18 years ago that the American columnist 
Michael Kinsley coined his now famous definition of a political gaffe. "A 
gaffe," he wrote, "is when a politician tells the truth. Not necessarily the 
objective truth, but the truth about what he or she really thinks." This 
applies perfectly to Brown's gaffe. He was caught out saying what he really 
thought, and this contrasted so dramatically to what he had said only minutes 
earlier that it is hard to see how he can go on presenting himself as an icon 
of straightforwardness.

Laura Bush and the four Bs

Several newspapers have had sneak previews of the still-unpublished memoir of 
Laura Bush, and each has chosen to highlight different bits of it. The Guardian 
made most of her suspicion that she and President Bush had been poisoned by a 
meal they were given during their state visit to Germany in 2007. The Times, on 
the other hand, was more interested in the admittedly curious fact that Prince 
Charles carried a flask of neat gin from which he had poured glasses for 
Camilla and himself before greeting dignitaries at the White House in 2005.

In fact, there seems to be quite a lot in the book about booze, including her 
daughter Jenna's arrest for underage drinking while a student at the University 
of Texas, and her husband's own attachment to alcohol before she persuaded him 
to give it up. He had indulged, she wrote, in the "three Bs" – a bourbon before 
dinner, a beer with dinner, and a Benedictine and brandy (B&B) afterwards. 
These were followed by a fourth B – he became a bore.

Otherwise, she predictably defends her husband's record, including his 
decisions to invade Iraq and not to visit New Orleans in the immediate 
aftermath of hurricane Katrina. But strangely, she suggests that some of the 
blame for the Iraq war should be given to its chief European opponents, former 
presidents Gerhard Schröder of Germany and Jacques Chirac of France. She writes 
that she has often wondered if they "could have done more" to prevent it "if 
one of them could have persuaded Saddam to go into exile, if they could have 
conveyed that the United States was not bluffing". Is she implying that they 
actually wanted it to happen?

Smoke screen

If, as some doctors are demanding, films in which people smoke cigarettes 
should be re-classified to stop people under 18 from watching them, the same 
restriction should logically be applied to films showing anything that only 
over-18s are allowed to do. That would include people driving cars and, of 
course, voting.
 