
Gordon Ramsay is set to make millions from the £40m deal to buy the production 
companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/aug/06/all3media-optomen-television> 
behind hits including Ramsay's Kitchen Nightmares, the US version of MasterChef 
and The F Word.

All3Media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media>, the super-indie 
behind shows including Midsomer Murders and Skins, is in exclusive discussions 
over a £40m deal with Optomen Television and One Potato Two Potato, in which 
Ramsay is a 50% shareholder. In 2008 Optomen set up One Potato Two Potato as a 
joint venture with Ramsay to produce all his TV shows.

Optomen is also responsible for Heston's Feast with Heston Blumenthal, Mary 
Portas show Mary Queen of Shops and Police Camera Action!.

"All the parties can confirm that they are in advanced exclusive discussions 
and will issue a full statement in due course," said a spokesman for All3Media, 
Optomen and One Potato Two Potato.

Because of the success of Ramsay's formats internationally, including the US 
versions of Ramsay's Kitchen Nightmares and MasterChef, a co-production with 
Elisabeth Murdoch's Shine, One Potato Two Potato is considered to be a key 
focus of the deal.

As a 50% stakeholder in the company Ramsay is understood to be in line to make 
several million pounds from the deal.

It is understood that the £40m figure is a maximum possible amount payable by 
All3Media, depending on Ramsay and other key executives hitting performance 
targets.

The initial downpayment is thought to be much less than this with a deal due 
to be announced within about a week.

All3Media is keen to grow Ramsay formats in international markets, especially 
the US, where One Potato Two Potato has just a fledgling presence, having 
opened a Los Angeles office earlier this year.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 