
What a psychological double-bind ­Gordon Brown must have been caught in over 
these past few days. When things go wrong, everyone now knows, the prime 
minister tends to succumb to fury, bellowing at whoever happens to be handy, 
knocking 10 bells out of ­innocent pieces of office equipment. Not this time, 
though, because it would be absurdto greet accusations of ­temper-tantrums with 
a temper-­tantrum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/feb/21/gordon-brown-tantrums-downing-street>
. So what can be done to ease the moiling frustration that must surely be 
infecting Brown's every ­synapse? Perhaps John Prescott will generously allow 
Brown to have a ­protracted nibble on his nails.

It's all so unfair. Just think. If Brown's premiership had gone without a 
hitch, each new decision an easy one, each new crisis patently manageable, then 
no one would ever have had a ­reason to encounter Brown's "dark side". But if 
running a country were simple, there would be no shortage of people willing to 
take the job on. And there is a shortage. Brown, ­Cameron, Clegg – what a 
bunch. Where are the perfect people? Where are the Titans?Where are the guys 
from the ­Kipling poem, who can keep their heads when all around are losing 
theirs? <http://www.kipling.org.uk/poems_if.htm>

Much has been said over the last few days about how "character" has never been 
more important in our leaders, ­especially byAndrew Rawnsley, the man who spent 
three years ­tediously gathering evidence of Brown's ­drearily commonplace rages
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/feb/23/gordon-brown-bullying-andrew-rawnsley>
. Rawnsley was more of a Blair man, and Blair had an avatar to do all that 
stuff for him – Alastair Campbell. Does a finer ­character get someone else to 
yell at the staff on their behalf, leaving their own "good cop" status intact? 
Or is that just the mark of a more calculating personality?

Anyway, the staff still get yelled at. The implication of all those ­posters 
in public buildings is that this is an ­undesirable yet ­ubiquitous 
­occupational hazard: "Our staff have the right to go about their work ­without 
fear of abuse or attack. ­Abusive or ­violent behaviour will not be 
­tolerated." Was one such poster pinned to the Downing Street notice board? Did 
it include a helpful ­telephone number, exhorting victims to call the national 
bullying helpline? It seems weird that desperately downtrodden civil ­servants, 
their personal resources so frail that all they could manage to achieve in life 
was a job at the heart of government, could not ­access advice or ­support 
without turning to strangers. What afflicted the staff at Downing Street? Mass 
hysteria?

The word "bully" has been tossed around a lot in connection with this story. 
Yet I see no evidence of bullying, at least as far as I understand the term. It 
is not pleasant to work for a boss of this kind, that's for certain. It's 
­exhausting and demoralising, having to walk around on eggshells, in fear of 
the next loss of control. But while ­victims mightfeel bullied, that is not the 
case.Bullying <https://www.theguardian.com/society/bullying> is personal. 
Exposure to a powerful man with a short fuse is circumstantial. Brown, it is 
plain, does not like to be thwarted. But this has been obvious for years. That 
whole business of Brown entering a decade-long sulk because he only got to be 
chancellor – it hardly spoke of saintly good character.

Is it really true, anyway, as ­Rawnsley argues, that character is more 
­important than ever? Some people suggest this is because the nature of 
contemporary ­media dictates that the personal foibles of public figures are 
more fully revealed. Others ­suggest that the "culture of victimhood" prompts 
people to be less accepting of behaviour that doesn't make them feel good. But 
maybe "character" is more "important" or "valued" for the same reason that any 
commodity achieves more importance or value. Maybe it is in shorter supply 
nowadays.

Those baleful signs on the wall at the doctor's, or on the bus – they are, 
after all, a fairly new phenomenon. Could it really be that until recently, 
public servants were happier to be sworn at, or smacked in the mouth? Or could 
it be that such awful behaviour has actually become more ­prevalent? Are 
teachers of long experience ­deluded when they say that standards of behaviour, 
from pupils and teachers, aren't what they used to be?

A while back, rage was all the rage, and there was much discussion about the 
emergence of road-rage, air-rage and a general flowering of public displays of 
bad temper, or just high emotion. When the footballerPaul Gascoigne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/paul-gascoigne> was booked for a foul in 
the 1990 World Cup, his public tears prompted national debate. Was this a sign 
of his passion, his commitment, his rejection of the ghastly English emotional 
repression that worshipped the "stiff upper lip"? Or was it something that a 
man with some "control issues" might self-piteously indulge in? The unhappy 
answer is obvious now, but still male tears – even Brown's own tears – are seen 
as a controversial talking point, something people still hope might be a good 
thing, a sign of a more emotionally honest and open age.

In 2008, before the recession bit, there was much talk on the left about how 
to revive the concept of "good character", except that it had a new name: 
"pro-social behaviour". Avner Offer, professor of economic history at Oxford, 
suggested that consumer capitalism itself, by providing a constant source of 
novelty, undermined "self-control, both cognitive and social". Matthew Taylor, 
Blair's former head of strategy, now head of the RSA, made the excellent point 
that "the reason we find the concept of character difficult is because of class 
conflict in British society. There was a sense that good character was handed 
down from a ­patrician class to the great unwashed."

A couple of years on, and here we are, appalled that the prime minister is not 
a patrician, and that the people around him are not either. Yet wasn't the 
dumping of emotional ­repression, hypocrisy, the idea that our leaders are 
somehow better than us, what we wanted all along? IfGordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> is angry, why shouldn't he 
show it? Why shouldn't he let it all hang out?

Many commentators have made the point that successful leaders often ­display 
their ­anger, citing Winston Churchill and ­Margaret Thatcher as examples. At 
the Daily Mail, where ­ferocious dressing-downs are dispensed by editor Paul 
Dacre, there has been ­particular disgust at wimpish ­disapproval of boss-class 
fury. Yet the reason Brown's outbursts have not ­remained secret is ­because 
his more positive ­qualities are clearly not enough to inspire widespread 
loyalty. It's not Brown's ­anger that is the problem. It's the lack of enough 
of the positive character traits that might help him, and others, to put his 
anger in perspective.
 