
The Whitehall official leading a review of scandal-hit firms G4S and Serco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sercogroup> has said the government 
should take some blame for suppliers' bad behaviour because the way their 
contracts are managed is "poor in a lot of areas".

Bill Crothers, the Cabinet Office chief procurement officer, said government 
departments "get the suppliers they deserve" and claimed oversight of private 
firms delivering public services "needs to improve considerably".

His comments come after a series of scandals about companies running 
outsourced public services, including allegations of fraud atG4S 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/g4s> and Serco in a tagging contract, and 
A4E, which runs welfare-to-work programmes.

Since then, the government has been urged to slow down its massive expansion 
of multimillion-pound outsourcing contracts, which are spreading from more 
traditional areas such as IT and administration to frontline work including 
probation, health and immigration controls.

Crothers suggested some problems have been caused by the government spending 
too little time making firms "deliver what they said they would do" for a 
certain price.

Asked whether the government should take some of the blame for bad behaviour 
by its suppliers, Crothers said: "The short answer is yes. Certainly, we need 
to improve considerably. I am leading a review of contract management for 28 
contracts which happen to be Serco and G4S. Our plan is to come out with 
recommendations that are more than about Serco and G4S. How we manage contracts 
has been in a lot of areas poor, no question."

Crothers said the government puts a lot of effort into deciding which 
suppliers should be hired, but "traditionally spends relatively little time 
managing a contract once it's let".

"Actually, that's where value leaks," he said. "Spending time with a supplier, 
ensuring they're delivering what they said they would do, their pricing for 
what they deliver – just basic stuff – we need to spend more time on that and 
get people who are qualified and experienced to do it."

Crothers said he was not just talking about G4S and Serco, as "there are other 
examples where things haven't gone well". A spokesman for the Cabinet Office 
later said Crothers did not intend to suggest the latest problems with G4S and 
Serco are "all the government's fault".

The senior Cabinet Office official also said more time should be spent 
encouraging small suppliers to bid for government work because "what happens is 
in IT we tend to get the oligopoly – the same suppliers bidding".

However, he said the big outsourcing companies would continue to get business 
from the government as "there is a lot of profit to be had" and argued the 
firms "want to end bad practices as much as we do".

The coalition now offers around £20bn in contracts to deliver public services 
each year – more than double the value in 2008 – as part of its drive to run a 
more efficient civil service.

Crothers made his remarks at an event held at the Cabinet Office attended by 
outsourcing companies including Capita, and City of London financial analysts.

At the presentation, Francis Maude, a Cabinet Office minister, said he has 
found £5.4bn of savings this year so far compared with the level of spending in 
the year before the coalition came to power. He is aiming to find £15bn before 
the end of the financial year.

Sajid Javid, a Treasury minister, said the savings are an example of the way 
civil servants are "radically rethinking the way they operate to increase 
productivity and support small and medium-sized businesses".

The drive to save money has created an opportunity for outsourcing companies. 
However, G4S and Serco are under intense pressure to prove they offer value for 
money after the Serious Fraud Office launched a formal criminal investigation 
into claims they overcharged by tens of millions of pounds for the electronic 
tagging of offenders. Crothers is now leading a review of 28 contracts that the 
two companies currently hold with the government worth a total of £9bn, 
including the management of the atomic weapons establishment at Aldermaston.

Last year, A4E was under a similar spotlight over its historic welfare-to-work 
contracts, with nine of its former employees appearing in court last month 
charged with fraud.

Earlier this summer, the Institute for Government warned there have been 
mistakes in the way outsourcing in areas such as care for older people, 
schools, probation and employment services had been set up and managed.
 