
It was the skeletons that apparently had four legs or three arms that startled 
the archaeologists, not the mere fact of finding masses of human bones in the 
back yard of one of London's most famous teaching hospitals.

In 2006 archaeologists from Museum of London Archaeology  
<http://www.museumoflondonarchaeology.org.uk/> stumbled on evidence of a grim 
chapter in the history ofthe London Hospital  
<http://www.bartsandthelondon.nhs.uk/about-us/how-to-find-us/the-royal-london/>
and other hospital – the decades when the corpses of executed criminals were 
the only legal source of bodies to teach surgeons anatomy. In the early 19th 
century there was a problem: the number of crimes meriting a death sentence 
fell sharply. The gap was filled by corpses dug up by grave robbers, or in the 
case of the London Hospital the unfortunate poor who died in its wards, and in 
the most infamous cases by murder.

In the 19th century the London Hospital had had a burial ground, neatly marked 
on later maps, but the archaeologists were digging in unmarked ground where 
there was no record of burials. The bones had been neatly buried in long since 
rotted coffins, in the Christian east-west alignment, but they were a bizarre 
jumble of skulls with the crowns neatly cut through like the top of a hard 
boiled egg, bones wired for teaching, or bones clearly dissected rather than 
cut through in operations, and animal bones including dogs, tortoises and a 
guinea pig.

Altogether they uncovered 262 burials, but in the confusion of different 
remains in the same coffin, layers of burials which had slumped down together 
into the ground, and many missing skulls, hands and feet, they may have found 
the remains of up to 500 individuals.

It took the archaeologists years of poring over hospital records – those for 
the London on either side of a crucial date, the Anatomy Act of 1832, were 
missing – and contemporary newspaper accounts, pamphlets, medical and social 
history collections, even ballads and broadsheets, to understand what they had 
found. The site was a covert burial ground where the unfortunates who died in 
the hospital, having been dissected illegally in the adjoining anatomy school, 
were buried by night.

The excavation has inspired the new exhibition at the Museum of London 
<http://www.museumoflondon.org.uk/London-Wall/Whats-on/Exhibitions-Displays/Doctors-Dissection-Resurrection-Men/>
, as gruesome as any Halloween horror film.

The terror inspired by grave robbers is vividly reflected in objects such as 
an extraordinary patented locking iron coffin, from the vaults of St Bride's 
church, designed so that once it was closed it was almost impossible to open 
again. Few were wealthy enough to afford such protection.

The exhibition includes some of the bones found at the London, and also 
remains of grave robbers who themselves ended by being executed and handed over 
to the medical schools. There is a fragment of the brain of William Burke, 
partner of William Hare – the legendary Edinburgh grave robbers who turned to 
murder to obtain bodies more conveniently. There is also tattooed skin of 
either Thomas Williams or John Bishop, whose case was even more notorious in 
London. The case of "the Italian boy" – probably a poor young cattle herder 
whom they captured at Smithfield – provoked such outrage that it helped bring 
about the Anatomy Act which ensured a supply of legal bodies. This introduced a 
new terror for the poor who knew that if they died in hospital and their 
families could not afford to claim and bury them, the anatomists would have 
them.

In the 1820s the London Hospital's surgeons would have regarded themselves as 
fortunate. They did not need to buy from the body snatchers. Enough of their 
patients died, including previously healthy strong men in the prime of life 
injured on ships or at the nearby docks, far from home and unclaimed, to 
provide them with a ready supply.

The hospital evidently had so many bodies that they were able to sell the 
surplus to other hospitals, but their own burial ground was targeted by body 
snatchers. In 1823 the prison governor, William Valentine, reported that 
patients were woken by strange sounds in the night, and saw men trying to dig 
up a body buried immediately below their ward windows: the terrified patients 
raised enough uproar to frighten off the grave robbers.

In 1832 one of the most intriguing characters in the story, a man called 
William Millard, was arrested in the burial ground. He was charged with 
vagrancy – since he had not actually got around to digging up any bodies – and 
eventually died in prison. His enraged wife Anne was a formidable character who 
petitioned parliament, and not only published a pamphlet called "An account of 
the circumstances attending the imprisonment and death of the late Mr William 
Millard" but bought a printing press to do so. She continued to insist after 
his death what he claimed in life, that he was not a grave robber but had been 
transporting bodies with the tacit sanction of the hospital. Millard, it seems, 
may not have come to dig up a body, but to collect one from the back door.

• Doctors, Dissection and Resurrection Men 
<http://www.museumoflondon.org.uk/London-Wall/Whats-on/Exhibitions-Displays/Doctors-Dissection-Resurrection-Men/>
, Museum of London, 19 October until April 2014. The Guardian is the media 
partner for this exhibition.
 