
Guardian Law is a year old. Pessimists could have foreseen some of the big 
developments in the legal world - particularly the planned cuts to legal aid 
and the increasingly tense relationship between judges and the government - but 
who would have predicted the rise of the superinjunction? We asked our regular 
writers for their predictions for the next year.

Joshua Rozenberg

The coming year will be marked by a steady deterioration in the provision of 
justice. Most court users will have to wait longer for hearings in ever more 
distant courtrooms; more court papers will go missing; more litigants-in-person 
- unable to obtain legal representation - will slow down the courts even 
further. The judges will find it increasingly difficult to cope without 
adequate resources and injustices will abound.

Siobhain Butterworth

Libel reform <https://www.theguardian.com/law/libel-reform>, privacy law and 
regulation of the press will continue to make headlines while debate about the 
government's draft defamation bill goes on in the background. Prior restraint 
will go out of fashion with celebrities who won't want to spend money on 
gagging orders that are routinely disregarded by online gossips. We will see, 
as a consequence, more litigation over media intrusions into the private lives 
of public figures and judges will be inclined to award very substantial damages 
- higher even than the £60,000 awarded to Max Mosley - for breaches of article 
8 rights.

Alex Aldridge

With undergraduate tuition fees rising to £9,000 next year, there'll be plenty 
of anxious reflections about the legal profession attracting only the 
independently wealthy. Law firms and barristers' chambers are likely to respond 
by broadening the spread of universities from which they recruit, and launching 
sponsored degree initiatives in the style of accountancy firm KPMG. But don't 
expect too much: the emptiness of the profession's pronouncements on social 
mobility are notorious. Law may be "open to all" , but lawyers are more than 
seven times as likely to have been privately educated than members of the 
general population.

Neil Rose

Alternative business structures should come into being on October 6, and the 
uncertainty and speculation about the shape of the new legal order that has 
gripped the profession for several years will finally begin to harden into 
fact. Change seems inevitable, even though nothing happens quickly in the legal 
world. The threat of non-traditional competition is already encouraging new 
approaches to the practice of law. It will be a more than fascinating year

Jon Robins

Many happy returns! If "access to justice is the hallmark of the civil society,
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/interactive/2010/nov/17/legal-aid-criminal-justice>
" what does that mean? That's the single issue I hope will "grip" legal 
discourse (but suspect it won't given this week'ssparsely attended debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/may/13/mps-split-legal-aid-reforms-jon-robins>
 in the Commons).

Not even one in three of us is now eligible for legal aid. That's before a 
potentially fatal triple-whammy heading this way: the government's plan to 
remove £350m from a £2.1bn scheme, the ongoing collapse of the not-for-profit 
advice sector, and the uncertain experiment of the Jackson reforms. OK, not as 
sexy as superinjunctions - yawn - but it's an issue that genuinely goes to the 
heart of a civil – and indeed - civilised society.

Maya Wolfe-Robinson

In the past year, we've attempted to bring you the biggest domestic legal 
stories, shone a light onEurope's legal landscape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/series/europe-on-trial> and covered the 
increasing developments in international law. At our official launch party, 
Judge Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf from the international court of justicewelcomed the 
site's potential 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/afua-hirsch-law-blog/2010/sep/09/1> to 
translate the complex and convoluted language of international law and 
communicate it in an immediate way. As international law cements itself in the 
global discourse, its role will continue to grow. I look forward to trying to 
keep up, and hope I'll be helped by all the courts joining theICC on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/#!/IntlCrimCourt>.

Ros Taylor

The attorney general and the lord chief justice will have to decide whether 
jurors who Google defendants should be prosecuted - and jurors and (some) 
newspapers will have to decide whether they intend to obey the law on contempt 
of court. Divorcing couples will try settling their differences through 
mediation. Some won't manage it. Some will decide to stay together after all. 
David Cameron will somehow manage to ignore a couple of distasteful European 
court of human rights judgments without having to leave the Union. Thousands of 
people who would have received legal aid will not, but we will hear very little 
of their plight.
 