
Gwendoline Riley readily admits that her need to write borders on the 
obsessive. "Definitely," she says, eyes lowered as though revealing some 
intimate secret. "I can't muster the energy to engage with any other thing, so 
thank God I can do this." She gives a short, brittle laugh. "Because, if I had 
to go without it, it would be very depressing trying to do other stuff… I mean, 
I can't forge a new career from scratch at this point."

Luckily, there is no need for her to do so. At the age of 33, Riley has just 
publishedOpposed Positions, her fourth book. Written in the first person, it 
tells the story of Aislinn Kelly, a 30-year-old occasional novelist, beset by 
both financial and emotional insecurity and plagued by what one reviewer has 
accurately described as "one of the most convincingly monstrous fathers in 
contemporary novels".

When we meet in a restaurant near Riley's Shepherd's Bush home, she concedes 
that her protagonists are always fairly similar to her. "I've tried writing in 
the third person," she says. "I can't do it – it always sounds so false." What 
about writing as a male narrator? Riley gives a semi-comic shudder. "Ugh, men's 
brains! That vipers' nest? No."

Opposed Positions took her four years to complete – it was, she says, by far 
and away the most difficult book she's written, partly because much of it was 
based loosely on personal experience.

Perhaps for this reason Riley seems to approach the interview process with 
deep suspicion. For the first 10 minutes after we meet, she is uneasy and 
scratches at her arm as she answers a question. When I tell her how much I 
loved the book, she smiles awkwardly. "I feel all wrong-footed now." Riley 
orders a gin and slimline tonic. Drinking it seems to relax her.

The nervousness is rather endearing given Riley's litany of achievements. Her 
debut book, Cold Water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/may/11/fiction.reviews1>, was published 
when she was 22 and won a Betty Trask Award for first-time novelists.Joshua 
Spassky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/jun/02/featuresreviews.guardianreview33>
, her third, won the Somerset Maugham Award in 2008. A volume of short stories,
Tuesday Nights and Wednesday Mornings, appeared along the way. Her writing has 
been compared to F Scott Fitzgerald, Carson McCullers, Virginia Woolf and 
Albert Camus. Riley's precocity would no doubt be irritating were her talent 
not so extraordinary. Anne Enright gaveOpposed Positions a rave review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/03/opposed-positions-gwendoline-riley-review>
 in theGuardian and concluded that Riley was "more than up to the job of 
writing the wasted hinterlands of the human heart".

Did that please her? A rapid nod of the head. "I really liked The Gathering 
[the novel for which Enright won theMan Booker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize> in 2007]. I'm definitely into 
that whole family-imploding-into-a-horrible-black-hole thing."

In Opposed Positions, both the family and the black hole are skilfully 
managed. At times, Riley's prose is so psychologically exact, so brilliantly 
attuned to the smallest gradations in atmosphere and tension, that reading it 
is almost physically painful. The portraits of Aislinn's disconnected mother, 
her bullying, manipulative father and her passive-aggressive, tuba-playing 
stepfather are brilliantly done. Does she really hate the tuba so much? "Oh 
yes. There've been a lot of times when an argument's been going on, accompanied 
by the sound of tuba-playing next door," she replies.

A fair amount of real-life experience has gone into the writing, she says, 
though she's unwilling to go into details. But, as with Aislinn, her parents 
divorced when she was young and her mother took her and her younger brother to 
live with Riley's maternal grandparents in the Wirral.

"It was horrible," she says baldly. Writing became a retreat and the young 
Riley was forever making up short stories. "I liked the privacy of it, I 
suppose." In fact, it never occurred to her to do anything else with her life. 
When pressed to explain where this drive came from, Riley is unsure. "I didn't 
have much of a family. I don't see my dad. My mum… I couldn't tell you what she 
thinks. No one was there going, 'Follow your dream!'"

She doesn't want children of her own, she says. Why? "Philip Larkin wrote a 
poem about it didn't he? For that reason. Because the buck stops here. Because 
I've got bad blood. Because what would a child do with themselves? It's too 
difficult."

Riley ended up doing a degree in English literature at Manchester Metropolitan 
University. "I loved it, it was fantastic," she says. "I remember writing 
essays and waking up in the middle of the night with ideas and wanting to write 
them down." She graduated with a 2:1 and became literary editor for a brief 
time at Manchester's local magazine,CityLife. After that, she worked on and off 
in a bar for eight years while she wrote, eking out a living on literary grants 
when she couldn't make ends meet.

In her 20s, Riley enjoyed several brief spells in America, a place where she 
found it easier to think and write –Joshua Spassky was set in Asheville, the 
North Carolina town whereZelda Fitzgerald was killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2007/may/18/wouldyouswapplaceswithzel>
 in a fire. "I just needed to be on a different continent," Riley says. "It's 
not an original idea. I just found being 3-5,000 miles away from everything was 
better."

These days, having moved from Manchester to London, Riley still writes 
full-time, getting up in the mornings, sitting down at her computer – "One of 
those netbooks that look like sandwich toasters" – and not moving until her 
inspiration has dried up. She does not own a television or a radio and is a 
fervent note-taker. "If something strikes me, I have to get it down, otherwise 
you lose it… I know, having done this for a while now, that I'm terribly slow. 
It takes me a long time to get anything together… To begin with, it's all a bit 
haphazard. There's no plot, no characters or anything. I just see what catches 
fire."

Her inspirations come in varied forms – she's a die-hard Morrissey fan and 
counts Fitzgerald, JD Salinger, Philip Roth andAlice Munro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-munro> among her favourite authors. 
Indeed, she has unapologetically high literary standards. "Someone told me I 
should readHHhH [the debut of French author Laurent Binet] recently," Riley 
says. "I thought it was absolute bollocks."

Riley is already working on her fifth novel, despite being in her early 30s. 
Does she feel young, I wonder. She laughs, her face clearing. "No, I don't feel 
particularly young. I used to feel a lot more gauche than I do now. I used to 
feel very embarrassed – not knowing how to act or what to wear. I was 
constantly out of my depth."

And now? She grins. "I feel a little less at sea."
 