
Afghan officials today declared Hamid Karzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamid-karzai> the winner of the country's 
disputed presidential poll after cancelling a planned runoff election.

The announcement came after Karzai's main challenger, Abdullah Abdullah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah>, dropped out of the race 
on the grounds that the vote would not be free or fair.

"The Independent Election Commission [IEC] declares the esteemed Hamid Karzai 
as the president … because he was the winner of the first round and the only 
candidate in the second round," the commission's chairman, Azizullah Ludin, 
told reporters.

"The constitution of Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> does not require any sort of 
turnout parameters for the second round," he said, adding that not holding a 
second round would save money.

The IEC has come under intense western pressure to swiftly name Karzai the 
winner and end the political uncertainty.

A legitimate Afghan leader is seen as essential to western war aims, and the 
lack of a credible result has prevented the US president, Barack Obama, from 
being able to make a decision on whether to send up to 40,000 more troops to 
Afghanistan.

Britain and the US both welcomed the cancellation of the runoff. A Downing 
Street spokesman said Gordon Brown had telephoned Karzai to congratulate him on 
his victory.

"They discussed the importance of the president moving quickly to set out a 
unifying programme for the future of Afghanistan," the spokesman said.

The UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, who is on a surprise visit to Kabul, 
congratulated Karzai, but said the president should move fast to form a new 
administration.

"Afghanistan now faces significant challenges and the new president must move 
swiftly to form a government that is able to command the support of both the 
Afghan people and the international community," he said in statement.

Abdullah announced his decision to sit out the 7 November vote 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/nov/01/afghan-election-karzai-abdullah> 
yesterday after almost all his demands for changes to the IEC and the 
suspension of government ministers – which he said would have reduced the risk 
of major fraud in the next round of voting – were rejected.

Abdullah's announcement threw the election into disarray, with some analysts 
describing the situation as "a shocking failure" of efforts by the west and 
other international communities to build a democracy in Afghanistan.

Abdullah told thousands of supporters he had no choice but to bow out "because 
of the action taken by this government and the action taken by the IEC".

Both Karzai's campaign and the commission initially said Saturday's runoff 
should go ahead because there was no other legal method for choosing the 
president.

However, the IEC's chief electoral officer said he was concerned about 
security risks and the legitimacy of the next government if Karzai was the only 
candidate.

"If we go for a runoff and it did not give much legitimacy to the president 
and many lives are lost, it is also a concern for us," Daoud Ali Najafi told 
Reuters.

Karzai faced unenviable choices after Abdullah's withdrawal. Either he went 
ahead and won a mandate based on a second round which was likely to attract 
even fewer participants than the first vote in August, or he could be appointed 
as leader without the 50% of votes the constitution says are required.

Senior diplomats had privately said they did not want to risk troops' lives to 
protect another election. They said there was enough ambiguity in Afghanistan's 
constitution to allow the country's supreme court to rule a second round 
unnecessary and that Karzai should be elected on the basis that he received the 
highest number of votes in the first.

The US secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, said Abdullah's decision to 
withdraw from the election would not affect the vote's legitimacy.

But Nadjib Yussufi, a senior Abdullah campaign member, said that if Karzai had 
any "political wisdom" he would back the establishment of an interim government 
and reform of the IEC, allowing Abdullah to participate in elections in the 
spring.

Abdullah hinted he would consider re-entering the race if conditions for a 
runoff were made fairer.
 