
23 August 2014

At 5.30pm the 24-year-old Iranian asylum seeker Hamid Kehazaei arrives at the 
clinic at the Manus Island regional processing centre. He says he has been sick 
for two days, andcomplains of fever, chills, a sore throat and an aching body 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/hamid-kehazaei-inquest-manus-island-asylum-seeker-death>
. A small, infected sore is noticed on his lower leg, and another in his groin. 
He is put on intravenous antibiotics and pain relief medication. His fever does 
not abate.

24 August 

Despite continued antibiotic treatment, Kehazaei’s fever remains high. His 
blood pressure drops, heart-rate increases and the infection worsens and 
appears to spread. By the end of the day, he is vomiting and needs to be taken 
to the toilet by wheelchair.

The day my friend Hamid Kehazaei died | Behrouz Boochani
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/the-day-my-friend-hamid-kehazaei-died>
25 August

8am: Kehazaei is worse still. A Manus Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island> senior medical 
officer, Dr Marten Muis, and an emergency doctor, Leslie King, examine him and 
consult about his proposed treatment. They agree he should be evacuated on 
scheduled commercial flight at 5.30pm that afternoon. Another doctor whose 
rotation has ended, Dr Richard McGrath, is booked on that flight and agrees to 
act as medical escort.

Muis speaks by phone with the area medical director for offshore processing, 
Dr Anthony Renshaw, who agrees that Kehazaei should be evacuated at 5.30pm.

9.11am: Muis calls International SOS to request the “urgent” medical transfer 
of Kehazaei to hospital. The International Health and Medical Services 
coordinating doctor in Sydney agrees that he should be evacuated at 5.30pm. 
International SOS doctors say Australia would offer “gold-standard” care but 
that the Department of Immigration and Border Protectionis reluctant to 
transfer asylum seekers to Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/hamid-kehazaei-inquest-doctors-faced-political-pressure-over-patient-transfers>
 and often rejects those requests, so suggests Port Moresby as a secondary 
option.

Hamid Kehazaei inquest exposes failures of Australia's secretive immigration 
regime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/10/hamid-kehazaei-inquest-exposes-failures-of-australias-secretive-immigration-regime>
12.29pm: Renshaw calls the department’s assistant director of detention health 
services, Caroline Gow, in Canberra to discuss Kehazaei’s transfer. He says he 
told her about 5.30pm flight. Gow claims he said next flight was at 11am the 
next day.

1.15pm: Gow sends an email to Amanda Little, the Canberra-based director of 
detention health services, requesting the “urgent medical transfer” of Kehazaei 
to hospital. Medical staff on Manus state:

This client has exhausted all antibiotic treatment that is available on Manus 
Island. The client is deteriorating despite treatment with antibiotics 
available. There are risks of the infection spreading, leading to sepsis – 
life-threatening widespread systemic infection.

Afternoon: Doctors debate giving Kehazaei gentamicin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/02/hamid-kehazaei-inquest-manus-island-asylum-seeker-gentamicin>
, a different antibiotic, that may have helped his condition. They decide 
against prescribing the drug because the blood chemistry analysing machine in 
the clinic is broken and without it they believe the drug’s use risks renal 
failure.

5.30pm: Little is in meetings throughout the afternoon, and has not seen the 
transfer request. Gow calls Little to alert her to the email.

6.01pm: Little responds to the email but does not escalate the request for 
approval. She says:

I am wondering why this can’t be managed at Lorengau hospital? Even using 
something ‘unusual’ should be able to be managed locally. Is there a [drug] 
supply issue that we are unaware of? Again, these should be brought in, rather 
than the person being transferred if this is the case. DIBP staff on island are 
being pushed for this urgent transfer in the next 18 hours, however I don’t 
have adequate information to be able to escalate at this point if this is still 
warranted.

6.30pm: Renshaw responds to Little’s email, calling her to emphasise the 
critical nature of Kehazaei’s condition.


7.24pm: Little emails the immigration department assistant secretary Paul 
Windsor in Canberra with the “escalation” of the transfer request. Windsor has 
gone home for the day and does not read the email until 13 hours later.

26 August 

8am: King and Muis examine Kehazaei. His case is upgraded from “urgent” to 
“emergency”. King tells Muis: “There’s no doubt he’s now an emergency, he’s 
deteriorated very rapidly in the last few hours. We need to get this guy out 
fast.”

8.30am: Windsor reads the transfer request email from Little and escalates 
request to the first assistant secretary, John Cahill.

8.41am: Kehazaei’s transfer is approved by the department. His condition has 
deteriorated to the extent he cannot fly on a commercial plane. The latest 
recommendation from doctors is that he be taken directly to Brisbane by air 
ambulance.

Late morning: Kehazaei is now septic, according to doctors. He is moaning in 
pain, and is confused and distressed. He has pulled his intravenous lines from 
his arm and is combative with staff who try to give him oxygen. Driven to the 
airfield in an ambulance, he is left lying on a gurney in the sun, waiting for 
the plane.

Lunchtime: Kehazaei is flown by air ambulance to Port Moresby’s Pacific 
international hospital, in defiance of doctors’ recommendation who have said he 
should fly directly to Brisbane.

Overnight: Kehazaei has three heart attacks in hospital in Port Moresby.

27 August 

Morning: Kehazaei is flown by air ambulance, now unconscious, to Brisbane’s 
Mater hospital. He is checked in at10pm. He does not regain consciousness.

2 September

Kehazaei is declared brain dead. His family are consulted.

5 September 

The family give permission for Kehazaei’s life-support machine to be switched 
off. They give instructions that his organs are to be donated. At7.25pm 
Kehazaei dies.
 