
A new Italian study points towards a handy way to identify who might become a 
top doctor. The method: Compare the lengths of a person's second finger and 
fourth finger. It's that simple.

The monograph is called The Second-To-Fourth Digit Ratio Correlates with the 
Rate of Academic Performance in Medical School Students 
<http://www.spandidos-publications.com/mmr/4/3/471> and appears in the May-June 
issue of the journal Molecular Medical Reports.

Researchers who spend time studying this finger ratio – the individuals who 
have found meaning by looking to both sides when someone shows them a middle 
finger – call it "2D:4D". That's shorthand for the phrase "second-to-fourth 
digit length ratio".

The big dog, the Einstein of the field, is Professor John Manning of the 
University of Liverpool, whose work has includedhow to spot footballing stars 
of the future <http://www.liv.ac.uk/researchintelligence/issue14/index.html>, 
by looking at finger length.

The authors of the new study, mostly medical researchers from the University 
of Catania in Sicily, and Kore University in Enna, Italy, write that: "2D:4D 
has been shown to predict the success of men who play sports and of financial 
traders." But, they claim, their paper is the first to reveal what 2D:4D says 
about high flyers in a highly competitive university system such as the 
state-run Italian medical schools.

After measuring the fingers of 48 male medical students using callipers 
accurate to 0.2 millimetres, they concluded that students with a slightly lower 
2D:4D ratio of the right hand (although, confusingly, it is not quite clear 
whether this means the fingers are more similar or different in length) are 
more likely to be successful. The researchers noted in particular how those who 
passed their medical school admissions test had a significantly lower 2D:4D 
ratio of the right than those who failed. Interestingly, however, finger ratios 
could not predict how those students performed in their exams.

Their findings contrast with a series of reports done by a different group at 
the University of Catania,which I described here a few months ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/nov/01/random-promotion-research>. 
Those other researchers, mainly physicists, published a study called The Peter 
Principle Revisited: A Computational Study. It demonstrates mathematically that 
organisations would become more efficient by promoting people at random. This 
earned them an Ig Nobel prize last year, in the field of management. In a 
subsequent paper they demonstrate, also mathematically, that democracies would 
work better if they selected politicians at random.

It's possible that identifying future stars by examining their fingers is even 
better than choosing people at random. But until and unless somebody does the 
research, no one can say for sure.

• Marc Abrahams is editor of the bimonthly Annals of Improbable Research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/research> and organiser of the Ig Nobel 
prize
 