

Smoking gun ... Sillitoe at the 2004 Edinburgh Book Festival. Photograph: 
Murdo Macleod

Today is Alan Sillitoe's 80th birthday, an event that's definitely worth 
celebrating even if it makes my next clause about him being the most durable 
Angry Young Man vaguely ridiculous. He is a fine writer. His early successes 
like Saturday Night And Sunday Morning and the stories collected in The 
Loneliness Of The Long Distance runner have rightfully elbowed and kicked their 
way into the canon. Some would say subsequent works like Birthday, A Start In 
Life and the autobiographical Life Without Armour are even better.

About those later works, I should admit ignorance, although I'm planning on 
reading them soon. Especially since I've been spurred on by my recent 
re-reading of The Loneliness Of The Long Distance Runner collection. This book 
remains remarkably fresh. And I say "fresh" not only in the sense that good and 
vivid literature is always relevant, but also in that I've read very little 
written since that is anything like it.

Swap "borstal" for ASBO-hoody-purdah and the titular teenage jogger's sense of 
alienation is eerily modern - ditto the contempt and fear in which society 
holds him. Have "Mr Raynor the School-teacher" spy on the girls in a Top Shop 
instead of a draper's and his despair about his unruly pupils ever getting any 
kind of education could be about today's classrooms. It wouldn't take too many 
cosmetic changes for the book to feel entirely contemporary... Except for the 
fact that nothing like it is being written today. I struggle to think of any 
new novels with so-called working class narrators treated with such defiant 
realism and so free of sentimentality and stereotype.

In Saturday's Review, DJ Taylor made an excellent case for Sillitoe 
<http://books.theguardian.com/review/story/0,,2261064,00.html> as a writer 
distinguished more by his artistry than his "realistic'" treatment of the 
working class. I'm largely in agreement. The Loneliness Of The Long Distance 
runner is more resonant because of its writing than any political thesis you 
want to attach to it. But I part company with Taylor when he says "the working 
class novel is only one among many fictional varieties", continuing in the 
implication that the working class novel is a genre of its own from which you 
can pick any number from the shelves of your local bookshop.

It could be a simple case of my ignorance - in which case please do correct me 
in the comments below - but the only white working class narratives I have read 
recently have come in crime novels, drug novels or fairly miserable 
fictionalised autobiographies. That's not to disparage these books - plenty of 
them are excellent. But they do all slot into stereotypes of what the working 
class should be doing; unlike Sillitoe's which caused a stir precisely because, 
as Taylor put it, reviewers thought his characters "ought not to exist".

As noted, I could be wrong. There could be plenty of non-middle-class voices 
out there.

But if I am right, the difficult question arises of why this should be. As 
proved by themiles of column inches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/mar/02/britishidentity.guardiancolumnists>
 already rolled out over the recent BBC investigations into what it means to be 
a member of today's white working class, any number of theories can be put 
forward. When thinking about this article, I trotted off down my own blind 
allies about the way so much of publishing is still treated like a posh 
finishing school and the shameful tacit agreement that one of the prime 
signifers of being "white working class" is lack of education, meaning the 
literary world almost by definition excludes those outside certain backgrounds. 
A belief that has been played out in all it's ugly brutality this week in the 
panic over school places and what that shows about the general failure of our 
secondary educational system to select on any basis other than wealth (except 
perhaps, even more disgracefully, religion) since the destruction of the 
grammar schools...

Maybe there's something in those ideas. Probably, there are a dozens more 
complicating factors as well. What is certain, however, is that the situation 
would certainly benefit from a blast of fresh air from a new writer with the 
talent of Sillitoe. His ability to shine through all murky generalisations 
about the "common man" is needed almost more today than it was 50 years ago.
 