
Harvey Pekar, who has died aged 70, was the writer of American Splendor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-splendor>, an autobiographical comic 
in which he wrote about the everyday, often mundane, aspects of his life. Pekar 
experimented with the narrative form and used a shifting roster of artists on 
his comics, but it was the sheer ordinariness of the stories that slowly earned 
him a strong following, critical acclaim and comparisons with Chekhov and 
Dostoevsky.

Set in the rundown neighbourhoods of Cleveland, Ohio, American Splendor's 
world was revealed without exaggeration or self-aggrandisement. Pekar, 
opinionated and curmudgeonly, was often the most frustrating and aggravating 
character to appear in his books. The writer became a regular guest on the 
talkshow Late Night With David Letterman, but his confrontational style led to 
him being banned from it.

In 1990, Pekar was diagnosed with lymphoma and underwent chemotherapy. Heavy 
medication led to hallucinations and occasional paralysis, but the cancer went 
into remission. His wife, Joyce Brabner, kept detailed notes during this period 
and collaborated with him on Our Cancer Year (1994), an unflinching account 
of their relationship, illustrated by Frank Stack.

Our Cancer Year was central to the 2003 movie American Splendor, directed by 
Shari Springer Berman and Robert Pulcini, and starring Paul Giamatti as Pekar 
and Hope Davis as Brabner. Pekar and Brabner also appeared as themselves in the 
film, which won major prizes at the Sundance and Cannes festivals.

When asked in an interview whether he thought the film was an accurate account 
of his life,Pekar replied <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2003/dec/19/3>: 
"I don't know what's normal because I don't see too many movies ... but yeah, 
it felt right. It felt true." Not surprisingly, he gave his own account of the 
film-making process in his 2004 collection, American Splendor: Our Movie Year.

Born in Cleveland, he was the eldest son of Saul and Dora Pekar, Polish Jews 
who had recently moved to the US from Białystok. Pekar grew up in a 
working-class neighbourhood, where his father ran a grocery store. After 
graduating from Shaker Heights high school in 1957, he held down a series of 
short-lived jobs, including stints as a janitor and an elevator operator.

He attended Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland but dropped out after 
a year. He was also briefly in the navy – as he later recounted in his 2005 
comic, The Quitter, drawn by Dean Haspiel. In 1965 he settled into a dull 
but stable job as a clerk at a Veterans Affairs medical centre in Cleveland, 
where he remained until his retirement in 2001.

Pekar had read comic books from the age of six but lost interest in them after 
a few years because he found the stories cliched and repetitive. In 1959 he 
began writing jazz reviews for magazines. His interest in comics was rekindled 
in 1962 when he met the 19-year-old artistRobert Crumb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/robert-crumb>.

Crumb was already involved in the nascent "comix" scene of artists who were 
creating underground, counterculture strips. Pekar, although impressed by the 
freedom of expression offered by this new movement, felt that they concentrated 
on a bohemian lifestyle which he – as a wage slave – did not share.

Pekar enjoyed the directness of writers such as Henry Miller and felt 
that even his workaday life had its moments of humour and drama. In the early 
1970s he began writing stories, using stick figures and laying out the scripts 
as storyboards. He showed these to Crumb, who offered to illustrate some of the 
stories. Their collaboration appeared in Crumb's The People's Comics in 1972 
and Pekar's autobiographical tales were featured in other underground titles, 
including Bizarre Sex, Flaming Baloney, Snarf and Flamed-out Funnies.

In 1975 he conceived the idea of self-publishing so that he could write 
longer, more involved stories. Although he lost money on the first issue of 
American Splendor, published in 1976, later annual issues – which ran to around 
60 pages – slowly found an audience. By the early 90s, American Splendor had a 
print run of 10,000 copies per issue.

Pekar continued to review books and records and write essays, often for the 
alternative press. From 1992 to 1996, he also penned a series of comic strips 
about jazz, drawn by Joe Sacco, for the Village Voice newspaper. Doubleday 
published the collection American Splendor: The Life and Times ofHarvey Pekar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/harvey-pekar> in 2006. A sequel, More 
American Splendor, came out the following year.

American Splendor was published by Dark Horse Comics from 1994 to 2002 and 
Vertigo (DC Comics) from 2006 to 2008, giving Pekar the financial stability to 
work on other projects, including Unsung Hero (illustrated by David Collier, 
2003), about the experiences in Vietnam of an African-American colleague at the 
VA hospital where Pekar worked.

Pekar wrote Students for a Democratic Society: A Graphic History (drawn by 
Gary Dumm, 2008) and Studs Terkel's Working: A Graphic Adaptation (drawn by 
various artists, 2009). He also contributed to The Beats: A Graphic History 
(various artists, 2009).

He divorced twice before marrying Joyce in 1983. The couple adopted a 
daughter, Danielle, in 1998. They survive him, along with his younger brother, 
Allen.

• Harvey Lawrence Pekar, comics writer, born 8 October 1939; died 12 July 2010
 