
Harvey Pekar <https://www.theguardian.com/books/harvey-pekar> carved a unique 
niche for himself within the spandex world of comics, often working with 
material from his own life against the backdrop of his native Cleveland. Pekar 
was arguably the first and best to use the medium to illuminate foibles, flaws 
and failures. With his death this week at the age of 70, visual literature bids 
farewell to a true American anti-hero.

Pekar was no artist – he was a writer through and through, as blue collar and 
geographically territorial as Charles Bukowski, and as idiosyncratic as Robert 
Crumb. It was a shared love of jazz that would lead Pekar and Crumb to first 
form a friendship and then a creative partnership that gave Pekar the break he 
needed. It was his stories, and not the crudely-drawn stickmen that accompanied 
them, that persuaded the then-established Crumb to be the first to illustrate 
the comic for which Pekar is best remembered,American Splendor 
<http://www.darkhorse.com/Comics/96-425/American-Splendor-Comic-Con-Comics>.

And what stories they were. In an era – and medium – of superheroes, Pekar was 
anything but. Adopting the philosophy that "ordinary life is pretty complex 
stuff", his comics relayed the painful experiences of a creative-minded, 
penny-pinching curmudgeon at odds with the world, who floundered while working 
as a file clerk in a hospital, a job he held down even after his comic book 
success.

Pekar saw in comics an opportunity to create something akin to film, only 
easier, cheaper and quicker. His weary depiction of an existence spent scraping 
by in between failed relationships was shot through with the type of 
misanthropic humour that puts Pekar's work on a par with Woody Allen, Larry 
David or a supremely irate New York cab driver. And as with the very best 
anti-heroes, in his work no one came across quite as honestly as Pekar himself.

There was immense compassion and humanity in his work, too, and it is 
testament to the strength of his writing and characterisation – and his 
association with life's underdogs - that Pekar attracted a legion of 
collaborators which included comic titans such as Spain Rodriguez, Joe Sacco 
and Alan Moore. As well as enjoying a healthy sideline career as a jazz and 
book critic he became an unlikely national celebrity in the late 80s when he 
appeared onLate Night with David Letterman 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KxqHb5dIo9I> numerous times. His energised 
everyman <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bKNr5WrjRCc> views eventually became a 
little too much, and he was banned for criticising the show's owners. But it 
was this honesty and ability to see through the facile pretence of mainstream 
America represented by the likes of Letterman that endeared him to so many.

The 2003 film of his life <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=APpxQm7sH5k>, 
American Splendor, elevated him to international status when Paul Giamatti 
perfectly nailed his rasping rants, with Pekar himself popping up to comment on 
the onscreen depiction of himself in a fine piece of meta-cinema.

It's only in recent years that comics have been re-branded as the more 
intellectually-acceptable "graphic novels" and finally gained the critical and 
academic attention they deserve. Unlike those of the counterculture generation, 
however, Harvey Pekar didn't want to destroy society or alter minds through 
comics. He wanted instead to write serious literature, and his work – perhaps 
more than anyone's – was key to this shift. His substantial output continues to 
show that comics long ago stopped being just for kids.
 