
A week before beginning the defence of their European crown Wasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> may not yet be the force of 
last season but they are getting there. Yesterday they twice came back from 
being 18 points down in the second half to beat the side currently sitting 
pretty on top of the Premiership.

Since their Heineken Cup victory in May, Wasps have won once in seven matches 
and looked to be going down again yesterday when they trailed 21-3 seven 
minutes into the second half and then 26-8 when Iain Balshaw scored 
Gloucester's bonus point try after 61 minutes.

However two tries from the replacement James Haskell and then a second from 
the left-wing Tom Voyce took the European champions into the lead for the first 
time with three minutes left and gave them the lift their director of rugby, 
Ian McGeechan, was looking for ahead of the tie with Munster next Saturday.

McGeechan hopes to have Simon Shaw back for that game and there is a chance 
that Phil Vickery and Josh Lewsey will also play. "They're getting there and 
are not too far off," said McGeechan.

He had Lawrence Dallaglio and Paul Sackey in the starting line-up for the 
first time with Raphaël Ibañez on a star-studded replacements' bench that did 
much towards turning the match. But returning from distant parts and gelling 
immediately as a team are different things as Rory Lawson proved within four 
minutes.

The Gloucester scrum-half sold the most outrageous of dummies to skip through 
a gap caused by a lack of Wasps back-row cover, his touch down at the posts 
making Ryan Lamb's kick a formality. After a couple of weeks of mixing and 
matching, Gloucester returned to something like side which put them on top of 
the league and will probably take the field against Ulster at Ravenhill on 
Friday. Their common purpose and understanding showed a minute after Lawson's 
try, when Akapusi Qera, their Fijian recruit, not only plugged a similar gap in 
theGloucester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> defence but 
sent the Wasps centre, Rob Hoadley juddering backwards.

Qera, playing open-side flanker, was spotted causing mayhem in National 
Division One last season and spent the first half doing something similar. He 
is adept at the tight stuff as well, being part of the red-shirted posse which 
extended Gloucester's lead in the 34th minute, by bundling Olivier Azam over 
the Wasps line. Lamb again added the extras and the European champions' only 
response before half-time was a Danny Cipriani penalty. The best they could 
offer in the first 40 minutes were largely individual efforts - a couple of 
breaks by Sackey and a delightful chip and catch from Cipriani which would have 
given him a clear path to the Gloucester line, but for a finger-tip tackle by 
Lamb.

The second half started no better. Qera was gone but Luke Narraway had 
shuffled across the back row and into the Fijian's shoes, zipping through the 
Wasps midfield with a break that took him to within inches of the try line. 
Cipriani dragged Narraway down but long before the Wasps defence had got itself 
organised, Olly Morgan was waiting in oceans of space out on the right wing, 
much as Balshaw was to be 14 minutes later when Lamb and Lawson again combined 
to get the ball wide for the bonus point try.

However the European champions are quick learners and they had Ibañez and 
Haskell to bring on. Voyce had scored their first try - thanks to a clever 
flick on by Fraser Waters in the 54th minute - but it was two tries in five 
minutes by Haskell, the World Cup reject, that totally undermined Gloucester. 
If the first was a muscle job, Haskell being the ball carrier his fellow 
forwards chose to drive over the line, the second was almost magical as the 
22-year-old accepted the deftest of off-loads from the France captain.

Wasps Cipriani; Sackey, Waters, Hoadley, Voyce; Flutey (Van Gisbergen, 52), 
Reddan (Amor, 67); Payne, Ward (Ibanez, 70), Adams; Skivington, Birkett (Hart, 
28); Leo, Rees, Dallaglio (capt; Hart, 61).

Tries Voyce 2, Haskell 2. Cons Cipriani 3. Pens Cipriani.

Gloucester Morgan; Balshaw, Simpson-Daniel, Allen, Foster (Vainikolo, 55); 
Lamb (Paterson, 70) , Lawson; Wood, Azam (Titterrell, 52) Nieto; Buxton (capt), 
Brown; Strokosch, Qera (James, h-t), Narraway (Delve 65).

Tries Lawson, Azam, Morgan, Balshaw. Cons Lamb 3.

Sin-bin Buxton, 70.

Referee W Barnes (Gloucestershire). Attendance 7,802.
 