
AA Gill's comprehensive dismissal of Morrissey's autobiography as "utterly 
devoid of insight, warmth, wisdom or likeability" has won the Sunday Times 
reviewer a place on the shortlist for the most scathing review of 2013.

Eight cutting write-ups are in the running for the Hatchet Job of the Year 
award, run bythe Omnivore website <http://www.theomnivore.co.uk/>, from Gill's 
take-down of Morrissey in the Sunday Times ("Putting it in Penguin Classics 
doesn't diminish Aristotle or Homer or Tolstoy; it just roundly mocks 
Morrissey, and this is a humiliation constructed by the self-regard of its 
victim"), to David Sexton's dismissal of Eleanor Catton's Booker prize-winning 
tome The Luminaries. The prize is intended "to promote integrity and wit in 
literary journalism", with the winner, to be announced on 11 February, taking 
home a year's supply of potted shrimp.

"'Let's concede that The Luminaries is a stunning feat of construction," wrote 
Sexton in his review. "The Booker judges knew, whatever else its merits, they 
were giving the prize to a tremendously technically accomplished piece of work. 
I suspect some exhausted reviewers praised it for the same reason. It doesn't 
necessarily make it any good, of course. A ship made of matchsticks in a bottle 
is a feat of construction but not necessarily a great work of art."

The shortlist was selected by Rosie Boycott, former editor of the Independent, 
author and critic Brian Sewell and UCL professor John Sutherland. Sutherland 
had nominateda New York Review of Books take on his latest book 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2012/aug/16/very-lush-garland-writers/>
, The Lives of Novelists, for the shortlist – "The self-congratulatory nod to 
Samuel Johnson's magnificent Lives of the English Poets is as embarrassing as 
it is presumptuous" – but it was judged to be not sufficiently excoriating.

Instead, Frederic Raphael has the dubious honour of being the first writer to 
make the list as both hatcheteer and hatchetee: his book of correspondence 
Distant Intimacy: A Friendship in the Age of the Internet, written with Joseph 
Epstein, was the victim of a vicious review in the Mail on Sunday by Craig 
Brown. "The first thing to be said about their exchanges is how extraordinarily 
unpleasant they are, almost as though they were trying to make it into the 
Guinness Book Of Records under a section called Authors, Most Bilious," wrote 
Brown. "Anyone unfamiliar with the literary world will, I think, be astonished 
at the ease with which these grand old men of letters turn into queeny old 
hairdressers, furiously bitching about their younger, prettier or more highly 
regarded rivals."

But Raphael can cheer himself with the fact he was also selected by judges for 
his own review of John le Carré's A Delicate Truth, in which he found for the 
TLS that le Carré "stretches his thrills with mixed clichés, idiosyncratic 
phrases (can people 'go faint at the knees'?) and witless dialogue whaleboned 
with 'he retorted stiffly' and the like."

Rachel Cooke, writing in the Observer, makes the cut for her write-up of Ann 
Widdecombe's autobiography, in which after damning the book with faint praise 
("her grammar is fine – Ann is a stickler for grammar – and her anecdotes make 
sense in that they have a beginning, a middle and an end") she found that "in 
every other respect her memoirs bear a strong resemblance to her paso doble: no 
rhythm, no beauty, no humour and, above all, no feeling".

The shortlist is completed with Peter Kemp's review of Donna Tartt's The 
Goldfinch (it's " a turkey", wrote Kemp), Hedley Twidle's attack on Paul 
Theroux's "offensive and plain bizarre" rhetoric in The Last Train to Zona 
Verde, and Lucy Ellmann's critique of Douglas Coupland's novel Worst. Person. 
Ever. in the Guardian. It "can only appeal to people who like to hear women 
belittled, and everything trashed – and it's hard to see the necessity for it 
when we've already got plenty of trash and belittled women," found Ellman.

Omnivore editor Fleur Macdonald said the selection "shows embattled critics 
still have enough fight left in them to puncture publishing hype", while fellow 
editor Anna Baddeley added that "the recent high-profile sackings of book 
reviewers and literary editors makes theHatchet Job of the Year award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hatchet-job-of-the-year-award> – which 
celebrates the books pages and gets people reading reviews – more crucial than 
ever".

Previous winners of the prize are Adam Mars-Jones for his Observer review of 
By Nightfall by Michael Cunningham, and Camilla Long for her Sunday Times take 
down of Rachel Cusk's memoir Aftermath.

 
 