
There is a strange new smoking-related trend in movies and television. I 
noticed it while watchingThe Theory of Everything 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/01/the-theory-of-everything-review-stephen-hawking-biopic-gravity>
, the excellent new film about Stephen Hawking, starring Eddie Redmayne. Then I 
noticed it watching That Day We Sang, the similarly excellent television play 
that was on over Christmas, written and directed by Victoria Wood, starring 
Imelda Staunton and Michael Ball about a poignant adult relationship in the 
late 1960s between two people who had sung together 40 years previously in a 
children’s choir.

These period dramas showed people in pubs, restaurants, cafes and teashops. 
All the details and the superb production design were wonderfully clear. So 
where was the blue haze, the fug, the horrible brimming ashtrays and the nasty 
fag smoke? A lot of people would have been smoking in those places at that 
time: both the good guys and the bad guys. But we’ve cleaned them up – 
fictionally.

Since the 2007 ban on indoor smoking in public places, TV and film producers 
have started retrospectively imposing the no-smoking rule: reaching back 
decades into the past to pluck the cigarettes out of characters’ mouths, the 
packets out of their costumes’ pockets and generally sweep away the rotten 
habit. In Downton Abbey, you hardly ever see people smoking, except for those 
wicked below-stairs meanies O’Brien andBarrow 
<http://downtonabbey.wikia.com/wiki/Thomas_Barrow> in earlier episodes, who had 
the modern decency to do it outside. Compare that TV series with the film 
Julian Fellowes wrote,Gosford Park <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0280707/>, the 
country-house drama which was the precursor and prototype for his Downton Abbey 
and also set in the early years of the 20th century. People smoke indoors in 
that, quite a bit. But it was released in 2001, before the ban.

Worshipping the Wi-Fi 

Andrew Lloyd Webber has caused a tiny sensation with his pronouncement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/04/churches-install-wi-fi-andrew-lloyd-webber-cats>
 that churches should be fitted with wireless broadband. “I want to get every 
church in the country on Wi-Fi. Once you do that the church becomes the centre 
of the community again. They should go back to the medieval traditions, which 
is that the nave of the church was always used for local businesses.”

What does Lord Lloyd-Webber envisage? A noticeboard with the hymn numbers and 
also the username and password? Or will vicars test parishioners on their 
sincerity before they are allowed these details – just as they might sternly 
quiz them on their religious beliefs before allowing their children into the 
local oversubscribed CofE school?

There is a very real and gruesome possibility that the vicar will look down 
from the pulpit to see a glittering mosaic of rectangular lights in the gloom: 
the congregation will be ignoring the sermon, bent over their smartphones and 
tablets, checking their emails, updating their Facebook profiles and possibly 
getting stuck into Candy Crush Saga.

But what is more worrying is that the members of this modern community 
wouldn’t actually come into the church at all. Just as they congregate outside 
Marks & Spencer and John Lewis to pinch the free Wi-Fi, so today’s flock might 
hunch furtively outside the venerable stone walls of ancient establishments: 
they will cringe in the churchyards, they will cheekily park up just outside 
the side entrance, and get their iPads out. Perhaps the vicar can at least put 
some improving message on the compulsory home page.



The film punchline I missed

Over the holiday party season, people have tended to confide to me – in a 
facetious spirit – their own movie projects. Someone approached me in the 
deafening crush on New Year’s Eve with a film idea, apparently a showcase for
Michael Caine <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-caine>, and a version 
of his most treasured catchphrase.

The idea was that the actor would be playing a sinister sexual svengali on the 
fringes of the 60s pop scene; a mysterious young woman comes up to him and 
whispers: “I performed an oral act on Jim Morrison and his bandmates just as 
you ordered – and then I did the same thing with the Beatles and the Rolling 
Stones.” Caine is supposed to shout something furiously back. But in this noisy 
party I couldn’t hear the reply. What could it have been?
 