
The words "loud", "shouty", "larger than life" and "talks a lot" feature 
habitually in sentences used to describe the comedy agentAddison Cresswell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/addison-cresswell>. He talks so much, they 
say, that he has to constantly relight his cigar because it is always going out.

A cigar walks into a room, goes the joke, Cresswell follows it, and the cigar 
can't get a word in edgeways. Yesterday, Cresswell, 48, would have been doing a 
lot of talking and very little cigar smoking as he tried to rescue his client
Jonathan Ross <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jonathan-ross> from the 
maelstrom that has engulfed the star this week.

Cresswell is the man who negotiated Ross's totemic £18m deal with the BBC, a 
sum that been used as a stick to beat both the corporation and the presenter, 
whose take-home pay amounts to roughly £16,000 a day. Around the time of 
signing that contract, Cresswell, perhaps not able to believe his good luck or 
gall, was reported to have been seen merrily burning money at the bar of 
Edinburgh's Assembly Rooms.

Ross is his highest profile client, but Cresswell promotes a roster of talent 
with his company Off the Kerb that includes Lee Evans, Jack Dee and Mark 
Lamarr. Through his production company, Open Mike, Cresswell is the executive 
producer of Friday Night with Jonathan Ross as well as a number of other comedy 
shows. With his long-term friend William Burdett-Coutts, he is a director of 
the Brighton comedy festival.

He first got a taste of wheeling and dealing with stars when entertainments 
officer at Brighton Polytechnic. He began representing them professionally in 
1981, his first acquisition being the comedian John Hegley, and his office was 
his kitchen table. Soon though, his comedians were head to head with a line-up 
from competitors Avalon at the Edinburgh Fringe, and the two companies warred 
with each other with posters and flyers and stand-ups. When asked to be a Simon 
Cowell-style judge on a BBC talent show (the deal fell through), Cresswell 
jokingly named his agent as Richard Allen-Turner, his Avalon rival.

Karen Koren, artistic director of Edinburgh's Gilded Balloon, says that the 
two companies made comedy the new rock and roll. "Addison is a jolly chappy. 
Loud," she says. "He absolutely knows the business inside out and is incredible 
at making deals. He works hard for all his performers. He plays really hard 
ball and looks after his performers to a fault."

Kevin Lygo, Channel 4's director of television and content, describes 
Cresswell as a "big, flamboyant character in the showbiz comedy world". He 
says: "In the end, you can judge how effective and how good agents are by the 
long-term relationships they have with their clients. In other words, is their 
client base always changing or not? Addison has managed to keep his clients for 
a very long time, which is an indication how good he is for them.

"With broadcasters, he can be volatile - but my experience with him is that he 
is straight, and you always have the feeling that he has his client's best 
interests at heart. He has an understanding of television, and is a hard 
negotiator but also fair."

Described as a "good-looking guy", Cresswell has a fondness for not just 
cigars but shiny suits. He also seems to like coming across as a little bit 
rough: one gossip columnist claimed he said "I am going to have you kneecapped, 
mate". Two years ago he took part in the Gumball Rally, an international car 
race. Driving an S Type Jaguar, he raised more than £16,000 for Great Ormond 
Street children's hospital. Sponsoring him, the comedian Dara O Briain said: 
"What? You get this as well as 50% of what I make while you're away? I need a 
better deal ..."

"To all intents and purposes you would think he was a spiv," one comedy 
talentspotter said. "But he is amazing at doing really good deals, and his 
bolshiness comes across and he fights for 'his boys', his clients."

Another said : "He is a cockney wide-boy agent, not unlike Jonathan in many 
ways: a wheeler, a dealer, a ducker, a diver. He is like a barrow boy who has 
been very canny at building a business to represent the big stars to the BBC. 
In spite of the cockney 'ducker and diver' front, I think of him like an 
old-fashioned Hollywood impresario."

Burdett-Coutts, artistic director of the Assembly Rooms, says: "Addison has 
something of a reputation of being a hard-nosed agent who has done extremely 
well for his clients. It is extraordinary - he has one of the strongest comedy 
agencies in the business. He works incredibly hard for his talent, and is a 
great, great hustler. He does look after them, he lives with them all the time 
- probably to the detriment of his own life. He is obsessive about his work but 
is also an incredibly generous character.

"Jonathan is his friend, and Addison very much revived his career, he got him 
his job at the BBC."

It is the lengths to which Cresswell will go for his "boys" which keeps 
clients loyal. Koren remembers how he came to one client's aid after they 
headbutted a police officer. "He was down at the station right away, stood 
their bail, looked after them," she says. "That's the kind of agent he is, it's 
like its personal when you touch 'my boys'."

And now he is trying to bail Ross out. "Jonathan will not come out of this 
smelling of roses," says Koren. "But his career is no way over, Addison will 
make sure of that."

"I am sure Addison will be trying to save Jonathan's career for him," says 
Burdett-Coutts. "He will be negotiating as hard as he can. And that is what he 
is good at."

CV

Born June 28 1960 

Education Brighton Polytechnic

Career Began as entertainments officer at Brighton Poly. Runs the celebrity 
agency Off The Kerb, set up 25 years ago; now part of the so-called "comedy 
mafia" of agents, he represents comedians such as Jo Brand, Jack Dee and Alan 
Carr; involved as well in tours, videos and books. As director of Open Mike 
Productions and Little Mo Films, produces programmes for the BBC. Also on the 
board of Brighton comedy festival

They say Once described by a journalist as "the Darth Vader of the fringe" 

He says "I don't see us as in any way different from the people who run the 
channels. They're complete bastards as well but we all have to work with each 
other"

• This article was amended on Tuesday November 4 2008. Jonathan Ross earns 
around £16,000 a day, not a week as we first said in this article. This has 
been corrected.
 