
The chief executive of homelessness charity Shelter, Adam Sampson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/adamsampson>, is quitting to head a new 
consumer watchdog.

Sampson, who has led the charity for the last six years, is to be the first 
chief ombudsman of the Office for Legal Complaints (OLC), which will monitor 
legal services.

He began his career as a probation officer and later became deputy director of 
the Prison Reform Trust. In 1994 he joined the Home Office as assistant prisons 
ombudsman before returning to the voluntary sector as chief executive of drugs 
charity RAPt.

He took the helm of Shelter just months after plans to merge with rival 
organisation Crisis collapsed, and put the charity firmly at the heart of the 
debate on homelessness and housing policy.

Sampson's departure from Shelter comes as the charity gets to grips with the 
effects of the recession. Shelter has seen a significant drop in the level of 
donations over the last 18 months, especially from corporate supporters, and 
has been forced to make job cuts, while also handling a surge in demand for its 
services.

Sampson will leave Shelter to start work with the OLC in three months, 
formally taking up the post as chief ombudsman on 1 July 2009.

Shelter's acting chair, Hugh Norton, said: "Over the six-year period in which 
he has been its CEO, Adam has given Shelter strong executive leadership. The 
board is grateful to him for taking Shelter through a period of considerable 
change and challenge, and for the way he has led its transformation in response 
to the fast-moving pressures of today's world. 

"Most importantly, he has helped to move housing issues from the periphery to 
the centre of the political landscape. We wish him all success as he pursues 
his further career, and develops the new organisation he is taking on as its 
first chief executive.

"The board will be making an early appointment of an interim CEO to take 
Adam's place pending the appointment of a permanent replacement.  Meanwhile 
Adam will, until his departure, continue to lead Shelter's vigorous 
participation in the current national debate on housing, and its services of 
advice and assistance to the homeless and poorly housed."

Sampson added: "The six or more years I have spent in Shelter have been some 
of the most satisfying – and challenging – of my life. Shelter has been, and 
always will be, very important to me and I always knew that it would take a 
special job to tempt me away.

"The prospect of being in a position to set up and lead a new organisation 
which will help to protect consumer interests and drive improvements through 
our legal services is too exciting to turn down. I look forward with keen 
anticipation to the challenge of my new job and, at the same time, look back 
with a deep sense of satisfaction with the achievements I have been lucky 
enough to be a part of at Shelter."

Elizabeth France, chair of the OLC, said: "The chief ombudsman will play a 
critical role in building the new dispute resolution system that consumers of 
legal services have long required. Adam brings a strong background in 
organisational development combined with direct and relevant experience of the 
broad range of issues faced by some of the most vulnerable consumers of legal 
services.

"His previous experience at an ombudsman scheme makes him uniquely well-placed 
to lead the establishment of the OLC. I am delighted, on behalf of the OLC, to 
welcome him to the role."
 