
A prominent public health academic says he makes “no apologies” for flooding 
Australia’s medicines regulator with complaints about alternative therapies, a 
move that has drawn the ire of Complementary Medicines Australia.

Assoc Prof Ken Harvey has accused Complementary Medicines Australia of 
attempting to “oust” him from his role at Monash University by complaining 
about him to the Therapeutic Goods Administration and to the university.

Harvey is the representative for the consumer advocacy group, Choice, on the 
therapeutic goods advertising code council and the therapeutic goods 
advertising complaint resolution panel. As part of this role, he draws 
attention tofalse and potentially dangerous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/11/homeopathy-not-effective-for-treating-any-condition-australian-report-finds>
 health claims being made by the complementary and alternative therapy industry 
about their products.

Chiropractic Board of Australia ‘should be sacked’ over members' contentious 
claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/18/chiropractic-board-australia-should-be-sacked-members-contentious-claims>
At Monash University, Harvey is leading a research project 
<http://www.medreach.com.au/?p=1847> approved by the University’s school of 
public health in which students decide which spurious health claims to bring to 
the attention of regulators. Complementary Medicines Australia alleges Harvey 
is using his university position “to solicit enrolled students to become 
involved in a political anti-complementary medicines campaign”.

“By recruiting Monash students to this cause, under the guise of academic 
training, they are becoming complicit in your anti-complementary medicines 
campaign and we question the breach of government statutory conflicts of 
interest provisions,” the complaint said.

“We asked Monash to consider the reputational risk relating to this issue and 
consider whether your position at Monash is consistent with the university’s 
standards of ethical conduct.”

Harvey is no stranger to controversy. In 2014 he quit his job 
<http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/academic-quits-over-swisse-deal-with-uni-20140204-31zhl.html>
 as an adjunct associate professor with La Trobe University after the 
university struck a $15m research deal with the vitamins giant, Swisse 
Wellness, a move Harvey believed was unethical. He is also a member of the 
pro-science group, Friends of Science in Medicine.

He said he stood by the research project with his students. “I make no 
apologies for being involved in a campaign to flood the regulator with 
complaints,” Harvey said.

Australia to change medical regulations to allow faster access to new drugs 
and devices
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/australia-to-change-medical-regulations-to-allow-faster-access-to-new-drugs-and-devices>
“The aim is to draw attention to the consequences of the current ‘light touch’ 
regulation of complementary medicines and the need for regulatory reform. That 
98% of all complaints submitted to the therapeutic goods advertising complaint 
resolution panel are upheld is just one indication of the sorry state of this 
industry.”

Harvey said it was standard procedure for members of the committees he served 
on to declare possible conflicts of interest when assessing complaints. 
“Accordingly, when a complaint has been submitted to the panel from myself, my 
students, or Friends of Science in Medicine, I declare a conflict and leave the 
room while this complaint is being discussed,” he said.

He dismissed Complementary Medicines Australia as “crazy” and said he had the 
full support of his department. “The student project is a legitimate academic 
exercise approved by senior members of the school of public health,” he said.

A spokeswoman from Complementary Medicines Australia said the organisation 
respected Harvey’s right to generate complaints about complementary medicines 
and his right to encourage others to submit complaints.

“CMA perceives, however, a conflict of interest when complaints are generated 
as a classroom exercise supervised by Dr Harvey, and then subsequently 
forwarded for judgement by a committee of which Dr Harvey is a sitting member,” 
she said.

“If Dr Harvey personally lodged the complaints, and correct procedures 
followed, he would not be able to participate in the committee’s deliberations. 
Our organisation has queried the procedural fairness and apparent lack of 
impartiality when an individual is heavily involved in producing complaints and 
then judges the validity of those complaints.”
 