
Severe weather has damaged a runway at Aberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/aberdeen> airport and the city’s council has 
closed schools and made sandbags available after the river Don reached the 
highest water level on record.

The Scottish Environment Protection Agency has issued several flood alerts and 
two severe flood warnings – where there is risk to life – in the Kintore and 
Inverurie areas. The Met Office added that, as of 10pm on Thursday, Fyvie 
Castle has had 59mm of rain and Craibstone had more than 50mm.

Following days of heavy rain, Aberdeen airport’s tarmac has been damaged, 
forcing it to cancel arrivals. Workers are repairing the damaged runway and the 
airport is expected to reopen normal service on Friday morning.

A spokesperson for the airport said that, due unprecedented and excessive 
rainfall, a very small section of tarmac at the top north end of the runway had 
been damaged.

They added that as a safety precaution, a shorter-than-normal runway length 
had been employed for departing flights, and any further arrivals on Thursday 
evening were cancelled. .
“A repair is underway, and weather permitting, we anticipate full operations 
being available by [Friday] morning. We would advise any travelling passengers 
to check with their airline before attempting to travel to the airport, 
particularly with the current treacherous road conditions.

“We will continue to update our website and Twitter account 
<https://twitter.com/ABZ_Airport> as more information becomes available.”

The adverse weather has also forced the council to close two schools and warn 
residents in the Donside area of the city that the river is expected to overtop 
its banks after it reached its highest water level on record.

Police advised residents not to travel by car, following reports of some 
people becoming trapped in their vehicles in flooded areas.

A statement on the council’s website added: “Council officials have advised 
those living in lower residential areas close to the river Don, and in 
particular the Grandholm area, to seriously consider evacuating their homes as 
water levels continue to rise across the city.

“Residents are advised to seek shelter with friends and family where they can, 
or alternatively, a respite centre has been set up at the Bridge of Don 
Academy.”

 