
The 70s were a dark decade for English football, beset by problems such as 
hooliganism, dirty play, lack of cash and woeful performances by the national 
side. But one of the most powerful malignancies lurked within the Football 
Association itself, in the person of Professor Sir Harold Thompson, an Oxford 
chemistry don who had taught Margaret Thatcher when she was a student. Sir 
Harold was a bullying autocrat: "He was a bastard. He treated the staff like 
shit," said one former FA official.

As FA chairman from 1976, Thompson ensured that Brian Clough never became 
England manager, even though Clough was by far the best candidate for the job. 
And in his role as a senior FA director before this, Thompson was also the 
driving force behind the sacking of SirAlf Ramsey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alf-ramsey> in 1974. Given England's 
failure to qualify for the World Cup that year, Ramsey's dismissal may have 
been justified, but the whole episode was handled with brutal insensitivity. 
Despite having won the World Cup for England in 1966, Ramsey was kicked out 
after 11 years of unstinting service and unprecedented success with a payout of 
£8,000 and a meagre annual pension of £1,200. In his last year as England boss, 
his salary was a pitiful £7,200 – less than some Division 3 managers were 
earning. To add insult to injury, Don Revie, Alf's permanent successor, was 
paid £25,000.

The FA's shabby behaviour was largely down to Thompson, who had developed an 
intense animosity towards Ramsey. Part of this was due to nothing more than 
snobbery. Though Sir Alf spoke in the clipped manner of an army offi cer, he 
was from a deprived Dagenham background. But Thompson was obsessed with public 
school and university pedigree. "He always referred to me, even to my face, as 
Ramsey, which I found insulting," Sir Alf once said. An incident during an 
eastern Europe tour in 1972 crystallised the hostility between the two men. At 
breakfast in the team's hotel one morning, Thompson was smoking a large cigar. 
The players found the smoke unpleasant and, on their behalf, Ramsey asked him 
to put it out. Thompson did so but was infuriated to have been shown such 
disrespect. Sir Alf's fate was sealed from that moment. Soon Thompson was 
waging an internal campaign to have theEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> manager ousted. The exit from 
the World Cup allowed him to force the hand of his fellow FA directors and Sir 
Alf's sacking was agreed in April 1974.

After brief management spells with Birmingham City and Greek club 
Panathinaikos, Ramsey slipped into semi-retirement, living in his modest 
Ipswich home and struggling on his small pension before succumbing to 
Alzheimer's. England's greatest ever manager deserved so much better. He was a 
true hero, but thanks to Thompson, he became an outcast. The late Alan Ball, 
one of Ramsey's World Cup winners, said the treatment of Sir Alf was "the most 
incredible thing that ever happened in English football".

• Leo McKinstry is the author of Sir Alf: A Major Reappraisal of the Life and 
Times of England's Greatest Football Manager, published by HarperSport
 