
If imitation is indeed the sincerest form of flattery, Hertha's manager, 
Lucien Favre, has now truly arrived. On Saturday, afterBayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> had won their first 
clean-sheet victory at home under Jürgen Klinsmann, Uli Hoeness officially 
declared Favre's minimalist style as the new gold standard. "We don't aspire to 
play beautifully, merely successfully," said Hoeness after the disjointed 1–0 
over the bottom side, Karlsruhe. "That's exactly how Hertha have won their last 
10 matches."

The general manager's red face told a very different story, though. Hoeness 
was visibly riled by the suggestion that Franck Ribéry had been extremely lucky 
to escape a red cardfollowing his push/slap in the face of Andreas Görlitz 
<http://www.bild.de/BILD/sport/fussball/bundesliga/vereine/bayern/2009/03/23/franck-ribery/darum-schlug-ich-zu.html>
. "This is football, we're not in kindergarden!" he exclaimed when a TV 
interviewer confronted him with irrefutable video evidence of the Frenchman's 
misdemeanour, "stop taking the moral high ground all the time". The 57-year-old 
won't have been too happy with Bayern's shambolic performance after the break, 
when Mark van Bommel's accuracy of distribution stooped to Nigerian spammer 
levels, the keeper Michael Rensing seemingly applied for English nationality 
and sole striker Lukas Podolski showed all the work rate of a 30st benefit 
fraudster. To claim that his side were taking a page out of Favre's clever book 
was disingenuous at best. In all probability, Hoeness was rather trying to 
belittle the table leaders with the comparison.

Hoeness's thinly veiled attack proves that Bayern have at last started to take 
the club from the capital seriously. The "old dame" of German football still 
looks down on the opposition from her stairlift,despite a 2–0 defeat at 
Stuttgart <>. The Swabians were much the better side in the 
Mercedes-Benz-Arena; Hertha, on the other hand, "ran too little and didn't win 
enough tackles", according to Favre. "We were playing at our limit in the last 
few games, now we fell down a hole."

Hertha had been "too cool" for their own good, wrote Der Tagesspiegel, while 
Süddeutsche Zeitung speculated that the team had perhaps started to believe 
their own good press: "They've read so much about their great playing system 
that they were led to believe the system might win the game by itself. Belief 
in the system was confused with passivity." Favre has worked wonders with the 
squad, without a doubt. Not many sides execute counter-attacks with such 
methodical precision. But theirs is still essentially a negative and  rigid 
set-up that can't provide answers once Hertha are a goal or two down. 

The trappings of relative success have also started to come into the equation. 
Hundreds of enthusiastic schoolkids have taken to visiting Hertha's training 
ground, and one or two players have witnessed a lack of intensity in the 
practice sessions over the past week. On Tuesday night the midfielder Patrick 
Ebert went on a late-night bender with ex-team-mate Kevin-Prince Boateng that 
resulted in a spot of petty vandalism. Six cars and a motorcycle were damaged 
outside a nightclub at 3.45am. Ebert, one of Hertha's most important players 
this season, missed the Stuttgart defeat after Favre suspended him. He was 
fined €10,000 (£9,300) too.

Hertha's mishaps have opened up the title race even further. It is now so 
open, in fact, that Jabba the Hut and Beth Ditto could both sit comfortably 
next to each other and share an ice cream.  Wolfsburg, who calmly won 3–0 away 
to Bielefeld, are level with Bayern and only one point behind Hertha,as are 
Hamburg after their 2–1 win at Schalke 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/videodisplay/2252441/.>. The Bundesliga is surely 
experiencing the most exciting, animated movements at the top since Baywatch 
was dropped from German TV screens.

HSV were feted as "die Unkaputtbaren" (the indestructibles) by Hamburger 
Abendblatt, as they prevailed despite a dozen injured or ill players. Martin 
Jol, fresh from a heroic 3–2 away win atGalatasaray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/galatasaray> that ensured a get-together 
at Eastlands with former staff members Nigel de Jong and Vincent Kompany next 
month, tried out all sorts of unusual players in unusual positions and was 
rewarded for his adventurousness. Paolo Guerrero scored another brace to sink 
Schalke. "I'm proud of my team," said Jol. "We only had three days to prepare."

A determined, smart perfomance from his men was enough to overcome a home side 
who played "without great confidence" (Schalke's manager, Fred Rutten) and made 
it easy for the visitors. The Schalke keeper, Manuel Neuer, accepted full 
responsibility for his grave mistake in the run-up to Guerrero's opener. The 
crowd in the Veltins-Arena were uncharacteristically subdued, as well. They 
only got excited when Jefferson Farfán pulled one back late on. The Peruvian 
tried to pick up the ball quickly but the Hamburg keeper, Frank Rost, held on 
to it.They both fell over and became entangled with each other and the net, 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/videodisplay/2252482/> where they remained for a 
small eternity. "A little longer and they would have needed surgery to be 
separated, like Siamese twins," mused Süddeutsche. "This reminds me of a film I 
watched last night," said Jol jovially. Man-on-man action with big, shiny boots 
and a bit of bondage? The Dutch really know no taboos.

Hamburg are still chasing an unlikely treble but for Schalke the season is now 
all but a write-off. Rutten is seen as a dead man walking by the local media 
and seems to have lost all will to fight. "We will see," he said ambivalently, 
when asked about his future at the club.  Schalke have put not-so-discreet 
feelers out to Armin Veh (ex-Stuttgart) and are also very much in the market 
for a new sporting director. On Thursday, Oliver Kahn flew straight from China 
to the village of Rheda-Wiedenbrück to sit down with S04's supremo Clemens 
Tönnies. "He showed us a strategy paper of 30 pages. I was very impressed with 
him," said the meat-packing millionaire. Kahn, the Bayern icon, atSchalke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> – an interesting scenario that's 
not to everybody's liking. "Schalke need a seasoned professional for the job, 
not an apprentice," said the ex-general manager Rudi Assauer.

A decision is expected next week and will, if prior form is anything to go by, 
be known to Bild a couple of days before anyone else, including the Schalke 
board.  Apparently, old boy Huub Stevens is also in the running for both or 
either position following his dismissal in Holland.  Like Kahn, he has 
absolutely no experience upstairs but a very attractive USP: the avowed 
clean-sheet fetishist of "Die Null muss stehen" fame would surely do his utmost 
to add a few zeros to the bottom line.

Results: Gladbach 0–1 Bochum, Bayern 1–0 Karlsruhe, Stuttgart 2–0 Hertha, 
Frankfurt 1–1 Leverkusen, Bielefeld 0–3Wolfsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg>, Hoffenheim 2–2 Hannover, 
Cottbus 0–2 Cologne, Dortmund 1–0 Bremen, Schalke 1–2 Hamburg.
 