
Hewlett-Packard <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hewlettpackard> has 
launched a $5bn (£3.4bn) claim in the high court against Cambridge software 
entrepreneur Mike Lynch and his former finance director Sushovan Hussain.

Lynch sold his British software company, Autonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation>, to HP in 2011 for 
$11bn in one of the largest deals for a UK technology group. But the following 
year, HP wrote down Autonomy’s value by $5.5bn, after accusing its management 
team of fraudulently inflating the company’s value.

HP said it had filed a claim in the chancery division of the high court in 
London on Monday. Lynch immediately hit back by vowing to file a £100m claim in 
the UK against HP for loss and damaged caused by a “smear campaign”.

Although HP has been sued by its shareholders for wasting money on the 
Autonomy deal and has reported the UK firm’s management team to regulators on 
both sides of the Atlantic, its high court filing marks the first time the 
company has taken direct action against Lynch and Hussain.


HP said: “The lawsuit seeks damages from them of approximately $5.1bn. HP will 
not comment further until the proceedings have been served on the defendants.”

Lynch and Hussain, who went on to found a $1bn technology fund called Invoke 
Capital, deny any wrongdoing and say they have been used as scapegoats for HP’s 
failings.


A spokesperson for the pair said: “The former management of Autonomy announces 
today they will file claims against HP for loss and damage caused by false and 
negligent statements made against them by HP on 20 November 2012 and in HP’s 
subsequent smear campaign.”

Britain’s Serious Fraud Office closed its investigation into Autonomy’s 
accounting in January without bringing charges owing to “insufficient evidence 
for a realistic prospect of conviction”. But the watchdog handed over 
jurisdiction for some of the allegations to the FBI and US Securities and 
Exchange Commission, which have been conducting parallel investigations.

It is understood that HP decided to file a claim to avoid any issues 
concerning possible statutes of limitations – the deadline by which a plaintiff 
must launch legal action or abandon a claim.

HP’s lawyers have described Lynch and Hussain as the “architects” of a 
“massive fraud”, accusing them of “accounting improprieties, misrepresentations 
and disclosure failures” that inflicted billions of dollars of harm on the US 
computing giant. The two men deny the claims. HP has provided 750,000 pages of 
confidential documents to investigators, drawn from Autonomy’s own auditors and 
accounts.

Autonomy and its sophisticated search engine, which can store and retrieve 
internal company documents from emails to voicemails, was acquired as part of a 
plan by previous HP chief executive Léo Apotheker to transform the personal 
computer manufacturer into a software-based company.

Apotheker’s plan was to spin off the hardware arm, but shareholders rebelled 
and the German was replaced by Meg Whitman, a month before his deal to acquire 
Autonomy had completed.
 