
Hewlett-Packard <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hewlettpackard> (HP) has 
said former Autonomy chief executive Michael Lynch should be "held accountable" 
as it accused the founder of the UK software company of fraud in a court filing 
on Monday.

In a dramatic escalation of the war of words between the US group and the tech 
entrepreneur, HP said it would also sue Autonomy's ex-chief financial officer 
Sushovan Hussain.

Hussain is seeking to block HP's settlement of three shareholder lawsuits over 
its troubled purchase of the British software company.

Hussain is trying to block the settlement, saying HP officials were wrongly 
absolved in the ill-fated acquisition of Autonomy for $11.1bn (£6.6bn) in 2011. 
HP wrote down Autonomy's value by $8.8bn (£5.2bn) a year later and accused
Autonomy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation> officials 
of accounting fraud, which those executives have denied.

In the settlement, shareholders had agreed to end efforts to force current and 
former HP officials, including chief executive Meg Whitman, to pay damages to 
HP over its Autonomy purchase.

Instead, the shareholders agreed to help HP pursue claims against former 
Autonomy officials such as Hussain and former CEO Michael Lynch, who have 
denied wrongdoing.

"The notion that (Hussain) should be permitted to intervene and challenge the 
substance of a settlement designed to protect the interests of the company he 
defrauded is ludicrous," HP said in a court filing.

"The shareholder plaintiffs who originally sued HP's directors and officers 
now agree that Hussain, along with Autonomy's founder and CEO, Michael Lynch, 
should be held accountable for this fraud."

Last month, Hussain said in a court filing that the "collusive and unfair" 
settlement, if approved by a federal judge, would let HP "forever bury from 
disclosure the real reason for its 2012 write-down of Autonomy: HP's own 
destruction of Autonomy's success after the acquisition."

"This breathless ranting from HP is the sort of personal smear we've come to 
expect. As the emotional outbursts go up, the access to facts seems to go 
down," Autonomy said in a statement in response to HP's filing. "Meg Whitman is 
buying off a bunch of lawyers so she doesn't have to answer charges of 
incompetence and misdirection in front of a judge and jury."

In an open letter published in March, Lynch accused Whitman of "incendiary and 
defamatory" accusations.

He said: "In the 16 months that have followed [since the value of Autonomy was 
written down], HP has not provided information or evidence to the Autonomy team 
to substantiate any allegation. Instead, it has selectively leaked documents 
and information to the international media, frequently using material taken out 
of context to create false impressions and smear our reputations."

Lynch also claims that HP was aware of certain Autonomy sales practices months 
before it told shareholders that a whistleblower had raised the alarm.

HP responded with a statement, saying: "As HP has previously reported, it 
uncovered numerous accounting irregularities at Autonomy prior to its 
acquisition by HP. HP reported those irregularities to appropriate civil and 
criminal regulators in the US and UK. HP continues to cooperate in ongoing 
investigations by those regulators."

However, the HP court filing is by far the strongest set of accusations 
leveled at either side in the Autonomy row.
 