
Autonomy, the leading British technology firm whose former management is 
accused of inflating its value, sold $23m of software to a small Washington 
reseller in the year to December 2009. In February 2010, as some of the money 
began to fall due,Autonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation> bought the company.

MicroLink was a security-cleared IT contractor working with US government 
departments, employing 140 people at offices in Virginia, on the outskirts of 
Washington DC. On 9 February 2010, with around $7m in payments overdue by more 
than a month, according to documents seen by the Guardian, Autonomy announced 
the acquisition of MicroLink for $55m.

Mike Lynch, the Cambridge scientist who founded Autonomy, his finance director 
Sushovan Hussain, and the group's auditor Deloitte have been threatened with 
legal action byHewlett-Packard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hewlettpackard>, which acquired Autonomy 
for $11bn in 2011. A year later, HP shocked investors by marking down the value 
of the British group by $5bn, blaming "accounting improprieties".

The transactions with MicroLink are understood to be among those questioned by 
HP. A spokeswoman for the Californian computing group said: "As HP has 
consistently stated, Autonomy senior management participated in deals with 
value-added resellers designed either to improperly accelerate revenue 
recognition or to manufacture revenue where none existed, all with the end goal 
of making Autonomy appear to be growing at a faster rate than was actually the 
case."

Autonomy's founder and former managers deny any wrongdoing, attributing much 
of the problem to differences between UK and US accounting standards, and 
blaming the write-down on mismanagement of Autonomy by HP.

A spokesman for the former managers dismissed as false any suggestions the 
purchase of MicroLink was designed to wipe out its debt to the British firm. In 
fact, they claim MicroLink helped secure $150m in US government sales over the 
following years.

The spokesman said: "Revenue is revenue if it translates into cash, and the 
cash is all there. HP's own accounts confirm it. As is normal for a business 
doing 15,000 transactions during that time, sometimes a customer didn't pay all 
their bills, but it didn't happen often, and it was covered by provisions in 
the accounts, meaning there was no impact on the accounts or the growth rate."

The Guardian has seen papers which show Deloitte was aware of the transactions 
and flagged them to Autonomy's audit committee. A spokesperson for the auditor 
said: "Deloitte conducted its audit work in full compliance with regulation and 
professional standards."

When MicroLink became part of Autonomy, nearly $12m of the software it had not 
yet paid for remained unsold. Following the takeover, $11.5m of the $23m debt 
was deemed not owing, in calculations approved by Deloitte. During 2010, the 
Guardian has seen evidence that Autonomy retrieved $7.7m in cash from MicroLink 
– less than half the original debt.

By the second quarter of 2010, $3.8m remained not accounted for. It was 
however covered by a provision of $5m in Autonomy's accounts. The provision, 
essentially a cushion against invoices that might not be collected, was 
approved by Deloitte. Former management say the sum was not material when 
compared to the British firm's $870m in revenues for 2010.

When announcing the purchase, Autonomy did not explain in its financial 
statements that it was buying a reseller which owed tens of millions of 
dollars. However, the sum owed appears to have been significant for both 
parties.

MicroLink's net annual revenues – the margin it made on top of the tens of 
millions of software it re-sold – in 2008 were $22m, and its projected revenues 
for 2009 were $25m, according to papers Lynch showed to his board before the 
purchase. So the $23m MicroLink owed Autonomy was the equivalent of a year's 
revenues. For Autonomy, the debt equalled 10% of all money outstanding from its 
various business partners as of December 2009. Microlink's previous owners, 
David Truitt and Timothy Wharton, declined to comment.

The price paid for the reseller was verified by Autonomy's auditors and 
subject to a fair value test by an independent consultancy. Of the $11.5m 
considered no longer owing, $6.9m was for Autonomy products which MicroLink had 
acquired to include in its own software, according to Autonomy's former 
management. Once the British firm owned MicroLink, that product was registered 
as an asset.

A further $4.6m was Autonomy software which MicroLink collected payment for, 
from its customers, but had not yet passed to the British company by the time 
of the takeover in February 2010.

The decision to buy MicroLink, taken in December 2009, was driven by 
Autonomy's concern that the US government was increasingly worried about 
dealing with a foreign owned company, albeit one based in Cambridge rather than 
Beijing. At the time, Autonomy's US business, which accounted for half of its 
global headcount, had sensitive contracts with the departments of defence and 
homeland security.

An internal email dated September 2009, seen by the Guardian, shows Lynch was 
advised that in order to continue working for federal agencies, the US division 
would need to be run at arm's length. UK managers would only be able visit or 
make phone calls by prior arrangement, and a separate management board would 
have to be installed.

Autonomy decided it would be more practical to purchase MicroLink, a company 
it had done business with since 2006 and which already had 86 security cleared 
staff.

"Autonomy acquired MicroLink so it could keep supplying software to sensitive 
branches of the US federal government," a spokesman for Autonomy's former 
managers said. "MicroLink's most important assets were its security cleared 
personnel and a secure facility. Without it, changes to the US government rules 
meant that, as a foreign owned company, Autonomy would have had to withdraw 
from this significant market."

Details of MicroLink's debt have emerged from a letter sent by Autonomy to the 
Financial Reporting Review Panel, which polices how listed companies 
communicate with their shareholders. The panel conducted a review of Autonomy 
in 2011 but took no further action. Following HP's allegations, the panel 
opened a full inquiry in 2013, which is ongoing. The Guardian has also seen 
Deloitte audit notes and emails.
 