
Hewlett-Packard <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hewlettpackard> has 
unveiled full details of its $5bn (£3.3bn) fraud case against the founder of 
the UK software company Autonomy, claiming that Mike Lynch inflated the 
revenues of his business by about $700m over a two-and-a-half-year period.

HP, which bought Autonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation> in 2011 for $11bn, 
has filed a claim against Lynch and his finance director, Sushovan Hussain, in 
the high court in London, alleging they engaged in improper transactions with 
software resellers and in questionable accounting practices.

The filing contains new allegations, denied by Lynch, that Autonomy dismissed 
its US chief financial officer Brent Hogenson after he raised concerns about 
the company’s transactions to its UK based auditor, Deloitte, and UK regulator 
the Financial Services Authority (FSA). HP has previously said it is 
considering taking legal action against Deloitte.

HP claims that Lynch and Hussain breached their fiduciary duties as directors, 
that Lynch breached his contractual duties as an employee of Autonomy, and that 
Hussain repeatedly misled the Autonomy audit committee.

The dispute has seen the HP chief executive, Meg Whitman, who joined the 
company after its disastrous Autonomy deal, lock horns with Britain’s most 
successful software boss.

Lynch hit back against the claims, saying HP had failed to produce a “smoking 
gun” to support its accusation of fraud. In a statement onhis blog 
<http://autonomyaccounts.org/#Reaction> he said: “HP’s claim is finally laid 
bare for what it is – a desperate search for a scapegoat for its own errors and 
incompetence. The contents of the claim are a simple rehash of previous leaks 
and insinuations that add up to one long disagreement over accounting 
treatments, and have nothing to do with fraud.”

Lynch and Hussain, who also dispute the charges, acknowledged receiving the 
particulars of the claim on Tuesday, allowing the full details of HP’s forensic 
trawl through Autonomy’s accounts to become public for the first time.

Between the first quarter of 2009 and the second quarter of 2011, the 
Cambridge-based company reported revenues totalling more than $2bn. HP claims 
that a third of that was wrongly reported, misleading Autonomy’s shareholders 
on the London Stock Exchange and later HP.

“This conduct by Lynch and Hussain was systematic and was sustained for more 
than two years prior to the acquisition of Autonomy by HP,” the Californian 
software group said. “Its purpose was to ensure that the Autonomy group’s 
financial performance … appeared to be that of a rapidly growing pure software 
company … The reality was that the group was experiencing little or no growth, 
it was losing market share, and its true financial performance consistently 
fell far short of market expectations.”

HP’s lawyers have outlined five main sources of allegedly wrongly claimed 
income:

 * $194m of supposedly hidden hardware sales. HP said it found Autonomy resold 
hardware such as servers made by other companies, often at a loss, and claims 
its directors allowed investors to believe this was software revenue. 
 * $196m in apparently wrongly reported sales of Autonomy’s core software 
product, IDOL, to other software companies. 
 * $205m in supposedly questionable transactions with software resellers. 
 * $80m of claimed incorrectly reported hosting deals, in which Autonomy 
renegotiated contracts to host other companies’ data on its own servers. 
 * $33m in other alleged improper transactions. 
After the release of Autonomy’s results for the first half of 2010, US 
executive Hogenson allegedly blew the whistle. He raised concerns - about 
reseller deals - with the FSA in an email sent on 26 July of that year. On 28 
July 2010, HP claims, he was summarily dismissed by US chief operating officer 
Joel Scott, “acting at the direction of Lynch”.

Lawyers for Lynch said in a letter to HP’s legal team that Hogenson was 
actually dismissed by Autonomy’s chairman. His concerns had been investigated 
by Deloitte and UK accounting body the Financial Reporting Review Panel, they 
said, but neither organisation had taken issue.

Of particular interest are 37 deals with small IT contractors that bought 
Autonomy’s software. Deals with these outfits, known in the industry as “value 
added resellers”, were key to Autonomy’s ability to present itself as a 
fast-growing software business.

The resellers were presented as acquiring the rights to sell on Autonomy 
software to end users including UBS bank, General Motors, the Vatican library, 
accounting firm KPMG and even Hewlett-Packard itself. But HP claims many of 
these deals were fictional in that no agreement with an end user was ever 
concluded, and that the resellers were simply warehousing Autonomy’s software.


Other deals were recorded as revenue too early, before the end user had agreed 
to buy the Autonomy products.

The resellers involved were located in countries including the US, Italy and 
the UK.

In a point-by-point rebuttal, Lynch and Hussain have dismissed HP’s claims, 
saying: “Out of 23,000 deals and $2.2bn in revenue that took place at Autonomy 
during the period, Whitman makes assertions concerning only six specific 
reseller transactions, which add up to under $40m in revenue, and for which 
almost all the cash was, in fact, received. Whitman provides scant supporting 
evidence even for these few assertions.

“She raises questions over fully paid hosted deals, the form of which HP’s own 
accountants approved, and in a structure HP itself also used. She now admits 
that hardware sales were correctly recorded as revenue and that HP was fully 
aware of this when they valued the company at $11bn. Meg Whitman has been 
playing a delaying game, promising a smoking gun that has never materialised.”
 