
Hewlett-Packard <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hewlettpackard> has 
revealed it plans to sue the UK arm of Deloitte, auditor of the Cambridge 
software firm Autonomy that HP bought for $11bn (£6.6bn) before writing off 
nearly half the company's value and accusing the former management of 
accounting improprieties.

The latest threat came as a San Francisco judge shot down HP's $48m settlement 
with two law firms which had been pursuing HP directors over the affair on 
behalf of disgruntled shareholders. HP instead had persuaded the firms to drop 
the class action and join it in pursuing Autonomy's former management.

HP bought Autonomy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation> 
in 2011 but the following year wrote down its value by $5bn, blaming 
"accounting improprieties, misrepresentation and disclosure failures" by its 
former management. The Californian laptops, printers, servers and software 
group's shares crashed after the announcement.

HP has repeatedly threatened court action against Autonomy founder Mike Lynch 
and his finance director Sushovan Hussain. On Monday, during the hearing over 
HP's settlement with shareholders, the company's lawyer Marc Wolinsky disclosed 
that HP also planned to sueDeloitte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/deloitte> over its auditing of the 
Autonomy accounts.

An HP spokesperson said: "We will continue to work to have the derivative 
actions settled or dismissed and to hold the former executives of Autonomy as 
well as Autonomy's auditor, Deloitte UK, responsible for the wrongdoing that 
occurred."

Deloitte signed off Autonomy's accounts in 2009 and 2010, a period during 
which HP claims to have found a number of irregularities. HP claims that more 
than $200m of Autonomy's $1bn revenues in 2010 were questionable.

A spokesperson for Deloitte UK countered: "Any possible claim would be utterly 
without merit and we will defend ourselves strongly against it. Deloitte was 
not engaged by HP, or by Autonomy, to provide any due diligence in relation to 
the acquisition of Autonomy. Deloitte UK was auditor to Autonomy at the time of 
its acquisition by HP. Deloitte UK conducted its audit work in full compliance 
with regulation and professional standards."

This week the Guardian revealed Deloitte was aware of the details of three 
transactions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/aug/24/hewlett-packard-questions-autonomy-deals-middlemen>
 which HP says cast doubt over Autonomy's dealings with resellers – companies 
selling its software on to end users. Kraft, Eli Lilly and KMPG were named as 
end users of Autonomy software in multimillion-dollar deals with resellers, 
sales which helped boost Autonomy's quarterly revenues. All three deals were 
subsequently restructured, with one reseller paid $400,000 in compensation fees.

Lynch and Hussain deny all allegations of wrongdoing and blame the writedown 
in their company's value on bad management by HP. The HP allegations have 
prompted an investigation by the US Securities and Exchange Commission and the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation, as well as the UK's Serious Fraud Office.

At the San Francisco hearing, called to give preliminary approval to HP's 
settlement of shareholder class actions, US district judge Charles Breyer 
rejected the fees attorneys would have recouped under the settlement. "That's 
out," he said.

HP had promised Cotchett, Pitre & McCarthly and Robbins Geller Rudman & Dowd 
$18m in over 32 months, so long as they switched their efforts to pursuing 
Lynch and Hussain. Should legal action against the former Autonomy managers be 
successful, the firms could win a further maximum of $30m.

It is understood both firms have already agreed to sign the settlement without 
the promise of fees.

A number of parties objected to the shareholder settlement, including Hussain. 
In court on Monday, Hussain's attorney John Keker called the deal a "whitewash".

"This is a joke," Keker said. "If it were a carcass, animals would walk around 
it, it stinks so much."

Marc Wolinsky, HP's lawyer, said HP would vigorously contest Hussain's ability 
to review documents.

Breyer has scheduled a hearing for 26 September. The judge said he would need 
to weigh the evidence against HP officers as part of his analysis on whether 
the deal absolving them of liability is fair for shareholders.

"Something went terribly wrong," Breyer said of the Autonomy acquisition.
 