
Plans by the Child Maintenance and Enforcement Commission to cut spending are 
risky and rely too much on the introduction of a new IT system, according to a 
report from the National Audit Office (NAO).

The commission has committed to cutting its budget to £428m in 2014-15 – 
although this is £44m higher than than its original estimate – from a 2010-11 
budget of £560m.

"Faced with a challenging but achievable target for reducing its spending, the 
Child Maintenance and Enforcement Commission is relying heavily on the 
introduction of fees to parents, underpinned by a new IT system. This is a high 
risk approach with no contingencies if it goes awry," said NAO head Amyas Morse.

While the child maintenance administration system was envisaged as a way of 
saving money, its own price tag has risen since it was conceived. In January 
2011 its cost was estimated at £149m, by October of that year it had risen to 
£275m. "The commission cannot afford the cost of its new child maintenance 
scheme to increase further," according to the NAO's report, Child Maintenance 
and Enforcement Commission: cost reduction.

The system is intended to replace two existing ones, which each underpin a 
separate child maintenance scheme. Due to flaws in the IT systems for each 
scheme, some 100,000 cases have had to be removed from the system and managed 
manually by clerical staff at a cost of £48m, according to the NAO.

The delivery date of the system has slipped three times from full delivery in 
April 2010, to implementation in two phases in October 2012 and July 2013.

"Ministers have stated that introducing fees depends on the commission 
implementing a new, effective child maintenance scheme from October 2012. The 
[commission's predecessor, the Child Support] Agency did not have a good track 
record in delivering IT systems. Our analysis suggests that the commission 
could repeat some of the agency's mistakes. The original plans were optimistic 
and the commission lacked sufficient internal resources to understand fully how 
the IT system would be developed," the report said.

According to the document, among the mistakes made by the Child Support Agency 
that the commission is at risk of repeating include having sufficient internal 
technical resources to be an intelligent customer of the contractor.

"The commission initially used elements of both an 'agile' (iterative) 
approach and a traditional approach to build the new system. Its mix and match 
approach meant there were two distinct routes for specifying requirements and 
resulted in duplicated, conflicting and ambiguous specifications. The 
commission did not have previous experience of using the agile approach," the 
report notes.

"The Office of Government Commerce (OGC) concluded in July 2011 that the 
commission's ability to act as an intelligent customer contributed to slippage 
in the programme."

Along with the introduction of an agile approach, undertaken in mid-2011, the 
commission has improved on existing government measures, such as the use of 
'project review gates' which stop design work proceeding from one stage to the 
next without being ratified by all main stakeholders.

"It is not yet clear whether such remedial actions have sufficiently addressed 
the earlier problems. An external review rated the programme as 'amber' in July 
2011. The commission must undertake critical testing in parallel with programme 
delivery to meet the implementation date," the NAO report adds.

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For weekly updates on 
news, debate and best practice on public sector IT,join the Guardian Government 
Computing network here 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing/start.php>.
 