
The latest twists in the takeover battle around insurer Resolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/resolution> kept traders on their toes 
today and combined with a record high oil price to provide for a busy session.

 In the afternoon, a strong start on Wall Street helped the FTSE 100 extend 
gains as stock markets in Europe joined the collective sigh of relief over 
comments from America's biggest mortgage lender Countrywide.

 The group soothed worries over the extent of turbulence in financial and 
property markets by saying it expects to return to profitability this quarter.

 That boost to sentiment combined with solid rises for miners and oil 
companies to leave the FTSE 100 up 85 points, or 1.3%, at 6,661.3. 

 A flurry of takeover talk and the bid battle for Resolution also powered 
gains in the London market, with retailerKingfisher catching traders' eyes in 
the afternoon.

 With the market making a tentative return to M&A activity after a summer 
hiatus thanks to the credit crunch, the B&Q owner was the biggest riser on the 
FTSE 100, jumping 12.2p, or 7.1%, to 185.3p. The company declined to comment on 
the latest speculation it could become a takeover target.

Standard Chartered Bank also declined to comment on talk surrounding its 
possible status as a bid target for Bank of China. Shares in the London-listed 
bank soared 84p, or 4.9%, to £18.05.

 Moving from banks to insurers, it was a day of high drama in the sector as 
Standard Life announced its bid for Resolution and its contender Pearl then 
came in with a higher offer. Pearl also revealed it now has a 22% stake in the 
takeover target.

 Pearl's £4.94bn cash bid was the equivalent of 720p per share. That compares 
Standard Life's offer of 517p a share in cash and 0.715 Standard Life shares 
for each Resolution share. That offer derailed a rival proposal from Friends 
Provident.

 Before Pearl's announcement, Resolution said it expected to be required to 
pay a break fee of around £49m to Friends Provident, which Standard Life will 
reimburse to the takeover target subject to its offer completing.

Standard Life shares rose 2.25p, or 0.8%, to 278.5p, Resolution closed up 17p, 
or 2.4%, at 726.5p andFriends Provident edged down 0.8p to 174.9p. 

 Elsewhere in the takeover sphere, supermarket J Sainsbury was down after the 
takeover watchdog set a November 8 deadline for Qatari investment fund Delta 
Two to make a bid. Shares in the grocer lost 18.5p, or 3.2%, to 565.5p as 
doubts emerged over the predator's abilities to raise the funds it needs.

 Moving to the day's main gainers, oil companies were in demand as crude 
prices powered ahead to fresh records.

 Renewed fears over relations between the US and Iran pushed the price of a 
barrel of oil for December delivery through $92. That liftedRoyal Dutch Shell 
shares, up 62p to £21.21,BP, up 16.5p to 629p and Tullow Oil, up 13.5p to 630p. 

 Signs of strong demand from China and a weakening US dollar also boosted 
metals prices and that lifted most of the miners.Xstrata added 187p, or 5.6%, 
to £35.28,Rio Tinto rose 182p to £44.17 and Antofagasta added 31.5p to 849.5p. 

 There was more support for telecoms stocks following this week's strong 
results from France Telecom.BT added 7.25p, or 2.3%, to 327.75p and Cable & 
Wireless gained 1.9p to 193.6p. The effect was also felt among the midcaps, 
whereColt Telecom added 7p to 190p. 

 Back on the FTSE 100 British Energy was under pressure again over worries 
about problems at one of its reactors. The shares ended down 10p, or 1.86%, at 
538p, a fall that follows a drop in the shares on Monday after British Energy 
warned that the reopening of two nuclear power plants had been delayed.

 Following rumours about the running of the company's Hinkley Point nuclear 
power station, British Energy said the station was running safely, a statement 
that helped erase at least some of the shares' losses.

 Back to the insurers and Legal & General rose after its 8% drop in nine-month 
sales came within the market's expectations. The group also flagged up strong 
prospects for 2008 and the shares ended up 3.5p, or 2.7%, at 135.2p.

 Tim Young at Collins Stewart said that quarterly new business figures are 
"not that important" rather it was other factors that mattered.

 "Analysts focus on new business figures because it is easy to do and gives 
them something to talk about," he said in a note. "In practice, they have 
little or nothing to say about prospects for the business and profitability. 
The three things that do count – back office efficiency and efficacy, capital 
management and sales and marketing (not the same thing as gross new business 
premiums) – are harder to analyse and so are swiftly ignored. Legal & General 
has all three."

 In the construction sector, smallcap M J Gleeson made up some strong ground 
after its results showed it swung into a profit in the year to June 30. 
Chairman Dermot Gleeson cautioned, however, that the credit crunch could cloud 
the outlook.

 "The recent turbulence in the financial markets has resulted in mortgage 
lenders becoming more cautious. This, combined with higher interest rates, has 
had a marked impact on buyer confidence and house prices in many parts of the 
country. At this stage it is not clear how protracted or severe this market 
adjustment is likely to be," he said.

 Still, the shares ended up 7.5p, or 2.2%, at 348.5p as traders focused on the 
fruits reaped so far from Gleeson's turnaround plan.

 Struggling property group Erinaceous slipped 0.5p to 24p after it emerged 
that hedge fund Fursa has requested a meeting of the company's shareholders to 
demand the removal of two executives from the board. It wants to oust executive 
deputy chairman Neil Bellis and chief operating officer Lucy Cummings.

 Finally, decontamination specialists Bioquell leapt 26p, or 13%, to 222.5p 
after it said its system for killing off hospital bugs had received an upgrade 
to "Category One" status by a Department of Health panel looking at ways to 
tackle suberbugs.
 