
A new higher apprenticeship for care workers with ambition to shape the future 
of adult care homes and services is being widely adopted across the sector.

The work-based level 5 care leadership and management qualification 
<http://www.skillsforcare.org.uk/Qualifications-and-Apprenticeships/Apprenticeships/Higher-Apprenticeships.aspx>
, launched in 2012, is being seen as the gold standard for aspiring registered 
managers and others who are keen to become heads of service. It is appealing to 
both young and older sections of the workforce, boosting the hope that it could 
contribute towards attracting the extra two to three million care workers 
needed to meet the demands of the sector by 2025.

According to official figures, just under 3,000 care workers started the 
qualification in the last academic year, representing 30% of all higher level 
apprenticeships begun in 2012-13. Most of the apprentices are women and 
significantly 91% are aged over 25 – not the typical apprentice demographic. 
This is proof that the qualification is achieving its original goal of 
appealing to the older managerial workforce.

Maddy Thompson, programme head of standards, learning and qualifications at 
Skills for Care <http://www.skillsforcare.org.uk/Home.aspx>, said the 
apprenticeship – which uniquely has an option to accrue university credit 
points – has also been attracting younger care workers looking to develop a 
career in the sector.

She added: "Anecdotally, we are finding that it's appealing to aspiring 
younger people who are coming through at level 2 and 3 who want to progress. 
That is what we are trying to show, that we can offer a career route that you 
can go through."

Charity Leonard Cheshire Disability <http://www.leonardcheshire.org/> already 
has 3% of its service managers on the Level 5 apprenticeship route – a policy 
which has been written into its leadership and development programme.

Wendy Entwistle, a team leader at a home for adults with acquired brain injury 
in Greater Manchester, has just completed the qualification. She represents the 
kind of care worker the apprenticeship was designed for. The 44-year-old left 
school at 16 with few GCEs and finds it hard to believe that she now has a 
qualification equal to a foundation degree.

She said: "I never thought I would be doing this kind of qualification. The 
Level 5 has definitely opened doors for me and has made me much more confident 
in what I am doing, as well as made me think more about where I could go next. 
I feel that I have taken a huge step forward."

Training to become a NVQ assessor or a mental health specialist are now in her 
sights. According to her manager Corrine Waters, Level 5 apprentices are 
typically aged over 30 as they have to be working at a senior level to be able 
to provide the work-based evidence to support the qualification.

She said: "I think it appeals because staff are putting their learning into 
practice, it's vocationally based, which is good. I think it could also make 
the sector more appealing to younger people because it shows that you can 
progress."

That view is shared by Steve Hughes, chief executive of Lilian Faithfull Homes 
<http://www.lilianfaithfull.co.uk/> in Cheltenham, which provides care for 212 
residents, many of whom have some degree of dementia. He said: "It's all about 
having qualifications which make sense. We now have a qualification which is 
affordable in terms of price, is relevant and there is a job at the end of it."

The care home's registered manager Carole Cook, also fits the typical Level 5 
apprentice demographic. The 56-year-old was the home's chief executive before 
it was taken over by Lilian Faithfull just over a year ago. She said: "I had to 
do the Level 5 if I wanted to be a registered manager. It's been a good 
opportunity for me to go on a new journey and to realise that there is still 
time for learning.

She added: "It's given me the opportunity to re-examine what I do every day 
and a route to another career – I have finally found where I should be."

Latest statistics from Skills for Care confirm the potential recruitment 
crisis – and employment opportunity – facing the sector. The number of jobs in 
adult social care in England rose 4% between 2011 and 2012 and has increased by 
15% in the last five years. That figure is expected to grow to between 20 and 
60% by 2025. The King's Fund predicts the sector is going to need up to 3m more 
care workers.

Michael Gibson, a career changer and former hotel and catering businessman in 
Blackpool, might be one of them. Attracted to the sector by the struggle he had 
finding his father a suitable care home, the route in offered by the Level 5 is 
appealing. He said: "I am currently trying to find a role in the sector and 
want to complete the level 5 in a year. I think I have a lot of transferable 
skills and my aspiration is to run my own home."

Why not join our social care community? Becoming a member of the Guardian 
Social Care Network means you get sent weekly email updates on policy and best 
practice in the sector, as well as exclusive offers. You can sign up – for free 
–online here <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/>
 