
This is an unprecedented year for the Man Booker. Not only does Hilary Mantel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hilary-mantel> become the first British 
novelist and the first woman to win the prize twice, she is also the first 
writer to win double glory with a sequel. Bring Up the Bodies is a 
continuation, in effect, of the literary project that began with Wolf Hall but 
expanded to become a promised trilogy: the rehabilitation of Thomas Cromwell, 
fixer and eventual victim of Henry VIII's break with Rome, and the reimagining 
of the Tudor period in thrillingly close focus and startlingly immediate prose.

This volume follows the downfall and execution of Anne Boleyn, in scenes that 
become ever more taut as the scaffold approaches. We may know the outcome, but 
Cromwell does not; Mantel's genius, as she inhabits Cromwell's consciousness in 
an urgent present tense, is to animate history in all its contingency and 
peril. The character of Anne, her mutability and ultimate unknowability, raises 
fertile questions about fiction and representation, while no one who reads the 
scenes of interrogation and torture, forced into uneasy sympathy with the 
affable Cromwell's chilling realpolitik, can consider historical fiction 
irrelevant to our own times.

But is the awarding of the prize a second time to what is essentially volume 
two in one very long book a missed opportunity? The judges had already noted 
"her even greater mastery of the method", so in some ways it makes sense to set 
a double crown on our most brilliant English writer, brought into the spotlight 
by her first Booker in 2009.

Her previous novels would have made worthy winners, too, especially her French 
Revolution epic A Place of Greater Safety, which does for Paris in the 1790s 
what Wolf Hall and Bring Up the Bodies do for the Tudor era, or Beyond Black, 
an extraordinary novel about lost souls and psychic pain set on the margins of 
modern Britain and the spirit world, which is indeed outlandishly dark. One of 
the happy results of her first Booker win was a 900% boost in sales for her 
backlist.

Indeed, Wolf Hall became the fastest-selling winner in the prize's history: a 
happy marriage of literary quality and popular approval. Mantel is a singular, 
uncompromising writer, but her current subject matter – high intrigue and low 
cunning at the Tudor court – happens to have wide appeal.

The other novels on the shortlist could never be so popular. Deborah Levy's 
Freudian tale of madness among the middle classes, Jeet Thayil's brilliantly 
rambling stories of druggy Bombay, Tan Twan Eng's exploration of atrocity and 
artistry, Alison Moore's slow-burning portrait of a man in flight from his 
past: Mantel's is, literally and metaphorically, a weightier book than these.

But Mantel's real challenger on the shortlist, and the novel that has missed 
out to her double coronation, must have been Will Self's Umbrella. An 
undeniably daunting slab of high modernist prose, without such concessions as 
speech marks or paragraph breaks, it's also a brilliantly absorbing and 
audacious meditation on madness, consciousness, technology, war and the mess of 
the 20th century.

As a highbrow panel dropped the previous year's demands for "readability" in 
favour of complexity and the sheer pleasures of innovative prose, it looked for 
a while as though it could have been Self's year. As it is, perhaps Umbrella 
would have been too radical a choice for a prize that, as the country's 
biggest, cannot help but be a little conservative.

And so the judges have rewarded a popular and brilliant book – again – and 
left a poisoned chalice for whoever is on the panel when the third part of 
Mantel's trilogy comes out.
 