
Hocine Aït Ahmed, who has died aged 89, was one of the key figures in 
Algeria’s fight for independence, and could conceivably have become president. 
But he was also highly principled, and, once the country was free from the 
French, always found himself at odds with those who did take control of the 
government, whether properly elected or not.

The commander of the first guerrillas to fight French colonial rule in 1948, 
he was also the last survivor of the nine revolutionary leaders who launched 
the FLN (National Liberation Front) in November 1954. Yet after independence 
was eventually achieved in 1962 he split with the FLN over military control of 
the government and created Algeria’s first opposition party, the Socialist 
Forces Front (FFS). After 23 years of exile in Switzerland, he returned in 1989 
amid rising protests against the FLN.

Aït Ahmed argued against military dominance and religious extremism, and 
highlighted the plight of his people, the Berbers of Kabylie, a region in the 
Tell Atlas mountains, close to the Mediterranean coast.

In 1992, Aït Ahmed, a practising Muslim, offered an olive branch to the banned 
Islamist movement in Algerian politics, while the government favoured its 
eradication. He decried the “silence and indifference of western powers” as 
civil war intensified in 1997, and warned thatAlgeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria> faced “all-out slaughter, likely to 
assume the dimensions of genocide”. Later, he championed the rights of African 
migrants in Europe.

Born in the Kabylie town of Aït Yahya, east of Algiers, into a landowning 
family, Aït Ahmed joined the nationalist Parti du Peuple Algerien (PPA) as a 
16-year-old schoolboy. Though immensely proud of his Berber heritage and 
Tamazight language (not recognised nationally until 2002), he did not get 
involved in ethnic separatism.

In 1947, aged 21, he became the youngest member of the PPA central committee, 
rejected the possibility of compromise with the colonialists, and co-founded 
and soon led the clandestine armed Special Organisation (OS). In March 1949 he 
held up the post office in Oran before fleeing to Egypt to avoid arrest.

Though Aït Ahmed mended ethnic rifts within his party, he became a scapegoat 
for simmering anti-Berber sentiment and lost his OS post to an Arab,Ahmed Ben 
Bella <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/11/ahmed-ben-bella>, a 
co-raider at Oran.

Aït Ahmed presented the FLN’s case at the conference of non-aligned countries 
in Bandung, Indonesia, and at the UN general assembly in 1955, and founded its 
New York office. When he and fellow Algerian leaders flew to Tunis the 
following year, French authorities intercepted their flight and jailed them in 
France.

Released in 1962, Aït Ahmed became a minister in Algeria’s first 
post-independence government. But he soon resigned, accusing Ben Bella, by now 
president, of corruption and autocracy. He founded the FFS in September 1963 
and launched an unsuccessful armed insurrection. In a speech after his arrest, 
he accused the FLN of betraying “the common people” and exchanging its ideals 
for Stalinism, but without the coherence of Stalin’s rule.

Aït Ahmed was sentenced to death, though this was later commuted to life 
imprisonment. In June 1965, the FLN and FFS announced a truce. Three days later
Houari Boumedienne <http://www.britannica.com/biography/Houari-Boumedienne> 
overthrew Ben Bella in a coup that ruled out hopes of rapprochement. Aït Ahmed 
escaped from prison in May 1966, and fled toLausanne, Switzerland 
<http://www.24heures.ch/vaud-regions/long-exil-militant-hocine-aitahmed-pris-fin-lausanne/story/11530095>
. The FFS still managed to maintain its clandestine network despite legal 
repression and its leader’s absence.

In 1981, Aït Ahmed, by now a law graduate and the author of several books, 
co-founded the International Islamic Commission for Human Rights in London with 
Ben Bella. Four years later they proclaimed the creation of democracy in 
Algeria.

Aït Ahmed returned to Algiers in 1989 and the FFS was legalised. In December 
1991 the party knocked the FLN into third place in terms of seats in the 
initial round of Algeria’s first multiparty elections. However, the 47% polled 
by the Islamist FIS terrified the military: in January 1992 they cancelled a 
second round of elections, oustedPresident Chadli Bendjedid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/15/chadli-bendjedid> and instituted 
armed rule.

Aït Ahmed led calls for national reconciliation and sovereign democratic 
institutions. He left Algeria after the assassination of President Mohamed 
Boudiaf in 1992, and three years later spearheaded theSant’Egidio Platform 
<http://www.santegidio.org/archivio/pace/algeria_19950113_FR.htm>, a 
cross-party call for democracy and human rights brokered by an Italian 
organisation, the Catholic Community of Sant’Egidio. In 1999 he returned to 
contest presidential elections. Alarmed at polling irregularities, he and five 
other candidates withdrew from the race, which saw the former Boumedienne 
ministerAbdelaziz Bouteflika 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Abdelaziz-Bouteflika> elected. 
State-instigated violence in Kabylie pushed the FFS back into its regional 
base, while Saïd Sadi’s Rassemblement pour la Culture et la Democratie, also 
representing the Berbers of Kabylie, now rivalled the more moderate FFS.

Aït Ahmed returned to Lausanne and continued calling on Bouteflika to reduce 
the military’s power and enshrine human rights in a new constitution. It took 
the Arab spring of 2011 and fear of resultant domestic upheaval to ease the 
logjam. In 2012 Bouteflika promised Aït Ahmed’s supporters a say in running the 
country. In 2013 he brought the intelligence and security department (DRS) 
under cabinet control. Re-elected for a fourth term in 2014, Bouteflika 
promised a historic reconciliation. But despite intense negotiations, Aït 
Ahmed, who had formally resigned as leader of the FFS in 2013 after repeated 
heart attacks, stubbornly held to his full demands.

“Deep inside, Bouteflika always felt admiration and respect towards the rebel 
Hocine,” a relative of Bouteflika’s told Le Monde after Aït Ahmed’s death. Some 
younger democrats now lament his 1963 revolt, which they say rashly undermined 
Algeria while preserving the FLN.

He is survived by his wife Djamila, a daughter, Bushra, and two sons, Jugurtha 
and Salah-Eddine.

• Hocine Aït Ahmed, revolutionary and democratic campaigner, born 20 August 
1926; died 23 December 2015
 