
 His Girl Friday 
Olivier, London SE1 

 Brand 
Theatre Royal Haymarket, London SW1 

This is the first safe thing - the first retro thing - that Nicholas Hytner 
has done since he took over at the National. His Girl Friday  is the offspring 
of two established successes - Ben Hecht's and Charles MacArthur's 1928 play 
The Front Page and the 1940 feminised film version directed by Howard Hawks. 
John Guare, author of Six Degrees of Separation, has plaited the scripts 
together, embellishing their famously swift and gag-laden dialogue with good 
jokes of his own.Alex Jennings <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alex-jennings>
 and Zoë Wanamaker - actors who can do banter for breakfast - star. Getting 
audiences in will be a cinch.

Hecht and MacArthur's play was a satirical ode to newspaper life: editor 
Walter Burns and journalist Hildy Johnson wisecracked their way, homburgs on 
heads, through a rigged murder trial, a corrupt city and each other's psyche. 
Hawks's film spiced this up with romance. The journo became not just a woman 
(delicious Rosalind Russell) but the editor's ex-wife - as hooked on scoops as 
she was on her former husband.

Guare and director Jack O'Brien give this several twists. The outlines of the 
action - escaped prisoner in desk, prostitute out of window - remain the same, 
though too slowly played to register as black farce. But corruption is given an 
uglier aspect: the play is set on the eve of the Second World War. And a 
barnstorming cameo by Margaret Tyzack - feral in furs - raises the question of 
women's uncertain position: blaming society's rot on 'all these women writers 
running amok', she is particularly eager to nail 'that anti-Christ Agatha 
Christie'.

Bob Crowley's over-artful design encases the action in a movie set which gives 
the evening the air of a showbiz tribute. Its vivacity is elsewhere: in the 
exchanges between Jennings and Wanamaker, each of which suggest a shared 
history.

Russell was no ingénue but she was clearly a protégée, moulded by her ex. 
Wanamaker, alluringly husky but sharp - although her dignity is impaled on a 
hobble skirt and a hat like a satellite dish - is an equal, slugging it out 
with him like an old-time partner. Jennings does rigid, red-faced bullying 
frighteningly well (he's an actor who can change colour from moment to moment) 
but is at his supple best when drawling and withering. And effortlessly 
delivering some classic lines. Such as his advice to an expectant father: 
'Don't be dictated to by the squalling demands of some infant you've never 
met.' The most striking moments here are not the most ambitious but the most 
local, giving the pleasure you might get from listening to sharp-tongued wags 
on a burnished Bakelite radio.

For once, the West End, usually sclerotic with pap, looks more adventurous, 
though not exactly more fun, than the South Bank. You have to be bold to stage 
Brand. Ibsen's play - written in 1865, more than a decade before The Doll's 
House and 20 years earlier than Hedda Gabler - was never intended to be acted. 
It's a poem. It contains a child of nature who comes on babbling about trolls. 
And its protagonist is a figure of adamantine resolution, far removed from the 
Third Way or the New Age: Brand founds his faith as a priest, and his 
personality, on lack of compro mise - he demands from his flock and his family 
total renunciation, not only of worldly goods but of tender feelings. It's a 
perilous play, sometimes absurd and sometimes repellent. And yet, grandly 
sculpted, carved with unforgettable chiaroscuro images - lowering mountains, 
candlelight, gathering darkness, a cathedral of snow - it has magnificence as 
well as intensity. It is completely itself. Adrian Noble's production - his 
swansong for the RSC - is alive with this sense.

Peter McKintosh's beautiful abstract design is lofty, unyielding. High timber 
boards shift through a chic Scandinavian palette under Peter Mumford's lighting 
- changing from slate to watery greens and ice blues; a tall black fissure 
opens like a fjord. In a marvellous final coup, when an avalanche sweeps down 
and engulfs Brand's fixed conviction, the whole hard set disappears into a 
cloud of white mist. Norwegian wood dissolves along with Norwegian will.

The first performance of Brand lasted for six and a half hours: women unlaced 
their corsets in order to last it out. No need for that here: Noble's 
production is brisk but not hurried. Claire Price as the high-minded but (this 
is Ibsen after all) outrageously submissive wife, is shining and tremulous: a 
bleak domestic exchange in which she and her husband catch the fear in each 
other's eyes is the best in the production. Susan Engel, in the smaller but 
crucial part of Brand's mother, dispenses a chill with her habitual grace.

As Brand, Ralph Fiennes <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ralphfiennes> is 
saturnine and taut. Cramped with misery, he forcefully suggests a character 
propelled by disgust at everyone else's fudging. He moves warily; he 
shootssuspicious looks; he seems to despise the words that fall with reluctant 
slowness and staccato emphases from his mouth, as if unable to bear looking at 
anyone else on the stage; he directs his speeches to an empyrean realm over the 
heads of the audience. At his most driven, he gets a Richard III lope. It's a 
detailed, intelligent interpretation. But it's too careful, too rational, too 
contained for this craggy play. What he doesn't show is someone impelled by an 
idealism that might justify his sacrifices, if only to himself. Brand should 
burn.

Three to see

The tragedy of Hamlet Warwick Arts Centre

The only chance in the UK to see Peter Brook's
compelling adaptation. 

Scenes from the big picture Cottesloe,
London SE1 

Owen McCafferty's Belfast vignettes,
radiantly directed by Peter Gill.

Brassed off Birmingham Rep
 Paul Allen's stirring
stage version.
 