
Much of the retail interest so far is focused on Morrisons' results but Home 
Retail is also ringing up some impressive gains after a better than expected 
trading update and revived talk of possible private equity interest.

The Homebase and Argos owner raised its annual profit forecast for the second 
time this year, and now expects the figure to be £90m. In January it expected 
£83m, itself a £10m increase on previous predictions.

Argos was the star performer, with like for like sales up 5.2% in the eight 
weeks to the start of March. Homebase sales fell 1.5% but this was better than 
City expectations of a 2.8% decline. For the year underlying sales at Argos 
climbed 2.1% while Homebase dropped 4.9%.

Argos, which had come under pressure as its bargain seeking customers became 
increasingly cash strapped, appears to have turned the corner, with sales now 
boosted by strong demand for tablets and other electrical goods. During the 
period it benefited of course from the demise of electrical retailer Comet.

Argos is also building up its digital business, emphasising online, mobile and 
tablet purchases as high street sales decline. Chief executive Terry Duddy said:
 Against a backdrop of subdued consumer spending for the new financial year, 
we will continue to invest and are focused on delivery of the tranformation 
plan to reinvent Argos as a digital retail leader and the Homebase proposition. 
The news has sent its shares up 17.1p to 150p, a 13% increase, but analysts at 
still cautious. In a hold note Freddie George at Cantor Fitzgerald said:
 Following this update, we are raising our 2013 forecast from £84m to £91m 
versus £101.6m in 202 taking earnings per share up from 7.3p to 7.9p. We are 
also making similar revisions to our subsequent year forecasts.

There is little in the recent strategy, in our view, that makes us believe 
that the company can significantly arrest the underlying decline in Argos' 
profits, although they are expected to be slightly up in 2013. Argos sells to 
the 'low end of the market', does not have particularly strong own label 
brands, which currently account for 16% of sales, and in electricals, which 
account for around 37% of its sales, it is now heavily reliant for growth on 
low margin commodity items, such as tablets. Homebase also looks structurally 
challenged. However, with confidence picking up in equity markets, the chances 
of a bid from private equity, which would run the business for cash, and 
subsequent management changes increases. Private equity would be attracted by 
the cash balance and the strong cashflow. We are retaining our hold 
recommendation but upgrading our price target from 115p to 125p reflecting the 
earnings upgrade. 
But Philip Dorgan at Panmure Gordon kept his sell rating and 80p price target:
 While this is a short trading period being reported, it does beat 
expectations; we would not get too carried away with the fact that this is the 
third consecutive quarter of positive like-for-like sales growth at Argos. We 
think that Argos's turnaround will take too long and that Homebase is heading 
towards losses. We also believe that many traditional retailers are making a 
virtue out of a necessity in that they have a lot of stores and so they are 
building bricks and mortar into an online model. Long term, we think that this 
will fail.

We just don't believe that the recovery is going to happen, given the 
complexity of the issues and the speed of change in the market place. To trade 
on 7 times earnings, then Home Retail would need to generate pretax profits of 
£220m. Consensus is expecting just half of this by 2016. 
As for Morrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons>, its shares 
have added 2.4p to 274p as it said it would launch an online food offering by 
next January, as profits fell by £34m to £901m for the year, the first decline 
for six years. It said it was in talks with online grocerOcado, up 27.6p at 
165p, about some form of partnership. Ocado itself reported a 14.4% rise in 
sales in the 12 weeks to the end of February.

Overall leading shares have taken their cue from a steady performance on Wall 
Street after better than expected US retail sales. Later come weekly jobless 
figures from America which could influence the market's immediate direction.

The FTSE 100 is currently 15.66 points higher at 6497.16.

Miners were a drag on the market as metal prices slipped on worries about 
Chinese demand.Rio Tinto is down 65.5p at 3311.5p while Vedanta Resources is 
23p lower at £11.46.

Temporary power supplier Aggreko - which issued two profits warnings last year 
- has added 106p to £19.45. The company has climbed to the top of the leading 
index following news of a deal to supply power to Electricidade de Mocambique 
in Mozambique and NamPower in Namibia. Caroline de La Soujeole at Cantor 
Fitzgerald said:
 The power will be supplied from Aggreko's existing facilities in Ressano 
Garcia, Mozambique. The total value of the project is likely to be in excess of 
$200m, including fuel costs. Ressano Garcia, which was built in 2012, already 
provides 110MW of power to EDM for national energy requirements and to ESKOM, a 
South African utility. This is an exciting development and suggests that the 
potential of Aggreko's Mozambique facilities is greater than we had previously 
envisaged. We reiterate our buy recommendation and target price of 2,200p.

Will Kirkness at Jefferies was also positive, saying:
 A 122MW contract win to the Southern African power pool is testament to the 
success of the existing contracts in place. The incremental revenues from the 
second quarter of 2013 of $200m over two years are certainly a positive for 
sentiment and we believe place upside risk to consensus 2014 earnings per share 
forecasts.
 