
Q I have a windowless bathroom in which the central light casts ugly, 
unflattering shadows over my face when I'm looking in the mirror. How can I 
make my morning routine a little less scary?
Lucy Richards, Norfolk

A Good lighting is essential in a bathroom if you want to leave the house 
looking your best. All too often I see bathrooms painted in watery blues or 
turquoises, with harsh downlighting - classic mistakes. The former reflects a 
very cool blue light on to the skin, which tends to make you look quite sick 
and washed out, so try painting your bathroom with warmer tones such as light 
stony browns and warm reddy-greys instead.

Secondly, avoid downlights, as they cast long shadows across your face, 
accentuating wrinkles and eye bags. Instead, get an electrician to fit fully 
covered lights at eye level either side of the bathroom mirror, making sure 
they are safety-protection level IP65s to protect against electrocution. Check 
out Habitat's Carrara Mirror (£199) with integrated lights, or for the budget 
option, fit a few Osram DOT-it battery LED lights beside your existing mirror. 
Then you'll find it easier to see - and rectify - any soul-destroying signs of 
age or reckless living.

Q When I came back from holiday recently, I realised how shabby my front door 
looks. How can I make it more welcoming?

Roger McLeish, Birmingham

A The fronts of our homes reveal much about our personality - luckily, 
however, you don't have to spend your weight in solid-gold doorknobs to make a 
difference. Repaint your front door and its surround, perhaps in darker tones 
than your interior, and replace any shaky handles and letterboxes with solid 
versions - door furniture is the first point of physical contact for visitors, 
so you'll want it to present a stable and secure impression. Finally, affix 
some new stainless-steel numbers - try architectural ironmongers Poole Waite & 
Co (020 7253 8117) for a good selection.

· If you have a decorating/design question for Oliver, email 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
 