
"National treasures are often fools and worse: dare I say that until last year 
Jimmy Savile was perhaps the greatest of them all?" Tanya Gold wrote in the 
Guardian in January. A flick through the newspapers around the time of Savile's 
death – less than two years ago, though it seems a lot longer – readily 
confirms this.

"It made me smile to see national treasure [my italics], Sir Jimmy Savile, 
being laid to rest in his usual unconventional style … It's heartwarming to see 
that even after passing away, Sir Jimmy can still bring a smile to people." 
(The Sun)

"He was the irrepressible TV presenter who made the wishes of hundreds of 
children come true and raised more than £40m for charity. Last night tributes 
poured in fornational treasure Sir Jimmy Savile, who died yesterday aged 84." 
(Sunday Mirror)

"The death of Sir Jimmy Savile just two days before his 85th birthday leaves 
the world a poorer place … His most important work was as a tireless charity 
fundraiser. We have lost anational treasure." (Sunday People)

Well, journalists were not the only people to misjudge Jimmy Savile. Most of 
the country did. But you might have thought newspapers would be a bit more 
careful about bestowing national treasure status on celebrities in the wake of 
Savile's fall from grace. Not a bit of it.

The trouble is that buzzwords and phrases are like the latest smartphone: once 
one writer or broadcaster has used it, they all want one. And national treasure 
is the phrase of the decade.

Originally reserved for figures who enjoyed the affection of a large part of 
the nation – Stephen Fry or Joanna Lumley, perhaps – the term has now been 
extended to anyone about whom the writer can't think of anything more original 
to say.

If you aspire to be one, your best bet is to be nearing the end of a long 
career on television, the big screen or both.Barbara Windsor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/barbara-windsor>, a star of the Carry 
On films before she became landlady of the Queen Vic in EastEnders, has been a 
national treasure for years. Elderly or retired sports commentators are 
guaranteed national treasure status: Henry Blofeld, Peter Alliss and Murray 
Walker, for example. Clare Balding is probably the current favourite treasure. 
Anyone would be happy to have her as a big sister, which I reckon is as good a 
test as any of whether the epithet is deserved.

National treasures can be old (Sir David Attenborough, Sir Paul McCartney) or 
young (Laura Robson, Joe Root). Politicians can become national treasures, but 
only if they are too old to do any harm (Tony Benn) or have been on Strictly 
Come Dancing (Ann Widdecombe).

The papers all love a national treasure, but they are not always unanimous. On 
17 May, the Daily Telegraph revealed that John Humphrys wasnot a national 
treasure. All was not lost for the Today presenter, however, because by 8 June 
the Daily Express had acclaimed him as one after all.

There are more national treasures than ever. A search through the archives 
reveals more than 1,100 uses of the phrase in UK national newspapers in the 
year to 21 July. (Ten years ago, the annual figure was a steady 500 or so.) You 
don't even have to be alive. The late astronomer Sir Patrick Moore and Rupert 
Murdoch's late mother, Dame Elisabeth, were awarded posthumous national 
treasuredom.

Nor do you have to be a person: the band Madness, Channel 4's Time Team, the 
BBC, Glastonbury, Marks & Spencer, the Commonwealth War Graves Commission, the 
Irish Hurling League final and the Jamaican boys' and girls' athletics 
championships have all been accorded national treasure status in one or more 
newspapers. Dare I suggest that all this treasure has become devalued?

The more far-fetched the nominations are, the more likely they are to appear 
in Private Eye's National Treasures column, the more it seems to encourage some 
writers to conjure up ever less appropriate candidates. Unlikely recent 
national treasures include the England cricketer Jonathan Trott, the 
broadcaster Eddie Mair, the actor Miriam Margolyes and the writer Stephen 
Poliakoff. I've nothing against any of these people, and they have all achieved 
distinction in their field, but at this rate anyone who has been in the public 
eye for more than about two minutes is going to be claimed by some journalist, 
somewhere, as a national treasure.

And of course we now have a whole new genre of former national treasures who 
have been disgraced, notably Savile and Stuart Hall, with the possibility of 
more to come. No one appears to have questioned whether the media were too 
ready to acclaim national treasures in the first place, but then most 
newspapers have short memories and rely on their readers to be the same.

After a while, national treasure hunting becomes tedious and I expect even 
journalists will eventually tire of it as new buzzwords come along. Trawling 
through the archives, it was refreshing to find a report about not a 
clapped-out entertainer or minor public figure, but the final frontier. Nasa, 
it turns out, has a special category for moon rocks and other geological 
specimens brought back by various missions into space.

National treasure.

For Who the Bell Tolls: One Man's Quest for Grammatical Perfection, by David 
Marsh, will be published by Guardian Faber in the autumn.
 