
Getting the best careers advice to young people is no easy feat, particularly 
with so many options available. But it's vital to securing their future, and 
withyouth unemployment levels at 19% 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/research/briefing-papers/SN05871/youth-unemployment-statistics>
, it's not something that can be ignored.

At a recent Guardian early careers summit, in association with Alexander Mann 
Solutions and RateMyApprenticeship, the results of an exclusive survey revealed 
that the three main people who influence students' decisions are parents, 
teachers and employers.

The panel debate, which took place under the Chatham House rule, by which 
comments are not attributed to speakers to encourage open debate, began with an 
overview of the findings, shedding light on how young people feel about their 
future and the information they're receiving on career options.

School is a common source of careers advice for many young people, with over 
three quarters of teachers (88%) and parents (82%) agreeing that it should be 
included in the national curriculum.

Teachers understand they're a main point of contact for students, but 84% of 
them admit they need more careers advisers in school, and 59% say they don't 
know enough about the options available.

Both the panel and audience felt teachers should be helping children plan 
their futures. But, as already highlighted, this is often just a part of their 
many responsibilities. Simply knowing the numerous industries and sectors by 
name is a challenge, even for dedicated careers advisers. The panel suggested 
that one way to help children get the information they need to make an informed 
decision is to ensure teachers know about the job market in their subject area.

Another suggestion from the panel was to have a central place where teachers 
could go to get the latest job market information and careers-focused lesson 
plans, to be taught in lessons such as PSHE.

Careers guidance is also found beyond the school gates – the research found a 
huge number of parents (90%) are advising their children. However, it also 
found more than half (55%) feel they don't know enough about alternative 
options to university. This finding is supported by arecent survey by EY 
<http://www.ey.com/UK/en/Newsroom/News-releases/14-01-27---Half-of-parents-feel-ill-equipped-to-help-children-make-career-decisions>
, where 54% of parents said they feel in the dark about their children's 
options.

With university fees rocketing, it's also not surprising half of parents say 
they can't afford to fund their children through university. This is reflected 
by 55% of the students surveyed saying the cost of higher education puts them 
off. Money, to these young people, is an important factor. When asked what 
three words they associate with apprenticeship schemes, one of the most common 
answers was "low-paid".

Three quarters of students surveyed also think graduates have the greatest 
potential to earn a high salary. However, despite this common view that 
graduates will earn more, the ONS recently found in reality,graduates are 
earning less than those on work-based schemes 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/educationnews/10578118/Graduates-earning-less-than-those-on-apprenticeships.html>
.

As the real value of a degree in finding a job is debated, and graduates 
struggle to find work after university, there is an unquestionable need for 
other options, such as apprenticeships and school-leaver programmes. But what 
do people really think about these alternatives?

While half of the students think apprenticeships are a good alternative to 
university, only a fifth plan to do one, and just 28% have even considered it. 
So what could be the reason for this? Surprisingly, just under half of the 
pupils had never been advised to look at these choices instead of getting a 
degree. And around half of those who were advising them – parents and teachers 
– said they were unaware of other options for school leavers. This raised the 
issue during the panel debate of how best to educate those giving careers 
advice, so they are properly equipped to help young people.

The question of how to inspire and inform children about their options once 
they reach 18 was also discussed. It was widely agreed that getting people who 
have done these schemes into schools to talk to the students about their 
experiences would help. People like Constance Nafuna, who has completed a level 
2 apprenticeship in delivering financial services with Barclays. She shared 
with the room her inspiring story about how she came to England with no 
qualifications. After six months of desperately trying to find a job, she 
applied to the Barclays apprenticeship scheme.

Speaking to the Guardian after the event, she says: "The best thing about it 
is I got a qualification. I got to graduate in November last year, and I also 
got promoted. I love the job and the business is wonderful; Barclays believed 
in me and promoted me from being a cashier to a local business manager. Because 
I don't have an educational background, they got me extra help with my English 
and maths.

"I believe people like me show you don't have to have everything in life, if 
you believe in yourself you can do it. It's about informing people about 
apprenticeships. Every time I go to events, I share my story and people leave 
feeling if this girl can do it, I can do it."

When it comes to solving the issue of how to get the right advice to young 
people in schools, there is no easy fix. All the panel thought greater 
communication between the key influencers – parents, teachers and employers – 
and students would be hugely beneficial. This is supported by 70% of the 
employers surveyed, agreeing they should have more presence in schools; while 
67% say schools need to give them more access. This need for greater contact 
was supported by the panel and members of the audience who said their companies 
had struggled to get into local schools.

On the panel:

Felicity Forster, head of communications, RateMyApprenticeship

Michael Keoghan, director of vocational education, Department for Business 
Innovation Skills

Steve Keith, employer brand officer – schools, EY

Carrie Longton, founder, Mumsnet

Mike Thompson, director of early careers, Barclays

Chaired by: Kerry Eustice, head of education and society networks, the Guardian

To talk about this research further, or to discuss how to reach any of these 
groups mentioned, please call Alistair Williams, head of commercial, on 020 
3353 2162, or send him anemail <mailto:alistair.williams@theguardian.com>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 