
THE VIEW

It's a little odd, the food is pretty grim (although the breakfast buffet is 
suprisingly good) and it's chock-full of tourist groups, but the aptly-named 
View Hotel is all about, well, the view. All rooms look straight out to the 
Mittens, the spectacular buttes that dominate Monument Valley. Settle on the 
viewing platform and watch the light creep across them at dusk, and set your 
alarm to see the spectacular sunrise from the privacy of your own terrace.

• Doubles from $95. Book on 00 1 435 727 5555; monumentvalleyview.com 
<http://monumentvalleyview.com>

RED FEATHER LODGE

Accommodation within the Grand Canyon tends to get booked up to a year in 
advance; if you're prepared to stay five minutes' drive outside the park, 
availability rockets while prices plummet. Red Feather Lodge is a classic 
roadside motel in the small town of Tusayan, with good-sized rooms and 
continental breakfast included at the diner next door, and a smattering of 
restaurants within walking distance. The fabulous Route 66 town of Williams is 
an hour's drive south and well worth a visit.

• Doubles from $73. Book on 00 1 866 561 2425; redfeatherlodge.com 
<http://www.redfeatherlodge.com>

LAKE POWELL RESORT

Right on the shores of the lake, the resort is ideally placed for lazy days 
exploring the spectacular lake and nearby Antelope Canyon, and longer forays to 
the national parks that dominate the region. Rooms are spacious and 
comfortable, if a little plain, and there's a restaurant and bar on site. 
Combine a stay with a few days on one of the houseboats, to explore the lake at 
your own pace.

• Doubles from $99. Book on 00 1 888 896 3829; lakepowell.com 
<http://lakepowell.com>

T-BIRD LODGE

South of Monument Valley, in the heart of Arizona, the Canyon de Chelly 
National Park has spectacular ruins of Native American villages alongside 
stunning canyon landscapes. The Navajo-owned lodge is on the site of a historic 
trading post, and the pink adobe building has an authentic "pueblo" feel. Rooms 
are decked out with Navajo rugs and furniture, and the hotel runs daily tours 
to explore the canyon and its history. Canyon de Chelly is the only National 
Park in the US entirely on Native American land.

• Doubles from $69. Book on 00 1 800 679 2473; tbirdlodge.com 
<http://tbirdlodge.com>
 