
The local gazetteer has taken its place among the prime digital assets of 
public authorities. There has been a widespread recognition of how the details 
of land and property can be used to improve service delivery, and an increasing 
number of organisations have launched initiatives that are now being held up as 
exemplars for others to follow.

It has been an evolutionary process that has recently moved on to a new stage 
with the creation of the National Address Gazetteer Database. Developed and 
managed in England and Wales by GeoPlace, a joint venture between the Local 
Government Association (LGA) and national mapping agency Ordnance Survey, 
GeoPlace went live in April 2011 and raises the possibility of authorities 
extracting even more value from their geographic information.

The predecessor of the National Address Gazetteer Database, the National Land 
and Property Gazetteer (NLPG), has been the prime tool for existing 
initiatives, together with the National Street Gazetteer (NSG). They have often 
been used to create new products for specific local services, some of which 
have been highlighted in the latest round of Exemplar Awards run by GeoPlace.

West Midlands fire service (WMFS) carried off the overall winner award for the 
creation of a new gazetteer named Chimp, which brought together a number of 
datasets into a single system.

The project involved creating or modifying more than 1m pieces of data to 
create a holding of 2.9m basic land and property units and 86,000 streets, 
along with more than 20,000 land and property identifier records to help 
correctly identify a location in an emergency call out. Using Chimp, all of the 
data was integrated into the brigade's new command and control system and its 
corporate gazetteer was extended across all of its business support systems.

The key result has been that the brigade is now better equipped to get crews 
to the right location more quickly, but it also has a valuable tool to support 
its long term planning. Chimp has already been used to manage more than 120,000 
home safety checks in the West Midlands and in an area risk modelling project 
to support policy making.

Chimp has now been picked up by Staffordshire fire and rescue service and two 
others are said to be preparing to take it on.

In another case, Northumberland county council made use of the NSG in 
consolidating its 1,500 paper based traffic regulation orders (TROs) into a 
single database.

All the orders were scanned before being referenced against the NSG, following 
which the council surveyed all of its roads and reviewed each of the TROs. All 
of the information was placed in the new database, which was then used to 
create a layer in the council's geographic information system, so that anyone – 
including the public - could easily see the full details of the TROs on 
Ordnance Survey MasterMap. The database can also be used to produce reports and 
consultation documents.

Carl Dent, Northumberland's asset database manager, says the NSG was crucial 
in the validation of paper records and has become so in the introduction, 
revoking or updating of TROs. "In three years we have moved from a paper based 
system with lots of missing orders that relied on officers' memories to 
function to a full electronic system that is up to date and available to all," 
he says.

The National Address Gazetteer Database is going to add a new element to the 
capabilities in combining the NLPG with Ordnance Survey's address layer, the 
national dataset with addresses and their precise locations. It is also 
expected to gradually replace the NLPG as a basis for local land and property 
gazetteers.

Gayle Gander, marketing manager for GeoPlace, says that public authorities 
would not make direct use of the new gazetteer, butAddressBase 
<http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/oswebsite/products/addressbase-products.html> 
products from Ordnance Survey through its public sector mapping agreement. This 
makes them free at the point of use for eligible organisations, although they 
have to pay for use of Royal Mail's Postcode Address File when utilising it in 
conjunction with the datasets.

A key feature is the provision of a unique reference number, described by 
Gander as a "golden thread", which makes it possible to find matches of a 
property in different datasets. This makes it possible to identify significant 
discrepancies, such as when the bins from an address are emptied but nobody 
there is on the council tax register or electoral roll. This could be used to 
correct a shortcoming in the delivery of a service, or to detect a potential 
case of fraud.

Equally important is that the information is now coming from all of the public 
sector, not just local authorities. Fire services and councils are already 
providing updates to GeoPlace, many on a daily basis, and Gander says that none 
of the information has gone more than a month without verification.

"Once embedded in local authorities there are all sorts of opportunities to do 
new things," he says. "Organisations are now testing it and we believe that in 
future it will be a core service offering for public authorities."

Two fire and rescue services, Hampshire and North Yorkshire, have emerged as 
early adopters. They are using the AddressBase Premium product from Aligned 
Assets, which includes details of non-addressable objects such as bus stops and 
park benches and can alert them to potential obstacles in an emergency.

How quickly others follow, particularly from local government, remains to be 
seen, as it may take time for councils and others to discover the value for the 
new products based on the National Address Gazetteer Database. But the long 
term trend indicates that public authorities are extracting more value from 
location based information, and the more detail it includes – and the closer it 
gets to real time – the more it is likely to be used.

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For updates on public 
sector IT, join theoin the Government Computing Network here. 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing/start.php>
 