
University participation has suffered in 2011, following budget cuts, tuition 
fee rise and end of Aimhigher, a programme to raise higher education 
aspirations of young people and co-ordinate inter-university activities As 2012 
approaches, it is time to chalk out main priorities for widening participation 
in the new HE landscape.

For too long, policy debates have failed to engage with those working in the 
area. The Bridge Group was founded in late 2010 as an independent policy 
association to promote social mobility through higher education, and to provide 
a forum through which experts can inform policy. Its core belief is that we 
cannot boast of a world-class university sector if sections of it are open only 
to the privileged. The UK still has one of the developed world's lowest levels 
of social mobility and universities have an essential role to play in securing 
the progress of talented individuals.

Research shows that a failure to improve social mobility will cost the UK 
economy up to £140bn a year by 2050. Higher education is preparing students for 
vocations which may not exist yet, to tackle problems which have not yet been 
defined, using technology which is not yet invented. Adaptability, innovation 
and a capacity to work with diverse groups are critical assets for our future 
workforce.

The government's recent white paper is intended to foster a more competitive 
market in higher education, empowering students as consumers. Unfortunately, as 
most economists will tell you, the customer is not always right. Students do 
not necessarily choose courses according to their job prospects. For example, 
science and engineering courses, which generally have excellent graduate 
outcomes, attract far fewer applicants per place than dance and drama. The new 
key information sets are likely to make it easier for prospective students to 
access the relevant information, but students will need guidance to decipher 
what these indicators are really showing. On the other hand, quantitative data, 
such as number of contact hours and graduate salary indicators, do not present 
the whole picture.

The new student number allocation policy risks reversing gains in widening 
participation and social mobility. Students from less advantaged backgrounds 
are much less likely to achieve AAB grades and more likely to apply withAccess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/access> qualifications, 
which cannot be included in the AAB+ population. The students most likely to 
gain from a degree do not just come in an 'AAB' package. Universities will now 
also need to ensure that the HEFCE's 20% margin to recruit students from 
widening participation backgrounds is indeed used for this purpose. 
Institutions should also consider how they can strengthen their current efforts 
to prioritise AAB+ applicants from less advantaged backgrounds.

Universities already work to raise the aspirations of disadvantaged pupils 
with academic potential, but increased marketisation of higher education risks 
seeing outreach activity focus disproportionately on pupils soon to progress to 
higher education (where the immediate gains are most obvious). To achieve the 
best long-term effects on social mobility, universities must continue and 
increase their work with younger pupils.

The Bridge Group is calling universities to play more of a leading role in 
mobilising, brokering and coordinating the professions' contributions to social 
mobility. There is compelling evidence of the levelling effect of a university 
education. However, this levelling pattern is not mirrored in graduate 
destinations, where less-advantaged students with the same higher education 
background remain less likely to progress to competitive professions. An 
important differentiating factor is access to professional networks. These 
provide valuable resources that in turn promote access to the workplace. 
Universities should facilitate opportunities for students from less advantaged 
backgrounds to develop these networks, particularly with alumni, where there is 
a ready connection to be made.

A socially responsible society makes higher education a vehicle – not a 
barrier – to social mobility, and the Bridge Group is committed to finding 
practical and affordable ways to make that a reality.

Nik Miller is a founding member of The Bridge Group 
<http://www.thebridgegroup.org.uk> and a manager in the University of York's 
development office <http://www.yorkspace.net/>. Contact Nik via email 
<mailto:nik.miller@thebridgegroup.org.uk>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 