
How to find a placement: Remember that it can be very expensive for companies 
to advertise roles on newspaper websites and job boards. Many only advertise on 
their own website and it's a good idea to carry out a search on Google, Twitter 
and LinkedIn for companies within the sector you're looking at. A lot of places 
rely on recruitment agencies to fulfill their human resources function, so you 
should also consider signing up with a relevant agency. I'd recommend a mix of 
looking on job boards, approaching companies directly and signing up with 
graduate recruitment agencies.

Think carefully about how your application targets the specific role you're 
going for: Do your best to make yourself stand out by tailoring your 
application to each role and consider recording a video CV to add a splash of 
personality. You must think about how you can add value to a company – what is 
it in particular that you can offer them that means they should take you on?

Alex Townley, marketing manager at Inspiring Interns

Find out about the sector you want to get into: Even though your end goal 
might be working in IT, for example, don't rule out the idea of working (or 
interning) within a technology recruitment company in the first instance. You 
will get fantastic exposure to the IT sector as a whole and will come into 
contact with a huge range of candidates who are looking for work (against who 
you can benchmark your own skills and experience). You'll also gain a great 
insight into organisations who recruit IT staff and the type of skills they 
seek. In addition to all of that, you will learn approaches to writingCVs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/cv>, interview techniques and whole host 
of other transferable skills.

Be proactive: Don't hang back and wait to be asked to do things. Instead, 
[look for opportunities where you can help out] and seize them. Even if the 
tasks aren't set out in your job description or in the outline of your work 
programme, if you can see a chance to showcase your skills and add value to the 
organisation then let them know.

Julie Bowen, member services manager at the Association of Professional 
Staffing Companies (APSCo)

Make a record of what skills you acquire from your placement: Keeping a 
detailed log of what you do during your internship – not to satisfy any 
placement coursework that you may have to complete, but to build up a bank of 
evidence – is a great way to seriously upgrade your CV, LinkedIn profile and 
applications when you leave.

Don't wait until you're about to graduate to access university careers advice: 
Get the edge on other applicants and get your CV in good order as soon as 
possible, so you can get your CV reviewed by the placement officer at your 
university early on. They will have more availability for appointments at the 
beginning of the year – you won't have to be competing with your classmates for 
their time.

Hannah Wrightson, marketing assistant at RateMyPlacement

Make the most of the connections you make: My top tip is to make as many 
connections as possible at all levels of the organisation and keep in touch 
once your placement ends. LinkedIn is a powerful and convenient tool to do this 
and as they say it's often who you know, not what you know, that leads to 
success.

Simon Gray, qualified chartered accountant and managing director of Career 
Codex Limited

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly update and careers ebook 
<https://register.theguardian.com/careers/?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>.
 