
Adrian Chiles’s £4.6m earnings last year rank him among the top earners in 
British broadcasting. Industry executives evidently value the ITV football and 
BBCRadio 5 Live <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-5-live> presenter’s 
“slightly grumpy mate in the pub” schtick. But his attraction is lost on some, 
judging by the bemused reaction on Twitter to news of his hefty 2013 pay packet 
last week, as many asked, not always in polite terms, how he became one of the 
highest-paid figures on television.

Chiles has bounced back after falling out very publicly with the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> and switching from The One Show along 
with co-presenter Christine Bleakley to ITV’s ill-fated breakfast programme 
Daybreak in 2010.

He is back on more familiar ground fronting ITV’s Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> and World Cup coverage 
and a twice weekly morning show on Radio 5 Live, having repaired his 
relationship with BBC management.

“I think he is a good frontman, although a lot of people say they don’t like 
him at all,” says Boyd Hilton, TV and reviews editor at Heat magazine. “He has 
this knowledgeable, effortless, blokey, everyman style but he seems to be very 
divisive.”

Chiles’ 2013 earnings reflect the fact he was in the final 12 months of a 
four-year contract withITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv>, signed 
when he joined to front football and Daybreak and reportedly worth £6m. The 
deal came to an end in April this year, just before he headed off to Brazil for 
the World Cup.

His 2014 pay is likely to be considerably less, with a new ITV contract 
reportedly worth £500,000 annually. There will be less ITV football presenting 
work for Chiles, with the FA Cup returning to the BBC this weekend and live 
Champion’s League coverage switching to BT next year.

He started in broadcasting covering financial news on Business Breakfast and 
Working Lunch, moving on to Radio 5 Live, BBC2’s Apprentice spin-off You’re 
Fired! and Match of the Day 2, before landing his first big mainstream 
presenting role with The One Show in 2006.
 Adrian Chiles in 2001 during his time covering financial news for the BBC. 
Photograph: Jeff Overs/BBC 
“Back then he was known as the Swiss army knife of TV, sports, business and 
The One Show, he was literally everywhere,” said one former associate. “But I’m 
not sure if he is now up there with the likes of Graham Norton or Jonathan 
Ross. But then he is the normal guy, the everyman, he doesn’t want or pretend 
to be [up there].”

But he became used to being a star. Four years after the launch of The One 
Show, Chiles was angered by a decision by BBC executives to hand the Friday 
slot of the programme to Chris Evans. The down-to-earth Brummie and glamorous 
Bleakley had been a huge success and a disgruntled Chiles refused a new 
presenting portfolio offered to placate him. Chiles could not resist leaving 
without a parting shot at the BBC, criticising tampering with an “apparently 
successful and well-loved show”.

It was a turbulent period for Chiles who months earlier had faced the end of 
his 11-year marriage to Jane Garvey, a host on Radio 4’s Woman’s Hour.

Within months of signing to anchor ITV’s football coverage and Daybreak, the 
broadcaster also nabbed Bleakley, seeking to transfer their on-screen chemistry 
to its morning show to take on rival BBC Breakfast.

“There was so much excitement because they had been so successful at The One 
Show,” said one former ITV executive. “But it took about 10 minutes on day one 
for optimism to give way to depression.” Viewers started fleeing and Chiles 
admitted he wasn’t a morning person. “Despite the critics he appeared to dig 
deep and gave his all to make it a success. But humour is hard to find waking 
at 4am to do live telly, especially given his persona was like your slightly 
grumpy mate in the pub,” the executive added. “It was a bad career move.”
 Christine Bleakley and Adrian Chiles presented ITV’s ill-fated breakfast show 
Daybreak. Photograph: ITV/Rex Features 
Daybreak, the successor to GMTV, saw ratings plunge to well under half those 
of rival BBC Breakfast. The pair threw in the towel after just 15 months. 
Daybreak continued to falter and was rebranded as Good Morning Britain, fronted 
by more BBC firepower in Susanna Reid from rival Breakfast on BBC1.

Hilton recalled: “I went on [Daybreak] a couple of times and the whole formula 
didn’t seem to work. Morning TV is functional and doesn’t make for much of a 
vehicle for personalities. He did have a lugubrious quality that seemed odd for 
the morning. But even if it had George Clooney presenting it probably wouldn’t 
match the BBC’s ratings.”

In August last year Chiles relationship with the BBC finallythawed when he 
landed a role as co-host on Radio 5 Live’s Friday drivetime show - his first 
work for the corporation since leaving The One Show.

The new show and his commitment to fronting ITV’s Brazilian World Cup coverage 
this summer put paid to his relationship with comedian and actress Catherine 
Tate, with the couple citing “heavy workloads” as the reason for the split late 
last year.

Chiles recently extended his relationship with the BBC, adding two new 
three-hour morning shows to his Radio 5 Live schedule, but his ITV sport work 
remains his bread and butter. He will lead ITV’s coverage including England 
football internationals and qualifiers until 2018, as well as Europa League and 
Champion’s League highlights.

He has put the Daybreak disaster behind him. But he seems unlikely to be as 
ubiquitous as he once was anytime soon. In 2008 he was named Britain’s most 
watched TV presenter ahead of stars including Ant & Dec, Noel Edmonds and 
Davina McCall. With typical self-deprecating humour he quipped that “there 
can’t have been much else on television”.
 