
The role of marketing in higher education has never been more important. In an 
era of higher fees, universities need to work even harder to differentiate 
their offering from that of their competitors.

Having worked as an advertising executive in the private sector, the idea of 
creating something that stands out from the crowd is instinctive for me. But 
moving into higher education, I saw the sector had been slower in realising the 
potential impact creative marketing can have on student recruitment.

In the last year alone, my own institution, Arts University Bournemouth (AUB), 
has seen a surge in Ucas applications – 15% ahead of its competitors. And what 
is our secret, I hear you ask? Well, the five simple tips below are my own 
humble "how-to" guide to producing similar results.

1) Be clear about who you are. Without sounding like a marketing manual, this 
is the key to unlocking what makes your organisation unique. By giving it some 
thought, you can start to build a solid brand identity.

When deciding on the things that set our institution apart, we identified 
AUB's maker culture – the idea that AUB is an institution defined through the 
act of making. This may sound simplistic, but it helped us to distil an 
identity that lends itself to creating stand out marketing campaigns that are 
relevant to and understood by our target audience of aspiring young creative 
talent.

2) Go against the grain. Remember there is always a place for subversion. 
Without subversion there is no progress. This same logic needs to be applied to 
university marketing. We need to challenge its norms to discover what works 
best when trying to attract students. For example, the distribution of 
cumbersome, information-heavy prospectuses at Ucas events probably won't cut it 
with the creative young people you're trying to win over.

Today's young people are inquisitive, curious and want their information to be 
easily digestible, as well as fun. It was this insight, combined with our brand 
identity of making things, that led us to creating a prospectus that can be 
assembled into a house of cards. This may seem far out to some, but it had the 
desired effect when it came to engaging and ultimately recruiting.

3) Draw on the talent around you. The advantage of working in higher education 
is that you are constantly in contact with talented individuals. For a 
university marketer this has huge advantages.

Marketing teams need to talk to students in order to find out what makes them 
tick. By doing this regularly, your department will have its finger on the 
pulse of what trends, fashions and subcultures they can tap into in order to 
engage prospective applicants.

At AUB we've gone a step further and invited students to take part in a number 
of marketing initiatives. Our students have also been at the core of department 
planning and consulted on the design of marketing materials.

4) Resist the urge to sell. This might sound counter-intuitive to some, but 
refrain from selling your brand to people. What you need to do is engage them.

It's well recognised that young people are suspicious, even cynical, of the 
marketing noise that surrounds them. With this in mind, marketers need to 
ensure that they have a strategy in place which allows potential students to 
get under the skin of their brand before making a commitment to it. The better 
a potential applicant understands your brand, the happier student you will have.

Most recently we launched an app called the kscope 
<http://aub.ac.uk/campaign/kscope/>. It contains scant information about our 
offer. Instead it allows users to create a unique kaleidoscopic still image or 
short video through the lens of a mobile phone, upload to an online gallery and 
share. The purpose of this project was to start a conversation with young 
people and engage them in making something – we now have nearly 50,000 of them 
to date.

5) Get help from outside the sector. When considering the options in your 
quest to increase Ucas application numbers, don't feel bad if you or your team 
haven't got all of the answers. As a relative newbie to the higher education 
sector, I was able to bring a fresh perspective to my own department.

But if you're struggling with creative block, why not seek help from outside 
your sector? Consult with friends who may work in private sector marketing, or 
even contact a marketing agency who often have reasonable consultative rates 
for universities.

Simon Pride is head of marketing and communications at Arts University 
Bournemouth – follow him on Twitter@SimonPride1 
<https://twitter.com/SimonPride1>

Add any tips you have on how to attract savvy students in the comments below.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
 