
Apprenticeships are a hot topic, and government incentives such as grants 
<https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.gov.uk%2Fgovernment%2Fnews%2Fapprenticeships-boost-for-business&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNHlRTsEQA_c6LkmcbkLwYyIGsaecA>
, have created a wide variety of opportunities in many different industries. 
There is a lot of competition for roles so it's important to ensure you stand 
out.

But what is an employer looking for in an apprentice? And once you have got 
the job, how can you make the most of it?

Application and interview

Most apprentices have no formal training or qualifications so recruiters look 
for people who are passionate about the sector they're applying to and will 
bring energy and enthusiasm to the job.

While you may not have direct work experience, you can demonstrate your 
interest and skills in other ways, including drawing on our hobbies if they are 
relevant. For example, someone applying for a role as an apprentice technician 
will fly through the interview if they can demonstrate their love of IT by 
showing how they use it in their spare time.

It's also important to demonstrate some of the other day-to-day skills 
required in the workplace, such as good communication skills and creativity or 
innovation. Give examples of how you have worked in a team and on your own. In 
short: show you are versatile. If there's an element of sales or customer 
interaction, talk about your experience of providing a great service in other 
areas of your life, demonstrate why it was good and what you have taken from 
this.

It's hard to juggle work and study so employers are also looking for 
individuals with a real hunger to learn more and who are committed to working 
hard.

Remember, it's not just about what you say or your application, body language 
is also key in an interview – something many apprentices forget. Make eye 
contact, sit upright in your chair and speak clearly without mumbling. Remember 
that your employer will be assessing how you might relate to their customers.

Be patient

Apprentices can sometimes make the mistake of trying or wanting to do too much 
too quickly and become impatient when things don't move as quickly as they'd 
like. This impatience can be mistaken for boredom.

You will be new to the trade so it's not uncommon to have to do some of the 
more basic tasks early on – initially, it should be about learning the ropes, 
getting a feel for the role and becoming familiar with the industry.

Know what you are getting into

Make sure you have a good understanding of what your employer and manager 
expect from you to avoid disappointment. Ask them whether you can speak to 
other apprentices before you start. This demonstrates great initiative, which 
employers will appreciate, and it will ensure you have a good insight into the 
business and apprentice role.

Admit your shortcomings

Being prepared to admit when things are not right for you is a must. So, if 
you hate sales and are not very good at selling then say so. It is better to 
find a career that suits you than try and self-impose one that doesn't. 
Employers will appreciate honesty and self-awareness as a sign of professional 
maturity.

By being honest with yourself you will have time to look for an alternative 
career path rather than spend a couple of years working hard in an apprentice 
programme that you don't enjoy.

Listen to your colleagues 

As an apprentice, you are likely to come into contact with some highly-skilled 
individuals who are already working in the industry. They may be at a different 
stage of their life and have different hobbies, but make sure you spend time 
with them – their experience and advice can really help you to carve a 
successful career.

Don't make the mistake of pushing them away. See them as your mentors and draw 
on their skills and expertise. Ask them for advice and feedback to improve your 
skills, map your career path, raise your profile and boost your confidence.

Be confident and positive

Employers have to invest a lot of time and money in apprenticeship programmes 
and they want to see these programmes have a positive impact. It's important to 
demonstrate your hunger to learn, and your interest in the business. Don't be 
afraid to offer ideas.

The reality is that many employers will offer you a role at the end of your 
apprenticeship programme because they have got to know you and won't want to 
lose your knowledge.

But you need to demonstrate that you want to be there and are committed to 
what you are doing. Be positive, show you can use your initiative, aim to 
impress, and consider what are you bringing to the team.

If you get involved, work hard and integrate yourself into a team, you will 
succeed.Apprenticeships <https://www.theguardian.com/education/apprenticeships> 
will set you up with the qualifications you need to enter the field, and offer 
priceless hands-on experience.

Joseph Blass is chief executive of WorkPlaceLive 
<http://www.workplacelive.com/>, which employs one fifth of its workforce as 
apprentices.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 