
Many lawyers abhor the idea that what they do can be boiled down into a 
process that can be commoditised and systematised. It is not the same as 
selling a tin of baked beans, to use the common refrain, and the way the market 
is developing will be to thedetriment of clients 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/jan/26/alternative-business-structures-consumers-lose>
.

Not everyone agrees. While there are some aspects of legal work that will 
always need the personal touch – unless you want to be represented in court by 
your mobile phone – there is no reason to think the law will be insulated from 
the inexorable advance of the internet and the disruptive impact it is having 
on every aspect of life.

Many people still want the reassurance of face-to-face advice: I have recently 
been trying to do an agreement online but found it raised so many questions 
that I needed help with that I'm now looking for a solicitor to draft the thing 
for me.

But will the next generation, brought up on being able to access pretty much 
everything they want online, feel the same? Leading legal "futurist" Professor 
Richard Susskind predicts that the way legal services are delivered will move 
from a one-to-one model to a one-to-many as technology develops.

As a first step, all the research shows, unsurprisingly, that the web is 
playing an ever-increasing role in how consumers find a lawyer. A recent survey 
by Peppermint Technology found that nearly a quarter of people would turn to 
the web, second only to (but still well behind) personal recommendation – a 
recommendation they may well get through a social media network such as Twitter.

As I blogged recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/aug/19/online-legal-services-growth>, 
most of the online services have focused on a wide range of dynamic legal forms 
that are filled out by the user, with the option of having them reviewed by a 
lawyer afterwards. But last week I was given a tour of what could be the next 
stage in online law, a website calledRoad Traffic Representation 
<http://roadtrafficrepresentation.com/RTR/PublicForms/Home.aspx> (RTR).

Painstakingly developed over three years by solicitor Martin Langan – who says 
he is "wedded to automating what you can" – it provides people charged with 
motoring offences with a free online diagnosis of their case and an idea of the 
likely penalty, with ultimately the option of electronically booking and 
briefing a barrister to represent them at court.

The aim is to replicate the process a solicitor would go through when 
considering a motoring offence, but much quicker and at no cost by getting the 
"client" to enter all their details into the system. "You're not paying for the 
process – just the bit you value," Langan explains.

To me that is one of the central changes coming to the legal market: stripping 
down what lawyers do to focus on the part where the application of all that 
training and knowledge is vital for the client.

As well as the option of instructing a barrister from £399 for a plea in 
mitigation – organised by Old Bailey Chambers in London – users can also seek 
telephone advice for £35 per call. There are additional fixed-fee services, 
such as template letters.

Nicholas Bull, a barrister at Old Bailey Chambers who has been heavily 
involved in the project, describes RTR as "a pretty impressive piece of kit – 
we put a lot of time and effort into road-testing it". Tellingly, he continues: 
"It's made me realise how simple the information is that we actually require. 
[The site] has distilled a series of steps to get that information. As a 
barrister I am better prepared than if a solicitor calls up with an instruction 
because the website asks the right questions."

Langan compares RTR to insurance websites which have cut out brokers. The 
ultimate question is whether his system can deliver as good a result as taking 
time off from work to go and consult a solicitor face to face. The more 
immediate one, however, is whether people will think it can. He admits his main 
concern is whether the system is ahead of its time. "Are people ready for it?" 
he asks. "Will people trust their case to the computer? That is why the 
telephone service is there."

It is a valid concern, the curse of the first mover. But whatever the fears of 
the traditionalists, and however justified they may be, I suspect he won't be 
alone in offering this kind of service for very long.

Neil Rose is the editor of legalfutures.co.uk <http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/>
 