
In his 1963 book God and Golem 
<http://luisguillermo.com/diosygolem/God_and_Golem_Inc.txt>, the founder of the 
cybernetics movement Norbert Wiener suggested a compelling thought experiment. 
Imagine cutting off someone’s hand, he wrote, but leaving intact the key 
muscles and nerves. Theoretically, a prosthesis could connect directly both to 
nerves and muscles, giving the subject control of the replacement organ as if 
it were real (I’m indebted to Thomas Rid for highlighting Wiener’s thought 
experiment in his new book,Rise of the Machines <https://ridt.co/>).

So far so sensible: this scenario was a reasonable extrapolation at the time, 
and isclose to becoming a reality today 
<http://www.wired.co.uk/article/darpa-creates-feeling-prosthetic-arm>. Wiener, 
however, went further. Having imagined an artificial hand able to replace its 
original, he wondered why we should not now imagine the addition of an entirely 
new kind of limb or sensory organ? “There is,” he wrote, “a prosthesis of parts 
which we do not have and which we never have had.” There was no need to stop at 
nature. Human-machine integration could in theory blur its boundaries well 
beyond replacement.

It’s 14 July 2016, and between typing this paragraph and the last I dashed 
outside with my iPhone to catch a Pokémon lurking next to a tree (a cute orange 
lizard: Charmander, weight 8.5kg, height 0.6m).

What would Wiener have made of this? I suspect he would have been delighted. 
While I’m playing Pokémon, my smartphone functions much like a sensory 
prosthesis. In order to move my avatar around a map, I must move myself. When I 
get close enough to a target, I hold the device up and through its camera see 
something superimposed on the world that would otherwise be invisible. It’s 
like having a sixth sense. My Pokémon-gathering escapades place me somewhere 
between a cyborg and a stamp collector.

If Pokémon Go feels like a religion, that's because it kind of is
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/pokemon-go-addictive-game-shares-much-with-religious-devotion>
Yet there are also elements in this species of enhancement that clash with 
Wiener’s vision. If I had a superhuman prosthetic eye able to see infrared – 
like Arnie’s beloved cybernetic organism in the Terminator movies – I could 
step outside into the dark with clear vision. I would have access to actuality 
in a fresh way: a machine-enhanced grasp of what’s under my nose. This is the 
kind of enhancement that technology has offered humans over millennia. We move 
faster, further; we enhance the strength of our limbs, the reach of our wills; 
we look deep into space, or at the microscopic order of things. We magnify our 
scope and capacities.

None of this is quite like playing Pokémon. What I see and do while lobbing 
tiny balls at a cartoon orange lizard does not exist outside of the machines 
I’m using. Yet nor is it a straightforward piece of mediation like reading a 
book or watching a movie. The experience is present on my screen, in my mind, 
and in the dance of data between mobile device, GPS satellites, mobile networks 
and distant servers. And everyone else with the right app is welcome to join in.

A clue to what’s going on lies in a term first coined in 1990 
<http://www.digitaltrends.com/features/what-is-augmented-reality-iphone-apps-games-flash-yelp-android-ar-software-and-more/>
: augmented reality. What’s on offer is a supplement rather than 
straightforward enhancement: an act of layering and addition. My smartphone is 
not helping me to see the world with superhuman acuity (quite the reverse: I 
nearly fell into a canal while capturing that Charmander). Rather, it’s like a 
third eye opening onto the information realm – a gaze overlooking the Earth’s 
oceans of data.

In a famous 1974 paper 
<http://organizations.utep.edu/portals/1475/nagel_bat.pdf>, the philosopher 
Thomas Nagel asked what it might feel like to be a bat. We cannot begin to 
discuss such a question, he argued, until we accept that the universe as 
experienced through a bat’s sensory organs is alien to our psychological 
reality. A bat’s primary sense is sonar. It may share a planet with us, but 
there is no bridge between our experiences.

What, I wonder, does it feel like to be an iPhone? I don’t mean to imply that 
machines have feelings. Rather, I’m intrigued by the fact that the inputs 
received by my smartphone – its experienced reality, if you like – are not tied 
to any particular location in the way my inputs are. Its world is the network. 
A query is issued, a matched response is served – the device is above and 
beyond actuality as I experience it. And yet we continuously, solicitously 
interact. As communications technologies have done since at least the age of 
the telegraph, I am subtly distributed by my connection to the connected tool: 
blurred between networked spaces.

We are barely at the beginning of this process, one characterised by the 
astonishing intimacy of our interactions with and through digital devices. 
Information is everywhere and nowhere. It is simultaneous, placeless. 
Similarly, augmentation trumps enhancement because it is unconstrained by the 
actual – because there is no limit to how far my experience of the world can be 
supplemented or supplanted. The free download of a single app turns physical 
space into a gameboard. Gleefully, my phone and I turn presence into play. In 
augmented reality, all the world’s a screen.

Augmented reality: it's like real life, but better
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2010/mar/21/augmented-reality-iphone-advertising>
Today, Pokémon lives on my mobile device. Tomorrow – by which I mean within 
five years – it will make themagic leap to retinal projection 
<http://www.techradar.com/news/wearables/magic-leap-s-next-gen-ar-is-about-to-become-a-reality-1324785>
, into something increasingly labelled “mixed reality”: the seamless 
interfacing of informational artefacts and environment.

As Wiener foretold half a century ago, the boundaries between human and 
machine experience are not so much interlacing as being erased. Is it a new 
sensory organ, this ever-more-intimate interface with information? Perhaps. 
It’s certainly a mental prosthesis whose absence already feels crippling. We 
are beginning our migration towards a networked sensorium. The question is no 
longer how technology makes us feel. It’s whether, without it, we are even 
ourselves.
 