
Q Please help me! I am 22 years of age and in need of financial advice. I 
graduated this year from Leicester University and moved to Scotland. I am 
currently living in Edinburgh but work in Glasgow as a graduate trainee archive 
assistant, although this is not the career I am hoping to pursue.

 I find I am not getting out of the debt I ran up when I was a student, and 
need advice as to how I could improve my situation. I have a £1,000 
interest-free overdraft until June next year, and find that towards the end of 
each month I am very near, if not slightly over, the limit. I have a student 
loan of around £8,000, although I don't start paying it back until April. I owe 
my parents around £700 and have started to run up my credit card bill - at the 
moment around £300.

Help! Is there anything I can do to improve my situation (apart from move to 
Glasgow, which isn't really an option)?

RB

A First of all, try to pay off your credit card bill as quickly as possible, 
and then cut up the card. Credit cards are an expensive way to borrow, and the 
danger is that you will start using your card for essentials like food and 
clothing, rather than as a convenient way of spreading the cost of a major item 
you have budgeted for. If you are struggling to pay it back, perhaps your 
parents could give you a bit of short-term financial help.

 Secondly, set yourself a monthly spending budget and stick to it. You have 
five months to get your financial affairs in order before you have to start 
making repayments on your student loan, and six months before your 
interest-free period on your overdraft runs out. Work out what you spend on 
essentials - heat, light, travel, food and rent. Then calculate how much you 
have left. This money should be put in a savings account to build up into a sum 
which you can use to pay off your overdraft. If you have problems being 
disciplined about saving, set up a regular savings account where you 
automatically send money.

 Thirdly, use the time you have to make changes to your lifestyle in order to 
keep yourself out of debt for the long term. Can you share a lift with a friend 
to cut the cost of travel? Do you need to move into a cheaper flat or share 
with another lodger in order to reduce your rent? Don't forget that drinks 
after work and takeaway meals can add £10 or more to your costs every week. It 
may seem hard to cut back now, but if you don't sort out your debt while you 
are young you could be burdened with it for years to come.

 Be particularly wary of the run-up to Christmas, when everyone tends to spend 
more than they should. Ask your family if they would agree to spend no more 
than say, £10, on each present - they may be relieved as well not to have to 
fork out for expensive gifts. Leave your cards behind when you go out shopping, 
and don't buy big rounds in the pub. Explain to your friends that you are 
trying to economise - if they are good mates they will understand.
 