
"I like beer," our youngest declares at the dinner table. Everyone laughs, and 
his older siblings urge him to say it again, louder. I shoot them a serious 
look, because their favourite thing at the moment is to get their brother to 
say controversial things in public. I don't want him to ruin his nursery 
induction morning in a couple of days, by answering the teacher's question of, 
"What do you like?" with a well–rehearsed: "Willies and beer."

Instead of admonishing him for saying he likes alcohol (because let's face it, 
until he's tried it he can't say if he does or not), I look at my son and say, 
"This isn't real beer."

I should have just said, "Yes, beer is lovely," and moved the conversation on 
because my son looks cheated and crestfallen, like he's got his references all 
wrong. I'm surprised that he knows what beer even looks like, but then I 
realise there's a line in The Tiger Who Came to Tea, where the mother in the 
story is very worried because a visiting tiger has eaten all of the food in the 
cupboard, and alas, drunk all of Daddy's beer.

If a tiger came for tea at ours and was looking for booze, he'd be 
disappointed. We don't have any, save the odd bottle of beer that I 
hide under the stairs for when R's out and I fancy an evening swig. I pop the 
bottle into the freezer five minutes before I want a drink. I haven't told him 
I do this because he'll probably laugh and say, "You think finding one beer in 
the house will make me want to drink again? I can go to the shop at the end of 
our road if I really want to get pissed." But not having alcohol in the house – 
as a loose rule that I set when R moved back in – feels right at present. The 
stuff that R is drinking now is alcohol-free and quite why I feel the need to 
point this out to our three-year-old son – who is confused to say the least – 
is questionable.

I don't think I have a problem with R drinking pseudo-beer (despite some 
people thinking it's a step towards relapse), but I think I'd worry if our 
neighbour popped by, saw the bottle and didn't spot the 0% on the label, and 
thought he'd fallen off the wagon, and we were carrying on as if everything 
were normal. It makes me question how I'd react if R did sit down one evening 
and pour himself a real drink. I think I'm OK with him doing exactly as he 
pleases now, but that's only because he's still sober.

When I've answered friends' questions about R's on/off relationship with 
drink, I feel like it might be more helpful to just stay quiet and let his 
sobriety and progress do the talking. But I can't stay silent about everything 
because our children ask questions all the time.

How do I talk to them about alcohol? Or rather, how do I talk to my children 
about the problem with alcohol? Because if there hadn't been a problem in the 
first place, then R wouldn't be sitting here with half a litre of impotent 
brown beer in front of him. He'd be drinking the real stuff.

Like all talk surrounding stuff that can sometimes be great but also be awful 
(sex, modern art, solitude), the joy and the pain that alcohol can elicit is 
hard to explain. Our older two children might realise that in our family life 
it has been the crux of many a problem in the past few years and we've talked 
about how well R is doing. But it's hard to talk about his actual problem and 
how alcohol became a problem in the first place.

What I really want to say is "Drinking can be fun, kids. Do it right and it 
can be a riot and a total pleasure, and totally fine. Do it wrong and you could 
end up in the gutter."

I don't want to put alcohol in the same bracket as heroin because any way you 
look at heroin – even if the user is lucky enough to be doing the pure stuff – 
they are losing. But alcohol? I have always been able to drink in moderation 
and R has not. One of us can handle alcohol, and the other cannot. How do you 
explain that to people who still have fairly idealistic views about life?

I try to answer the questions as they come, such as the tricky "sex, love and 
which-comes-first?" ones, or the even harder ones regarding good, necessary 
fibs and bad, nefarious lies. However, as hard as answering my children's 
questions might be at times, I realise that they are an incredibly useful way 
of exploring areas that I find uncomfortable or I am unsure about. And I don't 
always have to pretend that I know all the answers.
 