
Building a list of references is hard enough, but what if you didn’t get along 
with your last boss?

He or she probably won’t have the best things to say about you – and that 
could ruin your chances of getting hired.


In fact, 69% of employers have changed their mind about a candidate after 
speaking with a reference, according to a 2012 CareerBuilder survey 
<http://www.careerbuilder.com/share/aboutus/pressreleasesdetail.aspx?sd=11/28/2012&id=pr727&ed=12/31/2013>
, which analysed responses from 2,494 human resources professionals and hiring 
managers.


Here are some ways to obtain positive, supportive references to provide at an 
upcoming interview:


Ask your managers what kind of reference they would provide

Though you didn’t exactly see eye to eye with previous bosses, that doesn’t 
necessarily mean they won’t have anything nice to say about you. Hopefully, you 
left on good terms by asking how you could make the transition as smooth as 
possible before your departure.


The truth is, you can’t be sure what they would say until you ask. Confidently 
reach out to them and ask if you could use them as a professional reference. 
Most importantly, ask for an example of a reference they would provide.


You might be surprised to find that a past boss mentions your accomplishments 
and great things you did for the company. If so, great. You’ve got a good 
reference after all. If not, shrug it off and find someone else.


Ask previous co-workers

Think about co-workers with whom you’ve worked closely to accomplish projects 
or handle day-to-day tasks. You might have plenty of people who can vouch for 
your work ethic and strengths.


For example, at your previous job, you might have stayed late a few times to 
help a team member meet a deadline. Reach out to that colleague and ask if they 
would be willing to endorse you as a team player who takes initiative. Talk to 
your co-workers about specific traits, or stories they could highlight so they 
are prepared, should they receive a call.


Ask a mentor or trusted industry friend

Professional references don’t have to be limited to people you’ve worked with. 
They could just as easily be industry professionals who know you personally.


Let’s say you have a professional mentor who has watched you grow and develop 
throughout the years – a college professor, maybe. That professor could easily 
provide a recommendation because they have a good understanding of your 
professional background, character, and capabilities.


If you don’t have a mentor, ask another industry professional who knows you 
well and who you trust to serve as a positive reference. Trusted clients or 
customers are another great place to look.


Look beyond your day job

Extracurricular activities or organisations that require you to participate or 
volunteer regularly are a great place to find alternative references.


Ask a volunteer coordinator or organisation leader to recommend you based on 
your soft skills, such as interpersonal communication skills, reliability, and 
attitude. Or ask other professionals with whom you volunteer.


Anyone who knows and enjoys working with you directly will make a great 
reference for your list. Just make sure you ask permission first, and contact 
your references after each job interview to tell them they may receive a call.


Disagreements at work happen: you won’t always get along perfectly with 
everyone. As long as you maintain your integrity and build solid relationships 
with professionals in your field, you’ll have plenty of great references to 
choose from.


Alan Carniol is the founder of Interview Success Formula 
<http://www.interviewsuccessformula.com/>


Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <https://jobs.theguardian.com/> or 
sign up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest vacancies and careers advice
 