
When Nancy Tucker was 15, her mother, Jessica realised that she had a problem 
with food. Nancy had gone on a diet, but the diet seemed to be going on and on, 
she seemed more and more obsessed with what was on her plate, and she was 
behaving strangely at mealtimes.

Jessica persuaded Nancy to visit their GP, but the GP’s reaction was 
unexpected. She weighed Nancy, consulted lots of charts, and then said she 
didn’t meet the criteria for referral. Her weight wasn’t “low enough”, it 
seemed, to trigger help.

Three years later, Nancy was as dangerously ill with anorexia as it is 
possible to be. Twice she had to be hospitalised: Jessica remembers phoning the 
ward in the middle of the night to check whether her daughter was still alive. 
Could things have been different if the GP had heeded Jessica’s initial 
flag-waving? It is impossible to know, but what is clear, talking to the two of 
them, is that what should have been “help” on the part of medics and therapists 
was often more of a hindrance. “When the GP told me I wasn’t bad enough to 
merit referral, what that said to me was: go away and lose more weight,” says 
Nancy.

Then there was the fact that, once Nancy was diagnosed and referred to 
the Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS), Jessica felt 
undermined and unsupported. “I felt blamed, disapproved of, traumatised. One 
therapist in particular was very suspicious of our relationship – she felt we 
were unhealthily close, and that I was colluding in Nancy’s illness.” Looking 
back, Jessica feels she was simply struggling with an incredibly difficult 
situation, with her daughter wasting away in front of her and a younger child 
to look after as well. The attitude of the therapists became one more burden.

Now Nancy is 21, and in a very different place. When doctor after doctor, 
therapist after therapist and hospital visit after hospital visit failed to 
make things any better, at least in the longer term, Jessica made the drastic 
decision to give up her job and to take Nancy out of the pressurised atmosphere 
of the independent girls’ school she attended: like CAMHS, she felt it was 
problematic rather than helpful. It was Nancy’s GCSE year: she continued to 
study, but she did it with guidance from tutors, and from home. “People around 
us were very disapproving,” says Jessica. Nancy agrees: “I think they thought 
that if I was allowed to retreat from the world, I’d never want to go back 
there.”

But Jessica had a strong instinct that this was the right way forward, and 
Nancy says now that, although her year cocooned at home with her mother wasn’t 
the end of her anorexia, it was a step on the road to recovery. “It got me to a 
place where I was living a life again, and that allowed me to move forward,” 
she says.

Nancy did well in her GCSEs, and went to a different school to do A-levels. 
Then, at the age of 19, she decided to write down the story of her illness. 
Strangely enough she had written to children’s author Jacqueline Wilson, of 
whom she is a big fan, a few years earlier, when she was in the throes of the 
worst stage of her illness, suggesting Wilson should tackle the subject in one 
of her books. “She wrote back straight away, and she said she had thought about 
it but she was worried about the sensitivities. But she said maybe I should be 
the person writing the book. And I suddenly realised it was something I had to 
do, and once I’d decided to do it, the story just rushed out of me.
 Nancy Tucker as a small child. Photograph: Graeme Robertson/Guardian 
“I wrote it in three days and three nights – I hardly slept. I just wrote it 
all down. I wrote it in a purging sort of way: it was as though I had this 
story inside me and I simply had to get it out.”

The story was never intended for publication, but then Nancy heard from a 
friend she hadn’t spoken to for a while and decided to send her what she had 
written as a way of explaining what she’d been through. That friend sent it to 
another friend, whose mother was a writer: when she read it, she sent it to her 
agent, who is now Nancy’s agent, and this month the story arrived in bookshops 
as The Time in Between: A Memoir of Hunger and Hope. Wilson, who gave her that 
initial prompt to write it, has said it “isn’t just another anorexia misery 
memoir – it’s a work of literature”.

It is easy to see why that writer mother sent Nancy’s story to her agent: the 
book is stylish and incisive, and she weaves her tale of fear and food, 
confusion and calories grippingly and with skill. At one point she provides the 
kind of description of how anorexia feels that could only have come from the 
vortex of the condition itself. “I am too big and too small and too much and 
not enough and too frightened to change and too sad to stay the same,” she 
writes. “I am an addict and a slave to the beauty myth and I diet and regress 
and reject and control and cry for help and I still can’t stop the 
ring-ring-ringing in my ears telling me that something bad is coming, something 
bad is coming RIGHT NOW. I want to shine and I want to be invisible and I want 
to be myself and I want to be anyone else in the world and in the end I think 
the only solution is to get smaller and smaller and smaller and then one day to 
disappear.”

For all its writerly skill, The Time in Between makes uncomfortable reading 
and not only because it describes such a complex and disturbing medical 
condition. The other disquieting element is how frank Nancy is about her family 
relationships, and especially what she feels about her father, David.

He is described, at times, as distant and critical and not as involved in her 
life as her friends’ fathers are. Some of the best parts of the book are 
written script-style, like scenes from a movie or a documentary, with camera 
directions (“Stay with Nancy’s face. She blinks heavily; she looks very 
tired”); and when Jessica reveals that her father directs TV dramas you can’t 
help feeling that what Nancy really wants is to please her dad.

Can it be that simple? Apparently, he criticised the book when he first read 
it, though he has since read it again and declared it extremely well written.

Jessica, it turns out, has not read the book. “I’m a bit scared of reading it. 
I lived it, and I don’t want to go back to those times,” she says.

Nancy, meanwhile, says that while she would not say writing the book was the 
key to her recovery, getting her story out was a catharsis that helped her 
begin to move on. She’s still “not normal around food”, she says, but she’s a 
great deal better than she was and hopeful of making a complete recovery one 
day. This autumn, having twice deferred it, she is taking up a place to study 
at Oxford University.

“Sometimes I think, what on earth am I doing, going somewhere so pressurised 
and competitive after everything I’ve been through,” admits Nancy. “But I 
really don’t think I’m doing it because I want to be an academic star. What I 
want to do is study psychology; and what my illness has done is made me realise 
that life isn’t all about getting top marks in exams, it’s about working out 
who you are and what you want to do with your life.”

• The Time in Between: A Memoir of Hunger and Hope by Nancy Tucker 
is published by Icon Books, price £12.99. To order a copy for £9.99, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/> or call 0330 333 
6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders minimum p&p £1.99.
 