
On the same evening that Restaurant magazine published its annual list of the 
world's top 50 restaurants, other futures were being decided at the Mandarin 
Oriental in London's Knightsbridge. Mark Birchall, who won the28th Roux 
scholarship 
<http://www.rouxscholarship.co.uk/recipes/2011_competition_recipe.php> on 
Monday, will now spend three months abroad working in a three-Michelin-starred 
restaurant. Earlier winners have shadowed such luminaries as Thomas Keller of 
the French Laundry in California and Alain Ducasse, who has 19 Michelin stars 
between his establishments around the world. When I visited last year's 
scholar, Kenneth Culhane, during his stint at New York gastrotemple Jean 
Georges, he told me without smiling that winning the scholarship was the 
greatest achievement of his life.

Downstairs at the Mandarin is Heston Blumenthal's new restaurant Dinner, 
perhaps the most sought-after table in Britain. But the dichotomy between Roux 
and Blumenthal could not be more striking. Dinner represents the apotheosis of 
modern eating: highly technical, meticulous, contemporary food with a strong 
appreciation of history. The scholarship finalists cooked veal orloff, a 
preposterously frilly dish involving roast veal cut from the bone, sliced, 
stuffed and squeezed into a cavity made from the bones, slathered in bechamel 
and truffles, and baked. It came with fiddly stuffed cucumbers and a kebab made 
from kidneys.

Such dining is more than old-fashioned: no restaurant in Britain cooks that 
way today. It's deferential, thuddingly elaborate eating that has, at least in 
this country, died. But it is utterly typical of the Rouxs, a family steeped in 
the noblest and Frenchest gastronomic traditions, who have probably influenced 
the British understanding of French food more than anyone in the past century.

Albert and Michel Roux <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/michel-roux>, 
now in their 70s, left France in the 1950s. Initially they worked as private 
chefs for, respectively, the Cazalets (Major Cazalet trained the Queen Mother's 
horses) and the Rothschilds, before setting up their own restaurants. Albert 
opened Le Gavroche in central London, and Michel opened the Waterside Inn in 
the pretty Berkshire village of Bray, now clogged with tourists traipsing to 
Blumenthal's Fat Duck. Both chefs eventually won three Michelin stars, though 
Le Gavroche lost one in the 1990s and never regained it. Michel begat Alain, 
now chef patron at the Waterside, and Albert begat Michel Jr, who today owns Le 
Gavroche and has found fame on TV.

"They have a tremendous understanding of authentic gastronomy," says Raymond 
Blanc, who first met the Rouxs in the 1970s. "They were among the first to 
popularise French food, and my head chef Gary Jones learned a great deal from 
working with them." Gordon Ramsay's cuisine, comparatively heavy and 
unashamedly French, is laden with Rouxish notes. Marco Pierre White was, like 
Ramsay, a Roux trainee. "If it wasn't for those brothers I would never have 
become the person I am," he says. "Albert employing me was without doubt one of 
the defining moments of my life." Though White eventually fell out with Albert, 
an episode he describes in his autobiography, he insists: "I won't hear a word 
said against them."

Le Gavroche's famous former maître d', Silvano Giraldin, displays similar 
loyalty. "I worked for the family for 40 years," he says. "They are fantastic. 
Most chefs are jealous of front of house; the Rouxs always gave me space to do 
my job." And the family's networking, their ability to make friends with 
influential people, is extraordinary. Albert convinced the Cazalets to help him 
open Le Gavroche, and they gave him £500 (in 1967) to get him started. Michel 
Jr admits that "string-pulling" saw him spend his military service cooking at 
the Elysée Palace for President Mitterrand, while other, less-connected young 
men were not so lucky.

Does modernity threaten the Rouxs? Michel Jr bemoans "young chefs obsessed 
with gadgets and molecular gastronomy, but unable to cook". It's no accident, 
though, that restaurants no longer serve veal orloff: if customers wanted that 
kind of food, the market would cater for it. Fashion is probably against the 
family, but then fashion is defined by its impermanence. The great and weighty 
tradition of high French cooking will long outlive the powders and foams, and 
recognition of the Rouxs' contribution to gastronomy seems assured. Just ask 
the latest scholar.
 