
Amid the debate about television stealing the film industry's thunder, another 
entertainment form has crept up unnoticed, further threatening Hollywood's 
creative hegemony: video games. With a new, much more powerful generation of 
games consoles poised to arrive – Microsoft'sXbox One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox-one> goes on sale on Friday, with 
Sony'sPlayStation 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation-4> due 
a week later – the games companies reckon they finally have the ammunition to 
shake off the perception that their digital epics are inferior to movies.

I'm in a place that could not reinforce that impression more emphatically: the 
historic Ealing studios, where classics such as The Lavender Hill Mob and The 
Ladykillers were filmed. But I'm here to experience the process of making a 
video game calledRyse: Son of Rome <http://www.crytek.com/games/ryse/overview>, 
an epic tale charting the Roman conquest of Britain, which will be a launch 
title for the Xbox One. And the studio is nowadays home to The Imaginarium,an 
outfit co-founded by Andy Serkis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/apr/23/andy-serkis-motion-capture-studio>
, who – asGollum in The Lord of the Rings 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DLvIFRNbqOs> – is perhaps the world's leading 
exponent of performance-capture, in which every nuance of an actor's 
performance (specifically movement, voice and facial expressions) is recorded 
and mapped on to a video game character.

Serkis says: "There was probably a time when people in the games industry 
wanted to emulate films, but now it's very much the other way around: the 
technology is driven by video games. So, for instance, virtual production, 
pre-vis, many of the tools we use in the film industry have come out of the 
games industry." Peter Gornstein, global cinematic director at Ryse: Son of 
Rome developer Crytek, argues that the sheer power contained within the Xbox 
One finally allows what techies call the "uncanny valley" – the idea that, in 
computer-generated realism, little details that are slightly off render 
proceedings creepily unrealistic – to be bridged: "That has been a big problem 
with games in the past. But what we can do now, in real-time, is produce 
imagery and emotional experiences within a game, at a level where the uncanny 
valley is left far behind."Intrepidly, I don a tight, grey, reflector-studded 
motion-capture suit, grab a sword and shield made of plastic rods covered in 
DayGlo tape, and enact some gladiatorial combat with a stuntman. What's 
stunning is that it involves merely a couple of minutes moving different parts 
of my body. On a monitor by the stage, I can see my movements driving those of 
a Roman in full armour.

Apart from accidentally connecting with the stuntman, sadly my movements 
aren't sufficiently macho and emphatic to pass muster convincingly. I quiz 
actor John Hopkins (familiar to devotees of Midsomer Murders and the RSC), who 
plays the game's heroic lead, for tips about moving like a Roman: "They put 
about 10kg of weightbelts on our chests to simulate the feeling of wearing 
armour, which shifts your centre of gravity and makes your shoulders rotate 
while you're walking." Hopkins enjoyed the process. There are cameras at every 
angle, "so a five-minute scene with eight actors, which would take a day or two 
to shoot conventionally, can be done in five minutes. It becomes a much more 
theatrical experience." To emphasise that point, The Imaginarium shot 93 
minutes'-worth of performance in just 17 days.

Serkis is in no way abandoning film: The Imaginarium, for example, is 
preparing to make the movie version of Animal Farm 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/andy-serkis-animal-farm-381314>. But he 
believes that video games have finally shrugged off any inferiority complex: "I 
was listening to Classic FM this morningand the third top-ranked piece of music 
created uproar, because it was from a video game. It just goes to show where 
convergence is at. Video game technology and video games are acknowledged by 
Bafta now, and are rightly getting credit for what they are, which is 
extraordinary pieces of art."
 