
For weeks, Downing Street has been bracing itself for Andrew Rawnsley's book 
as if it was expecting the arrival of a particularly violent storm. As the 
allegations about the prime minister's character were published today, No 10 
stepped up the fightback operation which it had been preparing since the first 
clouds appeared on the horizon.

The operation began several weeks ago when Downing Street chose to get its 
retaliation in first after Rawnsley decided to put the allegations about Gordon 
Brown's behaviour to various Downing Street staff before the book went to the 
printers. Rawnsley was confident about his sources and he did not need to do 
so, but he thought that in terms of journalistic ethics it was the proper 
course of action.

Two weeks after he put the chief allegations concerning Brown to No 10's 
staff, Simon Walters, the Mail on Sunday's political editor, ran a front page 
story on 31 January containing an uncannily similar set of allegations. Walters 
said Rawnsley's sensational book would include allegations that Brown hit a 
senior aide who got in the way as he rushed to a reception at No 10, physically 
pulled a secretary out of her chair as he dictated a memo to her, and hurled 
foul-mouthed abuse at two aides in his hotel room in America in a state of 
semi-undress after reports that he had been snubbed by President Obama.

Rawnsley's publishers Penguin became convinced Walters had been fed the story 
by No 10 on the basis of the charges put to them by Rawnsley. The aim was to 
weaken the impact of the book,The End of the Party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/the-end-of-the-party>, through a classic 
spoiler.

This week, Downing Street's pre-emptive damage limitation operation moved to a 
higher gear. On Thursday, Brown gave an interview to the Independent on Sunday 
for publication today in which he dealt with issues of his character. "So I'm 
both strong and weak? That seems to be the theme. I'm strong-willed. I'm very 
determined. I don't take no for an answer when I want to do something. I'm 
tough about getting things done. It is simply a lie to say that I've ever hit 
anybody in my life. I may have done one or two good tackles at rugby, but the 
idea that is suggested in this so-called inside account is just ludicrous."

By Friday, as tension built in No 10, the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> website LabourList posted a 
loyalist story warning readers that Rawnsley had made errors in his previous 
book, Servants of the People.

On Saturday Brown gave another interview, this time to Channel 4 News, 
insisting he had never hit anyone in his life – an allegation that Rawnsley was 
not intending to make. Brown said: "If I get angry, I get angry with myself ... 
I throw the newspapers on the floor or something like that, but please ... I 
was brought up – my father, I never heard him say an unkind word about anyone 
and I always think when you're – the heat of the moment you say things some 
time, of course you do get angry, mostly with yourself. But I'm very 
strong-willed, I'm very determined, I think the country wants someone that will 
push things forward, and not allow things to be stagnant and stale, and every 
morning I get up with a determination to do my best for this country."

Charlie Whelan, the Unite political officer, a close ally of Brown and a 
target of Rawnsley's book, was more aggressive towards the Observer columnist, 
using his Twitter page to challenge Rawnsley's credibility. He started by 
claiming: "Don't forget when Rawnsley book comes out, he has got form in making 
things up."

He then tweeted: "No wonder some people want to smear Brown now with poll lead 
down to six points." His ire then switched to the broadcasters, tweeting: "If 
Observer want to relaunch paper and Rawnsley flog a book fine, but why does the 
BBC collude. The BBC should report news not follow newspapers."

Just after 10.30pm on Saturday Brown's official spokesman issued a terse 
statement denying the Observer story. It said: "These malicious allegations are 
totally without foundation and have never been put to No 10." The Cabinet 
Office then issued a further statement, saying: "It is categorically not the 
case that the cabinet secretary asked for an investigation of the PM's 
treatment of No 10 staff. These assertions have been put to the cabinet 
secretary who has rejected them."

Rawnsley countered that the Cabinet Office had denied something he had not 
alleged. He had never suggested there had been a formal investigation, but that 
the cabinet secretary, Sir Gus O'Donnell, had made his own inquiries about his 
treatment of staff and warned Brown that such behaviour was not the right way 
to get things done. Pressed today, the Cabinet Office said they had nothing to 
add to their denial.

No 10 also complained that they had not had a chance to deny the allegations 
before the paper went to press. This was possibly a consequence of the 
Observer's anger at the way Rawnsley's previous fact-checking had been misused 
to hand out spoiling stories to other journalists.

Today No 10 said individual staff named by Rawnsley as victims of Brown's 
temper – Gavin Kelly and Stewart Wood – had told officials the stories were not 
true. The Guardian spoke today to a former senior No 10 adviser toGordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown>, who insisted the stories, 
including the concern of the cabinet secretary, were "100% correct". Rawnsley 
said: "This is not tittle-tattle or gossip. The sources were 24-carat. They 
were not third-hand, second-hand, but first-hand."

By this morning, Lord Mandelson, the business secretary, was deflecting claims 
Brown was a bully, and attempting to redraw the portrait of Brown's character 
to the PM's advantage. According to Mandelson, Brown was not a volcanic, 
insecure, disloyal bully, but a decisive leader impatient with himself and his 
staff.

Mandelson said the book extracts told a "story of a man who is quite 
emotional, is quite passionate in what he believes and what he's doing. I don't 
think he so much bullies people as is very demanding of people. He's demanding 
of himself, he's demanding of people around him. There is a degree of 
impatience about the man. But what would you like? Some sort of shrinking 
violet at the helm of the government when we're going through such stormy 
waters?" Asked if he had ever been shouted at by Brown he replied: "I think 
history records we've had our moments, but I would like to think that I took my 
medicine like a man."

Inside Downing Street there is a belief that the storm will last 24 hours, and 
since few voters are going to back Brown on the basis that he is more likeable 
than David Cameron little has been lost. One source even went so far as to say: 
"Even if all this rubbish were true, would it be that awful? We all know he is 
a bit grumpy."

The blame game: key figures who fell foul of Brown

Spencer Livermore 

Livermore was the member of Brown's inner circle who first touted the idea of 
an autumn election in July 2007. The prime minister initially laughed it off 
but then became convinced by the idea of an early election. He only backed away 
at the last minute with disastrous consequences for his political credibility. 
Rawnsley documents how furious Brown was with his team for the debacle – and 
how he allowed Livermore and others to take the blame.

"Brown's court started to devour itself as members of the inner circle 
attempted to dump culpability for the [planned autumn election] farrago on each 
other," Rawnsley writes.

The way Livermore was hung out to dry, in Rawnsley's account, resembled a 
real-life episode of the political satire The Thick of It, complete with a 
foul-mouthed screaming match. Damian McBride, Brown's spin doctor who was later 
forced to resign over his involvement in plans to spread ill-founded gossip 
about senior Tories, was instructed to brief against Livermore and others.

He tried to spin the blame for the plans for an early election on Livermore, 
Douglas Alexander and Ed Miliband, rather than Brown's closest ally, Ed Balls.

Livermore then caught McBride briefing against him to reporters. According to 
Rawnsley, a furious Livermore asked him: "What the fuck are you doing?" McBride 
said he was doing what Balls had told him to. Civil servants then watched the 
two aides scream at each other, before they were dragged away by Brown's diary 
secretary, Sue Nye.

"Many relationships in the Brown court were permanently poisoned by this 
calamitous episode," Rawnsley says. Livermore left No 10 six months later after 
more than a decade as one of Brown's most trusted lieutenants.

Jack Straw

Straw was plotting to oust Gordon Brown as prime minister only a year after 
running his leadership campaign, Rawnsley claims. The justice secretary is said 
to have held meetings with Brown's fiercest critics in the party, including 
Charles Clarke, Frank Field and Stephen Byers, to discuss the leadership. He 
met Byers six times. "The justice secretary was in constant clandestine 
communication with those plotting to topple Brown," Rawnsley's book says.

At one lunch with Clarke in summer 2008 Straw said Brown "had to go" and 
"something will be done", Rawnsley's book says. But Straw, working in tandem 
with the chief whip Geoff Hoon, is portrayed as ultimately reluctant to 
dethrone Brown for fear it would cause a bloodbath.

In a statement yesterday Straw admitted the meetings took place but denied he 
was plotting against Brown. "A number of people came to me to talk about their 
concerns for the party. Some of these people wished to see a change of 
leadership. They have not made a secret of this, then or now. But it is untrue 
that I was 'plotting to oust Gordon Brown'."

Alistair Darling 

Brown has had a particularly tense relationship with Alistair Darling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alistairdarling>, and didn't even want 
him to be chancellor, Rawnsley says. He had pencilled in his closest ally Ed 
Balls for the job, but Blairite loathing of Balls and worries over charges of 
cronyism persuaded Brown to appoint Darling instead. One aide told Rawnsley 
that he saw Brown rubbing out the name of Balls as chancellor on a draft of his 
cabinet.

One of the sources of the volcanic temper described by Rawnsley was his 
chancellor, the book claims. Brown flew into a rage after Darling said in an 
interview with the Guardian in 2008 that the economic crisis was the worst for 
60 years. "Through the paranoid prism of a prime minister under siege, it was 
seen as a premeditated attack," Rawnsley writes. "This will be over in six 
months," Brown told Darling in a telephone row on the day the article was 
published. "I'm glad you think so," Darling responded.

Brown also allowed his spin doctors to brief against Darling in the wake of 
the remarks, but then pleaded ignorance over who was responsible. Maggie 
Darling, the chancellor's wife, is reported as saying: "The fucking cunts are 
trying to stitch up Alistair." By then the prime minister had become 
politically too weak to reshuffle Darling, and kept him in post after Darling 
threatened to resign from the government. Rawnsley writes: "Both men knew that 
Brown could not afford to lose any more ministers. Both men were also aware 
that the chancellor knew so many of the prime ministers's dark secrets that he 
could deliver a resignation speech that would kill his premiership."

The chancellor's spokesman would not comment, but added that the chancellor's 
wife had not used the words quoted.
 