
Think about what you want to get out of it

A gap year can provide a wealth of experience, insight into different cultures 
and much-needed time out after studying. It’s also an opportunity to set 
yourself apart from the crowd. Sophie Graham, a careers adviser for theNational 
Careers Service <https://nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk/Pages/Home.aspx> 
says: “The skills and experiences you gain can help you become ready for 
university and employment both academically and socially. Gap years can really 
boost those attributes employers are looking for.”

What you actually do during your gap year – whether it be travelling, working 
or volunteering – will depend on your own plans and the career that you 
eventually want to get into. Luckily Victoria McLean, founder ofCityCV.co.uk 
<https://citycv.co.uk/>, says there is no one answer: “A gap year abroad can 
add language skills, an understanding of cultural differences and utilising 
your skills in whole new environments and situations. Working closer to home in 
your chosen field obviously shows how dedicated you are to your future 
industry. If a perfect internship opportunity arose, it would be wise to take 
it up – you could also have a shorter break afterwards, fulfilling your 
travelling wishes.”

Gain experience in your dream field 

Finding an internship in your chosen field can be a challenge, but the experts 
recommend being determined, speculatively contacting companies you admire and 
utilise any networks that you have. Lydia Fairman, owner of recruitment company
Fairman Consulting <http://fairmanconsulting.co.uk/> adds: “Take time to tailor 
[your email] to the company. Find a good person within to send it to (use 
LinkedIn or just pick up the phone and ask). Follow up a week or so later to 
check they’ve got it and be charming.”

Vicky McNeil-Kornevall, the co-founder of WorkingAbroad.com 
<http://www.workingabroad.com/>, says that volunteering in a field you’re 
passionate about can also help set your application apart when it comes to 
bagging a dream job later: “If it’s cetacean research you are passionate about, 
and you can show that you have spent three months researching whales and 
dolphins in Patagonia for example, this will really stand out on your CV”.

Or do something unusual

If a suitable internship or volunteering position proves elusive, there’s no 
need to ditch the gap year plans, adds McNeil-Kornevall: “Do something unusual 
and learn a skill that will make you stand out from the rest. Or learn a new 
language. Use the time wisely to do something constructive that will impress 
potential employers.”

Joe Hallwood, founder of Tefl Org UK <http://www.tefl.org.uk/> agrees: “Don’t 
turn down any opportunities. It might not be something you’re interested in 
doing right now but the skills you learn, experiences you have and people you 
will meet can all help shape your future career path. Travelling [itself] is a 
great way to learn a whole host of new skills – from a new language, to 
negotiation, to project management.”

Plan beforehand

One thing the experts do agree on is that pre-departure planning is key for a 
successful gap year. Richard Nimmo, chair of theYear Out Group 
<http://www.yearoutgroup.org/> says: “If you want your work experience to be 
good quality and worthwhile, you will need to have arranged it in advance. 
There are so many options and so many countries that you could go to that the 
research will take time but should be fun.”

Jon Gregory, editor of win-that-job.com <http://www.win-that-job.com/>, says 
that planning can also help allay any reservations that even the most 
adventurous traveller may have: “Try to make sure that, for at least the start, 
you’ll have some supporting framework around you. That might mean choosing your 
locations carefully, engaging with organisations or remote family members, 
perhaps arranging some work before you set off.”

It’s also important to think beyond the gap year itself. Some internships and 
graduate schemes are advertised in the autumn, so make sure you’re aware of the 
deadlines if you’re interested in applying.

Tailor your CV

Once you’ve returned home, how best to describe your adventure? Matt Arnerich, 
a writer forInspiring Interns <http://www.inspiringinterns.com> says that if 
you’ve spent time working or volunteering, the experience should be treated 
like any other job: “Detail the organisation, the time spent there and your 
role to start with, and expand with the responsibilities you held and the 
skills you learned. Often what will really impress is the things that you 
achieved more than what you did day to day.”

If you’ve been more focused on the travelling side, McLean adds that this 
should also take pride of place on your CV: “Discussions about your gap year 
can give the reader a flavour of the kind of person you are. Good to talk about 
are things that show you are a strong individual – eg involvement in voluntary 
or community work – especially positions of leadership. Something that shows 
stamina and commitment can also be good, like marathon running or mountain 
climbing. You want to demonstrate the competencies required by the target role 
as much as possible.”

But don’t apologise

While gaps should be avoided in a CV if possible, Gregory says that candidates 
who have taken a gap year, career break or sabbatical should never shy away 
from talking about their experience. “Never feel defensive or apologetic for 
your time out,” he says. “It’s a great experience, different from the ordinary, 
and out of the typical comfort zone. Try to show how your skills have developed 
as a result of the challenges you’ve experienced during that year.”

“You have some great stories to tell, but your best story is the one that 
shows what you can do next for your prospective employer.”

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 