
Group A Bordeaux

v Chelsea, Stamford Bridge Tomorrow 7.45pm

Laurent Blanc's Bordeaux have had a mixed start to the season but they were 
buoyed ahead of their trip to London after coming from behind to draw against
Marseille <https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> on Saturday, 
Marouane Chamakh's goal cancelling out Bakari Kone's early effort at the Stade 
Chaban Delmas. The point, however, which leaves Bordeaux eighth in Ligue 1, 
came at a cost as Marc Planus, the central defender, limped off injured and is 
a doubt for tomorrow. Yoann Gourcuff, the midfielder on loan from Milan, and 
David Bellion, the former Manchester United forward, are set to feature.

Group D Marseille

v Liverpool, Vélodrome Tomorrow 7.45pm

Saturday's 1-1 draw at Bordeaux <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux>
 may have seen Marseille miss out on going top of the table but Eric Gerets, 
the manager, will be more than satisfied with his side's unbeaten start to the 
season. The former Belgium international has tightened up the defence following 
a 4-4 draw in the opening game at Rennes and with Bakari Kone, the Ivory Coast 
striker, in goalscoring form Marseille are in good shape. Gerets rested 
Boudewijn Zenden, formerly of Liverpool, for Saturday's game and the Dutch 
forward is expected to start at the Stade Vélodrome.

Group E Villarreal

v Manchester Utd, Old Trafford Wednesday 7.45pm

Santiago Cazorla scored the only goal against Deportivo yesterday to seal 
Villarreal's first win in La Liga this season. The hosts were also boosted by 
the return from injury of Robert Pires. The former Arsenal forward's substitute 
appearance puts him in the frame for the trip to Manchester. Giuseppe Rossi is 
hoping to recover from an ankle problem to face his former club, but his fellow 
forward Nihat Kahveci, the Turkey international, is ruled out with a thigh 
injury.

Group E AaB

v Celtic, Parkhead Wednesday 7.45pm

Last season's Danish league champions have struggled to replicate their form 
this time around. Saturday's 2-0 home defeat by Aarhus left AaB ninth in the 
12-team Superligaen table with just two wins from seven games. They may be 
relieved Wednesday's first leg is at Parkhead as they have yet to win in four 
attempts at home so far. However, Celtic will need to be wary of the 
motivational powers of AaB's coach, Bruce Rioch, the former Scotland 
international. The visitors' attacking threat will be led by Marek Saganowski, 
the Poland forward currently on loan from Southampton.

Group G Dynamo Kiev

v Arsenal, Valeri Lobanovskiy Wednesday 7.45pm

After the draw for the group stages was made Arsène Wenger admitted Kiev were 
an "unknown quantity". More than two weeks later and the Arsenal manager will 
be little the wiser when it comes to the Ukrainians as Kiev have since played 
just one league fixture, a 2-0 win over the leaders, Metalurg Donetsk. There 
are no stars like Andriy Shevchenko in the 2008 vintage but Ismael Bangoura and 
Artem Milevsky, who between them scored seven goals in the 8-2 aggregate defeat 
of Spartak Moscow in the preliminary round, will need watching.
 