
A few years ago, for a feature on a music blog, I asked Björk to make a 
selection of her favourite records 
<http://www.therestisnoise.com/2011/11/my-favorite-records-bj%C3%B6rk.html>. 
Her list included Mahler’s 10th Symphony; Alban Berg’sLulu; Steve Reich’s 
Tehillim; a collection of Thai pop, entitled Siamese Soul, Volume 2; Alim 
Qasimov’sAzerbaijan: The Art of the Mugham; Joni Mitchell’s Don Juan’s Reckless 
Daughter; Kate Bush’s The Dreaming; Nico’s Desertshore; Public Enemy’s It Takes 
a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back; Aphex Twin’s Drukqs; the Ranges’ Panasonic
 EP; Black Dog Productions’Bytes and James Blake’s debut album, James Blake.

What’s striking about the list is not just the breadth of Björk’s taste – this 
is no surprise, given her obsessive curiosity about every corner of the musical 
world – but also the animated map of genres that materialises in the 
background. It is as though, in a reversal of tectonic drift, isolated land 
masses of taste were re-forming as a supercontinent. A grandiose howl of late 
Romantic agony; a juggernaut of 12-tone modernism; a cool minimalist dance 
through Hebrew psalms; off-kilter pop from south Asia; a virtuoso survey of 
Azerbaijani mugham; three defiantly idiosyncratic albums by female 
singer-songwriters; three pathbreaking electronic records; a raging 
tour-de-force of political hip-hop; a collection of dubstep ballads: Björk’s 
list circumnavigates the globe and, at the same time, it overruns the 
boundaries separating art from pop, mainstream from underground, primeval past 
from hi-tech present.

The partition of music into distinct genres, each with its own history, 
philosophy and body of technique, is a relatively recent development. Before a 
global marketplace emerged, with the advent of recording technology in the late 
19th century, there was little talk of the classical, the popular and 
subdivisions thereof, although the language of music was seen to vary widely 
from nation to nation and from city to city. Shakespeare employed the word 
“music” with blissful vagueness: “If music be the food of love, play on.” He 
apparently felt no need to specify what kind of music might feed a lusty ear. 
Rousseau, in hisDictionary of Music, noted that tastes varied widely – “One is 
most touched by pathetic pieces, another prefers gay Tunes” – but nonetheless 
spoke of a “general Taste upon which all well-constituted people are agreed”.

The possibility of such a consensus now seems remote. The musical landscape 
teems with genres: classical, jazz, folk, blues, gospel, country, Latin, R&B, 
funk, soul, hip-hop, rock, metal, punk, pop and dozens of national and regional 
varieties. Recording technology has surely fuelled this explosion of 
typologies: once a piece of music becomes a circulating commodity, it requires 
classification, so that one can know what section of the record store to put it 
in or, in latterday terms, what tag to place in its metadata. Furthermore, each 
genre has its own subgenres and ideological schisms. Popular music is regularly 
riven by debates between acolytes of classic guitar rock and devotees of newer 
pop genres that make sophisticated use of digital manipulation. Contemporary 
classical music exhibits a long-running conflict between tonally oriented 
composers and those who still pursue Schoenberg’s high-modernist “emancipation 
of the dissonance”. Music is far from being a “universal language”, as Arthur 
Schopenhauer once defined it; to the contrary, no art stirs more heated debate.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoRAd8nFmIiU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoRAd8nFmIiU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoRAd8nFmIiU&media=>
Shortly before his death, in 1992, John Cage said: “We live in a time I think 
not of mainstream, but of many streams, or even, if you insist, upon a river of 
time, that we have come to delta, maybe even beyond delta to an ocean which is 
going back to the skies.” Stream, delta, border, boundary: we keep reaching for 
geographical metaphors as we speak of genres and we sense that the real 
landscape of musical activity ultimately has little to do with our tidy 
delineations, or indeed with the dismantling of them. Fluid and shifting, music 
is spread out like populations around urban centres, and certain communities 
could plausibly be assigned to one city’s suburbs or to another’s. Genre may be 
a kind of gerrymandering practised by musical politicians. Indeed, composers 
routinely complain when they are described as busters of genre or crossers of 
boundaries; they tend to view themselves simply as artists working with various 
kinds of material. The jazz composer Michael Gibbs may have summed it up best 
when he said: “There is a fusion going on every time somebody writes music.” 
The idea of fusion keeps materialising and disappearing before our ears, a 
mirage generated by the limited ability of language to account for what we hear.

In the intersecting tributaries of Björk’s work, there is a glimpse of the 
delta that Cage described at the end of his life – whether or not Cage himself 
would have been able to wrap his mind around her music. He died the year before 
Björk released her first solo album, 1993’sDebut, in which she began in earnest 
her fierce dance across the continents of genre. You hear first a bouncing riff 
sampled from an Antônio Carlos Jobim–Quincy Jones soundtrack, its syncopated 
beat consigned to a venerable orchestral instrument, the timpani. Over this 
pattern,Björk <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bjork> sings a gloriously odd 
opening line: “If you ever get close to a human and human behaviour, be ready 
to get confused”. The voice exists somewhere on the continuum from the folkish 
to the operatic; less by calculation than by default, it lands in the middle 
ground of pop.

Björk’s Icelandic origins almost certainly contributed to her quizzical, 
questing approach to musical identity. She belonged to a geographically 
isolated society in which centuries-old folk traditions remained strong and in 
which young people passed the time singing in choral groups, as generations 
before them had done. “Somehow, we missed out on the Industrial Revolution and 
modernism and postmodernism,” Björk recently told me. “We are jumping straight 
from colonialism – we got our independence only in 1944 – into the 21st 
century. We could enjoy a still almost untouched natural landscape and draw 
upon it as we headbutted our way into a green, techno, internet age.”

All the latest products of western culture were readily available to Björk’s 
generation and to those who came after. Yet these shiny commodities could be 
assembled in eccentric formations. The up to date mingled with the obsolescent 
and the ancient. Despite Björk’s enthusiasm for the latest developments in the 
digital arena and her painstaking attention to the minutiae of studio 
production, there is much in her music that feels rough-hewn, homemade, 
pre-technological.

Classical music <https://www.theguardian.com/music/classicalmusicandopera> 
loomed large in her early years. From the age of five, she attended the 
Barnamúsikskóli in Reykjavík (a children’s music school now called the 
Tónmenntaskóli), where she studied theory and history, sang in choirs and 
played the flute. (The boxset collectionFamily Tree contains a fragment of 
Björk’s flute playing: a sinuous little piece from 1980, called Glora.) The 
focus on a canonical repertory of Bach, Mozart and Beethoven frustrated her. “I 
remember being almost the fighter in the school, the odd kid out,” she once 
said. But a teacher named Snorri Sigfús Birgisson excited her imagination by 
introducing her to major 20th-century composers: Schoenberg, Messiaen, 
Stockhausen, Cage. Early on, she made her own attempts at avant-garde 
composition, creating pieces from sonic found objects such as a tape of her 
grandfather snoring.

Björk: Vulnicura review – heavy yet compelling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/25/bjork-vulnicura-review-heavy-yet-compelling>
The art of singing often consists in hiding the physicality of the voice – the 
noise of the breath, the click of the tongue, the croak of the throat, the 
innumerable nuances that fall between the 12 chromatic tones. Björk, by 
contrast, has never tried to disguise that visceral aspect: her voice has a 
raw, abrupt, outdoor character, even at its airiest and most unearthly. While 
you can hear intimations of that sound in her earliest recordings, she laboured 
for many years to refine the vocal presence that so often elicits adjectives 
such as “organic”, “natural”, “authentic”. The development of the voice went 
hand in hand with her emergence as a songwriter and as a producer of complex 
electronic and instrumental textures.

While artists as various as Maria Callas and Joni Mitchell shaped her sense of 
the capabilities of the voice, perhaps the most enduring influence on Björk’s 
career, fromDebut to 2011’s Biophilia and beyond, has come from the American 
composer, singer, dancer and theatre artistMeredith Monk 
<http://www.meredithmonk.org>, who shares with Björk a fundamental 
unclassifiability, a tendency to invade the interstices of institutionalised 
culture. Monk belongs to the great vanguard of artists and musicians who 
thrived in the unheated lofts and makeshift galleries of downtown Manhattan in 
the 1960s and 70s. Where so many of her contemporaries, including Steve Reich 
and Philip Glass, adopted a cool, impassive mien, Monk brought a touch of 
ritual mysticism to the New York avant-garde, cultivating an otherworldly yet 
piercingly immediate vocal style that suggested some lost, nameless folk 
culture. She aimed for a “voice as flexible as the spine” and connected it to a 
self-invented dance vocabulary and a mobile theatre of gesture and image. The 
resulting work caused a certain panic in critical circles: theNew York Times 
once sent a trio of music, dance and theatre writers to assess her.

Monk provided a clear precedent for Björk, even if the two artists seem to 
inhabit fundamentally different worlds. Having admired each other from a 
distance and exchanged letters over the years,Björk and Monk finally met in 2005
 
<http://www.newmusicbox.org/articles/radical-connections-meredith-monk-and-bjork/>
, in a conversation mediated by the pianist Sarah Cahill. Björk described her 
early encounter, at around age 16, with Monk’s 1981 albumDolmen Music, which 
gives perhaps the purest demonstration of her invented-folk style. Björk 
recalled that until that point she hadn’t been greatly interested in vocal 
music, preferring the buzzing complexity of instruments and electronics.

But Monk showed what could be achieved when the voice alone, divorced or 
distanced from language, is treated as the most malleable of instruments. The 
two found other common ground: a family tradition of collective singing; an 
early love for Cage; a tendency to compose while walking outdoors; an abiding 
interest in how the voice is linked to the body.

Björk resists being called a composer, even if she has drawn extensively on 
the notational classical tradition. The cult of the solitary genius is alien to 
her. Instead, she sees her work as an essentially collaborative enterprise, one 
that calls for an entire community of musicians, studio technicians, instrument 
makers, producers, programmers, videographers, fashion designers and other 
creative individuals. She is not the kind of pop star who makes a game of 
donning masks and disguises; her vocal identity has changed remarkably little 
over two decades as a solo artist. But almost everything else has changed: the 
instrumentation, the arrangements, the production techniques. Her albums tend 
to react against one another, with extroverted moods giving way to intimacies, 
dense textures followed by transparent ones.
 A snapshot of Björk as a child. Photograph: Hildur Hauksdóttir 
To a great extent, Björk’s career can be narrated in terms of her 
collaborations. In the early and mid-1990s she was living in London, keeping 
close tabs on the city’s club scene.Debut and Post had purring trip-hop beats 
layered beneath the sinuous strings of Talvin Singh and more opulent parts that 
Björk co-arranged with Eumir Deodato. OnHomogenic, from 1997, the late producer 
Mark Bell became a crucial member of Björk’s team, injecting cooler, more 
brittle timbres; forVespertine, in 2001, Björk brought in the avant-garde 
harpist Zeena Parkins and the electronic duo Matmos; andMedúlla, in 2004, 
involved, among others, the avant-garde rock vocalist Mike Patton, the Inuit 
throat-singer Tagaq, and the “human beatboxes” Dokaka and Rahzel.

Biophilia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/oct/09/bjork-biophilia-review>, from 
2011, is perhaps Björk’s most ambitious project to date. Part-album, part-stage 
spectacle, part iPad-app emporium, part new instrument laboratory and part 
school curriculum, it is almost Stockhausen-like in its joyous disregard for 
the constraints of genre. As often before, Björk set about mapping the 
intersection of art, nature and technology, presenting analogies between 
scientific and musical elements.Crystalline 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MvaEmPQnbWk> compares crystal structures to 
the efflorescence of songs from small motifs; Solstice likens swinging 
pendulums to overlapping contrapuntal lines; and Virus, whose folk-like melody 
seems to come from the depths of the centuries, has an unstable, ever-shifting 
accompaniment that suggests cells subdividing and multiplying. The battery of 
bespoke instruments includes thegameleste 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J0uXL1E5qn8>, a Midi-controlled device that 
incorporates gamelan-like bronze bars in a celeste housing; and the 
Sharpsichord, a 46-string automatic harp controlled by a pin cylinder.

The circle of colleagues now included the organ craftsman Björgvin Tómasson, 
the sound sculptor Henry Dagg, the percussionists Matt Nolan and Manu Delago, 
the engineer and programmer Damian Taylor, and the sound-artist and educator 
Curver. They joined such long-time confederates as Zeena Parkins, Matthew 
Herbert, Mark Bell, the Icelandic poet Sjón, and the Iranian producer Leila 
Arab. Grownup audiences thrilled to the hi-tech spectacle that Björk unleashed 
inlive performance <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zvLZl1HlW3Y> – plasma bolts 
zapping inside a Tesla coil, producing organ-like blasts of sound – but most of 
all she wished to serve the starved imaginations of schoolchildren, many of 
whom now enter adulthood without having studied music in school.

“I want the kids to feel like they’re superheroes of sound,” she told me, 
before a series of performances at the New York Hall of Science, in Queens, in 
2012. One afternoon, I watched as a group of kids from Queens middle schools 
raced around playing with the instruments and the attendant software, their 
eyes glittering with unsuspected possibilities.

Vulnicura, just released, may be the most emotionally direct work of Björk’s 
career, recording, with blistering candor, the breakup of her relationship with 
the artist Matthew Barney. At the same time, it marks another stage in her 
musical evolution, with the 10-minute expanse of Black Lake presenting one of 
her most intricately layered compositional conceptions to date. All these 
records document both an intellectual journey and a personal, psychological 
one. How the work matches up with the life is a subject on which only the 
artist herself can speak with authority; what matters for the listener is the 
sense that each song is an attempt to transmit honestly and unabashedly an 
inward state, rather than to concoct a calculated, knowing image for the 
outside world. As in Schubert’s final string quartet or Berg’s Lyric Suite, the 
music has a seismographic action, recording shocks and sensations that we may 
not see firsthand.

This is an edited extract from an essay by Alex Ross (Beyond Delta: The Many 
Streams of Björk) inBjörk: Archives 
<http://www.thamesandhudson.com/Bjork/9780500291948> published by Thames & 
Hudson (2 March, £40) with other contributions by Klaus Biesenbach, Nicola 
Dibben, Timothy Morton and Sjón. Björk, the exhibition, opens 8 March at MoMA, 
New York

Art and soul: Björk’s creative debt to Iceland
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEiXQ5qaUGDI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEiXQ5qaUGDI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEiXQ5qaUGDI&media=>
For the forthcoming retrospective of her work at MoMA in New York, Björk 
created, with director Andrew Thomas Huang, the workBlack Lake, which was 
filmed on location in Iceland during the summer of 2014. The show’s curator,
Klaus Biesenbach, watched it being made...

Black Lake is an 11-minute looped composition that deals with the expression 
of the pain that Björk went through during her separation [in 2013] from artist 
Matthew Barney. For the video, she worked with choreographer Erna Ómarsdóttir 
on expressive, dance-like movements, through which she palpably exorcised her 
pain.

I sat in the prep trailer during filming in the Icelandic landscape. In the 
background, behind a curtain, Björk was tuning her voice, exercising the width 
and capacity of her vocal spectrum, before leaving the trailer clad in a dress 
made out of a woven copper wire fabric to sing in a freezing, water-dripping 
cave. The camera crew and director were covered in layers of coats, but Björk 
was doing take after take, standing in her bare feet on cold wet sand. For each 
take there was no lip-synching; she sang live, loud and real.

Outside the cave, the prep trailer, the set, walking through the lava fields 
of Iceland, you are as a human being by far the tallest living object. There 
are no trees, no large animals, just moss and very low-growing vegetation. 
Coming across rocks feels like the only encounter of an equal volume, another 
object standing across from you, the human being. All of a sudden, it becomes 
clear that for all of her career Björk has created a body of work in which the 
landscape around her, she herself and the landscape inside of her – her blood, 
her organs, the sounds made by her and perceived by her – are all one universe 
of objects and subjects, subjects and objects, robots and humans, plants and 
animals, stone and volcanoes and oceans at the same time.

Björk was born in 1965, during the four-year volcanic eruption that caused the 
formation of the Icelandic island Surtsey. Red-hot flowing lava formed a rocky 
island that was soon colonised by seeds that were washed ashore. These seeds 
brought the dead island into the cycles of life. At the end of filmingBlack Lake
, the Icelandic volcano Bárðarbunga erupted under a glacier, again bringing 
together scorching liquid with centuries-old glacier ice and generating new 
rocks out of the cooling magma.

© Björk: Archives (Thames & Hudson)
 