
It’s easier than you think to keep your business safe from cyber-criminals. By 
devising a cybersecurity strategy, you can protect your technology and systems 
from attacks and data breaches – and reduce any fallout if the worst happens.

Most of the measures are inexpensive and quick to implement – but they could 
mean the difference between survival and closure if hackers target your 
business. There are good reasons for doing this: cybercrime is one of the most 
significant threats to British businesses, with hacks and attacks rising by 22 
per cent year-on-year.

In 2015, online crime cost UK firms large and small a total of £1 billion, and 
the World Economic Forum has ranked cyber-crime as one of the top five global 
threats over the coming years.

While you can never be entirely safe when trading online or using internet 
tools, think of a cybersecurity strategy as locking your door instead of 
leaving it wide open.

Forewarned is forearmed

The first step is to understand what data is being held, explains Stephen 
Ridley, senior cyber underwriter at Hiscox UK & Ireland.

“The number one thing that businesses must be aware of is what information 
they’re holding and where it’s stored,” he says. “If you’re storing data on 
certain devices, many have the ability to encrypt as standard – you just have 
to turn it on.”

Many businesses will collect reams of data, such as email addresses or 
customer details, and hang on to that information indefinitely. By deleting the 
data when it is no longer required, the size of breaches can be vastly reduced.

Passwords should be changed frequently and each staff member should have their 
own logins for systems and software, rather than there being a single one for 
all users. Government research recently showed that 27 per cent of people have 
shared their passwords, which dramatically increases the potential for a breach.

Cybersecurity is often the last thing that a business owner wants to think 
about, especially when their venture is small or growing fast. But security 
must be built in from the get-go.

“You have to nail this early otherwise it can be very complex to add security 
measures to legacy systems down the line,” Ridley warns. “And make sure you 
always download software updates to get the latest protections.”

Not all cybercrimes take place because of flaws in technology – sometimes 
people let in the hackers unwittingly. Staff should be trained to watch out for 
phishing attacks; financial information should never be given out without 
stringent checks.

Ridley says: “Ransomware may be deployed via a phishing email, so staff must 
be aware of the risks. Knowing not to click on email links will protect you 
from a lot of cyber-crime. As will taking care not to email information to the 
wrong people, as that is a data breach.”

How to deal with an attack

Taking some of these basic precautions could help reduce the pain that hackers 
can inflict on your business. But what should you do if hackers do manage to 
seize your data, or are holding your company to ransom? A good insurer will 
help fix a breach by providing access to experts as well as providing a 
financial limit of indemnity.

“Ideally you want someone lined up to call,” says Matt Webb, group head of 
cyber at Hiscox. “Make sure you think about who you need to contact. Is it your 
IT department, the police, the regulator, your lawyer? This needs to be worked 
out in advance.

“You also need to be able to get to the bottom of a breach quickly, which 
involves forensic IT, and you may also need some help from a PR company to 
manage your reputation following a hack.”

From 2018, the EU’s new General Data Protection Regulation will force 
companies to admit any breach of customer data. They may then be fined up to 
€20m or 4 per cent of their annual turnover. If your customers are in the US, 
you are obliged to reveal breaches already.

Accountancy firm KPMG says cyber-crime can have a devastating impact on small 
businesses’ ability to trade. Its research found that 89 per cent of breaches 
result in reputational damage. But, by creating a robust cybersecurity 
strategy, you can be prepared for the worst.

You may never need it, but you will be grateful if cyber-criminals come 
knocking.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Hiscox 
<https://www.hiscox.co.uk/>, sponsor of the Adventures in Business hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/series/adventures-in-business>
 on the Guardian Small Business Network.
 