
The acrimonious fallout from Hewlett-Packard's disastrous takeover of Autonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation> has continued with a 
war of words erupting between the British tech firm's founder and the US 
company.

After Mike Lynch fired off an angry letter to HP's board demanding "immediate 
explanations" for its "highly damaging allegations" that his company inflated 
its revenue-and-profit figures before HP bought it, the Silicon Valley company 
hit back on Tuesday night, effectively saying it would see Lynch in court.

"The matter is in the hands of the authorities, including the UK Serious Fraud 
Office, the US Securities and Exchange Commission's enforcement division and 
the US department of justice, and we will defer to them as to how they wish to 
engage with Dr Lynch. In addition, HP will take legal action against the 
parties involved at the appropriate time.

"While Dr Lynch is eager for a debate, we believe the legal process is the 
correct method in which to bring out the facts and take action on behalf of our 
shareholders. In that setting, we look forward to hearing Dr Lynch and other 
former Autonomy employees answer questions under penalty of perjury."

Lynch, who left HP in May only seven months after the US firm bought his 
software company for $10.1bn (£6.3bn), said in the letter that HP needs to 
explain how it arrived at its figure for the writedown on the purchase. He 
asked: "Can HP really state that no part of the $5bn writedown was, or should 
be, attributed to HP's operational and financial mismanagement of Autonomy 
since the acquisition?"

HP last week announced that it was writing off a total of $8bn in the value of 
Autonomy and shareholder value impairment, as it released its quarterly 
figures. Meg Whitman, the chief executive, said that there had been "outright 
misrepresentation" in Autonomy's pre-takeover accounts – although she stopped 
short of calling it fraud. She said it had gone on for at least eight quarters 
before the takeover.

Almost all Autonomy's former senior managers have left the company since the 
takeover was completed in October 2011. Whitman said that a whistleblower only 
came forward to allege improprieties in how Autonomy booked revenues after the 
departure of Lynch and others.

Whitman and the HP board face huge problems in explaining how they approved 
the purchase of Autonomy at a 58% premium to its stock market value when they 
made the offer. Although Léo Apotheker – since ousted – was then the chief 
executive, Whitman was one of the directors who approved the purchase.

It is the third big writedown in less than a year for HP, following purchases 
of EDS and Palm, where it has spent a total of $26bn and written off $19bn in 
all.

HP's woes were magnified on Monday as a number of investors filed a class 
action lawsuit in San Francisco, claiming that HP concealed accounting 
manipulation at Autonomy between the announcement of the deal last summer and 
last week, when it took the writedown against the deal.

"At the time Hewlett-Packard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hewlettpackard> agreed in principle to 
acquire Autonomy, defendants were looking to unwind the deal in light of the 
accounting irregularities that plagued Autonomy's financial statements," the 
lawsuit stated. HP said the alleged manipulation of financial performance at 
Autonomy had not been spotted at the time of the deal, and was revealed only 
later by a whistleblower. It said $5bn of the writedown was related to the 
alleged accounting improprieties.

But Lynch has hit back with a number of pointed questions, which HP has not so 
far answered. He said that "a significant amount of revenue" would have to be 
involved for a $5bn writedown to be necessary.

He says: "Please explain how such issues could possibly have gone undetected 
during the extensive acquisition due diligence process and HP's financial 
oversight of Autonomy for a year from acquisition until October 2012 (a period 
during which all of the Autonomy finance reported to HP's CFO, Cathie Lesjak)."

HP suggested last week that Autonomy had inflated its revenues by selling 
hardware at break-even or a loss in order to boost software revenues – to which 
Lynch responds: "Please confirm that Ms Whitman and other HP senior management 
were aware of Autonomy's hardware sales before 2012. Did Autonomy, as part of 
HP, continue to sell third-party hardware of materially similar value after 
acquisition? Was this accounted for by HP and was this reported in the Autonomy 
segment of their accounts?"

Whitman said in a phone call last week that HP had not spotted the alleged 
improprieties ahead of the takeover: "We believe from what we have seen there 
were internal efforts by certain individuals to conceal these from the 
marketplace."
 