
In the shadows of the carpark on the Broadwater Farm estate in Tottenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/tottenham>, north London, three young men sit 
in a car, hoods over their heads, eyes down on their BlackBerrys. Another 
balances on his bike by the open window. A few paces away a queue is beginning 
to form outside the estate's community centre for a showing of the French film 
La Haine – which starts with images of angry young men rioting on the streets 
of Paris and ends with one of the main characters being shot by police.

"I don't understand why they are showing a film like that here, it's peak," 
says one of the young men, explaining for the Guardian's benefit that "peak" 
means "a bit terrible". Asked why, he says, as though to a child: "Our friend 
was shot by a police officer, why would you show that on our turf?"

The film – shown on the eve of London's mayoral election in the area of London 
where the shooting of Mark Duggan sparked riots that spread through the country 
– is undoubtedly provocative. The event is the brainchild of Future Cinema, an 
interactive film company which usually limits itself to showing classic movies 
to dressed-up clientele, whopartnered with residents on the estate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/apr/11/la-haine-screening-broadwater-farm-estate>
. Fabien Riggall, founder of Future Cinema is unapologetic about the film's 
content. "This is a film that still resonates," he says. "The problems that 
caused what happened last year have not necessarily been dealt with. But I 
think showing this film could inspire people to provoke and question in other 
ways than violence."

Speaking earlier from Los Angeles, the film's director, Mathieu Kassovitz, 
dismissed the suggestion that the film could spark trouble. "What we do is 
raise consciousness and help people stay awake, and that bothers politicians," 
he said. "These guys are taking a stand and saying, we have not forgotten what 
happened in Tottenham. It is a moment to remember, but it is being remembered 
in a creative way."

In the buzzing halls of the community centre it is clear who is running the 
project. Volunteer security guards from the estate, wander around the building. 
Local women give out wrist bands for entry with a smile, and everybody tucks in 
to the jerk chicken on offer. Among the breakdancers and the graffiti artists, 
there are no shortage of hipsters. But there are also estate residents, young 
and old. "There are a lot of warm-hearted people there, and that's a good thing 
on a notorious estate," says one 24-year-old. A 28-year-old who gives his name 
as Arcane G adds: "No-one speaks on the roads anymore, this is bringing people 
together, getting them to interact."

Issac Densu, a Broadwater Farm resident who has co-organised the event in 
partnership with Future Cinema, says it has "energised" the estate. "There is a 
lot of anger in the community but now we have to look at ways of channelling 
it." he says. "Last year we rioted and we still got no answers, now its about 
being educated in our argument." Densu aims to carry on showing films at the 
estate, and has created a production company called Outreach Films to develop 
local talent. "As a community we have to take responsibility for ourselves. 
There is no point pointing your finger at the government, it just gets pointed 
right back at you," he says. Before the film starts he tells the audience: "You 
want things to change? Vote tomorrow."

Before the screening begins in the hanger-like sports hall, mesmerising 
rapper-poetAkala <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JsZZ8caB5dw> has a room of 400 
people focussing on his rapid lyrics. "Revolution is not beyond reach," he 
spits to applause. Local boxer Daniel Soares, stripped to the waist, pounds a 
punchbag in one corner and on scaffolding either side of the giant screen stand 
graffiti artists. By the time the film starts one has finished a pair of angel 
wings, R.I.P scrawled above them. The film starts to roll with images of Paris 
burning, looting and rioters beaten by police, its soundtrack, played live by 
Asian Dub Foundation, throbbing through the hall. For the next few hours, no 
one moves. But as the film finishes and residents stream out of the door back 
into the estate, Gary Williams, 40, who had earlier done security for the 
event, comes over to make his point. "You see, it was a good atmosphere, a good 
turnout, no trouble," he says. "The Farm is not what people think it is, we're 
not animals."
 