
One of few wholefood stores in Cardiff, Hungry Planet on Clifton Street, 
Adamsdown <https://www.theguardian.com/cardiff/adamsdown>, has been saved from 
closure by a group of friends.

After closing for just three weeks following a slump in turnover, the store 
will reopen with a party tomorrow run as a cooperative business by 14 
individuals who enjoyed buying vegetarian and vegan wholefood from the store.

Christoper Johnson, 45, ran the shop with his wife for three years but found 
with roadworks and supermarket giant Tesco opening just down the road, along 
with the recession, the shop would have to close.

When fans of the wholefood store heard the news they clubbed together to form 
a cooperative business to keep the shop running – spreading ownership out among 
the shareholders and working on a round-the-clock schedule to staff the 
premises.
 Hungry Planet's wholefoods dispensers Photograph: Hannah 
Waldram/guardian.co.uk 
It was all hands on deck yesterday, as a number of the new owners scrambled to 
re-stock the shop and prepare the cafe area for the reopening party, which will 
give locals a chance to taste some of the food on the new menu and find out 
more about Hungry Planet.

Sitting among boxes of new stock, Johnson said:

"We really wanted to expand the store but we were basically facing 
liquidation. But people that we knew and friends were interested in coming 
together to pull resources, time, money and skills to do a lot more than with 
just two owners, so we decided to get to it and sold the assets of the company."

The wholefood store is popular with vegans and vegetarians for stocking foods 
such as Soya milk and tofu – and giving a 10% discount to customers who bring 
in their own container.
 Wholefoods whole spice at Hungry Planet Photograph: Hannah 
Waldram/guardian.co.uk 
There are few dedicated wholefood stores in the city. Pulse, on Kings Road in 
Pontcanna, also faced a similar predicament earlier this month, but owners 
Derek and Rhian announced it would reopen with a new cafe area one week after 
it closed. When Pulse reopened residents celebrated by sharing a freshly cooked 
Welsh cake in the new cafe. Johnson said he hoped residents would be equally 
happy Hungry Planet can remain open. He said:

"People really didn't want us to close. There's nowhere else in the area which 
stocks what we do, and people come over here from elsewhere to shop here too. 
Now all the owners are those who enjoy what we stock too. There's just no 
equivalent to that."

Listen to Johnson talk about the experience of opening a coop and the changes 
in place here:

Joint owner Ian Owen said: 


"I think Clifton Street is a Mecca for independent stores. There's a Tesco and 
it doesn't feel right. There's lots of independent shops and it sits quite well 
with that. It's not the most affluent part of Cardiff, but it suits us and 
customers pretty nicely.

"This is an exciting time for us."

Now Hungry Planet hope to expand on the cafe and deli by offering a separate 
breakfast and lunch menu. They will also be making a veggie box and lunch box 
scheme for local offices and mobile catering for festivals later in the year, 
and hope to have a stall at Riverside and Roath market.

What do you think of Hungry Planet wholefoods reopening? Add your comments 
below.
 