
It worked for Arctic Monkeys; it worked for Sandi Thom. No one should be too 
surprised that another act have now used the MySpace website - which spreads 
word of a band (and their downloadable songs) via a growing network of internet 
"friends" - to launch themselves to stardom. The difference is that Hope 
Against Hope are a scam, a spoof indie band "with no talent whatsoever" 
invented by Q magazine in order to prove that the Rupert Murdoch-owned site is 
now just another cog in the older industry phenomenon of hype.

After just four weeks, Hope Against Hope had a devoted fanbase. Alan McGee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alan-mcgee> - once a member of Tony Blair's 
Creative Industry Taskforce, and the man who discovered Oasis and the 
Libertines - even offered them a gig at his influential Death Disco club night. 
But while McGee is portrayed as the butt of the joke, he was only doing his job 
- responding to a "buzz". Hype is as old as pop itself, and has brought us many 
of pop's biggest names - as well as some of its most notorious disasters.

One of the first artists to be the subject of significant hype was Elvis, who 
had a very shrewd (if not exactly cut-throat) manager in "Colonel" Tom Parker, 
and who benefited from a whispering campaign about "a white man who sings like 
a black man". Once Presley became famous - he turned out to be pretty good - 
another curled-lipped pretender, Cliff Richard, was marketed as "the British 
Elvis". No matter how good an artist's music, most acts need some way of 
grabbing an audience's initial attention.

One of the most effective tools is outrage. In the 1960s, Rolling Stones' 
manager Andrew Loog Oldham was looking for a way to counter the Beatles' 
suits'n'moptops image when he hit upon the idea of pushing his proteges as bad 
boys. They grew their hair so long that the Daily Mirror said "one of them 
looks like he's got a feather duster on his head". The "cavemen-like quintet" 
were photographed urinating against a wall and later appeared accompanied by 
the headline: "Would you let your daughter marry a Rolling Stone?" Probably 
not, but you couldn't stop her, and her brothers, buying their records.

Of course, outrage is more potent when it appears genuine. On December 1 1976, 
Freddie Mercury's toothache meant Queen had to cancel a TV appearance. Luckily, 
the band's label EMI had a standby in their latest signings, the Sex Pistols, 
whose infant punk-rock fury was intensified by alcoholic supplies from the 
Green Room. When fusty (and equally tipsy) presenter Bill Grundy seemed more 
taken by the risqué costume worn by the accompanying Siouxsie (later of the 
Banshees), the Pistols protested in four-letter terms. One member of the public 
kicked in his TV set in disgust and the following day's front page headlines 
("The filth and the fury!") took the Pistols to No 1.

Another effective means of hyping an artist is introducing them as a fait 
accompli. In the early 1990s, Suede's publicists persuaded Melody Maker to 
declare them "The best new band in Britain" and record-buyers decided that they 
probably were. This approach started to lose some of its impact when the music 
papers declared a new "best band" every week. A few years ago, Boy George's 
buddy, Amanda Ghost, appeared on the cover of a magazine, with the coverline 
The Making of a Rock Star - after which she disappeared. Last year she had a 
"comeback" of sorts, as the co-writer of James Blunt's You're Beautiful.

If hype were this straightforward, surely everyone would be doing it. But the 
fact is, talent tends to out - and vice versa. A lack of talent can be made 
painfully obvious through clumsy hype. In the early 1970s Bacofoil-clad 
Jobriath was marketed as the "world's first gay pop star", but his only fans in 
the long term were Morrissey and Neil Tennant. More recently, avant-weirdo 
Conrad Merz gathered column inches as "the next Beck" - until the public 
decided he sounded like a jackdaw.

It's not just the industry who play this game: sometimes bands take the 
initiative themselves. A few years ago, Radio 1 started receiving unexplained 
boxes of tomatoes, one of which was even delivered by a window cleaner 
abseiling down the BBC building. The source? Unsigned band Big Boy Tomato, of 
course. They never got air play.

Hype can break careers as well as make them. Bruce Springsteen knew this when 
in the early 1970s he went around London tearing down posters proclaiming him 
"The future of rock'n'roll", although his music subsequently suggested he was 
just that.

One of the all-time hype PR disasters has to be the case of 1970s pub rockers 
Brinsley Schwarz, who were already loved by the media when their record company 
hit on the wheeze of flying a planeload of journalists to New York to see their 
first American gig. Alas, there were problems with visas, the planeloads of 
hacks and band landed in the wrong town, and many of those who made it to the 
gig were so drunk they were refused admission to an apparently disastrous 
performance. In 1998 the industry tried a similar stunt when a planeload of 100 
journalists were flown out to Copenhagen to meet Barbie Girl hitmakers Aqua, 
and plied with vodka. The drunken questions at the press conference were wildly 
inappropriate. Some journalists failed to make the return flight home, and were 
never seen again - which is pretty much what happened to Aqua's career.

People behind the hype like to make spurious claims: 1990s girl duo Shampoo 
received acres of publicity on the back of becoming "millionaires in Thailand", 
which their PR later admitted was the result of crossed wires; likewise reports 
that Sigue Sigue Sputnik signed to EMI for £4m turned out to be exaggerated.

Like temptation, hype comes in many forms, and mischief should be 
distinguished from the more sinister payola. The phenomenon of record companies 
paying people to "buy" records into the charts (unwitting beneficiaries have 
included the Police and the Pretenders) was thought to have died out, but this 
year a band called the Modern were disqualified from the charts after they were 
caught doing the same thing, only using downloads.

There must be scores of "great white hopes" out there, wondering where it all 
went wrong, from the reality TV-to-bargain bin likes of Gareth Gates, Michelle 
McManus and Darius, to much-pushed, little-selling would-be phenomenons such as 
The Legendary Stardust Cowboy (he wasn't), Adorable, Five Thirty and Orlando. 
Usually the answer is that, while the people around them told them they were 
the next big thing, people with ears decided they were rubbish.

Then again, we should all check out Hope Against Hope. Someone on the internet 
reckons they're really good.

The good, the bad and the ghastly

Believe the hype

Robert Johnson Mississippi bluesman whose legend continues to this day, based 
on the story that he "sold his soul to the devil at the crossroads" in return 
for good tunes. The devil is unavailable for comment, but the tunes still sound 
good.

Elvis Presley Although the Memphis Flash's first track, That's All Right Mama, 
caused a radio station's switchboard to light up, the music industry soon 
realised the potential of a "white man who sings like a black man", didn't 
write songs, and was prettier than Carl Perkins. Presley became the first pop 
superstar.

The Rolling Stones Heavily marketed as a badder alternative to the Beatles. 
They were.

The Spice Girls Hugely pushed as a phenomenon of "girl power". Marketing tools 
ranged from everything from sponsored cameras to knickers, but what they 
really, really wanted were massive pop hits like Wannabe. They got them.

Richard Clayderman Ghastly classical pianist and early example of the power of 
mass TV marketing. Much loved by late 1970s and early 1980s grannies, his first 
single sold 22m copies in 38 countries. Ugh!

Eminem Pushed as the first great white rapper. He was.

Don't believe the hype

The Legendary Stardust Cowboy Early 1970s art rock weirdo beloved at the time 
by David Bowie. Hyped as "the new music", one of his records prompted a 
reviewer to throw it out of the window. This didn't stop Bowie later 
incorporating the Cowboy's image into his actually legendary Ziggy Stardust.

Sigue Sigue Sputnik The kings of the mid-1980s publicity stunt, the Sputs 
"sold advertising space" on their debut and reportedly signed to EMI for 
millions. After a couple of minor hits, their 1986 debut album Flaunt It 
flaunted only failure.

Vanilla Ice Pushed as the first great white rapper. He wasn't.

Ultrasound The 134th "best new band in Britain" heralded by the music press in 
1999. Rampant egos combined to make their debut, Everything Picture, a mighty 
flop.

Birdland One eminent music publication was excited enough to declare their 
debut single "one of the all-time greats". We can't remember it either.

Orlando Early 1990s second wave New Romantic arrivistes hailed by the music 
press as part of the ill-fated "Romo" phenomenon. Alas, the public decided 
their tunes were no better than their make-up.

Gareth Gates Runner-up to Will Young in Pop Idol. Last heard of being dropped 
by his record company. Young, meanwhile, prospers.
 