
Other people on Pankaj Mishra's list of influential anti-Islamic witch-hunters 
(Comment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2010/sep/01/anti-muslim-hysteria-western-intellectuals>
, 1 September) can speak for themselves, but please let me state clearly what I 
have several times stated before: that I am not against Islam, but against 
Islamic extremism. I regard Islamic extremism as the biggest threat that Islam 
faces. I only wish I were influential, so that I could do more to get this 
surely very simple point across: Islam, like most religions, is well supplied 
with textual incitements to violence that nobody takes seriously except the 
violent, who are looking for an excuse. In other words, the menace lies in the 
extremism, not in the religion.

Doesn't Pankaj Mishra feel the same? It isn't always easy to detect what he 
really means under the rhetoric: writers who don't realise that a collection of 
words like "triggers a tsunami of vitriol" is a hopelessly mixed metaphor are 
apt to leave their readers puzzled. But as far as I can make out, he genuinely 
thinks thatAyaan Hirsi Ali <http://www.theahafoundation.org/> has a right to 
protest against her childhood injuries, as long as she accepts that such 
injuries are inflicted by "patriarchal cultures" and not by her religion. Hirsi 
Ali blames the religion, which she wants dismantled.

As it happens, I agree more with him than I do with her. The abolition of 
Islam, in my view, would not be desirable even if it were possible. WhatIslam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> most needs to do, however, is to find 
ways for its vast majority – more than a billion people all over the world – to 
express their condemnation of a murderous minority. We are prepared to accept 
that silence does not mean indifference or tacit approval. But if silence means 
that those who say nothing about atrocities generated within the Islamic 
culture are worried that they will help anti-Islamic forces in the west then 
they are mistaking their real enemy.

No western government wants to persecute Muslims. There are private citizens 
in the west, extremists on their own account, who would like to persecute 
Muslims, but they do not have their hands on the levers of power. Whether in 
the Islamic countries or in those western countries which have a significant 
Islamic component to their population, most of the people who want to persecute 
Muslims are Muslims. Most of the Muslims who get persecuted are women. To that 
hideous anomaly,Ayaan Hirsi Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayaan-hirsi-ali> is perfectly understandable 
when she takes a root-and-branch attitude. After all, a root-and-branch 
attitude was taken to her: she was a female, so she suffered.

Perhaps Pankaj Mishra could answer a simple question. It is the same question 
that Nicolas Sarkozy, before he was President of France, once askedTariq Ramadan
 <http://www.tariqramadan.com/> when they were on television together. Sarkozy 
asked Ramadan whether he condemned the stoning of women. Ramadan, so much 
admired by Pankaj Mishra, said he couldn't answer until the subject had been 
discussed by the imams. Would Pankaj Mishra care to answer, or is he, too, 
waiting to be told?

Clive James

Cambridge
 