
Q When my boyfriend and I separated last year I decided to carry on living in 
our flat, even though it was a bit of a struggle to pay the rent on my own.

Since then, I have been having trouble with my debts. My credit card bill is 
now £9,000, which I can't afford to pay off - I barely have enough left over to 
pay the interest, and I am up to my limit on my overdraft.

There is no prospect of me getting a pay rise in the near future, and I can't 
see any way out of this. It is really getting me down as I seem to be working 
just to pay off the debt. Is there any advice you can give me?

CB

A When people find themselves in debt it's often as a result of a dramatic 
life change: illness, bereavement, redundancy or the breakdown in a 
relationship. In your case, you took on all the responsibility of paying the 
rent on a flat which used to be shared by two wage-earners.

It sounds as though you need to draw up a budget to help you work out which 
bills and debts are priority. It is very important that you continue to pay the 
rent, although you may decide that it would be better to cut your costs and 
move to cheaper accommodation. You could do this by sharing with a friend, 
which means that heating and lighting costs are also split in two.

One of the best ways to tackle debt is to draw up a list of your income and 
expenditure, and work out how much money you need each week for essentials like 
food, travel and toiletries. Then you'll have a clearer idea of where your 
paycheque is going.

You could write to your credit card company, asking them to freeze your 
interest payments and explaining your situation. But it is probably better to 
sort out the whole of your money so that you don't end up slipping into debt 
again.

A good option is to use Payplan, a free debt counselling service set up by the 
National Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux. Payplan is paid for by the 
credit industry and there are no fees to pay, so 100 per cent of your 
repayments go towards reducing your debts (unlike some consolidation loan 
plans).

You'll need to make a list of all your creditors and any maintenance payments 
you receive, then an adviser will help you work out how much you can aford to 
pay each month.Once this is in place, you make a monthly payment to Payplan, 
and they forward the money onto the relevant creditors.

The scheme is supported by National Debtline, the Money Advice Association, 
HBOS, and Marks & Spencer Financial Services.

Payplan is not a debt collection agency and advisers negotiate with creditors 
on your behalf in order to draw up a realistic plan.

For more information, you call or email Payplan on help@payplan.com 
<mailto:help@payplan.com>, freephone: 0800 085 4298

Can Payplan help you?

· You may have experienced some kind of change in your circumstances and be 
struggling with debt.

· You may have already tried to borrow more, to consolidate your debts into 
one payment. It is possible that you have been refused credit at some time.

·· You may be receiving letters and phone calls from your creditors because 
you have missed payments.

· You may be feeling stressed and unsure what to do about the situation. 
Worries about your financial situation could be having an impact on other areas 
of your life such as work and family.

Payplan says 60 per cent of clients started out with another company who 
charged for their services and then switched to Payplan because the service was 
free.
 