
The oldest man on my street, Eric, has lost his keys for the umpteenth time 
this week. In the time that he repeats the routine of shuffling slowly from the 
front door to his car, opening the passenger door, turning on the light, 
looking through his key wallet under the light, unclipping a random key and 
then walking slowly back to his front door to see if it works, day has become 
night.

"Need any help?" I shout from across the street, because Eric is deaf in one 
ear. "No, no," he replies cheerfully, but I cross the road anyway. I always 
look for physical signs of degeneration, such as dirty clothes, fingernails, or 
a strong smell of urine that would suggest he hasn't been washing. But he is 
immaculate as ever, his shirt ironed, cuffs and collar clean. When we find the 
key that works for his door, I notice that the hall of his house is as tidy as 
an officer's mess. The only thing that is falling apart is his mind, and the 
speed at which it is happening is alarming.

Up until a few weeks ago Eric had neighbours, Stan and Eva. They were in the 
very old-age stage of life together. Eric would drive 200 yards to the shop to 
collect their newspapers if if it was raining or, if dry, he would walk with 
his stick. Stan died a couple of weeks ago and Eva has been taken into 
residential care so everything in Eric's life has changed. And quickly.

Call this the beginning of dementia. Call it immense grief. Call it 
loneliness. It is certainly not craziness. Eric is in his late 80s, and in the 
few years I've lived on the street with him he has never been anything other 
than totally with-it. In old age, the reasons for losing one's mind can be a 
mixture of all these things and it is hardly surprising, but nearly always 
upsetting.

I think I've lost my keys nearly every time I get to my front door, but I am 
not old. I call my children by the cat's name, my brothers' names. But this is 
just confusion, tiredness.

The mental deterioration that I feel comes from a desire to try to control the 
way in which my brain actually works. I have always been chaotic, always 
scatty. Seldom am I wholly present in a room. Yes, I can do things to improve 
the ways in which I function, but like somebody who is naturally highly 
organised, I have to understand that there is only so much of one's personality 
that can be changed. Yet I still have regular fights with my character traits: 
every day, all the way.

Take lost keys: I berate myself for being such a scatterbrain when I really do 
lose my keys, ie when they are not lying in the bottom of my bag along with 
wrapperless tampons and a half-eaten sandwich. I think about these keys being 
picked up by an opportunistic passerby who might try to break in to the house 
and steal more keys to precious things, keys that lie in a bowl right by the 
front door, like metal soup.

But, slowly, I'm letting myself off the hook. I'm admitting that everyone at 
some point loses their keys. I am trying not to see this as a unique problem 
associated with people like me, who find high stress bearable, but the chaos of 
day-to-day life difficult to deal with.

I've always had strange, illogical ways of thinking and often use those 
strange, illogical ways to try to sort out my problems. For example, when I was 
nine, I got worms. My mother took me to the doctor, and I remember thinking he 
looked like he had been taken down from a shelf and dusted off. He scared me 
before he even spoke and it was an experience that still makes me shudder.

When the worms returned, I thought I was abnormal, a serial catcher of bad 
things, and I feared being sent back to that old GP with the cold fingers. So I 
told no one, and made a vow to myself to wait until I was 11, when I'd be 
allowed to take a bus all by myself to the chemist in town to buy some tablets 
(we lived in a village with only a post office and a pub).

Two years. I would rather have waited two years with an itchy bottom and an 
insatiable appetite, than tell my mother. The worms left of their own accord, 
but my twisted logic did not. It is still here, but now I can see it for what 
it is and ask for help when I can't cope on my own. It can't change 
personalities or behaviour, but it gives me a certain empathy for and 
understanding of others.
 