
There is a very simple answer I could give the therapist, in response to her 
question about what it is that I really want from R: I want him back. I can't 
quite pluck up the courage, though, because despite being honest in her 
presence, I still view her as a professional who requires serious adult answers 
to serious adult questions. I have a propensity to impress with my 
self-knowledge, but then I worry I'm paying the therapist in order to appease 
her, which is wrong.

If I tell her that I want R and I want him now then it might seem too 
forthright or greedy. She'll think I'm avoiding the need to explore why and 
when I started believing that acquiring things would ease my sense of 
hopelessness and loneliness; or that I'm using desire as distraction, turning 
my back on discovering who I was before I had children, before I met R.

So I don't confess my ultimate desire straight away. I say that I am still 
thinking, and soon the conversation moves on to money. This is a tricky subject 
because I have a relationship with cash that verges on abusive, with me as the 
victim and enabler, and the cash as the oblivious tormenter. I view money with 
irrational fear. I allow it to ruin my days when there is none, and conversely 
flip my mood from flat to jubilant in a matter of seconds if I discover there 
is more than I'd thought.

R is similarly rubbish. He spends without thinking much, although at least he 
is able to talk to mortgage advisers and bank managers without sweating and 
shaking.

We begin to talk candidly about things that scare us. It isn't comfortable at 
all, but then I realise that any "easy talk" is best left for other times with 
friends. This therapy is great, but expensive, so we try to keep the focus on 
how to best deal with our money problems. I want to be able to keep my eyes 
open when my balance appears on the cashpoint screen; to stop dreaming that a 
mystery benefactor will pull me out of my financial tangles. All my non-sexual 
fantasies have involved a genie offering me a pot of cash and a promise that I 
will never have to look at my bank statements again.

But while I am thinking about how long I have until my card is declined again, 
I can only think of R and how I want him. Madly, deeply, almost obsessively. Is 
it that another woman showed an interest in him, first as a friend and then as 
a lover? That has crossed my mind: someone recently said to me, "Knowing that 
someone else wants your man? It's the most powerful aphrodisiac of all."

I like to think that the reasons for wanting to be with R are more simplistic, 
less reactive. Often I've overlooked our friendship when I think about us, and 
what it is that I miss – I realise that the comradeship is something I now 
crave desperately. I consider the times I've allowed my controlling behaviour 
to cloud the potential for fun – for happy, contented times in the past. I 
realise that with a little thought, there could be room for all of that in the 
future. I look at the clock and see the end of our therapy session is near.

"I want you to move back in," I say to R, my face turning red because I'm 
scared I might be shunned, despite us having talked about this in looser terms 
many times before now.

I can't think of anyone else I'd rather be propped up in bed with later, 
reading side by side, R stroking his foot up and down my calf. From the smile 
on his face, a profound amount of optimism wells within.

My reservations about us getting back together have to be just that. I have to 
bear them in mind: not as things that haven't happened, or won't happen, but 
rather as things that are not happening now.

If R gives up his flat there'll be no bolthole for his binges and he'll have 
to come home every night to his family like he used to, whether he's drunk or 
not. How will we cope?

This Spanish proverb appeared in a novel I read recently: "Take what you want, 
and pay the price." I understand it as making the decisions that I want to 
make, and taking responsibility for my actions. Of course, when family and 
children are involved, selfish desire is something to be wary of. But on this 
decision, I am spurred on by hope and love, and the present knowledge that in 
the past R never had any intention of hurting anyone but himself.
 