
I almost always remember where I was when reading a particular book. I read 
Henry Miller's Sexus and lots of PG Wodehouse in India, Clare Tomalin's 
biography of Pepys by a pool in Khartoum, all of Thomas Mann and much of Evelyn 
Waugh in Manchester and Frederick Forsyth's The Day of the Jackal working on a 
building site. The book and the place are forever joined in my memory, even if 
am at home.

When I opened the booklet, which I think had a blue cover, containing the 
6,000 words of Alexander Solzhenitsyn's Nobel acceptance speech, I was an 
18-year-old sitting on Oxford station, perhaps a little pleased with myself at 
having bought it at WH Smith.

It was as important a moment for me as reading Arthur Koestler's Darkness at 
Noon. I have always remembered roughly the paragraph that influenced me. Here 
is what he said:

'To reach this chair from which the Nobel lecture is delivered, I have mounted 
not three or four temporary steps but hundreds or even thousands, fixed, steep, 
covered with ice, out of the dark and the cold where I was fated to survive, 
but others, perhaps more talented, stronger than I, perished. I myself met but 
few of them in the Gulag Archipelago... Of some I only heard; and of others I 
only guessed. Those with a name in literature who vanished into that abyss are, 
at least, known; but how many were unrecognised, never once publicly 
mentioned?... A whole national literature is there, buried without a coffin, 
without even underwear, naked, a number tagged on its toe.'

He never climbed the Nobel podium in Stockholm because he rightly feared he 
would be not allowed to return toRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>. Oddly, his absence gave the words 
much more force - we were straining to hear a crackly radio broadcast from the 
heart of one of the darkest regimes in history. Today, it is almost impossible 
to capture what Solzhenitsyn meant and why young students like me read The 
First Circle, Cancer Ward and, later, the Gulag Archipelago, and felt awe at 
his achievement.

Born in 1918, at the beginning of the Revolution, Solzhenitsyn survived 
imprisonment in the Gulag, went into disobliging exile in Vermont, where he 
never warmed to Americans - or they to him - and lived to see the collapse of 
communism. He returned to Russia in the Nineties and took a two-month train 
journey with his family from Vladivostok through his country, peering from the 
carriage windows at his briefly free, dishevelled homeland, and, after making 
17 breaks in the journey, declared Russia to be 'tortured, stunned, altered 
beyond recognition'.

He was no good at endearing himself or making concessions and, like many a 
Russian moralist, was often found wanting in his personal relations. Even so, 
the obituaries last week seemed strangely cool, sometimes even hostile. The 
implication was that he was a bore, unconcerned with style and too rebarbative 
and earnest for the West's literary salon. One writer said: 'Being outraged, 
and being right, and being a brave witness are not the same things as being a 
good writer, and Solzhenitsyn's writing fails to outlive its subject.'

What I suspect this writer is saying is that Solzhenitsyn had served a purpose 
in the Cold War but had long since outlived his usefulness to the liberal West, 
which, now that the Gulag had been exposed and dismantled, could quietly forget 
any notion of his literary genius. Anyone who has read The First Circle - my 
favourite of his novels - or One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich will see 
that the literary powers of a 19th-century novelist - 'our living classic', as 
Yevgeny Yevtushenko put it - were brought to bear on the crime and tragedy of 
the 20th century.

Solzhenitsyn was a great writer as the result of the collision of a particular 
personality and an awesome subject matter - one thinks of Wilfred Owen and the 
First World War, Primo Levi and Auschwitz - and it is absurd to try to separate 
him from the Gulag in order to suggest that in other respects - humanity, style 
and intelligence perhaps -he does not cut the mustard as a writer; that he 
would not have made it but for his subject.

In his Nobel speech, Solzhenitsyn paid tribute to the greater talents who did 
not survive the Gulag. This - not literary egotism or stylistic dash - was 
plainly one of the propulsive forces of his output. He was not just a witness 
to the Gulag, as Levi was to the camps, he was somehow the representative of 
the writers who were 'never once publicly mentioned' - a heavy responsibility 
that few writers in the West can possibly imagine.

Certainly Levi did. He and his subject will be linked as long as his books are 
read and the camps are remembered. So it seems odd that Solzhenitsyn did not 
receive the same sort of tributes as Levi after his suicide, even though he is 
bound in exactly the same way to the Gulag. One possible reason is that 
Solzhenitsyn - unlike Levi - was the willing instrument of great political 
forces, and that once the Cold War was over we forgot what he had been saying. 
His political success - few writers have had such an influence on their times - 
overwhelmed his message.

Another more troubling possibility is that the Gulag, into which Solzhenitsyn 
estimated 60 million people vanished, is by some odd accord fading from the 
memory. In the Western consciousness, it has never occupied anything like the 
same place as the Holocaust. Even in Russia, the Gulag is being omitted from 
the school curriculum and is less and less mentioned by the members of the 
intelligentsia, who once stood by Solzhenitsyn but have now reached a grudging 
accommodation with their government. If anything, the worry must be not that 
Solzhenistyn's 'writing fails to outlive his subject', but that both are dead.

'What can literature do against the pitiless onslaught of naked violence?' he 
asked in the Nobel speech. 'Let us not forget that violence cannot flourish by 
itself; it is inevitably intertwined with lying.'

And forgetfulness.
 