
How do you deal with guilt? I bury it deep, keep kicking dirt on to the box 
that contains it, keep hoping that it won't escape when a storm comes 
a-calling. And eventually it will turn to dust. Simple!

If only. My mother still talks about the time she took Frank the family cat to 
the vet to be put down. Frank was senile and would pee on our beds daily, 
ruining mattresses and making the air in our house acrid. She still tells me 
how guilty she feels, how distraught I must have been. I keep reminding her 
that I never really liked that cat anyway, but she carries the guilt around 
with her like a heavy handbag.

When I try to suppress guilt, I end up feeling nothing at all. My feelings are 
too uncomfortable, too much like an itchy shirt that needs to be taken off, and 
so I do things that distract me – eat, shop, shout or go to sleep.

I've discussed guilt with R, but with my children it's far more complex. I 
have a fractious relationship with my daughter at the moment, one that's seldom 
been peaceful but is currently aflame. We can rarely communicate without 
shouting, and I often behave like more of an adolescent than she does when 
we're together. Shouting is fine, but shouting at a teenager who is shouting at 
me is a bit sad really.

It would be great if some of the guilt that I wanted to shake off could be 
expelled with the shouting. I haven't killed the family cat, but I have done 
things that are wrong and that my daughter remembers, and we both know this. 
But it's my guilt, my problem, and the truth is I don't know if I should say 
sorry, or how.

I keep remembering the nights when she was very young when I speed-read 
bedtime stories to her, so that I could finish an argument with R downstairs; I 
look at the times when she should have been my focus (over so many years) and 
wonder what I was thinking expending energy trying to fix problems that were 
not my own, but R's. I keep wondering if she would be happier now if I'd gone 
to bed early and been bright for her in the morning; cried less so I could 
smile for her more; been a healthy minded, independent role model.

"You really should never have been a mother," she says, mid row. I walk away 
with an odd sense of emptiness, knowing that I've been a better mother to my 
sons in so many ways, but also realising that there is hope that things will 
get better between us if I simply step outside my guilt and start behaving like 
a person who has made mistakes, but is willing to try harder not to make those 
mistakes again.

Recently, things are improving. Now that I'm not blindsided by drama, there is 
something more polished to compare the not-so-good times against, and it shows 
up every kink, every scratch on the imperfect surface of the past. It makes me 
wonder how I could have lived with such flawed behaviour (mine, R's), so much 
chaos for so long. Like an ill-tuned piano, it only takes a tuner to adjust the 
pins and strings to get the thing playing well again. The music is cleaner, 
sweeter, and you wonder how you put up with out-of-tune harmonies for so long.

Look forward. Always look forward. This would be my advice to myself, to stop 
smarting from the past. Kurt Vonnegut wrote inCat's Cradle 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141189345>
: "History! Read it and weep!" Sometimes it's necessary to look back. But often 
it's far more useful to recognise it, rather than kill yourself with the facts 
that unfortunately cannot be changed.

The most edifying thing from all of this is that our daughter is getting on 
really well with R. He simplifies their relationship by making bacon sandwiches 
in the morning when she doesn't want to go to school. He has an old-fashioned 
relationship with her, cool exchanges of "How are you?" answered with "Fine 
thanks." Simplicity for them is working at the moment. The therapy that R and I 
have had has been brilliant and necessary for us, but I can see that we don't 
need to therapise the whole of family life and all of its members.

I didn't foresee this blossoming of R and our daughter's relationship at all. 
My thoughts about how things were going to be, my preemptive ideas about how to 
stop the things that were inevitably going to be wrong between them are 
reminders that until things happen, I shouldn't waste time worrying about them. 
I can't predict the future, but I did contribute to my daughter's past, so the 
question of what to do with all of the guilt still remains.
 