
The Copper River flows cold and fast out of the heart of Alaska, 300 miles 
through rocky canyons and past calving glaciers until it branches into a broad 
delta of wetlands and into the Gulf of Alaska. It is a river of wild salmon and 
seals and drowning men, and my imagination has been swirling in those waters. 
Now, on a sunny July day, I set afloat in its current. My husband Sam and I 
will spend the next five days alone, rafting the most remote 80-mile stretch of 
the Copper River. We are armed with a tent, camera, maps, freeze-dried food, 
chest waders and a rifle for bear protection. There will be no mobile-phone 
reception or contact with civilisation. We will be completely on our own. The 
prospect both thrills and terrifies me.

"We don't want to end up against those rocks," Sam says. He gestures 
downstream to Salmon Point, a rocky outcropping where people catch salmon with 
long-handled nets. Three weeks ago a fisherman fell from the rocks not far from 
here and drowned, his body swept away by the river.

The raft is pushed and pulled towards the rocks by the merging currents of the 
Chitina and Copper rivers, and Sam rows harder, beads of sweat forming on his 
brow. The 14ft raft has only one rowing seat, so all I can do is sit and watch.

When we first decided to float along the river, we considered hiring guides to 
take us. But those we knew and trusted were already booked for the summer, and 
they advised us that with Sam's experience with rivers as a biologist and 
fisherman, we'd be fine on our own.

With Salmon Point quickly approaching, Sam wonders aloud if we've made a 
mistake. He strains at the oars and puts us into a ferry position, with the 
nose of the raft at an angle away from the shore, in an attempt to keep us from 
being crushed into the outcropping or drawn into the dangerous eddy. The 
fishermen on the rocks watch us, and time seems to slow. We are near enough 
that I can see their eyes. And then the current sweeps us past and spits us out 
the other side towards Woods Canyon. Back at home, on our kitchen counter, we'd 
left a hastily typed note: "In the event of both of our deaths, Samuel Service 
Ivey and Eowyn LeMay Ivey…"

In late afternoon we pitch our tent on the sandy bank and unroll our sleeping 
bags. "There's a lot of bear sign," I say, looking towards the willow bushes 
and cottonwood trees. "Yep." More than anyone I've known, Sam is at home in the 
Alaskan wilderness. He awoke in a tent once with a black bear nosing him in the 
shoulder. Years ago, when a sow grizzly bear with three cubs charged at us, he 
calmly took out his pistol and shot into the ground to frighten her away. But 
even he is wary here. We passed up a previous campsite because the ground was 
riddled with bear tracks. We start a campfire and heat water to make our dinner.

"Look," Sam says, and shows me the best-before date on the freeze-dried meal 
of pasta primavera. "Best used by 2018." "Yum!" I say with exaggerated 
enthusiasm, and we both laugh.

The next morning, a dozen people on two larger rafts float past. They call out 
to us, asking where we intend to camp next. "Dewey Creek", Sam answers. "Watch 
out for the bears," one of the women shouts. We all wave cheerfully at each 
other. They are the last people we will see for four days.

The float is easy now. When the river braids, Sam rows us into the larger 
channel, but mostly he leaves the oars at rest. The land changes, leaving 
behind the stunted shrubs and rolling hills of interior Alaska for the 
snow-capped mountains and tall evergreen trees of the coast. As we float, Sam 
and I talk – about jobs, family, my book, our plans for the future. When we 
stop talking, it is so quiet we notice a strange, slithering sound that we 
realise comes from the tiny grains of silt in the river gliding along the 
bottom of the raft.

On the third day, we spot a brown bear with two small cubs on shore. At first 
the animals are so far away I can barely see them. As the raft draws closer I 
watch the sow pause mid-stride to look back for her cubs, and my heart quakes.

How can I come to know this wild river? By following its current and sleeping 
with its roar in my ears? Or is it revealed through facts? The Copper River 
discharges 1m gallons of water a second. More than 2m wild salmon swim upstream 
each year. Even in summer, the temperature of the river barely rises above 
freezing and, with the fast current and heavy silt load, those who fall in 
without a life jacket are likely to drown and their bodies never be found.

Perhaps the river is defined by history. In 1908 a copper mine in the 
mountains sparked construction of a railroad teetering along the edge of the 
Copper River; the mine has been abandoned for decades, the tracks are sloughing 
off into the water. Follow the river back in time, to the mid-1800s, and 
several Alaskan Natives killed their Russian captors as they travelled up the 
frozen waterway. And for thousands of years before that, the indigenous 
Athabascans earned a hardscrabble life on its shores.
 Eowyn Ivey on the Copper River, drifting through Alaska’s pristine wilderness.
But maybe the Copper is more intimately known by its afternoon sand storms, or 
the icy fog that settles along the bends in the early mornings. Or the harbour 
seals bobbing and splashing as they chase salmon; the beaver, coyote, fox and 
wolves that wander down its valleys; the silver willow and fireweed thriving on 
its muddy banks. Or is the river simply this cold, gritty water at the tips of 
my fingers as I let my hand trail off the edge of the raft?

It is no easier to define a marriage. In 1993, on an Alaskan summer day, we 
made our wedding vows. Two daughters, two careers, a home, a life together – is 
this a marriage? Perhaps it is better distilled to this moment: each of us with 
a cup of wine, a blazing driftwood fire throwing sparks into the night sky, the 
Copper River rushing through the darkness, and neither of us wanting to be 
anywhere else in the world.

The river carries us down through the mountains and spills us into Miles Lake, 
cradled between two glaciers. We have been warned that the three-mile lake is 
sometimes blocked by ice dams even in the middle of summer, so we are relieved 
to find the water empty of icebergs. On the far side, we can see the bridge 
leading back to civilisation. Tomorrow, we'll row across the lake.

On the sandy shore, we sit outside our tent, drink the last of our bottle of 
wine and watch small pieces of ice float on the water. Our adventure is winding 
to an end. But in the dark of night we are startled awake by a splitting boom, 
like dynamite being detonated. We sit up in our sleeping bags. Miles Glacier is 
calving, great chunks of ice falling from its side and crashing into the lake. 
Again, and again – all through the night. We can't sleep, not just because of 
the noise, but because of what it might mean.

When we stick our heads out of the tent the next morning, our fears are 
confirmed. The passageway across the lake is filled with house-sized chunks of 
glacier ice. "Maybe we can make it through there," I say, pointing. Just then 
the huge shards of ice grind and shift, and what looked like a small berg 
overturns with a deep "sploosh," revealing its blue underside that now towers 
20ft into the air. "We could get crushed in that," Sam says. We decide to 
waiting another night to see if the ice floats away, but in the meantime, the 
glacier continues to calve.

Just after noon, we spot a narrow open channel along the shore and around the 
ice jam. We get in the raft, and Sam studies the currents to see which way the 
ice will move when it does. As he cautiously rows us between the icebergs, I 
feel the cold radiating off their glistening sides. We are tired and 
weather-beaten when we arrive at the far side of the lake. We haven't bathed in 
nearly a week and we smell of wood smoke.
 Looking for lunch: a bear on the river’s shore. 
At the bridge, a massive brown bear lumbers down the dirt road. Just before it 
reaches us it stops, paces, and turns to disappear into the forest. Tomorrow, 
my mother will drive down that road, our two daughters grinning in the back 
seat. By afternoon, we'll be in a hotel room in Cordova.

But we have one last night on the Copper River. We camp near the bridge. As I 
lie in the dark with Sam, the brown bear is a shadow at the edge of my 
consciousness. Just downstream, a chunk of blue-white ice the size of a 
10-storey building falls from the side of Child's Glacier into the river. The 
crash roars like thunder, and the ground trembles beneath me. I reach over to 
squeeze Sam's hand.

The Snow Child by Eowyn Ivey, one of the Waterstones 11 authors, is published 
on 1 February by Headline Review. To order a copy for £11.99 with free UK p&p, 
go toguardian.co.uk/bookshop <http://guardian.co.uk/bookshop>, or call 0330 333 
6846

Frontier Canada (frontier-canada.co.uk <http://frontier-canada.co.uk>; 020 
8776 8709) offers eight nights in Alaska, including five days rafting/camping 
on the Copper River with guide and return flights from London, from £3,267pp
 