
In his time as a TV critic, Peter Cook was famous for two things: not owning a 
television set, leading him to review programmes his neighbours were watching 
by cupping his hand to the wall to hear snippets of muffled dialogue, and his 
obsession with the actor, Raymond Burr.

Cook's thesis with regard to Burr was that in playing America's best loved 
lawyer, Perry Mason, he had become the most eligible bachelor on American 
television. Yet, like Rock Hudson, Burr had a secret. With a natural 
inclination to the extraordinarily camp, he was forced by the network to become 
ever more macho. Yet the straighter the network wanted him, the camper he got.

In a last ditch attempt to mask his homosexuality, the network killed off 
Mason and came up with a brand new - heterosexual - vehicle (if you will) for 
their star: they put Burr in a wheelchair, the only way - as they could see it 
- to stop him from flouncing about in court. Ironside was born. It was then, 
Cook argued, that Burr became most camp. Even restricted by a chair, he still 
managed to sashay down corridors.

The Burr paradigm - the greater one seeks to change a TV persona, the more 
extreme it becomes - finds its modern manifestation inAinsley Harriott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/ainsleyharriott>. Tomorrow night's 
episode of the strangely-titled Ainsley's Big Cook Out is the penultimate in a 
series that continues the campaign to liberate Harriott from the pinny of Ready 
Steady Cook and establish him as a BBC "face".

The conceit of the series is simple - travelogue cookery. Tomorrow night's 
visit to Brazil, for example, is similar in feel to Blue Peter's recent piece 
on the same country (though lacking its depth and insight). The comparison is 
apt, because Ainsley is essentially a children's presenter for adults, 
overenthusing as a substitute for having anything to say.

"Mexicans have a natural exuberance", he told us last week, as if reading from 
a badly-translated guide book, "Ah, what aromas in the air!". A six-year-old 
would find Ainsley's observations imbecilic, and it's no accident that Blue 
Peter shied away from such clichés. But apparently they're good enough for 
adults.

Following Peter Cook's Burr Paradigm, the BBC have attempted to tone down 
Ainsley's all-round too-muchness. They've played the Ironside wheelchair trick 
by recreating a cheesy daytime set on location in Central America, so limiting 
Ainsley's arm-flinging cooking space by constraining him between terracotta 
pots and a cheese plant. Naturally, this has only made him worse. "Ooh, lovely, 
mmm! Parsley! Har Har! Ainsley loves parsley!" Ainsley has a worrying tendency 
of referring to himself in the third person, and it seems to have reached 
certifiable levels: "Mmm, yummy! Ainsley can smell the onion sweating!".

Ainsley's truly sinister side is, however, reserved for his signature OTT 
presenter style, rolling his eyes like a panto dame, dancing disturbingly with 
his pan, cuddling vegetables and whispering, "ooh, Ainsley, Ainsley" to 
himself. No matter how many times the producers tell him to stop, the man 
cannot help it: Ainsley was born to mug.

In his inanity, Harriott perfectly fulfils the curious criteria of the late 
90s TV entertainer. Michael Jackson, controller of Channel Four, said recently 
that TV used to be a small pond, so that it was easy to create a significant 
ripple with a pebble. But competition has made it a raging sea: if you toss a 
pebble in now, it has no impact. We need to toss boulders.

Niche TV presenters need a gimmick. Hence, we are subjected to a raft (sorry) 
of post-ironic cutouts: Gail Porter (kids presenter-who-takes-her-kit-off); 
Ainsley (kids presenter-who-cooks); and Charlie Dimmock (no bra).

The imperative towards crassness, however, runs deeper than this. In 
attempting to throw boulders into the raging sea of late 90s TV, the medium has 
fallen back on replicating the crude stereotypes of the 70s. Hence, we have 
Graham Norton playing a homophobe's dream of a gay man, Melinda Messenger as a 
Carry On strumpet, and Ainsley doing a Please Sir! parody of a 1970s black man. 
He stops short of telling racist jokes like Charlie Williams on The Comedians; 
but not far short.

No one could accuse Harriott of racism - nor could they say that he hasn't 
suffered from it. The point is that his curiously anachronistic persona is an 
unnerving echo of a racist era we would all rather forget, but which seems to 
be making a comeback.

Television is still embarrassingly backward in terms of promoting black 
presenters on prime time entertainment shows: Lenny Henry's people show, Big 
Night Out, was axed after only a couple of outings. At the margins of prime 
time, John Fashanu had the odd series of Gladiators, Josie Darby is stuck with 
Bigger Breakfast, and Gary Wilmott makes the occasional appearance as a music 
hall turn on The National Lottery. Only Ian Wright is making headway with his 
geezer-chat success, Friday's All Wright.

And Ainsley himself, in spite of signing a £500,000 deal with the corporation 
in April 98, still only has Party Of A Lifetime on BBC1, which flopped. Rumours 
that he was to front the Beadle-esque Hidden Camera Show ended when the job was 
given to Noel Edmonds. In such a hostile environment for black presenters, the 
kind of image Harriott promotes could well set the clock back - specifically to 
1976.

But I may be wrong. I could just be being racist.
 