
And so it is revealed that yet more pop stars are involved in an aggressive 
tax-avoidance strategy. George Michael, Gary Barlow, Katie Melua and the four 
current members of Arctic Monkeys are among those said to have invested in the 
Liberty tax strategy, alongside Anne Robinson, Michael Caine and the delectable
Paul Nicholson, a loan shark jailed indefinitely in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/mar/20/cheshire-loan-shark-jailed> for 
raping a client, and blackmailing and assaulting others. It sounds like quite 
the VIP area.

But, somehow, it is the rock stars who attract Lost in Showbiz's attention 
here. In truth, it is not merely their avoiding tax that it objects to 
although, it admits, the £1bn the Liberty investors attempted to shelter might 
have come in useful somewhere given, say, the welfare cuts that, according to 
Oxfam, have pushed 1.75 million of the UK's poorest families deeper into 
poverty. It is the absolute lack of style today's rock stars show when they're 
avoiding tax. If you're a rock star and you persist in avoiding tax, at least 
do it in the time-honoured way.

Don't sit around in an accountant's office discussing the tax relief available 
on the cost of buying a dividend in a subsidiary of an offshore parent company, 
like some kind of square. Go and live in a huge crumbing mansion in the south 
of France, with a vast coterie of hangers-on you can lord it over, like a 
ghastly deposed 18th-century monarch, and a drug dealer called something like 
Dave the Hat, whom you persist in referring to as a "mellow guy", despite 
substantial evidence that suggests Dave the Hat is a violent psychopath.
 No accounting for style … Robert Plant in concert with Led Zeppelin at Earls 
Court, London, 1975. Photograph: Ian Dickson/Rex Features 
And, while you're there, behave at all times as if you're some kind of outlaw 
escaping The Man, who is relentlessly persecuting you because you're too 
brilliant and free-thinking and thus a terrible threat to the pathetic mores of 
bourgeois society, rather than, say, a bass player who is too greedy to pay his 
whack. Write some songs whining about being a tax exile, in the eye-popping 
belief that this is going to elicit sympathy from your fellow countrymen: yes, 
we're reduced to using a food bank, but at least we're not that poor guy who 
has had the inconvenience of relocating his life of non-stop luxury, drugs and 
shagging to Villefranche-sur-Mer.

Before you leave, don't skulk about secretly pouring money into a 
tax-avoidance scheme as if you're somehow embarrassed about your actions: make 
a big old song and dance about it, as though you're convinced it's you that has 
the moral upper hand.

Take a leaf out Robert Plant's book. He spent a significant proportion of time 
between songs at Led Zeppelin's 1975 Earls Court shows complaining wildly that 
"everyone" was leaving the country because of the fiscal policies of the then 
chancellor, Denis Healey, and admonishing the audience – then in the midst of 
an economic downturn brought about by a slump in house prices and a global 
stock market crash – for voting for Labour without first considering the effect 
their taxation plans might have on multimillionaire musicians.

You may scoff at the sheer, brazen, screw-you arrogance on display there, but 
it's worth noting that it seemed to go down pretty well with the audience, in 
marked contrast to, say, Mark Owen of Take That's quiet investment in the 
Icebreaker tax-avoidance scheme, which resulted in persons unknown scrawling 
the graffiti "FUCK OFF TAX EVADER" on the front of his south London home.

In short, Lost in Showbiz sees the Liberty tax strategy as evidence not merely 
of greed, but of a wider malaise in popular music. Without wishing to compound 
the woes of the musical wing of the investors, it offers them this message: 
You're supposed to be a rock star, a job that brings with it certain 
responsibilities codified by your forebears. Start doing your job properly or 
I'm afraid we're going to have to advertise your position.
 