
Today, as over 1.35 million people have done this year, I will take a stroll 
aroundKew Gardens <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kew-gardens>. Kew 
may be a global tourist magnet, but it started life as an idyllic escape, a 
hunting park from which Henry VII's court could escape the festering capital. 
George III's parents, Prince Frederick and Princess Augusta, began a garden 
around Kew Palace. Under Queen Victoria's patronage, Kew became integral to the 
expanding empire, supplying seeds, crops, personnel and horticultural lessons 
to the globe.

Britain may no longer rule the world, but these Royal Botanic Gardens remain a 
powerhouse for botanical scientific research, plant conservation and 
cataloguing. There is barely a conservation project on the planet that does not 
depend upon its 253 years of investigation.

Still, for my money, one goes to Kew for the trees: over 14,000 across its 132 
hectares. Some walkers favour the lavish excesses of summer, all dappled light 
on a sea of green. However, deep December holds its charms, not least for being 
able to see the shape of matters, the wood from the trees, revelling in the 
beauties of bark and bud.

The American poet Joyce Kilmer's much-parodied 1913 lyric Trees <http:> ("I 
think that I shall never see / A poem as lovely as a tree") was a winter 
creation, inspired by hibernal boughs: "Upon whose bosom snow has lain; / Who 
intimately lives with rain." And there is a pleasing solidarity between the 
winter walker – ruddy-cheeked, bitten fingered – and these giants of landscape, 
stalwart where all other vegetation lays low.

Perhaps this is why we Brits identify so fundamentally with trees: witness the 
collective horror overChalara fraxinea, which causes ash dieback 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/oct/04/deadly-fungus-ash-tree-imports>
, discovered in woods in East Anglia in October. In a form of arboreal 
anthropomorphism, trees remind us of ourselves – and our best selves at that: 
our robust, blitz-spirited, stoutly virtuous guise. We like to imagine 
ourselves as being solid as oak, that it takes much to fell us.

Britain's 80m-strong ash population has previously proved no less doughty. Ash 
is our third most commercial wood, a robust coppice species, the best furnace 
material, a straight, hardwood perfect for making tools, plough and plank. Ash 
supplied the arrows of Agincourt, the first furnaces of the industrial 
revolution. And it is beautiful, of course.

Long before hippies were deemed "tree-huggers", ashes bewitched us. Sick 
children were passed through its clefts, saints' staffs morphing miraculously 
into ash trees. As every schoolchild knows, the ash supports complex 
ecosystems. However, it no less supports humans, in spirit as much as oxygen 
emissions.

Today, as I admire the stately ashes of Kew's Princess Walk, I will do so 
while undertaking a series of resolutions. I am not merely going to wring my 
hands over dieback, I will campaign for commercial import bans as advocated by 
historical ecologistProfessor Oliver Rackham 
<http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/features/hearts-of-oak/>. I will respect the 
fact that, in the same way that hunting created many of our forests, so it 
conserves them (my arboriculturalist brother, like many tree specialists, is 
also a qualified deer stalker – to save trees, one must manage deer).

I will engage charitably by joining the Woodland Trust, Royal Forestry 
Society, Trees for Cities and, of course, Kew. I will visit some of Britain's 
5,500 woods, and the parklands of London, Birmingham and Sheffield (which 
boasts the highest number of trees per head in Europe). For the first time in 
30 years, I will go about with a spotter's guide in my pocket. And I will hope 
that ash dieback will prove a spur for all of us to think more deeply about 
trees, because somewhere I maintain a lingering pagan intuition that, if we 
save our trees, we save our souls.
 