
Five years ago, without pomp and circumstance, the family Lebedev’s mini 
newspaper empire tried something new. They put out a thin, cheap (20p) daily 
some bright subeditors had carved from the maw of the full-blownIndependent. 
Many critics were neither shaken nor stirred. This newi offering had no voice 
of its own. It was a quick trick to shore up the flagshipIndy’s advertising 
take. It would be sunk soon enough by price increases or sheer lack of 
salience, a flimsy bridge too far. But, baby, look at it now.

The i can charge more: 40p not 20p, a cash injection bringing the entire Indy 
enterprise closer to break-even – but its ABC circulation, at 277,498 copies a 
day in September, shows no sign of collapsing (and indeed, at only 3.25% down 
on September 2014, appears pretty resilient). Oliver Duff and a 12-strong team 
can produce a brisk, polished 56-page paper start to finish: your “essential 
daily briefing”, they say. And the fascinating thing is that, today, this isn’t 
so much a bridge too far as a series of bridges to the future.

There wasn’t entirely manifest faith in that future when the Society of 
Editors met last week. The struggles of declining revenues and circulation 
weigh heavy. Digital revolution without matching digital revenue means 
demolition, not transition. But in small ways, there are answers – potentiali 
answers – to lighten the gloom.

Take growth in print. The i, far, far beyond the M25, has lately found it in 
Scotland, with 18,000 or so sales that match theTimes and Telegraph totals 
there. Take an increasing tendency to order exclusive material, not cannibalise 
theIndy. Then take what’s happening now and what happens next.

One of the greatest proven experts on print-paper demise I know – a renowned 
digital operator – sees time (not flickering screens) as the ultimate enemy. In 
a digital world, through the working week, we all lack time. That’s time to 
watch TV, spend hours on mobiles, read email, time to Snapchat and Twitter and 
Facebook, ask What’s App. So, Monday to Friday, print papers have to get their 
words in edgeways. So, at their old fighting weight, they get crowded out. 
Blame digital? Blame the clock, ticking.

Perhaps then, a swifter, pared-down i can do better? It would seem so if you 
study through-the-week circulation patterns. Competitors in the quality and 
middle market score between 60% and 100% more sales on Saturday than Monday to 
Friday. Thei on Saturday comes in 24,000 or so below its weekday score. That’s 
the precise reverse of full-service dailies. In short, it shows where a 
briefing approach can fit. And down transition road, one common assumption is 
that sometime soon – in the wake of some US cities – dailies will turn into fat 
print weekend editions with weekdays left to online. Perhaps. Or perhaps 
there’ll be swifter, cheaper print papers filling that gap from Monday to 
Friday.

The i could be an outrider, then: a glimpse of things to come. Maybe its 
success depends on lack of competition. Maybe a frantic market would crowd it 
out. Maybe a bad idea (Jeremy Hunt’s expensive, toilsome London TV franchise) 
will be truly lethal for the Lebedevs. But meanwhile it’s churlish not to 
salute the birthday of something innovative, instructive – and still happening.
 