
Political correspondent Tania Branigan is trekking to the Arctic with a team 
of MPsRead all entries 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/news/archives/arctic_challenge/> / More on the 
Arctic challenge <https://www.theguardian.com/arcticchallenge> 

The aurora borealis. Photo: Tania Branigan

Day five, Rusuvarri: Should one let sleeping MPs lie? I don't mean in the 
Commons chamber (and no predictable jokes, please, about politicians being able 
to lie even in their sleep). But Emily Thornberry and I glimpsed the aurora 
borealis late last night and - when we saw just how spectacular it was becoming 
- debated whether or not to wake Jenny Willott, who was already out for the 
count (a herders' hut is positively luxurious after an igloo).

We do. She forgives us once she steps outside. Did I say I'd already seen the 
northern lights? It wasn't even a prelude. This time it fills the entire sky, 
sweeping across the horizon - and changing constantly. It pulses, shimmers, 
trembles and swirls around us, colours fading in and out.

Maybe the cold and exhaustion are taking their toll, but it's an strangely 
emotional experience. You can see how people suddenly find religion.

"There has to be a bearded guy with a beer belly and Rolling Stones T-shirt, 
sitting up there behind a mixing desk," murmurs Emily.

I stay up too late watching the show and struggle to get up. But it's worth 
it. We're continuing north, into hillier and more challenging terrain; at one 
stage, even the few scrubby trees vanish and for a few

miles there is nothing but snow and sky. As we pause briefly, our husky master 
Hugo - whose conversation has previously consisted of the instructions "don't 
fuck about," and "stop fucking about," addressed alternately to MPs and dogs - 
turns to me and observes with real passion: "It's beautiful up here, isn't it?" 
I almost fall off my sled in astonishment.

We're getting used to our dogs and make better progress, allowing us to stop 
for lunch and try our hand at ice fishing. Tobias Ellwood drills holes in the 
ice - it's about a metre from the snowcrust to

the water - and the MPs settle down for a long and apparently pointless 
attempt to catch supper.

The men have given up and are heading back to their dog teams when Emily yells 
- she's hooked something. I'm still not sure how she got it through the hole, 
which is only around 10cm across to start with and rapidly freezing over; the 
fish itself - a "sweetwater" cod, says our guide - is at least a

foot long.

The prospect of trying it for dinner spurs us on, which is handy since the 
last couple of today's 40km are seriously hard work. Fresh snow on the trails 
makes us stumble along behind the sleds, frequently

plunging in up to our knees. I think the worst is over as we arrive at the 
herders' camp - only to trip and fall flat on my face as I stagger up to the 
hut, trailing bags. If you're reading this, the satellite phone and PDA 
survived me landing on them.

Messrs Vaizey and Clegg spend the evening teasing each other on the finer 
details of a Lib Dem/Tory coalition.

Ed thinks Nick is a natural for the foreign office "because you can use those 
12 languages" (intimidatingly, Nick speaks Dutch, Spanish, French, German and 
fluent Lib Dem). Nick thinks a coalition is unnecessary because he can convert 
Ed to liberal democracy.

I suspect that may take rather longer than a week.
 