
A court has ruled that Peter Dutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/peter-dutton> and the immigration 
department unreasonably delayed the citizenship applications of two former 
Hazara refugees, a decision that advocates say will provide hope to thousands 
who have had their cases “put in the bottom drawer”.

The Refugee Council of Australia <http://www.refugeecouncil.org.au/> is 
hopeful the decision will force theimmigration department 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-immigration-and-asylum> 
to stop delaying citizenship applications by former refugees, something they 
say has caused “significant anxiety for the many thousands affected”.


“Today’s decision is a landmark ruling, providing hope for over 10,000 people 
around Australia who have been denied justice by the immigration department,” 
the council’s acting chief executive, Tim O’Connor, said.

“Our government has denied them basic rights to stability and, importantly, 
family reunion, through slow and targeted decision-making.

“Today’s ruling recognises this injustice and represents a first step towards 
a resolution for thousands and a chance for them to start to rebuild their 
lives.”

The plight of the Hazara: we can't bear any more tragedy | Abdul Karim Hekmat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/05/the-plight-of-the-hazara-we-cant-bear-any-more-tragedy>
The case involved two Hazara men who were found to need Australia’s protection 
after fleeing the Taliban inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>. Both had been permanent 
Australian residents for more than four years by the time they sought to become 
Australian citizens.

They passed their citizenship tests and were, like most people, told they 
would know final decisions within four weeks.

The first man, named “F” by the court, waited 18 months for a decision on his 
citizenship before lodging proceedings in the federal court. The second, 
referred to only as “‘G”, waited 23 months.

The department typically processes 80% of citizenship applications within 80 
days, while applicants who sit citizenship tests are generally told a decision 
will be made in four weeks. The pair argued the delay was unreasonable and 
appeared to be discriminatory.

The case, initiated against the immigration minister by the Refugee Council of 
Australia with pro-bono legal support, sought the federal court to force his 
department to make a decision.


While the court case was still afoot, the department decided to reject the 
citizenship applications of both men. The department said it could not be sure 
of F’s identity and was not satisfied that G was of good character.

The two men also asked for the refusal decisions to be set aside. 

Immigration authorities had described the cases as “complex”, arguing they 
would take far longer than normal cases.

Hamid Kehazaei inquest exposes failures of Australia's secretive immigration 
regime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/10/hamid-kehazaei-inquest-exposes-failures-of-australias-secretive-immigration-regime>
But Justice Mordecai Bromberg found there had been unreasonable delay for 
significant periods in the department’s handling of the applications.

“I find that the department took no steps to progress F’s or G’s applications 
for some 14.5 months from the time at which each of those applications was 
categorised as a ‘complex case’,” Bromberg said.

“I also hold that for a period of about four months in the case of G, in the 
time between when fingerprint checks were concluded and when his application 
was categorised as ‘complex’, nothing was done by the department to assess that 
application.”

Once they began their court action, the department expedited their cases. That 
caused Bromberg significant concern.

“The fact that an applicant who institutes court proceedings is given priority 
suggests an arbitrariness which does not engender confidence that a reasonable 
allocation mechanism was being applied,” he said.

Bromberg also found that the decisions to refuse the two men were invalid. 

The Refugee Council said delays in cases of former refugees caused significant 
anxiety. It makes it difficult for them to reunite with their families, who are 
unable to come to Australia, exposing them, in many cases, to prolonged 
situations of danger and persecution.

The citizenship applications have been referred back to the immigration 
minister for decision.
 