
Synecdoche, New York (15)
(Charlie Kaufman, 2008, US) Philip Seymour Hoffman, Samantha Morton, Catherine 
Keener, Emily Watson. 124 mins.
Is Charlie Kaufman a genius or are you just stupid? Those appear to be the 
only alternatives on offer here, but you might also be forgiven for feeling 
distinctly unentertained by Kaufman's magnum opus, in which Hoffman plays a 
stage director who constructs a huge simulacrum of his life as a sort of 
over-reaching performance piece. What starts as an accessible comedy sprawls 
out into a disorienting hall of mirrors. Time seems to speed up, you start to 
lose track of things, memory blurs with reality and it gets less funny. Then 
it's over before you expect - a lot like life, really. And not a lot like a fun 
night out, maybe, but this is ambitious, mysterious, challenging and 
courageous. And unlike life, you get to see it a second time and make more 
sense of it, or simply avoid it altogether.

Angels & Demons (12A)
(Ron Howard, 2009, US) Tom Hanks, Ewan McGregor, Ayelet Zurer, Stellan 
Skarsgård. 138 mins.
What do those strange numbers and symbols mean? Ah, they're just dollar signs 
and sales figures, as another Dan Brown product hoovers up cash with some 
warmed-up, watered-down conspiracy theory. Here it's the Illuminati (who are 
bad) plotting against the Vatican (they're good), and only Tom Hanks (he's 
really good) can figure out how to stop it all - by talking a lot and running 
around with a torch.

Viva (12A)
(Anna Biller, 2007, US) Anna Biller, Jared Sanford, Bridget Brno, Chad 
England. 120 mins.
A loving parody of early-70s sexual liberation that should have Russ Meyer 
going "hubba hubba!" in his grave. This is the 1970s of Playboy magazine and 
cocktails with the swinging neighbours, seen from a post-feminist viewpoint, as 
Biller sends up the wooden acting, garish decor and softcore sensationalism of 
the genre, even throwing in animation and musical numbers into the mix. She 
could have learned a thing or two about pacing from Meyer, though. The whole 
thing sadly tips over into self-indulgence.

French Film (15)
(Jackie Oudney, 2008, UK) Hugh Bonneville, Anne-Marie Duff, Douglas Henshall. 
87 mins.
An utterly British film of bumbling middle-class guys, dinner parties and 
awkward romantic entanglements - much of which is predicated on the fact that 
the French are much better at "l'amour" than us. Or at least their movies are. 
It's not quite the Richard Curtis-lite romcom it sounds, and Eric Cantona's 
cameo as a pretentious auteur adds a certain je ne sais quoi.

Fighting (15)
(Dito Montiel, 2009, US) Channing Tatum, Terrence Howard, Zulay Henao. 105 
mins.
No prizes for guessing what this is about. But big prizes for getting your 
shirt off and beating the crap out of another muscley guy. But for an 
essentially routine story of an innocent in New York's gritty underground fight 
scene, this is actually above average, with some decent character drama.

Out from Friday

• Everlasting Moments Swedish drama in which a woman discovers the power of 
photography.

• Night At The Museum 2 Ben Stiller and his exhibits run riot. Out on Wednesday

• Awaydays Football hooliganism and indie music in a 1980s reminiscence.

• The Girl Cut In Two Ludivine Sagnier is torn between two men in Claude 
Chabrol's latest.

• Blind Loves Imaginative documentary on the lives of four blind people.

• Mark Of An Angel French family thriller led by Sandrine Bonnaire.

• Tormented Bullying schoolkids get their just desserts in this Brit horror.

• Alice Neel/Louise Bourgeois/Painters Painting Three art-related 
documentaries.

• Pierrot Le Fou Vintage Godard romance.

Coming soon

In two weeks... Sam Raimi back in horror mode for Drag Me To Hell... Heroes' 
Ali Larter stalks The Wire's Idris Elba inObsessed...

In three weeks... Christian Bale rages against the machines in Terminator: 
Salvation... Dustin Hoffman romances Emma Thompson in Last Chance Harvey...

In a month... Ken Loach's Cantona-centric Looking For Eric... Vegas comedy The 
Hangover...
 