
Industrial groups were hit hard by a profit warning from Cookson, which blamed 
its woes on weak production in the global steel industry.

Cookson <https://www.theguardian.com/business/cooksongroup> closed 76p lower 
at 539p - a 12% decline - after it said the trading performance in its 
engineered ceramics division in the third quarter, and the last month in 
particular, had been weaker than expected. The division supplies products and 
systems to the steel industry, which accounts for around half its revenue, and 
has been hit by falls in steel production. According to industry statistics 
production fell by 3% in July and August excluding China, and 1% for the world 
as a whole. September has seen further weakening, rather than the usual upturn 
after the summer lull:
 News flow from the ultimate end-markets, such as heavy truck, higher-end 
automotive, wind turbines, and construction, mining and agricultural equipment, 
is indicating a further general slowdown in production levels that started to 
become evident towards the end of the second quarter.

The division's solar business also continued to be depressed, the company 
said, and it has taken action to cut costs including closing one of its two 
Chinese factories, resulting in a £16m write-off and £1m of restructuring costs.

Cookson said if the situation continued, the performance of its ceramic 
division in the second half would be below expectations and lower than the 
first six months:
 As a result, full year performance for the group as a whole is now expected 
to be materially below the board's previous expectations. 
The company said plans for its proposed demerger were progressing well and it 
expected to give a further update before the end of the year. Michael Blogg at 
Investec said he expected earnings estimates to fall by 10% to 15% after the 
news.

Other industrial groups also suffered. Morgan Crucible Company, which also 
makes industrial ceramics, was down 21.7p at 257.8p whileBodycote International 
fell 20.1p to 391p andIMI dropped 23p to 948p. GKN, the automotive and 
aerospace specialist, was hit by Cookson's remarks about the sectors where it 
is involved, losing 9.4p to 216.9p. Harry Philips at Oriel Securities said:
 The immediate read across is Morgan Crucible given its solar 
related/renewables in China. Elsewhere, IMI and Bodycote on the truck reference 
but we have spent a great deal of time with Bodycote ahead of our initiation 
last week and IMI was in robust form on Thursday at the capital markets day. 
With the weakness in the steel industry highlighted by Cookson's figures, 
Russian steel producerEvraz, controlled by Chelsea owner Roman Abramovich, 
dropped 9.4p to 244.7p.

Commodity companies in general were undermined by the World Bank warning of a 
continuing slowdown in China, a key market these days. SoVedanta Resources lost 
33p to £10.68 andEurasian Natural Resources Corporation was 7.6p lower at 
325.7p.

All that helped push the FTSE 100 down 29.28 points to 5841.74. Investors were 
also nervous as European finance ministers met to thrash out the latest plans 
to tackle the eurozone crisis. There was no guidance from Wall Street, which 
was closed for the Columbus Day holiday. On Tuesday the US reporting season 
begins with Alcoa, and analysts believe the global slowdown will be reflected 
in the latest company reports.

Aquarius Platinum fell 4.75p to 42.75p after chief executive Stuart Murray 
left the mining group after ten years amid continuing unrest in South Africa. 
No reason was given for his departure. The company has been struggling with 
falling platinum prices recently but a growing concern is the strikes for 
higher wages which are spreading across the industry, with the unrest leading 
to almost 50 people losing their lives.

Meanwhile Xstrata, still in the throes of attempting a merger with commodities 
group Glencore, lost 3.3p to 950.2p after the company confirmed workers at its 
Eland platinum mine had gone on strike on Friday.

Worries about the situation in South Africa have also hit insurer Old Mutual, 
down 2.9p to 169.5p on concerns about its operations in the country.

Recruitment group Michael Page International dipped 2.1p to 363p after its 
second profit warning in less than a year. The company said third quarter 
profits fell 8% compared to the previous three months and 11% on the same 
period last year, so full year operating profits would be slightly below 
current City expectations

FirstGroup continued to fall in the wake of last week's decision to remove the 
West Coast rail franchise from the company, down 5.3p to 190.8p. Analysts at 
Liberum Capital said FirstGroup's balance sheet could be hit by the move, and 
it might need a cash call of around £400m.

Liberum's Peter Hyde said:
 Clearly investment is not for the faint hearted. However, at the current 
share price, and even assuming a £400 rights issue, we see possible upside. 
Ocado lost 3.1p to 65.6p in the wake of weekend reports that Morrisons, up 
5.7p to 283.9p, planned to launch on online food service next year.

Halfords accelerated 12p to 314.6p as analysts at HSBC raised their target 
price on the retailer from 215p to 330p in the wake of last week's better than 
expected results. They lifted their pretax profit estimates for 2013-2015 by 
8%-12% but kept their neutral rating after the group's recent strong share 
price performance.

A broker upgrade also lifted data centre operator Telecity by 18p to 957p. 
Berenberg said:
 We are raising Telecity's price target from 960p to £11 and maintain our buy 
recommendation. Telecity is one of the highest-quality names in our coverage. 
It has a near monopoly position due to the eco-system it has created inside its 
data centres, which leads to less than 5% churn and greater than 90% recurring 
revenues. 
Finally UK snack maker Zetar jumped 23% to 291p. After the market closed on 
Friday the company announced it had accepted a £43m, 297p a share offer from 
German food group Zertus.
 