


The welfare-to-work company A4e <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/a4e> faces the 
possible cancellation of multimillion pound government contracts after the 
announcement of another official inquiry into an alleged attempted fraud.

A4e, which has contracts worth more than £180m from the coalition government, 
is facing an inquiry into a mandatory work scheme in south east England.

The government has also launched an audit of 10 other A4e contracts. If found 
guilty of systemic fraud, the company could have all its contracts suspended, a 
government spokesman said.

The new inquiry, by the Department of Work and Pensions, is particularly 
embarrassing for the coalition because ministers including David Cameron 
insisted that the allegations of fraud involving A4e concerned work schemes 
launched by Labour.

This latest investigation centres on mandatory work activity placements, 
launched by Chris Grayling, the employment minister, last May.

Under the scheme, unemployed people are required to work on community projects 
such as property maintenance, recycling or charity work, under threat of having 
their benefits withdrawn if they fail to participate.

One former welfare to work employee told the Guardian that mandatory schemes 
can be lax and could easily be abused by fraudulent staff.

She said: "'Mandatories' tend to involve people who have major problems that 
make them difficult to place on other work schemes – people with drug or 
alcohol problems or mental health issues – and those asked to go on these 
schemes do not want to turn up. But the welfare to work companies get their 
money if they fill in the paper work saying that the jobseekers did turn up. So 
an agreement can easily be reached between the parties."

As well as the mandatory contract, A4e holds 10 other contracts with the 
government – five work programme contracts and five new enterprise allowance 
areas worth hundreds of millions of pounds.

Margaret Hodge, the chair of the public accounts committee who told Parliament 
last week that she has received hundred of e-mails from A4e whistleblowers 
alleging fraudulent activity, welcomed the latest announcements from the 
government but said they had not gone far enough. A DWP statement said that the 
chief executive of A4e was informed of the new allegation at a meeting with a 
senior civil servants on Friday.

"As a result of this new allegation, the DWP has immediately commenced its own 
independent audit of all our commercial relationships with A4e.

"We have required A4e to make available all documentation which our auditors 
may require and provide full access to interview any A4e employees. This is 
separate from the independent review of internal controls which A4e has 
previously announced," the statement said.

Last month, Thames Valley Police launched an investigation into the company's 
Slough office. Four people have been arrested amid suspicions that the 
Government was being billed for placing people in jobs that never existed or 
were fleeting.

Cameron appointed A4e's chair and founder, Emma Harrison, as his adviser on 
problem families soon after coming into office despite fraud allegations 
hanging over her company. She resigned from both positions last month.

"There have been so many unanswered questions about A4e and so many people 
contacting us about alleged malpractice and fraud in A4e. The government should 
suspend all contracts until all contracts have been gone through," she said.

The government is making contingency plans in case all A4e's contracts have to 
be pulled, a DWP spokeswoman said.

"We have made it absolutely clear to A4e that we take this matter very 
seriously, and that if, at any point during the audit or thereafter, we find 
evidence of systemic fraud in DWP's contracts with A4e, we will not hesitate to 
immediately terminate our commercial relationship," she added.

A4e said that the company acknowledges the concerns raised by DWP, and 
welcomed the planned investigations. The company has always denied allegations 
of systemic fraud."The board has asked White & Case LLP to lead an independent 
and thorough review of A4e's controls and procedures. That process will be 
carried out concurrently, and all findings will be provided to DWP," she said.
 