
Why go now?

A survey of travel writers recently named Antwerp one of the top 10 must-visit 
destinations for 2009 - and with good reason. It is a focal point of Europe's 
art and fashion scene, with bars, restaurants and nightlife to match. The big 
deal in November is the Maison Martin Margiela exhibition atMoMu (momu.be 
<http://www.momu.be>), the city's first-rate fashion museum. Margiela's work 
consists of a special blend of classic tailoring and conceptual thinking and 
this unique retrospective delves into the various themes that underpin his 
high-octane clothes. Also on show in November is 'Heads on Shoulders', 
featuring two centuries (1600-1800) of Dutch and Belgian portrait busts, the 
realistic and the romantic side by side - and all in startling Baroque detail. 
The exhibition is at theMuseum voor Schone Kunsten, or KMSKA (kmska.be 
<http://www.kmska.be>) for short, a five-minute tram ride south of the centre.

Checking in

Many hotels are near the train station, which is a couple of kilometres from 
the city centre, and can be a bit of a pain. For atmosphere, stay near the main 
square - the Grote Markt - and it's here you'll find the plush and smartRubens 
Grote Markt (Oude Beurs 29, 00 32 3 222 4848; hotelrubensantwerp.be 
<http://www.hotelrubensantwerp.be>; doubles from €150) and the chic and stylish 
Matelote (Haarstraat 11, 00 32 3 201 8800; matelote.be <http://www.matelote.be>
; doubles from €120). The city also has a battery of B&Bs, one of the best 
being the ultra-coolM0851 (Nationalestraat 19, 00 32 3 297 6066; m0851.be 
<http://www.m0851.be>; doubles from €140). 

Hit the streets

Start the day with a visit to Antwerp's magnificent Gothic cathedral, 
Belgium's finest church, whose soaring nave holds several wonderful canvases by 
Pieter Paul Rubens. From here, it's a couple of minutes' walk to theGrote Markt
. Next up, wander the narrow lanes and alleys of the old centre before 
strolling down to the banks of theRiver Scheldt, a pretty prelude to the string 
of ancient buildings trailing north to the Baroque delights ofSt Pauluskerk (St 
Paul's church). With kids in tow, be sure to drop byDe Antwerpse ruien, on 
Suikkerrui for a tour of the city's sewers - but don't plan to eat immediately 
before, or afterwards.

Coffee break

For coffee and cake, look no further than Popoff (Oude Koornmarkt 18), a tiny 
café with the best desserts, tarts and gateaux in town. It's open Tuesday to 
Saturday, noon-10.30pm and Sunday, noon-10pm.

Neighbourhood watch

Most of the action is on the east bank of the River Scheldt, but a pedestrian 
tunnel leads under the river to theMiddenvijver Nature Park, a local favourite, 
popular for its river views and birdlife. And don't missHet Eilandje, a sprawl 
of canals, wharves and docks whose warehouses and maritime buildings are being 
turned into one of the city's most fashionable areas.

Retail therapy

New to town is the Designcenter De Winkelhaak, where the emphasis is on 
high-end domestic goods from chairs and sculptures to tin openers and fancy 
gift boxes; the shop is near the train station at Lange Winkelhaakstraat 26 (00 
32 3 727 1030;winkelhaak.be <http://www.winkelhaak.be>) and is open Monday to 
Friday 9am-5.30pm. Antwerp is famous for its diamonds. The trade is carried on 
behind closed doors, but there are about a dozen diamond shops near the train 
station onPelikaanstraat. The city also has an international reputation for 
fashion and there are several dozen designer boutiques a brief walk south of 
the centre. Highlights includeDries van Noten's Modepaleis (Nationalestraat 16) 
andVeronique Branquinho's boutique (Nationalestraat 73).

Worked up an appetite

Antwerp is an enjoyable and inexpensive place to eat, its busy centre 
liberally sprinkled with laid-back cafés and restaurants, which excel at 
combining traditional Flemish dishes with Mediterranean, French and vegetarian 
cuisines. Cream of the gastronomic crop isDe Kleine Zavel (Stoofstraat 2, 00 32 
3 231 9691), a bistro-style restaurant with wooden floors and old-style 
furniture serving Franco-Belgian cuisine at its tastiest. A great second choice 
isDe Groote Witte Arend (Reyndersstraat 18, degrootewittearend.be 
<http://www.degrootewittearend.be>), an eminently appealing café-bar which 
occupies one wing and the courtyard of an old mansion. Great range of beers - 
including authentic Gueuze and Kriek - plus delicious Flemish dishes, including 
stoemp (mashed potato with veg) and stoofvlees (beef cooked in beer) - all to a 
classical music soundtrack.

Big night out

Start by sipping your way through some of the vast range of Belgian beers. 
Paters' Vaetje (Blauwmoezelstraat 1) in the shadow of the cathedral offers more 
than 100;Het Elfde Gebod (Torfbrug 10) has become a tourist trap but is worth a 
look for the kitsch 19th-century religious statues cramming every surface 
(don't bother with the food though); or tryDe Herk (Reyndersstraat 33), a tiny 
bar down an alley and set around a courtyard; it's popular with a young hip 
crowd. Afterwards, all roads lead toCafé d'Anvers (Verversrui 15, 00 32 3 226 
3870;cafe-d-anvers.com <http://www.cafe-d-anvers.com>). It's in the red light 
district (next to one of Europe's biggest brothels), but don't be put off. The 
club, in a vast old warehouse with brick walls and huge industrial fans to make 
revellers' hair fly back dramatically, is one of the best in Europe.

Getting there

Train is the best bet - from London it takes as little as two hours 55 
minutes, changing in Brussels, and costs from £59, book through Eurostar (0870 
518 6186;eurostar.com <http://www.eurostar.com>). Alternatively, VLM (0871 666 
5050;flyvlm.com <http://www.flyvlm.com>) flies from London City and Manchester 
to Antwerp from around £115.

• Phil Lee is co-author of The Rough Guide to Belgium & Luxembourg, £13.99 from
roughguides.com <http://www.roughguides.com>
 