
The latest international test results for maths and science have been 
released, and yet again, they paint a picture of stagnating outcomes in 
Australian schools. Relative to other countries, we are actually slipping 
backwards – and fast.

Since 2011, year four maths results have fallen 10 places from 18th to 28th. 
At a year eight level we have fallen five places in both maths and science to 
sit at 17th. Year four science has seen no change, however at 25th place it 
remains one of our poorest results.

As our results continued to flatline, other countries improved (such as 
Slovenia and Croatia which now surpass us in primary maths). Australia’s 
failure to improve reflects a longer term trend: our results have largely 
flatlined since the inception of the Trends in International Mathematics and 
Science Study (Timss) test in 1995.

Australian students' results in maths and science falling in international 
rankings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/australian-students-results-in-maths-and-science-falling-in-international-rankings>
Only a few years ago, Julia Gillard articulated an ambitious goal for 
Australia to be in the top five countries in the world. Today, that goal seems 
as far away as ever.

But we must be careful not to overplay our slipping in international rankings, 
as so predictably occurs. The panic that can be created is simplistic and 
unproductive. First, these results only show student achievement, not student 
progress (growth over time), which is a far more important measure of the 
value-add of an education system, as well as student resilience for later life.

Second, they should not be whipped up into a frenzy for political ends, as 
further evidence that “money doesn’t matter” (given results have not improved 
as funding has increased). Of course it still matters to properly fund every 
school, alongside other more fundamental reforms to teaching and learning. Both 
are necessary: and could readily be achieved, as our new reportCircuit breaker: 
a new compact on school funding <https://grattan.edu.au/report/circuit-breaker/>
 shows.

So we must put international rankings into perspective. And heed the warnings 
on maths and science with a measured head. These test scores are not 
everything: we want our children to develop broader skills and resilience for 
success in both work and life. But they do tell us something about the 
practical knowledge and skills our kids have in maths and science. And these 
core skills matter too.

Our future scientists and engineers need not only to be well-rounded 
individuals who can communicate and work in teams, but they need to be able to 
do their sums right. We know the economy will go through a rapid transition 
over the next 20 years. Traditional jobs will be lost, and many that replace 
them will require skills in maths.

If you look more closely at the Timss results, we see problems at both the 
bottom and top end – it is widespread across the system. Up toone-third of 
Australian students do not meet the Timss intermediate benchmark (equivalent to 
the Australian proficiency standard of being able to apply basic maths and 
science at their grade level).

At the top end of the mathematics cohort, less than 10% of Australian students 
are performing at an advanced level, whereas for the top five countries this 
figure exceeds 30%. Singapore, the highest performer, has 50% of students in 
this cohort.

As our most recent report, Circuit breaker, shows, there are some practical 
policy steps that could be taken right now to improve teaching and learning for 
every student. First, our new proposal provides a way to distribute money to 
the right places, and bring all students up to their needs-based funding 
targets in six years, so that schools are properly resourced to function well. 
Moving on from the toxic school funding debate enables us to focus on the 
debates that really matter: how to improve teaching, known to have the largest 
impact on student outcomes outside of the home.

Our proposal kickstarts change to improve teaching quality through a new 
initiative that will increase the focus on subject expertise in teaching maths, 
science and English – very relevant to what the Timss results tell us today.

Many reforms are required to lift teaching effectiveness, and building 
subject-specific expertise is only one important aspect. But it has received 
less attention in Australian schools in the last couple of decades.

The pressure on kids is absurd, and a new Naplan rule is about to make it 
worse | Anne Susskind
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/22/the-pressure-on-kids-is-absurd-and-a-new-naplan-rule-is-about-to-make-it-worse>
This is very different to what the top-performing systems do in maths and 
science. In high-performing systems, such as Singapore, Japan, Shanghai and 
Finland, teachers in both primary and secondary are trained as subject 
specialists, and they continue to learn from the best teachers in their 
disciplines. These systems recognise that teaching maths is not the same as 
teaching English, and the skills of the best subject teachers in the field are 
utilised to build the skills of others.

In keeping with this, our report proposes two teaching roles – master teachers 
and instructional leaders – who will work as subject specialists in schools to 
drive improvements in Australians schools. These roles create a change in the 
career structure, and could make a significant difference to how teachers work 
and develop in their daily roles.

This latest edition of Timss results is disheartening for Australia. But it 
need not be cause for alarm. We may not be any closer to Gillard’s ambition of 
a top five position, at least in maths and science, but there is a way forward. 
With a sensible, rational approach to school funding and teacher reform, 
improvements are possible.

Julie Sonnemann is a school education fellow at the Grattan Institute. Peter 
Goss is the school education program director at the Grattan Institute.



 