
Every year some of the world's brightest young adults start MBAs at top 
institutions such as Insead in Paris, Harvard and the London Business School. 
Many go on to run multinational corporations, earning huge salaries. But just 
as many struggle to find loans to cover the cost of a one-year programme, which 
can bearound £60,000 
<http://www.london.edu/programmes/mba/feesandfinancing.html>. Into the gap has 
stepped an innovative scheme,Prodigy Finance <https://prodigyfinance.com/login>
, which links tomorrow's business leaders with today's savers desperate to earn 
better interest.

MBA students at the top schools typically earn more than £70,000 a year after 
graduating, yet face unique problems finding the money to study. For example, 
an American going to Oxford's Said Business School is likely to be turned down 
for a loan by a British bank because he or she won't have a credit record in 
the UK. The same goes for a Brit heading to Harvard or Insead. The American or 
French bank won't have a clue how to score them.

South African entrepreneur Cameron Stevens, a former Insead MBA student 
himself, says students often have to pay 12% interest or more on their loans, 
despite being an excellent credit risk with an exceptionally low default rate. 
Prodigy Finance offers them cheaper loans – around 6%-9% a year – financed by 
investors, who earn interest of around 4.5% to 5%.

Prodigy Finance has lent $37m (£23m) to 800 MBA students from 80 countries 
over the past five years, without a single default. Much of that money came 
from start-up investors in the scheme, such as David Stevens, who founded 
insurance company Admiral in the UK. Now Prodigy is launching a series of bonds 
for smaller investors hoping to earn similar returns.

The drawbacks? The minimum deposit is £10,000, there's no Financial Services 
Compensation Scheme to protect you, and default rates could rise, hitting your 
returns. You may also have to wait as long as eight years for the bond to 
mature fully.

But investors will be comforted by the fact that some major institutions, such 
as theUniversity of Oxford, have teamed up with Prodigy Finance. 
<http://www.sbs.ox.ac.uk/degrees/mba/Pages/MBAloan.aspx>

Stevens adds that the scheme has unique features that keep defaults low. The 
names of the MBA student borrowers are published and their repayment record 
made available for scrutiny. "The social pressure is incredibly powerful," says 
Stevens, yet it still meets data protection rules. Deposits into the bond are 
handled by Capita and ringfenced to protect savers.

Prodigy's current bond issue for potential UK savers is paying Bank of England 
base rate plus 4.5% starting in September. Go to
 