
A new website has been launched with the aim of enabling people to invest from 
as little as £5 in green energy projects and enjoy an attractive return.

Abundance <http://abundancegeneration.com/> describes itself as a "community 
finance platform" allowing small investors to put money into UK renewable 
energy schemes and receive a regular cash return based on the energy produced.

It is looking to raise money from consumers tired of the old banking model who 
want their cash to be used to help fund green projects and facilitate change. 
And it says rates of return are expected to average 5%-9%, depending on the 
type of scheme in which the money is invested.

Abundance is currently aiming to raise £1.4m to build a wind turbine on the 
edge of the Forest of Dean in Gloucestershire, and has plans for further 
renewable energy schemes – solar and hydro – around the country.

The platform says it works in a similar way to "peer-to-peer" lending websites 
such asZopa <http://uk.zopa.com/> - as a middle man, getting investors together 
with community groups and companies that want to build environmental projects. 
It collects the money and organises the payouts to investors in return for a 
1.9% fee paid by the body that builds and operates the project.

Individuals can invest as little as £5 in each project, or as much as £50,000. 
Abundance is marketing itself on the basis that some investors will put in 
enough to produce a return each year that will cover their annual electricity 
bill – typically £500 a year.

Bruce Davis, the site's co-founder, and one of the founders of Zopa, describes 
the website as democratic finance in action. "We are enabling small investors 
to produce a regular return from the generation and sale of 100% green 
electricity from wind, solar, hydro and other renewable energy sources," he 
says.

"Abundance is like a building society for the 21st century which enables our 
customers' money to go directly into projects generating growth and revenue in 
the real economy."

As with most such schemes, investors should go in with their eyes open. 
Abundance is authorised and regulated by theFinancial Services Authority 
<http://www.fsa.gov.uk/>. However, in the (probably unlikely) event that the 
body operating it went bust, investors would become creditors and could lose 
some or all of their money.

Davis believes the overwhelming majority of people want a greater say in where 
their money goes and how it is invested. Those who put their money in will be 
buying debentures, which are like official IOUs issued by the individual energy 
projects. In return, the project commits to pay the individual a share of the 
profits it makes from generating green energy. Returns, paid twice a year, will 
be variable, and based on the amount of energy produced and the price it is 
sold for. The original investment is paid back over the lifetime of the 
debenture or as a lump sum at maturity.

Construction of the 500kW Forest of Dean wind turbine is getting under way. 
The company that will operate the turbine and pay out the returns,Resilient 
Energy <http://www.resilientenergy.co.uk/>, has planning permission, and the 
turbine is expected to be up and running in September. Investors have three 
months to decide whether to invest in that project. Once that is subscribed, it 
will move on to other projects that need funding.

Although the investments will typically run for 20 or 25 years, if you want to 
get your money out before the end date, Davis says there will be an eBay-style 
bulletin board on the website allowing investors to sell their debentures for a 
mutually agreeable price to a willing buyer. He claims that once buyers see the 
returns on offer, there should be no shortage of people willing to take over 
the investments.

"Those buying into the scheme will be able to log on and see how much 
electricity the turbine has produced and what their share of the payout will 
be," says Davis.

He acknowledges the growing number of community hydro schemes featured in 
Guardian Money in recent years, but says the main advantage his scheme has over 
some of those is the flexibility to invest small sums and the ability to get 
your money out. "We want this to be open to everyone, which is why we have set 
a minimum investment of just £5."

• A solar energy scheme in Bristol this week launched a community share issue 
that aims to raise £87,000. The not-for-profit, community-ownedBristol Energy 
Cooperative <http://www.bristolenergy.coop/> plans to install almost 200 solar 
panels on community buildings in the city.

The newly formed co-operative hopes to attract hundreds of members investing 
as little as £50, and to deliver a return of up to 4% a year. It will initially 
concentrate on two sites:Hamilton House <http://www.hamiltonhouse.org/> in 
Stokes Croft, a community arts facility, andKnowle West Media Centre 
<http://www.kwmc.org.uk/>, a media and arts charity.

Bristol Energy Cooperative has been supported by the Co-operative Enterprise 
Hub <http://www.co-operative.coop/enterprisehub/>, which offers free advice, 
training and access to finance for new and existing co-ops.

The share offer closes on 18 May.
 