
There have been angry exchanges today between the government and opposition 
deputies in the Irish parliament over the legislation to reform banking and 
accept the €85bn (£71) IMF/ECB bailout.

Irish Labour's finance spokeswoman Joan Burton said that the powers granted to 
the finance minister Brian Lenihan over the banks created "a one man 
hierarchy", likening it to something you would see in North Korea.

Earlier today, Labour and Fine Gael had indicated that they would support that 
part of the legislation dealing with the banks as they were in favour of many 
of the reforms envisaged in the bill. After careful study, however, the two 
main opposition parties have expressed concern over the powers it would give to 
the finance minister.

It is now expected that it could be 6pm at the earliest before the Dáil 
ratifies both the banking reforms and the international financial bailout. The 
vote had originally been due to take place at 1.30pm.

Opposition parties have complained that insufficient time has been allocated 
to debate the legislation. They also object to the proposal to pass all stages 
of the Credit Institutions Bill by 10pm tonight.

Fine Gael's finance spokesman Michael Noonan said very serious issues had been 
raised by what he said was a complex measure. Noonan said he was concerned 
there would be insufficient time in the Dáil session to examine the legislation.

A party spokesman said Fine Gael would decide if it could back the bill after 
it heard Lenihan's responses to queries which it would be raising in today's 
debate.

Initially, the Irish government was reluctant to have a Dáil vote on the 
rescue package, but a motion from Fianna Fáil backbenchers paved the way for 
today's clash. Although the rescue package will be opposed by Fine Gael, Labour 
and Sinn Féin, it is still likely to be approved.

Among the measures Lenihan is trying to introduce is a radical restructuring 
of the country's banking system. For example, the bill will grant legal powers 
to the minister for the Allied Irish Banks towithdraw its controversial 
multimillion euro bonus payments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/dec/13/allied-irish-bank-bonus-brian-lenihan>
 to top staff.

It will also grant powers to the finance minister to appoint special managers 
who will take over a bank if the institution is under threat. They would have 
the power to sack directors and overrule bank shareholders.
 