
Ireland's prime minister, Enda Kenny, said Irish people were entitled to be 
angry about revelations that an executive at the firm that almost bankrupted 
the country boasted he had picked the €7bn (now £6bn) figure purportedly needed 
to rescueAnglo Irish Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-irish-bank> "out of my arse".

Taped phone calls between two senior executives at Anglo Irish have compounded 
suspicions that bankers lured the then Fianna Fáil-led government during the 
crash of September 2008 into a costly financial trap.

Irish taxpayers were eventually forced to hand over €30bn to save Anglo Irish 
Bank from collapse. The huge bailout resulted in the state going cap in hand to 
the International Monetary Fund, theEuropean Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> and the EU to save 
the country from bankruptcy.

The audio recordings, obtained by the Irish Independent, are between Anglo's 
director of capital markets, John Bowe, and Peter Fitzgerald, head of the 
retail bank, in September 2008. Initially the bank asked Ireland's central bank 
for €7bn to prop up its parlous finances following the Irish property crash. 
Critics of the bailout have insisted Anglo executives always knew the figure 
would be far higher – ultimately more than four times higher.

On tape Fitzgerald asks Bowe how he arrived at the figure of €7bn, to which 
Bowe replies: "Just as Drummer [the then Anglo Irish Bank CEO David Drumm now 
in exile and disgrace in Boston] would say, 'picked it out my arse'."

Speaking in Dublin on Monday afternoon, the taoiseach said he was constrained 
in what he could say about the Anglo Irish Bank as a result of the continuing 
Garda Siochana criminal investigation into it.

However, Kenny promised that there would be a parliamentary banking inquiry, 
and said: "Believe you me, I understand the rage and the anger of so many 
people who have been affected by all of this."

He added: "I have made the point in the Dáil on many occasions that … I don't 
have any paperwork to advise me as to the conversations that took place between 
members of the government and the banks on the run-in to that period."

The taped conversation between the bankers tends to back up the view that 
Anglo Irish bankers knew €7bn would never be enough to save the bank but once 
they had hoodwinked the Dublin government into providing support the taxpayer 
would keep picking up the tab.

In their exchange, Bowe says: "The reality is that actually we need more than 
that. But you know the strategy here is you pull them in, you get them to write 
a big cheque and they have to keep, they have to support their money, you know."

On the Irish government getting entrapped by Anglo, Bowe adds: "If they saw 
the enormity of it up front … they might decide they have a choice. You know 
what I mean? They might say the cost to the taxpayer is too high. But … em … if 
it doesn't look big at the outset … if it looks big, big enough to be 
important, but not too big that it kind of spoils everything, then I think you 
have a chance."

The two bankers are also heard laughing and joking at a time when the bank was 
tottering on the brink of destruction. They are heard saying they hope the bank 
is nationalised so "we'd keep our jobs".

Bowe, who was approached over the weekend about the 2008 conversations, 
claimed the remarks were "off-the-cuff comments" and denied he was trying to 
mislead the state.

Fitzgerald released a statement through his solicitor saying: "I am not nor 
have I ever been aware of a strategy or intention on the part of the Anglo 
Irish Bank to mislead authorities in relation to the forecasted funding 
position of Anglo Irish Bank."

Despite the pair's denials, the taped conversations come at a critical time in 
the bank's history and will increase the pressure for a full parliamentary 
inquiry into the bank rescue deal, which cost the taxpayer a further €30bn 
after two other debt-ridden banks, theBank of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bank-of-ireland> and Allied Irish Bank, 
also had to be saved from collapse.

Anglo Irish Bank, which was the preferred lender for property speculators and 
builders, epitomised the rise and ignominious fall of the Celtic Tiger economy.

No senior Irish banker has so far been found guilty of any offence in any 
court.
 