
The full extent of the multibillion-euro black hole in Ireland's banks will be 
detailed at 4.30pm on Thursday afternoon.

The breathtaking losses in Allied Irish Banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/allied-irish-bank> (AIB), Bank of 
Ireland, Irish Life & Permanent (IL&P) and the EBS building society will be set 
out as the new coalition government attempts to finally measure the debt 
mountain.

The Central Bank in Dublin will publish figures compiled using forensic stress 
tests and then finance minister Michael Noonan will give the government's 
response. Commentators have already said this will be Ireland's Black Thursday.

The report on the stress tests is expected to say that Irish banks need about 
another €30bn (£26bn) to remain in business.

Most of the loan losses caused by reckless lending to property developers have 
been identified, but the report will also quantify losses resulting from the 
failure of thousands of homeowners to repay mortgages.

More than 44,000, or 5.7% of homeowners, are at least three months behind with 
their mortgages – valued at €8.6bn.

Trading in Bank of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bank-of-ireland> and AIB shares has been 
suspended for the day by the Irish Stock Exchange amid fears that speculation 
on the stress test results could create disorder in the markets.

Since the 2008 financial crash, Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> has been forced to:

• Obtain €67.5bn loans from the International Monetary Fund and the European 
Union last November. The Irish state took €18bn from its pension fund to back 
that up. About €10bn of the total bailout was destined for the banks.

• Use about €46bn of state funds to recapitalise reckless lenders.

• Prop up banks with loans from Ireland's Central Bank worth about €70bn on a 
continuing basis and the European Central Bank, worth about €80bn.

When the Central Bank details the latest – and, the country hopes, the final – 
debt bill, and it is combined with sums already guaranteed or owed, Irish 
banking debt will be somewhere in the region of one-and-a-half times the total 
value of the Irish economy. Much of this debt mountain is being shouldered by 
the citizens of Ireland.

The strengthened left-wing bloc in Ireland's Dail continues to demand a share 
of the pain be forced on European banks in Frankfurt, London, Paris and Madrid 
which provided the billions borrowed and lent on by Irish financial 
institutions to feed the demand for property and development.

And the stress tests may provide the government with a slim opportunity to 
pressure the bondholders – major international investors who lent to Irish 
banks – to share in some of the pain.

Permanent TSB, the largest mortgage lender in the country, which is not 
covered by the September 2008 bank guarantee scheme, could be used to set a 
precedent for foreign lenders to accept losses rather than leave the burden 
with Irish finance houses and the state.

As part of IL&P – which was de-listed from the the London and Dublin stock 
exchanges on Thursday morning after a sudden share price collapse – Permanent 
TSB is expected to fail the stress tests by €2bn. A government cash injection 
would see it effectively nationalised and the board forced into selling its 
lucrative pensions division, Irish Life.

Elsewhere, Bank of Ireland is in a dogfight to stave off the need for further 
cash.

It has already been paid €3.5bn and there have been reports it wants to raise 
finance through the markets rather than state investment.

AIB is effectively in state control after using €7.2bn of Irish exchequer 
funds. It has been told it needs at least another €4.6bn.

And the EBS, which has been for sale for months, was dramatically taken off 
the market on the eve of the stress test report.

Noonan ordered the move, angering prospective buyers in the Cardinal Capital 
investment group, after state agency the National Treasury Management Agency 
claimed the consortium's bid was not sufficiently commercially attractive.

The other high-profile parts of the domestic banking sector, aggressive 
lenders Anglo Irish Bank and Irish Nationwide, have been crunched together and 
are being wound up by the state.
 