 Economist Morgan Kelly poses for Vanity Fair in Hogan's pub 

US investment bank Merrill Lynch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/merrill-lynch> had a critical role in the 
banking collapse in Ireland and censored an analyst's report that predicted the 
crash back in 2008, it was claimed today.

The US bank retracted a report by one of its research analysts in March 2008 
that was negative about the banks after the Irish banks called Merrill Lynch 
and threatened to take their business elsewhere. It toned the research note 
down and months later its author, Philip Ingram, left the bank, according to a 
much-anticipated cover-story in the new edition ofVanity Fair 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/>.

And one of his colleagues, Ed Allchin, was made to apologise to Merrill's 
investment bankers individually for the trouble he'd caused them by suggesting 
there was still money to be made by shorting Irish banks.

Allchin, who has since set up a new company Autonomous Research refused to 
comment. "I haven't even seen the article," he said.

The 15 page Vanity Fair article is written by Michael Lewis, a former bond 
trader who described his experiences working at Salomon Brothers in the 
bestselling book, Liar's Poker 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2011/jan/30/michael-lewis-the-big-short-interview>
.

It includes interviews with Brian Lenihan, Joan Burton, economist Morgan Kelly 
and one former Merrill Lynch bank trader who claimed he had offered to sell "a 
pile of bonds" back to one Irish bank for 50 cents in the dollar back in 2008 
before the bank guarantee.

"He's offered to take a huge loss, just to get out of them," says Lewis. When 
he woke up on 30 September to find the Irish government had guaranteed them "he 
couldn't believe his luck".

He says Ingram's note for Merrill had been sent to the market in March 2008 
but was withdrawn within hours.

"For a few hours the Merrill Lynch report was the hottest read in the London 
financial markets, until Merrill Lynch retracted it. Merrill had been a lead 
underwriter of Anglo Irish's bonds and the corporate broker to AIB.

"Moments after Phil Ingram had hit the send button on his report, the Irish 
banks called their Merrill Lynch bankers and threatened to take their business 
elsewhere," says Lewis. Anglo Irish did the same.

"Ingram's superiors at Merrill Lynch hauled him into meetings with in-house 
lawyers, who toned down the report's pointed language and purged it of its 
damning quotes from market insiders, including its many references to Irish 
banks. And from that moment on, everything Ingram wrote about Irish banks was 
edited, and bowdlerized by Merrill Lynch's lawyers."

Merrill charged €1m per page for its advice

Six months later, at the request of the Irish government, Merrill Lynch's 
investment arm wrote a seven-page memo that stated, "All of the Irish banks are 
profitable and well capitalised".

It charged €7m for the seven-page memo which fed into finance minister Brian 
Lenihan's controversial decision to introduce a blanket guarantee for the Irish 
banks in September 2008.

Months later, Bank of America took over Merrill Lynch amid fears that the 
bank, once the third largest on Wall Street, would itself fall victim to the 
tightening of the credit markets and the worsening property sector. Merrill 
says that Ingram's departure came as a result of the redundancies caused by 
that wider restructuring, and that he was not fired.

Lewis's article is part of a Vanity Fair trilogy on the global crisis – and 
was expected to further dent Ireland's already battered image in international 
markets.

In some respects Lewis obliges. 

Any Irish reader who wants to save being offended can skip the last quarter of 
the article which leaves an impression that theIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> is a land of fairies, potato 
farmers and rural unsophisticates.

But the article is well worth reading. It packages the drama of the last two 
years and particularly last November brilliantly.

It has a fascinating interview with Morgan Kelly who says he rues the day he 
went on TV. "I'll never do it again".

He asserts how the Irish Independent first refused to publish Kelly's article 
on the impending collapse on the grounds it was offensive and how the PR 
department in his University College Dublin tried to hose him down by asking 
the head of the department of economics to "write a learned attack" on Kelly's 
piece, which was eventually published by the Irish Times.

Pat Neary – "dragged from a hole"

And Lewis has an amusing description of the night in 2008 when the then 
financial regulator, Pat Neary, went on TV to be interviewed, looking as if "he 
had been dragged from a hole into which he badly wanted to return".

Economist and government adviser Colm McCarthy tells Lewis: "What happened was 
that everyone in Ireland had the idea that somewhere in Ireland there was a 
wise old man who was in charge of the money, and this was the first time they'd 
ever seen this little man. And then they saw him and said 'who the fuck was 
that? Is the fucking guy who was in charge of the money?' That's when everyone 
panicked."
 