
Ireland has nationalised its fourth troubled financial institution after 
taking control ofAllied Irish Banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/allied-irish-bank> (AIB) today in an 
attempt to stem the run on deposits at the stricken bank.

In the latest sign of the lack of confidence in the Irish banking system, 
Ireland's government secured a high court order to inject €3.7bn (£3.15bn) of 
funds into the bank through the nation's pension fund.

As Ireland was shoring up its banking system, problems inside the eurozone 
worsened after Fitch downgraded Portugal, the country that many market experts 
believe will followIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> in 
taking financial aid from its EU partners and the International Monetary Fund.

Fitch defended its downgrade by describing a difficult funding environment for 
government and banks and predicting a recession next year. Portugal is now 
rated A+ – still a high quality investment grade – but remains on a negative 
outlook.

The euro weakened slightly against the dollar to $1.3086 after Portugal was 
downgraded just as London's markets were closing. A €13bn capital injection 
into Ireland's banks had been expected following the €85bn bailout from the IMF 
and EU.

AIB will get €3.7bn now, but will need another €6.1bn before the end of 
February to meet the demands of Irish regulators. Bank of Ireland, 36% owned by 
the state, could be next in line for nationalisation unless it can find €1.5bn 
from private investors by the end of February.

Brian Lenihan, the finance minister, said today that Ireland's banks were 
having difficulty finding private investors to buy new shares.

"The markets are not willing to invest in the Irish banks because they do not 
have confidence in them," Lenihan told RTE. "We have to have a banking system 
in this country and it has to be brought into public ownership. I always made 
it clear that would be a last resort and we are now engaged in that last 
resort."

AIB is joining Anglo Irish, Irish Nationwide Building Society and EBS building 
society in being taken into state control. Irish Life is the only lender so far 
to avoid a bailout.

The €3.7bn of capital being injected into AIB will take two phases and will 
mean that the bank's directors must take account of the "public interest" when 
making decisions. The government has already stopped €40m of bonuses being paid 
to investment bankers and used its new legislation to stabilise the sector – 
known as the Credit Institutions (Stabilisation) Act 2010 – for the first time.

AIB's board acknowledged the extra support from the state. "It notes its new 
duty ... to have regard to the public interest in the performance of their 
functions and, if that public interest conflicts with the best interests of the 
company, that the new statutory requirement provides for the public interest to 
prevail," the board said.

The state's stake will first increase from 19% to 50%, but will then rise to 
almost 100% when convertible stock becomes ordinary shares early next year once 
AIB has sold its Polish business to Santander.

The money is coming from Ireland's National Pension Reserve Fund, intended to 
fund future state and public services pensions.

AIB's shares are to be delisted from the London Stock Exchange, while its 
stock market listing in Dublin will move to the secondary Enterprise Securities 
market. The shares are worth a mere 33c, compared with the €24 they traded at 
before the crisis.

• this article was amended on 6 January 2011. The original said: The 
government has already stopped €40bn of bonuses being paid to investment 
bankers. This has been corrected.
 