
What do you want Angela Merkel? A default? Because that's where Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> is heading if a renegotiation of 
the IMF/EU bailout isn't available. A change in Ireland's corporate tax rate 
simply won't do the trick.

The banking crisis in the country is getting worse, not better, and, it might 
be news to people outside of Ireland - but from where we sit, it is looking as 
if the €85bn (£73bn) deal constructed in November, has already failed.

Already on the agenda is talk of a requirement for yet more money for the 
country's failed banks.

There has been speculation for months in banking circles that the losses at 
Allied Irish Banks <https://www.theguardian.com/business/allied-irish-bank>, 
Ireland's largest retail bank, are far worse than previously thought and could 
even be as bad as Anglo. There are rumours of a programme involving up to 5,000 
redundancies and closures of bank branches up and down the country. Neither of 
those rumours are likely to be true (5,000 lay-offs would represent a third of 
Irish staff) but the nervousness surrounding the financials at AIB is real.

We will know the extent of the horror show at the end of March when the latest 
(and hopefully last) stress tests on four banks – AIB, Bank of Ireland, EBS and 
Irish Life & Permanent – are published.

The Central Bank will give a technical update on the stress tests later this 
week on the criteria and methodology used with the final reports to be 
published on 31 March. The Bank today said everything was "on schedule".

Variables employed in the tests include further drops in property prices of up 
to 20%, interest rate increases under worse-case scenarios; slow GDP growth and 
losses in asset values. The worsening buy-to-let mortgage debt is also being 
forensically scrutinised.

Three consultancies including Blackrock, Barclays Capital and Boston 
Consulting are involved in the tests but Blackrock are in the lead on loan 
losses and the assessment of the loan portfolio across the four banks.

As one bank chief executive told the Sunday Business Post yesterday: "I don't 
know what the Blackrock model is, but you can be sure they aren't being paid 
millions to produce a number that's been out there before." In other words, 
expect the demand for capitalisation to be much higher than previously outlined.

The Sunday Independent yesterday 
<http://www.independent.ie/national-news/banks-will-need-another-euro25bn-2577524.html>
 reported what appeared to a leak on the stress tests – suggesting another 
€15bn to €25bn will be needed to plug further black hole in Irish banks.

Some €35bn of the EU/IMF €85bn deal had already been earmarked to recapitalise 
the banks. An injection of €10bn of that is mandatory under the IMF/EU deal and 
the Central Bank had hoped the remaining €25bn would not be needed immediately 
but would act as a rainy day fund.

The entire €35bn now looks as if it will be needed and this could lead to a 
further downgrading of the country's credit status, something the new 
government has vowed to prevent in its Programme for Government. Junk status is 
not an option for any country in the EU because of the contagion effect it 
would have across the eurozone.

"Rehn does not want to see the eurozone collapsing and is more open to Ireland 
and Greece's case than others would be," says Alan McQuaid, chief economist 
with Bloxham Stockbrokers.

The trick is to find a way of continuing to find the banks without having the 
debt added to the country's national debt.

So back to what's happening in Brussels. Increasing the corporate tax won't 
fix the banking problem, won't stop a further downgrading of Ireland's credit 
status and certainly won't fix the eurozone crisis.

Merkel deal is less than Microsoft annual tax in Ireland

On Saturday morning German chancellor Angela Merkel pointedly stated at a 
press briefing that it was only "fair to say we can only give our commitment 
[to a renegotiation on the Irish bailout] when we get something in return". On 
offer was a decrease of 1% in the interest rate payable on the bailout loans. 
But only in exchange for an increase in the rate of corporate tax.

It is estimated that the one percentage point drop decrease in the interest 
rate will amount to a saving of just €400m a year.

I have it on good authority that that is less than the annual tax paid by 
Microsoft in Ireland every year.

So, to run the risk of losing one American multinational for the sake of a 
saving of €400mn just isn't worth it.Figures revealed recently by Revenue 
Commissioner economist Keith Walsh 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/ireland-business-blog-with-lisa-ocarroll/2011/feb/22/ireland-corporate-tax-rate-revealed>
 show that one third of Ireland's total corporate tax take is from US 
multinationals.

So if Enda Kenny isn't going to budge – and he won't - what else is on the 
cards?

Are we back to a default? Is that Ireland's trump card in negotiations?

As the Financial Times columnist Wolfgang Munchau says today Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> is looking at a never-ending 
debt crisis with the solutions it has on offer today, solutions borne, he says, 
out of "a good deal of ignorance of how financial markets work".

"There are, in essence, two ways to resolve a debt crisis: through a bailout 
or through default. Or through some clever combination of the two if you know 
what you are doing. If you muddle through, you end up with the default option, 
literally."

As Munchau and many other commentators have said a default in any eurozone 
country is not an option. 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/157cb6ce-4daa-11e0-85e4-00144feab49a.html> "If, say 
Greece, were to default today, Germany and France would have to make good on 
their credit guarantees to the facility. It would be a political disaster."

As default isn't an option, what is required is a magic mix of Machiavellian 
skills at the Brussels negotiating table. Ireland's finance minister Michael 
Noonan is a wily old politician but whether that'll be enough to pull a deal 
through in Europe remains to be seen.
 