
Journalism in Ireland is suffering from “very difficult times”, says one of 
its leading practitioners, Gemma O’Doherty. She tolda Limerick university 
conference 
<http://www.ul.ie/news-centre/events/conference-journalism-in-times-of-crisis> 
about the problems faced by “reporters who work at the coalface of 
investigative journalism.”

O’Doherty, speaking 12 days ago (I apologise to her and to you for the 
lateness in catching up), told the audience:

“Those of us who investigate corruption in public office make ourselves and 
our sources extremely vulnerable to those in power who would intimidate us, 
monitor our activities, threaten our safety and try to silence us. In return, 
we receive almost no support.

We work in an era where a culture of fear and timidity stalks many of our 
newsrooms. It has bred a generation of journalists who behave less like dogged 
agents of the public interest and more like compliant diplomats and spin 
doctors constantly looking over their shoulders and toeing the party line for 
compromised or connected bosses.”

O’Doherty knows of what she speaks, having been interrupted in the execution 
of her duties in 2013when she was fired by the Irish Independent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2013/sep/17/irish-independent-ireland>
 for having had the temerity to doorstep Ireland’s police chief.

Now freelancing, O’Doherty shows no signs of slowing down. She remains one of 
her country’s most diligent campaigning investigative reporters.

At Limerick, she spoke of media bosses who “have forgotten or chose to ignore 
the true function of our still noble vocation: to hold power to account, to 
comfort the afflicted and afflict the comfortable, to defend the public’s right 
to know, to seek the truth and report it.”

She argued that in such a media environment, what she calls an “era of 
covering journalism”, democracy is “the greatest loser.”

In a reference to Ireland’s largest media owner, Denis O’Brien (who has the 
largest shareholding in the company that publishes the Irish Independent), she 
contended that he “has far too much power and prominence in our small country.”

She contrasted him with her previous Indo employer, Tony O’Reilly, saying that 
he “invested in decent journalism and good writers.” She said: “He understood 
newspapers, and while he was not perfect, by and large he left editors to get 
on with it.”

O’Doherty was also critical of Ireland’s state broadcaster, RTE. She argued 
that it has “blatantly” failed in its public service remit, listing several 
examples, such as its “farcical coverage of the general election” and its 
“bizarre reporting” of the Máiría Cahill case, Slab Murphy and the failure to 
cover allegations about finance minister Michael Noonan and his role in the 
foster care scandal.

She went on to mention one of her current investigations - the disappearance 
in Donegal in 1977 of six-year-old Mary Boyle 
<http://www.thejournal.ie/fresh-appeal-mary-boyle-disappearance-2364294-Oct2015/>
, Ireland’s youngest and longest missing person.

“The authorities have failed to bring the chief suspect to justice amid 
allegations of garda corruption and political interference in the case,” she 
said.

“We need to smash the cosy cartel that exists between the press, power and the 
police in this country because it is so damaging to the public good.”

But she did not condemn every journalist and every outlet. She spoke of 
“exceptions in the Irish media who do try to prioritise the interests of 
democracy in their journalism”, naming the Sunday Times, The Examiner, Irish 
Daily Mail and the Irish Times along with the onlinebroadsheet.ie 
<http://www.broadsheet.ie/> and Phoenix magazine. She also pointed favourably 
to the setting up of the websiterighttoknow.ie <https://www.righttoknow.ie/>. 

Despite the problems, O’Doherty thought it was “a very exciting time to be a 
journalist” because investigative journalists were “finding new ways to tell 
stories and release information and high quality content into the public domain 
by cutting out the middle man.”

She concluded: “Our profession is on its knees, but it is worth fighting for. 
We have a duty to fight for it. We need to stand up for courageous journalism 
whose primary focus is the public interest. We need to read it, to buy it, to 
support it.”
 