
The latest round of bank stress tests in Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> is expected to show another black 
hole of between €18bn and €23bn and lead to the fifth bailout in two and half 
years.

The tests, conducted by BlackRock, the world's largest asset manager, were 
commissioned by the Irish central bank and focus on four lenders –Allied Irish 
Banks <https://www.theguardian.com/business/allied-irish-bank>, Bank of 
Ireland, Irish Life & Permanent and EBS. The results are due to be published on 
Thursday.

The new Irish government, which has had a bruising time in Europe over its 
demands for a better bailout deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/feb/14/ireland-fine-gael-corporation-tax?INTCMP=SRCH>
, hopes the tests will finally draw a line under Ireland's chronic banking debt 
crisis.

The further losses are expected to reflect the worsening state of the banks' 
commercial and residential mortgage loan books with a worst-case scenario of a 
60% fall in house prices from peak to trough.

A total of €46bn (£40bn) has already been pumped into Irish banks, including 
the bust Anglo-Irish. Another €10bn was due to be injected in February as part 
ofIreland's agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/18/ireland-imf-bailout-mixed-feelings>
 but, in a political "hospital pass", the outgoing finance minister Brian 
Lenihan decided not to do so.

Another €25bn in the IMF-EU bailout fund was earmarked as contingency but this 
was not expected to be used when the deal was signed last November.

If the figures, which are due to be finalised midweek, are confirmed it will 
mean virtually all this contingency fund is now consumed, giving Ireland no 
further wriggle room for bank debt.

Ireland's disastrous property bubble is not the only factor in the 
deterioration in the banks' capital base. They have not been able to borrow 
money on the commercial market on any terms since last autumn and have been 
relying on more than €130bn in European Central Bank (ECB) and Irish central 
bank funding to plug their capital holes.

A leading economist and government adviser said that the flight of capital 
from Irish banks was partly down to the ECB's continual demands for the return 
of its emergency funding.

"The run on the Irish banks was aided and abetted by the ECB, not to put too 
fine a point on it," said Colm McCarthy, who is advising the government on the 
sale of semi-state bodies.

"The short-term and discretionary nature of ECB funding leaves the Irish banks 
on a knife-edge and makes it more difficult to hold on to deposits," he added.

Ireland's new government has lobbied hard to persuade Europe that the bailout 
was "unsustainable" for a number of reasons including the flight of capital and 
the impact of this week's stress tests.

It is now considered that the spat over Ireland's low corporate tax rate was a 
political sideshow and, behind the scenes, this more technical debate was the 
one that mattered.

Publicly both the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, and President Nicolas 
Sarkozy of France have demanded that Ireland increase its corporate tax rate in 
exchange for concessions on the IMF-EU bailout, but last week Ireland switched 
its focus to the EU's finance ministers in the hope that they would "see the 
light".

The change in strategy appears to have paid off, with two key concessions. The 
ECB is expected to change the terms of emergency funding for Irish banks, 
replacing short-term, high-interest finance with a more medium-term mechanism, 
the terms of which have to be decided.

The IMF, which is back in Dublin this week, is also expected to concede, along 
with the EU, that one of the original conditions of the bailout – that bank 
assets be sold to help pay off the ECB loan quickly – will not now happen.
 