
It's been a tough time to be Irish. The boom years are a distant memory and 
now there's just austerity and a long haul back to recovery for a nation 
crippled by the reckless lending of its banks.

But, a year after the country was forced to call in the International Monetary 
Fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/nov/21/ireland-asks-70bn-eu-bailout>
(IMF), there is a sign that the people are fighting back and targeting the 
hated lenders with the "nuclear option" of a mortgage strike.

Ross Maguire is the co-founder of New Beginning, a new de-facto trade union 
for Irish mortgage holders and those in debt distress 
<http://www.newbeginning.ie/press/> with banks, which aims to recruit 10,000 
members in a movement that has strong parallels with the Occupy protests that 
have swept through scores of countries.

"The nuclear weapon is for borrowers acting in concert and to say that unless 
proper and sustainable solutions are put in place which are fair and 
reasonable, then we should not continue to pay under these current conditions," 
he says. So does this mean a "mortgage strike" under the New Beginning banner 
similar to the "rent and rates strike" by nationalists inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> protesting against internment 
without trial in 1971?

"It is radical but it is where we are going if things don't change. It's the 
last option but it is better that people like us have control over it because 
the danger is that if that kind of people power was misdirected it could wreck 
the financial system. New Beginning doesn't want to smash the financial system; 
we merely want to reform it and re-balance power between banks and borrowers."

With more than €70bn (£60bn) of taxpayers' money already transferred into the 
banks to save them from collapse and public fury intensifying after the banks 
refused to pass on a cut in interest rates by the European Central Bank two 
weeks ago, Irish people are bracing to pay a further price for the bailout. 
Next month the Fine Gael-Labour coalition will introduce yet another austerity 
budget aimed at driving down Ireland's national debt and satisfying the IMF 
that the government is getting the nation's finances in order.

Many blame the fiscal crisis on the banks' reckless lending to property 
developers – the same banks that are refusing to cut interest rates and 
threatening to repossess thousands of people's homes. New Beginning estimates 
that up to 250,000 homeowners could be in mortgage-distress.

The quiet 42-year-old who launched this crusade against the banks from his 
office in a trendy building near Dublin's Smithfield Market area is a 
barrister. But Maguire is the antithesis of the public perception of 
well-heeled "silks" in wigs and gowns: he doesn't charge fees for families with 
distressed mortgages who are fighting to keep their homes.

After working at the Dublin bar since returning from a successful legal 
practice in the City of London in the 1990s, Maguire noticed how skewed Irish 
law is towards banks as opposed to their borrowers. A person declaring 
bankruptcy inIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> will be in 
financial and credit purdah for 12 years, Unlike Britain's 12 months.

Hostility

Now he and New Beginning are emerging as lightning rods for the anger of an 
entire nation towards the banks that they believe helped bust Ireland. Other 
more sinister forces have tried to tap into the widespread hostility towards 
the banking system. The Real IRA recently confirmed that they had bombed three 
banks in Northern Ireland in response to complaints within the nationalist 
community about threats to re-possess homes. The terrorist group has warned of 
further attacks on banks and bankers. Maguire and his group, however, offer a 
legal, non-violent but direct action alternative to challenge bankers' power.

His own epiphany came last year when he and two colleagues heard of a client 
who had fallen foul of the banks. "A man came to us who had a loan with the 
Irish Nationwide building society, which subsequently was forced to merge with 
theAnglo Irish Bank <https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-irish-bank>. He 
got his file under the Data Protection Act and discovered that the Irish 
Nationwide had created a completely new version of him for their credit 
committee!

"They had changed his occupation. They had given him a salary far higher than 
his actual one of €30,000 – in fact, they said he was now earning €60,000. They 
had changed the grade he worked at in his job to a higher one. They had even 
forged not only his signature but also his employer's. It was incredible in 
terms of sharp practice. This was all so they could lend him more and more 
money during the boom.

"We thought to ourselves that if this happened once across the state it was 
happening all over. It was then that we realised something needed to be done to 
check the power of the banks and that it had to be done collectively."

Before they opt for the "nuclear option", Maguire stresses that New Beginning 
has devised a practical plan to reform the mortgage payment system that will, 
he claims, help the banks as much as the people. They have proposed to the 
government an "income annuity mortgage". It would mean a homeowner in 
difficulty paying a €1,000 a month mortgage could cut that to €700. If things 
improved, the payments could be raised to, say, €1,500.

But would the banks accept such a system, which would entail stretching out 
mortgage payments for longer?

"The Irish banks don't think we are serious," Maguire says, "but just wait."

New Beginning are about to go on a nationwide recruitment tour and Maguire 
compares the emerging social movement to the Irish Land League of the 19th 
century, which successfully gained land for the country's peasantry, or the 
trade unions of the early 20th century led by socialist stalwarts such as James 
Connolly and Jim Larkin.

"When we get over 10,000 members, each paying a levy of just €15, we will see 
who is serious. We are offering a fair solution for all concerned, including 
the banks, but if ultimately they reject it there is the nuclear option of a 
payment strike. Individually, people go in mortal terror to meet their banks 
but together in a national movement they won't be in such a weak position."

Disgusted

Maguire says they are not firebrand radicals hellbent on destroying the 
system. "Why throw a brick through a bank window? They will just replace the 
glass the next day," he points out.

However, the barrister says they could link up with others in Northern Ireland 
and Britain, such as theOccupy movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/occupy> and UK Uncut, who are equally 
disgusted at the banks' behaviour during this long recession.

"Two of the taxpayer-rescued banks in Ireland – the Bank of Ireland and First 
Trust [Allied Irish Banks' UK operation] – have a big presence in Northern 
Ireland. We would like to help out borrowers who are under pressure from these 
banks up there too.

"And I don't see why we couldn't see the establishment of a New Beginning 
force on the other side of the Irish Sea. We would like to speak to groups like 
UK Uncut and Occupy over there to help each other and explain some of our ideas 
for re-balancing the power between bankers and borrowers."

He suggests his organisation could provide a model on how to reform banks and 
reduce their power to threaten customers further across the globe.

"There is widespread discontent across the 'Anglosphere' and elsewhere 
regarding the banks. We are offering practical solutions on the one hand and 
the right of borrowers to organise and deploy the ultimate, last weapon of 
resort on the other."

"We want to establish an Obama-style grassroots movement that is financed from 
the bottom up. The Land League worked this way and took on the powerful 
Anglo-Irish aristocracy and won.

"The trade unions gave Irish workers power they never had before thanks to 
Connolly and others. This is a 21st-century struggle to re-balance power in 
favour of people. Whether in Britain or Ireland, we can find the power to turn 
off the banks' oxygen if they won't change their ways."
 