
Tony Abbott <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> has 
signalled his intention to press ahead with a parliamentary inquiry into the 
price of iron ore but has stressed that his government isn’t one “that 
interferes with free markets”.


Mining giants BHP Billiton <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhpbilliton> 
and Rio Tinto have been accused of flooding the market with iron ore, thus 
lowering its price, in order to hurt smaller rivals.

Iron ore is Australia’s largest commodity export but its price per tonne has 
dropped dramatically from $120 just two years ago. The government’s latest 
budget bases its forecasts of iron ore at $48 a tonne.

Andrew Forrest <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-forrest>, 
the billionaire founder and chairman of the Fortescue Metals Group, has said 
the drop in the iron ore price is due to “the nauseatingly repetitive 
statements made by these two companies that they are going to flood the market 
with iron ore, that they are going to be the last man standing and that their 
friendly competitors are going to disappear”.

Abbott told journalists in Perth on Sunday that it is “important that we get 
to the facts” over the drop in iron ore prices.

“There are all sorts of claim claims floating around, the important thing is 
that we have a dynamic, productive, creative iron ore industry for the future,” 
he said.

“Iron ore is incredible important commodity for this country and for the wider 
world, so we want to ensure that the market is operating as it should.”

The prime minister said that he doesn’t see any “heroes and villains” in the 
dispute and rejected the suggestion that the big miners may think the 
government is interfering in the free market.

“This is not a government that interferes with free markets,” he said. “The 
iron ore market has never been subsidised or supported by government. We aren’t 
in the business of holding them back, we’re not in the business of holding 
their hands. This government will never do that.”

The Minerals Council of Australia has ridiculed Forrest’s claims over BHP and 
Rio’s activities and any inquiry would highlight the “dangers of interventions 
in favour of selected producers”.

Rod Sims, chairman of the Australian Consumer and Competition Commission, has 
warned against cartel-like behaviour among iron ore producers but has said the 
accusations against BHP and Rio are “misguided.”

The treasurer, Joe Hockey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/joe-hockey>, said no final decision 
on an inquiry had been made, but denied that Sims has had the final say in the 
matter.

“Rod Sims is an independent umpire, he has had a look at that but obviously 
the parliament is able to look at issues as it sees fit,” Hockey told ABC’s 
Insiders program.

“I don’t think you should in any way stop the parliament from looking at a 
range of different issues, do you?”

Hockey added that any inquiry, which will reportedly be headed by Liberal MP 
Angus Taylor, would not be aimed at BHP or Rio.

“They are huge taxpayers, enormous contributors to Australia and big employers 
and we are not anti-Australian,” Hockey said. “Remember Kevin Rudd said they 
were big multinationals. Frankly, they’re great Australian companies and 
Australian-based companies in many ways making a massive contribution to the 
nation.”
 