
Diane Abbott: He failed to see Corbyn coming

Andrew Adonis is a very pleasant and extremely capable Blairite. As well as 
being a card-carrying Blairite, he’s a former chair of the rightwing pressure 
groupProgress <http://www.progressonline.org.uk/about-progress/>. So in some 
ways it is not surprising that he has jumped ship to work with the Tories as
chair of the National Infrastructure Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/05/lord-adonis-to-resign-labour-whip-and-chair-george-osbornes-infrastructure-body>
. This new quango will advise the government on infrastructure projects like 
the east-west HS3 rail line; the new north-south Crossrail 2, and a new 
generation of nuclear power stations.

On one hand it is exactly the type of project Adonis is passionate about. But 
on the other he probably does think that, with the election of Jeremy Corbyn, 
the world as we know it has come to an end. He has lived his political life 
surrounded not by ordinaryLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
party supporters but by members of the Westminster political class. So everyone 
he knows entirely failed to see the Corbyn phenomenon coming, had no idea about 
the yearning of many party members to move on from the Blair years and 
genuinely sees the election of Jeremy Corbyn as the equivalent of a meteorite 
colliding with Earth.

And Adonis has been dealt a double blow. He has a keen interest in housing and 
Crossrail 2. These are big London issues. So much so that he considered running 
for mayor of London himself. Instead he swung his support behindTessa Jowell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tessajowell>. And right up to the end, 
she and her team believed that she was going to sweep to victory. This was not 
an unreasonable view. She had much more money than any other candidate, began 
her campaign earlier, was the media favourite and led in the opinion polls 
throughout. But instead the Corbyn surge swept the unfortunate Dame Tessa away. 
So, in one weekend in September, Adonis found himself standing amid the rubble 
of everything he believed in.

Sadiq Khan elected as Labour's candidate for mayor of London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/11/sadiq-khan-elected-as-labours-candidate-for-mayor-of-london>
I bow to no one in my respect for Lord Adonis and his abilities. He is right 
to say that “without big improvements to its transport and energy systems, 
Britain will grind to a halt”, but I only hope he is not let down by his new 
friendGeorge Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>. So 
far the Tory record on infrastructure is a great deal of hype but less actual 
delivery. Headhunting an erstwhile Labour peer is a great coup for party 
conference week, but it does not mean that the Tories are any more serious 
about delivery.

Maybe Adonis is right. Maybe the Labour party is effectively dead, and he is 
right to tiptoe away from the corpse. But in the week following Corbyn’s 
victory, more than 50,000 people joined Labour; 150,000 have joined as members 
since its election defeat.

These are not the signs of an organisation on its last legs. Almost all the 
Westminster political class called the result of the Labour leadership contest 
wrong. And the infrastructure commission is actually a Labour policy. Maybe 
Adonis is miscalculating which party will be in a position to genuinely deliver 
on his infrastructure plans soonest.

John McTernan: Plagiarism is the greatest compliment for Labour

In 2020 there will be only one answer to the question “Who is the most 
successful Labour politician of the last decade?” Back will come the cry 
“Andrew Adonis”. Academies, his transformational reinvention of state 
schooling, will be 20 years old by then. And he will be into his fifth year as 
chair of the National Infrastructure Commission, well down the line of 
sketching – and building – the modern Britain we need.

There has been no greater signal of the Tory party’s intention than the 
signing of Adonis. While the Labour party is away with the fairies, the Tories 
intend to consolidate their grip on Britain.

The Labour party’s response to the Adonis appointment has completely missed 
the point. Some are clearly trying to wrap it into a narrative of Blairites 
defecting – though Adonis has resigned the Labour whip and not the party 
(indeed, with Corbyn’s new pluralistic leadership, some might question what 
whip there is to resign from).

But the official response is grudging and tin-eared, saying that this is all a 
smokescreen to protect the Tories from criticism over cutting tax credits. What 
was really needed from Labour was a full-throated endorsement of Adonis’s 
appointment. Labour should have claimed, rightly, intellectual dominance. Not 
only is the National Infrastructure Commission a Labour idea – it was the 
invention of Gordon Brown himself – it needs a Labour figure to chair it. 
Labour not only has the ideas for the future – it has the personnel too.

That Labour hasn’t done this is of a piece with its confusion over Osborne’s 
snatching of the living wage.Political plagiarism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/reality-check/2015/jul/08/george-osborne-budget-national-living-wage>
 is the greatest compliment but the chancellor’s audacious announcement was 
greeted by a sullen Labour response that feels halfway between “he doesn’t mean 
it” and “it’s not fair, he does mean it”. Lack of self-confidence is a killer 
in politics.

George Osborne’s conference speech – the verdict | Tom Clark, Anne Perkins, 
Jonathan Freedland, Mariana Mazzucato and Matthew d’Ancona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/05/george-osborne-conference-speech-verdict-chancellor>
The Labour party is cowering where it should be swaggering. A former Labour 
adviser – Simon Stevens – is needed to save the NHS. A Miliband idea – the 
living wage – is core to the Tory claim to be the party of working people. Now 
a Labour peer, and former cabinet minister is needed to sort out vital 
infrastructure. Bragging rights for ever, for any party not slumped in 
navel-gazing.

An opportunity missed for Labour, but not for Adonis. He is one of the most 
restless thinkers on the left. A man whose intelligence is only matched by his 
compassion. That combination leads to only one thing – a bias to action. It was 
always clear that Andrew was not going to languish on the back benches through 
another five years of opposition. He would have been a great deputy mayor for 
Tessa Jowell and, in due course, a great mayor himself.

Now he will have just as big a job – in effect the mayor of England. The 
alignment of planning, economic development and infrastructure is critical not 
just to the country’s future prosperity but to social justice too. Adonis knows 
that new roads, railways and power stations are not just projects in 
themselves; they are the engine of economic change. They take jobs to people, 
but they take people to jobs too.

The government are lucky to have him. As is the country. The great legacies of 
politics are institutional – the NHS, the state pension, academy schools. Few 
are the politicians who get that fact, fewer still the ones who know what to do 
about it, and fewest of all those who can then succeed. Adonis is in that 
number. When this modest social democrat succeeds in planning and delivering 
Britain’s future – as he will – it will be a great moment for the country. And 
a modest victory for social democracy in a very cold climate.
 