
The offices of the London Review of Books  <http://www.lrb.co.uk/>are situated 
on the top two floors of a Georgian townhouse in the shadow of the British 
Museum. To reach them, you either brave the claustrophobically small lift or 
walk up five flights of brown-carpeted stairs, before emerging in a 
light-filled room containing a scattering of terrifically bright people sitting 
at computers, surrounded by piles of books and an air of quiet industry.

The windows on one side of the large open-plan room overlook the nurses' 
accommodation for the nearby University College Hospital, where someone has 
left a carton of orange juice to chill on a window ledge. TheLRB's editor, 
Mary-Kay Wilmers, likes this view. She enjoys "seeing what the nurses get up 
to". On the other side, the windows overlook a fine Hawksmoor church spire, 
with carved heraldic symbols of a lion and a unicorn at its base. Wilmers 
doesn't have as much time for this. Most people would proffer some admiring 
blandishment about architectural style – but not Wilmers. "They're too fat," 
she sniffs at the stonework animals. And looking at them, it's hard not to 
concede that they are, indeed, a bit flabby.

The opposing London vistas, and Wilmers' reaction to them, seem to sum up her 
approach to editing what is now deemed to be the most successful literary 
publication in Europe. At 75, Wilmers retains both an insatiable curiosity 
about people (the nurses) and a healthy disregard for received opinion (the 
church). Both qualities course through the pages of theLondon Review of Books 
which, under her 22-year editorship, has become a highly regarded publication 
with an influence that extends far beyond the rarefied world of 
small-circulation literary magazines.
 The first issue: 25 October 1979 
Founded in 1979, after the Times Literary Supplement was closed by a year-long 
industrial dispute, theLRB has a circulation of 64,038 (by comparison, 
according to 2013 Audit Bureau of Circulations figures, theSpectator has a 
circulation of 62,581 and theNew Statesman of 28,495). The website attracts 
575,000 visitors a month and there are a further 2,000 Kindle subscribers. At a 
time when most print publications are losing readers, theLRB's circulation is 
going up.

Partly, this is to do with the commissions. Alongside the usual run of densely 
typed book reviews, arts criticism, authors' diaries and classified 
advertisements offering writers' retreats in the Peloponnese, Wilmers has made 
a feature of the long-form essay. The essay, usually penned by a leading author 
and often running to well over 10,000 words, with barely a concession to the 
fanciful modern desire for accompanying photographs or illustration, has become 
theLRB's forte. These are the pieces that consistently challenge orthodoxy and 
take delight in a well-constructed argument; that dare to say things the rest 
of us might be thinking or that simply reveal something interesting or curious.

One of her recent favourites, says Wilmers, was a piece on "the language of 
bribery". At its best, theLRB long-form essay is clever, mischievous, 
fascinating and fluent. At its worst, it might go on a bit.

"I think there's an awful lot of short opinion around," says Wilmers, "and 
it's quite nice to find an argument in a piece that isn't just stated."

She is sitting in a small corner room on a sofa upholstered in countrified 
pale-green and red stripes. For unexplained reasons, there is an abandoned iron 
and an Anglepoise lamp on the floor that Wilmers had to step over, somewhat 
shakily in ballet pumps, to get to her seat. She is a small woman with a 
striking face and shrewd eyes. Her physical appearance is elegant but 
economical, crafted with the same precision as a judiciously edited sentence.

Does she think, in a modern, media-driven world where opinions are 
increasingly reduced to soundbites of 140 characters or fewer, that there is a 
thirst for longer-form writing?

"I think that must, to some extent, be the case because otherwise, why would 
we be doing so much better than other papers?" And it is true that, over the 
past year, theLondon Review of Books has found itself in the unusual position 
of being the centre of rather a lot of attention. There was a recent public 
spat concerningthe lack of female reviewers in its pages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/feb/25/london-review-books-women-reviewers-gender-inequality>
, but much of the interest has been generated by the introduction ofa Winter 
Lecture series <http://www.lrb.co.uk/winterlectures>– speeches delivered by 
writers in person on a particular topic and then printed at full-length as an 
essay in the magazine.

Hilary Mantel did one in February 2013, in which she called the Duchess of 
Cambridge "a shop-window mannequin" 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v35/n04/hilary-mantel/royal-bodies>. The Daily Mail 
promptly featured the "attack" on its front page and David Cameron was moved to 
comment that Mantel was "completely misguided and completely wrong".
 6 March 2014. 
When James Meek analysed the housing market in the pages of the LRB in January 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v36/n01/james-meek/where-will-we-live> ("A housing 
shortage that has been building up for the past 30 years is reaching the point 
of crisis"), it triggered a national debate. The current issue carries an 
extraordinary 26,000-word piece byAndrew O'Hagan on his failed attempt to ghost 
the WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange's memoir 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v36/n05/andrew-ohagan/ghosting>, which was trending on 
Twitter before copies even hit the news-stands. The next issue features 
classicist Mary Beard's lecture on "the public voice of women", whichhas 
already caused a splash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/14/mary-beard-vocal-women-treated-freakish-androgynes>
following her assertion that women who speak up in the public sphere are 
"treated as freakish androgynes".

Does she enjoy the controversies generated by the magazine? Her lips twitch 
into an almost-smile. Her eyes, below the silver fringe of her bobbed hair, 
crinkle at the corners. "I don't un-enjoy it," she replies carefully. She says 
she "never, ever would have predicted" the fall-out generated by theHilary 
Mantel <https://www.theguardian.com/books/hilary-mantel> piece. "If you read 
the whole thing, it's really not… there's not much of an issue there. She was 
feeling sorry for her [the Duchess of Cambridge] more than anything."

What about the piece written in 2007 by Booker-prize winner Anne Enright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-enright> concerning the parents of 
Madeleine McCann ("I was angry at their failure to accept that their daughter 
was probably dead. I wanted them to grieve") or Mary Beard writing in the 
immediate aftermath of 9/11 that America "had it coming"?

"'People will say America had it coming' is what she said!" Wilmers corrects 
impatiently. "Well, everybody said we would have bombs put through our 
letterbox." And did they? "No. It just caught on and it obviously touched a 
nerve because there were people who presumably did think that."

This is, in many respects, a key part of the LRB's ethos: it provides a space 
in which intelligent people can think differently; in which discomfiting 
thoughts can be voiced and provoking arguments can be aired with enough room to 
breathe.

The writer Marina Warner, who is one of the magazine's contributing editors, 
compares theLRB's pages to "a lively discussion among engaged people… I like 
its range – and its boldness in allowing different views and strong opinions, 
and the length of the pieces allows for developing arguments and laying out 
evidence." Andrew O'Hagan agrees: "The paper is enquiring, funny, political, 
ambivalent, and filled with a sense of risk."

Wilmers sees the LRB as an antidote to the sameness of opinion in the rest of 
the media. "Newspapers say the same thing over and over again and we're all 
horrified and collectively up in arms and there's normally more than one side 
to something," she says. "So if you hear somebody saying something coherent and 
intelligent that's not totally out of order, it's interesting to read it."

Twitter, with its emphasis on instant reaction and opinion-forming cliques is, 
she thinks, part of the problem. "Why do people feel compelled to agree with 
everybody? It would be quite nice if there was slightly less outrage about the 
same things all the time."
 Photograph: Katherine Rose for the Observer 
Is Wilmers on Twitter? "No," she says and then immediately contradicts 
herself: "I mean, yes, I am. I've only ever been on once, when Jenny Diski 
asked me to do something."

Her Twitter avatar, rather confusingly, is the image of a fresh-faced young 
woman. "That's my god-daughter, Flora Neve," she says sternly. No further 
explanation is forthcoming and I suddenly feel rather foolish for asking.

For all its success, the London Review of Books 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/london-review-of-books> struggles to make 
money. It owes its continued existence to the generosity of Wilmers herself, 
who regularly siphons in cash from a family trust fund. Her German father was 
the founder of a multinational utilities company and her ancestors on her 
mother's side were Russian Jews who included the psychoanalyst Max Eitingon and 
Leonid Eitingon, a Stalinist agent responsible for masterminding the 
assassination of Leon Trotsky. Wilmers was born in Chicago, raised in New York, 
then moved with her family to Brussels aged nine and was sent to boarding 
school in England.

Did she like boarding school?

[Deadpan] "It was better than Brussels."

Having grown up abroad, does she feel like an outsider?

"You mean, do I feel foreign?" A pause. "When it suits me."

The family money means the LRB never has to worry about paying back its loans 
– in January 2010, the magazine was estimated to be £27m in debt to the trust. 
And yet it still manages to pay its writers at a base-rate of 30p a word 
(rising by a considerable margin if the article is longer than average). The 
fee for O'Hagan's piece on Assange was rumoured to be in five figures. Marina 
Warner says that payment is always processed quickly "and generously, by 
comparison with other papers".

Is it sustainable, I ask the LRB's publisher, Nicholas Spice? He looks vaguely 
shocked at the suggestion. "Oh no, it's not sustainable in financial terms," he 
says.

Spice has a pleasantly straightforward manner and a faintly military 
demeanour. He is the kind of man you suspect would be incapable of telling a 
lie, even though sometimes he probably should. "It loses a lot of money," he 
continues cheerfully. "The most important thing is that it has always had very 
generous support from its shareholders. And we've had the same shareholders 
since 1980, which is very unusual – I should think unprecedented – for a 
literary publication or arts organisation. The great thing is that we have been 
able to invest in creating a market for a very good editorial product."

The LRB has made inroads in other areas – there is a nearby London Review of 
Books bookshop, and a popular cake-shop that serves rosebud tea and gluten-free 
pistachio cakes – but even these, according to Spice, are only "near to 
breaking even".

"The great thing about the bookshop is it gives the magazine a location," 
Spice says, still looking on the brightest possible side, "and it's very good 
for our relations with publishers."
 21 July 1994 
The seeming lack of financial constraint means that the LRB can be run in a 
charmingly old-fashioned, semi-shambolic manner. There is, admits Wilmers, "an 
element of whim" to each issue. Writers are not given much of a deadline – 
"we're not too fussy about time, then after a few months the piece comes in" – 
and the editors take a great deal of care over the copy. Every fact is checked 
and proofs are sent back to the writer with suggestions and queries and then, 
says Wilmers: "there's all that awful stuff about spacing and line-breaks, 
which I'm sure nobody notices, but we do".

Many of the writers have never met the staff and Wilmers herself has acquired 
a healthy degree of mystique.

"I've never met Mary-Kay Wilmers," says Adam Mars-Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/adam-mars-jones>, a regular contributor, 
"and by the end of last year had come to think that was a good thing. If she 
liked my writing it seemed a bit rash to think she might like me as well."

The magazine goes to press on Friday night and the staff are often there into 
the early hours. Until recently, they ordered in supper from a local Indian 
restaurant much favoured by Wilmers. But she went on holiday a few weeks ago 
and returned to find that her staff had staged a silent coup and were getting 
their food from Ottolenghi instead. She doesn't like it as much. "Perhaps," she 
says, fiddling with the hem of her silk blouse, "it's just because I think, 
'How dare they!'"

She's joking. I think.

One of the criticisms levelled at the LRB is that it can occasionally seem 
cosseted from the real world, run by an exclusive coterie of literary-minded 
north Londoners who don't have to worry about anything so vulgar as the bottom 
line. Wilmers is an established part of the liberal-leaning Primrose Hill 
intelligentsia: she was married to the film director Stephen Frears (the couple 
divorced in the 70s and have two sons, Sam and Will) and used to live next door 
to the biographer Claire Tomalin and her husband, the writer Michael Frayn. The 
playwright Jonathan Miller was down the road. Her best friend from Oxford 
(where she read modern languages) is Alan Bennett.

When I put this to her, Wilmers blinks. "Does everybody live in north London?" 
she asks herself, before going through a mental checklist of contributors and 
staff. "John Lanchester doesn't," she announces triumphantly. Spice says that 
most of their readers come from N and NW postcodes. Anywhere else?

"Clapham," he replies briskly.

But the LRB's tendency to pluck writers from the same limited pool of 
contributors has a more serious knock-on effect: they have consistently 
struggled to publish as many women as men, for instance. In 2013, they used 43 
female book reviewers compared to 195 male, according to figures compiled bythe 
American literary organisation Vida <http://www.vidaweb.org/>. The Paris Review
, by contrast, achieved a 50/50 parity of men and women, while theNew York Times
book review published 725 women and 894 men. It is not just the review pages: 
over its history, theLRB has published 82% of articles by men and just 18% by 
women.

The issue was recently aired in a discussion on Open Book on Radio 4. The LRB 
declined to participate and issued a rather imperious statement claiming that 
the inequality in their pages was regrettable but reflected a wider 
discrimination in an imperfect world. The statement included a quote from 
Wilmers, given in a 2001 interview on the same subject: "I think women find it 
difficult to do their jobs, look after their children, cook dinner and write 
pieces," Wilmers said at the time. "They just can't get it done. And men can… 
They're not so frightened of asserting themselves. And they're not so anxious 
to please."
 9 January 2014. 
Listeners were duly enraged by the intimation that female writers were too 
busy scrubbing dishes to use their critical faculties. When I ask Wilmers about 
the episode, she visibly braces. "Obviously, over the years I've been 
discriminated against plenty," she says. "It started when I finished university 
and was told to go and learn to write shorthand by the Oxford 'head of women's 
appointments'. So, obviously, I know what it's like. I know what the problem 
is. And all I can say is that we hope to do better, we hope to get more female 
reviewers, blah blah blah."

But how exactly do they hope to do better? "Well, we hope we will find more 
women writers. We will look for more women." She glances anxiously towards the 
closed door that leads into the office and starts mouthing to me that she's 
been told not to say anything by her colleagues and they don't want her 
stirring it all up again. And yet, being of a naturally honest disposition, 
Wilmers can't help herself.

Surely that comment about women being too busy doing the household chores to 
write was spectacularly misguided? "Yes," she concedes. "I think the situation 
has changed because, certainly, when I was married, I did the washing up, I did 
the cooking, I looked after the children… I think that's much less the case 
now. Men do much more so women have less to do. So I think there has been a 
change but I do think men are more inclined to say 'Oh fuck it. I'll do 
whatever I want to do now. My career matters. I'll go and write a novel', 
whereas women are a bit more ho-hummy about their careers.

"All that has really changed since I've been working. When I was at Oxford, 
there was one woman for every 10 men. Imagine that. I mean, that's quite a 
statistic. So yes, it's changed a lot and there are many more women writers now 
in theLRB than there were 40, 50 years ago."

The irony is that Wilmers did end up becoming a secretary. After peripatetic 
upbringing that took her from America to Portugal, Switzerland, Belgium and 
England, Wilmers read French and Russian at Oxford. She had ambitions to be a 
simultaneous interpreter but ended up as a secretary at the offices of Faber & 
Faber. At the time, T S Eliot was director. "I was quite disappointed with 
him," she says. "He'd thank people for their 'gracious' letter and I though 
'Gosh, what a terrible word.'"

She left Faber and had spells at the Listener magazine and the Times Literary 
Supplementbefore co-founding the LRB in 1979, originally as an offshoot of the 
New York Review of Books.

And all the while, she was coping with single motherhood and the emotional 
grind of raising a sick child. Wilmers's youngest son, Sam, was born with 
Riley-Day syndrome, a rare condition that affects the development of the 
nervous system. Sam was subject to seizures, poor co-ordination, failing 
eyesight and breathing issues.Today, in his 40s, he is almost blind but 
"thriving" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/jul/07/sam-frears-actor-climber-friends>
, Wilmers says fondly, "because he's got such a good character".

Her work, she says, was an integral part of keeping her sane. "I think I found 
it easier with the job than I would have without. I would have been that much 
more anxious about my son had I been at home watching him all the time."

She sees her role as editor in the same terms as the simultaneous interpreter 
she once wanted to be; they are both, she says, "ventriloquial occupations. 
It's speaking through other people. It's not that I'm not as egomaniacal as 
everyone else. It's just that I say a bit less."

She has written an acclaimed volume of family history, The Eitingons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/oct/31/eitingons-mary-kay-wilmers>, but 
says she lacks the "inventiveness" to write a novel. I mention to her that I 
recently readLove, Nina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/10/love-nina-stibbe-review>, a 
delightful collection of letters written by Wilmers's former nanny, Nina 
Stibbe, while she was living with the family in the 80s. In it, Stibbe writes 
about Wilmers's habit of "piping up with a defining two words" while "everyone 
else [is] yakking and being boring and pointless".

Does she recognise that in herself? "Yes!" she says. "It's not what I most 
like about myself but I have to say, yes I do. But… um… it's that I don't 
necessarily have all the interim sentences. Those words are the two words I 
have. It's a bit of a defect."

But her facility for distilling a sentence makes her, according to Andrew 
O'Hagan, one of the great editors. "She and Karl Miller have done more for the 
British essay than anyone in the past 150 years," he says. "Mary-Kay works 
harder than any editor I know. And if this were France, they'd be posting the 
Légion d'honneur through her door every morning."

I wonder whether, at the age of 75, having lived through an era of unequal pay 
and endemic discrimination, part of Wilmers's attitude to the lack of female 
reviewers in theLRB is explained by a belief that people should just get on and 
do things rather than waste time complaining about them? "Yes, absolutely." Her 
feminism is, she concedes, "old-fashioned… I tend to take exception to men in a 
big way, but that's a slightly outmoded form of feminism."

Men as a general concept or men as individuals? "Men as a general concept, and 
individual men when they're behaving like men."

Is that why her marriage failed? "No. I mean, it was probably a foolish idea 
in the first place. I don't feel antipathy [towards men], I just am inclined to 
think that…" She breaks off. "It happened earlier this morning. You're talking 
to a male colleague, trying to get your point of view across, and then another 
male colleague walks across and agrees sagaciously with what the other man is 
saying. That always happens."

Does she say anything?

"Yes!"

I can't imagine, given her innate need to get on and do things, that she has 
altogether embraced the ageing process. "I feel appalled," she admits. "I keep 
thinking I'll wake up and find I'm not 75 any more." She has noticed a certain 
stickiness in the whirring of the mental cogs – when trying to convert dollars 
into sterling, for instance, or when she makes mistakes on the computer "and 
there's quite a lot of groaning" from her colleagues.

How will she give up this job, I wonder, when the time comes? "With 
difficulty," she says. "But the editor of theNew York Review of Books is 10 
years older than me. That's what I cling to."

The London Review of Books might not feature enough women in its pages. But 
there's no doubt that the one at its helm is pretty formidable.
 