
Q I am a 23-year-old student and I worked full time for three years before 
giving up my job and going to university. I got myself into considerable debt 
during the three years between school and university which amounted to nearly 
£20,000. I saw that my only way out would be to get a degree and hopefully get 
a better job at the end of my degree and pay off my debts.

The first two years at university were hard. I went from having a regular, 
albeit paltry, income to having to rely on my student loan to survive. I come 
from a low income family, so I don't have to pay tuition fees, but I still had 
to find money in order to pay for basic living costs. My debts continued to 
rise and I frequently had to rely on my credit cards to draw cash out, or just 
to pay for things like weekly groceries.

I am studying on a four-year degree course and the third year was spent in 
industry. I was very fortunate to get a reasonably well-paid (£16,000) job in 
London for 12 months. I thought that this would seriously help me pay off my 
debts; instead, they have just mounted and mounted and I am unable to make any 
inroads into them.

The problem is - by the time I reached my placement year, my debts had grown 
to around £30,000. This is not as a result of frivolous spending for two years; 
rather, it is down to using one card to pay off the other every month and 
relying on credit in order to pay for basic living expenses.

At the end of last year, I wrote a letter to all the credit card companies to 
whom I owe money, asking them to accept a lower monthly payment. Almost all of 
them accepted, and my main priority is that I do not want to end up with 
several county court judgements against or to have to declare myself bankrupt. 
However, I am now getting to a point where I can no longer make even these 
reduced payments.

I am unable to tell my parents - apart from the fact that they are in no 
position to help me financially, I don't think my father would ever talk to me 
again if I told him.

I feel absolutely sick with worry. I would do anything just to be able to wipe 
the slate clean, or at least be able to clear my debts with some sort of 
consolidation loan.

VL

A I can understand that having £30,000-worth of debt when you are in your 
early 20s is very worrying, but there is a way out of it. You have taken the 
first step by facing up to your problems and thinking about positive ways to 
tackle the debt.

The first thing to do is to make a list of your priority bills - things that 
you can't do without. These include rent for accommodation, food, utility bills 
and travel. Then make a list of all the cards and loans that you have, how much 
you owe, and what you are paying each month.

You can then either make an appointment with a money adviser at a Citizens 
Advice Bureau, or speak to a money counsellor at one of the helplines like the 
National Debtline or the Consumer Credit Counselling Service. All of these 
services are free: you don't pay any kind of charge for sorting out your 
finances, and they are completely confidential.

I would not advise you to take out a consolidation loan, although it may seem 
tempting right now. All that you will be doing is putting you borrowings into 
the hands of one company who will charge you a very high rate of interest and 
tie you in to repaying your debt for many years to come. Nor should you use the 
services of companies which offer to sort out your debts for a fee - there is 
no need to pay when the money charities offer excellent advice completely free.

One option might be for you to write to each of your credit and loan companies 
proposing a final lump sum payment towards your debts. This would be an amount 
which they would accept as a contribution to your debts, and they would write 
off the remainder of what you owe.

As you say, bankruptcy is a very serious step - it will affect your ability to 
obtain credit in the future, and some companies such as banks will not employ 
you if you have been in financial trouble. For this reason it is very important 
to get expert advice as quickly as possible.

The CAB and National Debtline have qualified staff who can take you through 
all the steps you need to sort out your money. Even though it seems now that 
you have a huge burden, there is help available. These charities see many 
people in your situation every day and they are experienced in negotiating with 
credit companies.

The National Debtline number is 0808 808 4000, and the Citizens Advice Bureaux 
website address iswww.nacab.org.uk <http://www.nacab.org.uk>
 