
For most of us, the thrill of a long-haul flight comes from free drinks and 
the chance to gorge ourselves on Matthew McConaughey movies. Also the joy, 
small but not to be underestimated, of making it out of there alive. What more 
could one want?

To sit on top of a plane, of course. This is the concept proposed by Windspeed 
Technologies <http://windspeedtech.com/>, a premier aerospace engineering 
services company based in Washington state, and aimed at the tiny proportion of 
first-class passengers and private jet owners for whom champagne and leg space 
is no longer enough. Welcome to SkyDeck, a pair of premium seats in a glass pod 
perched on top of the plane like a cherry on an empire biscuit. Except the 
biscuit is a Boeing 747. And the cherry is a super-rich person.

SkyDeck is a teardrop-shaped (and potentially teardrop-inducing) bubble that 
is set to be made available both to private aircraft and the commercial airline 
industry, where it could be sold as a sort of in-flight viewing deck for 
passengers. The pod offers 360-degree views and comes with rotating seats. If 
ever you wanted to pretend to be a fighter pilot without the risk, now is 
surely your chance.

The design, which could be added to existing aircraft, will beam passengers up 
to the “teardrop canopy” by a lift or flight of stairs, where they can sit on 
top of the world, heads raised that little bit higher than everyone else on the 
planet. Though the patent for the design is still pending, installation costs
are estimated at between £5.3m and £16.6m 
<http://www.businessjetinteriorsinternational.com/articles.php?ArticleID=1349>.

“I don’t think it’s going to be an attractive feature for airlines,” says 
Peter Barrington, head of the school of aerospace and aircraft engineering at 
Kingston University. “Poking a hole through a fuselage is possible, but it adds 
weight. You have to build a substantial frame around it. And sticking a glass 
bubble on top of an aircraft adds drag so it will increase fuel consumption.”

The SkyDeck concept, which follows an Airbus space-saving design launched in 
October 
<http://www.wired.co.uk/news/archive/2015-10/07/airbus-seat-patent-passengers-stacked>
 for a mezzanine level on planes that would stack passengers on top of one 
another, is being pitched as the ultimate window seat. The question is whether 
at 36,000ft, when you can’t look down, there is anything to see.

“There isn’t a huge amount to look at in the air above an aircraft,” 
Barrington points out. “If you were in the right place at the right time you 
might see the northern lights or, if you were really lucky, an eclipse. But 
chances are, you would just see the sky.” Would he be up for a seat on the 
SkyDeck? “I wouldn’t see a lot of point in it,” he admits. “I don’t think this 
idea is going to take off.”
 