
It may have no official artistic director to oversee affairs this year, but 
the 2011 Edinburgh international film festival will not want for creative 
input. Organisers yesterday announced a glittering lineup of guest curators who 
will help shape the new-look event in June.

The actor and director Isabella Rossellini will join film-makers Gus van Sant 
and Jim Jarmusch in the hotseat, with support from pop star turned composer 
Clint Mansell and rapper Mike Skinner, formerly of the Streets. Writers Alan 
Warner and Greil Marcus will also be on hand, as will Thailand'sApichatpong 
Weerasethakul <https://www.theguardian.com/film/apichatpong-weerasethakul>, 
director of the Cannes favourite Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives.

James Mullighan, the festival's producer, told the Glasgow Herald: "These are 
some of the people. Each will suggest a tone, series of films, dawn walk or 
theme.

"The effect could be a bit like the surrealist 'exquisite corpse' technique – 
one person draws a line, then folds over the paper, then the next continues the 
line without knowing what went before."

The bumper crop of creatives is part of an effort to boost ticket sales by 
refocusing the festival on individual visions in the style of London's Meltdown 
festival, which sees programmes curated by musicians such as David Bowie and 
Morrissey. Former artistic director Hannah McGill left in December to pursue a 
writing career after four years in charge.

Two other former artistic directors, Mark Cousins and Lynda Myles, have been 
overseeing the changes alongside Mulligan.Cousins staged his own highly 
successful alternative film festival alongside Oscar-winning actor and 
Edinburgh patron Tilda Swinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/dec/22/edinburgh-film-festival-shake-up>
, who was also involved in deciding the new blueprint, recently. It was held in 
Nairn in 2008 and toured the Scottish Highlands in 2009.

Cousins and Myles wrote: "Our suggestions try to make Edinburgh the most 
distinctive film fest in the world, possibly the most spirited and brainiest. 
We've been working behind the scenes trying to get the film and culture world 
to join in this rethink.

"We feel – sincerely – that Edinburgh should lead the world in exploring what 
film curation is, how it creates mood, audience, loyalty, appetite, 
expectation, taste, knowledge and joy. So, in our 65th year, to get the juices 
going we have asked great people in the world of culture to join our experiment 
and pitch ideas for themes, days, moments and events."

The changes have also taken place due to cuts in funding and decreased revenue 
from ticket sales, which slumped by 10% last year. Edinburgh was also told 
recently that it will lose £1.9m in funding over the next three years following 
the government's decision to scrap theUK Film Council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/uk-film-council>.

There will be no £15,000 Michael Powell award for best new British feature at 
this year's event, though Mullighan said there would still be premieres. "I 
don't know how many at this stage," he said. "My team and I are modelling this."
 