
Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> has said it has foiled an 
"advanced" al-Qaida plan to carry out a suicide bombing on the US embassy in 
Tel Aviv and other targets.

The Shin Bet intelligence agency said it had arrested three Palestinians who 
allegedly plotted bombings, shootings, kidnappings and other attacks. It said 
the Palestinian men, two from Jerusalem and one from the West Bank, were 
recruited by an operative based in the Gaza Strip who worked for al-Qaida leader
Ayman al-Zawahiri <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayman-al-zawahiri>.

The US state department said it was not yet able to corroborate the Israeli 
claims.

While a number of groups inspired by al-Qaida have carried out attacks against 
Israel before, this appeared to mark the first time an attack was directly 
planned by al-Qaida leaders.

The Shin Bet said the Palestinians planned on attacking a Jerusalem conference 
centre with firearms and then kill rescue workers with a truck bomb.Al-Qaida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-qaida> also planned to send foreign 
militants to attack the US embassy in Tel Aviv on the same day using explosives 
supplied by the Palestinians, it said.

It said five men whose identity and nationality were not disclosed were to fly 
into Israel with fake Russian passports to attack the American embassy. It was 
not clear where the men are located.

The Palestinian operatives had planned on several other attacks, it said. One 
included shooting out the tyres of a bus and then gunning down passengers and 
ambulance workers.

The agency said it the plot was in "advanced planning stages" but gave no 
further information on how close the men got to carrying it out. It said the 
Palestinians from Jerusalem had used their Israeli resident cards to scope out 
and gather intelligence on targets. They were arrested in the past few weeks, 
it said.

A number of al-Qaida-inspired groups have carried out rocket attacks from Gaza 
and Egypt's Sinai peninsula, as well as shootings in the West Bank. Israeli 
intelligence calls these groups part of a "global jihad" movement.

Aviv Oreg, a former head of the Israeli military intelligence unit that tracks 
al-Qaida, said the plot marked the first time it has been directly linked to an 
attempted attack in Israel.

"This is the first time that Ayman al-Zawahiri was directly involved," he 
said. "For them, it would have been a great achievement."

The Shin Bet said the three suspects made contact with al-Qaida over the 
internet. It said they planned on travelling to Syria, where various jihadist 
groups are battling the forces of President Bashar al-Assad, for training.

Oreg said that many foreigners fighting the Assad regime are from Chechnya and 
predominantly Muslim parts of Russia and speculated that the militants with the 
phony documents would be from there.

Zawahiri's location is unknown, but he was last believed to be in Pakistan. He 
is the subject of an intense manhunt and is not believed to personally go 
online or pick up the phone to discuss terror plots, experts say.

Last year, a threat that began with a message from the Yemen-based al-Qaida in 
the Arabian Peninsula to Zawahiri led to the closures of embassies across the 
Middle East and Africa, a US official said at the time. The message essentially 
sought out Zawahiri's blessing to launch attacks.

Al-Qaida-inspired groups are on the rise in the Gaza Strip, which is run by 
the Islamic militant Hamas.

These groups accuse Hamas of being too lenient because it has observed 
cease-fires with Israel and has stopped short of imposing Islamic religious 
law, or sharia, in Gaza.

In the West Bank, Israel and the Palestinian Authority of the western-backed 
Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, have cracked down on Islamic militants. 
Three Salafis, members of a movement that advocates a hard-line interpretation 
of Islamic law, were killed in a shootout with Israeli soldiers in the West 
Bank last November.

In Washington, state department spokeswoman Marie Harf said US investigators 
and intelligence officials were not yet able to corroborate the Israeli 
information and declined comment on specifics of the case.

"Obviously we're looking into it as well," Harf told reporters on Wednesday. 
"I don't have reason to believe it's not true. I just don't have independent 
verification."

She said there were no plans to evacuate the US embassy in Tel Aviv and was 
not immediately aware of stepped-up security measures there in light of the 
arrests.
 