
Israel’s most prestigious award, the Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> prize, has been plunged into 
controversy after the prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, intervened to remove 
three prominent judges of whose politics he disapproves.

Netanyahu has been accused of declaring war on the country’s intellectual 
life, and a series of judges – including the entire literature panel – and 
candidates for the award’s different fields have resigned or withdrawn their 
candidacy amid fears that this year’s literature prize may not take place.

Set up to award excellence in the arts, science and broader cultural and 
social contributions, the Israel prize is one of the country’s most venerable 
intellectual institutions. Inaugurated in 1953, it is handed out on Israel’s 
Independence Day with a $20,000 award in each category.

Among more than 600 recipients of the prize have been the novelists Amos Oz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/feb/14/amos-oz-interview> and AB 
Yehoshua, former prime minister Golda Meir, the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra, 
theYad Vashem Holocaust memorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2011/jan/27/yad-vashem-archive-in-pictures>
 and the philosopher Martin Buber.

The composition of the panel that selects Israel ​prize laureates must be 
balanced
Binyamin Netanyahu 
Since it was revealed this week that the prime minister’s office had 
intervened to block two judges for the literature prize and one for the theatre 
award the prize has been plunged into an escalating row, with Netanyahu 
publicly accusing some prize judges of being extremists and “anti-Zionists” who 
award the honour to their friends.

The intervention by Netanyahu’s office is understood to be the first time a 
senior Israeli government minister has intervened to remove the prize’s judges 
for political reasons.

Responding to criticism from judges – Netanyahu appeared to concede the reason 
for his office’s intervention was not the intellectual qualifications of the 
judges but their political beliefs.

“The composition of the panel that selects Israel prize laureates must be 
balanced and faithfully reflect the various streams, positions and strata of 
Israeli society,” Netanyahu wrote on his Facebook page.

“However, over the years, more and more radical figures, including 
anti-Zionists – for example, those who support refusal to serve in the IDF 
[Israel Defence Forces] – have been appointed to the panel and too few 
authentic representatives of other parts of the nation …


“The situation in which a small and closed group, which holds extremist views, 
has control of the selection of the winners of the Israel prize, must change.”

In response critics have accused Netanyahu of a “purge” and behaving like a 
Soviet official.

Prize juries are usually selected by an invited chairman and a senior civil 
servant at the education ministry and then approved by the education minister. 
But since the resignation of Shay Piron the latter role has devolved to 
Netanyahu’s office before March’s elections.

The controversy was triggered by the decision of the prime minister’s office 
at the beginning of the week to refuse to approve the appointment of Chaim 
Sharir to the film prize committee, and to remove without explanation Avner 
Holtzman and Ariel Hirschfeld from the literature committee.

Netanyahu: speech to US Congress about 'the very survival of my country'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/10/binyamin-netanyahu-speech-congress-democrats-boycotting>
Israeli media has suggested Netanyahu’s objection to Hirschfeld stemmed from 
the fact he had signed a petition with more than 300 other academics a decade 
ago supporting students and lecturers who refused to serve as soldiers in the 
occupied Palestinian territories.

Commenting on his removal to the Israeli newspaper Haaretz 
<http://www.haaretz.com/news/national/.premium-1.641912>, Hirschfeld said: “The 
prime minister took upon himself to determine the degree of Zionism of people 
who devote their whole life to Israeli culture.”

On Tuesday evening the novelist, dramatist and critic Yitzhak Ben Ner became 
the latest to withdraw his candidacy for one of the prizes, writing he was 
doing so “in protest of the systematic trampling of the executive branch and 
the turning of the Israel prize into an award based on the taste of the prime 
minister and his advisers”.

He added: “It’s all politics and now it is dirtying the institution of the 
Israel prize as well.

“One option is that there will not be an Israel prize this year, and the 
second one is that the Israel prize will be a showcase with a fixed panel of 
judges, which will agree to cover up the shame. In doing this Netanyahu will 
prove, in front of the people and the world, that the national prize has been 
prostituted.”

Others who have announced they are withdrawing either their candidacy or 
involvement in judging include the novelist Haim Be’er – a candidate for the 
literature award – Gail Hareven, author of The Confessions of Noa Weber, and 
actor Yona Elian who had been on the judging panel for the film prize.

One option is that there will not be an Israel ​​prize this year
Yitz​hak Ben Ner 
“I do not want to take part in this pathetic fiasco,” Elian told the Israeli 
media explaining her withdrawal. “The Israel prize is too important to be 
involved in this sort of travesty. Appointments that are dictated ahead of time 
and disqualifications that are made in such away are in opposition to the 
spirit of the arts that I know.”

Speaking to the Guardian from New York, professor Nissim Calderon, chairman of 
the literary research prize committee, who stood down earlier, condemned the 
political interference as authoritarian, “hackery” and a blow to Israeli 
democracy.

“The background to this is that I believe that Netanyahu has entered a new 
phase. He is now attacking the intellectual community. He is not attacking that 
or this person.

“This is something that has never happened before. The Israel prize is 
considered the highest prize in the state. Whether it is the arts or chemistry 
or physics or mathematics or in research into literature or the bible, those 
who have got it have been respected by intellectual community.”

Defending Netanyahu’s intervention on Israel Radio, Limor Livnat, a former 
education minister from Netanyahu’s Likud party said the literature and film 
prize committees had not been finalised, despite the civil servant in charge of 
the prize having invited judges to be on the panels, and those judges 
rbeginning work.

Livnat said: “No committee had yet been appointed for the Israel prize for 
literature or cinema. The person who appoints the committee, and this is 
according to the bylaws for the Israel prize, is the education minister. In 
this case, it is the prime minister who is today also education minister. 
Nobody else appoints committees.”
 