
The government is to introduce a limit to the length of IT contracts, starting 
with application software and hosting IT deals.

The move, announced by Cabinet Office minister Francis Maude, is part of a 
range of measures aimed at making public procurement more accessible to SME 
suppliers.

From now on, hosting deals will be limited to 12 month durations, while 
application development deals will be reassessed every four months.

It is also introducing break point into IT contracts, so "less money is locked 
into the large, lengthy contracts that are actually the bane of our lives in a 
whole lot of areas of government, making it more difficult to drive value", 
Maude said.

The government is looking to disaggregate contracts across IT in favour of 
smaller and more flexible deals.

"We've started to level the playing field for SMEs but we can go much further. 
[SMEs] told us that contract size was one of the greatest impediments to 
winning business, and we agree. Government contracts don't have to be, and 
shouldn't be, so big and complicated," Maude added.

According to Liam Maxwell, the government's director of ICT futures, 
disaggregation will be one way to tackle 'black box' type projects, which will 
be able to be componentised.

"A supplier said to me, 'but this will mean a whole new way of working – we'll 
have to do everything differently!' I said, 'yeah, you will, you're finally 
getting it'."

The Cabinet Office has also released a progress report 
<http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/sites/default/files/resources/SME-Progress-Report-Management-Summary-One-Year-On.PDF>
 on their work in the last year to make government business more accessible to 
SMEs. According to the report, the amount of money spent directly with SMEs by 
central government is expected to double year on year by the end of this 
financial year, to around 14%. The government has stated it hopes the figure 
will reach 25% for both indirect and direct spend by the end of this parliament.

The range of measures launched today are the second stage of the government's 
plan to increase the amount of public money spent with SMEs. Thefirst, 
announced in February 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/government-computing-network/2011/feb/11/cabinet-office-government-procurement-changes-boost-smes-11feb11>
, included the launch of the Contracts Finder website, which publishes 
information on all public sector deals over £10,000.

The latest package will see information on subcontracting opportunities from 
nine private sector companies – HP, Airwave, Amey, Balfour Beatty, Capgemini, 
Capita, Level 3, Logica and Serco – also made available through the site.

"I'm expecting many more [companies] to follow," Maude said.

A new scheme to allow small suppliers to rate government departments for their 
respective SME friendliness was also announced as part of the plans today, with 
the Cabinet Office set to be the first department involved.

"We'll be taking our own medicine before sending it around Whitehall. We're 
looking forward to that one," Maude said.

Other changes include the introduction of a SME champion in every department 
to check whether its procurement processes are appropriate for smaller 
suppliers, and mechanisms to speed up payment to SMEs.

In addition, the government has also enlisted the SME panel to pilot 
approaches to help SMEs form consortia to win public sector business. And, from 
April, a new web tool will enable informal discussion between SME suppliers and 
public sector procurements about upcoming procurements.

"There's a model for someone to develop: instead of a prime contractor finding 
subcontractors to work for the prime, why don't we have a model where the 
subcontractors, the SME suppliers, hire the prime to provide the umbrella, to 
be the bidder? There are lots of different ways of doing this, we need 
innovation in way in which put together bids as well."

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For weekly updates on 
news, debate and best practice on public sector IT,join the Guardian Government 
Computing network here 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing/start.php>.
 