
IT group Aveva has been working with French energy group EDF for decades, so 
it should benefit from the news of the go-ahead for a new nuclear power plant.

EDF has signed a deal with the UK government to build two reactors at Hinkley 
Point in Somerset 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/21/britain-nuclear-power-station-hinkley-edf>
, and analyst George O'Connor at Panmure Gordon said:
 EDF and the UK government's announcement that they have reached an agreement 
for an investment contract of the planned Hinkley Point C nuclear power station 
will lead to a revenue uptick for Aveva. On 7 November Aveva announced that EDF 
has expanded its investment in Aveva technology by implementing additional 
engineering software products from the Aveva Plant portfolio. EDF began working 
with Aveva in the 1980s.

Aveva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/avevagroup> shares are currently 
20p higher at £26, but O'Connor added:
 We remain encouraged by the operational progress but the valuation – PE is 
29.8 times – is likely to repel new buyers. Hence we retain our hold and 2374p 
target price.

Still with the mid-caps Provident Financial has added 59p to £16.35 after 
Shore Capital raised its recommendation, saying:
 The third quarter statement, released on 18 October, revealed overall group 
trading in the nine months to the end of September 2013 was in line with 
expectations...However, we think the outlook for the year ahead is much more 
exciting. This reflects the anticipated full launch of a new direct repayment 
lending product in the UK and a more significant expansion of the company's 
fledgling credit card operations in Poland. In addition, we expect the strong 
momentum in [the] Vanquis UK [subsidiary] to continue and see a return to 
profit growth in the consumer credit division, the latter benefitting from 
potential significant incremental cost savings from the implementation of 
mobile technology. Therefore, following recent share price weakness, we upgrade 
our recommendation to buy from hold.  