
Political correspondent Tania Branigan is trekking to the Arctic with a team 
of MPs.Read all entries 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/news/archives/arctic_challenge/> / More on the 
Arctic challenge <https://www.theguardian.com/arcticchallenge> 


The Arctic sun. Photograph: Tania BraniganDay six, Kilpisjarven, Finland: 
Forgive any typos - my hands have thawed but are still aching. It's been a very 
long, very tiring and somewhat painful day. It was -27C when we set out, and 
the first 30km or so were hard work - uphill almost all the way.

Imagine trying to run in the padded suits and huge boots they used to use on 
It's a Knockout. Except you're going up a steep gradient, you're sinking 
knee-deep into snow, you're clinging for dear life to the sled (the huskies go 
at full speed once they don't have to pull you) and, in my case, your suit is 
weighed down with around 8kg of batteries and equipment.

But it was worth it. The top of the mountain felt like the edge of the world - 
remote, frightening, but beautiful. We're elated as we set off again for what 
we hope will be an easy ride downhill.

Oh boy. The temperature is dropping rapidly, the wind is howling and it's 
beginning to snow. It's impossible to feel your hands or feet. We hang on 
grimly, knowing we only have 30km to cover, and cheer as we reach the meeting 
point and are told to anchor our sleds.

Except ... the vehicles that were due to meet us can't do so, because - get 
this - it's too cold for them to start. Which means it's another 12km to our 
stop for the night, in -35C (plus windchill). I have never, ever been this cold 
in my life. To paraphrase Scarlett O'Hara: "I will get through this. I'll go 
back to London. And I'LL NEVER BE COLD AGAIN."

Clearly, it's at moments like this that army training kicks in. While the rest 
of us are on the verge of tears or tantrums, Captain Ellwood steps up to the 
mark. "Dig deep - it's at moments like this that people find out what they're 
capable of," he urges.

It's not quite Harry, England and St George. But, somehow, we rouse ourselves 
for the final stretch. We're running downhill along a frozen river, and I begin 
to wonder if I'm hallucinating: the scenery seems identical for kilometres on 
end.

Eventually, we spot lights in the distance - but the further we go, the 
further away they seem (I find out afterwards that everyone has been finding 
their own way to hang on - singing songs, counting or, in Tobias's case, doing 
calculus. As you do).

Jenny Willott's headtorch has gone out and she can't see where she's going. 
Neither can I, since my eyelashes are frozen together.

Another 20 minutes, and the lights finally draw closer. We press on with 
Tobias's rallying cry ringing in our ears: "On the home straight, lads - back 
for tea and medals."

Sure enough, Nick Clegg and Ed Vaizey get their reward. Now that we're back in 
mobile reception, we discover they have come fourth and ninth respectively in 
an internet poll of sexy politicians.

They are not sure who voted (bar their wives), but the others vow to be extra 
dashing tomorrow in the hope of improving their ratings, while I promise to 
take more flattering photographs of them.

Curiously, the team had just agreed that today's political/journalistic 
culture places too much emphasis on personality ... I suspect Ed and Nick may 
have had second thoughts by now.
 