
ITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> is considering a major 
acquisition to boost its struggling programme-making arm, with the producer of 
shows including Midsomer Murders and Peep Show understood to high on the list 
of potential targets.

Adam Crozier <https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-crozier>, the ITV chief 
executive, has identified a "creative renewal" of in-house content business ITV 
Studios, which makes shows such as Coronation Street, Emmerdale and Channel 4's 
Come Dine With Me, as critical to delivering his five-year transformation plan 
and reducing the broadcaster's dependence on advertising revenue.

Crozier has set a target of 50% of revenue coming from sources other than TV 
commercials and it is understood that senior management is mulling whether a 
major acquisition would serve to speed up the growth of ITV Studios.

TV industry sources regard All3Media, the maker of shows including Midsomer 
Murders, Shameless, Hollyoaks and Peep Show, as of an "appealing size and 
scale".All3Media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media> reported 
earnings of £50.5m in the 12 months to the end of August last year, according 
to Companies House.

ITV is not thought to have approached a particular acquisition target. One 
industry source said he expected ITV to look at a number of UK and foreign 
independent production companies.

Under the previous management regime, led by Michael Grade, ITV considered 
options to boost ITV Studios including a deal with Elisabeth Murdoch's 
production company, Shine, which makes shows including MasterChef and Merlin.

"There is a general corporate understanding that acquisitions will be part of 
whatever happens in the content area. They will look at all of the sizeable 
options but you can't base a strategy simply on buying a big company and 
Crozier knows that," said one source. "There is a lot of pressure on ITV 
Studios at a corporate level."

Late last week Crozier told a conference in Barcelona that the broadcaster was 
"cash rich" and would look at investments that needed to be made to drive the 
turnaround strategy. ITV's finances are improving, with almost £700m cash in 
the bank at the end of June and net debt expected to be down to about £300m by 
the end of the year.

The problems facing ITV Studios were highlighted last week when the company 
revealed that commissions from other broadcasters were down 10% year-on-year in 
the first nine months of 2010 to £205m. This was partly attributed by ITV to 
the axing of I'm a Celebrity in the US and Germany and the latest series of 
Hell's Kitchen USA being delayed by Fox.

ITV has already considered an acquisition strategy as an option to boost the 
broadcasting side of the business, having looked at Channel 5, which was 
eventually bought by Richard Desmond for £103m in July. The broadcaster has 
also run the rule over Virgin Media's 50% stake in pay-TV operator UKTV, which 
is currently up for sale, but decided not to pursue a deal.

"An acquisition of [a company like] All3Media would solve problems for ITV 
Studios giving them increased turnover, profits and it will diversify ITV's 
revenue base and critically could drive formats that will sell overseas," said 
another industry source. "Acquisitions have to be part of achieving the aim of 
doubling revenues from ITV Studios to more than £1bn."

Crozier began the turnaround of ITV Studios with the appointment of Kevin 
Lygo, the former director of television at Channel 4, who took over as managing 
director in August. Last week he hired Denise O'Donoghue, the co-founder of 
Have I Got News for You producer Hat Trick, to run the commercial side of ITV 
Studios.

Grade also attempted to revitalise ITV's content division with a big-name 
hiring, Dawn Airey, who stayed only briefly, opting to take the role of chief 
executive and chairman at Channel 5.

ITV declined to comment.
 