
Broadcasters ITV and BSkyB were heading in different directions after a hefty 
note on the media sector from Morgan Stanley.

The bank's analysts raised their recommendation on ITV from equal weight to 
overweight, with an 80p a share price target. They believeITV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> may get off to a slow start for the 
year (although rival analysts at Deutsche Bank predicted a stronger advertising 
performance in the first quarter than previously expected) but said business 
should pick up after that.

Morgan Stanley said that ITV benefited from a low valuation, a strong balance 
sheet, exposure to the UK advertising market during the Olympics, and the 
prospect of further cost cuts:
 We expect a £20m to £25m cost saving programme to be announced in February. 
But Morgan Stanley was more negative on BSkyB, where it happens to act as 
corporate broker. Its analysts have moved from overweight to equal weight and 
cut their price target from 800p to 790p.

They said the company faced five headwinds at the start of 2012:

• it continues to operate in a difficult consumer environment and is entirely 
exposed to the UK and Ireland;

• the renegotiation of the Premier League football rights come up shortly, 
with rival bids likely from ESPN and possibly left field players such as Al 
Jazeera, which could push up the bidding (the bank predicts the annual cost 
rising from £541m to £649m);

• it faces the prospect of the competition commission pressing for a break-up 
of Sky's exclusive film deals with the Hollywood studios;

• there is the threat of increased competition when YouView, the 
internet-enabled successor to Freeview, is launched by June;

• and the outcome of Ofcom's fit and proper person test relating to News 
Corporation's stake in the business, which could in extremis lead to Rupert 
Murdoch's company having to sell some of its stake in BSkyB.

The upshot was that ITV rose 1.9p to 71.35p - an increase of nearly 3% - while 
BSkyB lost 9.5p to 711.5p.

Overall, positive news on US jobs proved a temporary distraction from the 
eurozone crisis, although by the end of the trading session the market had come 
off its best levels. TheFTSE 100 finished 25.42p higher at 5649.68 as investors 
continued to worry about next week's debt auctions by Spain and Italy, and news 
that Fitch had downgraded Hungary's credit rating. The spectre of a cut in 
France's Triple A rating by Standard & Poor's still looms large. Still, the 
leading index is up around 80 points on the first - shortened - week of the new 
year.

Despite worries about bank funding in the wake of Unicredit's deeply 
discounted cash call, the sector seemed to hold up reasonably well.Lloyds 
Banking Group shook off a report from Barclays Capital that it may need to make 
£20bn more provisions in 2012 for problematic mortgages and corporate loans. 
BarCap saidRoyal Bank of Scotland may need to take further charges of £13bn. 
These figures come on top of the £100bn of impairments the two banks have taken 
over the past four years. BarCap analyst Rohith Chandra-Rajan said:
 After £100bn impairments charged by Lloyds and RBS over the four years 2008 
to 2011 we had anticipated a decline in provisions in 2012. However, a slow and 
fragile economic recovery has led us to reassess this view and we see a high 
risk of a renewed deterioration in credit quality.

With higher impairment forecasts, we now expect Lloyds to be loss-making again 
this year. Along with a relatively weak capital position, this leads us to 
reiterate our underweight rating on Lloyds. We continue to prefer RBS and 
maintain an overweight rating. 
But Lloyds ended 0.76p higher at 27.11p while RBS rose 0.24p to 20.51p

Man lost 10.3p to 112.7p, making the hedge fund group the biggest faller in 
the leading index as a number of brokers turn negative. RBC Capital Markets cut 
its recommendation from outperform to sector perform, and its price target by 
40p to 145p:
 We believe there are both benefits and challenges to an investment in Man 
Group. In our opinion, in the absence of strong AHL performance and the 
cessation of outflows, we now fail to see positive catalysts in the near-term.


Meanwhile JP Morgan said consensus forecasts implied what looked like an 
unlikely level of performance at the start of the year:
 Man continues to struggle against weaker investment performance and poor 
flows. In our view estimates risk falling further. 
Credit Suisse lowered its price target on Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/mangroup> from 215p to 175p to reflect a 
26% reduction in its 2012 earnings forecast. The bank was also negative on the 
asset management sector, cutting its rating from outperform to neutral on both
Ashmore, 9.6p lower at 321.3p, and Jupiter Fund Management, down 11.4p at 196p.

Elsewhere GlaxoSmithKline climbed 15p to £14.97. Late in the day traders heard 
talk it could be taking a look at US group Human Genome.

Burberry rose 47p to 312.50 on hopes for its business in China, following talk 
the country's central bank planned to cut its banks' reserve requirement again 
to boost the economy.

Among the mid-caps Mitchells & Butlers added 20p to 249.8p as analysts at 
Morgan Stanley pointed out that billionaire Joe Lewis, who withdrew an offer 
last year but has since increased his stake to nearly 26%, was free to bid 
again from April.

But estate agency Savills slipped 8.1p to 336p after a downgrade from UBS. The 
bank said:
 We lower our recommendation to neutral from buy following recent strong 
performance. The shares are up 33% (total return) in the last three months, 
outperforming the FTSE all share by 22%. We continue to believe that Savills is 
an attractive play on global real estate markets. However, in our opinion, 
these attractions are now reflected in the price.  