
The investigative reporter behind ITV's award-winning Jimmy Savile 
investigation has said the industry needs to do more to challenge itself and 
those in authority to prevent a repeat of the child sex abuse scandal.

Mark Williams-Thomas said he was currently investigating two public figures, 
one of them believed to be in the media, and had passed the allegations to 
detectives investigating historic sex abuse.

Williams-Thomas, a former detective, said: "The industry needs to challenge 
itself more.

"I thought there was going to be a massive shift, a change in approach to 
investigative journalism. I'm still questioning whether that's happened.

"The reverse may have happened, people are thinking 'can we go there again, 
can we take the risk?'"

Asked if a Savile scenario could happen again with another public figure, he 
said: "Yes it could.

"There are people out there with elevated status [and] authority that enables 
them to have power above and beyond what it should be. Some of that has been 
challenged, the police and the CPS are upping their game. There are a couple of 
people I am looking into."

Williams-Thomas told the Ad Week Europe conference on Tuesday that police were 
focusing on "two individuals".

He said: "There are stories that are suppressed by the media, suppressed by 
organisations because individuals are too powerful.

"I think the media has got bolder in terms of what it is taking on, in some 
degree. In other ways, the media has gone back. It's too worried about doing 
some of this stuff."

Williams-Thomas said he gave evidence to the BBC internal review being 
overseen by Dame Janet Smith last week.

"Its terms of reference are so very narrow," he said. "Someone needs to pull 
all the investigations together. I have got more information that no one will 
investigate because it doesn't fall under anyone's criteria. We know far more 
than will ever be out there in the public domain."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 