
This year's Ivor Novello award nominations pitch young British talent against 
musical heavyweights for some of the highest accolades in British music.

The awards, which celebrate the best in British songwriting, this year see 
trip-hop trio London Grammar receiving their first nomination in the category 
for best song musically and lyrically for their hit Strong.

They are up against Best of Friends by Palma Violets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/palma-violets>, an indie band from south 
London, which won NME's song of the year in 2012, and Love Me Again, performed 
by John Newman.

The nominees shortlisted in the best contemporary song are Latch, by 
Disclosure featuring Sam Smith, which is up against Retrograde by electronic 
music producer and singer-songwriter James Blake, and Kemosabe by art rock 
outfitEverything Everything 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/everything-everything>.

Arctic Monkeys' album AM will battle it out against Nick Cave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/nick-cave> & the Bad Seeds' record Push the 
Sky Away – their 15th studio album – and Sing to the Moon by Laura Mvula for 
the album award.

Last year's winner Emeli Sandé – who won best song musically and lyrically for 
her hit Next to Me – was nominated again in the most performed work category 
for her song Clown.

The Ivor Novello awards <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ivor-novello-awards>
 ,now in their 59th year, celebrate excellence in British songwriting and are 
judged by the songwriting and composing community. Former winners include Kate 
Bush, Mick Jagger, Radiohead, Freddie Mercury and Elton John.

London Grammar, which is made up of Hannah Reid, Dan Rothman and Dominic "Dot" 
Major, said it "felt amazing" to be nominated. "It is lovely as the Ivor 
Novellos are so prestigious," said Reid, 24. "This has all come really quickly, 
it's been a bit crazy."

Speaking about the creative process behind the song, Reid added: "I don't know 
why, but I remember writing Strong really well. We were in Dan's garage in 
Hendon where we wrote loads of our music and he had written this guitar riff 
that was really catchy and it just evolved really quickly from there. It was 
the production of the track that took a year to get right."

Major added: "It was the song more than any that brought us together as a 
band. Hannah didn't even want to include it on the album initially."

The trio, who recently supported Coldplay on tour, said the award had given 
them more confidence as they enter the studio to start recording their 
highly-anticipated second album.

This year's awards will take place on 22 May at Grosvenor House.

Best Song Musically and Lyrically

Best of Friends

Written by Will Doyle, Sam Fryer, Chilli Jesson and Pete Mayhew

Performed by Palma Violets

Love Me Again

Written by Steve Booker and John Newman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/john-newman>

Performed by John Newman

Strong

Written by Dominic Major, Hannah Reid and Daniel Rothman

Performed by London Grammar

Best Contemporary Song

Kemosabe

Written by Jonathan Higgs, Jeremy Pritchard, Alexander Robertshaw and Michael 
Spearman

Performed by Everything Everything

Latch

Written by Guy Lawrence, Howard Lawrence, James Napier and Sam Smith

Performed by Disclosure ft Sam Smith

Retrograde

Written and Performed by James Blake

PRS for Music Most Performed Work

Clown

Written by Shahid "Naughty Boy" Khan, Grant Mitchell and Emeli Sandé

Performed by Emeli Sandé

Let Her Go

Written by Mike Rosenberg

Performed by Passenger

Troublemaker

Written by Claude Kelly, Oliver Murs and Steve Robson

Performed by Olly Murs ft Flo Rida

Album Award

AM

Written by Alex Turner

Performed by Arctic Monkeys <https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcticmonkeys>

Push the Sky Away

Written by Nick Cave and Warren Ellis

Performed by Nick Cave & The Bad Seeds

Sing to the Moon

Written and Performed by Laura Mvula

Best Original Film Score

Captain Phillips

Composed by Henry Jackman

Gravity

Composed by Steven Price

The Epic of Everest

Composed by Simon Fisher Turner

Best Television Soundtrack

Mr Selfridge

Composed by Charlie Mole

Ripper Street

Composed by Dominik Scherrer

The Thirteenth Tale

Composed by Benjamin Wallfisch
 