
Holy mole. News that Jack White’s rider specifies EXACTLY how he likes his 
guacamole 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/jack-white-redfaced-after-oklahoma-students-publish-diva-rider-that-stipulates-particular-guacamole-recipe-and-bans-bananas-10031600.html>
 – and helpfully provides venues with a recipe – doesn’t surprise me. Before I 
became a chef, I was a DJ, and once supported the White Stripes at a festival 
in Holland. White is quite an intense guy, with a unique and exacting approach 
to music – why wouldn’t he apply the same to his food? I’m Peruvian, but I 
lived in Mexico for a while and studied Mexican food, so his pursuit of 
guacamole perfection pleases me. I’m genuinely obsessed with avocados (I make a 
mean avocado ice cream) so I’m relieved that Jack has the good sense to 
specifically name check Peruvian Hass avocados for his recipe,even if, as his 
team insist, he didn’t actually write it himself 
<http://jackwhiteiii.com/holy-guacamole>. I’ve tried the recipe out and – 
ridiculously specific as it is – it’s decent.

“Please don’t make it too early before it’s served,” his rider instructs. 
“We’d love to have it around 5pm.” This may seem demanding but he’s absolutely 
right, and this is the sign of a man who loves his food. You can’t enjoy a 
guacamole that’s been sitting around; the trick, to make it zing, is serving it 
while the chemical reactions are still taking place. His tips are broadly good. 
But Jack, you’d be better quartering the avocado then peeling to keep all the 
inner fruit intact – then there’s no need to scoop. And yes, squeezing the lime 
on top will preserve it, but careful, you’ve got to mix that lime in right 
before serving, otherwise the dish might be too sour. I’d replace Serrano 
peppers for native Peruvian Amarillo or Limo chillies and maybe add a touch of 
crushed garlic but other than that, I’m happy with the recipe. I didn’t check 
the rider in his dressing room back in Holland all those years ago, but if he’d 
had this recipe, I would have been more than happy to be part of his entourage.

Jack White’s avocado recipe

8 large, ripe Hass avocados, cut in half lengthwise. Remove the pit – save 
them, though – and dice into large cubes with a butter knife – three or four 
slits down, three or four across. Scoop out the chunks with a spoon, careful to 
maintain the avocados in fairly large chunks
4 vine-ripened tomatoes, diced
½ yellow onion, finely chopped
1 full bunch of coriander, chopped
4 Serrano peppers, de-veined and chopped
1 lime
Salt and pepper, to taste

Mix all the ingredients in a large bowl, careful not to mush the avocados too 
much. We want it chunky. Once properly mixed and rested, add the pits into the 
guacamole and even out the top with a spoon or spatula. Add ½ lime to the top 
layer so you cover most of the surface with the juice. (The pits and lime will 
keep it from browning prematurely.) Cover with plastic wrap and refrigerate 
until served.

Martin Morales is chef and founder of Cevicheuk.com <http://Cevicheuk.com> and 
Andinalondon.com <http://Andinalondon.com>
 