
An evening that promised so much for West Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> ended in disappointment, 
acrimony and a dash of farce, with Slaven Bilic sent to the stands after 
contesting one too many of Adrien Jaccottet’s decisions in the closing stages 
and Astra Giurgi seizing control of this Europa League third-round qualifier 
thanks to a comical own goal from Angelo Ogbonna. West Ham’s European adventure 
is in the balance now and they face a daunting task to resuscitate it in 
Romania next week.

Poor discipline continues to blight West Ham in this competition; they were 
cruising after Mauro Zárate gave them a 2-0 lead early in the second half, yet 
they were vulnerable after James Collins was shown their third red card in five 
matches and Astra fought back to claim a precious draw thanks to a stunning 
goal from Fernando Boldrin and Ogbonna’s slice of misfortune.

Southampton 3-0 Vitesse | Europa League third qualifying round match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/30/southampton-vitesse-europa-league-report>
Even more damagingly for West Ham, they lost Enner Valencia to a potentially 
nasty knee injury in the first half after he caught his leg in the turf. “If 
you add to that, a couple of injuries with [Joey] O’Brien and Valencia, it 
wasn’t a great night,” Bilic said. “O’Brien felt a hamstring. With Enner, it’s 
a knee injury and I think he twisted it. He is going to have a scan. Until he 
does the scan, it is speculation.” He did not sound optimistic about Valencia. 
“I am worried,” he said. “It is the biggest reason why I am not happy tonight.”

West Ham’s manager also seethed at the Swiss officials and was sent away from 
the touchline after his angry reaction to a foul on Dimitri Payet. “I just said 
to the referee I wasn’t happy with the situation,” Bilic said. “I didn’t swear. 
He just told me I can’t shout at him.”

Although Bilic defended Collins after he was sent off for two yellow cards, 
the harsh truth is that West Ham are being let down by their naivety against 
cannier opponents. It is as almost as if they are aiming sarcastic digs at 
their back-door entry into Europe via the fair play league. Already missing the 
suspended Diafra Sakho and James Tomkins, they could not hold on with 10 men.

There had been signs of encouragement for Bilic before Collins went off. Payet 
was bright and inventive in his free role and he set up the opening goal, his 
teasing cross from the left met by a thumping header from Valencia in the 23rd 
minute.

West Ham continued to push and Zárate made it 2-0 when he danced past two 
defenders and slid a low finish past Silviu Lung. Yet the mood changed when 
Collins caught Constantin Budescu. Boldrin pulled a goal back with a bullet 
from 25 yards and with eight minutes to go, Ogbonna’s debut was ruined when the 
centre-back’s attempted clearance looped over Adrián.

Astra’s manager, Marius Sumudica, suggested the tie is 60-40 in West Ham’s 
favour. “If we get another red card, we have to stay here,” Bilic said.
 