
Ultimate News Quiz caption: the winner
And now, back to our caption competition. You remember, the one 
<http://media.theguardian.com/advertising/image/0,,1996798,00.html> of Jeremy 
Paxman with his hands round Kate Adie's ears. Anyway, literally several entries 
have been pouring in, and the winner is ... Alastair Stewart, who also just 
happened to be on the winning ITV News team. Monkey suggests he should buy a 
lottery ticket tomorrow, he'll probably win that as well. Anyway, the winning 
caption, to be read while glancing at this picture, is ... "Thinking Woman's 
Crumpet turns another girl's head". Boom, and indeed, boom. Alastair, we salute 
you.

Chart topping
 The Spectator is the latest publication to jump on the free wall charts 
bandwagon. Except these are wall charts with a difference - 'Birds of Britain' 
features nothing but pies - partridge pie, pheasant pie, turkey pie, and so on. 
There's another (detailhere 
<http://media.theguardian.com/advertising/image/0,,1999575,00.html>) with a 
load of different shaped sausages - 'Country Animals', obviously - with hare, 
wild boar, turkey and, er, edible dormouse. The fish one, meanwhile ... well, 
you can guess what they have done with the fish one. They are, it says here, 
probably the best wall charts in the world. Sponsored by Carlsberg.

iFake
 Can't wait for the launch of the groovy new mugger's magnet, the iPhone? Then 
why not make your own, thanks to this latest tidbit of i-telligence discovered 
by Mediacells. Clickhere 
<http://image.theguardian.com/sys-files/Media/documents/2007/01/26/diy_iphone.pdf>
, follow the easy to understand instructions and you will be the envy of all 
your friends. To make it more realistic try talking into it while playing a 
talking book. It will sound like a genuine conversation! Make it High Fidelity 
and you could pretend Nick Hornby had just rung! In case you were wondering - 
Monkey fact alert! - thereal thing <http://www.apple.com/iphone/> launches in 
the US in June and in the UK in the "fourth quarter".

Bad experience
 The Guardian reports that fans and bands are up in arms over the title of 
legendJimi Hendrix's first album, Are You Experienced? being used as the name 
of a new US soft drink. They may want to slow down on that outrage: it turns 
out that Hendrix has been exploited to the eyeballs for the years with more 
than 700 products branded in some way including, er, nappies, incense and lava 
lamps. Rock on.


Thursday January 25


Not-so-favourite 'gobby girl'
So another nail has been hammered into the coffin of Jade Goody's media 
career, as HarperCollins announced today that it "wouldn't be appropriate" to 
go ahead with publication of the paperback edition of her autobiography on 
February 5. The paperback was due to feature an extra chapter that 
HarperCollins previously said was "guaranteed to illuminate Britain's favourite 
gobby girl even further". Hmm ... Celebrity Big Brother rather pissed on your 
chips there, HarperCollins, eh?

Germany's licence to love
 German police have uncovered an unlikely bribery scandal after raiding the 
Cologne HQ of the country's TV licence-fee collection body, GEZ. Licence-fee 
inspectors for state broadcastersARD and ZDF stand accused of accepting bribes 
ranging from cash to slap-up meals at top restaurants, Formula One race 
tickets, and even trips to brothels. Which brings a whole new meaning to the 
phrase "licence-fee evasion" - right up there with "discussing Ugandan affairs".

Kidnapped - or just a Mail journo?
Austrian teenage kidnap victim Natascha Kampusch wants to go to university and 
study journalism, according to her dad. "She was always interested in 
journalism, I think all her involvement with the media has only strengthened 
that, although I admit no one in the family can understand it," Ludwig Koch 
said. What's not to understand, Ludwig? Held captive in the same room for 
years, denied basic human rights - it's the perfect way of preparing for a job 
at the Daily Mail.

Cheetah's Questionable footage
More on Endemol subsidiary Cheetah TV's attempt to drum up some debate about 
Question Time. The company is bidding to win the new three-year contract to 
make the BBC1 flagship show. As part of the application, Cheetah went all 
trendy. It delved into the world of user-generated content and put up somevox 
pops <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=> on YouTube, asking people what they 
thought about Question Time. Except the footage might not be as spontaneous as 
first thought. Nor from such "ordinary" members of the public. "Why is Colin 
Patterson from 5 Live on this?" asks one observant viewer, pointing out the 
less-than-glowing contribution from the BBC journalist. Monkey is still 
awaiting Colin's reply.

Second life for sale
The Independent reports that an Australian man has put his entire life up for 
sale oneBay. Items listed include his "cranky ex-girlfriend", his name, phone 
number, his best six jokes, the names of eight girls he has been flirting with, 
and a four-week training course "in becoming me". Bidding has reached A$7,500.


Wednesday January 24


Silence is golden ... but on radio?
A little later than planned, Monkey is delighted to hear from Radio 2 DJ Mark 
Radcliffe and his thoughts on his interview yesterday withIsobel Campbell and 
Mark Lanegan, whose monosyllabic answers made for hilariously painful radio. "I 
enjoyed it immensely," reports Radcliffe. "Mark Lanegan was quiet and 
reflective, but smiled more or less the whole time." Not ideal for radio - but 
never mind; carry on, Mark: "I found it quite refreshing in a way. Not everyone 
who sings songs wants to spew out babble. I liked him a lot, and his voice: 
well, just majestically lugubrious. Isobel is just a sweetheart. She doesn't 
say all that much either, but, like Mark, her presence is utterly benign. 
There's a difference between being moody and uncommunicative, and just being 
quiet and considered. And it all sounded wonderful. I'd have them back 
anytime." Still, if Lanegan ever does put down his guitar, he probably 
shouldn't consider a career in DJing. Perhaps something in mime.

Hair today...
 Breaking Wag news: Peter Crouch's on-off girlfriend Abigail Clancy is to star 
in a new Living show in which she takes on a different modelling challenge each 
week. Shoes one week, hats the next, presumably. The good news: Clancy will 
have "legendary" Janice Dickinson on hand to show her the ropes. And the hand 
towels. The press release says: "Despite numerous offers from other 
broadcasters, the new show marks Abbey Clancy's first television appearance 
since reaching the final of Britain's Next Top Model in September 2006, where 
she made a huge impact on viewers and the British press." Monkey must have been 
on holiday that week.

From X-Men to Oxford
 Captain Jean-Luc Picard has a new assignment - teaching the next generation 
of students as visiting professor of contemporary theatre at Oxford University. 
"I am honoured, delighted, thrilled to bits and tickled pink," said Star Trek 
and X-Men starPatrick Stewart. Monkey can only hope his guest appearance in 
Ricky Gervais's Extras doesn't come back to haunt him. You remember the one, in 
which he kept imagining storylines for films in which all the women's clothes 
keep falling off. "Even before she can get her knickers back on I've seen 
everything. I've seen it all." Ah, those were the days - back when Extras was 
funny. See ithere <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UGf9Hc-KpAA>. "You're not 
married, you don't have a girlfriend, you live alone and you don't watch Star 
Trek? Good lord." A bunch of bananas to the first student who suggests a 
similar idea to Stewart at his first lecture. "And then all her clothes fell 
off, professor!" Make it so.

Caught on tape
The BBC gave viewers an unintentional glimpse into the workings of its 
smoothly oiled news machine yesterday, when a clip of CCTV footage of one of 
the alleged 21/7 tube bombers included audio of producers discussing the clip. 
Insightful comments included "They all look a bit worried, don't they?" and 
"I've got the file where I fucked it up ... this'll be all right for the Six, 
won't it?" The sound has now been removed from the onlineclip 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/player/nol/newsid_6290000/newsid_6290400/6290479.stm?bw=bb&mp=rm>
, but Monkey's man on the spot took the liberty of recording the audio as anMP3 
<http://download.theguardian.com/sys-audio/Guardian/audio/2007/01/24/BBC_News_CCTV_story_230107.mp3>
. Well, we wouldn't want you to miss out, would we? Someone's microphone 
clearly needs a bigger off button.

Time will tell
 The BBC's glossy new Hugh Bonneville thriller, Five Days, is destined to be 
forever called "24-style" because it takes place in real time over Five Days. 
Except Five Days is over in five episodes, while 24 - guess what - takes 24. 
Five Days is over in little more than a week, while 24 takes the best part of 
half a year. Got it? Fortunately neither of these principles applied to Hugh 
Grant movie Nine Months.

The last refuge
 Much amusement at the Daily Mail at executive managing editor Robin Esser's 
comment to the parliamentary joint committee on human rights that "no 
journalist on the Daily Mail is ever told to write a story in a particular 
way". Alas it is not the experience of every hack who has worked at the paper. 
"I can't think of a single story that I haven't been told how to write," says 
one. Another journo recalls on many occasions being sent to Calais on stories 
about asylum seekers for the Mail. "So often, when stories didn't work out, we 
were told to 'stay until they do' and then the famous line, 'the editor is very 
keen on this one'."

Clean up your act
 News International and Associated Newspapers have been asked to do something 
about the carpet of paper, otherwise known as theLondon Paper and London Lite, 
that they lay over the capital every weekday. Westminster Council has issued a 
press release asking them to help pay for the clean-up - all three tonnes of it 
- or else! Interested journos who want to keep abreast of the story can contact 
none other than Oliver Finegold - the former journalist on Associated's Evening 
Standard, who famously had a run-in with Ken Livingstone ... now a Westminster 
Council press officer.

TV on the menu for kids?
 The Daily Mirror reports that, just as Ofcom is putting the final touches on 
new regulations to restrict junk food TV advertising to children, the education 
minister,Parmjit Dhanda, has said that TVs in school canteens could help kids 
eat their greens. Mr Dhanda, in charge of healthy eating, said that showing 
channels such as MTV might boost the often dour atmosphere in school canteens 
that had seen kids stay away as menus got healthier.


Tuesday January 23


We love it ... to death
A chilling look, now, into the minds of Sun readers everywhere, with the 
publication of the Sun Book of Short Stories, the result of a competition held 
by the paper to "get Britain reading" and discover the "hidden talent among its 
10 million readers". And what talent there is! Monkey's glance at an advance 
copy of the book, published by Transworld publishers, reveals most of the 
sharply-written tales are about ... violence and murder. Nice. Ball Games by 
Francesca Bardsley features a nine-year-old girl tricked into throwing a 
grenade through a window. A Living by Gavin Bell chronicles a hitman's kill, 
while another is about a member of the Home Guard who kills an escaping German 
prisoner. Most chilling of all is the story of an IT teacher who kills a rival 
who became head of department. It's truly a laugh a minute. Another tells the 
story of a national newspaper editor who ends up in the nick when, oh, hang on, 
wrong book. Don't have nightmares, Rebekah.

A finer cut
 There are three reasons why Monkey watches the Oscars. Who wins. Who's 
wearing what. And who has had the most obvious and ill-advised plastic surgery. 
The last of these is about to become a lot easier for high definition TV 
viewers, withSky broadcasting this year's event in HDTV for the first time. 
This, you will remember, is the technology that forced Sky Sports presenter 
Richard Keys to wax the back of his hands because the hair was freaking out 
viewers. Let's hope someone remembers to tell the Hollywood types, or those 
nips and tucks are about to become more obvious than ever before.

Not award-winning
 The Oscars website is up all year round, but the day it gets the most hits - 
Monkey is sticking his neck out here - is the day the nominations are 
announced. Well, that and the day of the ceremony itself. So what a shame when 
film fans clicked on the site this afternoon, moments after the nominations had 
been read out, to find that most of the category headings were indecipherable. 
Even worse, when you clicked on a nominee's name, you were greeted with the 
legend, "Oops, sorry!" and directed back to the main site. And the Oscar for 
best film website goes to ... not the Oscar film website. The good news is they 
have now fixed it - the online equivalent of turning up for a film 10 minutes 
late. Oh, hang on, now it's not working at all. Clickhere 
<http://www.oscar.com/> to find out for yourself.

His cup runneth over
 Who said yesterday was the most miserable day of the year? Staff at magazine 
publishersHaymarket got about two hours off work when its headquarters in 
Hammersmith was evacuated. Some ended up across the road at the Novotel, along 
with the deputy chairman, Rupert Heseltine. Rupert, son of the firm's owner, 
Michael, helped staff pass the time by forking out for coffees.

Monkey's caption competition
 More, now, on the Ultimate News Quiz, in which the elite of British broadcast 
journalism answered questions posed by none other than Jeremy Paxman. Monkey 
has already brought you the result - it was won by the ITV News team, led by 
Katie Derham and Alastair Stewart - now we bring you the visuals. That's right, 
Monkey's film has just come back from the chemist. Our favourite shot is of 
quiz host Jeremy Paxman manhandling - we think that 's the right verb - Kate 
Adie. Nice corduroy jacket, Jeremy. Anyway, there's one thing missing. That's 
right - a caption. So get thinking. The funniest one gets you your name in 
lights and the chance to say "I won that caption competition on Monkey, don't 
you know." Clickhere 
<http://media.theguardian.com/advertising/image/0,,1996798,00.html> to see the 
picture. Email your suggestions tomonkey@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:monkey@mediatheguardian.com>.

Other matters at hand
 After he was dragged into the Celebrity Big Brother racism row last week, 
Tony Blair has been keen to stay out of the latest controversy swirling round 
Shipwrecked. "We haven't seen it, and don't think it is our role to offer a 
running commentary on programmes on Channel 4 or elsewhere - that is a matter 
for Ofcom to reach judgments on," Blair's official spokesman said. Monkey 
wasn't there but guesses there might have been a mild look of bewilderment on 
his face. Isn't there a war on or something?

March of the ITV penguins
ITV News's "Big Melt" week, in which it upped sticks to Antarctica to report 
on the effects of climate change (what do you mean, you missed it?) had it all 
- news anchor Mark Austin a short distance from being crushed by a crumbling 
iceberg, science editor Lawrence McGinty being attacked by a giant bird, and 
now... a cute penguin called Guy. Austin introduced the little chap, who 
apparently grew rather fond of the ITV satellite dish, on Saturday's teatime 
bulletin. "The crew have christened him Guy," explained Mark. "Not quite sure 
why that is." Hmmm. Could he in some way be related to Guy Ker, chief operating 
officer of ITV News? This may be because Ker likes fish, enjoys taking a swim 
in very cold water, or is able to walk long distances with an egg balanced on 
his feet. In the meantime, a joke: What goes black and white, black and white, 
black and white, "Can I look at the Media Guardian job section please"? A 
penguin who has just been made redundant by ITV News.

Tough talking
It's early days, of course - we're not even through January yet - but is this 
the most agonising interview of the year?Mark Radcliffe's chat with singers 
Isobel Campbell and Mark Lanegan (she's got a squeaky voice, he's got a deep 
one) on Radio 2 was enough to make Meg Ryan on Parkinson look loquacious. But 
you can't blame Radcliffe - he tried his best. Here's how it went (the pair's 
replies are in quotation marks). Mark: Isobel, how are you? "Good, how are 
you?" It's taken a while to get back together again - how long has it been 
since the record? "A year at the end of the month." What took the time, were 
you busy Mark? "Yeah." Tied up with your showbiz commitments and a spot of 
pro-celebrity golf tournaments? "Yep, pretty much." How much time did you spend 
making the record? I know we had this conversation before, but how long were 
you actually in the studio? "One day I think. Yeah." You know, so what's it 
like playing live? It was the first time you had played together live last 
night, wasn't it? "Yeah." Glasgow, how was that? "It was great." It ends with 
Radcliffe offering to write Lanegan a joke for him to read out on air. Let's 
hope it was a short one. Listen for yourselfhere <http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio2/> 
by clicking on the "Listen again" button. Fast forward 15 minutes and wait 
until the end of the Super Furry Animals song.

Fawlty thinking
The Daily Express reports that John Cleese is backing plans to erect a £20,000 
life-size bronze statue of Basil Fawlty in the hotel's fictional home of 
Torquay. He is said to favour a "conventional, realistic kind of statue" and 
his agent, Garry Scott-Irvine, says that Cleese thinks erecting the statue is 
"the best idea that any human being has had since the Big Bang".


Monday January 22


Roll up, roll up...
Channel 4 may be at the centre of a double race row this evening with its 
headquarters besieged by the media, but at least it is getting some free 
publicity for one of its hot new shows. Seen all day behind the Sky News 
reporter desperately filling airtime - "Jeremy, there is nothing new to report 
at this point" - is a print ad for new E4 dramaSkins, plastered across the 
front of Channel 4 towers on Horseferry Road, with the launch date helpfully 
spelt out in huge letters. That's January 25 if you've missed it so far. So to 
recap - like Sky News has been doing all day - it's called Skins. And it's on 
E4. Which isn't Sky One.

Caught out
Davina McCall has been getting a fair amount of flak in recent days over her 
allegedly soft interviews with Celebrity Big Brother evictees. But in Australia 
it is the godfather of British chatshow hosts,Michael Parkinson, who is taking 
a bit of a kicking from the media for an interview in which Shane Warne appears 
to re-write the history of one of the lowest points in his career. In Parky's 
interview for Aussie pay-TV channel UKTV - part-owned by the BBC - the 
recently-retired cricketer put a more positive spin on the 1994 Sri Lankan 
bookmaker scandal than that of the official Australian Cricket Board inquiry 
into the incident, according to the Sydney Morning Herald. The SMH dares to 
suggest that this may have something to do with the fact that Warne is an 
executive producer of the high-rating show, along with Parky and James Erskine, 
who's the spinner's commercial manager - and also looks after Parky's affairs 
in Oz.

A new image - well, most of it
 The BBC launched new graphics for its news programmes today, not that you may 
have noticed. Monkey only did when he thought the office TV was on the blink 
after the ticker slipped below the bottom of the screen and the clock 
disappeared altogether. The changes have got viewers heated on the BBC's 
message boards. While many say the new look is cleaner and crisper, the fact 
that most of it can't be seen unless you have a posh new wide-screen TV has 
annoyed a lot of people. "It's not brilliant, because it's outside the 14:9 
safe zone and therefore doesn't display properly," wrote one clued-up viewer. 
"The news scroller and clock are cut off half-way down, whereas the weather 
graphics sit fine so - despite what your call centre tried to tell me - it's 
not my setup!" What might hurt more is this post from another viewer: "It all 
looks very slick, but (please don't hate me) ... it looks almost identical to 
Sky News." Ouch!

Call off the dogs
 Those out-of-date gags about Guardian spelling errors really have become 
tiresome, haven't they? It's the surefire mark of a third-rate wit when someone 
thinks it's funny to refer to the paper as the Grauniad. Yes, thank you very 
much, that joke's been in Private Eye for a mere 45 years. Unfortunate, then, 
to confess that the Guardian's reputation for orthographic blundering has now 
reached the brave new world of its wallcharts. Today's dogs chart features 
prominently a spotted canine named as a "Dalmation", a "Bichon Fries" [Frise, 
please], and a Dachshund with an errant "s". So galling when you've not gone 
wrong with Chihuahua, basenji or Lhasa apso - and even that potential minefield 
shih-tzu.

Come on!
 While Jade Goody's triumph in the unpopularity stakes in Celebrity Big 
Brother was being celebrated on Friday night, there was another contest 
gripping TV land. Far away from that deserted studio complex in Elstree, the 
elite of British broadcast journalism was doing battle in charity event the
Ultimate News Quiz. Teams from all the major TV and radio news programmes 
fought it out over 10 raucous rounds with none other than Jeremy Paxman asking 
the questions. At one point Paxo showed his fondness for his Newsnight 
colleagues by calling them a bunch of halfwits. In fact, it was a bad night for 
the BBC, whose various teams were outperformed by the news teams of Channel 4, 
Five and the night's eventual winners, the ITV News team, led by Katie Derham 
and Alastair Stewart. You can try your hand at some questions from the quizhere 
<http://media.theguardian.com/news/story/0,,1996151,00.html>.

Big task
 Given the events in the Big Brother house over the past seven days, it seems 
an appropriate time to return to an interviewPeter Bazalgette, chief creative 
officer of series producer Endemol, gave to Indiantelevision.com last year. 
"The great thing about Big Brother is that it reflects the culture of the 
country it is in," explained Baz. He's not kidding. "Big Brother is a real-life 
soap opera. That is something that I think will absolutely chime with Indian 
tastes." Monkey wishes the best of luck to Endemol's fledgling Indian 
production arm, whose shows include The Great Indian Laughter Challenge. The 
challenge just got tougher.

Waiter!
 Wicked whisper: which ITV executive was overheard at a posh London media 
eatery sounding not entirely overjoyed by the arrival ofMichael Grade? Amid the 
usual pleasantries (you know the sort of thing: "what's the special today?" and 
"er, sparkling please") were unfortunate references to "bad meeting" and 
"poking his nose in". And to think the newly-installed executive chairman only 
arrived last week. We can only hope that, like the crêpe suzette, the 
disgruntlement is a flash in the pan.

My specialist subject is...
 Forget about Celebrity Big Brother. The viewing highlight of this week may be 
the appearance of Daily Express editorPeter Hill before the joint select 
committee on human rights. The theme? Treatment of asylum seekers, a subject 
which Hill, if he ever appeared on Mastermind, would surely choose as his 
specialist subject, such is the amount of space his paper gives over to the 
topic. We can only hope the Express's admirable political correspondents will 
be on hand to give us word-by-word coverage. Also due to appear before the 
committee today are the Daily Mail's executive managing editor, Robin Esser; 
the Press Complaints Commission chairman, Sir Christopher Meyer; and the 
Guardian's home affairs editor, Alan Travis.

Disinterested? Not exactly
 Monkey's newshound of the week award goes to the BBC's business editor Robert 
Peston, who committed the cardinal sin of lapsing into the first person during 
his report about the licence fee settlement. "We've got our revenues guaranteed 
for the next seven years, er, the BBC has got its revenues ..." The intake of 
breath from the director's gallery was almost audible. Peston earned a special 
commendation from the judges for giggling during his reference to ITV's 
advertising slump.

Prize blunder
 Friday's Daily Mail featured an entertaining photo of Jerry Hall "presenting 
Seamus Heaney with the TS Eliot Prize" - entertaining because neither was 
actually at the TS Eliot prizegiving. Famous Seamus is still recovering from a 
stroke, as Today listeners learned when he was interviewed the following 
morning, and Hall - who was snapped with him when he won the Whitbread award 
seven years ago - wasn't invited. But, hey, it meant editor Paul Dacre had a 
blonde model cheering up his books pages.

Monkey's quote of the week (one)
 "Will Ian please take his head out of the oven?" Big Brother makes an 
emergency intervention after Ian Watkins, otherwise known as the bloke who used 
to be in Steps, had his hair dyed by Jade and Danielle and - in the absence of 
a hairdryer - decided to put his head in the oven. The incident was sadly 
overshadowed by other events in the house last week.

 Monkey's quote of the week (two)
 "I don't regard the Big Brother issue as an Endemol bubble. I regard it as 
part of a migratory trend from official news platforms to a much more networked 
form of information." Stephen Coleman, professor of political communication at 
Leeds University, at last week's Oxford Media Convention.

Wayne's world goes online
 The Sun reports that after a five-year battle with a cybersquatter, Wayne 
Rooney has finally been able to launch a website under his own name. To mark 
this, er, momentous occasion Rooney opted to let the world know that his least 
favourite TV personality in the world isJonathan Ross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jonathan-ross>. After stating that he is 
partial to spaghetti bolognese and, ah, sauvginon blanc, he admits his 
favourite TV shows are tough-guy gangster series The Sopranos, Coronation 
Street, EastEnders, Only Fools and Horses and Prison Break.
 