
For London Irish <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/londonirish>, as the rain 
poured down from gloomy Berkshire skies, this was a bucket of cold water after 
the euphoria of their win here over the Premiership leaders, Gloucester, a week 
earlier. The Anglo-Welsh EDF Energy Cup is a passport to the Heineken Cup for 
the winners but after this defeat the Exiles are unlikely to progress in a pool 
that also contains the dangerous Ospreys.

On a miserable day for Irish Delon Armitage, whose long-range penalty put them 
into the lead three minutes before the break, limped off with an ankle injury 
near the end. Armitage, who had been moved to centre from full-back for this 
match, will be doubtful for the start of next month's Heineken Cup campaign. 
Shane Geraghty had pulled out of the starting line-up after fracturing a hand 
in training on Friday and the fly-half will be missing for up to six weeks.

Irish's only cheering news yesterday was the arrival of the former All Black 
prop Clarke Dermody from New Zealand. He was much needed here as theHarlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru> pack dominated the scrums and 
in the wretched conditions matched Irish in the lineout, a traditional strength.

Geraghty's replacement, Jeremy Staunton, missed a conversion and a penalty in 
the first half before Armitage was given the kicking duties - either of those 
attempts would have staved off defeat had they been successful. Brian Smith, 
the Exiles' director of rugby, also thought that Phil Murphy's try in the 
corner near the end of the first quarter should have been allowed. The referee, 
Roy Maybank, judged that Nick Kennedy had been guilty of obstruction in the 
build-up.

The No8 had to wait only a couple of minutes before scoring a try that 
counted. During a period of intense pressure Irish won a ruck and moved the 
ball briskly out to the left wing, Nils Mordt giving Murphy a perfectly 
weighted pass for the forward to crash over in the corner.

The Exiles were well on top at that stage, with Quins down to 14 men after the 
lock James Percival, making a first start for the club, was sent to the sin-bin 
for killing the ball. The home side's lead lasted only 10 minutes, however; 
when the visitors made a rare excursion into Irish's half the flanker Will 
Skinner made a break and chipped on, helping to set up a scrum close to the 
Irish line. Quins wheeled and the Tongan No8 Chris Hala'ufia scored after a 
blind-side break.

Adrian Jarvis converted the try from close to the touchline and the fly-half 
and Armitage exchanged penalties before the break. That was where the scoring 
stopped. The closest anyone came to adding to it in the second half came just 
past the hour when Jarvis's replacement, Chris Malone, rattled the upright with 
a 40-metre penalty. The London Irish scrum-half, Peter Richards, on his return 
to a club he left a decade ago, was forced to carry the ball over his own line 
after being tackled by the energetic Skinner but Quins were unable to 
capitalise from the scrum.

Richards was excellent for Irish, considering that little over a week earlier 
he had been involved in the World Cup final as an emergency flanker. The Quins 
wing David Strettle, who missed World Cup selection after injuring a metatarsal 
while training during the summer, was also assured after an experimental switch 
to full-back. His side's performance pleased Quins' director of rugby, Dean 
Richards.

"It's an important competition for us and we have the strength in depth to do 
well in it," he said. Not many of the drenched crowd shared his happiness.

London Irish Curran; Ojo, D Armitage (Hickey, 66), Mordt, De Vedia; Staunton, 
Richards (Fury, 79); D Murphy (Warren, 57), Paice, Lea'aetoa, Kennedy (Johnson, 
57), Casey (capt), Roche (Danaher, 57), S Armitage, P Murphy (Thorpe, 55).

Try P Murphy. Pen D Armitage.

Harlequins Strettle; Keogh, Barry, Masson, Monye; Jarvis (Malone, 55), Care; 
Brooks, Brooker (Fuga, 55-63), Ross, Percival, Spanghero, Volley (capt; Guest 
55), Skinner, Hala'ufia.

Try Hala'ufia. Con Jarvis. Pen Jarvis.

Sin-bin Percival 13.

Referee R Maybank (Kent). Attendance 6,632.
 