
Broadcaster Joan Bakewell has apologised after suggesting that growing rates 
of eating disorders among teenagers are a sign of “narcissism”.

In an interview with the Sunday Times, Lady Bakewell, who is chairing the 
Wellcome book prize <https://www.theguardian.com/books/wellcome-book-prize> 
judging panel, said she was “alarmed” by the condition in young people but 
suggested it was a sign of the “overindulgence of our society”.

She added that eating disorders do not occur in countries ravaged by poverty 
or in Syrian refugee camps.

Bakewell, 82, said: “I am alarmed by anorexia among young people, which arises 
presumably because they are preoccupied with being beautiful and healthy and 
thin.


“No one has anorexia in societies where there is not enough food. They do not 
have anorexia in the camps in Syria. I think it’s possible anorexia could be 
about narcissism.”

She added: “To be unhappy because you are the wrong weight is a sign of the 
overindulgence of our society, over-introspection, narcissism, really.”

After her comments were criticised by eating disorder campaigners she tweeted 
that she was “deeply sorry”.

She wrote: “I have spent 6 hours answering tweets I did not expect the ST to 
quote my views on anorexia ... and am full of regret that my reported views 
have caused distress. I am deeply sorry.”

She added: “I am tired now and taking a break from Twitter. Goodnight 
everyone.”

Her comments were seized upon by Andrew Radford, chief executive of the eating 
disorders charity Beat, who said clinical psychiatrists, not Bakewell, are in a 
better position to explain the causes and impact of eating disorders.


“The NHS and academic researchers the world over are declaring eating disorder 
as a serious mental health disorder and recognising that it killed more people 
than any other mental health problem,” he said.

“I would tend to trust their judgment. There’s a body of research and logic 
says it’s a mental health disorder and needs to be taken seriously.

“I’m somewhat sceptical about this comment that teenagers are getting more 
introspective and it’s somehow a consequence of that. Firstly, if that were 
true, why don’t they all have anorexia? Second, I’m fairly certain my parents 
said that about my generation and their parents said it about theirs.

“If you want to know about the causes and impact of anorexia, you should talk 
to clinical psychiatrists.”

Bakewell’s comments do not help the stigma that already exists around eating 
disorders and mental health generally, Radford said.

“Mental health and eating disorders in general are misunderstood and 
under-resourced,” he said.

“You get far too many people saying ‘why doesn’t she eat a bit more food’ or 
‘why doesn’t she behave differently’ and that’s unhelpful at the best and 
harmful at the worst. Poor people going through this terrible disease feel even 
worse as a result.”

Earlier this year, David Cameron pledged to ensure teenagers with eating 
disorders receive treatment more quickly.

From 2017/18, a new waiting-time measure will track the proportion of patients 
being seen within a month of referral, or within a week for urgent cases.

Bakewell also suggested that, while she was pleased to see the stigma around 
discussing mental health fading, counselling and psychotherapy – including 
treatment for children – “can get out of hand”.

Her comments provoked anger on Twitter, to which Bakewell responded by saying 
she was “speculating loosely” on what might cause anorexia. In further 
responses, she said she believed anorexia sufferers deserve “sympathy and help” 
but said she was pleased if her comments had triggered some debate over the 
issue.
Joan Bakewell (@JDBakewell) 
If I've stirred a public discussion about anorexia... Good. Let's have more 
research and information.
 <https://twitter.com/JDBakewell/status/708985019822432256> March 13, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JDBakewell/status/708985019822432256> 
Bakewell, also president of Birkbeck, University of London, said that asking 
people “Are you really happy?” gave them a chance to consider anxieties that 
had not previously crossed their mind.

The Wellcome book prize rewards the best book, fiction or non-fiction, linked 
to medicine, health or illness.

The shortlist will be announced on Monday and the winner crowned on 25 April.
 