
The US secretary of state, John Kerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry>, has arrived in Kabul amid a 
tense standoff between Afghanistan's two presidential candidates that threatens 
to derail the country's first democratic handover of power.

In meetings with both candidates, Abdullah Abdullah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah> and Ashraf Ghani, Kerry 
hopes to resolve the tension by arriving at mutually agreeable criteria for an 
audit of votes.

Hours before Kerry's visit, the outgoing Afghan president Hamid Karzai 
endorsed a UN proposal to audit 8,000 polling stations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/11/hamid-karzai-ballot-check-un-john-kerry>
, a plan that was accepted by the Ghani camp on Friday morning. Discussions 
with the Abdullah campaign were continuing.

It is unclear whether the proposed audit would be complete by 22 July, when 
the final results are due, or even by 2 August, when the newly elected 
president is to be inaugurated.

There may be strong incentive, however, as US officials have warned that if 
the process were to be delayed,Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> would run the risk of losing 
its much-needed aid.

Confidence in the electoral process has plummeted since the 14 June runoff, 
when Abdullah accused his rival of fraud on a massive scale, a claim Ghani 
denies. Kerry's last-minute visit to Afghanistan was the latest indication of 
how dire the situation had become.

Both parties hope his visit may bring the impetus to break the weeks-long 
political stasis. The gulf between the two camps remains wide and it is unclear 
whether Kerry will be able to bridge the gap in an atmosphere of mistrust.

On Monday, both parties appeared on the cusp of an agreement that would have 
found a mutually acceptable way of identifying fraudulent votes. But the 
following morning Abdullah declared himself the winner in an emotional speech 
to a crowd of supporters who tore down a portrait of Karzai and replaced it 
with a photograph of Abdullah.

The need for a solution is becoming more pressing as the situation in the 
country becomes more volatile. Prospects for a full-blown civil war appear 
slim, but there are growing fears of violence spilling on to the streets. Both 
candidates are supported by strongmen who have been warring for decades, and 
may decide that swift and decisive military action is the only way out of the 
impasse.

Given the high stakes, both sides welcomed Kerry's intervention. Spokesmen for 
the Ghani and Abdullah have said that all direct contact between the two 
candidates has been severed since the runoff – they had been communicating 
through the UN and mediation teams. Both expressed hopes that this stalemate 
would come to an end, but have shown little sign of yielding their positions.

Mahmoud Saikal, Abdullah campaign's spokesman, referred to Kerry's visit as 
"an opportunity to explain to him what really happened".

Hamidullah Farooqi, spokesman for Ghani's campaign, said his camp remained 
bitter about Abdullah's perceived inconsistency, pointing to his "ever-changing 
demands".

Farooqi added: "If we want the democratic process to continue, we have to 
stick to the rules. You cannot change the rules 90 minutes into the game.

"Their demands have changed six, no, seven times, in the past two weeks. Every 
day – every day – we wake up and there is a different ask."

Both candidates have been campaigning since submitting their nomination papers 
in October 2013, and some of their supporters expressed fatigue as the process 
dragged into its 10th month with no sign of a resolution.

A spokesman for Abdullah said his camp wanted a robust audit that would "scrub 
the dirty votes from the clean votes". If this were to fail, they would be open 
to pursuing "other political options", the spokesman continued, declining to 
say what those would be.

Speculation in Kabul has included the possibility that the losing candidate 
could receive a new post, such as a prime minister's job, which would allow for 
some degree of power-sharing.

But Farooqi maintains that a deal of this kind is off the table.

Amid the bickering, there was also a sense that Kerry's visit may indicate a 
failure of Afghanistan's fledgling democratic process.

Farooqi, perhaps recognising this, said US recommendations would be welcome as 
long as they fell within the bounds of Afghanistan's legal framework. "Even Mr 
Kerry cannot replace and laws and institutions of this country," he said.
 