
Sometimes inspiration springs from the most unlikely sources. With more than 
half an hour gone this match was meandering aimlessly along, with cohesion and 
fluidity frustratingly elusive for two half-strength sides, when Saracens' 
20-stone Samoan prop Cencus Johnston received the ball in an unpromising 
situation on the left.

With a remarkably nimble step and a turn of pace he was away and surprisingly 
skinning Bristol's promising young wing Tom Arscott. He did not score, of 
course - he was 40 metres out after all - but he popped a ball inside to Edd 
Thrower, who in turn fed Kameli Ratuvou for the afternoon's first try. "He's 
got a fair few skills," Saracens' director of rugby, Alan Gaffney, said with 
some understatement.

It would be wrong to say that the floodgates suddenly opened but it was a 
crucial moment becauseSaracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> had 
the otherwise outstanding Hugh Vyvyan in the sin-bin at the time and, with 
Gordon Ross adding the conversion, the home side went 16-5 ahead and were never 
to be significantly troubled again.

Indeed they garnered four more tries and a bonus point which, with two wins 
out of two, may prove vital in their last pool match at Llanelli at the end of 
the month. And they can certainly approach that with confidence - as they can 
Glasgow in Europe next week - because here they revealed impressive strength in 
depth. Ross, the reserve fly-half, kicked excellently before making way for the 
more expansive Glen Jackson, whose arrival coincided with Saracens' second try 
and a rush of points asBristol <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> 
suffered with Brian O'Riordan in the sin-bin.

Andy Farrell showed up decently on his return from the World Cup, carrying 
powerfully and tackling soundly as well as making one fine break which 
naturally roused the crowd - not as much as Johnston's effort, though.

Saracens were also supremely superior up front, with their scrummage making a 
real mess of a Bristol eight who had inflicted similar damage upon Llanelli 
last week. "It was obviously a much sterner test than last week," said the 
visitors' head coach, Richard Hill. "We actually had quite a bit of ball and 
made some line breaks but could not finish them off."

Hill said he would make some 10 changes for next weekend's European visit to 
Cardiff. "To be honest we were surprised that we did so well against Llanelli. 
It's difficult competing on three fronts and we don't want to embarrass 
ourselves in Europe."

Gaffney is also concerned how his small squad might cope with such a triple 
burden but is looking forward to travelling to Wales. "Stradey Park is 
obviously a very difficult place to win," he said. "But we'll go there as top 
of this pool and at least we've been going OK away from home this season."

One facet of Saracens' game requiring attention is their lineout, which 
coughed up four throws early in the second half and also conceded a first try 
for the Bristol hooker, David Blaney - the other came from a quickly taken 
penalty - when Vyvyan was absent.

Vyvyan atoned by bulldozing over Nathan Budgett's lacklustre tackle from a 
quick tap every bit as effective as Blaney's and also later showing dextrous 
hands for David Seymour's try. And the replacement fly-half floated a delicious 
long pass for Ratuvou's second try before the replacement hooker Andy Kyriacou 
finished proceedings from a lineout drive.

Saracens Thrower; Penney, Sorrell (capt), Farrell (Powell, 68), Ratuvou; Ross 
(Jackson, 59), Rauluni (De Kock, 59); Lloyd, Cairns (Kyriacou, 68), Johnston 
(Mercey, 74), Ryder, Vyvyan (Chesney, 72), Gustard, Seymour (Saull, 63), 
Skirving

Tries Ratuvou 2, Vyvyan, Seymour, Kyriacou. Cons Ross, Jackson 3 Pens Ross 4.

Sin-bin Vyvyan, 25.

Bristol Hill (Morgan, 68); Robinson, Cox, Higgitt (Barnes, 70), Arscott; 
Strange (Thomas, 68), O'Riordan; Clarke (Hilton, 59), Blaney (Linklater, 68), 
Crompton, Llewellyn, Hohneck (Pennycook, 68), Budgett, El Abd (capt), Blowers 
(Phillips, 59).Tries Blaney 2 Con Strange Pen Strange.

Sin-bin O'Riordan, 58.

Referee T Wigglesworth (Hull). Attendance: 5,827.
 