
Culture secretary John Whittingdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-whittingdale> has invited Armando 
Iannucci to a meeting to discuss the future of the BBC and his MacTaggart 
lecture in which he accused ministers of in effect trying to kill off the 
corporation.

Whittingdale extended the invite to Iannucci in the wake of his speech on 
Wednesday night in which he rounded on politicians and Rupert Murdoch, 
comparing the government’s treatment of theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> to a “doctor urging his patient to 
consider the benefits of assisted suicide”.

Iannucci, who satirised Westminster in The Thick of It, and US politics in his 
hit HBO show Veep, said he would gladly accept the offer, but played down the 
prospect of him being invited to join Whittingdale’s “expert panel” advising on 
the BBC’s future.

“He said ‘come and have a chat’ so obviously I will come and have a chat but 
it’s got to go deeper than that,” Iannucci told the Guardian.

“You can’t put one token creative on the panel, you’ve got to ask yourself 
what this panel is for and what it should represent. At least half the people 
on that panel should be from the creative side of television.”

Iannucci was fiercely critical of the panel, including former Channel 5 boss 
Dawn Airey and ex-ITN chief executive Stewart Purvis, for not featuring 
producers or creatives.


Whittingdale has defended its selection, saying it was purely an advisory role 
and the final decisions would rest with government. It is understood there were 
negotiations to have one creative on the panel but they came to nothing.

Asked if the meeting would be with a view to him joining its lineup, Iannucci 
said: “No I’m sure not but also that would be pointless because then you would 
just be one token creative.

“It’s to have a discussion about looking at asking questions about positives 
as well as negatives [about the BBC], about how we allow BBC Worldwide to be 
much more aggressive and completely commercial in how it makes money 
internationally, paying a subscription to access the BBC archive, anything that 
will bring money in that will take the pressure off the licence fee.”

Iannucci said Whittingdale had told him it was unfortunate that the 
announcement of the panel, part of the government’s review of the BBC in the 
runup to charter renewal, had come so close to funding announcement that saw 
the BBC saddled with the £650m cost of funding free licence fees for the 
over-75s.

Describing their exchange as a “perfectly civil conversation”, Iannucci said 
it was up to Whittingdale and his cabinet colleagues to “do a bit of joined- up 
government and not to market your plan in such a way that it looks like you are 
trying to shut the thing down”.

He added: “I’m always saying this whole thing should be a proper dialogue, a 
proper conversation, it shouldn’t be about the government versus the BBC, it 
should be about the government, production community and all broadcasters 
talking together about what will improve the BBC and give more value for money 
for the licence fee payer.

“Anything I say is not going to solve everything, I just wanted to start that 
alternative approach to the discussion.”

 