
Did you feel it? Last Friday night, did you feel something changing – 
imperceptible to many, yes, but to others more significant even than a ripple 
in the very fabric of space and time: the reaching of an event horizon. Once 
again, we must co-opt Obi-Wan Kenobi's words on the destruction of the planet 
Alderaan, this being easily as tragic. "I felt a great disturbance in the 
Force," he says slowly, "as if a million voices cried out in agony and were 
suddenly silenced. I fear something terrible has happened."

It has. Alex Reid <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alex-reid> has become a 
celebrity.

Cross-dressing, cage-fighting – epithets originally bestowed upon Hector by 
Homer, but removed in later drafts of the Iliad on the basis that there was 
something that bit more epic to the Trojan prince than going to a book launch 
in a gold mankini by day, while by night affecting the persona of "the 
Reidernator", smacking Essex bankers for all the world like a showboater on a 
six-fight losing streak. These were, however, the descriptive handles attached 
to Alex Reid, who was in turn attached for dear life to the creature who 
sustained him. Until last Friday, Alex was entirely dependent for survival on 
his host organism Jordan (orKatie Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/katieprice> in the Latin binomial 
classification system).

Yet his Celebrity <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/celebrity> Big 
Brother win changed all that, conferring on him epithets such as winner of 
public votes, shifter of magazines – a leap at once evolutionary for Alex and 
infinitely regressive for the rest of humankind.

As I say, many of you might not have got a sniff of this, perhaps preferring 
to focus on so-called "real news", or reading a nice book, or passing time in 
the company of friends.

But madam smelled it. Like the shark to whose eyes her own are so frequently 
compared, Jordan can smell the possibility of making a killing miles away 
underwater. And of course, sociophysiological imperatives state she must keep 
swimming forward or she will sink into the abyss, and so it is that she has 
reacted to news of Alex's win with terrifying predatory speed.

Don't forget, not two weeks ago "sources close to Jordan" were hedging their 
bets by saying she might dump him if he underwhelmed in the Bungalow of the 
Damned. Yet on Monday night, copies of OK! magazine dropped bearing news of an 
"Engagement World Exclusive", in which Katie recalls the first days of their 
relationship – "I got it off him the first night" – but declines to say whether 
she proposed to him. "That's nobody's business."

On Tuesday, the couple married in Vegas. Too quick for you, squares? Yeah? 
Just deal with it. This is the way Reidernator 2010 rolls. Fast, hard, wed – 
spray-covering your world like a really effective tanning mist. According to 
their publicist's press release on the matter: "Their decision to marry has not 
been made with any pre-conceived commercial plan or media deal in place, and 
their reason for getting married is purely down to their love for each other."

A camera crew from Katie's ITV reality show filmed the event.

Lost in Showbiz is clearly getting old, because its first thoughts were, "God, 
his poor parents", who are now probably going to be herded, dazed and confused, 
into an 86-page OK! wedding celebration party shoot. In all sooth, it's been a 
bit of a change of pace for a 34-year-old who, until he was enticed into 
Jordan's web-shaped pink mansion last year, was still living at home with them 
in Aldershot. He was booted back there for a bit last year when she was in a 
bate about something or other, a homecoming that I imagine to have passed off 
like a meth-assisted version of Sorry!.

Still, Alex Reid is a Ronsealed Timothy Lumsden no more. As he says of his 
unlikely "triumph" in Celebrity Big Brother, "I just hope the public learns 
something from this."

Perhaps most hilariously ruthless is the under-fire Katie's attempt to claim 
her half of the public approbation given to Alex. "We are now one," she rules. 
In case anyone missed the implication, she later reiterates: "We are as one. If 
they're booing me, it's like they're booing him."

Do amend your records accordingly.
 