
This week, Lost in Showbiz has been forced to drag itself to its laptop from 
the floor, where it has lain all week, prone and inconsolable. Like the rest of 
the country, it has existed these last few days in a state of mute 
incomprehension, the eerie silence rent only by a sound unheard since it was 
described by Clive James in the aftermath of Diana's death – "'No', pronounced 
through an ascending sob, the consonant left behind in the chest voice as the 
vowel climbed into the head voice, the pure wail of lament whereby anyone, no 
matter how tone deaf, for one terrible moment becomes a singer" – and repeated 
rueful plays of Katie Price's No 60 smash hit Free To Love Again, which, in its 
own way, also makes one think of the pure wail of lament whereby anyone, no 
matter how tone deaf, for one terrible moment becomes a singer.

Stop all the clocks, cut off the telephone, silence the dog with a juicy bone, 
something something, something to do with a muffled drum or something: the 
dream, if Lost in Showbiz may venture to quote the late John Lennon, is over. 
Unbelievable as it seemed, here it was, in black and white. KATIE: I HAD TO 
DUMP ALEX. The front page of the Sun, alas folded in Lost in Showbiz's local 
newsagent in such a way as to omit the final word of the headline, leading to a 
brief glimmer of hope that the marriage wasn't over yet, that the latest was 
merely that the Zeppelin-breasted lovely had suffered a pronounced case of 
"runny bum". But there was no hope. Oh, Alex "The Reidinator" Reid. Oh, Jordan. 
The fairytale of our age, forged in the secret domain of Eros that is the 
office of the Outside Organisation publicity company, is dead.

"To Alex, it all seems purely like business and that she's being 
cold-hearted," offered one insider. How different that seems to 11 months ago, 
when the arc of their love was described in a simple statement that 
encapsulated every newlywed's hopes and dreams: "The decision to marry has not 
been made with any pre-conceived commercial plan or media deal in place," they 
giggled, like lovestruck teenagers on a first date. And like lovestruck 
teenagers, they impetuously ran away to be wed, surrounded only by their 
closest confidantes and a film crew from Living TV. If a union clearly forged 
in such good faith can flounder, then what hope have the rest of us?

It may be ghoulish to poke around in the dying embers of a love gone wrong, 
but as the floral tributes pile up outside the £2.5m eight-bedroom mansion in 
Surrey and the clamour grows for the prime minister to make an official 
statement – come on Cammo! We know you're busy and the welfare state won't 
systematically dismantle itself, but your people are suffering! – we're all 
trying to understand the reasons this happened. The tabloid press is no help: 
clearly as befuddled by grief as the rest of us, it offers only wildly 
conflicting reports on the admittedly vital matter of The Reidinator's sleeping 
arrangements. Alex has left the mansion! Alex is refusing to leave the mansion! 
Alex is sleeping in the same bed as Jordan ("the burly cage fighter has been 
creeping under the sheets every night to sleep beside the beauty")! Alex is in 
the spare room! Alex is on the roof, demanding a helicopter and safe passage to 
Cuba, $200m in cash, the release of all political prisoners in Iran and an end 
to the Israeli blockade of Palestine!

To experience the raw emotions at source, Lost in Showbiz can only direct you, 
if you feel able to bear it, to Katie Price's Twitter feed and ask you to 
imagine the kind of anguish that drove her to pour out her feelings to millions 
in one deeply affecting message shortly before the announcement of their 
separation: "I love 80s and 90s music wooooo." By 80s music she surely means 
the final, desperate postcard from the edge that is Joy Division's Closer. By 
90s music, perhaps The Manic Street Preachers' howl of impotent, nihilistic 
despair, The Holy Bible. She's definitely not bopping around the kitchen to No 
Limits by 2 Unlimited and Bad Manners's Lip Up Fatty.

Every day brings more harrowing 140-character frontline reports from a mind 
clearly half-maddened by sorrow, unable to think of anything beyond obsessively 
picking over the marriage's failure: "Just bathed my dogs and they still smell 
yuk", "Gutted missed beginning of Silent Witness boo hoo". And yet, there is a 
weak glimmer of hope on the horizon, a brighter, happier future, promised by a 
feature in OK! headlined WHO'S RIGHT FOR MISS PRICE: WE REVEAL KATIE'S 
POTENTIAL SUITORS.

The author has helpfully provided a list of love matches selected with the 
utmost care, including a 16-year-old boy from One Direction and cricketer Shane 
Warne, who certainly seems like perfect husband material. Let's not dwell on 
the fact that he was stripped of the Australian vice-captaincy after bombarding 
a British nurse with erotic text messages while married, broke up with his wife 
after sending erotic text messages to a pair of models, reconciled with his 
wife then broke up again after he accidentally sent her an erotic text message 
intended for another woman, then got together with Liz Hurley but sadly broke 
up after she discovered he'd been sending erotic text messages to a married 
mother of two. Put his seemingly demented obsession with sending erotic text 
messages to other women out of your mind! As OK! point out, the important thing 
is he's got an Australian accent JUST LIKE PETER ANDRE.

Doubtless some may cavil that so has the bloke who played Harold Bishop in 
Neighbours and Francesco Mangione, dubbed the Mr Whippy Ice Cream Turf War 
Murderer after hacking a rival ice-cream van driver to death in Moonee Ponds in 
2002, but Lost in Showbiz feels the gloom of the past week beginning to lift. 
Dry your eyes Katie! Is that the beeping of a newly arrived Ocker-accented 
erotic text message we hear? Lost in Showbiz suggests you answer it, and end 
the nation's torment at a stroke.
 