
José Mourinho will seek to present a more cerebral front at the conference to 
mark the beginning of his second managerial spell at Chelsea on Monday 
lunchtime. But the fireworks continued to explode behind him,with Andrés 
Iniesta, the Barcelona midfielder, saying that the Portuguese had "damaged 
Spanish football" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jun/09/jose-mourinho-andres-iniesta-madrid>
.

Mourinho's three-year tenure at Real Madrid, which ended last season, was as 
synonymous with confrontation as it was for high points on the field – his team 
interrupted Barcelona's dominance to win La Liga in 2011-12 – and Iniesta 
suggested he is far from sorry to see Mourinho depart for the Premier League.

"You have to look at the facts," Iniesta said. "Yes, he damaged Spanish 
football … in general, more harm than good. But I don't like talking about that 
person at all. So if you don't mind, we'll leave it at that."

Mourinho claims he has matured and it is difficult to foresee a repeat of his 
outspoken Special One unveiling from 2004, when he takes his seat in front of 
the cameras at Stamford Bridge's Harris Suite at 1.30pm.

One of his messages has been the need for evolution; that revolution is too 
strong a notion, as he has inherited a squad of tremendous quality. He is keen 
to promote from within and to assess the claims of the players that have been 
out on loan.

He is determined to retain Romelu Lukaku, who spent last season at West 
Bromwich Albion, and he appears to have won an early battle, with the Belgium 
striker saying he would "play forChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> next season". Lukaku does not 
want to be a bit-part player in a campaign he hopes will end with a successful 
appearance at the World Cup finals in Brazil. "I had a chat with José and he'll 
put me in his squad," Lukaku said.

Mourinho, though, is in the market to strengthen as he has noted with alarm 
how Chelsea have struggled in the Premier League for the past two seasons. He 
wants to upgrade his options up front, with Napoli's Edinson Cavani at the 
forefront of his thinking.Chelsea have opened talks with the Italian club over 
the Uruguayan, who has a €63m buy-out clause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jun/07/edinson-cavani-napoli-chelsea>
.

Chelsea also hope to take Stevan Jovetic from Fiorentina and André Schürrle 
from Bayer Leverkusen. In central defence, Porto's Eliaquim Mangala is a target.
 