
Towards the end of 1954, 23-year-old Richard Herrick lay delirious and 
paranoid in a hospital bed in Massachusetts, trying to pull out his catheter. 
His symptoms were caused by chronic nephritis – the kidney inflammation that 
was killing him. His brother Ronald offered to do something extraordinary – 
donate a healthy kidney. This was before the days of immune-suppressing drugs, 
but Ronald appeared to be Richard's identical twin and his surgeon, Joseph 
Murray, believed transplantation ought to be possible in such cases.

Murray, a practising Catholic, consulted various religious leaders to discuss 
the ethical implications of transplant, and, to check that the brothers really 
were identical, called on the Boston police department, who took their 
fingerprints and confirmed that they were. Murray, disturbed by the idea of 
putting Ronald through major surgery from which he might not benefit, also 
experimentally transplanted skin patches between the brothers to confirm that 
they "took". The kidney operations went ahead on 23 December, after Murray 
had rehearsed the procedure using corpses and dogs.

Another surgeon took the donor kidney from Ronald, which Murray connected to 
Richard's blood vessels and ureter. There was, he wrote later, a collective 
hush in the operating room, and then the kidney turned pink as blood entered it 
and "there were grins all round".

Richard was restored to health, married the recovery-room nurse, and lived a 
further eight years. Ronald lived until he was 79 and died of heart disease. 
The example set by Murray's operation, the first successful human organ 
transplant, has since saved the lives of countless people worldwide. In 1990 it 
earned Murray, who has died aged 93, the Nobel prize for physiology or 
medicine, shared with E Donnall Thomas, a pioneer in the field of bone-marrow 
transplantation.

Murray was born in Milford, Massachusetts, where his father was a judge and 
his mother a teacher. He was educated at the College of the Holy Cross in 
Worcester, Massachusetts, then at Harvard medical school in Boston. He 
undertook his training posts and residency in 1944 at Peter Bent Brigham 
hospital, Harvard (now known as Brigham and Women's hospital).

He then joined the army and was assigned to Valley Forge, a military hospital 
in Pennsylvania and a leading plastic surgery centre. Among the many badly 
burned patients he treated there was a 22-year-old pilot, Charles Woods, who 
had been shot down over Burma and needed months of extensive surgery to 
reconstruct his face and hands. Murray and Woods became lifelong friends.

As a life-saving measure, the Valley Forge surgeons used transplanted skin as 
a temporary cover for burns victims, including Woods. Its slow rejection 
fascinated Murray: how could the body distinguish between another person's skin 
and its own? His boss, Colonel James Brown, postulated that when rejection was 
slow, it was because donor and recipient were genetically close.

Returning to civilian life at Brigham hospital in 1947, Murray worked as 
a plastic and general surgeon, devoting his spare time to unpaid and unfunded 
transplant research on animals. In 1959 he pioneered the use of small doses of 
radiation to suppress the immune response that led to organ rejection, 
and later the use of azathioprine, the first immunosuppressive drug.

He transplanted kidneys between many identical-twin patients after the 
Herricks, and did the world's first successful transplant to a non-identical 
patient in 1959, when the early anti-rejection drugs had reached the market. 
Three years later he transplanted the first kidney from a deceased donor 
to a living recipient.

Another patient of Murray was Raymond McMillan, who had been born with Moebius 
syndrome, which caused facial deformities and heart defects, and had been 
abandoned to a psychiatric institution by his family. Aged 21, McMillan was 
referred to Murray, who repositioned his jaw so that he could swallow normally 
and smile for the first time. Then Murray's team repaired his palate and nose, 
while other surgeons repaired his heart. With the encouragement of his doctors, 
McMillan studied for academic qualifications and went on to work in hospital 
laboratories. "Surgery," wrote Murray in his memoir Surgery of the Soul: 
Reflections on a Curious Career (2001), "had enabled his inner self to grow and 
glow."

Murray resigned as chief of transplant surgery at Brigham in 1971 
to concentrate on plastic surgery, and retired as Harvard professor of surgery 
in 1986. He gave away his Nobel prize money to Harvard medical school, the 
Brigham, and Boston children's hospital. Other honours included election to the 
US National Academy of Sciences and Institute of Medicine. He was a member of 
the Pontifical Academy of Sciences, which advises the Vatican. After his 
retirement, he was in demand as a speaker, advising students to "keep their eye 
on helping the patients".

Murray was, said the British transplant immunologist Professor Leslie Brent, 
"the epitome of New England courtesy and a man of great humanity. He wore his 
Nobel prize lightly." He liked outdoor activities – camping, hiking, tennis, 
cycling and swimming.

Towards the end of his time at medical school, Murray attended a Boston 
Symphony Orchestra concert with classmates where he saw a young woman, Virginia 
Link (known as Bobby), who looked "too good for her male companion". He chatted 
her up during the interval, and they married in 1945. She survives him, along 
with their six children and 18 grandchildren.

• Joseph Edward Murray, surgeon, born 1 April 1919; died 26 November 2012 
 