
Ever wanted to work in film, TV or even a zoo? If so, have you considered an 
apprenticeship? From computer coders to firefighters, there aremore types of 
on-the-job training than ever before 
<http://www.pertemps.co.uk/en/about-us/news/record-numbers-now-taking-apprenticeships-uk-government-says>
.

To celebrate National Apprenticeship Week, here's a taste of what it's like to 
work as a trainee in some of the most sought-after industries.

Vay Ha, production apprentice for the BBC
 Vay Ha Photograph: Vay Ha 
Before joining the scheme, I had a short stint at university studying media 
production. I quickly realised that university wasn't the right thing for me. 
That led me to take a gap year, half travelling and working on personal 
projects. I lived in Australia for a year before travelling around Asia.

I knew I wanted to work in TV/media production so the BBC scheme particularly 
attracted me as it's is a huge organisation which I knew offered great 
training. Initially I was placed as a runner, but I was eventually given more 
responsibility and worked, for example, as a researcher on BBC1's Watchdog and 
got an on-screen credit.

I am confident that having gained the experience and met the right people 
within the BBC that I could get a researcher role after the scheme. Although 
most roles within the company would be freelance I feel that I could definitely 
progress well within the organisation.

The best thing about being on the scheme and placed on different programmes is 
the level of responsibility you can get on the job. This has often been 
challenging as I have been given more tasks than anticipated but it has helped 
me learn a lot about TV.

Brad Allen, 18, coding apprentice for O2
 Brad Allan Photograph: Brad Allan 
I've always been a bit of a tech geek, and after teaching myself to code after 
school, I knew I wanted to do something that would really challenge me and make 
the most of my digital skills. I'm now an advanced apprentice in the O2 Lab, an 
innovation team dedicated to coming up with weird and wonderful ideas for new 
products and turning them into reality. Still a programmer through and through, 
I spend my time developing new software to improve and enhance products in 
development.

I love the fact I'm encouraged to take the initiative in this role. A few 
months ago, I spotted a conference in Scotland for coders all over the world 
who use Ruby – the programming language I use daily. O2 encouraged me to go, 
which gave me the opportunity to network with fascinating people in the 
industry and share my knowledge with the rest of the team. Working in the Lab 
can be pretty full-on, with several projects always on the go, but it's great 
to work in such a vibrant atmosphere alongside some real tech geniuses. This 
September I'll officially graduate from my apprenticeship and become a 
full-time O2 employee, having gained two Level 3 BTECs in IT and a huge amount 
of on-the-job training.

Rory Beresford, 20, apprentice aquarist for the National Sea Life Centre 
Birmingham
 Rory B Photograph: Rory B 
I am an apprentice aquarist, which involves helping with the day to day 
husbandry of the creatures at the National Sea Life Centre Birmingham. Every 
day I feed a very large nurse shark called Albi and his mate Florence, a 
playful colony of Gentoo penguins and a very greedy green sea turtle called 
Molokai, to name just a few of my favourites.

Another important aspect of my apprenticeship here is a research project I'm 
undertaking in conjunction with the University of Manchester, with a view to 
having a paper published on animal nutrition. This apprenticeship is primarily 
focused on preparing me for a job as an aquarist, which can eventually lead to 
the more advanced role of curator.

Getting to work with such a diverse group of interesting creatures makes every 
day exciting, and despite the long hours and hard work, I can sometimes forget 
it is my job. Being involved in the various breeding programmes at the centre 
is another highlight, as it's so satisfying to see a seahorse or ray progress 
from a tiny, delicate newborn, to a fully grown adult that people can enjoy and 
learn from.

Thomas Maxwell, firefighter apprentice for Serco
 Tom Maxwell Photograph: Tom Maxwell 
In the mornings we train, going out and doing fire drills, while in the 
afternoon we go and fill out our reports on personal development. The 
apprenticeship takes two years, and during this time we learn how to get 
confident in all aspects of the job, including rescue technique and handling 
rescue tools. For our training we carry out fire scenarios, so are given a mock 
brief and we have to decide how to respond. Afterwards we are debriefed and 
told what we could have done differently.

Once I've finished the scheme I'll have a lot of options as a qualified 
firefighter. I will be able to work in any airport in the world: the 
qualification is international so I could move to Dubai or Australia. My goal, 
though, is to try and get a full-time place at this station and in four or five 
years time apply to be a crew manager. After that I could be a watch manager.

The watch team is like a family and I also like learning about the rescue 
equipment and different uses for tools. I find this the most challenging part 
of the role, as there's a lot to remember – aircrafts, type of rescue 
techniques, points of entry. It'll take at least two years to memorise it all.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 