
Next Tuesday, five writers, all seasoned readers, will meet to discuss six new 
novels and decide which they think is the best. And so the annual punch-up 
known to the literary police as the Man Booker prize will reach its climax.

The record shows that the outcome usually reflects a collective dynamic. 
Advice to punters: study the judges before the books. This year, they are 
novelist Susan Hill, writer and journalist Matthew d'Ancona, political diarist 
Chris Mullin and Gaby Wood, head of books at theTelegraph. Their distinguished 
chair is Stella Rimington, a career spook turned thriller writer. My impression 
is that Rimington and Hill's storytelling zeal has skewed the slate but that 
this wasn't a hard sell.

Uniquely, Man Booker gives judges freedom to establish the criteria by which 
they choose "the novel of the year". In 2011, defying conventional wisdom among 
publishers, and pleasing the trade, not the critics, Rimington's team has 
chosen ripping yarns. Announcing the nominations, Dame Stella briskly declared 
she celebrated "readability". She might have done better to quote EM Forster's 
spinsterish aside inAspects of the Novel: "Yes – oh dear yes – the novel tells 
a story."

Rimington, ably supported by Mullin, has effortlessly enraged the "London 
literati", inspiring headlines such as "Booker in crisis". One faction, led by 
literary agents, has even announced a new "Literature Prize" in protest. 
Several commentators have thrown hissy fits, as if telling stories was not, and 
should not be, one of the novel's primary functions. This panel's preference 
for plot has meant that big-ticket fiction, such as Edward St Aubyn'sAt Last 
(Picador) or Alan Hollinghurst'sThe Stranger's Child (Picador), were outgunned 
by, among others, a thriller and a western.

At Tuesday's high noon, that will be old news. The judges' unenviable task 
will be to reconsider their shortlist and extract themselves from the locked 
room of "readability" into which they have placed themselves.

Despite the omens, I remain optimistic about the verdict. The searching nature 
of a second reading is often overlooked by pundits and tipsters. Novels that 
sparkled in the summer sun will seem flashy and meretricious in the sober light 
of autumn. As a service toObserver readers, I have just re-read the six 
shortlisted titles, in alphabetical order. This is what I have found.

First, in name and seniority, comes Julian Barnes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/julianbarnes>, a veteran of this contest. 
The Sense of an Ending(Cape) is steeped in our literature. Even its title is a 
borrowing from a great English critic and scholar, the late Frank Kermode.

"We live in time – it holds and moulds us – but I've never felt I understood 
it very well," says Tony Webster, the quiet, subtly unbelievable narrator. This 
slim, spare book at first seems subtly unreliable, too; Barnes leaves out as 
much as he reveals.

On the surface, an account of Tony's efforts in late middle age to unlock the 
puzzles in two distant relationships, the novel becomes an emotionally charged 
reflection on the unreliability of recollection, on how we edit our pasts, and 
on the fatal grip of unintended consequences. With beautiful prose that recalls 
Ford Madox Ford'sThe Good Soldier, Barnes makes every word resonate, leaving 
the reader to ponder his meaning long after its ending.

Where Barnes is a fastidious anatomist, Carol Birch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/carol-birch> is a smash-and-grab artist. 
Jamrach's Menagerie (Canongate), the hectic tale of Victorian slumdog Jaffy 
Brown, is a high-spirited mash-up of Dickens, Melville, Stevenson and 
Coleridge. Like three of the shortlist, it's a first-person story that 
inexorably becomes a confession.

When Jaffy Brown is sent to sea by Mr Jamrach in quest of a far-east Asian 
dragon, he embarks on a journey that will take him, like the Ancient Mariner, 
towards a hallucinatory crisis that will both make and destroy him. This is a 
novel that will keep the nation's book clubs in a ferment for months.

Patrick deWitt's The Sisters Brothers (Granta) is also set in Victorian times. 
A tale of fraternal psychopaths in the wild west, it owes something toTrue Grit
, and something to Elmore Leonard, but triumphs on its own terms as a black 
comedy of the Gold Rush.

Esi Edugyan's Half Blood Blues (Serpent's Tail), is another confession, one 
that also explicitly acknowledges its historical sources. Adopting the voice of 
ageing jazz player Sid Griffiths, Edugyan narrates the terrible tale of Hiero 
Falk, the Afro-German trumpeter arrested by the Gestapo in occupied Paris. 
Edugyan's ventriloquism is compelling, personal and authentic, her story deeply 
researched.

In Pigeon English (Bloomsbury), Stephen Kelman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/stephen-kelman> takes on the voice of a 
south London teen to explore the murder of a Damilola Taylor-esque victim of 
mindless street violence. End notes credit the factual origins of an 
enthralling fictional debut. Kelman is a canny writer, with an ear for the 
street talk of "chooked", "fuglies" and "bulla".

AD Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ad-miller> in Snowdrops 
(Atlantic) declares his theme at once: "In Russia," he writes, "there are only 
crime stories." His title refers to "the sins the winter hides", bodies buried 
in the Russian snow. He is a big discovery, a new thriller writer with a 
powerful and distinctive voice, writing with maturity and confidence. If this 
thriller were to succeed, it would be a first for Man Booker.

So, who will win? This is a commercial, unambitious shortlist, the bruised 
fruit of recession. Unlike previous years, there are no obvious duds, but 
nothing outstanding either. Compared with 1980, say, when Golding'sRites of 
Passage pipped Burgess's Earthly Powers, this is an age of pewter. My guess is 
thatThe Sense of an Ending will prevail (after a dispute). It satisfies the 
committee's unconscious preferences and it will flatter their anxiety to make a 
good choice. Above all, it is a work of art, in a minor key.

Don't bet on it. My record with this prize is 100%: I am always wrong.
 