
Now we know what happens when Cobra  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2002/oct/21/Whitehall.uk>meets nanny 
state over swine flu. The public realm goes potty and people die. Ministers 
meddle, medical officials abuse language, and drug companies make huge profits. 
And all this is over a condition correctly diagnosed by a Dulwich 12-year-old 
during the initial outburst of hysteria in May as "like a cold". Whitehall 
empire-building has been reduced to a nationalised sniffle.

Last week the government's chief medical officer, Sir Liam Donaldson 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liam_Donaldson> – never knowingly out-panicked – 
suffered an acute attack of headline deprivation. Nostalgic for the famous 
"750,000 could die" prediction for avian flu, he decided that "65,000 people 
might die 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jul/16/swine-flu-pandemic-warning-helpline>
" of swine flu. He later said the figure was an "upper estimate scenario for 
planning purposes". He added that his "lower limit" was 11,000 dead. Donaldson 
knows his media. This week he terrorised ministers gathered in Downing Street's 
Cobra bunker into conceding his dream, a 2,000-strong department for a 
"national pandemic flu service".

Lord Haw-Haw could not have calibrated a more demoralising panic than the 
government's health establishment. Some spuriously exact statistic, such as 
65,000 or 31% or 0.1, is dressed up with mights, coulds and other 
pseudo-qualifications. The head of the Royal College of General Practitioners 
announces that "at its worse [sic], the pandemic will hit 30% of the 
population, of whom 0.3% might die". I suppose they might, or perhaps might not.

The death of two pregnant sufferers offered a perfect storm for the 
panic-merchants and their media acolytes, who duly staged a full MMR-style 
scare. Quick as a flash theNational Childbirth Trust  
<http://www.nctpregnancyandbabycare.com/home>warned that "symptoms could lead 
to premature labour or a miscarriage, or even cause birth defects".

Knowing that anything to do with pregnancy causes deep concern, the health 
secretary, Andy Burnham, went Stalinist. Pregnant women were told they should 
not go out, or should go out "carefully" or "only if necessary". They should 
see their doctor at once, or phone their doctor, or perhaps avoid their doctor 
in case they infect others.

In surely the most bizarre ministerial statement in history, Burnham added 
that British mothers should "plan their pregnancy carefully, but we are not 
advising women not to conceive … but to think twice". The mind boggles at the 
Cobra debate that preceded this conception edict. I can hear an official 
querying, "How many thoughts should we advise women to have before conception, 
minister, one, two or three?" Another official was solemnly telling woman to 
"wash and look after yourself".

Meanwhile, schools are warned they may have to close "to save lives", or 
perhaps not. Parents are told not to organise "flu parties". The public is 
recommended to get a "flu friend". The information that 28 out of the 29 
"killed so far by swine flu" had other potentially life-threatening conditions 
was rarely mentioned. This compares with 6,000 people a year who "die of" 
normal flu, without ever making the front page or the ministerial dispatch box.

By this Monday, madness ruled. Supplies of the anti-flu drug Tamiflu were said 
to be "rolling into the capital in convoys of lorries" to a secret location in 
Tower Hamlets that was "surrounded by a ring of steel". The BBC broadcast 
a warning that the public should not panic, then promptly bought up 4,000 doses 
for its staff, doubtless on expenses.

A firm called Oxford Economics won cheap publicity claiming that flu "could 
knock 5%" off gross domestic product. This was topped by Ernst & Young's Item 
Club in hysteria modeannouncing  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jul/20/swine-flu-pandemic-economy-deflation?FORM=ZZNR>
that "with the western world teetering on the brink of deflation … a pandemic 
on this scale could tip it over the edge". After such drivel I distinctly saw 
economists flying alongside Donaldson's pigs.

I have family and friends who have had swine flu, though I doubt if they 
appear in the figures. Doctors have better things to do than telephone the 
health department with every cough and splutter. All the victims found the flu 
less severe and certainly briefer than a bad cold. Most confirm that the one 
thing not to take is Tamiflu. I do not want to dent the soaring profits of 
Roche pharmaceuticals, but most I spoke to found the Tamiflu side-effects, of 
bad dreams, nausea and irritability, far worse than the illness. People should 
take an aspirin.

In Dread, an analysis of medical scares, the American public health expert, 
Philip Alcabes <http://www.philipalcabes.com/>, offers the sober warning of the 
1976 outbreak of swine flu in America. After immunising 45 million people 
against a near harmless strain initially compared with the 1918 virus, the 
federal government had to pay out $93m in compensation for side-effects. Time 
and again, says Alcabes, scares are used by someone with a vested interest "to 
incite anxiety or shake loose some funds".

Of course authority has to guard against harm. But the public is entitled to a 
sense of proportion. The manipulation of pregnant women last week was a 
disgrace. Untold billions are still being spent on "the risk of terrorism". Who 
knows what disproportionate costs have been incurred in what is an almost 
annual flu scare.

London's accident and emergency services are desperate at the best of times. I 
have lost three acquaintances to avoidable hospital-induced infection in the 
past year. Last week a friend had to wait seven hours after a bicycle accident 
to have a shattered arm set, by when a simple wound had become complex. In 
despair he went private.

These same resources are now being diverted to "await" a flu epidemic. The 
government is recruiting 2,000 telephone advisers to answer inquiries from 
members of the public reduced by the public health apparat to nervous wrecks. 
This will inevitably suck resources from elsewhere in the health service.

I would like to know how many people will die of heart attacks, meningitis, 
MRSA and delayed cancer treatment while health politicians play Whitehall games 
with flu. Many people might indeed die of flu, but they might also die of a 
nuclear attack, an asteroid strike or a dozen other diseases and accidents now 
receiving lower priority.

What should scare the public is not flu but the shambles of scaremongering 
that regularly envelopes it. Suppose Britain were afflicted by a serious 
disease? A habit of modern government is to generate public dependence by 
periodic scares. To do this with the nation's health is the politics of fear at 
its worst. 
 