
The brother of prime minister Justin Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau> has asked Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada>’s public safety minister to 
intervene to halt the deportation of an Algerian man accused of being an 
al-Qaida sleeper agent.

Alexandre Trudeau urged the government in a letter to quash its own order to 
deport Mohamed Harkat, a 47-year-old former pizza delivery man who has been 
fighting for more than a decade to stay inCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada>.

The documentary film-maker has long supported Harkat, reportedly offering in 
2005 to act as his surety in a bail application, while steadfastly opposing a 
provision of Canada’s immigration law used to detain him.

The seldom-used national security measure allows tribunals to be held in 
secrecy and indefinite jailing without charge of foreigners suspected of terror 
ties. It has been at the center of a post-9/11 legal and political shakeup in 
Canada that has pitted security advocates against champions of civil liberties.

In a letter to public safety minister Ralph Goodale published in the Ottawa 
Citizen newspaper on Wednesday, Alexandre Trudeau said the so-called security 
certificates are “fundamentally unfair”.

“I am absolutely convinced that at this moment, he (Harkat) poses no danger 
whatsoever to the public or to public safety in Canada, but rather offers a 
positive commitment to the life he has created here.”

A spokesman for Goodale confirmed receipt of the letter and its contents, but 
said the minister would not intervene.

“Minister Goodale has confidence in CBSA (Canada Border Services Agency) and 
IRCC (Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada)’s ability to assess cases, 
protect our security and maintain the integrity of our immigration system,” 
spokesman Scott Bardsley said.

He noted also that authorities assess “the risks to their life if 
(individuals) are removed, as well as humanitarian and compassionate 
considerations”.

The prime minister, speaking to reporters, declined to comment on the matter, 
except to say that his brother has as much right as any Canadian to lobby the 
government on issues he believes in.

Harkat, he added, can also count on the same “rigor which our citizens demand” 
being applied in his case.

Harkat was first detained in 2002 on suspicion of links to al-Qaida, and spent 
nearly four years in jail before being released under strict bail conditions.

He has denied terror links, claiming he fled Algeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria> over a crackdown on a political 
party to which he belonged, the now-defunct and banned Islamic Salvation Front 
(FIS).

But Canadian courts ruled he was likely an al-Qaida sleeper agent and a 
security threat.

The original security law used to prosecute Harkat was struck down in 2007 as 
unjust. But a tweaked version meant to ensure better legal representation of 
defendants was upheld by the supreme court in 2014.
 