
Afghanistan's presidential election is over, and it was a fiasco. The decision 
by the Independent Election Commission (IEC) tocancel the second round  <>and 
declare the incumbent,Hamid Karzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamid-karzai>, the victor concludes a 
process that underminedAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>'s nascent democracy. In the US 
and Europe, the fraud-tainted elections halted the momentum for President 
Obama's new Afghanistan strategy and undercut support for sending more troops.

The election was effectively over on Sunday when Karzai's remaining rival, 
former foreign ministerAbdullah Abdullah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah>, announced he would not 
run. Abdullah Abdullah did not withdraw because he calculated he could not win, 
as some have uncharitably implied, but because he knew the election would not 
be honest. Indeed, in an honest election, he might have had a chance.

In the first round on 20 August, more than 1m fraudulent votes were recorded 
for Karzai, taking his total to 54% – above the 50% threshold needed to avoid a 
runoff. Two factors made this level of fraud possible: ghost polling centres 
and corrupt election commission staff. Under the guise of maximising 
participation, the pro-Karzai IEC located at least 1,500 polling centres in 
places either controlled by theTaliban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> or so insecure that no one from the 
government side could go there. These centres never actually existed, but since 
the locations were inaccessible to candidate agents, observers and voters, it 
was easy for corrupt election officials to say they were open and to record 
hundreds of thousands of votes from them.

Much of the fraud was blatant. In many polling centres Karzai won 100% of the 
votes and results were recorded in improbably even numbers, such as 500 to 
zero. This made it relatively easy for the Electoral Complaints Commission, a 
UN-backed watchdog set up under Afghan law, to detect and toss out many 
fraudulent ballots. In the end, it excluded enough phoney votes to reduce 
Karzai's total to 49.67%, setting up the runoff. Because it only needed to 
determine if a runoff was required, the ECC did not do a full recount but 
instead audited a representative sample of votes.

If the ECC had done a full recount, Karzai's total would have been 
substantially lower. Insiders tell me that an honest result would have had 
Karzai at 41% and Abdullah at 34%. While Karzai was still the favourite in the 
second round, Abdullah clearly had a chance to overtake him, especially if he 
could capitalise on public disgust with the fraud. Karzai, however, took no 
chances. Abdullah and the UN asked the IEC to reduce the number of polling 
places by eliminating the ghost polling centres and to replace staff who 
committed fraud. Instead, the IEC – whose members Karzai appointed and who 
serve his interests – increased the number of centres and rehired corrupt 
staff. Not only was fraud more likely in the second round than the first, it 
also would have been harder to detect as the perpetrators presumably would have 
learned to be more subtle. Knowing the Taliban were determined to use violence 
to disrupt the vote, Abdullah did the statesmanlike thing. He withdrew rather 
than ask Afghans to risk their lives voting in a phoney election.

This outcome is a huge failure for the international community, and in 
particular the UN, which mobilised $300m million to pay for the elections and 
was supposed to help produce a fair outcome. UN professionals managed all 
aspects of the election process, from public education to the printing of 
ballots, while the UN-backed ECC handled hundreds of major complaints and 
audited more than 1,000 ballot boxes. Kai Eide, the Norwegian diplomat who 
heads the UN mission, claimed the audit process proved that the Afghan 
institutions worked, since the ECC took away Karzai's first-round victory. But 
the system did not work. The IEC deliberately adopted procedures that made an 
honest second round impossible.

There was a time when the UN could have made a difference. As deputy head of 
the UN mission inAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, I 
tried in July to get the IEC to remove the ghost polling centres from the 
elections roster. After the elections, I pushed the IEC to stick to its 
anti-fraud safeguards which, if maintained, would have excluded enough 
obviously fraudulent Karzai votes to have the runoff in September. In both 
instances, Eide overruled me, arguing that the UN mandate was only to support 
the Afghan institutions in their decisions, not to tell them to hold an honest 
election. Our disagreement over how to handle election fraud led Eide to 
engineer my dismissal. When he finally realised the IEC was not an independent 
body, it was too late. This week the IEC simply thumbed its nose at his efforts 
to reduce the number of polling centres and fire corrupt staff.

Unfortunately, we now have to live with the consequences. Before the election, 
Karzai was seen both at home and abroad as ineffective and tolerating 
corruption. Now, many Afghans see him as illegitimate while large parts of the 
public in the troop-contributing countries consider him irredeemably tainted by 
the fraud. Western leaders say they will work with Karzai, as they must, but he 
cannot be an effective partner in Obama's enhanced counter-insurgency strategy. 
And without an effective Afghan partner, the strategy will not work.

With support from some key countries, Kai Eide is now promoting a new compact 
between Karzai and the Afghan people. Elections are, of course, the normal way 
to establish such a compact. More promises, which will not be honored, cannot 
paper over the consequences of a dishonest election.

Afghanistan's winner-take-all presidential system is ill-suited to a country 
that is so geographically and ethnically diverse. In his campaign, Abdullah 
proposed constitutional amendments to establish the position of prime minister 
and to have the cabinet chosen by the parliament, not the president. But it is 
at the local level that most Afghans experience government, generally at the 
hands of Karzai-appointed officials who are too often themselves warlords, in 
the pocket of the local warlord, corrupt, or irrelevant. Electing provincial 
governors and empowering local government with some legislative and budget 
authority may provide greater accountability and, more important, it will put 
Afghanistan's diverse ethnic and religious communities in greater control of 
their own destiny. Constitutional change providing for meaningful power-sharing 
and greater local accountability is essential if there is to be a credible 
Afghan partner.

For now, however, Karzai is not a legitimate partner to the west and there is 
no immediate prospect of necessary change. Under these circumstances, sending 
more troops to Afghanistan to implement a counter-insurgency strategy is a 
waste of precious military resources.Hamid Karzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamid-karzai> was determined to win 
Afghanistan's presidential elections without regard to the cost to his country 
and to the international military mission. He succeeded, and Afghanistan and 
its foreign friends will now pay the very steep price.
 