
There are, broadly speaking, three schools of opinion regarding Katie Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/katieprice>. The first, quite common among 
Guardian readers, is incredulous dismay at her fame. How has some trumped-up 
Page 3 girl turned into a national icon? The second basically boils down to 
lust – usually found in hormonal lad-mag fans, for whom the glamour model's 
famously inflated breasts represent a pinnacle of pornographic appeal. But it 
is the third and last camp that makes Price interesting. To large numbers of 
young girls and grown women – and to widespread surprise – Price has become an 
inspirational role model; a collective ideal of modern femininity made flesh.

The first time I saw Price she was outside a Mayfair nightclub three years 
ago, posing in sequins and killer stilettos for a rabid paparazzi scrum. When 
we meet this time, at the Dorchester, Price arrives unrecognised, and indeed is 
almost unrecognisable – bare-faced, hair scraped back, in baggy white linen 
trousers and Ugg boots. In her natural state she is truly beautiful, her face 
fresh and mobile, and surprisingly undistorted by the nose job and Botox and 
collagen. Later on she will appear on the red carpet of a Leicester Square film 
premiere, reworked into a full-throttle sex-kitten vision of thigh-high boots 
and babydoll dress. "But this is how I dress normally," she shrugs, sprawled on 
the hotel bed, gesturing to her T-shirt. "This is what I look like. I don't 
think I'm beautiful. I just think I can scrub up OK."

If there is a single explanation for Price's popularity with women 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theobserver/2006/feb/12/features.review47>, I would 
guess this is it. After so many cosmetic procedures, she seems to regard her 
own body as a commercial enterprise from which she is almost entirely detached; 
a professional tool, to be deployed when necessary, but no more emotionally 
meaningful than a laptop. She refers to her beauty with neither vanity nor 
insecurity – and to most women today, mired in the anxiety of body image, that 
probably looks a lot like empowerment. To some, it may even pass for feminism.

Candour about her cosmetic artifice has, paradoxically, earned Price a 
reputation for being "real". And certainly, in person she isunaffected, 
friendly and talkative 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/aug/14/katie-price-jordan-family>. 
But having commodified her body so successfully, something else has happened, 
for Price's dissociation from her physical self seems to extend to her internal 
world as well. She filters every question about emotions through a calculus of 
commercial success – if she's making money, she's feeling good, QED – and it's 
practically impossible to work out what, if anything else, is going on inside 
her head. And strangely, for one so famously hard-headed, there is often quite 
a discrepancy between Price's self-perception and external reality.
 Katie Price and Peter Andre in the jungle for I'm a Celebrity ... Get Me Out 
of Here. Photograph: ITV/Rex Features 
When Price first appeared in the Sun 14 years ago, under the nom de guerre 
Jordan – a fresh-faced home counties teenager, more interested in horses than 
men – she was prettier than most Page 3 girls, but otherwise unremarkable. 
Gradually, as surgeons expanded her breasts to preposterous proportions, she 
acquired a certain trashy notoriety – falling out of nightclubs, feuding with 
the Beckhams, falling pregnant to a premiership footballer who promptly dumped 
her. Even the birth of their seriously disabled son Harvey in 2001 failed to 
elicit much public sympathy, and in 2004 she entered the Australian jungle for 
I'm ACelebrity <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/celebrity> . . . Get 
Me Out of Here! as Jordan, the cartoonishly vulgar tabloid bad girl.

She emerged, however, as Katie, the nation's new sweetheart 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/gallery/2009/nov/26/katie-price-jordan>. 
Viewers were charmed by her ease in her unadorned skin, and her jungle romance 
with Peter Andre led to a sugar-pink fairytale OK! wedding, followed by reality 
TV shows chronicling their marriage in all its turbulent intimacy. Despitenot 
physically writing a single word herself 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/audio/2010/apr/16/ghostwriting-hattenstone-bradshaw-jordan>
, Price has also become a literary goldmine; her three raucously frank 
autobiographies sold millions, as have her five novels, one famously dwarfing 
the combined sales of an entire Booker shortlist. Children's books, product 
lines, photo shoots and magazine deals amassed a reported fortune of £30m, and 
even a calamitous attempt to represent the UK in Eurovision – Price heavily 
pregnant, writhing about in a skin-tight fuschia catsuit – was forgiven by a 
fanbase which had become overwhelmingly female, and has voted her, among other 
things, best loved celebrity mum, Cosmopolitan's woman of the year, and most 
inspiring business role model.

But the backlash since her split from Andre in May last year has been 
violently gleeful, even by the standards of modern celebrity, and relentlessly 
ugly. Recast as a tacky, selfish tramp, her hasty marriage tocage fighter Alex 
Reid 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/apr/18/alex-reid-katie-price-polly-vernon>
 ridiculed as a stunt, Price's fall from tabloid grace has been spectacular. 
Even her disclosure last year of having once been raped by a celebrity 
attracted more derision than compassion, when Price refused to name him. "You 
should have thought about what you were and weren't prepared to talk about," 
sneered one columnist, "before opening your big mouth."

"At the moment," as Price says herself, "people think I've lost the plot, I'm 
probably nearly ready to go the Priory, they think I'm not normal, they think I 
sleep around, they think I'm a bad mum. Basically, they think I've lost the 
plot and am all over the place."

It is in this context, then, that she will give a live televised interview to 
Dr Pamela Stephenson Connolly 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/series/sexualhealing> at the Edinburgh 
television festival later this month. Connolly's Shrink Rap series of celebrity 
encounters are notionally psychotherapeutic, and more searching than the OK! 
interviews with which Price is more familiar, so I'm curious to know why she 
has agreed to it. But it transpires that Price is under the impression that her 
interviewer will be someone else altogether – an agony aunt called Dr Pam from 
a commercial radio station.

"Now, you know this Dr Pam, I don't know too much about her, did she used to 
do Heart? Was she the agony aunt from that? She's got long blond hair? Yeah, I 
used to listen to her on Heart, she's got an American accent? Yeah I used to 
like listening to her, she was quite reasonable." I ask if she has laid down 
any advance parameters or rules for the encounter.

"No, I never do that, never," she says flatly. "I don't mind anyone asking me 
any questions, I've got nothing to hide. I like it to be as real as it is, 
that's what I call an interview. I'm not someone who's like right, you can't 
ask this, that, this, that, this, that. It's got to be a real interview. I've 
literally got nothing to hide. You can ask any question you like."

Well this is odd, because only an hour earlier I'd had a man from her PR 
agency on my phone, warning me to ask nothing of a personal nature, and stick 
strictly to Price's books and business. To be fair, though, I got off pretty 
lightly; the restrictions imposed on interviews with Price in the past are the 
stuff of legend in media circles. I ignore the injunction anyway, and the only 
question her assistant intervenes to veto is, of all things, about her plans 
for further cosmetic surgery.

According to Price, there is not an ounce of truth in the avalanche of press 
about her since her split with Andre. "Just every day, constant lies." But she 
affects a degree of worldly pragmatism about the onslaught which is either 
impressive, or heartbreaking, depending on your point of view.

"Unfortunately with the media, the red tops and all the celebrity weekly 
magazines, the ones who were once loyal – well, when I say loyal, this is a 
game, this is a game that we're in. If it's your time to get picked on then you 
get picked on, and you know I'm used to that.

"I did have a shit year last year, obviously cos of the media it had a 
knock-on effect, like with Asda, I had my bra range, Panache, and the guy – 
actually it was coming to an end anyway – he came and met me and said, I'm 
sorry Kate but this will be the end of your career now, I can't sign you up any 
more. I said: 'You what? Well that's absolutely fine, you can say what you 
like, but I'm telling you know you're wrong, this is just the media thing at 
the moment and it will all blow over.' But he was adamant. All through my 
career I've had knockbacks, and then I think: 'Bollocks to you lot' – like my 
babywear range, that was going to be in Mothercare, then Selfridges wanted it, 
but obviously they all want their cut. Then cos of the press thing it sort of 
got in the way. So I said bollocks to this, let's just do it online, let me do 
a press call, as long as they get the logo in they're advertising for me, I 
don't give a shit what they write about me, so I hired out the studio for three 
hours, invited all the press along, done questions and answers, I knew they'd 
print my face to here," and she gestures down to below her bust, "so I knew the 
website [on my T-shirt] would get in, whatever shit they wrote with it people 
know I've got babywear out, and they know the website, and it's sold more that 
way than it has in the shops, cos I don't have to pay anyone."

This is classic Price at full pelt – canny, dauntless, defiant. But surely, 
I say, the criticism must be deeply hurtful. "You know what, I don't ever look 
at it as hurtful. It's more of a game, it's a game. It's a game now."

But it's not actually a game, is it? It's her life. I wonder how she can bear 
it.

"But it hasn't affected me. Everything's gone up – my book's number one, I've 
got my equestrian range, perfume's coming out, I've got my babywear, so 
everything's all working again."

Price talks at great pace, always maintaining eye contact, and is occasionally 
hilarious; when I ask if she has even read her own books, she says, "What, my 
autobiographies? No, cos I know what's in them." But her emotional range seems 
to be restricted to a spectrum of triumph, indifference and belligerence. The 
closest she ever comes to vulnerability is in her version of why the media 
turned against her – an account of a world in which management apparently 
functions as some sort of omnipotent superpower.

"I know why, it's because when I split with Pete, Claire [Powell, the couple's 
then joint manager] 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2010/apr/29/gordon-brown-peter-andre>
 stayed with Pete, and the only thing that hurts is Claire never sat down with 
me and said – and you know I'd been with her six years – she never said: 'You 
know what Kate, I'm going to help you find someone else, I'm going to help 
protect you.' But instead they lapped it all up, and Pete's there posing with 
the kids, doing everything, ah poor Pete poor Pete – I had no one to represent 
me, I was like a lost lamb, I had no representation to help protect me, 
nothing. Whereas Pete was protected straight away. So that gave him a lead, it 
was like: 'Oh fuck it, let's pick on Kate, she's got no one representing her so 
now we'll attack her and attack her cos she's got no one to fight back.' Cos 
they had no point of contact, no one to call. For a comment or spokesman, there 
was nobody, so I was left in the lurch. So that's how it happened. I mean, if 
people knew the real story . . ."

Go on, then, I say. Tell us the real story. For once, she hesitates before 
answering. "Well when my book comes out you'll get a picture of what really 
happened."
 Katie Price promoting her Jordan Workout DVD in 2006. Photograph: Chapman/Rex 
Features 
Price, it is often said, is no fool. When it comes to commercialising her own 
privacy, her success has been unparalleled – but the cost, she admits, has been 
considerable, and includes the breakup of her marriage to Andre.

"Yeah, definitely. It's not healthy to work – I mean, the cameras were there 
all the time, everything we did, like if it was my birthday they'd be filming 
it or doing it for OK!, it was like me and Pete could never do anything for 
each other unless it was a photo shoot or something. And I said I'll never do 
that again with Alex. I won't do it again. I do not want a repeat of what 
happened before."

She says so with such conviction that you'd almost think it must be another 
Katie Price who has just starred in a three-part reality TV series – Katie and 
Alex for Better for Worse – documenting their marriage blessing, their 
honeymoon in Thailand, and the ups and downs of domestic life. She was only 
honouring her contractual obligations to ITV2, Price says quickly. "And I've 
only done four paid interviews in the last year," she adds proudly. By her own 
standards of self-exposure, this may very well seem to Price like the privacy 
of a virtual recluse. But she has just signed a new two-year deal with Virgin 
Media TV, in which, according to the press release, "Katie herself will feature 
and star in an exclusive observational documentary series, which picks up the 
journey from the highly successful What Katie Did Next."

"Well you know TV," Price says happily, as if stating the obvious, "You can't 
buy better advertising than that."

The downside of this fantastic advertising is that Price is practically a 
prisoner in own home, on account of the paparazzi permanently parked at her 
gates. Her children can't play outside, and unless she smuggles herself out in 
the boot of a car – which she resorts to at least once a week – she fears for 
her life. "I know I will die in a car crash," she says with startling 
certainty. "When I'm in the car they try and box me in. Basically, I will die 
in a car crash, 100%." As if that wasn't bad enough: "It's the fact they're 
making money off me!"
 Katie Price promoting her third autobiography. Photograph: David 
Moir/Reuters/Corbis 
Price's diatribe against the paparazzi is impassioned and prolonged. "They 
don't give a shit about me." When I ask, though, if she thinks there's anything 
dishonest about colluding with them, to stage fake snatched photographs in 
return for a cut of the sales, she becomes less forthcoming. "A lot of people 
do that," she offers mildly. "And I've said I should start doing them."

But she already has, hasn't she? For a moment she looks awkward. "I did it 
once when I split with Pete and the paps were everywhere, and I thought fuck 
this, I'm going to do my own picture, I did it and got 50 grand for it and it 
went in the Sun, and I thought: 'Fuck you lot, I've got the picture so piss 
off.'" So that's the only time she's ever done it? She grows a little vague. "I 
think Dave Read [a previous manager] might have set up some, but . . ." Without 
her knowledge?

"I was naive to it all," she offers unconvincingly. Then, with more 
characteristic conviction, "Well even if people set them up, you know, no one 
should have a problem with that cos it's part of the game, and I think anyone 
who does set them up is smart, because then they get the money for it."

At 32, with three young children, a new husband and a fortune in the bank, I 
wonder why the game is still worth it to her. For a game, it doesn't sound like 
much fun – to be lied about, hounded, harassed and vilified. Why not retire 
from the limelight, and be done with it all?

"I enjoy it. I love my work. Like my perfume, I pick the bottle, then I go and 
pick the smells, I think of a name, then I think right let's do a picture, I 
think of the press call, I love doing the press call, I just love it." Every 
fortnight she holds a board meeting with the representatives of all her various 
business arms – TV, books, perfume, subscription websites, clothing ranges – to 
plan their commercial strategy. "And we're all equal, I'm not a bully." She 
turns to her assistant. "I wouldn't say I'm a bully, would you?" "Um, 
everyone's opinionated," says her assistant. "I just love my work," Price nods. 
"I just love it."

When women talk about Price as a feminist role model, it's her work ethic they 
always invoke – and it is indeed prodigious. But where it ends is a more 
complicated question – and perhaps it never does – for when I ask how she 
navigates between her public identity as a sex symbol, and her personal life, 
she looks quite confused. When she begins a new relationship with a man, I try 
to explain, can his preconceptions be an obstacle to real intimacy?

"What, do you mean do they think I'm going to be an animal in bed? I'm worse 
than an animal. I'm an extremist in bed." She looks so dead-eyed when she says 
this, it sounds a bit doubtful. Isn't it even slightly odd, I try again, to go 
bed with someone who thinks he's going to have sex with Jordan?

"Yeah but if you act up to their ideas then you're fine. You can say I'm like 
an ugly fat woman, cos they're the ones they say really try. I'm like one of 
them, I make an effort. I'm not just a lay on your back, open your legs, look 
at the time. I actually work it."

It's a grimly telling choice of verb. In fact, the only time Price ever 
becomes genuinely animated, it's on a subject as far from the Jordan persona as 
you could probably get. I ask her what she enjoys reading, and she lights up.

"I'm into really sick true-life crime. My dream is to go to prisons, real dark 
prisons where you see rapists, paedophiles, Hannibal Lecters, murderers. Yeah, 
absolutely. Get inside their brain, that's what I'm interested in. I'd love to 
be a detective like that, or, what are they called, a psychologist. Absolutely, 
that would be my dream job now. And autopsies, anything about that. I'd like to 
cut up bodies, I'd like to go to a murder scene and try and work out what's 
happened. I actually looked into how to be a detective, but you have to join 
the police force first. I looked, I actually looked last week. I'm so into it."

What is it she finds so fascinating? "The brain, how it works. I think it's 
really interesting."

Of her own brain, she says: "You'll never work me out. No one will ever work 
me out," and maybe she is right. But when I ask if she understands herself – 
"Yeah, course" – I'm not so sure, judging by a disorientating exchange we have 
towards the end about a photograph of her three-year-old daughter Princess in 
full makeup and false eyelashes, which provoked uproar when it appeared on the 
internet earlier this year.

"But at the end of the day, anyone who knows Princess," and Price turns to her 
assistant indignantly. "What's she like with makeup?" "Oh she's so funny, she 
goes straight to the makeup box, you can't stop her." "Yeah, and she's good at 
it!" agrees Price. "Cos she's so used to me doing it."

Does Price have a view about the early sexualisation of girls?

"I think it's disgusting," she says hotly. "Yeah, I do. Girls now, when they 
go to school, when I look at their skirts I think fucking hell, I never wore 
stuff like that. It's sexual. It's not right."

• Katie Price: Shrink Rap is at the Media Guardian Edinburgh international TV 
festival on Sunday 29 August,mgeitf.co.uk  
<http://mgeitf.co.uk/home/mgeitf.aspx>
 