
If you're looking for quirky Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> gifts, this could be the 
ideal present for a real ale fan: the opportunity to become part-owner of a pub 
for less than the cost of a round of drinks. For as little as £10, you can buy 
a stake in a Brighton local.

Alternatively, if you're hunting for a gift for a book lover, £20 is enough to 
buy them a share in an independent bookshop whose supporters include War Horse 
author Michael Morpurgo.

Meanwhile, bigger spenders looking for a potentially decent return on their 
cash are being invited to invest £500-plus in a scheme to install solar panels 
on 240 homes in the Newport area of south Wales.

These are just three of the latest community ventures looking for backers. 
Over the past couple of years, Guardian Money has featured a number of these 
"community co-operatives", which, typically, aim to bring vital amenities back 
to life, secure the future of valued local businesses or generate renewable 
energy. We've written about pubs, shops, a housing co-op, a music venue ... the 
list goes on.

These ventures are becoming increasingly common, and often there is an 
opportunity for people to invest in them by buying shares.

Some offer a return in the form of interest while, with others, the rewards 
are described as "social" rather than financial.

The pub – for £10

The Bevendean Hotel in the Moulsecoomb area of Brighton has had a troubled 
past – it was closed down by the police in 2010 following complaints of 
violence – but is now set to make a comeback after local residents revealed 
plans to reopen it as a community-owned enterprise.

The group of locals, which includes the vicar, formed a co-operative and has 
just launched a share issue with support from the Co-operative Enterprise Hub 
(it also backed the other two schemes highlighted here). It is looking to raise 
up to £200,000 to reopen the pub and establish a much-needed community 
facility. The minimum investment is £10, the maximum is £20,000. By buying 
shares you would become a co-owner ofthe Bevendean <http://www.thebevy.co.uk/>.

"This is an investment in our community but we would welcome investors who 
have always dreamt of owning their own pub. Indeed, we think it could make the 
perfect Christmas gift for the dad who has everything," says Warren Carter, a 
member of the co-op.

Alongside the real ale and the locally sourced food, the group plans to set up 
a cafe, a meeting room for societies, a community kitchen and an "edible pub 
garden".

The aim is to be as sustainable as possible, and it will look at eventually 
producing its own electricity.

However, this particular scheme isn't about making money; the shares cannot 
increase in value and, at the moment, there are no plans to pay any interest, 
so this should be viewed as a "social investment" (you will be able to sell 
your stake, although not for the first five years).

The rules allow the co-op to offer interest payments if the level of trading 
success justified it.

The management committee includes Father John Wall, team rector at St Andrew, 
Moulsecoomb, who is looking forward to becoming a regular.

"I always think a real community needs a good church and a good pub," he says. 
He adds that he mentioned "the Bevy" (as it's been dubbed) to the new Bishop of 
Chichester, Dr Martin Warner, who was very interested – and has even given him 
£10 to buy a share in the venture.

The share offer is open until 28 February.

The bookshop – for £20

What's described as the only independent bookshop in mid-Devon is poised to 
start a new chapter following the launch of a community share issue aimed at 
securing its future.

So if you're backing independent booksellers in their battle against 
"tax-avoiding" Amazon, here's a chance to put your money where your mouth is.

A few months ago, a group of residents set up a co-operative called Crediton 
Community Bookshop <http://www.creditoncommunitybookshop.co.uk/> to take over 
The Book Shop in High Street, Crediton, whose owner Jill Holden is planning to 
retire.

The co-op is looking to raise £44,000 to buy the business, including stock, 
fixtures and fittings, plus provide six months' working capital, and has set 
itself a target of raising £33,000 by 28 February. Anyone over 16 can become a 
member by buying shares. The minimum investment is £20, the maximum is £20,000.

Ken McKechnie, one of the founder members, is hopeful they will be able to 
secure the shop "for the next generation of readers and writers", adding: "Our 
main goal is to benefit the community by supporting local authors, promoting 
reading and literacy for all ages, with children's books a speciality, and 
providing a meeting place and focus for reading and writing groups."

Devon-based Morpurgo has said: "Every town needs a great bookshop. Crediton 
has one. Long may it continue."

As with the pub share issue, this initiative will not make you wealthy. The 
offer document makes clear that the shares "can go down in value but they 
cannot increase in value above their original price", and no interest will be 
paid. "The return on these shares must be viewed as a social dividend," it 
states.

The share offer is open until 28 February.

The solar scheme – for £500

If you are looking for a green investment offering a potentially decent return 
– estimated at 7% a year – you may want to take a look at a solar scheme 
launched by a new venture calledGen Community <http://www.gen-community.co.uk/>
, whose chairman, James Alexander, was a co-founder of pioneering 
"peer-to-peer" lending website Zopa.

Gen Community is an "industrial and provident society" that has been set up to 
develop and invest in low-carbon energy projects, and is aiming to raise £1m to 
install solar panels on 240 homes in the Newport area of south Wales. The 
minimum investment is £500, and the share offer runs until 31 January.

According to the share offer document, the project aims to "help alleviate 
fuel poverty for low-income residents through the deployment of community-owned 
generating capacity. This is projected to reduce annual fuel bills by around 
£38,000 for 240 homes, equivalent to a circa 25% annual electricity bill 
reduction."

At the same time, Gen Community aims to provide its members with a 7% annual 
rate of return, though this is not guaranteed.

Another site worth checking out is Abundance 
<https://www.abundancegeneration.com/>, which describes itself as a "community 
finance platform" enabling people to put money into UK renewable energy schemes 
and receive a regular cash return.

It says anyone with family and friends concerned about the planet can treat 
them to "the perfect Christmas present": their own share in a community wind 
turbine.

A spokesman says it is possible for people to "gift" a debenture (the 
financial product that secures the share in the profits made) either directly 
to another adult, or by designating it to a child or grandchild, with the 
investment becoming formally theirs at age 18. This gift can be given in 
amounts as small as £5, he adds.
 