


We got to meet Donald Trump’s family last night in a bizarre, tedious 
spectacle brought to you by CNN. What did we learn from this exercise in 
trolling for ratings? Not much. More than anything, it came off as a bit of 
damage control. His daughters tried to soften their dad’s image as a sexist 
blowhard. Melania fielded questions fromAnderson Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anderson-cooper> like “do you monitor your 
daughter’s social media” that made her seem less like an unapproachable, 
glamorous model and more the concerned mom that appeals to the American 
electorate. She’s very worried about the effects of cyberbullying, too, which 
makes sense, as she has quite a bit of first-hand knowledge of that phenomenon.

Trump kids discover they can't vote for Dad in New York Republican primary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/11/donald-trump-ivanka-eric-miss-vote-deadline>
One illuminating piece of information that I did learn, though, is that Donald 
Trump does not speak to his family the way he speaks during televised debates. 
If he did, I’d have to wonder why we never got a Kardashians-style reality show 
starring the Trump clan. They’re photogenic, rich, and fronted by a thirsty 
egomaniac who would do anything to get his mug on TV. It’s a show I’d assume 
millions of Americans would tune in to see every week. Just imagine the scene 
of Trump being asked by his concerned, saintly wife Melania whether or not he 
booked a carpet cleaner to wash out the red wine stain he left from a dinner 
party mishap the night before. Come with me, to a better world whereDonald Trump
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> isn’t applying to lead the 
free world, but has taken his rightful place as the star of a Bravo docusoap 
called Growing Up Trump.

Old Donny walks out of the living room, looking ruffled. He knows he’s been 
caught not following through on a promise he made to his long-suffering spouse. 
“Look, I wanted to get that guy out here. I did,” Trump says. “He would have 
been wonderful. Just wonderful. But I didn’t. I didn’t book him. He’s a good 
man. Honest. Too expensive, though. I’m not gonna pay $500 for some guy to come 
out to our house. It’s a beautiful home. Have you seen the crown molding? It’s 
gorgeous. Of course you have. You live here. In this amazing home. Amazing. I’m 
not going to pay $500 for some guy to do something I could do myself. I’m not 
going to, but I could. He should love. Love! He should love to come clean our 
house, Melania. He’s gonna come here, and he’s gonna pay us to get that stain 
out. How about that? He’s gonna pay us! That’s how confident I am in this 
carpet. I believe in this carpet. We’re gonna make this carpet great again.”

Mulder for Bernie: who would your favorite TV characters vote for?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/01/tv-characters-vote-for-election-2016>
Ivanka, the smart daughter, is visiting and can’t believe her parents are 
fighting over a stained carpet. “Dad, why don’t you swallow your pride and just 
pay the man,” she asks. “Because, Ivanka. Because. I make deals for a living. 
Think about all the deals I made to get you into Penn and pay for your clothes. 
Those earrings. Deals. Your shoes. That’s a deal. Your Porsche. Deal. Deal. 
Deal. Deal.”

This goes on for awhile, until Donald decides that instead of cleaning the 
carpet, it would be easier to just make the whole carpet red instead of white, 
to match the stain. “What’s the difference,” Trump asks Melania. Then, Eric 
Trump rides through the living room on a hoverboard while texting, knocking 
over an expensive vase before revealing that he’s dating Kylie Jenner. 
Cliffhanger! Tell me you wouldn’t watch that every week.
 