
Hello to our regulars and welcome to our clickalong first-timers!

Our July kitchen clickalong is a going to be a humdinger. It's not difficult 
per se, but it's definitely going to be a busy hour, so I've got some top tips 
to make sure you can keep up with yours truly. Before the 8 o'clock kick off, 
you may find it useful to:

Peel one bulb of garlic
Wash and roughly chop the spinach
Peel the shallots
Trim and wash the radishes (keeping the leaves on if they're in good shape)
Chop the onion
Make sure the sardines are gutted, scaled, well-washed and patted dry

And here's what we'll be eating. It's ambitious but delicious if - like me - 
you find this kind of food some of the yummiest in the world to tuck into of a 
summer evening:


Lamb filos, sweet with apricots, pine nuts and spices (or beetroot and goats 
cheese ones for the veggies)
White bean, garlic and spinach dip
Grilled sardines (garlic courgettes for the veggies)
Pickled sweetcorn wheels, carrots, chilli and garlic
Salad with baby gem, radishes, shallots, cucumbers and cherry tomatoes
Yoghurt with cucumber and dill
Flatbread or pitta

There are quite a lot of ingredients (all at the affordable end of the scale) 
and my advice is to make small piles so that all of the ingredients you'll need 
for each dish are in one place (guess), and you're not scrabbling around 
mid-cook. Things like lemon, garlic and olive oil straddle a few, so just keep 
them to hand. Oh, and I forgot to say you'll also need a quarter of a pat of 
butter.

Equipment-wise, this is pretty straightforward. Traditionally they don't use a 
lot of gee-whizzery hi-tech kit in that part of the world, so to make this food 
true all I think you'll need (apart from your wits about you) is ...

Heavy-based saucepan
Small saucepan
Pastry brush
A baking tray that doesn't buckle
A couple of mixing bowls

You'd also do well to think through serving dishes as you'll need up to six, 
though some dishes can of course share space. This does make a feast for the 
eyes and tum, and all of it will be good for lunch and supper over the next day 
or two, so don't worry if your gathered number is less than four.

So, my cooking friends, I'm delighted that you're all going to join Susi, me 
and Sara on our journey to the Middle East. As ever, thanks so much for 
playing, don't forget to take pics (like you'll have time!), get your prep 
done, brain in gear, knives sharpened and I'll see youse all later!

Allegra x

7.30pm: Only half an hour to go. Just thought you might want a quick reminder 
of the ingredients...

200g lamb mince
4 fresh sardines
2 bulbs garlic
1 onion
2 heads baby gem lettuce
1 bunch radishes
2 shallots
1 punnet of cherry tomatoes
1 ear sweetcorn
2 carrots
1 bunch flat leaf parsley
1 bunch dill
1 cucumber
200g baby spinach
1 chilli, any colour
3 lemons
A small pot Greek yoghurt
1 tin white beans (haricot, cannellini, butter - doesn't matter)
200ml white wine vinegar
2 tbsp sugar
Cloves (optional)
Cumin, seed or ground
Cinnamon (stick or ground)
A handful of dried apricots
A small handful of pine nuts or almonds
Small bottle extra virgin olive oil
1 pack pitta or flatbread
1 pack filo pastry, defrosted

And for the veggies who are joining us tonight you won't need the apricots and 
cinnamon, but need the following instead

2 cooked beetroots
2 spring onions
50g goats' cheese
4 courgettes

See you back here at 8. 

A x

7.40pm: Oh, and we forgot to mention that if you switch on the "This page will 
update automatically every minute" button at the top of this page you won't 
have to keep refreshing as you'll have more than enough to be getting on with.

8.00pm: Good evening fellow cookers. Right, I hope you are all as ready as I 
am (decidedly medium at the moment) and if you are all standing comfortably let 
us begin.

Hopefully you weren't too daunted by the list of ingredients but I promise you 
that the results will make you as proud as punch.

8.01pm: So the first thing we are going to do is start our filos. Veggies hang 
tight for a second while the meaties get their lamb going.

8.02pm: Get a heavy based saucepan on to a high heat. Add in a small glug 
(about 1 tablespoon) of olive oil and add the onion which you should have 
already chopped.

8.03pm: Add the mince and fry it with the onion breaking it up with a wooden 
spoon.

8.05pm: FOR THE VEGGIES: We are doing a beetroot and goat's cheese filling for 
your filo parcels (instead of the lamb). Chop your cooked beetroot into a rough 
small dice and put into a mixing bowl.

Crumble the goat's cheese then slice and add the spring onions. Give this a 
good season and a squeeze of lemon.

8.06pm: BACK TO YOU MEATIES: Roughly slice the apricots (I have used about 9) 
and chuck them in. Add ½ teaspoon cumin, ½ teaspoon ground cinnamon, a small 
handful of pinenuts and a good pinch of salt. Give it a good stir and turn the 
heat down to medium while we let it fry for a few minutes.

8.07pm: VEGGIES: Once everything is chopped smush the mix all together with 
your hands (if you don't mind having pink hands for a minute).

8.10pm: MEATIES: Give the lamby thing a stir and after a couple more minutes 
tip and spread it onto a plate to cool down and leave to one side. Give the pan 
the quickest of washes and put it back on a medium heat.

8.14pm: ALL TOGETHER NOW: Preheat your oven to 200C/400F.

Into your second saucepan, which should be smaller than your first (veggies, 
you'll catch up with the first pan bit later), on a medium heat put your 
white-wine vinegar, 2 tablespoons sugar, 1 chilli, 6 cloves and one of your 
bulbs of garlic cut in half straight through the centre, not through the root.

8.17pm: Give your carrots a quick wash and chop their top off. Slice them in 
half lengthways and then chop that length in half straight across the middle. 
These go in your vinegar pan with a lid on. If they are too big for your pan 
you might need to cut them in half again.

8.18pm: VEGGIES: this is where you want to get your supposed "first pan" on a 
medium heat - which should be bigger than your pickling pan.

8.20pm: RIGHT EVERYBODY TOGETHER:

Next we are going to make the beany-spinach dip: get 4 cloves of garlic and 
rough chop them. Add these to your empty pan with a glug of olive oil (a couple 
of tablespoons).

8.22pm: Have a quick look at your pickling thing. You don't want it to be on a 
full simmer but a very relaxed bubble with lots of steaming. Keep the lid on.

8.22pm: Give your garlic a stir. Open your tin of beans and drain them. When 
the garlic is beginning to go properly golden brown add the beans. Give it a 
good coat and stir.

8.26pm: Add the spinach (which you should have washed and chopped already) to 
the pot with the beans. Give it a really good stir. Put in some seasoning. Turn 
the heat up a bit so it is going quite fast.

8.26pm: Now back to the pickly pan. 

Lift your carrot pieces out and put them somewhere to cool down. Cut the corn 
on the cob into about six 3cm wheels and sit them in the vinegar pan. Put the 
lid back on and check the heat is on medium.

8.29pm: Melt the quarter pat of butter that I added to the ingredients list 
either in a little pan or in the microwave.

8.30pm: Now lamb folk and beetroot folk, together we are going to build our 
filo parcels. Taste your mix and season accordingly, giving the lamb mixture a 
squeeze of lemon too.

8.31pm: Once your spinachy/beany thing looks all amalgamated, a bit swampy and 
smell yummy, turn the heat off.

8.33pm: By now the corn will be pickled (doesn't take long) so take these out, 
as well as the garlic (and all the cloves which have fallen out) and chilli and 
spread them out on a tray or plate to cool down. You should have pretty much no 
liquid left as it will have evaporated away, and if you have pickles left at 
the end of the night you want to store them with this liquid poured over them.

8.34pm: Unwrap the filo and gently unroll it. Lay one sheet down on the table 
horizontally and brush it with melted butter. Lay on another one and brush it 
again. Then, depending on the size of your filo cut it in half to make 2 
rectangles: size varies a bit depending on what brand of filo you bought, but 
my strips will be 10cm by 30cm, so try and get to something similar.

8.34pm: Right guys I need you to work fast and furious on these. It's not as 
hard as it seems. If there is more than one of you in the house I would get all 
hands on deck.

8.36pm: Put a heaped dessertspoon into the top left hand corner of each of 
your filo rectangles.

8.38pm: Fold the left corner over the mix then bring the bottom left corner 
over the triangle repeating all the way down the length of the filo.

8.38pm:

8.41pm: Keep going until you have run out of either filo or mix. 

Brush your baking tray with melted butter and then arrange them triangles onto 
the tray. Give each filo and brush with the melted butter and chuck them in the 
oven.

8.46pm: You must admit that once you have the hang of them these are pretty 
simple and positively fly down the length of filo.

Nearly there guys. We're just on our last ones now but I will give you all a 
bit of time to catch up.

8.49pm: OK guys and girls. Reckon that you should be pretty much there by now 
and your filos are in the oven.

Stick your grill on high as we are on to the final hurtle.

8.50pm: Now for the yoghurty thing, compulsory at any mezze: take a quarter or 
half of your cuc depending on how big it is and grate on the big holes. Spread 
onto a plate and spread it out thin. Sprinkle with a good grab of salt to 
extract the water and set it aside for a few minutes.

8.53pm: In a mixing bowl put the Greek yoghurt, a clove of garlic finely 
chopped and a handful of chopped dill.

8.54pm: FOR THE VEGGIES: You want to prep the courgettes. Cut them in half 
lengthways then make a quick light crosshatch with the tip of the knife about 
2cm apart through the flesh but taking care not to go through the skin. Take 2 
cloves of garlic, sliced pretty thinly (Mafioso types would do this with a 
razor blade) and lay a couple of garlic pieces down each courgette.

8.57pm: By now you should all have your filos in the oven so lets get the 
grilling going, sardines for most folk and courgettes for the veggies.

VEGGIES: Put your halved courgettes under the grill and give them a splash of 
olive oil and a good sprinkling of salt.

SARDINERS: Pop the sardines (as they are, gutted and scaled) under the grill 
as they are and season.

9.02pm: Squeeze out the cucumber in 2 handfuls getting out as much water as 
possible then add this to the yoghurt.

9.03pm: Have a quick look at your filos. Mine are pretty much done by now - 
you want them to be a nice deep golden brown all over.

VEGGIES: Have a look at the garlic on your courgettes. I am turning mine over 
- the garlic that is not the courgettes.

9.08pm: Your grilled goodies should be done by now so turn the grill off 
whilst you pull together the salad.

We're going to serve it in an deconstructed fashion so find a big plate or 
platter.

Trim the end off your baby gem. Then cut in half and each half into thirds. 
Wash the baby gem and lay these on the platter. Use whatever cucumber you have 
left and cut it into batons and put these next to it. Give the cherry toms a 
good wash and these go alongside. Pile your radishes on too and sprinkle with 
picked parley leaves and thinly sliced shallot.

9.10pm: Once your filos are out and cooling (because they will be bloody hot) 
warm your flatbreads through in the oven.

9.14pm: Whatever lemons you have left cut into wedges and use around your 
various platters.

Now you're ready to serve: put the filos in a pretty bowl and the sardines on 
a suitable platter. Taste your spinachy/beany thing for seasoning and give it a 
tiny squeeze of lemon. Now move your two dippy things (spinachy and yoghurty) 
into bowls, and your salad should be resplendent on it's dish.

You should be happy, proud and just a little whacked, and I salute you.

9.22pm: Women and Men of the kitchen clickalong - that was a lot of work. I 
hope you enjoyed today's cookery lesson and will enjoy chowing down on it even 
more.

If you still have an ounce of energy I would love to see your pics and lets 
all raise a glass together to the food of the Middle East, some of the finest 
on the planet in my opinion.

Thank you, thank you, thank you for tuning in and I promise that next time 
will be a little less frantic.

Lots of love and see you at the end of August. 

A xxx

PS - If you haven't had enough of me already you can catch my new show Economy 
Gastronomy which starts next Weds (5th) on BBC2 at 8pm.
 