
New city or county regions will be given the power to keep all growth in their 
business rates income and use it to build new housing and infrastructure, and 
reskill their local workforce, under plans to be announced on Tuesday byEd 
Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> and former Labour 
cabinet minister Lord Adonis.

In what is being billed as a decisive shift away from decades of Whitehall 
centralisation, Adonis also proposes that at least £6bn a year of transport, 
housing, welfare and infrastructure budgets are devolved from central 
government to large city councils or combined authorities.

The government has so far agreed half of the growth in business rate revenue 
could be retained, a measure derided as too modest to provide an incentive for 
councils to focus on growth.

The Miliband-Adonis plans are seen as vital to reassuring business that 
Labour's responsible capitalism agenda will encourage balanced growth and not 
lead to punitive tax rates or excessive regulation. The ideas were welcomed by 
both the CBI and the EEF manufacturers' organisation, suggesting a much-needed 
thaw in Labour's relations with the business community could be under way.

Lord Mandelson, the former business secretary, recently warned that Miliband 
had not set out how he would create "the conditions in Britain for businesses 
to grow and thrive".

The launch is also internally important to Labour after reports emerged of the 
anger of the party's policy coordinator, Jon Cruddas, over the "dead hand" of 
the Labour leader's office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jun/29/ed-balls-labour-jon-cruddas-dead-hand-reforms>
.

Ed Balls <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edballs> led the pro-growth 
charge in a speech in which he promised to reduce and then freeze small 
business rates, rather than press ahead with a planned cut in corporation tax 
next year. The shadow chancellor said he was looking at cutting capital gains 
tax to reward long-term investors, but would keep the lowest rate of 
corporation tax in the G7. Adonis also sets out measures to address the lack of 
skills in the UK labour force – a factor cited by business to Adonis as the 
single biggest barrier to growth. He proposes:

• A threefold increase in apprenticeships for school-leavers in science, 
technology, engineering and maths.

• More than 100 new University Technical Colleges and the creation of a new 
"Teach Next" organisation for successful career switchers to teach maths and 
science.

• The appointment of new directors of enterprise and employment in schools to 
improve careers advice in schools and advise pupils on apprenticeships and 
higher education.

He also suggests that the boundaries of the current 39 Local Enterprise 
Partnerships (LEPs) should be redrawn to match local economic identities such 
as "travel to work areas", leading to a significant reduction in their number. 
LEPs were set up by the coalition government in 2010 – replacing the nine 
regional development agencies – and Adonis was told industry could not stomach 
another change to the architecture of local business support. The new LEPs will 
also be given direct say over growth strategies and priorities, backed by a 
substantial single pot of funding to invest in economic development.

The ability to keep the growth in business rates income will be dependent on 
the creation of a city or combined authority broadly modelled on those that 
already exist, notably in Greater Manchester. Working in concert with LEPs, the 
combined authorities would tackle the chronic problems of poor skills, 
infrastructure and economic development across a wider area than local 
government can currently address.

In England, business rates raised about £22bn in 2012-13, and were charged on 
about 1.8m properties.

Greater Manchester is looking for a deal with the government over the full 
five years from the next spending review (expected in autumn 2015) covering 
significant blocks of funding where the region can keep savings generated 
through reforms over the period – with an agreement sharing risk and reward.

These regional economic powerhouses would receive additional business rates 
revenue generated by growth to invest in building further success. This would 
be revenue-neutral – offset by reductions in grants – but would mean that any 
additional income generated by growth would be invested locally.

Adonis also proposes that 25% of all government procurement contracts go to 
small and medium-sized enterprises, both directly and through supply chains. A 
new Small Business Administration would be given the task of meeting the target.

Adonis is expected to say: "England's business leaders and local governments 
need empowering to invest in infrastructure, skills and economic development. 
While big numbers dominate discussions about economic growth, the real story 
exists in the company, the cluster, the school, or the city."

Katja Hall, CBI deputy director general, said:"Lord Adonis's report identifies 
the right priorities for growth and job creation, and recognises that the 
benefits of the recovery must be shared across all regions of the UK.

"Size matters for local government, and more combined authorities would help 
create regional economic powerhouses to invest in research and development, 
support exporters and expand apprenticeships."
 