
A Labour demand for the UK government to withdraw support for the Saudi-led 
coalition in the 18-month Yemen civil war failed on Wednesday when a 
substantial number ofLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
backbenchers either stayed away or abstained.

In a Commons debate, the shadow foreign secretary, Emily Thornberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/emily-thornberry>, said the government 
should withdraw support from the Saudi coalition until an independent UN 
investigation had examined whether the Saudi bombing campaign, which has seen 
the deaths of thousands of Yemeni civilians, was in breach of international 
humanitarian law.

The Labour front bench, partly due to resistance from unions with membership 
in the defence industry, did not explicitly call for a suspension of UK arms 
sales toSaudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> until the 
independent inquiry reported. The Labour call for ministers to withdraw support 
from the Saudi coalition was defeated by 283 to 193, suggesting that scores of 
Labour MPs did not vote.

Yemen war resumes as both sides ignore UN call to extend ceasefire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/23/yemen-war-resumes-both-sides-ignore-un-call-extend-ceasefire>
The foreign secretary, Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, rejected any suspension of arms 
sales, saying other western countries would “happily supply arms” to Saudi 
Arabia without the same protections should Britain suspend its sales. He added 
that suspending arms sales would “at a stroke” eliminate Britain’s diplomatic 
influence on the Yemen conflict, in which the Saudi Arabian-led coalition has 
been accused of war crimes. He also said it was right that Saudi Arabia first 
conducted its own investigation.

In a compromise on 30 September, the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva, with 
the backing of the UK, did not support an immediate independent UN inquiry, but 
instead called for UN experts to be given a role in assisting an existing 
Yemen-led inquiry.

Johnson’s foreign office deputy, Tobias Ellwood, accepted that Saudi Arabia’s 
own internal inquiries into its bombing campaign had been unduly slow. He added 
that he expected a specific senior Saudi officer to be subject to a 
court-martial for failing to follow internal procedures when Saudi planes on 8 
October bombed afuneral in Yemen’s capital, killing more than 140 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/08/saudi-led-coalition-airstrike-hit-yemen-funeral-officials-say>
 and wounding hundreds of others.

Johnson warned the Saudis they “should be in no doubt that we in this country 
are monitoring the situation minutely and meticulously, and will continue to 
apply our established criteria for granting licences with fairness and rigour, 
and in full accordance with UK law”.

But he added that if the UK suspended arms sales, “be in no doubt that we 
would be vacating a space that would rapidly be filled by other western 
countries who would happily supply arms with nothing like the same compunctions 
or criteria or respect for humanitarian law. And more importantly, we would at 
a stroke eliminate this country’s positive ability to exercise our moderating, 
diplomatic and political influence on a crisis where there are massive UK 
interests at stake.”

Johnson also claimed Thornberry had “substantially retreated” from the 
opposition’s motion, specifically over whether to suspend weapons sales.

'Heinous crime against humanity': how Saudi airstrikes have devastated Yemen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/15/heinous-against-humanity-how-saudi-airstrikes-have-devastated-yemen>
He said: “Under questioning … as to whether or not she would support the 
immediate suspension of arms sales to Saudi Arabia and the Saudi Arabian-led 
coalition forces, as is specified in this motion in her name, she refused to 
say that she would”.

But Thornberry disagreed, saying the Labour motion simply called on ministers 
to suspend support to the coalition until it has been determined whether they 
had been responsible for violations of international humanitarian law.

John Woodcock, the Labour MP for Barrow, asked Thornberry how UK withdrawal of 
support for the coalition – focused on training Saudis in compliance with 
international humanitarian law – would create fewer civilian casualties.

Thornberry answered that the overwhelming evidence suggested that Saudi Arabia 
was not listening to UK advice, and that the Saudis had only produced nine 
reports on its bombing incidents, and could not provide a timetable for the 
completion of further reports. She said it was a clearly disturbing trend that 
two coalition forces were in reality operating inYemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>.

The Guardian view on international law: we need enforcement and example | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/14/the-guardian-view-on-international-law-we-need-enforcement-and-example>
Thornberry said one command centre based in the capital Riyadh ran pre-planned 
operations based on strong intelligence under the direction of the Americans 
and UK advisers. The other centre, operating out of southern Saudi Arabia, 
“carried out dynamic, reactive operations often on the basis of sketchy 
evidence, often without thinking through the so-called ‘collateral damage’, and 
inevitably often with significant civilian casualties.

“Of course, if it is the case that any coalition forces are acting in a 
reckless or indiscriminate manner when it comes to air strikes in civilian 
areas, it would itself be a clear violation of international humanitarian law 
and cause this whole house grave concern.”

Thornberry said Ellwood had described the funeral bombing as a “deliberate 
error”, raising the prospect of “intentional targeting of civilians by elements 
of the coalition forces”. She added: “When we say one thing about Russia and 
Aleppo but we say another thing about Riyadh and Yemen, what the rest of the 
world hears is hypocrisy and double standards.

“While Saudi Arabia will remain a valued strategic security economic ally, our 
support for their forces in Yemen must be suspended until alleged violations of 
international humanitarian law in that conflict have been fully and 
independently investigated, and until the children of Yemen have received the 
humanitarian aid they so desperately need.”

Chris White, the Conservative chairman of the all-party select committee on 
arms export controls, also said there had been violations of international 
humanitarian law in Yemen justifying an independent, UN-led investigation, and 
the suspension of arms sales pending the inquiry.

He questioned whether civilian casualties at such a level could be regarded as 
a mistake. He said whether the mistakes were intentional or not, they 
represented a breach of humanitarian law, and the default position of the 
government should be to pause sales until it was satisfied with the conduct of 
the campaign.
 