
Dozens of Labour MPs are facing a backlash for being absent from their party’s 
motion to withdraw UK support from Saudi Arabia’s war on Yemen, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/labour-call-for-uk-to-withdraw-support-for-saudi-led-coalition-in-yemen-fails>
 with Emily Thornberry, the shadow foreign secretary, calling their actions 
disappointing.

Thornberry said the motion would have sent a message to the government that 
MPs do not want to back the war without an independent UN investigation into 
whether the Saudi-led coalition is breaking humanitarian law.

About 100 Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs were 
missing or deliberately abstained from the vote on Wednesday, which failed by 
283 votes to 193, although several dozen were given authorised absences by the 
whips.

In response, Thornberry, who argued for the motion from the Labour frontbench, 
said she was disappointed with her colleagues for abstaining and disgusted with 
the Conservatives who voted against withdrawing support fromSaudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia>.

“Yesterday’s motion gave us the opportunity to send the opposite message to 
the world … that, while Saudi Arabia will remain a valued strategic, security 
and economic ally in the years to come, our support for their forces in Yemen 
must be suspended until the alleged violations of international humanitarian 
law in that conflict have been fully and independently investigated. And until 
the children ofYemen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> have received 
the humanitarian aid that they so desperately need,” she said.


“That would have been the right message to send to the rest of the world. That 
would have reflected what we should stand for as a country. And that is why I 
was so disgusted that all but one brave Tory MP voted against sending such a 
message and disappointed that some of my Labour colleagues abstained from doing 
so.”

One Labour MP, who is not supportive of the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, but 
voted for the motion, said he was frustrated and upset that a number of his 
colleagues were “using the issue as a way of trying to beat Jeremy”.

“It is such as serious issue and it’s obviously going on the Tory side as 
well, but there is a massive humanitarian disaster here. It should not be an 
opportunity to score political points,” he said.

It is understood some Labour MPs who opposed the motion were orchestrating 
deliberate abstentions and in discussions with some Conservatives about the 
chances of defeating it.

A number of Labour MPs faced criticism on social media for not turning up to 
the vote, with lists of names circulating despite some having permission not to 
turn up for family, health or job-related reasons.

It came as ITV News said it had seen evidence that British-made cluster bombs 
had been used in Yemen attacks 
<http://www.itv.com/news/2016-10-26/itv-news-sees-evidence-british-made-cluster-bombs-used-in-yemen-attacks/>
 and there were pictures in the media of people suffering severe malnutrition.

Corbyn renewed his calls for the government to halt arms sales to Saudi Arabia 
on Thursday, saying it seems “very disturbing that there appears to be evidence 
British weaponry has been used in Yemen”.

“We put a motion to the House of Commons demanding a UN investigation into 
what’s happened in Yemen and I absolutely stand by the resolution we put,” he 
said. “My own view is that they should suspend supplies until such time as we 
have had the investigation.”

In the debate, Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, the 
foreign secretary, rejected the suspension of arms sales, saying other western 
countries would “happily supply arms” to Saudi Arabia without the same 
protections demanded by Britain.

He added that suspending arms sales would “at a stroke” eliminate Britain’s 
diplomatic influence in the Yemen conflict, during which the Saudi-led 
coalition has been accused of war crimes. He also said it was right that Saudi 
Arabia first conducted its own investigation.
 