
The idea of using industrial policy to direct technological change or pick 
winners became badly discredited in the 1980s once Lord Heseltine left 
government and Margaret Thatcher became a full throated advocate of laissez 
faire economics.

The concept was left on the scrapheap for much of Tony Blair's premiership, 
and indeed the chief conversation among British liberals for a period was 
whether to abolish the Department of Business altogether.

But in the final two years of the Labour government, industrial intervention 
was rehabilitated by Lord Mandelson, and now with the publication of Labour's 
growth review led by the former cabinet minister Lord Adonis it is formally 
re-established in the pantheon ofLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> public policy-making.

Adonis is one of the most prolific and practical Labour politicians, a man who 
brings solutions and not problems. His industrial policy is not about trying to 
control corporate strategies, but trying to create the best possible conditions 
for industry to innovate.

Much of the focus of Adonis's work – and the focus of a day-long Policy 
Network conference on industrial policy hosted by Ed Balls and Lord Sainsbury 
on Thursday – will be on providing capital with a skilled labour force. There 
are business-friendly plans to boost apprenticeships, increase employer 
engagement with schools and address skills shortages in engineering, digital 
and IT – the issues that business told Adonis remained their chief concern.

Adonis obviously hopes his review will be seen as a moment for Labour to 
reassure the business community, which has been disturbed by Miliband's 
appetite for identifying failed markets in banking, energy and other utilities.

More broadly, the week gives Labour a chance to have a broader story on growth 
that takes it beyond price freezes, postmortems on the 2010 coalition spending 
review, or relatively tepid commitments to extra capital spending.

Figures such as the shadow business secretary, Chuka Umunna, are determined to 
show that Labour knows the big issue is increasing the size of the pie and not 
just redistributing it.

The week may also mark a moment of reconciliation between Balls and Ed 
Miliband, two men who in their attitudes towards business often sound as if 
they are speaking to different audiences.

The big theme in the Adonis plan is to rebuild Britain by reviving cities and 
treating them as future economic powerhouses – a theme also surprisingly 
adopted by the chancellor, George Osborne, in a speech last week.

Opposition commitments to empower local government rarely survive a newly 
elected government's first sight of the Whitehall levers of power. But this 
time the Labour commitment to devolution seems not just to be a politically 
correct add-on, but central to the party's analysis of what is wrong with the 
economy.

Adonis has spoken of the obscene prosperity gap between London and the rest of 
England. From 2001-2010, for instance, regional growth was broadly similar, but 
from 2010-2012 growth in more prosperous regions was 88% higher than that of 
less prosperous regions.

A recent Centre for Cities report showed that eight in 10 new private sector 
jobs created since 2010 have been in London. In Germany, all eight of the 
biggest cities outside Berlin outperform per-capita GDP, whereas in the 
equivalent eight cities in Britain only Bristol does. Every region in England 
outside London is below the national average when it comes to productivity.

Adonis's central proposal is to encourage new economic and political units – 
either city regions or combined local authorities – and to offer them control 
over £6bn of annual Whitehall funds, mainly in transport, housing and other 
critical infrastructure needed to unlock growth potential. This is three times 
more than the government agreed to in the wake of Heseltine's largely discarded 
devolution review, conducted 18 months ago and much favoured by Adonis.

These economic regions appear to be going with the grain of what is already 
happening in Britain's cities, with Manchester's combined authority leading the 
way. West Yorkshire, Sheffield and Liverpool all created their own combined 
authorities on 1 April, and the north-east urban region followed soon after.

They would work with local enterprise partnerships, set up by the coalition 
following its abolition of regional development agencies. Adonis has decided 
not to abolish these 39 LEPs but instead significantly reduce their number and 
revamp their boundaries so they better match travel-to-work areas.

The combined authorities would also be given the right to retain all surplus 
business rate revenues above forecast. The coalition government has allowed 
cities to keep half of any surplus revenues from growth. Within 15 years a city 
such as Manchester might retain as much as £300m annually in additional 
revenue, Adonis calculates.

Sainsbury, in his book Progressive Capitalism, argued that "most of the best 
levers for creating necessary change are slow-acting ones such as investing in 
research encouraging competition and using demand to stimulate innovation. Yet 
as a whole most firms and workers would prefer quick and undemanding solutions 
such as subsidy protection and boosts to domestic demand."

It may be to Labour's intellectual credit that this time it has opted for 
long-term solutions.

• This article was amended on 1 July 2014. An earlier version said the 
north-east urban region was expected to create its own combined authority later 
this year. It has already done so.
 