
Birthday cakes have been banned by a school in Lancashire because teachers do 
not have the time to check whether they are suitable for pupils with allergies.

Karen McCarter, head at Norbreck primary academy in Blackpool, told parents 
she “hates to be a killjoy” but due to “modern society” she could not risk 
giving children something they might be allergic to.

In a newsletter  
<https://primarysite-prod-sorted.s3.amazonaws.com/norbreck-primary-academy/UploadedDocument/113e8db453b945a89f455210409bf60e/newsletter-no.15-8th-january-2016.pdf>
to parents last week McCarter apologised for the move, saying: “I appreciate 
that this is sad, but in our modern society, in which we are held accountable, 
we cannot take the risk.”

The head wrote: “As we are not able to account for the ingredients, we could 
unknowingly give a product to a child which they are allergic to.

“Even if we had a list of ingredients, in a busy school day it is too much to 
expect teachers to read it and decide who can and cannot eat the product.

“Sharing cake for a birthday is a lovely thing to do. However, all children 
are made to feel special when it’s their birthday and the teachers ensure all 
birthdays are remembered and celebrated.

“Cake is something to share outside of school with family or with friends at a 
party.”

McCarter said 10 of the school’s approximate 610 pupils had allergies and felt 
left out, and she said it was impossible to tell if kitchens at home were 
hygienic, adding that cake also went against the school’s healthy eating 
initiatives.

She said the decision to ban the treats from classrooms came after seeing 
teachers struggle to cut enough slices for a class of 30 people, as well as 
clean up the mess left behind.

The school said pupils bringing cakes to share with classmates had become a 
recent phenomenon but was disrupting an already busy school schedule.

Some parents said the ban was over the top despite the head being backed by 
councillors.

Nicola Mealor, the mother of seven-year-old Tyler Wallace, said: “It’s a bit 
over the top. Usually I send Tyler in with a cake on his birthday, but they 
always said it shouldn’t have nuts in. I didn’t know about this, but it’s a bit 
sad.”

Another parent, who didn’t wish to be named, said: “Some things you just 
think, ‘Really?’ If children are at school on their birthday they should be 
able to take a cake in to share it, but then again some people see this as a 
good thing. Each to their own.”

No parents have lodged any official complaints, a spokesman for Blackpool 
council said.

The school has previously banned glass bottles, aluminium cans and cash, but 
McCarter denied being overprotective of the children.

She said: “We are not a school that makes decisions that overprotect children, 
we are a school that makes sensible decisions to keep children safe.

“I am certain parents would not want their children to attend a school where 
glass bottles and cans are on site. Children don’t bring money because they 
don’t need it.”

The mayor of Blackpool, Peter Callow, said: “I’m sure there will be people in 
the town who will think it’s overcautious, but the teachers are the people on 
the frontline and the decision is theirs.”

Cllr Tony Williams said: “To be left out because you are allergic is a little 
bit cruel. I understand why the school is doing this because it’s very 
difficult to take cake to school to share and leave children feeling left out.

“I have never known it to be a problem anywhere else but if the school has 
children who are allergic then it’s common sense.”

The Food Standards Agency said while there was no legal requirement for cake 
being brought by pupils into class to display allergen ingredients, it was 
“good practice to do so”.

A spokesman for the FSA said: “As part of their duty of care to children, 
schools will of course want to ensure pupils with food allergies or 
intolerances are kept safe.”



 