
Soft, powdery, wind-whipped snow snaked back and forth across the road as we 
passed the exit sign: "North Pole." We turned off into the car park where the 
pole itself stood. It was 40ft high, made of wood, and painted with red and 
white stripes. Behind it, a group of reindeer eyed us for a moment and then 
went back to dreaming of chimney pots.

Inside the building, Santa Claus sat in his grotto with a clipboard on his 
knee. On the floor to his left was the latest batch of letters from children 
all over the world, and as he dealt with each one he dropped it into a bucket 
on his right. He was exactly as I'd expected him to be, with a real beard and 
crinkly eyes.

As you've probably divined by now, this particular North Pole was not the one 
your compass needle points to. No, this was a quirkily named little town 15 
miles outside Fairbanks, Alaska, reputedly so called because while Fairbanks is 
cold, North Pole is often a degree or two colder.

If you're going to call your town North Pole, you might as well milk it for 
all it's worth. So, the streets have names such as Mistletoe Lane and Kris 
Kringle Drive, and the store where I met the man with the beard, Santa Claus 
House, is one of the world's biggest repositories of Christmas-themed items: 
baubles, candles, fairy lights. Its busiest month is June, the height of the 
tourist season, while its website receives 2.5m hits in December alone.

I'd come to Fairbanks in winter because Insight Guide: Alaska told me not to: 
"Nobody ever visits the town in winter unless they absolutely have to." 
Certainly, it can be a viciously cold place. Bang in the middle of Alaska and 
far from the moderating influence of the sea, it's also located between the 
Alaska range to the south and the Brooks range to the north, trapping frigid 
subarctic air over the city and often sending temperatures plunging to minus 
40C or below.

At first sight, Fairbanks is much like any other US city: flat, sprawling, 
low-rise. But the subtle differences, many of them borne of the harsh climate, 
soon become apparent. They start with the stuffed polar bear that greets new 
arrivals at the airport, and continue with the parking lots outside, where 
dozens of driverless vehicles sit with their engines purring. Restarting your 
car in these temperatures can be a real grind, so people either leave them 
running or plug them in to one of the engine-warming cables provided.

The architecture, too, is one of a kind. Much of it dates from the boom years 
of the late 1960s and early 70s when the trans-Alaska oil pipeline was 
constructed, but there's also a generous sprinkling of log cabins, some dating 
from the turn of the 20th century when the town first grew up in the wake of 
the gold rush.

And then there are the ice sculptures. Shops, offices and hotels all over town 
proudly display corporate logos and other motifs, intricately carved from huge 
blocks cut from the three feet of ice on a local pond. It's a superb material 
to work with: clear, almost flawless, and with the shimmer of pale blue 
diamond, but a whole lot easier to carve.

Fairbanks is gearing up for the World Ice Art Championships, which it hosts in 
March every year. More than 100 teams from all over the world compete, and past 
entrants have included one from Morocco.

However, the element which draws most tourists to Fairbanks in winter is not 
ice but fire: this is one of the best places in the world from which to view 
the aurora borealis, the northern lights. They're theoretically visible on up 
to 240 nights a year, compared with only 100 nights at Anchorage, 250 miles to 
the southwest.

The aurora is like a giant neon sign: shifting patterns of light up to 120 
miles above the earth, fuelled by charged particles from the solar wind 
interacting with atoms and molecules in the upper atmosphere. Yellowish green 
is the most common colour, produced by oxygen atoms. But too much physics 
detracts from the poetry of the aurora, and even hard-bitten Alaskans who have 
lived in the state for decades will stop their cars and gape when the heavens 
put on a particularly spectacular display.

The aurora is also easier to see if you're well away from the city lights, 
which is where Chena Hot Springs Resort comes in. In the hills 56 miles east of 
Fairbanks, this is one of central Alaska's most popular tourist attractions, 
with winter being the peak time for visitors. Here, you can combine the 
pleasures of aurora gazing with those of wallowing in the gloriously hot indoor 
and outdoor geothermal pools.

In winter, the resort is like a charcoal drawing: white snow, the smudgy grey 
of leafless birch trees lining the valley floor, and stunted black spruce 
higher up the hillsides. A permanent cloud of sulphurous steam hangs over the 
springs themselves.

The accommodation ranges from log cabins to palatial hotel rooms. "When my 
company took over the resort, we asked the people of Fairbanks what they wanted 
from it," the manager told me. "Some of them wanted us to retain its funky 
charm, and others said, give us princess luxury. So we gave them both."

The cherry on the cake is the Aurora Ice Hotel which opens this weekend in the 
grounds of the resort. Designed and built by champion ice sculptor Steve Brice, 
the Aurora is an elaborate gothic-style palace decorated with ice sculptures of 
jousting knights, gargoyles and mythical lions and boasting a working ice pipe 
organ, ice chandeliers, a gazebo for weddings and an ice turret (still under 
construction) - from which guests will be able to view the northern lights. 
There are six rooms, each in a different style, but all in keeping with the 
overall gothic theme, and postively snug (about -4C) compared with the outside 
temperature.

The resort offers snow-cat rides to the top of a nearby hill, which provides a 
360-degree view and thus the best chance of seeing the aurora. On the night I 
went, in the company of 11 Japanese tourists wearing identical red parkas, we 
waited in vain until 2am.

Then, just as we were about to give up, a pale-yellow glow appeared in the 
northern sky, sparking a frenzied clicking of camera shutters. The guide did 
not have the heart to point out that it was just the moonlight reflecting off a 
cloud. My companions went back to Japan happy, but in fact the aurora declined 
to put in an appearance for the whole of my eight days in Alaska.

My final stop in the Fairbanks area was also out in the wilderness, at the 
Northern Sky Lodge. Here a French couple, Pascale Burnet and Tony Andreone, 
teach people the art of dogsledding, or mushing as it's known here.

I was introduced to the five Alaskan huskies that were to provide me with 
motive power for the next couple of days. I'd expected them to be vicious, 
snarling creatures one step removed from wolves, but they were surprisingly 
affectionate, yapping with excitement at the prospect of going out for a run.

Once we set off, it was heads down and tongues out as they silently 
concentrated on the task for which they'd been bred and trained for countless 
generations. The only sound was the swish of the runners and the wind in my 
ears, and after five minutes I was addicted.

Our route took us along deserted back-country roads and tracks to the frozen 
Tanana river, where we camped for the night in a tent which thankfully had its 
own stove and chimney.

This was the first time that I'd spent any significant period outdoors in the 
bone-chilling cold of Alaska's interior, and as the snow piled up outside I 
pondered the warning in my guidebook about not coming here in winter. I decided 
that given the choice between now and summer, when the tourists and mosquitoes 
arrive in swarms, I'd opt for winter any day.

Way to go

Getting there: British Airways (0870 8509850, ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) 
flies Heathrow-Seattle from £319.20 return inc tax in January. Phil Goddard 
flew Seattle-Fairbanks on a Best of the West airpass from Alaska Airlines 
(01992 441517,alaskaair.com <http://www.alaskaair.com>). Seattle-Fairbanks 
costs $338 return, based on the airpass fare.

Where to stay: In Fairbanks, All Seasons Inn (+907 451 6649, alaska.net/~inn 
<http://www.alaska.net/~inn>), Westmark Fairbanks Hotel & Conference Center 
(+907 456 7722,westmarkhotels.com <http://www.westmarkhotels.com>), Fairbanks 
Hotel (+907 456 6411,alaska.net/~fbxhotl <http://www.alaska.net/~fbxhotl>). 
Chena Hot Springs Resort and the Aurora Ice Hotel (+907 452 7867,
chenahotsprings.com <http://www.chenahotsprings.com>).

 Activities: For dogsledding, Northern Sky Lodge (+907 388 9954, 
northernskylodge.com <http://www.northernskylodge.com>). 

Further information: Fairbanks Convention and Visitors Bureau (+907 456 5774, 
explorefairbanks.com <http://www.explorefairbanks.com>). 

Country code: 001. Flight time London-Seattle: 11hrs, Seattle-Fairbanks 3hrs 
43mins.

Time difference: -9hrs. 

£1 = 1.70 dollars.
 