
Tarrant Launceston, easily reached from the M3, is perfect, if you live in 
London, for a nano-break - the new term for a swift, belt-tightening 
one-nighter.

"Um, am I meant to be looking out for anything?" I ask Daniela. "Oh yes, 
Launceston Farm was signposted back there." I'm about to ask why she kept that 
to herself when, rounding a bend, I almost drive straight into the black depths 
of a ford. "Blimey, no mention of that on the website," I say. We head back, 
then pull into the farmyard. The headlights illuminate derelict yet attractive 
brick outbuildings, helpful parking signs, gravel not mud, and a smart, grey 
porticoed front door.

The first thing we see on entering is an iron spiral staircase - painted 
glossy pale grey like the woodwork, and swirling its way up from the hall - 
like a little souvenir of the London Underground.

Would we like tea, a drink, or just to be left to our own devices, asks Sarah 
Worrall, who lives and farms here and renovated the house to start the B&B late 
last year.

We're both thinking it, walking along the landing from the stairs (not the 
spiral ones - there is a wider, carpeted staircase, too), and by the time we 
reach our room, are in no doubt. This is not your average farmhouse.

It bears a close resemblance to the sort that appears in glossy magazines, 
whose owners do not farm (more likely, one works in the City while the other 
dabbles in interior design or runs a baby shower business from the barn).

Here, though, on this proper working farm, with a beef herd, goats and arable 
crops spread over some 800 acres, we find a glass-sided walk-in shower, slipper 
bath, floor-to-ceiling curtains, painted and polished oak furniture. What we 
really love are the details. Fairtrade teas and coffee in a polished antique 
box, a sundae glass stuffed with truffles, organic toiletries from Enchanted 
Plants in Shaftesbury, wooden hangers, a shower mat rolled up and tied with 
rope, and wooden wedges for the giant sash window.

Dinner's a strange affair - strangely successful. The guest info lists plenty 
of places to eat out, but once or twice a week Sarah will cook, as she does 
tonight. Eight of us find ourselves at a highly polished dining table. Parsnip 
and apple soup to start, roast kid or veggie lasagne for main. Pity it's not an 
Aberdeen Angus night, I think. Of the two animals reared here, goat seems the 
riskier offering, so I opt for lasagne. Daniela's verdict? Tastes like lamb but 
tougher. Mine? Great lasagne.

Passing dishes of vegetables around helps break the ice, and it's 11pm before 
we know it.

"Bet they serve it at separate tables," says Daniela as we head down at nine 
and follow the "Breakfast" sign to a converted cart shed off the main hall. 
Nope, it's another big table, but once again conversation flows, and no one 
reads the Sunday papers laid out with the cereals and fruit. Homemade smoothies 
and cooked organic platefuls arrive with quiet efficiency.

And the best is still to come. The farm tour kicks off when breakfast ends, 
and Sarah's son Jimi collects us from the back door for a morning squelching 
through mud while he regales us with tales of, well, everything, from ancestry 
to husbandry. He's a one-off, and I wish I could bottle this whole experience - 
just like country air.

Be prepared To socialise.

• Launceston Farm, Tarrant Launceston, Dorset (01258 830528, 
launcestonfarm.co.uk <http://www.launcestonfarm.co.uk>). Doubles/twin from £80 
per night midweek or £90 per Fri/Sat, B&B. Dinner, by arrangement, £20 per head 
excluding drinks

Prices were updated on 31 August 2012

sally.shalam@theguardian.com <mailto:sally.shalam@theguardian.com>
 