
Three years ago, when we began setting up the Legal Ombudsman 
<http://www.legalombudsman.org.uk/>, our first press release talked of the new 
service as helping to resolve disputes between lawyers and their customers. The 
Guardian's Marcel Berlins immediatelytook me to task 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/jul/27/office-legal-complaints-marcel-berlins>
 for my solecism: people who use the services of lawyers are clients, he said, 
and to refer to them as customers was an unforgivable error.

But the choice of words had been a deliberate symbol of the change which our 
arrival signalled. The term "client" embodies the traditional view of the 
relationship between lawyers and those they represent: one of unequal power and 
status. For every client there is a patron, someone of higher rank who offers 
help and protection in return for future favours: Julius Caesar, asuccessful 
lawyer <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julius_Caesar> long before he was a 
successful general, built his political career on his network of grateful 
clients whom he had helped in the notoriously combative courts of the late 
Roman republic.

But the notion of customer turns this relationship on its head. In most 
businesses, customer is king. It is the customer who has the power, who can 
pick and choose what services to buy and from what provider. In a normal free 
market, it would be the lawyers who compete for patronage, rather than bestow 
it.

But those are not the traditions of the law and, protected by their social 
status, political power and deliberately obfuscatory language, lawyers have 
hitherto been able to ignore the notion of customer service. But the bulwarks 
of legal tradition are crumbling as the market changes, and lawyers are being 
forced to face the possibility that their habitual view of how they go about 
their daily work may have to go a fundamental change. Those who adapt to the 
market, it appears, will survive; those who cannot may be doomed to disappear.

Nowhere is the battle between the traditional view of client and customer more 
marked than in the notion of pricing. It is this collision between what lawyers 
are used to providing and what the modern users of professional services are

increasingly accustomed to expect which is at the root of the 100,000 contacts 
from disgruntled customers we receive every year and no fewer than one quarter 
of these, by far the largest element of our workload, are about cost.

Take an obvious example of the sort of thing we see. People going to see a 
solicitor may be told that it is not possible to put a price on what the 
service may cost but the lawyer will charge, say, £201 per hour plus VAT, with 
fees and disbursements (there's that legal language again) being extra. Even 
for someone familiar with the law, that provides almost no useful information 
about how much they can expect to pay and little or what options they have to 
keep costs down. An hourly pricing rate with no cap allows the lawyer to 
determine what work they deem necessary to carry out and makes it almost 
impossible for the customer to challenge the eventual size of the bill. Nor 
does it provide any useful information which allows a customer to compare the 
cost of one lawyer with another.

When challenged about this sort of practice, lawyers will argue that the 
trajectory of many legal transactions is impossible to predict – cases can be 
quick and relatively low-cost or they can be prolonged and extremely complex, 
requiring contested court hearings with all the associated expense. Indeed, 
while lawyers are increasingly bowing to consumer expectations by offering 
estimates of how much the service might cost, they do not regard those as in 
any way binding: we have seen estimates of £5,000 translate into final bills of 
ten times that amount. And where both sides in a piece of litigation are 
working on an hourly-rate model, the temptation to string the matter out by 
engaging in unnecessarily combative or complex correspondence sometimes appears 
to be overwhelming.

Of course there is some truth in their argument (lawyers rarely advance 
arguments entirely without some element of truth). Litigation can be very 
unpredictable and costs can vary hugely. But that is only true of a relatively 
small proportion of legal services. Writing a will, buying or selling a home, 
even conducting a simple criminal case – all of these activities are in most 
cases entirely predictable transactions where costs can be calculated well in 
advance. Even where more complex transactions are involved, it is often 
possible to predict what each element of the service may cost and offer some 
sort of conditional pricing dependent upon how the case unfolds.

And that is exactly where the leaders of the legal services market are going. 
We are already seeing the arrival of new, nakedly commercial enterprises 
offering fixed price wills or conveyancing, breaking those transactions down 
into discrete elements many of which can be provided by relatively unqualified 
(low-cost) staff supported by specialist legal software. The involvement of 
large insurers in funding personal injury or employment claims has led to a far 
more acute understanding of the likely cost of simpler litigation. Law firms 
who seem incapable of working on a fixed costs model for individual clients 
appear far more willing to do so for insurers and theLegal Services Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/legal-services-commission>.

And as the legal services marked continues to change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/alternative-business-structures>, with the 
arrival of commercial giants such as the Co-op and the increasing cross-selling 
of financial, legal and other services by banks and insurers, it is the lawyers 
who show that they can adapt their traditional view of clients and put 
customers at the heart of their business who stand the best chance of 
prospering. There are risks in that new market: no one wants pile 'em high and 
flog 'em cheap law, particularly not when our children, our homes or our 
freedom are at stake. But if it means cheaper, more predictable pricing, one of 
the key barriers between citizens and legal services will be removed.
 