
Self-flagellation by authors is a long and distinguished tradition, with 
Tolstoy (who dismissedAnna Karenina as sentimental, "serving no purpose" and 
"bad") and Kafka (for whomThe Metamorphosis was "imperfect almost to its very 
marrow") among its illustrious exemplars. Yet the appearance of startling 
ruthlessness is deceptive, as it is a younger self and his or her efforts that 
are usually being punished, whether by criticism or self-parody. The implicit 
message is: these are mistakes I wouldn't make now.

The same is true of the confessions collected by Robin Robertson in his 2003 
bookMortification: Writers' Stories of their Public Shame. Most of the tales of 
disastrous experiences are from the start of the authors' careers, as with 
Julian Barnes's anecdote about a literary party that couldn't have gone worse 
for him, or Margaret Atwood's account of an early signing session in the men's 
underwear section of a department store and a TV appearance in which she 
followed a woman from the Colostomy Association. You don't believe the shameful 
memories still keep them awake today.

This makes the self-rubbishing under the heading "What's Wrong with Me?" in 
the latest Dublin Review <http://thedublinreview.com/spring-2013/> more 
radical, as the authors who responded to its invitation (to reveal "what they 
do that causes them dismay, or what they wish they could do but can't") 
are exposing abiding, apparently ineradicable, flaws – not long-ago 
humiliations, or callow books, or problems since conquered.

Most of the confessions are nonetheless informal and relatively 
straightforward. Anne Enright berates herself for punctuation tics ("I am 
tormented by my need for commas"). Richard Ford is unable to "describe how 
people look".Tessa Hadley <https://www.theguardian.com/books/tessa-hadley> 
admits to repeating images. Neil Jordan says he has written "a thousand 
beginnings" but few become finished projects. Ruth Padel convicts herself of 
"too-muchness", writing too much and overdoing imagery.

Other pieces are more sweeping, more literary in form, or both. Robert 
Macfarlane mimics a catechism as he asks for forgiveness for portentousness, 
lack of jokes, "overlarded" prose and other tonal and stylistic failings 
("Q. What published sentence do you most regret? A. 'I looked between my legs 
and saw a whole lot of nothing' in Mountains of the Mind"). Joseph O'Neill 
seems to channel Flann O'Brien as he wryly portrays himself as only "doing 
fiction" to "escape the difficulties", creative and financial, of doing 
non-fiction or poetry.

Geoff Dyer, the only writer to do the double of "What's Wrong with Me?" and 
Mortification, is also the most energetic self-scourger, noting that he can't 
"think up plots" or invent characters, and "struggles" with facts and dates. 
Such weaknesses should be embraced with "gratitude", however, because they 
oblige authors to "concentrate on one or two little areas that are uniquely 
our own".

Starting with a confession of "an epicurean attitude to chastisement", Rachel 
Cusk's contribution touches on complaints that she is glum, prone to 
overwriting, and depicts "a world without love"; but "my own sense of shame 
about my writing" centres on thinking that "I ought to write about sex". As her 
novels have "never" been lambasted for not doing so, this allows Cusk to end 
with a characteristic flourish, criticising her critics for being 
insufficiently critical; they fixate on "what is not quite honest", not "what 
is appallingly true", and so deny chastisement-addicts theFifty Shades-style 
treatment they crave, "the cold and clever appraisal that is absolutely 
justified in its negativity".
 