
The detailed circumstances in which a US government may order the killing of 
an American citizen who is a high-ranking member of al-Qaida have been revealed 
in a leaked memo prepared byObama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> lawyers.

The document, acquired by NBC and dating from 2011, lays out for the first 
time the precise rationale for carrying out targeted killings of senior 
al-Qaida members who are US citizens, and who are believed to pose an "imminent 
threat of violent attack" against Amercia.

Although the white paper deals specifically with the issue of when and how the 
president can order the killing of a US citizen who is a member of al-Qaida, it 
also provides one of the most comprehensive accounts of the wider international 
legal framework the US believes supports its controversial drones policy.

Although the paper does not specify the "minimum legal requirements" for 
launching such an operation, it insists that the killing would be 
constitutionally justified as the United States is engaged in an "armed 
conflict", as defined by international law and authorised by Congress, with 
al-Qaida and its affiliates.

In a key passage in the document – which is unsigned – it argues that for a US 
citizen who has rights under the due process clause and the fourth amendment, 
"that individual's citizenship would not immunise from a lethal operation".

The paper concludes: "Where certain circumstances are met, a lethal operation 
against a US citizen who is a senior operational leader of al-Qaida … and who 
himself poses an imminent threat of violent attack against the United States, 
would not violate the constitution."

The leaking of the documents came as eight Democratic and three Republican 
senators wrote to Barack Obama requesting the disclosure of all the legal 
opinions drawn up at his request authorising the killing of Americans.

The question of the constitutionality of such operations emerged after the 
killing ofAnwar al-Awlaki <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-al-awlaki>, 
a US-born radical Muslim cleric, in a drone strike in Yemen in September 2011. 
Although the leaked paper is not understood to be the legal determination that 
authorised that killing, it is understood to mirror it.

The paper argues that the operation must be consistent with the laws of war, 
and that capture of the individual must have be found to be unfeasible. But in 
a number of areas, it controversially appears to give considerable flexibility 
to administration officials to define key issues.

Those include defining the imminence of the specific threat and the 
operational seniority of the target, considerations outside of the overview of 
the US courts. The paper insists the decision to authorise a lethal operation 
may be made by an "informed, high-level official of the US government", rather 
than by the courts.

On the issue of imminence, the justification is particularly wide-reaching: as 
attacks are "continually" being planned by al-Qaida, it is argued, "imminence 
must incorporate considerations of the relevant window of opportunity."

The paper justifies the exclusion of the courts by arguing that "judicial 
enforcement of such orders would require the court to supervise inherently 
predictive judgments by the president and his national security advisers as to 
when and how to use force against a member of an enemy force against which 
Congress has authorised the use of force."

The leaking of the document, with its dense legal argument justifying the 
targeted killings of US citizens, is certain to escalate the arguments that 
have been swirling around the issue.

Speaking to the New York Times, Hina Shamsi, director of the American Civil 
Liberties Union's national security project, denounced the memorandum as "a 
profoundly disturbing document", adding: "It's hard to believe that it was 
produced in a democracy built on a system of checks and balances. It summarises 
in cold legal terms a stunning overreach of executive authority: the claimed 
power to declare Americans a threat and kill them, far from a recognised 
battlefield and without any judicial involvement."
 