
After a long fight and a knife-edge vote in the Lords last week, the Queen 
gave her assent today to the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders 
Bill (Laspo). A significant number of people will no longer have access to 
professional help with legal problems.

While the government frequently points to the not-for-profit (NfP) advice 
sector - notably Citizens Advice Bureaux and law centres - as the safety net 
for these people, these organisations are suffering their own crises. Any 
notion that they can fully serve the interests of those legally disenfranchised 
by Laspo is wishful thinking at best.

The launch of alternative business structures has been mooted as a way of 
filling the gap, too, with proponents saying it will enable legal services to 
be delivered in innovative ways. But relying on the combined impact of Laspo 
and ABS is an explosive and haphazard approach to reforming the legal 
landscape. The deregulation of legal services, like the privatisation of public 
services, will not automatically improve them. In fact, the contrary may be 
true.

Some not for profit organisations have set up social enterprises and started 
to introduce small charges for services as a way of surviving and bolstering 
free advice provision. But they face outright competition from legal providers 
who already charge fees and the widespread perception that you consult a 
solicitor if you can afford one, and a law centre or CAB if you can't.

Some people may try to litigate in person, with all the difficulties that 
entails. Many more simply won't bother to go to court and will have to suffer 
the consequences of poor housing, debt, unfair welfare benefits decisions and 
employers' misconduct without recourse to the courts. So what can lawyers do to 
help people negotiate this harsh landscape?

1) Not-for-profit organisations should be clear about their main aim: to 
provide services to those denied access to justice by the lack of legal aid. 
They should make it clear that any ABS they have created is independent of 
their free provision, and they are not speculatively exploring new markets at 
the expense of their neediest clients

2) The 'for profit' legal profession should recognise that while lawyers have 
no equivalent of doctors' Hippocratic Oath, the law is more than simply a tool 
or trade: it is a glue that binds society. A proactive commitment, in one form 
or another, to make sure everyone is able to take their place within society is 
an essential part of being a lawyer

3) Clients' needs are not just a potential source of revenue. They arise from 
the human condition

4) Resolving legal problems at an early stage is vital, and properly funded 
legal advice can enable this to happen

5) Nonetheless, it is not the job of the legal profession to resolve all the 
iniquities involved in access to justice. You do not blame plumbers for winter. 
Society as a whole is responsible for improving the lot of its citizens through 
both access to justice and education about rights and responsibilities.
 