
Nichola Higgins, chair of the Young Barristers' Committee 


"Next year will be another unsettling one for the young publicly-funded bar, 
holding on to the promise of the Quality Assurance Scheme for Advocates while 
keeping one eye on the looming threat of contracting in 2013.

"The numbers of publicly-funded pupils and pupillages will continue to shrink, 
and increasing numbers of young tenants will seek to diversify or move into 
other areas of work entirely.

"2012 will see a boom in public access work. If the changes to the scope of 
legal aid are implemented, then many members of the public will benefit from 
the low cost, high quality legal advice offered by the junior bar. Likewise, 
the privately funded bar will also increase its direct access work. That is 
where private clients and companies will look to for the rapid delivery of 
competitively priced legal advice."

Mike Schwarz, partner specialising in criminal defence law at civil rights 
firm Bindmans


"Two big issues will dominate criminal practitioners' thoughts in 2012: 
funding and policing. While the sword of Damocles (best value tendering for 
block legal aid contracts) has been delayed for a year or so, the salami 
slicing of public funding continues unabated.

"Policing will remain in the spotlight, thanks to illiberal policing of the 
widening protest movement, further exposure of undercover spies, police 
corruption in tabloid journalism, and, more generally, the politicisation of 
the police force through the election of local commissioners."

David Carter, graduate recruitment partner at City law firm Ashurst

"The last quarter of this year has seen increased pessimism among the legal 
profession. The slowdown in the markets generally will continue into the first 
half of 2012 and transactional work will be patchy at best. What does this mean 
for the world of graduate recruitment? The long lead time of 18-24 months to 
recruit graduates means that trainee numbers will be broadly steady throughout 
the course of next year.

"Looking ahead, however, I expect all City firms to review their future 
requirements for trainees. This will result in reduced numbers of trainee 
spaces available across all practice areas. It's not all doom and gloom, 
though; I expect more firms to look to the fast-growing Asian and international 
markets and make commitments and investments in taking on trainees who can be 
used as resource in the Far East, India and the Emirates."

Cat Pond, Legal Practice Course student at the College of Law and a founding 
contributor of legalcheek.com

"The mood of law students as they look to the future hovers between worry and 
a sort of determined cheerfulness.

"Nobody seems to be completely secure in their situation – for those with a 
training contract, there's the potential for their firms to push back their 
start date or worse; for those without, the pressure is well and truly on.

"The biggest concern is the possibility that training contract places will be 
further reduced. There are also fears about law firms' increasing tendency to 
outsource paralegal work – one of the ways students who graduate from the LPC 
without a training contract gain experience and a foot in the door of the 
profession.

"As much as I would like to come across as unconcerned, the likelihood is that 
only a fraction of those searching for a training contract will get one. Based 
on a mixture of statistical and anecdotal evidence, I'd put the success rate at 
roughly a third of those applying, with the rest left to re-apply in later 
years or reconsider their careers entirely."

Baroness Deech, chair of the Bar Standards Board 

"Alongside the Solicitors <https://www.theguardian.com/law/solicitors> 
Regulation Authority and the Institute of Legal Executives, we will continue to 
oversee the review of legal education and training, which looks at the training 
of lawyers of the future. We await its findings with interest. Meanwhile, we 
will be consulting on the introduction of an aptitude test for the Bar 
Professional Training Course, with the aim to ensure a fair and equitable 
process for all applicants, while preventing those without the necessary skills 
spending up to £16,000 undertaking the course."

Steve Broach, a barrister at Doughty Street Chambers, and the 2011 young legal 
aid lawyer of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/jun/29/fiona-bawdon-legal-aid-awards>

"2012 will be an exceptionally busy year for all social welfare lawyers. The 
public sector spending cuts will bite again on budgets that have already been 
pared back to the bone. Public authorities will feel compelled to take even 
harsher decisions with respect to essential services for disabled people and 
other vulnerable groups.

"The only silver lining is that legal aid will continue to be available to 
fund many cuts cases brought by way of judicial review. The courts also seem to 
be prepared to hold the line and require compliance with legal duties even 
where the public authority's defence is effectively 'we've got no money'."

Emma Holt, managing partner of Manchester commercial law firm Pannone 


"Next year's introduction of Alternative Business Structures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/alternative-business-structures> – allowing 
new entrants into the legal market and non-lawyer ownership of law firms – is 
the most significant change ever in the legal profession. And it comes at a 
time when the law, like many other sectors, faces challenging economic times.

"To succeed law firms will need to be agile and innovative, and not be afraid 
to take measured risks. Those that recognise the need to run firms as 
businesses will thrive.

"Client service, quite rightly, must remain the priority for all lawyers. In 
this respect, much can be learnt from some of the potential new entrants into 
the sector. The time for speculation is now over and change is truly upon us. 
There will be many opportunities for the brave in the profession, not least by 
those offered to act in business with non-lawyers."
 