
Leading shares have suffered their fourth day of decline despite a recovery in 
the financial sector.

Legal and General led the market risers, up 2.8p to 78.95p as Credit Suisse 
moved its recommendation from neutral to outperform and its target price from 
91p to 113p. A downgrade from Bernstein Research - suggesting L&G was an 
unattractive target for its much rumoured predator Resolution - seemingly had 
little effect.

Meanwhile UK banks recovered from the falls last week which followed President 
Obama's proposed clampdown on financial institutions, on the basis that the 
effect of the plans would not be too onerous, even assuming they were 
implemented.

Ian Gordon at Exane BNP Paribas said the effect of the Obama proposals would 
be muted, withBarclays - up 4.65p to 276p - and Standard Chartered - 17p better 
at £14.45- the most obvious candidates for a rebound. He said:

Barclays has sold off by more than 10% in recent days in reaction to renewed 
(but we believe unfounded) capital concerns and the various Obama assaults over 
proprietary trading and planned recovery of US bail-out losses from banks with 
US operations over the next decade. There is no explicit disclosure of the 
quantum of non-client income withinBarclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> Capital, nor is it clear at this 
stage how much may fall foul of the Obama assault. Our guess is less than 5%, 
and in any event, we would highlight the fact that our existing forecasts 
assume no increase in Barcap "clean" revenues in 2010 versus 2009, so any 
impact on revenue expectations is likely to be muted.

Curiously, Standard Chartered has also participated in the Obama sell-off 
despite the fact that it has stated that it has no proprietary trading 
activities at all, and nil (or negligible) exposure to the Obama tax. We would 
highlightStandard Chartered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/standardchartered> as a relative "safe 
haven" from the Obama regulatory assault, and our 1800p target price offers 26% 
upside.

Our view remains that the UK is less likely than the US to impose irrational 
populist restrictions on prop trading and other investment banking activities, 
though we don't expect regime change in May to herald material relief from 
irrational political interference in the UK.

But Lloyds Banking Group dipped 0.68p to 52.92p as analysts at Barclays 
Capital suggested the bank might need to sell its Scottish Widows insurance 
business.

Overall the FTSE 100 fell 42.68 points to 5260.31, its lowest level since 
December 18 last year. Morgan Stanley's widely followed strategist Teun 
Draaisma added to the downbeat mood, advising clients to sell into strength. He 
said:

Authorities have switched from 'all out stimulus' to 'let's start some 
stimulus withdrawal'. Tightening measures are coming in thick and fast around 
the world. We always thought that the start of tightening was not the first Fed 
rate hike, but could be many other things including higher taxes, less 
spending, more regulation, Chinese/Asian tightening, or Fed language change. 
Recent initiatives include Obama's banking initiatives, and several Asian 
tightening measures. In the next few months this theme is set to intensify, and 
we expect positive payrolls, a Fed language change, and the start of 
quantitative easing withdrawal. This willingness of authorities to move away 
from crisis mode is an important change and means that the tightening phase in 
the broad sense of the word has now started.

Elsewhere building materials group Wolseley added 15p to £14.35 after it 
announced its finance director was leaving in March following the completion of 
its £1bn fundraising. Stephen Webster will be replaced by John Martin of 
Alchemy Partners, who has worked with Wolseley's chief executive Ian Meakins 
before. The company has also abolished the role of chief executive officer for 
Europe, so the current incumbent Rob Marchbank will leave in March.

British Land climbed 6.3p to 438.3p after an upgrade from UBS while Aveva 
added 16p to £10.59 after the software company issued an upbeat trading 
statement.
 