
Leicester's "shadow" team battled their way into the LV Cup final with a 
never-say-die performance against a near full-strengthBath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> side at the Recreation Ground.

Eighteen-year-old fly-half George Ford kicked four crucial penalties – three 
of them in the second half – to help earn the win. The Tigers' try was an 
opportunist effort in the first half by the lock Graham Kitchener.

Leicester's director of rugby, Richard Cockerill, has promised Ford that he 
will keep his place for the LV Cup final – even if Toby Flood is released again 
by England.

"I'm delighted with the result," Cockerill said. "The performance was far from 
perfect but our attitude kept us in there. Bath are a good side and they play a 
good brand of rugby – if you let them.

"Fordy does some great things with ball in hand and his knowledge of the game 
is first rate, far beyond his years. I've wanted to see him play at this level. 
He's come through with flying colours. It would be pretty cruel to leave him 
out of the side now. I'll play him next week."

Bath had romped through the pool stages but found themselves locked in a 
typically hard-fought contest with their old rivals. Now they face an uphill 
task to climb into the Aviva Premiership top six to qualify for the Heineken 
Cup. Their own tyro fly-half, Tom Heathcote, kicked three penalties and 
converted a try by the hooker Lee Mears.

Having announced an unchanged team, Bath had been forced to make a late change 
when No8 Simon Taylor pulled out. Carl Fearns stepped up for his first start 
since September.

The Tigers, already without five of the England match day squad, could have 
started Flood and Thomas Waldrom when they were released from international 
duty in midweek but kept faith with the majority of players who had steered 
them to the semi-final.

It was a poignant occasion for ex-Leicester favourite Lewis Moody, forced to 
announce his retirement this week and consigned to media duties. He had made 
just 18 appearances for Bath.

The game remained scoreless until Ford chipped over a penalty. He had already 
shown maturity beyond his years with a series of superb kicks out of hand and 
it was his finely judged garryowen that forced the penalty from ex-Tiger Sam 
Vesty.

Almost immediately Ford unleashed another inch-perfect 60-metre kick to the 
corner. Bath fumbled and Kitchener pounced for a try which went unconverted.

Bath were suddenly stung into action and Heathcote kicked a 30-metre penalty 
to cut the deficit to 8-3. On the half hour, they took the lead through Mears 
after Matt Carraro carved through theLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> midfield. Heathcote 
converted from touch with the help of both posts.

Early in the second half Bath were penalised and Ford kicked the penalty.

That was immediately cancelled out as Heathcote put his side back in front at 
13-11 with a fine touchline kick, but Ford replied just as quickly with his 
third penalty to restore Leicester's one-point advantage.

Bath had to be content with a third Heathcote penalty to edge them back in 
front at 16-14 but he was wide with a long-range effort on 65 minutes.

Leicester showed they were far from out of it as Steve Mafi broke away from a 
ruck, forcing Bath to scramble back desperately until the referee, Dave 
Pearson, awarded a relieving penalty. Ford's kick was spot on again, with just 
nine minutes remaining.

Heathcote was quickly given another long-range opportunity but could not find 
the direction. The visitors had done enough to earn a place in the final at 
Worcester on 18 March when they will face Northampton or Scarlets, who meet on 
Sunday.
 