
James Hook produced another brilliant Twickenham performance as the Ospreys 
lifted the EDF Energy Cup with victory overLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers>.

Two months ago, Hook took home the man-of-the-match champagne after Wales 
staged a remarkable second-half comeback to beat England in what proved to be 
the first leg of their RBS 6 Nations Grand Slam triumph. And today the 
22-year-old was a central figure at HQ once again, providing the scoring pass 
for bothOspreys <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> tries and kicking 
13 points himself.

Leicester, the defending champions, had taken an early lead with a penalty and 
drop goal from Andy Goode before Hook, Marty Holah, Filo Tiatia and the Ospreys 
took charge. Andrew Bishop and Alun-Wyn Jones scored either side of half-time 
as Wales' glamour region buried the disappointment of last weekend's Heineken 
Cup quarter-final defeat at Saracens. The Ospreys, who lost to Leicester in 
last year's final, became the first Welsh side to win the EDF Energy Cup.

The Ospreys were without Gavin Henson but still featured 11 of the Wales side 
that beat England in early February. The Tigers also came into the match on the 
back of a defeat, at home to Wasps in the league, but they had a weekend off 
and started stronger. Their urgency and physicality at the breakdown made it 
hard for the Ospreys to settle and, after Goode missed a long-range kick from 
his own half, he pushed Leicester 6-0 ahead with a penalty and a drop goal.

The Tigers could have been further ahead after marching to within inches of 
the try-line but the Ospreys' defence stood firm as Leicester first tried to 
pummel their way over through the forwards. And when captain Martin Corry, 
forced backwards in a huge tackle from Hook, offloaded to Danny Hipkiss the 
England centre spilled the ball and the chance was gone.

Hook missed two of this three goal attempts in the first half but with the 
ball in hand he was a constant threat. He showed a searing turn of pace to 
launch the Ospreys' first real foray into Leicester territory and then pushed a 
clever kick into the corner to pile on the pressure. Hook was promising to 
conjure something special and it almost came from a scything break through the 
broken Leicester defence. With Shane Williams outside on the overlap the try 
was on but Leicester scrum-half Harry Ellis produced a desperate, brilliant 
tackle to haul Hook down from behind.

The Ospreys, though, did not have long to wait for the opening try as Hook 
found Bishop on the switch ball. The Wales Under-21 international powered 
through tackles from Goode and George Chuter and had enough momentum to hold 
off Aaron Mauger and Tuilagi to score by the posts. The try changed the 
momentum of the game and the Ospreys dominated for the remainder of the opening 
half, with full-back Lee Byrne an increasing threat.

One of the standout performers in Wales' Grand Slam campaign, Byrne was 
confident under the high ball and attacked dangerously. Hook tried to tighten 
the Ospreys' grip just before the interval after latching onto an offload from 
Williams but his kick forward was just too strong and the ball skidded out. The 
Ospreys continued in the same vein after the restart with another break from 
Byrne splitting the Leicester defence and Hook sent Alun-Wyn Jones plundering 
over for the second try.

Hook's conversion from wide right was masterful and he followed that with a 
brilliant penalty from a similar position to open an 11-point lead their 
invention deserved. The Ospreys kept the pace high and were in complete 
control, with Hook, Tiatia and Williams leaving Leicester chasing shadows.

Leicester needed to secure a foothold and Ellis provided it, snaffling a 
turnover from Tiatia at the base of an Ospreys scrum in the shadow of the 
Tigers posts. Leicester marauded upfield as Jordan Crane galloped into the 22 
and earned a close-range penalty but Corry opted for the scrum instead of a 
shot at goal. And it proved to be the wrong move. The Ospreys defended 
valiantly for six minutes, holding up a Leicester drive over the line before 
clearing their lines and Hook applied the killer blow with his second penalty.

The Ospreys remained heavily on the front foot and almost finished with a 
third try for replacement Gareth Owen, only for referee Alain Rolland to call 
play back for a forward pass.
 