
Ahmed Mahrez was 54 when a heart condition took his life. His second son, 
Riyad, was 15 at the time. That was 2006 and the distraught teenager reacted in 
the way that would have made his father most proud, hardening his focus to make 
the most out of the talent that Ahmed had done much to cultivate. The young 
Mahrez has since outgrown the amateur district league in Paris where he had 
been playing,competed in the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/30/germany-algeria-world-cup-last-16-match-report>
 for the country of his father’s birth, Algeria, and becomeone of the most 
exciting – and effective – players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/08/leicester-city-sunderland-premier-league-match-report>
 in the Premier League for Leicester City.

“My dad was always behind me, he wanted me to be a footballer,” says Mahrez in 
careful English. “He was always with me. He came to every game with me to give 
me help. He played before for small teams inAlgeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/algeria> and France so he knew what he 
was saying, so I listened to him. [His death] maybe was the kickstart. I don’t 
know if I started to be more serious but after the death of my dad things 
started to go for me. Maybe in my head I wanted it more.”

Leicester City 1-1 Tottenham Hotspur | Premier League match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/22/leicester-city-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
Fulfilling his and his father’s ambition still seemed a long shot. He was 
playing for his local team in Sarcelles, a northern suburb of Paris with 
abundant state-built tower blocks, high immigrant populations and low career 
prospects. “We were definitely not rich, but we were not poor,” says Mahrez. 
“My mum always came home from work and did everything so that we ate well.” It 
was nature that decreed the young Mahrez would be exceptionally thin and his 
physique meant few coaches believed he would make it as a footballer despite 
his baroque skill.

“They said I was too skinny, everyone will push you off the ball,” says the 
24-year-old. “I had a good technique but physically I wasn’t too strong. And I 
wasn’t fast. But I always worked hard.”

Mohamed Coulibaly, the technical director of Sarcelles, agrees, telling 
L’Equipelast year that: “He was very frail. But he never gave up and that’s 
paying off. You can see on the pitch that he never hides. From very early on he 
learned to take responsibilities. He has something more than technique, he has 
the guts and character that make great players.”

Mahrez still looks slight enough to stash himself behind a post if he were 
inclined to hide, but he is more powerful now and speed has become one of his 
best weapons. What most confounds opponents and delights fans is the trickiness 
of his dribbles. Elusiveness is a quality he honed first in the streets, then 
at Sarcelle, then at Quimper, the French non-league club that decided to take a 
chance on him in 2009.

“When you’re skinny or small you don’t go into duels,” he says. “One manager 
at Quimper said to me: ‘You have to play without contact, you have to be clever 
because now you’re not strong enough.’”

He developed an anarchic savviness that he reckons academy graduates seldom 
possess and points to his Leicester team-mates Jamie Vardy and N’Golo Kante, 
who share his mindset having also worked their way up from non-league. “We’re 
not programmed. When you’re in an academy, every day you’re in at 9am and it’s: 
‘Do this, do that’, but we just came with our football. Sometimes you see me on 
the pitch and you think I’m playing on the street. That brings something 
different to the team. It’s better to have a lot of different qualities in the 
team, it’s a good mix.”

Mahrez has also shown savviness with his career decisions. Ambition has never 
made him rash. When, after six months at Quimper, Paris Saint-Germain and 
Marseille came calling, he elected to join Le Havre in Ligue 2 instead. “Le 
Havre was a good choice for me because they have a good youth system,” he says.

“I played for the under-21s and then the first team. It was difficult for me 
when I started in the first team because in the French second division it is 
always so defensive, everybody seems to be playing for 0-0. The first year was 
difficult, the second year was good. Then I did six months and went to 
Leicester. My life is like that. It always has to be step by step.”

He took some convincing that English football and the Championship, where 
Leicester were in 2014, was the right step. “Everybody was saying to me: 
‘Riyad, England is not for you, it is too physical, too strong. Spanish 
football would suit you better.’ So I never thought I would play in England. 
But I spoke to my agent and he said it would be very good for you. And I spoke 
with my family. I said: ‘OK, I will give it a go,’ and when I got here I really 
liked it. When I started training and playing games I thought to myself: ‘I was 
stupid to hesitate.’”

Leicester were admirably astute, picking up the player for €450,000. He is 
worth many multiples of that now, having taken his game to new levels and 
enjoyed experiences that money cannot buy.

“The club has given me everything,” he says. “I discovered the Premier League 
and played in the [2014] World Cup. I was playing in the Championship but we 
were always first and always winning so Algeria started watching me. If I was 
still playing in the second division in France, nobody would have watched me.”

Although he was born in France and his mother is Moroccan, he wanted to play 
for the country from which his father emigrated. “I used to go to Algeria on 
holiday every year with him and my brother. I have a lot of family there. I 
lived in France and grew up there and my mum still lives there but my heart is 
more Algerian.”

His affection for Leicester has also grown. He was saddened when his first 
manager at the club, Nigel Pearson, was sacked in June soon after presiding 
over the club’s sensational escape from relegation.

“Nigel was like a dad to me because when I came here he was always speaking to 
me and he gave me a lot of confidence. Sometimes he shouted at me and screamed 
at me but it was for my own good. I was disappointed when he left because he 
brought me here. He is a good person as well. They brought in a new manager and 
I didn’t know him.”

But he has come to know and like Claudio Ranieri, too, and attributes his 
spectacular start to the season, in which he hasscored four goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/22/leicester-city-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
, to the Italian. “He helps us a lot tactically so I’m getting better 
tactically. We needed that. And he has given me a lot of responsibility and 
confidence. He gives me the key of the game. He said: ‘Riyad, do your job 
offensively and defensively’ because he wants me to be a complete player. He 
helped me a lot in training and speaks to me.” The Italian’s defensive 
instructions are helpful, the offensive one simple: “He says: ‘Just go create 
things. I would never change your game. I like how you play.’”

Ranieri, like Pearson, has warned against expecting too much from Mahrez, 
pointing out that the player has come a long way in a short time. He withdrew 
him at half-time at Bournemouth, who successfully nullified him. “He said to 
me: ‘It was difficult for you, they blocked you. You’re not always going to be 
the best player on the pitch but that’s OK, there’s nothing wrong.”

Mahrez knows he has to find a way of overcoming extra attention from 
opponents. But Sunday’s visitors to the King Power Stadium, Aston Villa, may be 
unhappy to note that he says he still thrives at home. “Sometimes [opponents] 
put two or three players on me. It’s more difficult away, they close me more, 
but at home we have a lot of space when we have the ball so it’s better for me.”

Leicester really is home. He married an Englishwoman in the summer before 
pledging his professional future to the club by signing a contract extension to 
2019. That was despite interest from Roma and Villarreal. There were even 
rumours of inquiries from Barcelona. “I don’t care about things like that. I am 
aLeicester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity> footballer 
and I am happy here. In life if you have to go somewhere you go but I don’t 
want to think about that.”
 