
Any business with a serious approach to sustainability has to think carefully 
about how its sources its supplies.

Whether environmental, ethical or socio-economic, a fully committed 
organisation must look beyond its own direct impacts.

The problem facing Lend Lease, a property developer, owner, asset manager and 
construction company, was that it operates in a market where few supply chain 
standards exist.

Having identified the issues and costs involved in improving supply chain 
management, the company says it has found a formula to make an industry-wide 
difference.

Working in partnership with Achilles, the company developed a supplier 
accreditation system that increasingly acts as a central web-based hub for the 
UK construction industry.

First launched in 2007, the BuildingConfidencesystem has matured into "the 
most thorough" accreditation scheme in the industry, says Lend Lease, and has 
also saved the company around £500,000 a year in supply chain costs.

Lend Lease says the objective is for all major contractors and clients to 
share a single efficient process that helps to eliminate risk and improve 
supplier performance.

The system requires potential suppliers to complete a questionnaire, take 
remedial actions if necessary, and then undergo regular on-site audits to 
ensure compliance.

As well as a community of suppliers, there are now 13 buying organisations 
using the system, including Mace, Skanska, British Land, Costain, David Langdon 
and Shepherd Construction.

Qualifiers join the website and are then subject to regular audits to measure 
performance and share the data transparently with clients and contractors.

It is by no means easy to gain accreditation. But once accredited there is no 
need for suppliers to pre-qualify in future business bids.

Consequently, the scheme has quickly gained a reputation for helping users to:

• Win new business.

• Monitor and improve performance in areas such as health and safety, 
environment and sustainability.

• Qualify for multiple clients and projects.

• Demonstrate corporate social responsibility.

For its own part, Lend Lease is determined to source materials, like timber, 
in a sustainable way.

In November 2010 it set an industry benchmark by achieving full Forest 
Stewardship Council (FSC) certification on its Central St. Giles development in 
London, where over 1,600m3 of timber was independently verified as sourced from 
well-managed forests.

Lend Lease's accreditation system has also encouraged at least five suppliers 
to achieve FSC standards and three major concrete suppliers to gain the British 
environmental and sustainable standard, BES6001.

There are very good reasons for buyers to use the system, not least that it 
allows them to compare supplier scores and to set targets for weak performers. 
This encourages better reporting, more accountability and increased 
traceability.

For example, since becoming a member of the World Wildlife Fund's global 
forest trade network over a decade ago, Lend Lease has steadily increased the 
proportion of certified timber it buys. By 2009 the level was 95%. 2010 data 
puts the figure closer to 98%.

This holistic approach ensures that environmental and socio-economic 
considerations always influence procurement decisions and that suppliers 
continually improve performance.

Lend Lease has seen a 75% reduction in the number of significant environmental 
non-compliance cases and raised awareness of ethical issues deep in the supply 
chain, it says.

Lynn Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 