
An innovative website – backed by the Co-operative Group – has announced that 
people in the UK can now lend money, from just £15, directly to individuals 
trying to work their way out of poverty in Pakistan and Zambia.

Those benefiting from this new financial lifeline include people such as 
Rasheeda Irshad, who lives near the city of Lahore in Pakistan and earns a 
living from making and selling embroidered clothes and blankets.

She was one of the first Pakistani entrepreneurs to be featured on 
lendwithcare.org <http://www.lendwithcare.org/?gclid=CK2KlPPl67gCFS3HtAod0WoAfg>
, and had sought a £117 loan to buy raw materials – mainly cloth and thread – 
in bulk and at a cheaper price. Her profit margin will increase and she hopes 
to earn more as a result.

With seven in her household, only three of them working, that should make a 
big difference. Rasheeda's loan is now 100% funded but there are plenty of 
other entrepreneurs looking for financial assistance.

Lendwithcare.org <http://www.lendwithcare.org/> is a microfinance website set 
up by aid organisation Care International UK and was first featured in Guardian 
Money in December 2011. Then it was helping people in Benin, Cambodia, Ecuador, 
the Philippines and Togo to start or expand their own small business.

Would-be lenders can go on to the website and view the profiles of individuals 
in the seven countries. These are loans, not handouts: the money is paid back 
in instalments, typically over six to 12 months. Once repaid, you can choose to 
withdraw the money or recycle it into another loan.

One in three people in Pakistan lives on less than 30p a day, and next year it 
is set to become the largest recipient of UK aid. "We hope these loans will be 
of interest to the British-Asian community (and beyond), which has a high 
proportion of self-employed entrepreneurial people who know the difficulties of 
running a small business, and may be keen to help those in Pakistan in a way 
that is empowering and not just charity," says lendwithcare.

In Zambia, the intention is that lending will predominantly be to groups of 
women. A few days ago there were two groups on the site seeking loans: the 
"Mgwirizano Group" is made up of 15 women, aged 26 to 51, who each run a small 
business selling goods ranging from beans and tomatoes to charcoal and shoes. 
The second, the "Desire Group", are women aged 25 to 55 who, again, each run 
their own business. The groups are seeking loans of £1,283 and £3,466 
respectively.

So far more than 74,000 loans totalling £2.7m have been made to more than 
4,600 entrepreneurs around the world via lendwithcare. The entrepreneurs 
receive 100% of the loan – no administrative charges are deducted.

The downside is that you won't earn any interest. In the vast majority of 
cases you get your money back in full and on time – in fact, lendwithcare says 
the default rate is virtually zero. "We have had two of the 4,675 entrepreneurs 
default, and that is because they both died," it says, adding: "Loans are 
generally provided by many lenders, so in the event of a rare default, the loss 
to a single lender is usually small."

Not just anyone can seek a loan via the website: the entrepreneurs will have 
already approached Care partner microfinance institutions (MFIs) with their 
business plans. If the MFI is satisfied the plan is sound, it will approve the 
proposal and upload the entrepreneur's profile on to lendwithcare.org. Most 
entrepreneurs are seeking a few hundred pounds.

Lendwithcare has also teamed up with microfinance lender Akhuwat in Lahore to 
offer interest-free loans. Dr Ajaz Khan, lendwithcare's microfinance adviser, 
says: "Pakistan is not without its loan sharks, and we will provide an 
alternative for people who might otherwise be forced to pay excessive interest 
when they need to borrow small amounts."

Last year the World Bank said Pakistani women were losing out because of 
"discriminatory lending". It also found that up to 70% of microfinance loans to 
women in Pakistan may be used by male relatives who need money.
 