
Simon Jenkins (Our leaders are hooked on the narcotic of glory. That’s why we 
rush to war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/14/leaders-britain-war-tony-blair-david-cameron-iraq-libya>
, 15 September) follows many western commentators in viewing events in the 
Middle East through a typically colonialist lens that filters out the people of 
the countries concerned and only sees western entities as meaningful actors. 
Thus the Libyan revolution becomes “David Cameron’s war on Libya”, with the 
people of Benghazi – the authors of the uprising – dismissed in a side comment. 
Similarly, the fall of the Gaddafi regime is attributed solely to the Nato 
operation, with no place for the people of Misrata, who pushed back the 
notorious 32nd Brigade led by Khamis Gaddafi for two months before any air 
support from Nato arrived; or the people of Az-Zawiya, who rose against 
Gaddafi, were put down by his forces, and then rose again as soon as the 
regime’s attention was diverted elsewhere.

It’s understandable that Jenkins chooses to pass over these people because he 
has nothing to offer them except a Hobbesian injunction that resisting tyranny 
produces worse results than the tyranny itself – an easy formula to pronounce 
from the comfort of the home counties, not so easy to embrace from the 
perspective of the tyrant’s scaffold and torture chamber.

Popular revolutions are complex events that don’t always produce the results 
their supporters aspire to, especially when they come in the wake of 
decades-long suppression of any form of free political expression. However, the 
appropriate response to them from western democrats is not haughty dismissal 
but active engagement, understanding and support.
Brian Slocock
Chester

• Simon Jenkins puts our leaders’ eagerness to engage in foreign wars down to 
a quest for glory. But this drug is enhanced by the needs of the arms industry, 
which must have testing grounds for its new weapons to justify subsidised 
investment in R and D and increase export income.
Henry Charles Pryor
Hay-on-Wye

• The Guardian’s tacit defence of David Cameron over Libya’s present debacle 
equates his failings with those of parliament and Nato, but they can’t all have 
been oblivious to the consequences (Editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/14/the-guardian-view-on-libya-a-mess-not-just-of-david-camerons-making>
, 15 September). The Libyan adventure did not “creep” towards regime change; it 
had been prepared by US military strategists using satellite, aerial and 
ground-based surveillance, plus advice from experts in diverse fields. Oil 
surely had something to do with it.

Parliament actually voted for a no-fly zone, not “action to protect civilians” 
– the cruellest spin of all. Subsequently, even Libya’s civil airliners were 
destroyed, parked on the ground. Reportage of the war focused on Libyan regime 
brutality – authorised rapes; imported mercenaries; snipers killing civilians; 
mass executions of captive rebels; revelations of the 1996 Abu Salim prison 
massacre. After five years, these anecdotes have either been proved false or 
failed to mature into a proper historical account. We have no overall picture 
of the strategic progress of the rebellion on the ground – nor of the extent of 
western paramilitary support withinLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>. The number of civilian fatalities 
directly attributable to Nato and US action remains an apparent secret. Such 
opacity suggests a “dirty war” – one whose victory could be bought with 
millions of dollars in cash paid to some useful Libyan rebels.

In the UK, the buck stopped with Cameron. How odd that he resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/david-cameron-resigns-after-uk-votes-to-leave-european-union>
 when the Brexit vote went against him but expressed no shame about his part in 
Libya’s destruction.
Dr Kevin Bannon
London

• Civilians were protected from Gaddafi’s threats to the armed rebels in 
Benghazi within one day of the no-fly zone action – by which time government 
forces had retreated. Neither the UN resolution nor the parliamentary vote 
authorised the aerial bombardment of Libya for a further seven months, in many 
cases providing air support for Salafi-jihadist groups on the ground to 
overthrow the state.

It was the UK, along with France and the US, that violently destroyed the 
state and its infrastructure, not, as you suggest, Gaddafi. You ask whether 
Cameron “should have foreseen a disaster”: given the example of Iraq, and 
having set out to overthrow the state and support Islamist rebels, the 
consequences are surely a matter of deliberate intent rather than a potentially 
innocent absence of foresight.
Peter McKenna
Liverpool

• MPs on the foreign affairs select committee deserve some credit for 
recognising the failures of the war in Libya (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/mps-deliver-damning-verdict-on-camerons-libya-intervention>
, 14 September). But after the Chilcot report it is frustrating to see yet 
another case of politicians voting for war and then concluding afterwards that 
it hasn’t worked. It would be good to apply lessons about the reality of war 
before waging it. From Iraq to Afghanistan to Libya, it is clear that the UK 
armed forces neither protect people in Britain nor make the world safer.

The select committee concluded that non-military intervention might have 
“delivered civilian protection, regime change and reform at lesser cost to the 
UK and to Libya”. Those of us who made this argument at the time were accused 
of being unrealistic. It is those who think they can solve deep-seated problems 
with bombs who are unrealistic. Violence only fuels more violence. The UK’s 
“defence” budget – the fifth highest in the world – could be better used to 
tackle the underlying causes of insecurity such as global poverty and 
inequality.
Symon Hill
Co-ordinator, Peace Pledge Union 

• Cameron and Sarkozy clearly deserve the ignominy cast on them by the select 
committee report for their lack of planning for the aftermath of their military 
adventure in Libya. However, commentators such as Jonathan Freedland (Libya is 
another example of Cameron’s folly. History will not judge him kindly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/14/libya-cameron-folly-foreign-affairs-committee-eu>
, 14 September) miss the full horrendous consequences of their hubris.

It isn’t just the horror that has unfolded for the Libyan people, terrible as 
that is. Arguably, by cynically expanding the action condoned by the UN 
resolution from protecting civilians to regime change, they crumbled the wafer 
of trust that had developed on the security council and stymied any hope of 
getting a similar humanitarian resolution on Syria, contributing to the 
consequences we see today.
Rob Raeburn
Brighton 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 