
Two weeks into the legal world's big bang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/mar/25/tesco-law-alternative-business-structures>
, we're still waiting for the fireworks. There was a modest celebration at the 
Legal Services Board, addressed by the justice minister, Jonathan Djanogly, who 
sees the liberalisation of ownership restrictions in law firms – under the 
uninspiring name of alternative business structures (ABSs) – as his main legacy 
in the job.

But the fact that the Solicitors <https://www.theguardian.com/law/solicitors> 
Regulation Authority (SRA) was not in a position as planned to start licensing 
ABSs on 6 October meant that not a huge amount happened on ABS day – the day we 
expected to start hearing about all the exciting new approaches to legal 
services that they may bring about.

Instead we will have to wait until January or February next year. With various 
bits of the scheme not yet approved by parliament, the SRA, the Legal Services 
Board and the Ministry of Justice have been pointing fingers as to who exactly 
is to blame for the delay. Prof Stephen Mayson, a leading commentator on the 
reforms,described 
<http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/legal-services-act/alternative-business-structures/mayson-abs-implementation-has-become-something-of-a-shambles>
 the collective failure as "something of a shambles" – I would go further and 
say it seems the ministry has been most at fault.

But 6 October was not a total washout, as the Council for Licensed Conveyancers
 <http://www.conveyancer.org.uk/> – a lesser-known but well-regarded legal 
regulator – managed to get its ducks in a row and began licensing ABSs for 
those who want to shelter under its wing. Unlike solicitors (until the advent 
of ABSs, at least), licensed conveyancers have been able to accept external 
investment in their businesses for around a decade, and the 40-50 firms that 
have done so must become ABSs over the next year. But equally it means the 
development is not so groundbreaking.

It was Premier Property Lawyers – part of myhomemove and one of the largest 
conveyancing businesses in the country – that had the good sense to convert at 
once, and so could bask in the glory, such as it is, of becoming thefirst ever 
ABS 
<http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/regulation/other-lawyers/exclusive-top-conveyancing-practice-becomes-the-first-ever-abs>
. Director Kevin Smith says:
 "We believe that ABSs will, over time, transform the legal services market 
and we intend to be at the forefront of developments in this area. ABSs will 
inevitably lead to better funded and organised competition in the market, which 
will benefit consumers through better-value, higher-quality conveyancing 
services." 
Not everyone agrees – the Solicitor Sole Practitioners Group continues to 
fight a rearguard action against ABSs, which it argues will damage the 
independence of the legal profession. As part of the campaign it is trying to 
gather support on the government's new e-petition website, where you need 
100,000 signatures for your issue to be eligible for debate in parliament. At 
the time of writing, the group needs another99,885 
<http://epetitions.direct.gov.uk/petitions/18567>.

The other development of note last Thursday was the announcement by the law 
firmEveryman Legal <http://www.everymanlegal.co.uk/home.aspx> – one of the new 
breed of "virtual" practices in which lawyers work from home rather than a 
central office – that it intends to become an ABS and later seek admission to 
Sharemark, a junior stock exchange. This makes it the first UK law firm to 
commit to a listing, following in the footsteps of Slater & Gordon, a major 
firm that listed in Australia in 2007 (and which now has eyes on the UK once 
ABSs allow it to operate here).

The Everyman founder James Hunt explains:
 "Starting out on a smaller market such as Sharemark is a great way to build 
profile and get to grips with the practical challenges of being a traded 
company. It will also enable us to start the process of forming relationships 
with potential investors and analysts, while the low cost and regulatory burden 
will not weigh us down. This move is also evidence that smaller law firms can 
take advantage of the Legal Services Act."

That it is, but when SRA ABS day finally arrives, it will probably be the big 
boys that make the news. The Co-op, which already has a £25m turnover legal 
arm, has committed to becoming one of the first ABSs, while it would not be a 
surprise to learn the plans of national law firm Irwin Mitchell, which has 
already announced its intention to seek external investment, but not from where.

In the meantime, however, plenty of lawyers and non-lawyers are seeking to 
introduce new ways of practising law to the market – proving that while ABSs 
have provided the mood music, many have not felt the need to wait for the 
structural liberalisation and opportunities for external investment they offer. 
Particular attention is focused on the growing number of businesses looking to 
build national legal brands, backed up by networks of law firms.

There is face2face solicitors, HighStreetLawyer.com, Lawyers2you and, 
announced this week, Simplify the Law. But leading the way at the moment in 
size and visibility is QualitySolicitors, with firms across the country, some 
of whom are operating so-called legal access points in around 130 branches of 
WH Smith, a number set to rise in time to 500. Its latest marketing wheeze is 
to put information in the Bounty Packs given to all new mothers.

There is plenty more coming down the road. The legal big bang may not have 
been a dramatic one on 6 October, but looking back in 10 years, we may realise 
just how significant it was.

Neil Rose is the editor of legalfutures.co.uk <http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/>


 