
Linda Duriez, The House That Moved, Exeter, Devon 

My bridal shop, Pirouette, has been in "The House That Moved" since the early 
1990s. It's on an interesting Tudor square, and it gets its name because the 
house was moved in 1961, during the construction of the inner-city bypass. At 
the time, it was an amazing feat for a building to be moved lock, stock and 
barrel. It took two days and was on national television.

It's not necessarily the most viable space for a business because it gets 
bigger as it goes up – the ground floor is tiny. The beams are original but all 
the plaster was renewed when they moved it. The good thing with these old 
timber frames is that they are rock solid – English oak from that era is now so 
hard. The tiny leaded window panes have also been replaced, but kept in style. 
Maintaining them requires a window cleaner with a bit of nerve. None of the 
windows are the same size.

The floors slope in places and none of the walls are straight, which drove my 
husband mad when he put in the wardrobe rails – he made them all at home and 
then when he brought them into the shop, nothing fitted.

The house tends to be cold in the winter, but once it warms up, it retains its 
heat well. In the summer we have fans on, but it's fine. My back courtyard has 
the old Roman wall of the city as one of the walls. It's lovely to sit out 
there in the summer.

Until 1961 the council rented it out as a residential property. So I still 
have people who come around and say, "Oooh, my auntie Sue lived here", and 
so on. I met someone who had raised six children here. We also get a lot of 
schoolchildren coming along as part of their history lessons. Sometimes there 
are flocks of them outside with their teachers.

I've been in the wedding business now for quite a while, and I'm getting the 
girls who used to sit outside and draw the house for school come in and say, 
"Well I'm back – I've come for my wedding dress."

The brides love the house. It's so beautiful. My background was in vintage, 
and my business is so linked to the shop I would hate to be based somewhere 
modern.
 