
Nirmalya Sengupta, the central character of Amit Chaudhuri's new novel, The 
Immortals, has elements of the writer's teenage self. This self carried a 
guitar and wrote poetry: growing up in a middle-class Bengali household in 
Bombay (Chaudhuri never says "Mumbai") was no insulation against adolescence. 
"I used to dress, as we call it in India, 'ethnically'. I wore an Indian-style 
coat, khadi stuff, and I just used to glare at people," Chaudhuri remembers. 
For a period in his youth, he tells me, he also had a quantity of facial hair. 
"Then I shaved one side of the moustache a little too much, so then had to 
shave the other side, and that's how I lost the moustache." Nirmalya undergoes 
a similar shearing at the end of The Immortals. He has left his hometown, 
Bombay, to go to university in London; after his arrival, he gives up his hair 
to an Italian barber off the Tottenham Court Road. It is a symbolic moment that 
has little effect - although he now looks completely (to use his own word) 
"normal", he is still not cured of his metaphysical turn of mind. Chaudhuri 
hasn't been either.

The Immortals is Chaudhuri's first novel for nine years, an interval he 
largely devoted to another of his passions, music. This is the kind of gap that 
editors find distressing, and indeed, as Chaudhuri points out with a tiny hint 
of pride, he has been described in this paper as a "publisher's nightmare". "I 
reacted against this professionalising of the author, in India and in Britain," 
he says. At one time he wanted to be a singer, and trained in the north Indian 
classical tradition. He has performed in India, Britain and America, and 
recently released an album, This Is Not Fusion, that explores the junctions 
between Indian classical and western popular traditions to frequently startling 
effect. As well as writing and performing music, he spent some time since A New 
World editing The Picador Book of Modern Indian Literature (2001), a huge 
project featuring 38 authors, including 20 translated from Indian languages 
into English. A short-story collection, Real Time, was published in 2002. 
Meanwhile, his first three novels - published in a single edition in the US 
under the title Freedom Song - won the Los Angeles Times book prize in 2003.

The Immortals is a more compendious novel than its predecessors - more 
peopled, more plotted - though it retains Chaudhuri's tender precision for the 
detail of bourgeois Bengali lives. It is preoccupied with music, and the 
question of how art should fit into the world. The adolescent Nirmalya - 
scruffy, serious, on the edge of pretentiousness - lives with his businessman 
father and housewife mother in a company flat in Bombay's upmarket Cuffe 
Parade. The family drive about the city in a company Mercedes: on Sundays they 
eat chilli-cheese toast at the Taj hotel. Music functions as an uncontrollable, 
estranging force in their otherwise calmly privileged lives. Nirmalya's mother, 
Mallika, has a beautiful voice, a talent that has been confined by her 
marriage. Nirmalya is a singer too and filled with the anxieties Chaudhuri once 
had. "My problem," as Chaudhuri recalls in his autobiographical poem "E-Minor", 
"was how to suffer, for I knew / Suffering to be essential to art; and yet / 
There was little cause for suffering. I had loving parents / and everything I 
required."

Chaudhuri's parents did not always have everything they required, having lost 
their assets during partition. They moved from Sylhet to Calcutta after the 
province became part of East Pakistan in 1947; Amit, their only child, was born 
in the city. The family later moved to Bombay with Chaudhuri's father's job: a 
chartered accountant, trained in Britain, he went on to become the assistant 
company secretary of the Britannia Biscuits Company, providing Chaudhuri with a 
childhood home full of bourbons and cream crackers (he once confessed in a poem 
to liking only Jammy Dodgers, though went on to marry a woman described by his 
mother as a "biscuit junkie"). In Bombay, the family lived in a company flat on 
Malabar Hill, which gave them access to the most desirable view in Bombay: the 
"Queen's Necklace", the lights of Marine Drive, where the edge of the city 
curves round the Arabian sea. "Popular culture, corporate culture, English rock 
sounds, pop songs, comic books, pornography, the nuclear family, my father's 
work, capitalism," says Chaudhuri, listing the materials of his life at that 
time.

In 1983, at the age of 20, he left Bombay and moved to Britain to take an 
English degree at University College London. He had been to England before, as 
a child, to visit an uncle and to have a heart murmur listened to by a series 
of English doctors. Returning by himself was a very different experience. At 
first he stayed at International Student House, and was a poetic oddity among 
students studying accountancy and management. Spending much of his time 
practising his singing, he felt inhibited, and paranoid about being overheard. 
"People are much more aware of one another in England, super-aware. They are 
focused on others in a seemingly detached and abstract way. This was very 
different from India. In India you could do anything and people would see you 
but not see you, hear you but not hear you."

So he moved into a bedsit in Warren Street, where he lived off unpleasant 
snacks eaten at peculiar times, and had anguished thoughts. "I would rarely go 
to class - I couldn't bring myself to interact with the other students. I 
didn't know where I stood." Instead he baited the Salvation Army with the 
temptation of a potential convert: fascinated by religion, he'd invite 
doorsteppers in when they knocked. "I'd want to talk to them about the mythic 
other, the metaphorical side of things. They were more interested in converting 
me." Throughout what might be called his Ginster years (Nirmalya, heating up 
pasties in his bedsit, finds "the first bite always burnt his lips"), he wrote 
a great deal of poetry. "I'd send my poems to national poetry competitions as 
advertised in the Poetry Review. Then I discovered that no one was getting in 
touch with me to congratulate me on having won the first prize. So I would 
switch on the radio. Just in case. I knew it was hilarious, even at the time." 
And yet, despite his loneliness and shyness, he retained his self-belief. "I 
knew I would survive," he says.

His optimism was vindicated at the end of his degree. His tutor, Dan Jacobson, 
showed his essays to Karl Miller, who was then the head of the English 
department. "I got a call from his secretary, to go and see him. I thought 
maybe I had done something wrong." In fact, Miller was impressed and 
encouraging. A week later, the results were due. Chaudhuri had got a first. 
"Three years of complete pointlessness ended in a hopeful way." He went back to 
India with an idea for a novel, about a boy going on his holidays from Bombay 
to Calcutta. For much of the next year, he lived in Bombay, writing. He sent an 
extract from the resulting manuscript to Miller, who published it in the London 
Review of Books, which he edited. The extract became the novella and short 
stories that form A Strange and Sublime Address (1991), Chaudhuri's first book, 
which won a Betty Trask award, the Commonwealth writer's prize, and admiration 
from a readership conditioned to expect the magical realism of Rushdie.

The success of Midnight's Children had skewed a generation of Indian writing 
in English towards grandeur, whimsicality and pickle factories: Chaudhuri's 
slender, focused novels could not be more different. "Rushdie represents a kind 
of hallucinatory cliff behind which we cannot see," Chaudhuri observed in an 
essay lamenting the effect of Rushdie's big book on its smaller, quieter 
antecedents. For him, Midnight's Children embodied "all that was most unserious 
about India - its loudness, its apparent lack of introspection and irony, its 
peculiar version of English grammar". Chaudhuri's work is in a different Indian 
tradition (critics have most commonly compared him to RK Narayan.) As Ian Jack, 
the former editor of Granta magazine, says: "You feel that he's not trying to 
describe 'India', but certain people in a certain place at a certain time. His 
books are about particularising things and people. They're calm. Details of 
behaviour and scene are memorably well done. Domestic life is shown to be 
subtle and complicated."

In 1987 Chaudhuri returned to Britain to take his doctorate at Balliol 
College, Oxford. His subject was DH Lawrence (whose influence is detectable 
throughout Chaudhuri's work). It was during this period that Chaudhuri met his 
wife, Rosinka Khastgir, who is now a fellow in cultural studies at the Centre 
for Studies in Social Sciences in Calcutta. They married in 1991. Chaudhuri's 
second novel, Afternoon Raag, was published two years later. It is clearly 
drawn from personal experience, being about an Indian student at Oxford and his 
memories of Calcutta.

For Chaudhuri the enchantment of Calcutta lay in "this kind of ironical 
relationship between middle-class banality - the middle-class commonplace - and 
the transcendental and the profound". He was drawn in by childhood memories of 
a place "at once vernacular and cosmopolitan - people speaking in Bengali but 
actually being much more modern and cosmopolitan than their counterparts 
speaking English in Bombay." He found his parents' generation exotic in their 
unanchoredness: "A class of people who are at once there and who are exiled, 
who are not completely there, who are travelling at the same time." This sense 
of ordinariness mingled with alienation permeates Afternoon Raag; the novel 
foregrounds place, weather and atmosphere in a profoundly unconventional way. 
Like a suburban Sunday afternoon, the story seems to stretch time in peculiar, 
pleasurable ways.

Chaudhuri's daughter, Aruna, was born in 1988; and that year he published his 
third novel, Freedom Song. Set in the winter of 1992, with tensions rising 
between the Hindu and Muslim communities in Calcutta , the novel follows the 
stories of two Hindu families. It opens with Khuku, a middle-aged woman, being 
woken by the call to prayer from a nearby mosque. Her friend Mimi has frank 
views on this: "They are going too far! And it isn't really Indian, it sounds 
like Bedouins." The novel picks at the anxieties and rationalisations that will 
lead Mimi to vote for the Hindu nationalist BJP, and substitutes gentle irony 
for outright condemnation.

The Chaudhuri family moved back to India in the late 1990s, choosing Calcutta 
for their home (although as a visiting professor in contemporary literature at 
the University of East Anglia, Chaudhuri is often away). He had never really 
lived there before, and it was no longer, it transpired, the place explored in 
many of his books - he found a faster-moving, less decayed city, altogether 
less dreamy. "It does like writers, but it's also Calcutta now, not the 
Calcutta of 25 or 30 or 100 years ago. They maybe haven't got over the idea of 
it, but the reality, the context that produced that, has disappeared." And he 
discovered, on his return, that he didn't quite fit in. "Something I realised 
once I went to Calcutta was that it wasn't home, and how much of an outsider I 
was. On the one hand, I was appropriated as a Bengali boy who was writing about 
Calcutta, on the other, I was regarded with a degree of suspicion." It is not 
the going overseas that is seen as strange, he tells me, but the decision to 
return. "To go to England or America and then to come back, that's not typical. 
Coming back is seen as a sign of failure, of not having done as well as you 
could have."

Something of this feeling of estrangement finds expression in the novella A 
New World (2000), which visits the city again through an outsider's eyes. The 
protagonist, Jayojit Chatterjee, is a lecturer in economics at an American 
university. After his marriage fails, he leaves the States to bring his young 
son on a visit to his parents in their shuttered Calcutta flat. As in all 
Chaudhuri's novels, a compulsive narrative is somehow generated from near-total 
eventlessness: unpacking suitcases, the afternoon nap, supper with Jayojit's 
retired parents. The Indian reviews were not particularly kind: the Hindustan 
Times felt the novel unfolded in "gruelling slow motion"; India Today 
criticised it as "somnambulist". It is not the kind of book that Jayojit 
himself would like: visiting a bookshop, he stares sceptically at some of the 
Indian novels: "'They not only look light, they feel lightweight as well,' he 
thought, weighing one in his hand." Among Jayojit's kind - the newly pragmatic 
and acquisitive middle class - there is a preference for size over substance; 
or so Chaudhuri seems to suggest.

He also feels that the Indian press haven't found a workable language to talk 
about value. "They criticise a lot, but the criticism is based on arguments 
about authenticity these days. 'Did he earn his right to talk about this? Is it 
really this street he's talking about? Should he have been talking about this 
particular street or a street which is more representative of this or that?'" 
He feels that imagination has become subservient to the social sciences, in 
insidious ways. "Margins and the centre, colonialism - it all has to fit into 
that."

Does he fit into that? "I fit in a bit uncomfortably," he says. "That's not to 
say there aren't people who like my work, but it's doing something different 
from, you know, the others. I see myself as fitting into a tradition, of giving 
a great deal of importance to space, of looking at time." The new elite are too 
far removed from metaphysics to make proper sense to him - they're obsessed 
with getting things done, with making things happen; thoughtfulness has been 
sidelined. "It's a very strange middle class," he says, speaking about 
contemporary India. "Full of operators and people on the move. It really 
doesn't value disruptions in that activeness. It doesn't have time for any 
privileging of daydreaming." Chaudhuri maintains an old-fashioned Bengali 
belief in the value and pleasure of getting there slowly, of circling the 
point. "I believe that the arts, and art, and writing, are basically forms of 
addiction - you go to them again, and you read it again, re-reading. And you're 
not re-reading for what the story tells you, for the plot, or illumination. 
This is not the addiction of what happens next."

Chaudhuri on Chaudhuri

"Later, he would enter the toilet, armed with an ashtray, a newspaper and a 
pair of reading-glasses. The toilet was his study. Here, filling the room with 
cigarette smoke, he read the significant news of the day; he pondered on 'world 
affairs' and 'home affairs'; he pontificated to himself on the 'current 
situation' from a Marxist angle. He was a water-closet thinker.

"This part of the daily ceremonies over, he would enter the bathroom to have 
his pre-luncheon bath, humming a small tune to himself. He would turn on the 
old, ineffectual shower and, suddenly elated, begin singing aloud to himself."

These sentences are about the central character, Chhotomama ("Junior Uncle"), 
in my first novel. I wrote them when I was still a graduate student at Oxford, 
and felt I'd arrived at a language I hadn't possessed before, with which to 
describe baths, balconies, human activities, and a bliss that was at once comic 
and serious. I sent the chapter to the LRB, where it appeared as a story. Of 
the sentence, "He was not so much an armchair philosopher as a water-closet 
thinker", Karl Miller said: "I don't think you need the 'armchair philosopher' 
bit." This terse observation was a guide when I began the nightmarish task of 
revision.
 