
Of all the minor injuries I endured when I was young, splinters were the 
things I dreaded the most. My father would sterilise a needle and gently pierce 
and peel back the top layer of my skin, then pluck the splinter out with 
tweezers. I haven't had a splinter for years, but the thought of getting one 
again has grown into an irrational fear.

So when my son got one in his finger the other day and asked me to remove it, 
I was far more terrified than him. To save him from anxiety, I did my best at 
appearing unbothered. I put his finger in my mouth, and pinched the skin 
between my clenched teeth and sucked. To my amazement, the fleck of wood slid 
out immediately. I felt like I'd just killed a bear.

Standing there, I realised that my sense of courage in recent times has come 
not from the big, obvious "brave" things. The removal of a 2mm piece of wood 
from my son's finger pumped me full of pride that day.

I wouldn't expect anyone to tell me I'm brave for doing that, or for riding a 
bike around town, as I have been doing a lot recently. I feel a newfound sense 
of daring as I cycle along main roads, speed down hills on the way to work, to 
the shops, or to pick up the children from school. This – if I am to look back 
in a few years' time – will be remembered as the summer of cycling. It doesn't 
sound very romantic, courageous or even that fun, but all the cliches, the wind 
whipping through my hair and cooling my bare limbs and the feeling that I'm 
travelling at 100mph, even though I'm barely going 20mph – are joys I've 
rediscovered.

For years I lost my nerve when it came to cycling. Even though I have always 
been perfectly capable, and once cycled to work every day, in more recent times 
I kept thinking that if I ventured out I'd be hit by a car or swept under a 
bus. I've never had a nasty accident, so where these thoughts came from, I have 
no idea.

"Be brave," I was told as a child when I'd fallen from a horse. "Get straight 
back in the saddle." And I did, because I was young and fearless.

As time went by, however, my love of boys overtook my love of horses. It's 
hard to remember if my courage for trying new things began to wane around that 
time too, but it feels that as my confidence slipped, so did my resolve. I used 
to look at other people doing the things that I wanted to do, and heap 
idolatrous praise on to them and their relatively small triumphs. "I wish I 
could do that. You're so brilliant!" I'd say, even if all they had done was 
applied for a job that was ambitious, or joined a band, or got a boyfriend who 
was clever, kind and handsome.

As my courage shrank, my life became pretty limited. And when I met R, I 
thought our courage blossomed because of the things we didn't do: save money, 
get a pension, discuss when to have children. We did everything that might have 
required some sort of planning in an unplanned and slapdash manner.

Someone once told me that alcoholics are usually an odd mix of huge ego and 
low self-esteem. I think I recognise this in R, but I most certainly recognise 
it in myself despite not being the alcoholic. Often in the past, when my fear 
about doing something grew, I pretended that I never really wanted to do it in 
the first place. Or I talked myself out of trying, by belittling it from the 
start. The things I said over and over that I didn't want in life were often 
the things I wanted more than anything else.

When R tells me how, for much of his life, he stopped himself from doing the 
things he really wanted to do because he didn't feel good enough, I can relate 
to that. Drinking gave him an erroneous sense of courage, the unhelpful kind 
that inevitably fizzled out when the night was over. It took him on limited 
adventures, in the same way that sleeping with lots of different men did for 
me: adventures that were easy and that didn't need much thinking about.

While they could sometimes be fun, the drink and the promiscuity ended up 
having a damaging effect on our sense of self-worth. We wanted to feel 
brilliant, but more often than not we felt wretched.
 