
Lincolnshire police authority has made security specialist G4S its preferred 
bidder in an outsourcing deal that will include ICT, back office and command 
and control and could be developed into a shared service for other police 
forces in the country.

The company is on course to land a 10 year, strategic partnership contract 
valued at more than £200m. It beat off competition from a partnership between 
Steria and Reliance Security to win the deal.

In the business support sector G4S will deliver services for ICT, HR, learning 
and development, assets and facilities management, finance and procurement and 
support. Operational services will include managing the force control room, the 
custody and identification unit, town enquiry officers, the crime management 
bureau, the central ticket office and collisions unit, the criminal justice 
unit, firearms licensing and the resource management unit.

In a joint statement, the police authority chairman Barry Young and chief 
constable Richard Crompton said the move is intended to support a 
transformation in the force aimed at providing savings that can be invested in 
areas such as IT infrastructure.

"The subsequent streamlining of processes will free up officer time to 
concentrate on operational policing," they said.

"The partnership deal has the widest scope of any for policing in the country 
and is now open to other authorities. The Lincolnshire model is the new 
benchmark; underpinning the future of local policing and investing in new 
technologies and services.

"If additional authorities decide to obtain services through the contract, 
they could be provided from Lincolnshire – potentially giving a boost to local 
employment." Ten other police authorities attached their names to the original 
tender document in the Official Journal of the European Union.

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For weekly updates of 
news, debate and best practice on public sector IT,join the Government 
Computing Network here. 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing/start.php>
 