
Linda Fairstein <http://www.lindafairstein.com/> was the chief of the sex 
crimes unit, later called the special victims unit, at the Manhattan district 
attorney’s office from 1976 until 2002. Since 1996, she has published 18 crime 
novels about a female prosecutor named Alexandra Cooper, who just happens to be 
the chief of the special victims unit at the Manhattan district attorney’s 
office. Smartly plotted, the novels draw on Fairstein’s considerable experience 
and expertise.

Killer Look 
<https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-reviews/linda-fairstein/killer-look/>, the 
most recent entry in the saga of Alexandra Cooper, sees a heroine slowly 
regaining her strength after a dramatic kidnapping experience. Three weeks 
after her release, Cooper is not yet back at her desk, but can’t help herself 
from tagging along with the handsome detective Mike Chapman as he investigates 
the high-profile death of a big-name American fashion designer. Fairstein spoke 
from Montana about her new fun, fashion-loving crime novel.

Alexandra Cooper is loosely – perhaps even not-so-loosely – based on your 
actual experiences as the chief of the sex crimes unit in the Manhattan DA’s 
office. What is it like continue your career as a prosecutor through fiction?

I’m still a lawyer. I keep all my credentials current and actually work on 
cases and write pieces about the law. I’m still very involved in advocacy and 
lawyering for victims of violence, and, in particular, I stay very close to the 
Manhattan DA’s office, where I worked for 30 years, and where Alex Cooper works 
in the novels. I stay connected because I love it. And, of course, it serves me 
well, I think – I can stay up to date on forensics, for example, and that can 
inform how Alex might handle a case. When I started the series, Alex Cooper was 
35, and I was maybe a decade older. She’s only 38 now, 18 books later. Of 
course, I’m much past that point. It requires a lot more of me to think and act 
like a 38-year-old woman. I’m saying that with a big smile on my face. It’s 
part of the fun.

Do you feel like Alex, as a 38-year-old female prosecutor in 2016, has a lot 
of privileges that you didn’t?

Yes. One of the things I really thought I was going to show in in these books 
was a woman in a non-traditional role. Most crime novels written by women 
before the 80s, let’s say, featured amateur sleuths – like inAgatha Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/agathachristie>’s novels. Women never used 
to be police chiefs or forensic scientists or homicide prosecutors. So, I 
thought how great to be able to show an actual female prosecutor in a very high 
profile position. It was totally uncommon in the 70s, and people were just 
getting used to it in the 90s. Now, it’s old hat.

But when I joined the DA’s office in 1972, there were only seven women, out of 
about 200 prosecutors. Back then,Frank Hogan 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/archives/news/frank-hogan-keeping-decent-proper-article-1.849350>
, the district attorney of New York, did not allow women to work homicide 
cases. “You’ll be in the law library,” he said. “I don’t think women should be 
trying murder cases, talking about blood and guts in front of juries.”

But things changed. Mr Hogan died in 1974. Diversity of all kinds became a 
much healthier thing in the Manhattan DA’s office. But that was just in New 
York. Imagine the rest of the country, then. For the most part, we just didn’t 
exist – we, meaning women prosecutors. Ours, in Manhattan, was the first sex 
crimes unit in the country. So it was a very different world, and, yes, I very 
much wanted to show a strong woman in a non-traditional role. Now, you see it 
on TV. You see it in movies. You see it in a lot of crime novels. And of 
course, you see it in real life, which is the happiest change.

Do you feel like that’s changed the way that you’ve written these books? The 
fact that when we do watch crime procedurals on television, for example, there 
is, very often, some sense of gender parity on the team?

I’ve not gone back and read my first three novels, from the 90s, but I’m quite 
sure that they reflect a different tone. It was more unusual for someone like 
Alex Cooper to show up at a homicide crime scene, or to walk into the morgue. 
Now, it’s far less shocking.

For instance, if you were to call up the New York chief medical examiner’s 
office today, I think more than 70% of the forensic biologists are women. There 
were no, or very few, women medical examiners in ’72, when I started. That was 
an all-male profession, and that’s changed, too.

Why did you pick the fashion world for this book, for Alex’s not 
quite-on-the-clock, getting-back-on-her-feet case?

In writing these novels, I’ve always picked a world to go into to set as the 
backdrop, exploring some aspect of New York City. So, I’ve been all over the 
place. I’ve done thepublic library <https://www.nypl.org/>. I’ve done Governors 
Island <https://govisland.com/>. I’ve done bones in the Museum of Natural 
History <http://www.amnh.org/>. It makes it more interesting for the reader. 
You’re not reading these books to be educated, but they’re not car chases and 
shootouts and people committing crimes for no reason.

So, I had my eye on the Garment District, the physical area, and the business 
of it. New York is the US fashion capital, on par with Paris, London, Milan. I 
did not want to do a book about a beautiful model who’s vulnerable to sexual 
assault on the designer’s couch kind of thing. You see a lot of mysteries like 
that.

What fascinated me was the business side of it. I just had no idea about the 
numbers. I really did not stop to think of the global impact, of how big these 
New York businesses are, around the whole world. I never thought of Muslim 
women and haute couture, and if you just Google those two words, you could read 
all day. So, there was so much to drive the business end of it. That happily 
surprised me, because I still got to use the runway, to have the big show at 
the end, but to have a business background that was a little more intense. And 
unexpected.
 