
Engaging with schoolchildren at an early age to improve motivation and 
encourage their aspirations around higher education is an important aspect of 
university life. The imminent welcoming back to its spiritual and scholarly 
home of one of the 'great landmarks of human cultural achievement' in Durham – 
theLindisfarne Gospel Book <http://www.lindisfarnegospels.com/> – has provided 
a unique opportunity for Durham University to engage in some creative 
educational outreach activity.

One of our main roles as a university has been to raise awareness within 
schools about what is arguably the finest and most important western manuscript 
and everything it represents for North-East culture and heritage.

Bridging school work to higher education

At the core of the schools' programme is a commitment to bridge classroom 
teaching to high level academia. The workshops may not take place in a lecture 
theatre but by developing a sense of critical enquiry and expressing opinions, 
the children are told that they are learning similar skills to undergraduates. 
The content of some of the workshops comprises high levelDurham University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/durhamuniversity> research filtered down 
to classroom level, for example an exploration of the meaning of symbols used 
in the Gospels.

Our hope is that this first-hand experience of higher education translates 
into many of these pupils considering university as an option for them.

Planning in partnership with schools

Durham University library's learning team has devised a colourful programme of 
events that bring the Gospels to life. Since the start of the school year, they 
have been delivering a range of workshops for children as young as three right 
through to pupils of secondary school age, using games, crafts and stories. 
Over the course of the programmes, we hope to have engaged 15,000 children.

The preparation involved collaboration with schools and museums to identify 
potential crossover between the exhibition and the national curriculum. From 
puppet-making to carpet page bingo, the team created activities to underpin the 
key Gospel themes within a range of subject areas, spanning the arts, sciences 
and humanities.

Local history

Children have been dressing up in monks' habits and learning how the 
Lindisfarne monks would have lived; they have been writing with quills to 
better appreciate the patience and precision needed to create the work of art. 
There is genuine amazement when they discover the Gospels are made from calf 
skin and that around 150 cows would have been needed to create the book. The 
close proximity of St Cuthbert's shrine in Durham Cathedral helps the children 
to feel more of an affinity with the book.

Empathy and creative writing

It's easy to feel far-removed from the Viking attacks on Lindisfarne in 793, 
but colleagues encourage children to use words and emotions to describe how the 
monks would have felt about fleeing from their home. The team then link this to 
the present day by comparing the plight of the Lindisfarne monks with a modern 
day refugee's experience of being driven away from home. The university sought 
advice from the education team at theUN Refugee Agency 
<http://www.unhcr.org/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/home> on incorporating real refugee 
stories into the session to develop a high quality citizenship resource.

Evangelism versus education

The team limits their teaching to the significance of the book as a cultural 
object rather than dwelling on the religious messages of the Gospels, 
recognising that there is a clear line between evangelism and education. The 
classroom sessions are as inclusive as possible, connecting people and enabling 
them to learn more about their heritage.

Lessons we have learnt

Through doing this outreach activity, the team has learnt some valuable 
lessons that may be useful to other universities embarking on similar 
programmes:

• Do not be tied to your ideas. They may look great on paper and they may meet 
all your learning outcomes, but be open to what works well with children and 
let this inform what you do.

• Be imaginative. One Anglo-Saxon manuscript has produced workshops that 
include elements of history, religious education, science, design and 
technology, art and citizenship. The key is to make sure it is enjoyable, 
informative and tied to the national curriculum.

• Trust your team. They're the ones at the 'chalk face' and know what works, 
so let them develop and change workshops in response to their experiences.

• There's no such thing as being over-prepared. No matter how much you do, 
there will always be something (usually a question from a child) that you have 
not considered.

• Collaborate. Take the opportunity to further develop genuine partnerships 
with schools in the area.

Long-lasting legacy

The schools programme is not just a short-term event to coincide with the 
arrival of the manuscript; it is now embedded in the curriculum which means 
that the story of the Lindisfarne Gospels – which helped to shape the North of 
England and indeed the UK and beyond – will form part of our children's 
education, long after the exhibition finishes.

I believe that, through schemes like this, universities can influence the 
content of classroom teaching to enhance knowledge and make higher education 
accessible.

Professor Chris Higgins is vice-chancellor at Durham University 
<http://www.dur.ac.uk/> – the Lindisfarne Gospels 
<http://www.lindisfarnegospels.com/> will be exhibited at the university's 
Palace Green Library from 1 July – 30 September 2013

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member of theHigher Education Network 
<https://register.guardian.co.uk/higher-education/>.
 