
Lionel Messi tonight became the inaugural winner of the Fifa Ballon d'Or at an 
award ceremony in Zurich. The Argentinian forward was selected ahead of his 
Barcelona team-mates Xavi andAndrés Iniesta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andres-iniesta>, who won the World Cup 
with Spain last summer.

Messi, 23, scored an astonishing 60 goals for club and country in 2010 and is 
regarded by many as the most gifted player of his generation.

"To be honest, I didn't expect to win today, but it was already great to be 
here next to my two mates," said Messi.

"To win it makes it even more special. I want to share with all of my friends, 
my family, all the Barcelonistas and the Argentinians."

The Fifa Ballon d'Or <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ballon-d-or> was 
created following the merging of France Football magazine's European Footballer 
of the Year prize with the FIFA World Player of the Year award. It is awarded 
based on votes cast by journalists from around the world and coaches and 
captains of national teams.

Messi was the holder of both titles and so joins the former Brazil strikers 
Ronaldo and Rivaldo and France legend Zinedine Zidane as a multiple winner of 
the latter accolade.

Alfredo Di Stefano, Johan Cruyff, Franz Beckenbauer, Kevin Keegan, Michel 
Platini, Marco van Basten, Karl-Heinz Rummenigge and Ronaldo are the only other 
men to win the Ballon d'Or more than once. Messi also became the first player 
to come first in a World Cup year without having won the tournament for the 
first time since 1994.

José Mourinho was named Coach of the Year ahead of the Spain's Vicente del 
Bosque and Barcelona's Pep Guardiola for leading Inter to an unprecedented 
Champions League, Serie A and Coppa Italia treble.

There was disappointment for Glentoran's Matty Burrows in the Goal of the Year 
prize, with his jaw-dropping backheeled volley against Portadown losing out to 
Hamit Altintop's volley for Turkey against Kazakhstan.

Meanwhile Brazil's Marta won a record fifth successive Women's Player of the 
Year award.

Award list in full

Men's Player of the Year: Lionel Messi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lionel-messi> (Barcelona and Argentina).

Women's Player of the Year: Marta (FC Gold Pride, Santos and Brazil).

Men's Coach of the Year: José Mourinho (Inter and Real Madrid).

Women's Coach of the Year: Silvia Neid (Germany).

World XI: Iker Casillas (Real Madrid and Spain); Maicon (Inter and Brazil), 
Gerard Piqué (Barcelona and Spain), Lucio (Inter and Brazil), Carles Puyol 
(Barcelona and Spain); Andrés Iniesta (Barcelona and Spain), Xavi (Barcelona 
and Spain), Wesley Sneijder (Inter Milan and Holland); Cristiano Ronaldo (Real 
Madrid and Portugal), David Villa (Barcelona and Spain), Lionel Messi 
(Barcelona and Argentina).

Puskas Award (Goal of the Year): Hamit Altintop (Kazakhstan v TURKEY).

Fair Play Award: Haiti Women Under-17s.

Presidential Award: Desmond Tutu.
 