
I wish I'd known Mrs Exeter – stylish and in her 50s, she sounds like my kind 
of woman. When she was "born" on the pages of Vogue magazine in 1949 she was 
introduced as a woman "approaching 60 … a fact she accepts with perfect good 
humour and reasonableness". She was also something we deperately need today – 
an older woman's voice in an iconic fashion magazine.

Mrs Exeter <http://bit.ly/1efIgtq> is particularly interesting because her 
tour of duty on the glossy pages of Vogue coincided with an ageist schism, 
brought about by the relentless rise of youth culture in the 1960s, which 
ultimately laid the foundation for our present predicament. And by that I mean 
the conspicuous absence of older voices out there in the wider world. This is a 
problem right across the board and lately there have been noises in the 
broadcast media about making efforts to introduce more diversity and redress 
the balance. This can't come soon enough. However, when you get in among the 
big shiny magazines. there is a definite sense that fingers are being stuck in 
ears and loud singing is going on. They resolutely and stubbornly refuse to 
acknowledge that a good deal of what goes into their fashion shoots is of great 
interest stylistically to older readers and not only that, the older readers 
are frequently the customers who can actually afford what they put on their 
pages. Why would anyone not, therefore, wish to see older generations 
represented here? Vogue is on record as saying it is an aspirational magazine 
and that "people want a dream". Well, we aspire and dream too, and not 
necessarily about being 25 again.

In the 1950s Mrs Exeter appeared on two Vogue covers. Can you imagine that 
happening in 2013? Some liberties had been taken with "smoothing" her face, but 
she was recognisably an older woman with white hair. She was also slender, with 
a 33in waist and no suggestion of middle-aged spread. We know that slim was 
deemed chic decades before Kate Moss uttered the immortal words, "nothing 
tastes as good as skinny feels", because Wallis Simpson had already announced, 
"you can never be too rich or too thin". Mrs Exeter was living in terror of an 
upward movement of the needle on the bathroom scales too, but personally, I 
could live with "slim" on glossy pages if the faces reflected some life and 
experience because that at least would be a small step in the right direction.
 Mrs Exeter, Vogue cover star. Photograph: Peter Akehurst/Associated Ne/REX 
While I was digging around for information on Mrs Exeter (and there isn't 
much) I came upon a piece by Alexandra Shulman, the editor of Vogue, onHow to 
look fantastic over 50 <http://dailym.ai/tt5sAr>, written for Femail in 2006. 
In it Shulman says that she is often petitioned for the return of Mrs Exeter 
but says: "I am not bringing her back to the pages of Vogue because Mrs Exeter 
nowadays would simply not work as an idea." All right … so change the concept 
to fit the times. Shulman goes on to explain that, "far from wanting their own 
fashion commentator, most women over 50 do not wish to be thought of as living 
in a different shopping cosmos to the rest of the world." I wouldn't disagree 
with that, in fact it's exactly the problem I have with the Mary Portas line for
House of Fraser <http://bit.ly/VKAzBD> but Shulman then goes on to say: "What 
we want is for the rest of the world to take into account our particular 
requirements." Yes! We want to be included! HURRAH! But hang on a minute … 
doesn't "the rest of the world" also include Vogue?

It seems we need to spell this out: we want a Mrs Exeter for 2013. We want a 
Mrs Exeter in the pages of most if not all glossy magazines. We need a Mrs 
Exeter to explain the problems and pitfalls of older style and how to deal with 
them. And we would like to know which designers work best in the kind of shapes 
and styles we now are. All the rest is generic and we can work it out for 
ourselves. We want to be included, which is, I think, what Shulman was saying 
in that 2006 piece but is apparently also deliberately failing to understand. 
Perhaps the root of the editor's problem lies in another, more negative 
statement from her in Julia Twigg's excellent book,Fashion and Age 
<http://amzn.to/1cV1fcV>: "Nobody wants to be fat and nobody wants to be old." 
Ah, now I see.

So I say bring back Mrs Exeter – poor Mrs Exeter who was killed off by the 
swerve to youth culture in the 1960s and who has remained consigned to the 
archives for almost 50 years. This is her moment.

Follow The Invisible Woman on Twitter @TheVintageYear 
<http://www.twitter.com/TheVintageYear>
 