
The urban sophisticates of Copenhagen like to tell a joke about the Danish 
national railway company: why have intercity trains when there is only one 
city? They conveniently forget about the country's second largest city, Aarhus, 
a vibrant, youthful place that easily competes with the capital as a weekend 
destination.

Situated on the eastern coast of the Jutland peninsula, which shelters it from 
the worst of the North Sea weather, Aarhus is a manageable city with a 
population of 275,000, of which 30,000 are students. It has recently undergone 
a massive renovation project, and the thriving waterfront area - Vadestedet - 
is jammed with hip hangouts, providing the focus of the city's nightlife.

The centre of the city mixes pedestrianised shopping streets with narrow lanes 
of timbered houses. During the summer months, the streets are thronged with 
revellers right through to the small hours as the locals take full advantage of 
the region's long white nights.

 Where to tune in
 Don't expect a kicking club scene in Aarhus, as the focus is on a thriving 
live music industry. The bars lined up along the river in Vadestedet also offer 
lots of possibilities.

· Voxhall
 Vester Alle 15, voxhall.dk <http://voxhall.dk>.
 Eclectic underground feel in a state-of-the-art venue. Recent acts have 
included 808 State and ex-Pixies frontman Frank Black.

· Train
 Toldbodgade 6, train.dk <http://train.dk>.
 One of the city's most important live music venues, hosting everything from 
jazz through to local and international rock and pop acts.

· Jazzbar Bent J
 Norre Alle 66. 
 Danes have a love affair with jazz, and this is the place to see both local 
and international acts in a friendly atmosphere - it claims to be Scandinavia's 
longest running jazz bar and, believe me, it really swings at weekends.

· Casablanca
 Rosensgade 12.
 A hip bar that attracts the city's trendsetters as well as a more sedate 
early-evening crowd.

 Where to eat
 There are dozens of bakeries stuffed full of mouth-watering pastries as well 
as bread, coffee and sandwiches. For a more serious eating experience, check 
out the following:

· Poême
 Fredens Torv 2, poeme.dk <http://poeme.dk>.
 Run by a Jamaican émigré and an Italian chef, Poême offers an affordable and 
adventurous set menu that fuses Caribbean, Mediterranean and Scandinavian 
influences.

· Jacobs BBQ
 Vestergade 3.
 An atmospheric place to hang out on a warm evening as the restaurant focuses 
on a timbered courtyard where, during the warmer months, live music is 
performed. The food is mainly meat and veg but is well prepared and not too 
heavy on the wallet.

 Where to shop
 Shopping in Aarhus is a great experience due to the size of the place and 
quality on offer.

· Munthe plus Simonsen
 Borggade 2, muntheplussimonsen.dk <http://muntheplussimonsen.dk>.
 Check out the only other branch of Copenhagen's hippest boutique. 

· Bohemia
 Møllestien 57.
 A quirky shop specialising in handmade wooden toys and designer glass, in a 
cobbled street that contains a number of similar outlets.

· Blues
 Volden 20.
 Another very trendy though more affordable clothes shop, whose designs are 
created in Aarhus.

 Where to stay
 Expect to pay upwards of £60 for a double with breakfast. There are some 
bargains to be had in the B&B sector. Contact the tourist office for details, 
and be prepared to pay £20 plus for a double per night.

· Royal Store Torv 4, tel: 8612 0011. £120 plus.
 A grand old hotel next to the cathedral in the city centre; 30% discount at 
weekends.

· Guldsmeden
 Guldsmedgade 40, tel: 8613 4550, £60 plus.
 A homely hotel run by a young couple who know the city well. Right in the 
heart of the so-called Latin Quarter.

· Scandic Plaza 
 Banegaardspladsen 14, 8732 0100, scandic-hotels.com 
<http://scandic-hotels.com>, £110 plus.
 Another good option for the city centre, the Plaza offers comfortable well 
designed en suite rooms.

 Where to be arty

· Art Museum 
 Vennelystparken, aarhuskunstmuseum.dk <>, Tues - Sun, 10am- 5pm, 40DKr.
 Features a fine collection of Danish art - the dramatic abstracts of Asger 
Jorn are well represented, and the building is a fine example of modern Danish 
architecture.

Where to be natural
 To the north, Risskov hosts a blue flag beach, while to the south 
Marselisborg offers a wildlife sanctuary, a royal residence and some great 
forest walks. A 30-45-minute walk or short bus ride away.

 

Getting there
 Ryanair (ryanair.com <http://ryanair.com>) flies to Aarhus from £19.99 one 
way. Danish Railways runs a regular train service to and from Copenhagen, 
journey time roughly 2hours 30mins, cost around £20 each way.

Getting around
The Aarhus Pass is valid on local transport and in all museums for 48hours, 
price DKr110.

Further information
Danish tourist board (0900 1600109, visitdenmark.com <http://visitdenmark.com> 
orvisitaarhus.com <http://visitaarhus.com>).
 Country code: 0045.
 Flight time: 1hr 35mins.
 Time difference: +1 hour.
 £1=11.5 Danish kroner.


·  Andrew Spooner is the joint author of the Rough Guide to Copenhagen.
 