
Having a dog in the family reduces a child’s risk of asthma by 15% and contact 
with farm animals can halve it, a comprehensive study has shown.


The findings lend strong support to the “hygiene hypothesis” that suggests 
living in too-clean conditions early in life can increase susceptibility to 
allergy conditions such as asthma.

Scientists analysed data on more than 1 million children born in Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden> between 2001 and 2010, where dog and 
farm animal ownership has to be registered by law.

Dog exposure during the first year of life was associated with a 15% lower 
likelihood of childhood asthma, while living close to farm animals cut the risk 
by 52%.

Lead scientist Dr Tove Fall, from Uppsala University in Sweden, said: “Earlier 
studies have shown that growing up on a farm reduces a child’s risk of asthma 
to about half.

“We wanted to see if this relationship was true also for children growing up 
with dogs in their homes. Our results confirmed the farming effect and we also 
saw that children who grew up with dogs had about 15% less asthma than children 
without dogs.

“Because we had access to such a large and detailed data set, we could account 
for confounding factors such as asthma in parents, area of residence and 
socio-economic status.”

The research, published in the journal JAMA Pediatrics, was possible because 
of Sweden’s organised system of national databases accessible to scientists. 
Every visit to a specialist physician and every prescription is recorded.

Co-author Prof Catarina Almqvist Malmros, from Sweden’s Karolinska Institute, 
said: “These kind of epidemiological studies look for associations in large 
populations but do not provide answers on whether and how animals could protect 
children from developing asthma.

“We know that children with established allergy to cats or dogs should avoid 
them, but our results also indicate that children who grow up with dogs have 
reduced risks of asthma later in life.

“Thanks to the population-based design, our results are generalisable to the 
Swedish population and probably also to other European populations with similar 
culture regarding pet ownership and farming.”

According to the hygiene hypothesis, lack of early exposure to microbes and 
parasites may prevent the immune system developing properly. As a result, 
natural checks on unwanted immune responses that can lead to allergy are 
lacking.

Erika Kennington, head of research at Asthma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/asthma> UK, said: “Asthma is a complex 
condition with many different types and causes. While this study identifies a 
link to living with a dog or regular exposure to farm animals in the first year 
of a child’s life, and their chance of developing asthma by the age of six, 
more research is needed. This will help us better understand the effects so 
that it can be turned into practical advice for parents of young children.”
 