
On an emotion-charged evening caused by the death of the Wales and Llanelli 
legend Ray Gravell only 48 hours earlier, theScarlets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets> managed to register a resounding 
bonus-point victory to keep their EDF Energy Cup hopes alive.

It was a difficult night for all concerned, especially the home players 
following the passing of their popular president. Upwards of 8,000 had turned 
up to pay their respects to Gravell who had died in Majorca on Wednesday aged 
56. He had been due to fly back to watch the game. In his honour the players, 
who walked on to the pitch rather than ran, wore jerseys with the name "Grav" 
embroidered below the badge. They also donned black armbands and there was a 
minute's applause.

The emotion was tangible but the Scarlets made sure they were not deflected in 
their bid for a crucial victory. Within the opening 17 minutes they had opened 
up a 21-0 lead and by half-time they had wrapped up the bonus point. They were 
playing a brand of attacking rugby which no doubt would have brought a smile to 
Gravell's face as they breezed in for eight tries, all converted by Stephen 
Jones.

The debutant 18-year-old full-back Dan Evans started the assault and there 
were also first-half tries for the flanker James Bater and Mark Jones. Jones's 
try was a bizarre effort as he fooled everyone, even the referee, as he ran in 
unopposed down the blindside with everyone thinking the ball was still in a 
ruck.

Stephen Jones, who did not miss a kick, put over a penalty before Leeds hit 
back with a try through Tom Biggs. In first-half injury time Alix Popham sealed 
the bonus point with the fourth try following some neat interpassing. Biggs 
crossed again early in the second half before the home side responded with four 
tries in 20 minutes. Iestyn Thomas, Scott MacLeod and Simon Easterby all 
crossed before Dan Evans rounded off the scoring.

Scarlets: D Evans; M Jones, King, Gavin Evans, James; S Jones, Peel (Cattle, 
77); I Thomas, Rees, Douglas (Manu 71), Cooper (Eustace, 71), MacLeod, Easterby 
(capt), Popham (Gavin Thomas, h-t), Bater.

Tries D Evans 2, Bater, M Jones, Popham, I Thomas, MacLeod, Easterby. Pen S 
Jones.Cons S Jones (8).

Leeds: Goodridge (Hinton, 61); Satala (Holtby, 64), Hepworth, Tuilagi, Biggs; 
Di Bernado, Edwards (Brooks, 61); Pala'amo (McGee, 46), Parkes (Ma'asi, 55), 
Noon (Pala'amo), Hooper (capt), Bouza (Lund, 55), Paul (Stitcher, 69), Lock, 
Schusterman.

Tries Biggs 2, Hepworth. Cons Di Bernado 2.

Referee T Spreadbury. Attendance 7,672.
 