
It is 14 May, the day of Lloyds Banking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group’s annual meeting. Thanks 
to the reappearance of a dividend, the occasion is less raucous than in recent 
years. Mention of chief executive António Horta-Osório’s £11.5m pay packet, 
part of a £30m bonus pool for top managers, generates some gentle booing. But 
only one irate shareholder suggests the new corporate slogan, “Helping Britain 
Prosper” should read “Helping Horta-Osório Prosper”.

But, as chairman Lord Blackwell calls for votes on the resolutions before the 
meeting, there is drama. A nervous figure gets to his feet to announce himself 
as the representative of UK Financial Investments, the body managing the 
state’s 24% stake in Lloyds.

UKFI, he says, had indicated previously that it would vote in favour of the 
bank’s remuneration report and pay policy. But fresh instructions were received 
that morning from chancellorEd Balls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edballs>, appointed after Labour’s narrow 
election victory a week earlier. UKFI will now vote against.

Within minutes, a statement from new prime minister Ed Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> is released: “My government 
will support and encourage responsible capitalism. Lloyds’s pay policies, past 
and present, do not meet this description. As a responsible shareholder, we 
call on Lloyds’s board to draw up fresh proposals that are acceptable to the 
millions of taxpayers who saved the bank from collapse.”

Unbelievable? Almost certainly, even if Labour wins an overall majority on 
7 May. If Labour spied votes in bashing Lloyds’s bonuses, Friday’s statement 
from shadow Treasury minister Cathy Jamieson would not have been so timid.

“People will be rightly taken aback by the huge scale of the bonuses being 
paid – especially when Lloyds continues to be part-owned by the taxpayer,” said 
Jamieson. Taken aback? Well, yes, £11.5m – even as a reward for success over a 
few years – has that effect. But it’s not a phrase to make the Lloyds boardroom 
shudder.

Lloyds is the bank where Labour needs to make up its mind. It’s easy to demand 
restraint at Royal Bank of Scotland; that bank is still loss-making and the 
state owns 80%. And throwing insults at HSBC’s fat cats is child’s play after 
the Swiss tax revelations. Lloyds is slightly different.

As Horta-Osório spelled out on Friday, the clean-up operation has followed the 
script. Foreign adventures have been abandoned and 95% of the loans are in the 
UK. The funding position has been transformed – even the next eurozone crisis 
shouldn’t cause alarm. And the rise in the share price means the state’s 
holding has risen in value by £14bn since 2011.

On Labour’s current thinking, the real issue is Lloyds’s dominance of the UK 
market. Miliband has promised to cap market shares and create new “challenger” 
banks by carving out branches from the current big five, just as TSB was 
extracted from Lloyds. Even post-TSB, Lloyds has most to lose. It has 25% of 
current accounts and 21% of mortgages and retail deposits; and Halifax, which 
Lloyds ludicrously calls its in-house “challenger” brand, is an obvious 
candidate for liberation.

But a radical break-up plan would have upfront costs. The direct one would be 
the plunge in value of the state’s remaining Lloyds’ shares. The indirect cost 
would be industry upheaval, with possible knock-on effects on lending.

Of course, the price might still be worth paying, if the outcome is greater 
competition between banks. But Miliband will know that the banks would fight 
tooth and nail. On Friday, Horta-Osório stated the obvious by saying Lloyds was 
happy to work with any government; but he then delivered a sermon on how 
Italy’s fragmented banking sector delivers high prices for customers. His point 
seemed to be that Labour should concentrate its pro-competition fire on 
measures to improve lending to small businesses, which everyone agrees is too 
concentrated, and forget structural reform.

Miliband needs to spell out what he really wants. If he makes it to Downing 
Street, he could force UKFI to vote against Lloyds’s pay report in his first 
week. That would be a real statement of intent, both about boardroom pay excess 
and Labour’s willingness to reshape the structure of UK banking. Would he 
really dare?

Back to basics for Morrisons?


Morrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> has found its new 
boss, hiring former Tesco executive David Potts as chief executive. All three 
top jobs at the grocer are now held by former Tesco top brass who ran the UK’s 
biggest retailer in its glory days.

Undoubtedly, Potts knows how to run a shop: he started stacking shelves at 16 
in 1973 and has worked at every level of the food retail business in a near 
40-year career. New corporate chiefs usually need months to complete a business 
review, mull its findings, perhaps employ a few management consultants, and 
then unveil a turnaround strategy. But Morrisons’s main problems – and Potts’s 
action plan – do not require a lengthy period of chin-scratching to work out:

Basic shopkeeping: Staff cuts might save money, but then customer service, 
product availability and quality monitoring suffer. Potts must revive staff 
morale and focus on basic retailing standards. Similar moves have delivered 
swift improvements at Tesco.

Technology: Morrisons is still years behind its rivals on systems to help with 
basics like staff management systems to improve efficiency and accurate product 
ordering.

Top team: Potts’s predecessor, Dalton Philips, had a penchant for management 
consultants in his top team. Potts needs more top shop-floor experience – but 
an influx of more Tesco alumni might not go down well with long-suffering staff.

Sort out the brand: One minute the adverts are basic price messages, the next 
they are glossy celebrity affairs. Morrisons used to stand for great British 
food at bargain prices. Potts needs to reclaim that space.

Good value: Find out how to take on the discounters – and it’s not the 
confusing Match & More loyalty card. Potts needs market-leading prices and 
better quality – some of the own-label food just isn’t up to scratch.

Future growth: Philips moved into convenience stores and linked with Ocado for 
online shopping. Potts has to make online more profitable and work out whether 
corner shops are right for Morrisons. The retailer was built on keeping things 
simple and efficient – a trick the discounters stole.

Airlines slow to pass on fuel savings


British Airways’ parent company IAG made a cool €1bn profit for 2014 and 
expects to see that figure soar a further 20% higher this year as the benefits 
of lower oil prices really hit home.

So, will passengers be seeing the benefit in lower fares?

Since oil prices turned down, airline executives have explained that their 
prices will not drop dramatically because airlines have hedged their fuel 
buying and are committed to higher prices. IAG boss Willie Walsh even said that 
fuel “only” accounts for about a third of airline costs.

It’s all a bit rich after years of airlines howling about fuel prices and 
demanding that air passenger duty be axed to ease their ailing profit margins.

There’s some evidence that surcharges have fallen slightly, but with profits 
climbing fast, passengers might rightly wonder when the mysterious “surcharge” 
for a now far cheaper commodity will disappear from their ticket price.
 