
Stefano Hatfield is a very smart operator. He devised and edited thelondonpaper
 for Rupert before it choked on too much opposition. He devised and edited thei 
for the Lebedevs, and it's still one of the brightest, most innovative print 
shows in town. So to Stefano III, and hisLondon Live 
<http://www.londonlive.co.uk/> – one of the new local TV stations ordained 
years ago by Jeremy Hunt in an era when culture secretaries did more than snarl.

Warm words are clearly due. One week's viewing in, London Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/london-live> is full of young, enthusiastic 
presenting and chatting people you haven't seen before – and wouldn't mind 
seeing again. It looks as multi-ethnic as London itself. It bubbles along like 
the oldBig Breakfast of beloved Channel 4 memory. It aims to hit the roughly 
twentysomething audience spot, and makes BBC3 look geriatric, ripe for the 
chop. You can watch it via smartphone on the bus going home after work or 
waiting in a nightclub queue. Hatfield delivers different. He's done it again.

There are problems yet to solve, of course. One is sheer visibility. The 
website, which ought to buzz with life, is perfunctory. TheEvening Standard 
site, part of the same family, somehow doesn't quite fit. There's nothing here 
that says The Lebedevs Own London, no massive marketing push to get sampling 
and awareness under way. Indeed, for all the professionalism of the links and 
onscreen puffs, lack of cash and requisite investment may prove a real handicap 
in the end.

This isn't the kind of local TV that Hunt talked about after his US travels. 
It doesn't reflect "the community" – more a random selection of gastropubs from 
Hoxton to East Dulwich. It lacks the news about London that falls down the 
cracks between Fleet Street and local weeklies. It is a one-off that may boast 
too much of an expensive sheen for the ad revenues that will have to support it.

But who wants forebodings after a mere six days on air? The people out front 
of camera are obviously having a good time. They deserve a while to enjoy it.
 