
The NHS needs to improve co-operation on a local basis, Will Smart, Royal Free 
Hampstead trust's director of IM&T, has told an event in London.

In December, Royal Free and partner University College London Hospitals (UCLH) 
trust launched a joint procurement for an Oracle finance system worth up to 
£20m.

However, Royal Free has no connection to records used by UCLH, despite the 
finance plans and the trusts being closely linked through both the UCL Partners 
academic health science partnership and the University College London medical 
school, Smart said.

"We need to connect up the health economy," he told an event run by supplier 
OpenText in London. "That's our challenge."

Establishing joint working and connectivity presents significant difficulties, 
according to Smart: when Royal Free compared its ICT infrastructure to that 
used by other London acute trusts, it found that 95% of systems were different. 
Another challenge comes from trusts competing for business: "The NHS is a small 
world, so we do tend to know our peers," he said. "But it does tend to be 
opportunistic."

The health service has historically had a tranche of management that could 
facilitate local co-operation between trusts. That level of management was 
partially removed when the last government combined 28 strategic health 
authorities into 10, and has been cut further under this government with 
strategic health authorities (SHAs) being combined into four clusters, covering 
the north, Midlands, south ofEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/england> and London. The SHA 
clusters will be abolished in April 2013, although the NHS Commissioning Board 
plans to retain the four zones.

Smart criticised the National Programme for IT, which had aimed to establish 
common systems for the health service allowing connections between trusts. 
Royal Free uses Cerner's Millennium patient record suite, provided through the 
National Programme: "It works for us. It saves people's lives," he said. "It's 
just delivered under a framework that is barking mad."

Royal Free experienced "a significant number of problems" introducing 
Millennium in 2008 
<http://www.smarthealthcare.com/royal-free-hampstead-cerner-01may09>, with the 
software's introduction needed far more resourcing than expected.

The trust plans to improve its own patient records through a pilot a document 
scanning system in its infectious diseases department.

The trial will start in March, with the hope of using the system to phase out 
the 30m paper records in the hospital's basements. The trust is using agile 
methods to run a quick pilot of an OpenText system, with which it signed a 
memorandum of understanding in November. According to Smart, the trial will 
focus on creating an easy to use interface – something he said had been a 
problem with other systems used by trust.

Budget cuts

Saving money also remains a focus at the trust: it is cutting £120m from its 
£556m annual budget over five years, with £30m going from the budget in this 
financial year alone, Smart said. "That clearly can't be done by managing 
agency costs or being harder on suppliers," he added. "It's got to be done 
fundamentally changing acute care."

As part of this, Royal Free is reducing the number of elderly patients it 
admits, and discharging them more quickly. This depends on ensuring there is 
appropriate care in the community, Smart said, which the trust is doing through 
working with partners including the London boroughs of Barnet and Camden and 
their equivalent primary care trusts, rather than by taking over provision of 
such care itself.

"We're beginning to look at the world as a supply chain," said Smart, adding 
that through this process the trust has prevented 640 elderly patients being 
admitted through this work, and cut the readmittance rate from 24% to 7%, which 
has allowed the trust to close a ward in its main hospital.

Smart told the audience that suppliers wanting to work with his trust, and 
with the NHS in general, do not need direct healthcare experience, but must be 
able to show how they can create savings rapidly, rather than two years after 
deployment.

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For weekly updates on 
news, debate and best practice on public sector IT,join the Government 
Computing Network here <http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing>
.
 