
A London-based web designer who is accused of training for terrorism and 
working as a propagandist for al-Qaida is facing a possible life sentence in a 
US prison after being extradited toNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, prosecutors announced on 
Tuesday.

Minh Quang Pham is charged with possessing and using an AK-47 rifle “in 
furtherance of crimes of violence”, receiving military-style training and 
providing support to al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP), the Yemen-based 
branch of the terrorist network.

Pham, a 32-year-old Vietnamese citizen, boasted that he had “travelled to 
Yemen in order to join AQAP, and to wage jihad on behalf of AQAP”, according to 
US authorities in New York.

He is also accused of helping to produce Inspire, al-Qaida’s English-language 
magazine. Prosecutors have said the alleged 2013 Boston Marathon bombers may 
have learned how to construct explosives from the publication.

Announcing the charges on Tuesday, Preet Bharara, the Manhattan US attorney, 
said Pham’s support for al-Qaida began after he “surreptitiously travelled from 
the UK to Yemen in late 2010”, telling his wife in New Cross, south-eastLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, that he was going to Ireland.

“During the half year he spent in Yemen, Pham allegedly vowed to wage jihad, 
sworebayat (loyalty), and provided material support to high-level AQAP members, 
almost always brandishing a Kalashnikov rifle,” Bharara said in a statement.

Pham was previously reported to have converted to Islam after moving to the UK 
as a boy. He reportedly established a website and leaflet design company 
registered to his home in New Cross, where he had lived since 2005.

He is said to have been known as “Amin” to al-Qaida operatives. Prosecutors 
claim that he cooperated with two now-dead American members of al-Qaida. The 
men were not named by prosecutors but their descriptions appear to match those 
ofAnwar al-Awlaki <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-al-awlaki>, the 
notorious New Mexico-born radical cleric, and Inspire’s editor,Samir Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/30/samir-khan-anwar-al-awlaki>.

Prosecutors allege someone who later became a cooperating witness spoke to 
both men and “understood from them that Pham was providing valuable assistance” 
to the American who appears to be al-Awlaki “in connection with the production 
and editing of Inspire magazine”.

Al-Awlaki and Khan were both reportedly killed following an air strike in 
Yemen by a US drone in September 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/30/anwar-al-awlaki-killed-yemen>.

Pham is also alleged to have told the informant that he had travelled to Yemen 
intending to join AQAP for jihad, that he had sworn an oath of loyalty to an 
al-Qaida commander, and that he had spent time at three AQAP safehouses.

The 32-year-old was detained at Heathrow airport when he returned to the UK in 
July 2011, according to prosecutors, and was “found to be in possession of a 
live round of .762 caliber armor-piercing ammunition, which is consistent with 
ammunition that is used in a Kalashnikov assault rifle”. He was also allegedly 
carrying computer files identical to those possessed by the man who later 
became a US government witness.

Pham was arrested in the UK in June 2012 following an indictment issued in New 
York, prosecutors said, but had been challenging his extradition until a judge 
ruled against him and ordered his deportation last month. He arrived in the US 
last week and is due to be arraigned in court on Wednesday.

He is charged with five counts: conspiracy to provide material support to 
AQAP, providing material support to AQAP, conspiracy to receive military-type 
training from AQAP, receiving military-type training from AQAP, and the “use, 
carrying and possession of a firearm (machine gun) in furtherance of crimes of 
violence”. If convicted on all counts, he faces a maximum sentence of life in 
prison, and would be made to serve a minimum of 40 years.
 