
Ministers should prioritise developingthe £33bn Crossrail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/crossrail> 2 line in London in order to prevent 
the capital “grinding to a halt”, according to the independent body advising 
the government on Britain’s long-term infrastructure projects.

Funding should be released immediately to enable work on the rail link – which 
would run from north to south across the capital – to start as soon as the 
first Crossrail route is completed in 2019, the National Infrastructure 
Commission (NIC) said.

London should pay at least half of the expected £33bn bill for Crossrail 2, 
but the development of the north-south rail line should be a priority with 
benefits for the entire nation, according toAndrew Adonis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-adonis>, the NIC chair.

Adonis called on the chancellor to release funding in next week’s budget to 
produce plans for the rail link in a year’s time, to ensure it opens in 2033, 
when HS2, the £55bn high-speed rail network, will linkLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> to Birmingham, Manchester and Leeds.


Crossrail 2’s latest proposals show it operating as far north as Broxbourne in 
Hertfordshire and as far south as Epsom in Surrey, passing through central 
London via stations such as Tottenham Court Road, Victoria, Clapham Junction 
and a planned station in Chelsea.
Crossrail 2 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/03/crossrail2/giv-27167xtCe0E7ehIW4/>
Up to 30 trains an hour would run in each direction through a tunnel built 
from Wimbledon to New Southgate and Tottenham Hale.

The NIC urged the Department for Transport and Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> for London to issue a revised 
business case for the project, with the aim of securing the go-ahead from 
parliament by autumn 2019.

Speaking at the London Infrastructure Summit, Adonis said it was essential the 
capital stumped up its fair share of the cost – partly in order to ensure the 
scheme went ahead. “It has huge benefits to London but also national benefits 
too,” he added.

The national benefits included ensuring that rail terminuses in the capital 
for intercity trains were not overcrowded, as well as the route directly 
serving inhabitants of the home counties, Adonis said, adding: “A critical part 
of Crossrail 1 not being cancelled in 2010 was that London had already paid the 
biggest part of it.”


The cross-bench peer, who resigned the Labour whip to take the infrastructure 
post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/05/lord-adonis-to-resign-labour-whip-and-chair-george-osbornes-infrastructure-body>
, warned that Crossrail 2 was a very expensive project and the cost of each 
individual station should be scrutinised to keep the costs down. He said that 
while Britain was good at delivering infrastructure, it had built the most 
expensive rail line per mile in the world with HS1 between London and the 
channel tunnel, and would exceed it with HS2.


London’s mayor, Boris Johnson, said the report was “a huge vote of confidence” 
and also expressed his hope that George Osborne, would approve funding in next 
week’s budget.


Johnson has previously claimed the benefits of Crossrail 2 would “more than 
pay for the scheme”.

The NIC suggested improving the link’s affordability by delaying the 
north-western branch to New Southgate, which could reduce costs in the 2020s by 
about £4bn.

The report also recommends a funding plan to be created for Crossrail 2 in 
which London contributes more than half the money required.

There should also be a strategy to maximise private sector investment and 
ensure the construction of at least 200,000 homes along the route, the NIC said.

The scheme would complement the £14.8bn east-to-west Crossrail route, which is 
scheduled to open in phases from next year.

Adonis said: “By the 2030s London will be a megacity of more than 10 million 
people. Even allowing for planned investment and the imminent arrival of the 
east-west Crossrail line, the capital will grind to a halt unless significant 
further improvements are made.”

On a visit to Crossrail’s Tottenham Court Road station in central London, he 
said the capital needs Crossrail 2 as quickly as possible to relieve severe 
overcrowding at railway stations and ease congestion on underground and rail 
lines.

He said “proper value-for-money assessments” would be crucial because 
parliament would want to be satisfied that the cost of the project was 
justified.

Adonis added: “There is no good reason to delay. Crossrail 2 will help keep 
London moving, create hundreds of thousands of homes across the city … we 
should get on with it right away and have the line open by 2033.”

Michèle Dix, Crossrail 2’s managing director, said the project was “uniquely 
able to address our most important strategic challenges”, adding: “We hope that 
the chancellor commits the development funding and legislative time the 
commission recommends. We are ready to take this vitally important scheme 
forward.”
 