
J Sheekey Oyster Bar <http://www.jsheekeyoysterbar.co.uk/>

28 – 34 St Martin's Court, Covent Garden, WC2N 4AL 
020 7240 2565 
Tube: Leicester Square
Fish 

This is possibly the most discreet venue in Covent Garden. The tranquil scene 
inside is the antithesis of the bustle outside. The art deco of the original J 
Sheekey, marble, mosaic and lacquered wood panels hung with photos of theatre 
luminaries carry a timeless ambience. Many come to appreciate this calm and 
enjoy the seafood specialities at their leisure.

The symmetrical U-shaped oyster bar has comfortable stools, the area softly 
lit by pearl dome lamps that make the bar glow. Here the finest West Mersea 
oysters, Maldons and Fines de Claire are enjoyed by many. But there are many 
other seafood specialities such as Dublin Bay prawns, razor clams, scallops, 
crab, lobster, tiger prawns and shrimps to be savoured or put together as a 
magnificent platter of fruits de mer.

The original J Sheekey restaurant that links with the newer oyster bar has a 
similar ambience of relaxed calm. The sweet scent of poached fish sings on the 
air as it has since first granted a licence decades ago. The menu also takes in 
prime fish such as Dover and lemon sole, brill and salmon, with seasonal 
special dishes such as Esk sea trout with lovage and girolles, roast lobster 
with sweetbreads and salt baked bass. Old favourites include lobster thermidor 
and skate with nut brown butter and capers alongside pollack, haddock, bream 
and cod, not to mention the legendary fish pie.

The service is calm and considered even from the younger members of staff who 
fit into the mode with ease. The timeless feel is certainly something unique in 
London.

• Rock and native – from £14.25. Wine from £18. 

Bibendum Oyster Bar <http://www.bibendum.co.uk/>

Michelin House, 81 Fulham Road, South Kensington, SW3 6RD 
020 7589 1480
Tube: South Kensington
French oyster bar

The basic style of this oyster and seafood bar has a continental charm where 
the freshest flavours of the sea shine. Enjoy Fines de Claire Prestige, 
Colchester Natives, West Mersea no 2, and Loch Ryan oysters.

• Rock and native – from £10.75. Wine from £19.95. Al fresco.

Hix <http://www.hixsoho.co.uk/>
 Beef and oyster pie at Hix Oyster and Chop House. Photograph: Sophia Evans 
for the Observer 
66 –70 Brewer Street, Soho, W1F 9UP 
020 7292 3518
Tube: Piccadilly Circus
British

HIX Soho opened its doors to critical acclaim in 2009 and soon after won 
London's Time Out Award for Best New Restaurant in 2010. The restaurant boasts 
Mark Hix's signature daily-changing menu of seasonal food, with such classics 
as Heaven and Earth, and De Beauvoir smoked salmon "Hix cure".

With a responsible attitude to sustainable fishing, one can relax and enjoy 
the bounty of seafood within the menu, amongst beautifully prepared meat dishes.
Downstairs is the celebrated Mark's with its apothecary bar and an eccentric 
cocktail list designed by mixologist extraordinaire Nick Strangeway, which go 
hand in hand with Mark Hix's sumptuous British bar snax. Try a Scotch quail's 
egg with caper mayonnaise, or Welsh rabbit fondue, washed down with a Hix Fix 
cocktail.

• Rock and native – from £13.50 Brownsea Island Rocks, Brownsea Island with 
Sillfield farm sausage, West Mersea Native no 1. Wine from £20. Private room.
Theatre menu. 

Motcombs <http://www.motcombs.co.uk/>

26 Motcomb Street, Belgravia, SW1X 8JU 
020 7235 6382
Tube: Hyde Park Corner / Knightsbridge
Modern British

A Belgravia institution serving natives and rocks opened in front of eager 
oyster lovers in the bar. Dining extends into a brasserie and downstairs 
restaurant.

• Rock and native – from £9. Wine from £16.85, Chateau Tour Sauvignon Blanc 
£20.85. Private room. Al fresco.

Quo Vadis <http://www.quovadissoho.co.uk/>
 Sea bass stater at Quo Vadis. Photograph: Katherine Rose for the Observer 
26 – 29 Dean Street, Soho, W1D 3LL 
020 7437 9585
Tube: Leicester Square
Modern British

This revamped long-standing and ever popular Soho restaurant serves 
exceedingly fine dishes from well-sourced British ingredients. Commendably 
unfussy cuisine, and great Cumbrae oysters. Oyster happy hour is a bargain.

• Rock – from £13.80. Wine from £18. Private room. Al fresco. Theatre menu. 

Randall & Aubin <http://www.randallandaubin.com/>

16 Brewer Street, Soho, W1F 0SQ
020 7287 4447
Tube: Piccadilly Circus
Seafood

In bustling Brewer Street Soho Randall and Aubin is one of London's landmark 
oyster bars. A former butcher's shop key elements of the original décor have 
been retained and the white tiled walls and marble topped tables create a 
wonderful, unique dining atmosphere with subtle clues to the past.

A bountiful seafood counter packed with fresh produce tempts you on arrival – 
oysters, lobsters, prawns, mussels, whelks, crabs, langoustines and clams. 
Savour a platter of the fruits de mer or if this is too much try a smaller 
"assiette".

The menu extends to a full carte with crab cakes, queen scallops, calamaris, 
gravadlax, moules and tuna nicoise amongst the starters. Mains range from fish 
and chips to grilled sea bass, or a seafood grill. Meat from the rotisserie 
includes belly pork, Loire chicken, roast salt beef and loin of lamb. For a 
quick snack there are eggs Benedict, chicken Caesar and substantial baguettes.

Oysters <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/oysters> come in their 
season: plump natives, Fines de Claire and rocks, or cooked as oysters 
Kilpatrick. Oyster Happy Hour (3–6pm) is a bargain.

Enthusiastic young staff keep service on the ball and the place buzzing. It's 
a great place to unwind, listen to modern music, and watch the Soho world go by.

• Rock and native – from £8.85. Special 6 rock oysters and glass of champagne 
Monday–Friday 3pm – 6pm. Rock oysters, Fine de Claire, native, Oyster 
Kilpatrick, oyster of the month. Wine from £16.95.

Wright Brothers Soho Oyster House 
<http://thewrightbrothers.co.uk/index.php/restaurants/soho_oyster_house/>
 Oysters and langoustines at Wright Brothers, Soho. Photograph: Katherine Rose 
for the Observer 
13 Kingly Street, Soho, W1B 5PW 
020 7434 3611
Tube: Oxford Circus
Seafood

Close to Carnaby Street, still swinging since the swinging 60s, is the 
discreet façade of the new Soho oyster bar. It runs through into a small gastro 
yard where several restaurants share the al fresco area. The split levels make 
for interesting casual eating, for either a plate of smoked salmon, or a full 
feast of oysters and seafood washed down with a glass of the mainly French 
wines on the list. There is plenty of ale, porter, stout, aperitifs and 
Manzanilla to choose from.

The mezzanine is perhaps for more comfortable dining, while the bar at the al 
fresco level is for a casual glass or snack. Down again is a traditional oyster 
bar with high tables and plenty of bar seating. Diners can pick and mix a 
fruits de mer from langoustines prawns, winkles, whelks, mussels, clams and 
crab then adorn it with a bed of three oysters from the Wright Brothers own 
Duchy Oyster Farm or Brownsea Island, Carlingford, Cumbrae or Speciales de 
Claire.

Other house specials include Cornish crab, fish pie, and ox cheek, ale and 
oyster pie. There are several specials every day on a chalkboard, perhaps 
home-made fish cakes or slow-cooked belly pork with scallops. At the bar the 
hot oyster dishes are chalked up, perhaps oysters Rockefeller, Kilpatrick or 
Mornay.

Die-hards will want to devour the oysters au naturel with some brown bread or 
there's the traditional shallot vinegar, lemon juice or Tabasco sauce to keep 
numerous regulars extremely happy.

• Rock and native – from £6.50. Rock oysters, Duchy natives, Colchester, 
Maldon, Spéciale de Claire, Carlingford. Wine from £20.

One New Change Champagne Bar 
<http://www.searcys.co.uk/one-new-change-champagne-bar/>

One New Change, First Floor, Cheapside, EC4M 9AF 
020 7871 1213
Tube: St Paul's
Champagne bar

This new champagne bar is situated on the first floor of the new modernist 
shopping destination. It has floor-to-ceiling glass panels with a panoramic 
lift, and stunning views over St Paul's Cathedral dome. The cuisine takes in 
new-style tapas and rock oysters to complement the wide selection of champagne.

• Rock – from £9. Wine from £23.

The Boundary <http://www.theboundary.co.uk/>
 The Boundary restaurant, London. Photograph: Sophia Evans for the Observer 
2–4 Boundary Street, Entrance on Redchurch Street, Shoreditch, E2 7DD 
020 7729 1051
Tube: Liverpool Street
French brasserie and fruits de mer

This recently converted impressive Victorian warehouse is in the new trendy 
area of Shoreditch. The conversion has discreetly imposed elegant modern design 
in the three restaurants, bars and the twelve bespoke bedrooms and five suites. 
The roof restaurant and bar with al fresco area has wonderful vistas of the 
London skyline.

The love of Parisian brasseries comes through in impressive fruits de mer, and 
a host of seasonal produce that includes gulls eggs, asparagus, grouse, game, 
wild berries and funghi as the culinary calendar unfolds. In the open kitchen 
chefs beaver producing platters of oysters from fisheries of Scotland and 
England, Cornish lobster and crab, Dover sole and line caught seasonal fish 
taking in skate, monk, halibut, sole and bass.

The fruits de mer comes in one, two or three tiers adorned with lobster, 
grises, langoustines, prawns, clams, oysters, cockles and mussels. Escargots 
bourguignonne, confit de canard, veal brains in caper butter, beef fillet with 
bone marrow and snails, English veal, Landes chicken, haunch of venison and 
suckling pig roast are among the salivating offers for meat lovers.

The impressive wine list takes in the finest of Europe yet starts with house 
wine in carafes and under £20 a bottle with 60 wines under £35 a bottle with 
over 500 bins in total. Prix fixe menus make this affordable for a broad range 
of people who can relax and enjoy the fabulous surroundings and the correct 
discreet amiable service.

• Rock and native – from £12. Rocks from Scotland and England, Rockefeller 
oysters. Wine from £18. Private room. Accommodation. Basement level – large 
seafood selection.

Livebait, Waterloo <http://www.livebaitrestaurants.co.uk/location/waterloo>
 Livebait restaurant, Waterloo. Photograph: Giles Christopher 
43 The Cut, Waterloo, SE1 8LF
0844 692 3901
Tube: Southwark
Fish

Livebait, Waterloo offers a great range of fresh fish and seafood, cooked to 
perfection every time. Located in The Cut and within a two minute walk from the 
Old and Young Vic theatres, the Waterloo restaurant is ideal for pre-theatre 
dining.

Only ethically-sourced fish is served and the restaurant supports sustainable 
fishing policies, providing the freshest seafood with a minimal impact on the 
environment. The ever-changing catch of the day ranges from gilthead bream to 
bass, Cornish sardines, generous plates of tuna and classic fish and chips 
which is simply a must to try.

Their international wine won't disappoint with a massive selection of wines to 
choose from, or why not try a refreshing Bloody Mary which perfectly 
complements the fresh oysters.

• Rock – from £9.50. Wine from £17, Muscadet £22. Theatre menu.

Lutyens <http://www.lutyens-restaurant.com/>
 Lutyen's restaurant in Fleet Street. Photograph: Eamonn Mccabe for the 
Guardian 
85 Fleet Street, EC4Y 1AE
020 7583 8385
Tube: St Paul's
Seafood bar and brasserie

This former headquarters of Reuters has been transformed into a modern bar, 
restaurant and club. The light, minimalist décor of the bar has a shiny nickel 
bar top against white walls and marble floor tiles. Comfortable bar stools and 
tables are set for enjoying the delicious bar food that includes a platter of 
fruits de mer, a tapas board, charcuterie and cheese. The restaurant has an 
impressive fruits de mer display and oyster bar where a plate of natives, 
rocks, or seafood can be taken.

Traditional brasserie dishes take in aged beef steaks, seasonal fresh fish 
including lobster, bass and turbot, real dishes such as veal Holstein, calf's 
liver Lyonnaise, and poultry and game in season.

At the bar there are Speciales de Claire, Maldons and Carlingford Lough 
Natives and Rocks to be enjoyed, and perhaps cherrystone clams, scallops and 
crab.

There is an impressive cellar wine library and lounge bar, with treasures 
which start at a modest level with top selected regional wines at friendly 
prices. Service as expected hits the balance between friendly and formal.

• French Speciales, Maldon and West Mersea Natives. Rock and native – from 
£12.50. Wine from £18. Private room. Closed Saturday and Sunday.

Fox and Anchor <http://www.foxandanchor.com/>

115 Charterhouse Street, Clerkenwell, EC1M 6AA 
020 7250 1300
Tube: Farringdon
Gastro pub and dining

A beautifully renovated old tavern has been restored for the 21st century in 
Smithfield Market. It serves a great British menu includes a Maldon raw bar 
with Rocks and natives, also steak and oyster pie.

• Rock and native – from £9. Wine from £14.50, Muscadet £17.95. Accommodation.

Scott's <http://www.scotts-restaurant.com/>
 A spread at Scott's. Photograph: Sophia Evans for the Observer 
20 Mount Street, Mayfair, W1K 2HE 
020 7495 7309
Tube: Green Park 
British

One of Mayfair's most renowned seafood restaurants was reborn several years 
ago to greater style. Dine around the central oyster bar on freshest seafood 
and British meat. Sample Fine de Claires, Strangford Loughs, West Mersea no.2, 
Dorset Rocks.

• Rock and native – from £11.25. Wine from £24 – Marsanne-Viognier. Private 
room. Al fresco.

Bentley's <http://www.bentleys.org/>

11–15 Swallow Street, Piccadilly, W1B 4DG 
020 7734 4756
Tube: Piccadilly Circus
Traditional oyster bar and restaurant

Oysters are a religion at this institution that is switched on in its oyster 
selection. Sample finest and freshest Maldon, Scottish and Irish Rock, and Loch 
Ryan Natives among a broad range.

• Rock and native – from £9.50. Wine from £19.50. Private room.

• This is an extract from the London Oyster Guide by Colin Pressdee (Graffeg, 
£12).Order a copy for £9.60 from the Guardian bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781905582563>
 