
At first glance, London Irish (Tuesday, 10pm, C4), which follows four living, 
loving, self-medicating Northern Irish friends in London, seems like just 
another staggeringly charmless comedy drama. It soon becomes clear, however, 
that this is more of a mindless, grinning sick-com:A Clockwork Orange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-clockwork-orange> in the style of Two Pints 
Of Lager And A Packet Of Crisps. Instead of violent fantasies and 
hallucinogen-spiked milk, the characters are fuelled by alcohol and stupid, 
morbid apathy.

A clip from the show released by Channel 4 earlier this year was received with 
slightly more abject horror than the standard sitcom teaser, mainly in response 
to a scene in which one of the characters wakes up in bed next to a small 
child. "We didn't, did we?" she asks him, frowning, fag in hand. She is Bronagh 
(Sinead Keenan), who isn't so much a cynic as a woman internally manufacturing 
negativity on an industrial scale. While she (fingers crossed!) hasn't just had 
sex with a three-year-old, in the next room someone actually has been raped. 
It's Patrick (Peter Campion), one of Bronagh's flatmates. His attacker, Steph, 
a posh robotic English woman, climbed in through a bathroom window. With barely 
a moment to digest that information, we cut to aggressively idiotic third 
housemate Niamh on the toilet, cracking up at The Tragic Story Of Anne Frank.

Those delights are all to come. As for this week's opener, Patrick bumps into 
old friend Ryan, who lost his hand years ago while covering Patrick's shift at 
work. Patrick guiltily invites him to a pub quiz, which leads Bronagh to 
realise that she slept with the "crafty sly deformed little fuck" at a party 
without knowing about his amputation. Meanwhile, Niamh won't listen to any of 
Ryan's quiz answers because he's "only got the one hand".

The show, which is the work of Being Human writer Lisa McGee, might be 
intended as an exercise in bad taste, a stab at the dark art of 
boundary-breaking offensiveness. But because the tone is identical to that of a 
matey comedy, it all feels spectacularly misjudged. The comedic set-ups, for 
instance, are bog-standard fare – Patrick trying to climb out of a pub window 
to avoid a fight; the friends getting thrown out of a wake – while the 
punchlines are underlined with jangling stings. Anywhere else, these mishaps 
would have been the result of an unfortunate misunderstanding; here they are 
the logical conclusions of the characters' odd, senseless and casually sadistic 
japes. Next week's wake-ejection, for instance, is down to Niamh full-on 
snogging the corpse for a £20 bet. Uncomfortable exits, rattling indie music: 
it's basically The Inbetweeners if Will and Simon were routinely involved in 
sexual assault of people both alive and dead.

That's not to say all the characters exist in a self-constructed moral vacuum. 
As the parental figures of this makeshift family, Bronagh and Patrick are 
intermittently hit by their consciences. Niamh and Bronagh's brother Conor are 
the children; empty-vessel people who try to keep themselves topped up with 
alcohol or, as in this first episode, heroin. But while Patrick might object to 
Bronagh telling Ryan to "stop disguising your stump and riding people", this is 
a world where right or wrong depends almost exclusively on opportunities to 
gain money and/or alcohol. It's not hard to imagine any one of them murdering 
someone for 20 quid and a pint.

Calling this London Irish instead of Sociopath Central is a little bit risky, 
then, because although these ghoulish characters might not be stereotypes, the 
episodes are bookended by the four friends sitting in a pub musing on what it 
means to be Irish: this week, Patrick argues that the Irish don't binge-drink, 
even as a steaming Conor wets himself in the seat next to him. But the people 
of Ireland shouldn't be worried about the programme reflecting on them 
negatively, because this transcends nationality; if anything, the entire human 
race might want to start distancing itself from London Irish.
 