
As if there were not enough mysteries in the world, a fresh one emerged at 
Stradey Park where Saracens somehow fought back from 36-19 down with 10 minutes 
remaining to earn the two bonus points that edge them to the top of their
Anglo-Welsh Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anglo-welsh-cup> pool ahead 
of the Scarlets and into the semi-finals. Phil Davies' Scarlets did everything 
but capitalise on the lead they built and whatever the bones of contention 
surrounding the two penalty tries they conceded from scrums - one in each half 
- the hosts gifted too much loose possession to the visitors, an apparently 
inherent problem in Welsh rugby.

The Scarlets had the wind in their favour in the first half and desperately 
needed to assert some superiority in that period. They did so with Stephen 
Jones penalties in the third and 10th minutes, each awarded asSaracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> succumbed to pressure on their 
defence. But the Scarlets' vulnerability was also exposed as the visitors' 
powerful pack established themselves in the home 22, where Simon Easterby was 
sent to the sin bin for failing to roll away from a tackle.

In Easterby's immediate absence things began to look decidedly bleak for the 
Scarlets' chances of reaching the quarter-finals, as referee Dave Pearson 
awarded a penalty try after Saracens' first attempt at a push-over against 
seven men ended with the scrum collapsing a metre short. Whether Pearson should 
have given the depleted home pack at least one more opportunity to hold their 
opponents at bay was a moot point. After all, theScarlets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets> had already illegally blocked 
promising moves by a variety of illicit means before the scrum was awarded.

However, the hosts' response was as swift as it was spectacular, with Dwayne 
Peel setting off from a free-kick before the ball went via Stephen Jones to 
Regan King, before Morgan Stoddart enhanced his attacking reputation with a 
magnificent break. Had Deacon Manu not been able to pluck the ball off his toes 
after Stoddart was halted, the move would have died. But he and fly-half Jones 
kept the Saracens defence off balance, and Adam Eustace had the presence of 
mind to send Scott MacLeod over.

Jones converted, but then Saracens provided a contrast to the hosts' expansive 
play by launching a series of close-quarter forward drives. At the end of it, 
however, all they achieved was to gift Jones another penalty shot at goal, 
which he duly converted to give his side a 16-7 half-time lead.

Wales's erstwhile captain finished off an exhilarating counterattack that set 
the tone for the second period and, while Saracens responded in kind when Adam 
Powell burst clear, they were unable to live with the pace and panache for 
which the Scarlets are renowned. First, powerful young centre Jon Davies 
charged through Kameli Ratuvou and Francisco Leonelli on the right. Then, 
veteran wing Garan Evans raced over in the same corner after some superb 
interplay between forwards and backs.

Had their chasing been as good as their tactical kicking, the Scarlets would 
not have given Saracens the chance to send Ratuvou over on the counter. If that 
were not enough to make the hosts edgy, what followed certainly was. Jones 
kicked the penalty that seemed to make his side safe, but Mr Pearson awarded 
the visitors a second and highly controversial penalty try from a scrum for 
their first bonus point. Andy Farrell converted then stepped up to kick the 
76th-minute penalty that gave his side the vital second bonus point. And he 
added another penalty with the last kick of the game.

Stradey Park 6,625

LLANELLI SCARLETS Stoddart; M Jones, King, Davies, Evans; S Jones, Peel; I 
Thomas, Hayter, Manu, Eustace, MacLeod, Easterby (capt), G Thomas, D Jones

Tries MacLeod, S Jones, Davies, Evans Cons S Jones 2 Pens Jones 4

SARACENS Leonelli (Thrower 53); Haughton, Sorrell, Powell, Ratuvou; Ross 
(Farrell 56), Rauluni (Dickens 76); Yates, Ongaro (Kyriacou 64), Visagie 
(Johnston 56), Ryder, Fullarton, Gustard (Chesney 49), Seymour, Skirving

Tries Penalty 2, Powell, Ratuvou Cons Ross 2, Farrell Pens Farrell 2

Referee D Pearson (Eng)
 