
Lord Adonis, the former Labour cabinet minister charged with Ed Miliband's 
growth review, is to hold talks about the potential tax-raising powers of new 
city regional authorities backed by theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader yesterday. Adonis said he 
would be holding discussions with Tony Travers, the leading local government 
academic responsible for writing a radical plan to give the London mayor 
tax-raising powers including on property, such as stamp duty sales and council 
tax. Adonis is due to publish his full growth review by the late summer.

Labour yesterday set out a vision of combined local council authorities 
working alongside the government's existing business-led Local Enterprise 
Partnerships to form engines of growth in Britain's big cities.

Labour insisted that the two bodies – LEPS and combined authorities – would 
work independently and in co-operation, denying there would be any duplication. 
Adonis said the initial model wasGreater Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester> Combined Authority, but 
similar bodies are being established in Leeds, Merseyside, Sheffield and the 
north-east. The combined authorities have statutory functions and are 
indirectly elected.

The issue of city regions may have little traction on the doorstep, but in 
urban authorities and among businesses and local government the concept is seen 
as critical to regeneration.

In his speech yesterday, Miliband proposed a larger devolution of power than 
proposed by the coalition, since Labour has suggested that not just transport 
and economic development be devolved, but also skills and the work programme, 
making the amount of money diverted from Whitehall close to £4bn a year.

Labour believes the package represents a new way of promoting growth outside 
the capital, and has asked local councils to draw up plans for Labour to 
examine when it is in government.

The combined authority for the north-east was given the legal go-ahead in the 
Lords only this week, and follows a template established by a commission that 
Adonis set up more than two years ago.

Adonis said yesterday he believed the combined authorities could prove to be 
the best way yet discovered to handle the skills crisis that still besets the 
UK and holds back growth outside London.

In the case of the Manchester combined authority, its leaders are already 
asking for more control over money for economic growth and public service 
reform. It has said it is happy to be held strongly to account for achieving 
outcomes so long as it is not told exactly how to deliver them.

Adonis says he is aware there is a danger that the plan's radicalism will be 
diluted by Whitehall civil servants, who will make councils jump through hoops 
to be given freedoms and access to money.
 