
A higher speed, higher frequency, higher capacity railway, supported by a 
better smarter motorway system is long overdue in the north of England. 
Transforming transportation between the great cities of the north is undeniably 
necessary. On capacity alone, existing infrastructure will simply fail if it is 
not drastically improved.

But there is a bigger prize in view: better connections across the north can 
help fire the local economy and make the region a powerhouse once again.
Transport for the North <http://www.transportforthenorth.com/>, the new 
regional transport authority modelled on London’s TfL, must now work with the 
government to ensure that real change is not just discussed, but delivered.

George Osborne launches national infrastructure commission
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/30/osborne-launches-national-infrastructure-commission>
Improving connectivity will not, however, be enough to create the northern 
powerhouse. Better transport connectivity is essential, but not the only part 
of the strategy. Significant improvements in education, workforce training, 
research and innovation, spatial planning and wider infrastructure investment 
are also needed.

So it is up to local leaders to take advantage of new powers devolved their 
way. Rapid improvement in education is possible, as we saw withthe London 
Challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/dec/11/london-challenge-turned-poor-schools-around>
. Now the northern city regions must develop their own programmes to push local 
education forward.

The north of England, after all, holds enormous potential. It is home to some 
of the UK’s largest most vibrant cities. Its universities are world-leading 
hubs of research and innovation. And its wider city regions have a greater 
population than London, contributing more than £200bn a year to the British 
economy. The arrival of high-speed rail has the potential to help fire the 
region forward. It will act, both directly and indirectly, as a catalyst 
driving skills and employment.

In the mid-2020s, at the peak of construction, HS2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hs2> will employ 25,000 people, supporting up 
to 2,000 apprenticeship opportunities, with the potential for an additional 
400,000 jobs in the wider economy. Given that so much high-speed rail 
infrastructure will be constructed in the north across the next 15-20 years, 
the potential for northern regions is enormous. During the rail revolution in 
the 1800s, opportunity was created in towns and cities across the UK; 
Manchester and Sheffield quadrupled between 1801 and 1851, Bradford grew 
eightfold. The arrival of HS3 can be similarly transformative.

Ultimately a better connected north will mean a more dynamic region and a 
stronger UK

High-speed rail will demand a high-skilled workforce – 50% of which is likely 
to require NVQ level 3 (A-level) qualification or above. Under existing demands 
the UK is, notoriously, failing to attract and train a sufficient number of 
engineers. That’s why the creation of two high-speed rail colleges in 
Birmingham and Doncaster is so important. Together, they will help to ensure 
that the next generation of engineers are in place to deliver high-speed rail 
as well as future projects not yet conceived. The colleges will leave a lasting 
legacy – not just in the north and midlands but nationally, helping to address 
concerns about future skills shortages.

What’s more, the improvements in connectivity these schemes will deliver have 
enormous potential to bring benefits to the wider workforce in the north. 
Building the HS3 network will open up the major cities of the north to each 
other, easing inter-city commutes, opening up markets, and making the region 
more attractive to businesses, entrepreneurs and highly-qualified workers. 
This, in turn, will foster an environment in which more top young graduates 
remain in the cities of their higher education after their studies are complete.

Ultimately a better connected north will mean a more dynamic region and a 
stronger UK. The first steps, plans for high-speed rail networks from east to 
west and north to south are now in place. This is a golden opportunity for the 
region and the country – we should grab it with both hands.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 