
Louis Armstrong <https://www.theguardian.com/music/louis-armstrong> bought his 
first cornet at a New Orleans pawnshop, when he was 15 years old. The 
instrument cost $10, and was "all bent up, holes knocked in the bell". 
Nevertheless it was the instrument with which he would take the first 
significant steps towards becoming thefons et origo of jazz improvisation: not 
just the first of the music's major solo voices, emerging loud and clear and 
unmistakably individual from the collective polyphony of early New Orleans 
jazz, but the figure who first revealed the inherent nobility of an idiom born 
in the humblest of material circumstances.

The child of an absent father and a mother who left him to be brought up 
by his grandmother and by various friends, Armstrong endured great poverty. He 
learned to live on the streets until, in his early teens, various misdemeanours 
– probably not including the famous but apparently apocryphal story about the 
firing of a pistol in the street on New Year's Eve – led a juvenile court to 
sentence him to an indeterminate stay in the Colored Waifs' Home. Here, 
homeless black children were taught reading, writing, arithmetic, and "garden 
work".

He had already sung in a barbershop quartet, and six months after his arrival 
he was invited to join the home's brass band, quickly graduating from the 
tambourine via the bass drum and the alto horn to the bugle, and thence to the 
cornet. When he left, in 1915, it was with the rudiments of the technique that 
would eventually give him, in the fine words of one biographer, James Lincoln 
Collier, "that beautiful attack – sharp and clean as a razor cut – and a rich 
and utterly firm sound, as solid as a bar of brass". But he also left the home 
without an instrument. Living in his mother's house on Perdido Street in the 
black section of the Storyville neighbourhood, making a living by delivering 
coal, milk and newspapers, he would have heard the bands playing the new form 
of music – a bouillabaisse of ragtime, French quadrilles, work songs, hymns and 
marches – in the local "tonks", which merged the functions of bars, dancehalls, 
grocery stalls and bordellos. Borrowing a cornet, the teenager in short 
trousers became a regular deputy when bands found themselves short-handed. 
Having acquired his own horn, he began to play regular engagements for a dollar 
a night, also taking part in the street parades that were a regular feature of 
New Orleans life, while driving the coal cart during the day and unloading 
bananas to earn extra cash. He was still in his teens when, in a pivotal 
encounter in the history of jazz, he met Joe "King" Oliver, an older man then 
generally reckoned to be the city's finest cornetist, and the leader of an 
excellent band. A stern, sometimes difficult character, Oliver nevertheless 
became one of a series of strong men who would take on a quasi-paternal role in 
Armstrong's life and career. After Oliver moved to Chicago in 1921, in search 
of larger audiences in a town thriving with industry, he called Armstrong to 
join him in his CreoleJazz <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jazz> Band. The 
unfettered expressionism of the younger man's approach made a striking contrast 
with the more austere style of his leader, and Armstrong was on his way to 
stardom.

His own recordings were soon making an impact. West End Blues, cut in 1928, 
opened with a rivetingly imaginative unaccompanied introduction that seemed 
like a fanfare to an entire new world. Like the rest of the great Hot Five and 
Hot Seven recordings, it showed what richness could be obtained from the 
combination of a superlative soloist with like-minded colleagues. Weather Bird, 
a duet recorded in the same year with the pianist Earl Hines, opened up the 
possibility of jazz as intimate conversation. The big band recordings made in 
Los Angeles at the start of the 30s represented an artful approach to the 
popular music of the era.

In time Armstrong's smiling face and that gravelly voice would become as much 
of a signature as the glorious trumpet solos, and Hello Dolly and What a 
Wonderful World, which maintained only the most tenuous relationship to the 
music he had pioneered, were international hits. He was anointed the 
international ambassador of America's first cultural gift to the world, 
acclaimed and embraced by kings and presidents – although not, for a while in 
the militant 60s, by younger musicians who deplored his crowd-pleasing 
instincts. He died of heart failure on 6 July 1971, a month short of his 70th 
birthday, universally mourned.
 