
The student protests may have passed off quietly on Wednesday, but for me this 
was a momentous week in HE all the same. Signs and portents, dead fish floating 
in the pond, warning that all it not well with the ecosystem. The first dead 
fish popped up to the surface on Monday in the form of an announcement that 27 
universities had applied to reduce their fees below an average of £7,500pa so 
that they could qualify for the 20,000 places allocated to institutions 
offering cheaper courses. For some of these institutions, this lowering of fees 
will just have been an exercise in moving money from upfront bursaries into fee 
waivers.

I know for a fact that one of these universities has been forced to divert 
money it had planned to give to poorer students in the form of upfront help 
with accommodation costs and bursaries into fee waivers instead, in order to 
meet the qualification rules.

When I questioned the Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE) 
about this, a spokesman confirmed: "Institutions can reduce their fees through 
fee waivers, but not through bursaries or accommodation support. This is 
because we were asked by the government to consider bids from institutions 
where an 'average tuition charge (after waivers) is at or below £7,500 per 
year' (White Paper executive summary para 8)."

The government – or rather the treasury – prefers fee waivers because they 
reduce the amount it has to spend on subsidising the student loan system. At 
the moment, the treasury reckons that a quarter of what is lent will never get 
repaid, so encouraging fee waivers is a way of cutting its losses.

Why does this matter? Because many people, and the National Union of Students 
(NUS), believe upfront cash matters when encouraging students from deprived 
backgrounds to go to university. The president of the NUS, Liam Burns, says fee 
waivers are a "con trick".

If this is the case, then surely the Office for Fair Access 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/access> (OFFA), the 
organisation charged with safeguarding the interests of widening participation, 
should be up in arms. But when I spoke to OFFA it told me there was no evidence 
that students were influenced by the scale of upfront bursaries when choosing 
universities. No evidence with fees at just under £3,400 perhaps, but at double 
or treble that? Shouldn't someone have done some research or some behaviour 
modelling before deciding between up-front support and lower debt tomorrow?

On Wednesday, the second fish came to the surface. The Commons Select 
Committee on Business, Innovation and Skills published its report on the White 
Paper. It warned, probably too late to do any good, that "focusing financial 
support on providing money for living costs to students while they are studying 
would be a more effective means of support than fee-waivers and would be more 
consistent with the message that students should not be dissuaded from applying 
to university because of the cost."

Yesterday another cluster of small bodies belched ominously to the surface. 
The BBC's You and Yours programme had conducted a survey comparing how much 
students in the 1980s had left from their grants to live on each week after 
accommodation costs, and how much students had left to live on after paying for 
student accommodation today. In the 1980s, students were left with an average 
of £55. Today's students have just £9. Add that to evidence from the OU that 
students, and in particular poor students, are disproportionately affected by 
rising inflation, and a bleak picture emerges of the choices facing students 
who can't rely on the bank of mum and dad to help them through.

Of course, it's not just poorer students who will be affected. Those from the 
"squeezed middle" will be choosing to live at home while they study – perhaps 
to undertake distance learning or work and study part time. I read in the Times 
Higher Education Supplement a prediction from Malcolm Gillies, the 
vice-chancellor of London Metropolitan University, of state funded universities 
"withdrawing from all face-to-face teaching, going virtual". There was also 
Geoffrey Crossick, the University of London's vice-chancellor, warning of a 
"future dystopia" in which the residential university experience becomes 
"socially restricted", and there is "much less social mobility".

We seem to be sleepwalking into this potential disaster heedless of the 
warning voices off-stage, too quiet and too late. If the government is serious 
about social mobility then it should commission some proper research into the 
likely consequences of the current plans – and promise to act on what it finds.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 