
A leaked Malaysian police report warns there are 10 suicide bombers in Kuala 
Lumpur, where the country will host the Association of South East Asian Nations 
(ASEAN) summit this weekend.

Malaysia’s police chief Khalid Abu Bakar said the memo was authentic but 
warned the intelligence was not verified.

Paris attacks: Terror threat spreads to Malaysia as Obama visits – live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/nov/19/paris-attacks-police-investigate-isis-mastermind-dead-st-denis-raid-live>
“There have been reports of imminent terrorist threats in Malaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia>,” he said in a statement. “At this 
point, I would like to underline that they have yet to be confirmed.”

World leaders, including US President Barack Obama and Chinese Premier Li 
Keqiang, are arriving in Kuala Lumpur this weekend, and at least 2,000 army 
personnel are being deployed around the capital, Malaysian military forces said.

Police chief Khalid said attacks in France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, Egypt, Lebanon, and the Philippines 
merited increased security for the two-day summit for 18 world leaders.

“The Royal Malaysian Police have intensified the existing comprehensive 
security arrangement for the Asean and related summits in Kuala Lumpur,” he 
said. “Security checks at all entry and exit pointed to Malaysia have been 
stepped up.”

Local news website Malaysiakini  <https://www.malaysiakini.com/news/320236>
reported on the circular, which detailed a meeting on Sunday between Islamic 
State and Philippines insurgent groups Abu Sayyaf and the Moro National 
Liberation Front.

The police memo said the meeting, held in southern Philippines, was attended 
by “14 leaders from the three outfits and 50 members of Abu Sayyaf armed with 
M16 rifles, pistols and bombs.”

It said that Islamic State and Abu Sayyaf have eight suicide bomber in Sabah, 
Malaysia’s western state, and 10 in Kuala Lumpur.

“These suicide bombers underwent military training in Syria, Afghanistan and 
Iraq, as well as prepared to receive orders from their leaders to launch 
attacks/bombings,” Malaysiakini quoted the circular as saying.

Federal Police Special Branch Director Fuzi Harun said the internal directive 
was to alert his staff.


“It is an information that we received but we don’t have a clearer information 
... It may be true or false, but action is still taken,” he told Malaysia’s 
state-news agency Bernama.

“We will pass on this information to our ground units for any action,” he said.

The Asean meeting follows the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit 
in neighbouring Philippines, where China’s territorial disputes over the South 
China Sea was a key issue.

Obama, who opposes Beijing’s claims to coral reefs and islands in the stretch 
of water, said that a US “pivot” to Asia remains a core policy.

Vietnam, the Philippines, Malaysia, Taiwan and Brunei all have overlapping 
claims with China in the South China Sea, where more than $4.5 trillion in sea 
trade passes each year.

In talks with Philippine President Benigno Aquino, Obama demanded China end 
its land reclamation work, turning reefs in the South China Sea into islands 
using dredged sand from the sea floor.
 