
The prime minister is refusing to say whether Australia would participate with 
the United States in freedom-of-navigation exercises in theSouth China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea> and says the US Congress 
remains the biggest impediment to landing the still contentious Trans-Pacific 
Partnership.

On the opening day of the Apec summit in Manila, and after his first 
substantial meeting with the US president, Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/17/malcolm-turnbull-and-barack-obama-hold-first-meeting-and-promise-to-ramp-up-fight-against-isis>
, Turnbull was coy about Australia’s intentions if the US decided to send 
another warship to the disputed region of the South China Sea.

China says it has been 'restrained' by not seizing more islands in South China 
Sea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/17/china-says-it-has-been-restrained-by-not-seizing-more-islands-in-south-china-sea>
The US recently sailed a warship within 22km (13 miles) of the Spratly 
archipelago in a direct challenge to China’s territorial claims.

After meeting Obama on Tuesday, Turnbull delivered the diplomatic message that 
Australia stood with the US on freedom-of-navigation issues. Australia and the 
US were of “the same mind”, he said.

But asked whether Australia would participate with the Americans if another 
naval exercise came forward, Turnbull said: “We will consider our position in 
respect of these matters with great care.

“We believe in freedom of navigation but the way in which we deal with the 
issue in terms of our discussions withChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and the United States – we will 
manage that in a very thoughtful and measured way that is designed to achieve 
the outcome.

“The test of every action by government … is the outcome. That’s why we 
address these things in a very careful way.”

Australia’s official line is any conflicts in the region need to be managed 
peacefully and in accordance with international law.

The South China Sea flashpoint requires Australia to balance two of its most 
important foreign policy relationships: its ties with Washington and its ties 
with Beijing.

Australia going from diplomatic support for freedom of navigation to practical 
participation in a US naval exercise would not go down well in Beijing.

The summit host, the Philippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> president, Benigno Aquino, also 
raised his country’s concerns about Chinese activities in the South China Sea 
during a one-on-one discussion with Turnbull.

During talks with the Chinese over recent days, Australian officials have 
urged Beijing not to inflame the situation in the region in order to protect 
its long-term national interests, which are best served by conforming with its 
public statements of commitment to a “peaceful rise”.

Turnbull was speaking to reporters before a meeting on the sidelines of Apec 
between the US and the signatories of the TPP.

The controversial trade deal, if signed, would create the largest free trade 
area in the world. It is seen by some analysts as a strategic counterbalance to 
Chinese economic power in the Pacific rim.

Malcolm Turnbull and Barack Obama hold first meeting and promise to 'ramp up' 
fight against Isis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/17/malcolm-turnbull-and-barack-obama-hold-first-meeting-and-promise-to-ramp-up-fight-against-isis>
At the meeting, leaders were asked to make general remarks about the impact of 
the TPP on their economies and also give an indication of when the deal may be 
ratified in each jurisdiction.

Turnbull was invited by the US to sum up the contributions at the conclusion 
of the session.

Current signatories to the deal include Brunei, Chile, New Zealand, Singapore, 
Australia, Canada, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru, the US and Vietnam.


Indonesia has also expressed belated interest in signing up, but the new 
Trudeau government in Canada has not yet said whether it will ultimately 
support the agreement that was negotiated by the outgoing prime minister, 
Stephen Harper.

Turnbull was later asked about the domestic challenges in signatory countries 
to ratifying the TPP.

The deal has been criticised for a number of reasons, including having its 
negotiations conducted in strict secrecy and for containing a ISDS clause that 
allows foreign companies to sue governments.

Turnbull noted to reporters in Manila the US was yet to land the deal it has 
sought with the signatory countries: “The principle challenge I would see is 
ratification by the US Congress.

 “The president is optimistic about it being passed by the Congress but 
[congressional approval] seems to be to be the major domestic obstacle of all 
the 12 [signatories].

“That’s president Obama’s challenge. Obviously we encourage all those 
legislators in Washington to give the TPP their support but I imagine they will 
be taking the advice of their own constituents rather than foreign governments.”

Turnbull’s Apec program on Wednesday also included a meeting with the Mexican 
government, a session with business leaders and a meeting with chief executive 
of Hong Kong, Leung Chun-Ying, before the formal dinner of the summit.

The prime minister was expected to catch up with the New Zealand prime 
minister, John Key, after the dinner.

Apec leaders will close off in their retreat on Thursday before emerging with 
a communique that will be released on Thursday afternoon marking the summit 
outcomes.
 