
A study of gay men in the US has found fresh evidence that male sexual 
orientation is influenced by genes. Scientists tested the DNA of 400 gay men 
and found that genes on at least two chromosomes affected whether a man was gay 
or straight.

A region of the X chromosome called Xq28 had some impact on men's sexual 
behaviour – though scientists have no idea which of the many genes in the 
region are involved, nor how many lie elsewhere in the genome.

Another stretch of DNA on chromosome 8 also played a role in male sexual 
orientation – though again the precise mechanism is unclear.

Researchers have speculated in the past that genes linked to homosexuality in 
men may have survived evolution because they happened to make women who carried 
them more fertile. This may be the case for genes in the Xq28 region, as the X 
chromosome is passed down to men exclusively from their mothers.

Michael Bailey, a psychologist at Northwestern University in Illinois, set out 
the findings at a discussion event held in conjunction with the annual meeting 
of theAmerican Association for the Advancement of Science in Chicago 
<http://meetings.aaas.org> on Thursday. "The study shows that there are genes 
involved in male sexual orientation," he said. The work has yet to be 
published, but confirms the findings of a smaller study that sparked widespread 
controversy in 1993, when Dean Hamer, a scientist at the US National Cancer 
Institute, investigated the family histories of more than 100 gay men and found
homosexuality tended to be inherited 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9zno8e4R6gA>. More than 10% of brothers of gay 
men were gay themselves, compared to around 3% of the general population. 
Uncles and male cousins on the mother's side had a greater than average chance 
of being gay, too.

The link with the mother's side of the family led Hamer to look more closely 
at the X chromosome. In follow-up work, he found that 33 out of 40 gay brothers 
inherited similar genetic markers on the Xq28 region of the X chromosome, 
suggesting key genes resided there.

Hamer faced a firestorm when his study was published. The fuss centred on the 
influences of nature and nurture on sexual orientation. But the work also 
raised the more dubious prospect of a prenatal test for sexual orientation. The 
Daily Mail headlined the story "Abortion hope after 'gay genes findings' ". 
Hamer warned that any attempt to develop a test for homosexuality would be 
"wrong, unethical and a terrible abuse of research".

The gene or genes in the Xq28 region that influence sexual orientation have a 
limited and variable impact. Not all of the gay men in Bailey's study inherited 
the same Xq28 region. The genes were neither sufficient, nor necessary, to make 
any of the men gay.

The flawed thinking behind a genetic test for sexual orientation is clear from 
studies of twins, which show that the identical twin of a gay man, who carries 
an exact replica of his brother's DNA, is more likely to be straight than gay. 
That means even a perfect genetic test that picked up every gene linked to 
sexual orientation would still be less effective than flipping a coin.

While genes do contribute to sexual orientation, other multiple factors play a 
greater role, perhaps including the levels of hormones a baby is exposed to in 
the womb. "Sexual orientation has nothing to do with choice," said Bailey. "We 
found evidence for two sets [of genes] that affect whether a man is gay or 
straight. But it is not completely determinative; there are certainly other 
environmental factors involved."

Last year, before the latest results were made public, one of Bailey's 
colleagues, Alan Sanders, said the findings could not and should not be used to 
develop a test for sexual orientation.

"When people say there's a gay gene, it's an oversimplification," Sanders 
said. "There's more than one gene, and genetics is not the whole story. 
Whatever gene contributes to sexual orientation, you can think of it as much as 
contributing to heterosexuality as much as you can think of it contributing to 
homosexuality. It contributes to a variation in the trait."

Qazi Rahman, a psychologist at King's College London, said the results were 
valuable for further understanding the biology of sexual orientation. "This is 
not controversial or surprising and is nothing people should worry about. All 
human psychological traits are heritable, that is, they have a genetic 
component," he said. "Genetic factors explain 30 to 40% of the variation 
between people's sexual orientation. However, we don't know where these genetic 
factors are located in the genome. So we need to do 'gene finding' studies, 
like this one by Sanders, Bailey and others, to have a better idea where 
potential genes for sexual orientation may lie."

Rahman rejected the idea that genetics research could be used to discriminate 
against people on the basis of their sexual orientation. "I don't see how 
genetics would contribute more to the persecution, discrimination and 
stigmatisation of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people any more than 
social, cultural or learning explanations. Historically, the persecution and 
awful treatment of LGBT groups has been because politicians, religious leaders 
and societies have viewed sexual orientation as 'choice' or due to poor 
upbringing."

Steven Rose, of the Open University, said: "What worries me is not the extent, 
if at all, to which our genetic, epigenetic or neural constitution and 
development affect our sexual preferences, but the huge moral panic and 
religious and political agenda which surrounds the question."
 