
Nowhere does music have a greater social and political importance than in the 
vast desert state of Mali. It is shocking, therefore, that it has been banned 
across much of the two-thirds ofMali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali> 
currently controlled by Islamic rebel groups.

As "Manny" Ansar, the director of the country's celebrated Festival in the 
Desert, which has now been forced out of the country, explained: "Music is 
important as a daily event. It's not just a business, for it's through our 
music that we know history and our own identity. Our elders gave us lessons 
through music. It's through music that we declare love and get married – and we 
criticise and make comments on the people around us."

Reading on mobile? Click here to view video 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/video/2012/feb/23/amadou-mariam-wili-kataso-live-video>

Malian musicians have become household names in the west. The list is 
remarkable, from the late Ali Farka Touré to the soulful Salif Keita, from
Toumani Diabaté <https://www.theguardian.com/music/toumani-diabate>, the 
world's finest exponent of the kora, to the bravely experimental Rokia Traoré. 
Then there's the rousing desert blues of Tinariwen, who have performed 
alongside the Rolling Stones.

There is the passionate social commentary of Oumou Sangaré, and the rousing, 
commercially successful African pop fusion of Amadou & Mariam.

These musicians, with varied, distinctive styles, have educated western 
audiences aboutAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and their 
country's ancient civilisation, and the way in which traditional families of 
musicians, the griots, had acted as advisers to the rulers and guardians of the 
country's history, and kept alive an oral tradition for generation after 
generation.

And yet the Islamic rebel groups are trying to wipe out this ancient culture – 
and in the process have forced Malian musicians to examine the role they should 
now play.

Ansar said he was "ashamed at what has happened has happened – and it was 
provoked by people who call themselves Muslims, like me".

When I met him at a censorship conference in Oslo, he said the militias were 
stopping the music "to impose their authority, so there's nothing to threaten 
them". He added: "That's why they are attacking the traditional chiefs and 
musicians. And they're using concepts of Islam that are 14 centuries old and 
have never been applied. I find it strange that these ideas are being imposed 
now. It's as if they took a computer and wiped the hard drive, and then imposed 
their ideas instead."

Reading on mobile? Click here to view video 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/video/2010/apr/22/toumani-diabate-fantasie>

The situation is particularly painful for musicians from the north of Mali, 
for bands such asTinariwen <https://www.theguardian.com/music/tinariwen> from 
the nomadic Touareg or Kel Tamashek people, whose international popularity has 
been helped for the last 12 years by the Festival in the Desert.

There have been upheavals in the region in the past, including a huge 
rebellion in 1990, when Tamashek fighters turned against the Malian government, 
demanding greater autonomy, a right to defend and support their culture, and 
even demands for a new country, Azawad.

It seemed at first that the latest rebellion, now a year old, might follow a 
similar pattern, yet it splintered and changed course, and Islamic groups took 
over from the nationalists, partly because the former nationalist leader Iyad 
Ag Ghali (whose songs were once covered by Tinariwen) has now converted to a 
more extreme form of Islam.

Reading on mobile? Click here to view video
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/video/2013/jan/16/damon-albarn-mali-video>
Tinariwen are currently back in northern Mali, or living in exile in southern 
Algeria, but when they played in London last year, guitarist and bass player 
Eyadou Ag Leche talked of their problems since the Islamists took over the 
north.

Young people have been stopped from listening to music and families have had 
their televisions smashed for watching music shows, but music was still being 
played "underground", he said.

As for the Islamists, he said that he "didn't know where these people had come 
from", and suggested they were financed through Qatar.

Other bands from the rebel areas reported similar problems. Pino Ibrahim ag 
Ahmed, of Terakaft, said he had been forced into exile in Algeria and "lost 
much of his land". He said: "I don't know these groups, or what they want, and 
it's dangerous moving around." But he was determined to keep playing.

In the Malian capital, Bamako, outside the rebel-controlled area, musicians 
are also determined to keep working, but face different problems.

Bassekou Kouyate <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/bassekou-kouyate>, the 
world's leading n'goni player, said that musicians in the city are unable to 
work at the moment as clubs have been closed, all public concerts have been 
postponed, there are very few weddings taking place, and "even the concert in 
honour of the great balafon player Kélétigui Diabaté, who died recently, has 
been cancelled".

He said: "The government is nervous and afraid of terrorist attacks on public 
gatherings. They are asking everyone to wait until the situation in the north 
has calmed down."

But he and his wife, the singer Amy Sacko, did take part in a national 
television programme, along with Oumou Sangaré, in which they "all sang against 
all forms of sharia law".

Reading on mobile? Click here to view video 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/video/2011/aug/16/tinariwen-tassili-video>

Asked about the French military involvement, he said "they have saved Africa. 
They have saved Mali from the Islamists. I am going to buy a French flag to put 
in front of my house, to say thank you. That is how us Malians feel now".

In another musical unity project, the singer Fatoumata Diawara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/fatoumata-diawara> has just finished a new 
song and video, Peace, which will be quickly released in Bamako on Thursday. 
The aim, she said was to promote peace and "show that not all Touaregs want an 
independent state in the north – we want one Mali".

Touareg musicians appear on the song, as part of an extraordinary 45-strong 
cast that features 13 musicians, including Toumani Diabaté and guitar hero 
Djelimady Tounkara, and 29 singers, including Sangaré, Amadou & Mariam and 
Ivory Coast reggae artist Tiken Jah Fakoly. "There has never been anything like 
this in Mali," she said. "The political situation is bad so it's time for the 
musicians to come together." She also agreed with Bassekou that "people are 
happy" about the French military involvement.

Outside Mali, other musicians are involved in an international campaign to 
promote the culture of their battered country. Rokia Traoré, arguably the most 
adventurous female singer in Africa, is currently on tour in Australia. She 
explains: "I can just keep going and doing the best in my work, to try to make 
people think good things about Mali and see good things from Mali."

There will no doubt be similar sentiments expressed in London and Glasgow on 
26 and 27 January when three Malian artists appear together at the Sahara Soul 
concerts, at which Bassekou Kouyaté will be joined by the young Tamashek band 
Tamikrest, seen as a younger answer to Tinariwen, and Sidi Touré, a griot from 
the ancient city of Gao, currently under rebel control.

When those shows are over, Kouyaté heads back to Mali for further events, 
which will only take place if security allows. A major festival in his home 
town of Ségou is to be followed by an appearance at the Evening for Peace and 
National Unity in Bamako, organised by Oumou Sangaré.

Both events will also feature musicians who are also taking part in a 
two-pronged Caravan of Artists for Peace and National Unity, which will travel 
around west Africa next month, ending up in the town of Oursi in the 
neighbouring state of Burkino-Faso.

It's here that Ansar is hosting his 13th Festival in the Desert, now being 
staged in exile.

"The brutal sound of weapons and the cries of intolerance are not able to 
silence the singing of the griots," he said. "The Festival in the Desert must 
survive all this."

• Sahara Soul is at the Barbican, London <http://www.barbican.org.music>, on 
26 January and Glasgow Royal Concert Hall (celticconnections.com) on 27 January.
 