
A grandfather has called on parliament to legislate in favour of assisted 
dying before ending his own life at Dignitas.

Andrew Barclay, 65, died on Thursday after taking a lethal dose of drugs in an 
apartment near Zurich, having travelled to Switzerland with his wife. He had 
advanced multiple sclerosis.

Speaking to the Daily Mirror, the former civil servant, from Folkestone, Kent, 
said he was concerned that his partner, Sandra, 67, may face a police 
investigation on her return to Britain for helping him fulfil his wish.

“We need a law that makes it a feasible option in Britain,” he said. “It needs 
to be tightly regulated but why not draw the line where Dignitas has?

“It’s not easy to go there, you need medical and psychiatric reports and you 
need to carry out the final act yourself.”

Barclay said it had cost more than £10,000 and taken 14 months of “fighting” 
to die at Dignitas. He was diagnosed with MS in 1992 and endured the 
neurological disease though stages of remission and relapse, at times being 
unable to get out of bed or swallow.

In 2013 he was told his condition had entered a secondary progressive stage 
that meant his symptoms would not improve. He used a wheelchair for three years 
and was devastated that he was unable to lift up his two granddaughters, aged 
two and four.

His struggle with immobility, incontinence and partial blindness meant his 
mood was unpredictable and he was often depressed.

He said: “There are still genuine moments of happiness. But they no longer 
outweigh a life in which every single day is a struggle from start to end. So I 
have made this decision.”

Sandra Barclay said she was heartbroken, but added: “If you love someone you 
don’t want to see them suffer.”

Under the Suicide Act 1961, anyone helping or encouraging someone to take 
their own life can be prosecuted and jailed for up to 14 years.

In 2015 MPs including David Cameron rejected a bill to legalise assisted 
dying, but a second bill was raised in the House of Lords in June.

Opposition to changing the law has come from faith groups, campaigners who say 
disabled people may feel pressured to end their lives, and campaigners who fear 
assisted dying would become a business.

Sarah Wootton, chief executive of the pro-assisted dying group Dignity in 
Dying, told the newspaper: “It is a tragic and unacceptable reality that 
seriously ill people like Andrew feel they have no other choice but to spend 
their final days travelling hundreds of miles to Switzerland in order to have 
the dignified death they desire.”
 