
A former bus driver has been jailed for eight weeks after posting offensive 
tweets about the fatal stabbing of the teacherAnn Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire>.

Robert Riley, who used the nickname "Bucketmouth" on his Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> profile and branded himself 
"unabashed and unafraid", said he would have killed not only Maguire but all 
her school colleagues, and joked about teachers needing stab vests.

Maguire was stabbed while teaching a lesson at Corpus Christi Catholic college 
inLeeds <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/leeds> last month.

Riley, from Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, made a series of 
offensive remarks on Twitter about subjects ranging from Auschwitz to the 
Korean ferry disaster, magistrates in Swansea were told on Thursday. He also 
posted a string of racist rants against Muslim, Chinese and eastern European 
people.

The 42-year-old faced a backlash from other Twitter users after posting the 
inflammatory tweets two days after Maguire's death. He joined the debate about 
his remarks at one point, tweeting: "Of all the sick things I've tweeted, 
starvation, genocide, rape and torture, it's the teacher from Leeds that 
outrages everyone the most."

Boasting that he had the "biggest gob this side of the river Severn", Riley 
goaded those who criticised him. "I hope I get into the tabloids. I can see the 
headline now: dole scrounging leecher [sic] makes fun of dead teacher."

Twitter users reported his comments to West Yorkshire police, who tracked him 
down to his home in the village of Cwmavon, near Port Talbot. When arrested, 
Riley asked officers: "Am I going to go to prison?"

On Thursday he pleaded guilty to sending a grossly offensive message via a 
public communications network.

Linda Baker, prosecuting, told the court that after police received the 
complaint, Riley's other offensive tweets came to light.

His solicitor, Giles Hayes, said Riley left school at the age of 15 with no 
qualifications and lived an insular life. Of the tweet about Maguire, Hayes 
said: "It's a senseless act at a very sensitive time".

The court heard a report from the Probation Service that said Riley was a 
full-time carer for a 44-year-old woman. "Because of this he has very little 
time for social activity out of the house," it said. Riley regarded Twitter as 
a chance to engage in "social banter" but had no idea of the site's vastness, 
it added.

Hayes asked the court to impose a suspended jail term, saying this would give 
Riley the chance and the support to address his behavioural problems.

But the chairwoman of the bench, Georgina Scannell, said the court had no 
choice but to send the defendant to jail.

"The offensive messages outraged the public," she said. "You had complete 
disregard for the tragic death of Ann Maguire. Besides this, countless other 
vile messages were made by you. The bench finds these were racially and 
religiously aggravated. The offences are so serious that only a period of 
immediate custody can be justified."

Riley had posted more than 4,000 messages on Twitter in two and a half years 
and had more than 500 followers.

A 15-year-old boy, who cannot be identified for legal reasons, has been 
charged with Maguire's murder and is due to stand trial in November.
 