
When you base your business on reputation, the last thing you want is a 
complaint. That’s especially true of management consultancy.

Consultancy is now big business in the UK, growing at around 7 per cent a year 
to become a £6 billion industry.

During the last recession, when firms were shedding staff, many people chose 
to exploit their expertise and go into management consultancy. But while this 
niche has many advantages for the entrepreneur – you can pick and choose 
projects, your time can be turned into money – there are pitfalls, too.

So what happens when you become a victim of your own success and demand 
outstrips supply?

If you take on new staff, can you be sure they will uphold your values and 
provide the same service that you do? There are other issues that arise when 
you are – in effect – your own brand. If you fall sick, or are involved in an 
accident, your income is cut off.


Protecting your consultancy business

Many entrepreneurs are so focused on building their consultancy business and 
providing brilliant service that they don’t stop to think about how they would 
cope with challenges.

“Consultants very often have a set brief to deliver for a job,” explains 
Ciaran Morrissey, from Hiscox, which provides cover to 22,000 management 
consultants. “But what if they don’t deliver on those points, or they miss a 
deadline? This can lead to complaints and even legal action.”

Consultants need to understand their contractual obligations so they can be 
prepared. It’s crucial to take legal advice when drawing up terms – make sure 
you understand the fine print. It’s important not to overpromise and ensure 
goalposts aren’t moved over the course of the contract.

There for you: the power of a business mentor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/hiscox-partner-zone/2016/nov/21/there-for-you-the-power-of-a-business-mentor>
Professional indemnity insurance can help guard against the financial pain of 
missing targets, but it’s vital to nail down goals at the outset and stick to 
them.

“It’s also very important that consultants keep up with all the latest 
developments in their industry,” says Morrissey. “If your advice is out of 
date, that could be a problem.”

Keeping comprehensive records, showing progress and a detailed breakdown of 
the work you have done, is also a must.

It’s worth planning for sickness or injury. What will happen to your business 
if you are unable to do your job? Personal accident cover will provide cash for 
a deputy if something happens to you, but it’s worth thinking in advance about 
who that individual might be.

Dealing with an unhappy customer 

Consultancy, at its core, is about the transfer of knowledge, and sometimes 
customers don’t like what they hear, resulting in a dispute. If there are 
problems with your work, the impact on your business could be substantial; you 
may have to return your fee, defend a claim or pay a settlement if your client 
proves that you have lost them money.

It’s important to have professional indemnity insurance so that these costs 
are covered. But a good insurer will do more than pay out money.

“It should help resolve disputes by getting all parties around the table,” 
Morrissey explains. “Try to get them to agree on what elements would mean that 
a brief has been fulfilled.”

Regardless of the scale of the issue – although a grumble will be treated 
differently to a formal written complaint – it’s important to tackle it head on 
and work towards a resolution. Sometimes the unhappy party just wants to be 
heard and will be satisfied with an explanation or detailed breakdown of 
services rendered.

That said, if the consultant feels that they have met their obligations in 
full, an insurer would back their client. “If our customer doesn’t think 
they’re in the wrong, we’ll defend them all the way to the courts,” Morrissey 
says. “If there’s a complaint, we also pledge to respond within 48 hours.”

Many consultants think that their liability ends once a contract is completed. 
This is not the case: it lasts at least six years after the work is carried 
out, perhaps longer. This is why there are forms of cover that will protect the 
consultant between projects, in case disputes arise.

Building a consultancy business can be hugely rewarding. Your expertise brings 
big gains for clients. Having proper cover and a decent risk-management 
strategy will allow you to focus on doing what you do best – helping people.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Hiscox 
<https://www.hiscox.co.uk/>, sponsor of the Adventures in Business hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/series/adventures-in-business>
 on the Guardian Small Business Network.
 