
Teams: 
City: Given, Richards, Onouha, Dunne, Bridge, Wright-Phillips, Zabaleta, 
Ireland, Elano, Robinho, Caicedo.

AaB: Zaza, Bogelund, Beauchamp, Jakobsen, Kristensen, Augustinussen, Caca, 
Johansson, Enevoldsen, Due, Shelton.

Preamble:
Denmark, land of a statuesque mermaid who keeps losing her head,  a heavy 
metal titan who screeches like the brakes on a banshee's clapped-out jalopy 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G_efgqGySCw&feature=related>, the most lively 
Hells Angels community this side of the 1970s and football teams who've 
developed a strange attraction to Manchester City just when everyone else is 
starting to dislike them. Following Midgetland and FC Copenhagen, tonight 
visitors to Eastlands are AaB, who are only fifth in their domestic league but 
first in the Danish Yellow Pages. Last time they were in Manchester they were 
trampled on – not figuratively, of course, since they drew 2-2 with United – 
but literally, thanks to Wayne Rooney's unfortunate carelessness. City's worst 
enemies this season, meanwhile, have been themselves but slowly they are 
showing signs of gelling and Mark Hughes may just be about to reward his 
employers' patience by presenting them with the Uefa Cup of which, undoubtedly, 
they've always dreamed.

In other news, I've just been watching this 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cULwlnEok1c&feature=related> . Wonderful people.

7:42pm: Yikes! The Danes have trotted out on to the pitch wearing nauseating 
black and yellow gear. And they're not even sponsored by Setanta.

7:44pm: ITV have cut to commercials ... I'd say that means there must have 
been a goal but for the match hasn't started yet.

1 min: We have kick-off, courtesy of the visitors. They hoof it forward and 
Dunne immediately takes possession for City. By the way, where isshe 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MoZ_Lg21b14> now?

2 mins: Robinho rips the Danish defence asunder with a cutting ball to 
Wright-Phillips, but Zaza surges off his line and pounces at the little man's 
feet.

4 mins: A humdrum build-up by AaB is brought to an abrupt end by Richards, who 
stomps past three opponents and to the brink of the Danish box. he then slips 
the ball wide to Wright-Phillips, who spoils the fun bwith some slack control. 
"I suggest that you visit
Christiana 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Copenhagen_entrance_christiania.jpg>
in Copenhagen before you watching your Hawkwind video," toots Dave Elderfield. 
"It's not what it used to be, but then again neither is Robinho."

6 mins: Lovely one-touch interplay by City, with Wright-Phillips the 
orchestrator. After a snappy exchange with Ireland he fed it to Caicedo on the 
edge of the box and the striker's snapshot flew just over.

GOAL! City 1-0 AaB (Caicedo 7')

7 mins: Elano cut in from the left and rolled the ball to the feet of Caicedo, 
who spun powerfully past his marker on the 18-yard line before slotting the 
ball past the advancing keeper.

9 mins: City are in total control and playing with real panache. Their 
movement and quick one- and two-touch passing is bewildering the Danes.

11 mins: A reasonable spell of possession for Aalborg culminates with 
Johansson centering for Enevoldsen, who slips while shooting and sending the 
ball miles wide. "Six yellows in Moscow, seven and a red in Hamburg, one each 
in Paris and Bremen which are still in the first half. What is it in the air 
tonight, is it because tomorrow is Friday the 13th?" spooks Robin Hazlehurst. 
"How many cards did you bet on for this game?" My only wager tonight was on 
Ajax to win at Marseille.

14 mins: City has resumed their probing and only two fine interventions by 
Beauchamp prevented Caicedo from latching on to taunting through-balls.

16 mins: Freekick to Aalborg wide on the left. Due's curls it in and Jakobsenm 
outjumps Zabaleta and Dunne but heads wide. But wait, that's not true! The 
replay shows it was Dunne who got his noggin to it, which explains why Aalborg 
were baying for a corner. They didn't get one.

17 mins: A defensive goof gifts the ball to Robinho, who tries to release 
Caicedo but again the keeper charges off his line to beat the forward to the 
ball.

19 mins: Suddenly we have what is technically known as 'end-to-end stuff'. 
Given has just dived full length to wave at a Johansson shot as it arrowed wide.

21 mins: Robinho is outmuscled in the middle by Johansson. He then finds 
Shelton with a neat ball and the former Blade wriggles his way into the box 
before firing a decent shot at Given, who beats it behind for a corner. 
Spirited play from the Danes.

23 mins: Dunne is caught out by a quick lob over the top but Shelton is 
penalised for an alleged push on the burly Irishman.

26 mins: Christensen clatters into Wright-Phillips to avenge a nutmegging. 
Freekick to City wide on right, in line with the 18-yard line. Elano's delivery 
is decent but Onuoha's header from eight yards isn't.

28 mins: After a vibrant start City were temporarily shaken out of their 
groove by the valiant visitors but they're starting to swagger again. After 
more fluent interplay Ireland supplied the overlapping Richards, who shot 
straight at the keeper.

GOAL!! City 2-0 AaB (Wright-Phillips 29')

29 mins: Wright-Phillips collects the ball on the right, skips past Kristensen 
and then sends an unstoppable swirtler into the top corner from 20 yards!

32 mins: Augustinussen slaps the ball wide from 18 yards, a wonderful chance 
wasted. "Wayne Rooney's 'unfortunate carelessness, eh?" splutters Eopin 
Traynor. "If by that you mean ol' Wayne was 'unfortunate' to only trod on 
Risgaard's chest, not his throat, then yes, that was unfortunate. Or perhaps 
you mean it was a sign of "carelessness" that Risgaard was able to continue 
playing instead of leaving on a stretcher. Oh Wayne, when will you learn to 
finish them off properly? Just because this is an English site doesn't mean 
that English thuggery should be brushed." Eoin, once you've calmed down , why 
don't you readthis magnificent article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2009/jan/09/wayne-rooney-manchester-united>
.

34 mins: Zaza hurtles out of his box to intercept a long ball over the top but 
then plays a defender into trouble. Wright-Phillips nicks the ball and shapes 
up to shoot into the empty goal from 35 yards, but Zaza recovers sufficiently 
to bundle the ball into touch.

36 mins: Ireland scampers through the middle in anticipation of a 
Wright-Phillips through-ball ... but that pass doesn't come, leaving the 
Irishman with nothing to do but throw up his hands in frustration a la all the 
Republic of Ireland fans who'd quite like him to return to international action.

38 mins: Richards, showing rare defensive nous, disposseses Due and hammers 
the ball forward. But Caicedo commits a foul to afford Due the chance to whip 
the ball into the box from a freekick, which he fails to do.

40 mins: A superbly swift City counter-attack reaches Robinho, who teases a 
defender 97 lollipops and then smashes the ball into the keeper's chest from 
six yards!

42 mins: Ireland dazzles Augustinussen in the middle with what some folks call 
a rainbow, but his attempt to release Elano is undermind by an inaccurate pass.

44 mins: "I feel cheated .. I know they've got two goals but I was expectign a 
more exciting and entertaining performance," blubs Jim Beglin on ITV. Ireland 
and Robinho try to give him what he wants but after a a fancy nutmeg by the 
former and a dinky feint and shot from the latter, the ball is deflected out 
for a corner.

45 mins: Robinho foxes Beauchamp with no fewer than six million lollipops on 
the edge of the six-yard box, and the lubberly defender's only response is to 
chop him down. Incredibly, the ref waves play on. It was the most flagrant foul 
you're ever likely to see (or read about on a MBM), but Luxembourg's most 
famous man doesn't agree. And with that, he blows for half-time.

Back soon. In the meantime, how about sending some mails I can use once play 
resumes, eh?

46 mins: City set the second half in motion. "The last (and only) time I saw 
Hawkwind was circa 1974 at Southend Kursaal when they still had that topless 
dancer Stacia, who used to perform with them," drools Paul McKenzie. "That was 
quite a deal for a 14-year old lad at the time. Research on Wikipedia shows 
Lemmy described her as '6 ft 2 with a 52 inch bust' which, in my memory, sounds 
about right." As I said, wonderful people.

48 mins: Ireland dashes down the right to collect a fine flick from Robinho, 
but Augustinussen recovers in time to poke the ball out for a corner. "I dashed 
out of Big Office tonight for this which is, pathetically, probably the biggest 
(in terms of prestige) City game of my lifetime," confesses Will Dean. "Is that 
the saddest thing ever? Anyway, seeing as you nicked our magazine's name, how's 
about plugging my London marathon fund -www.justgiving.com/willdean <> - to 
fellow Blues/MBMers in aid of the NSPCC. Ta!" Come on now, folks, give 
generously.

51 mins: A lull.

53 mins: beautiful move by City. It all started when Aalborg gave it away 
stupidly. Robinho then waltzed towards the box and slipped a sweet ball through 
to Ireland, aided by a crafty dummy by Caicedo. Rather than shoot, Ireland 
trapped the ball and rolled it back to Robinho, whose effort defelcted off a 
defender and out for a corner.

56 mins: Ireland, who is the new Paul Scholes in case you hadn't noticed 
(except that he can tackle), flights a fabulous ball to Wright-Phillips. But a 
defender stretches out a leg to knock it behind for a corner. "I'm watching my 
Blues play from across the pond in New Jersey through the magic of the 
internet," marvels John Lunder. "This year has been frustrating (especially 
with all the stupid Man U fans over here) but if we can make a deep run in the 
Uefa Cup it could make it worth it. A win in the Derby would help as well. Hey, 
a guy can dream."

58 mins: Richards feeds Wright-Phillips, who skins his man but his next touch 
is too heavy and Zaza is able to scurry off his line to stifle the danger.

61 mins: Johansson strides through the middle to initiate a rare Aalborg 
counter-attack ... which peters out as soon as they get into the City half.

63 mins: Caicedo, who has tired in the second half, is replaced by Ched Evans, 
who will certainly have chances to score as City continue seeking the third 
goal that would kill this tie. In fact, they could hit six tonight if they felt 
like it.

65 mins: Elano retreats energetically to win back the ball in his own half. 
Yes, you read that right. You did read that, right?

65 mins: Robinho drives to the by-line and cuts the ball back but it narrowly 
eludes Evans.

67 mins: AaB substitution, for all the good it'll do. Due off, Curth on.

68 mins: City continue to monopolise possession but their tempo has dropped, 
as if they're kinda settling for 2-0. Given their away form, at least in the 
Premier League, that seemsw unwise.

70 mins: Yes, well, City nearly scored again. Ireland was the mastermind of 
the move, adroitly picking out Robinho, who had nipped into the box. Instead of 
shooting when he had only the keeper to beat, however, the Brazilian elected to 
clip it across to Richards, who was offisde.

71 mins: Enevoldsen booked for a late hack on Wright-Phillips.

72 mins: Elano booked for kicking the ball away after Aalborg are awarded a 
freekick.

74 mins: Dreadful miss by Wright-Phillips! After a wonderful touch and pass 
from Elano, the little Englander blasted the ball wide from 16 yards.

76 mins: Enevoldsen pulls off the considerable feat of barging Richards to the 
ground. The impressed ref declines to issue a second yellow card, so his 
manager takes him off the pitch instead. On comes Risgaard in his place.

77 mins: Robinho goes down in the box. The ref looks the other way. Which was 
the right thing to do, because there was no foul, merely a slip.

79 mins: Bridge tickles a teasing ball behind the back of the defence and 
Evans slides in to reach it ... but once again the keeper gets there first.

81 mins: Golly! City came ridiculously close to conceding an away goal there, 
allowing Jakobsen a free header from a corner. Happily for them, he head it 
straight at a defender. But the pressure's not over, for now the Danes have a 
freekick on the edge of the area. This tie should be dead, but a goal here 
would bring it back to life, making the game something King Diamond might sing 
about.

83 mins: We have a delay before the freekick can be taken because Jakobsen 
after being clobbered by Zabaleta. And on comes the stretcher to carry him off 
...

85 mins: The freekick is eventually taken and, truly, it wasn;t worth the 
wait. Risgaard ballooned it over the bar. "A very good attempt," patronises Jim 
Beglin on ITV.

87 mins: City substitution: Wright-Phillips trots off, Etuhu lumbers on.

88 mins: Still no real urgency from City. If they concede early on in the 
second leg they'll regret not having put this shower to sword here.

89 mins: A fine move by Aalborg, let down by Caca's wayward shot from 15 yards 
after a well-cushioned lay-off by Due.

Full-time: City were sparkling at times but they should really have gone for 
the jugular and killed this tie. They were obviously fearful of conceding, and 
the Danes did occasionally look half-decent going forward even if they were 
regularly betrayed by wild shooting or oafish final balls, but the home side 
could still have struck enough to render an away goals irrelevant. Robinho 
hobbled off the pitch after getting a whack in the last seconds ... that's good 
news for Chelsea ahead of the weekends' league meeting.
 