
.

Preamble "The cup really starts at the end of February," said Sir Alex 
Ferguson this week. "That is when the real tests start for us." It is early 
December. What theManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> boss is saying, 
essentially, is that if you care about this match enough to watch it, you're a 
bit of a fool. If you actually paid for a ticket, you might as well have sent 
your cash to the Dignitas Clinic in Switzerland to have it properly euthanised. 
But by simply reading about it in online while doing other important stuff like 
checking your emails and buying Christmas presents on eBay, you escape with 
your dignity intact. If you're lucky, you might also find out whether United 
will win the group, or go through in second place. Also, is Gary Neville very 
old, way too old or just gently distinguished? All these questions, and more, 
will be answered, or ignored, right here...

So here are tonight's teams:
Man Utd: Kuszczak, Neville, Ferdinand, Evans, O'Shea, Nani, 
Gibson, Anderson, Giggs, Rooney, Tevez. Subs: Foster, Park, Vidic, Scholes, 
Rafael Da Silva, Fletcher, Possebon.
Aalborg: Zaza, Bogelund, Olfers, Jakobsen, Pedersen, Curth, Enevoldsen, 
Augustinussen, Risgaard, Due, Saganowski.Subs: 
Kenneth Nielsen, Nomvethe, Caca, Braemer, Sorensen, Kristensen, 
Ronnie Schwartz Nielsen. 
Referee: Laurent Duhamel (France)

3 min GOAL Manchester United 1 Aalborg 0 (Tevez 3) "That's the Manchester 
United we all love," says Dion Dublin as Carlos Tevez thumps in a goal with 
United's first shot, lovely assist by Ryan Giggs

5 min Crikey, well that was quite a start. It could even have come sooner, 
with Karim Zaza in the Aalborg goal going a bit wobbly in the opening minute. 
On that occasion Wayne Rooney obligingly chipped the ball back into the 
keeper's hands

6 min: Tevez totally fluffs a really easy chance from Wayne Rooney's very good 
pull-back. This might not be a night for great dramatic tension.

9 min Jonny Evans slaps a shot high over the bar from 15 yards. Did you know, 
by the way, that the linesman Stéphane Duhamel is the brother of referee 
Laurent Duhamel. What are the odds, eh?

10 min John O'Shea very nearly gives away a penalty, after United's defence is 
caught completely befuddled when Aalborg attempt an actual attack. Thomas 
Augustinussen nicked the ball off O'Shea's toe and went over. If O'Shea's toe 
had actually made contact with him, he'd have had a decent shout

13 min: I'm just wondering whether Ben Foster has actually been dropped. 
Everyone thought he was going to play, but he's only on the bench. Is this the 
same as being dropped, or do you actually have to be in the team for at least 
one game first? If he hasn't, technically, been dropped, how best to describe 
what has happened to him? Any ideas?

15 min: Aalborg are actually doing a bit of attacking. In the latest example 
Marek Saganowski, on loan from Southampton, ran 40 yards before thumping the 
ball optimistically towards the corner flag

18 mins: Now Celtic are beating Villarreal. This would put United even more 
top of the group than they were already. Nani is relaxed enough to perform two 
crowd-pleasing tricks before giving the ball away

23 min: Rooney crosses, Tevez heads wide from close range, though the ball was 
a little high for him. There's something of a make-believe atmosphere about 
this game already

26 mins: A smart one-two between Nani and Giggs and the Portuguese slips a 
shot narrowly wide. Elsewhere a suggestion, from Thom James, that Foster has 
technically been promoted. It's just being paraded in front of the media as 
United's custodian-elect, and then not actually being United's custodian-elect, 
that makes it seem a little harsher

29 min I notice that Sky have suspended their habit of abbreviating team names 
to two letters in their scorebox for tonight's game. While United are, indeed, 
MU, Aalborg are not, sadly, AA but AAL. Perhaps the brains at Sky thought 
viewers might confuse them with a popular shape of battery?

30 min: GOAL Manchester United 1 Aalborg 1 (Jakobsen 30) An equaliser from 
Michael Jakobsen, a Manchester United fan. Just a devilish delivery from a 
right-wing free-kick and a really clever header with the back of his head. Take 
that, überlords of depressing predictability!

35 min: When we come to talk about this game to our grandchildren, this is the 
period that we will tenderly refer to as the Golden Age. With a whistful look 
in our eyes, we will tell our incredulous offspring that, for a few minutes 
after Aalborg's equaliser, United behaved as if they genuinely believed they 
were taking part in a genuine competition. These are glorious minutes, truly 
they are

38 min: Replays of Aalborg's goal show a storming late run into the box from 
Jakobsen that went totally ignored by United's defence, followed by that really 
top class header. A very fine set-piece goal. Meanwhile, Gary Neville heads at 
goal from seven yards following an enterprising run to the back stick in open 
play. It's easily saved, but with all that energy, you'd almost think he'd 
hardly played for a year.

40 min: "Just look at Gary Neville," says Dion Dublin. "His arms are going, 
his mouth is going..." Not to mention the arthritis

42 min: Why are so many Aalborg players wearing gloves? Surely it's way, way 
colder in northern Denmark than it could possibly be in Lancashire? But no! 
According to Google, it was scheduled to be -1C in Manchester tonight, but a 
balmy 1C in Aalborg. Brrrr. Gloves on, lads.

45 min: O'Shea has a shot saved at the very start of stoppage time, before 
Aalborg clear the ball upfield. After a depressingly one-sided start, this has 
been quite a fun half

45+1 min: GOAL Manchester United 1 Aalborg 2 (Curth, 45) Well, wowee. An 
absolute stonker of a Danish wondergoal in stoppage time puts Aalborg a goal up 
at the interval. A deep cross from the left wing and Jeppe Curthy, arriving 
late into the penalty area, heads the ball back across goal and into the far 
corner of Tomasz Kuszczak's goal

Half-time Well maybe wondergoal was overstating matters. You're unlikely to 
see it when your festive copy of Theo Walcott Presents: 101 Best Goals From My 
Playing Days pops up under your Christmas tree in 50 years' time. But it was 
devilishly simple and impeccably finished, as indeed was Aalborg's first. Very, 
very watchable, in short. Astonishingly, the same description could be applied 
to this game in general. What happened to our predicted snoozefest? Am I 
unwell, or am I genuinely looking forward to the second half? Actually, I'm 
unwell. So I'm off to the toilet.

45 min: The second half is under way. Paul Scholes is coming on "which was 
always the plan anyway" according to Fergie, with Ryan Giggs - who was really 
good in the first half - coming off. And Park Ji-Sung is replacing Darron Gibson

47 min: Patrick O'Brien and John Barry both email to suggest that several 
viewers might have confused the initials AA appearing in the top of their 
screen for some kind of coded exhortation to deal with their alcoholic issues. 
AA might also refer to Anaplastic Anaemia, the Automobile Association and a 
form of lava flow associated with Hawaiian-type volcanoes. Elsewhere, Wayne 
Rooney performs a comedy bum-first lunge so as to fall inside the penalty area 
after being nudged by a defender. He doesn't even get a free-kick

51 min: Nani crosses from the right wing and Tevez misses the header. Don't 
ask me to describe how. He kind of runs past the ball, flips his back round a 
bit, and throws his head in five directions at once. He doesn't get anywhere 
near it

52 min: GOAL Manchester United 2 Aalborg 2 (Rooney 52) Anderson's pass, Rooney 
takes it in his stride and wallops it with his big right toe through the 
keeper, who I'll remind you is called Zaza, and into the back of the net

54 min: Curth booked for a late lunge on Tevez down on the left wing. From 
Nani's free-kick, Scholes's miscued header loops up and is tipped over the bar

56 min: A totally stupendous 50-yard pass from Scholes hits Nani on the foot. 
His volleyed cross hits a defender on the head. Good ball Scholesy

58 min: "I think they made a lion angrier," says Dion Dublin of Aalborg's goal 
in first-half stoppage time. United don't really look angry, though. They do, 
however, and for the first time since the first 15 minutes, look quite a lot 
better than their opponents

60 min: Another good attack from United ends when, from Rooney's cross, a 
defender gets in the way of, and you might want to sit down before reading 
this, Gary Neville's attempted scissor-kick

62 min: With Celtic now 2-0 up against Villarreal, United really are under no 
pressure at all to win this game. It does, however, appear to be something 
they'd quite like to do, given the choice. Just a little bit of quality in the 
penalty area letting them down at present, lately Tevez's cross which floated 
behind with Rooney lurking

64 min: Did you know that Aalborg is twinned with Edinburgh? Anyone?

65 min: A very fine challenge from Steve Olfers dispossesses Scholes just as 
the Mancunian midfielder was about to, as Dion Dublin says, pull the trigger

69 min: The ball's starting to get a bit bogged down in midfield. United know 
they don't have to win. Aalborg know they're about to go on holiday (this being 
the last game before their winter break). Both sides might settle for this 
result, by the looks of things

72 min: Rooney chips the ball to the back stick from deep and Gary Neville, 
rushing in from his right-back position, collects it beautifully only to be 
denied a fairytale goal by Zaza

73 min: Another Rooney ball in and Olfers' defensive back-header hits his own 
bar. Aleksandar Mitreski, meanwhile, emails: "Did you know that United have not 
lost at home in theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> since 2007? So there is 
a lot at stake tonight. I read it last night but I think it is 19 games. 
Tonight would be 20th, passing Juve's record of 19. If I am correct, but you 
are paid the big bucks so check it." 1) Meeeowwww. 2) My bucks ain't so big, I 
assure you. 3) But it's 17. I checked it

76 min: While checking Mr Mitreski's factual inaccuracies, Gary Neville was 
taken off and replaced by Rafael. He could have had a hat-trick here. He may be 
unpopular with Scousers, but he's a mighty fine full-back and always has been. 
I might as well say that before he's packed off to the retirement village for 
good

80 min: For all the talk of United's new generation, their best players here 
have been Giggs, Neville and Scholes. And Rooney, I suppose. Still, you get my 
point. Well, kind of point. Half-point.

83 min: Aalborg haven't really tried to mount an attack for half an hour. They 
haven't lost for 11 games, they're about to go on holiday and their manager, 
Allan Kuhn, is about to be replaced by Magnus Pehrsson. A draw would be 
fitting, probably. Pehrsson, fact fans, once played for Bradford City

85 min: Rooney's ball plays in Tevez. He goes wide in a bid to go past the 
keeper but he should have had a shot while the goal was gaping, as Rooney did 
earlier. Instead he ends up too wide and miscues the ball wide

90 min: Three added minutes signalled. No indication that anything fun will 
happen during them, though as I write that Nani blasts a 20-yard shot just over

90+1 min: Co-commentator Dion Dublin eulogises about United's current team, 
comparing their shooting skills to his own. "Their technique is just so much 
better," he surmises. Well, you said it mate

Peeeeeep! It's all over, an honourable draw and everyone's off on holiday with 
a spring in their step. Allan Kuhn leaves his post as manager of Aalborg with a 
12-game unbeaten streak to boast about, his side are off on their winter break, 
and United are group winners and off to play in the World Club Best Team in the 
Whole World Right Now Competition. Smiles all round, then

Postscript Apparently Aalborg's sports director, Lynge Jakobsen, promised to 
fly home naked if they got anything tonight. Which might explain why their 
players didn't look as pleased as might be expected at the end of the game. 
Anna Ebbesen, my source on the ground, says the Danish commentators are going 
absolutely mental. The first 10 minutes and the last 15 were as expected, 
United scoring early and no one really bothering to stop them playing the ball 
around comfortably. Everything in between, though, was a lot of fun. 
Unexpectedly good.

Stop press: Sky are reporting that it's United's 19th unbeaten Champions 
League home game, which would suggest that a) Uefa's own stats department need 
a bit of a rollicking, and b) Aleksandar Mitreski wasn't as wrong as I thought. 
He was still wrong though, which is the important thing.
 