
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 
director David Gill is set to be elected as Fifa vice-president this week, with 
FA chairman Greg Dyke claiming Gill can be part of an “awkward squad”, trying 
to expose any wrongdoing within the controversy-hit organisation.

Gill was initially reluctant to stand for the role, representing Uefa on 
Fifa’s executive committee, buthe was convinced to stand by the FA, as well as 
Uefa president Michel Platini. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/07/david-gill-confirms-fifa-vice-presidency-2015>

With the 79-year-old Blatter tipped to be re-elected for a fifth, four-year 
term in May, the English FA nominated Gill so he could ask tough questions of 
Fifa’s management from within the organisation.

“David will be the sort of person who will do the job as a Fifa executive 
committee member properly,” English FA chairman Greg Dyke said. “He will not be 
afraid of asking appropriate questions. In fact perhapsFifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> needs to have someone from the 
awkward squad asking tough questions.

“He has a strong background in finance so if there are financial questions he 
will know what to ask and what to look for. There is a feeling that there have 
been too many acolytes and not enough people asking difficult questions and 
ensuring that decisions are taken in a transparent, ethical and business-like 
manner.”

Although the home nations are no longer guaranteed a Fifa vice-presidency, as 
the candidate will be chosen by all Uefa members and not by the four UK nations 
alone, Uefa will continue to choose from a list of British candidates. Gill is 
expected to easily beat rival candidate Trefor Lloyd Hughes, the Welsh FA 
president, in the vote at theUefa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa> 
Congress on Tuesday. The winner will replace Jim Boyce of Northern Ireland on 
Fifa’s ruling executive committee in May.

Gill, a former accountant, worked at Manchester United during an unprecedented 
period of success under Sir Alex Ferguson, rising to become the club’s chief 
executive, before stepping down in 2013 when the manager retired. Gill 
currently sits on the board of the FA and the Uefa executive committee. He and 
Ferguson also remain at United as directors..

Since being elected to Uefa’s executive committee in 2013, Gill has maintained 
a low public profile but made an impact at last year’s Fifa congress by calling 
on Blatter to stand aside. Platini was reluctant to challenge Blatter for the 
top job in world football but urged Gill to bid to join him on Fifa’s executive 
committee.

“I aim to use my skills in football around the table and work with my Uefa 
colleagues to have a greater say and influence in how it operates. In terms of 
votes it’s quite an important block,” Gill said.

“In areas like transparency and decision-making, it’s not going to happen 
overnight and it’s arguable whether it will happen unless there is a president 
change. My personal view is that it needs a change at the top to ensure that 
the required changes take place. I’m not naive enough to think I can change 
things overnight.”

If successful, Gill win join the Fifa executive committee after the 29 May 
presidential election. Fifa vice-president Prince Ali bin Al-Hussein of Jordan, 
Dutch football chief Michael van Praag and former Portuguese international Luis 
Figo are challenging Blatter in a secret ballot of Fifa’s 209 member 
associations.
 