
Lord Mandelson today defended Gordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> after damaging revelations 
in today's Observer that his abuse of his staff got so bad it led to a 
reprimand from the head of the civil service, but conceded that the prime 
minister does get furious with those around him.

A new book by the Observer's political commentator Andrew Rawnsley reveals the 
cabinet secretary,Sir Gus O'Donnell, launched his own investigation into 
reports of Brown bullying his staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/feb/21/gordon-brown-abusive-treatment-staff>
.

The claims, including an account of how Brown seized his deputy chief of staff 
by the lapels, have been fiercely denied by Downing Street and the cabinet 
office.

However, the business secretary conceded there was a "passionate" and 
"emotional" side to Brown's character that people didn't see. "He gets angry 
but chiefly with himself," Mandelson said. "He doesn't so much bully people as 
he is very demanding. He's demanding of himself and people around him. He does 
not like taking no for an answer."

Speaking on BBC One's Andrew Marr show, Mandelson said: "Yes there's a degree 
of impatience about the man, but what would you like? Some kind of shrinking 
violet at the helm of the government when we are going through such stormy 
waters?"

Mandelson appeared to admit he had been subjected to angry tirades from Brown. 
Asked if he had ever been hit by Brown, Mandelson said: "History records that 
we had our moments, but I would like to think that I took my medicine like a 
man."

Extracts of the book, which is being serialised by the Observer, detailing a 
series of alleged furious outbursts have again raised questions about the prime 
minister's character.

William Hague, the shadow foreign secretary, said Rawnsley's claims were "part 
of a pattern of allegations about the prime minister's judgment and behaviour".

Speaking to Sky News, Hague said: "I don't think he [Brown] has ever shown 
that he can lead a happy team and a successful team and maybe if there's any 
truth in these allegations that's part of the reason why."

Alan Johnson, the home secretary, said he didn't recognise Rawnsley's 
portrayal of the prime minister. "I have got no knowledge of him effing and 
blinding at officials," he told the BBC's Politics Show. He said he was struck 
by how "calm and softly spoken" Brown remained in so many "fraught and 
pressurised situations."

The book suggests Sir Gus was so concerned at reports he received of Brown's 
anger that he investigated before delivering a "pep talk" to the prime minister 
and a warning to calm down.

A cabinet office spokesman said: "It is categorically not the case that the 
cabinet secretary asked for an investigation of the prime minister's treatment 
of No 10 staff. These assertions have been put to the cabinet secretary, who 
has rejected them."

Mandelson said he believed Sir Gus's version of events. But speaking on Sky 
News, Rawsnley stood by the allegations, which he insisted were "impeccably 
sourced". He said: "I was particularly careful in this area because it's 
obviously a very sensitive area to be sure that this wasn't gossip or hearsay 
or tittle-tattle. The sources were 24-carat. Not third-hand or second-hand 
[but] first-hand sources."

Rawnsley also said he was "bewildered" why Brown choose to deny that he had 
hit anyone, an allegation that was not in the book.

In an interview with Channel 4 News yesterday, Brown said things were 
sometimes said "in the heat of the moment", but added: "I have never hit anyone 
in my life."

The prime minister's official spokesman said: "These malicious allegations are 
totally without foundation and have never been put to No 10."

According to Rawnsley's book – titled The End of the Party and based on 
interviews with "hundreds" of ministers and officials – Sir Gus felt the need 
"to calm down frightened duty clerks, badly-treated phone operators and other 
bruised staff" and tell them not to "take it personally".

Brown, the book claims, turfed a typist out of her seat to take over the 
keyboard, swore at senior aides and "roughly shoved aside" one adviser.

In another incident, the prime minister was said to be so incensed at being 
given unwelcome news that he thumped the back of a protection officer's car 
seat so hard that he flinched, while the aide who delivered the news feared 
Brown "was about to hit him in the face".

The revelations emerged hours after Brown unveiled Labour's election campaign 
at a rally at the University of Warwick. They risk undermining recent efforts 
to portray a softer side of the prime minister, such as his tearful television 
interview with Piers Morgan.
 