
Margot Robbie <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm3053338/> is the most nearly-famous 
almost-star you've never heard of. At only 23 years old, the Australian actor 
has already been directed by Martin Scorsese and Richard Curtis and starred 
opposite Leonardo DiCaprio; a call from Woody Allen can't be far off. Next 
month shebegins filming the caper comedy Focus 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/margot-robbie-join-will-smith-585771>, 
in which she'll star as a pickpocket who falls for a con artist played by Will 
Smith. Consequently, she has a lot to be excited about. So once she starts 
talking about the thrill of getting this callback while she was doing that 
read-through, or interrupting a backpacking holiday in Croatia with her brother 
to travel for 50 hours by plane, train and catamaran to an audition in New 
York, it's best to just to let her finish; it's also highly refreshing to find 
that she has not yet had the ebullience ground out of her by promotional duties.

Near the end of our interview, the studio PR pops her head round the door to 
wrap things up, and I have to confess sheepishly that I will need a little 
longer. We've been talking for 45 minutes and we haven't even got round to 
discussing the film that Robbie has been flown here at great expense to 
promote: Curtis's time-travel romcomAbout Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155249/about-time>. It's not that I 
didn't try. When Robbie mentions her habit of people-watching, I ask how this 
came in useful in About Time. When she tells me that it's unwise to finalise a 
character's backstory in your mind – "The director might say, 'We're gonna make 
it that she had an abortion two years ago,' and you'd be, like, 'Really? I had 
her down as a virgin'" – I ask whether she and Curtis differed at all over her 
About Time character.

But on each occasion, she steers the conversation round to Scorsese's The Wolf 
of Wall Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155767/wolf-of-wall-street>, which she 
recently finished shooting opposite DiCaprio. He plays thedrug-addled 
stockbroker Jordan Belfort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2008/jan/26/weekend7.weekend4>, who 
served time for fraud and money laundering; she is his tough-cookie wife, who 
gets to kick and flail and to scream "You're not taking the fucking children!", 
or variations on that sentiment. About Time, on the other hand, provides her 
with a small, decorative role as the woman of the hero's dreams.

It isn't that she's not proud to be a part of Curtis's film. "You fall in love 
instantly with his characters," she says once we are all Wolfed out. "You want 
everything to go right for these people two minutes after meeting them." She 
has a bright, moonlike face, open and direct, with blond hair scraped back; she 
could pass for Denise Richards's naive kid sister.

She's sparky enough in About Time <https://www.theguardian.com/film/about-time>
, but there isn't very much for her to play. It doesn't surprise me when she 
reveals how her character was described in the script. "It was so intimidating 
to read: 'She steps out of the car and she's the most gorgeous thing he's ever 
seen, she's got these beautiful long legs …' I'm thinking: 'Oh no, my legs 
aren't like that …' You just hope Richard's going to use reaction shots to 
convey all that, so it takes the pressure off me. Seriously, there were two 
whole sentences about how stunningly attractive she is. It was the same with 
Wolf …"

There is a faint air of disbelief in the way she talks about The Wolf of Wall 
Street. She keeps examining it from different angles, as if to confirm that it 
really happened – that she isn't going to wake up and still be starring in 
Neighbours, on which she was a regular for three years. Not that she has any 
shame about that. Why would she? Now thatGuy Pearce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/dec/04/guy-pearce-interview>, Russell 
Crowe, Kylie Minogue andJesse Spencer 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jesse_Spencer> (from House) have all passed 
through, it is practically the Australian equivalent of the Actors Studio.

She landed the role of Donna Freedman 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donna_Freedman>, Ramsay Street's fun-loving 
bisexual in search of her biological father, after cold-calling the show's 
production company for an audition. "That is not the way it's supposed to 
happen," she says, visibly embarrassed. It turns out her agent at the time, who 
advised her to get on the blower, was less than tip-top. "A proper agent does 
the calling for you," she huffs. "I didn't know that." Still, it got her the 
part, and a lot of attention. "Do you know who Slipknot are?" she asks. "Well, 
I was at a Slipknot concert once and I've never had so many people coming up to 
me. These huge burly goths with tattoos, they were all asking me: 'What about 
the baby? What about Susan Kennedy?' I didn't see that coming."

Soap opera actors don't get enough recognition for their technical skill, she 
insists. "It's harder than anyone gives it credit for. A movie shoots six 
months for two hours of film. We shot an episode a day." She lets that sink in, 
but I don't think my mumbled "sheesh" placates her. "There are three cameras, 
booms everywhere, you have to hit your mark perfectly every time. There's no 
room for error: if you screw up, that's tough, it's going on air. And all 
people say is: 'Oh, it's just cheesy melodramatic acting …" Anyway: The Wolf of 
Wall Street, you say?
 Margot Robbie in The Wolf of Wall Street. Photograph: Rex Features/Buzz Foto 
Robbie was still a television actor when Scorsese called: she had been part of 
theensemble cast of Pan Am <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/pan-am>, 
the Mad-Men-in-the-air retro-chic drama that experienced a severe loss of cabin 
pressure around the fourth or fifth episode. That is when the network realised 
that the ratings were plummeting, and tried to pull the show out of its 
nosedive. "They said we had to make it more like Desperate Housewives," she 
says ruefully. "That's not what the show was. There were so many historical 
points we were going to cover."

Still, silver linings and all that: if Pan Am had continued, she wouldn't have 
been free to hurl herself at doors and walls under Scorsese's direction, or to 
tear her vocal cords to shreds howling like a banshee at DiCaprio for weeks on 
end. If you want a measure of how gruelling the production was, Robbie has one 
at the ready: "The most relaxing point was when we had to stop shooting for 10 
days because the hurricane hit New York. That was my vacation. No power or 
water. All you could do was sit there and chill." As taxing as the film was, 
she wouldn't have had it any other way. "That's why I love this job. I love 
getting drawn into it. And most of the time I'm doing my best work when I'm in 
that vulnerable state."

Keeping up with Scorsese and DiCaprio, who had already made four films 
together, was possibly the biggest challenge. "They're telepathic," she says. 
"You'd be sitting there discussing a scene and they'll be like, 'Do you think 
…?' 'Hmm.' 'But what about the …?' 'Yeah.' I'm going: 'Hello? Did I miss 
something? Are we changing anything? I have no idea what we're changing.' 
Honestly, I just put all my energy into keeping up with them because they are 
both powerhouses in their own way; if you don't keep up you get left behind. 
They just won't cut to you and your part will get smaller and smaller." I give 
another "sheesh", but I really mean it this time.

It is around this point that the door creaks open and Richard Curtis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/richard-curtis> lopes in unexpectedly, 
snowy-haired and pink-faced in a comfortable jersey. As the PR beckons me out 
to allow actor and director some privacy to shoot the breeze about the previous 
evening's premiere, I find myself hoping for Curtis's sake that their 
conversation doesn't swing round too quickly to The Wolf of Wall Street. Let 
the film-maker enjoy his moment. It'll be Margot Robbie's time soon enough.

• About Time is released on 4 September; The Wolf of Wall Street opens in the 
UK next January.
 