
Margaret Tyzack, who has died aged 79, was one of Britain's greatest and most 
popular actors, working on stage, television and film for more than half a 
century. Sometimes described as being in the mould of Edith Evans and Flora 
Robson, she will be remembered particularly for performances in the golden age 
ofBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> TV drama – Winifred in The 
Forsyte Saga (1967), Antonia in I, Claudius (1976) – as well as for stage 
performances such as Martha in the National Theatre's revival of Edward Albee's 
Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf (1981), for which she won an Olivier award for 
best actress, and Lottie with Maggie Smith in Lettice and Lovage (1987 and 
1990), which earned her both Tony and Variety Club stage actress of the year 
awards. In 2008, well into her 70s, she scored perhaps one of her finest 
triumphs on stage as the wily, wittily eccentric Mrs St Maugham in Michael 
Grandage's outstanding revival of Enid Bagnold's The Chalk Garden at the Donmar 
with Penelope Wilton.

With her open face, broad eyes and generous mouth, there was perhaps always 
something a little melancholic about her – even pessimistic, a trait she 
readily admitted to – that found her playing more "mature" roles than her 
actual years. She once confessed: "I've always played older than myself." It 
was an asset that served her richly.

Tyzack considered herself first and foremost a character actor, asserting that 
she "never wanted to be a star". Immensely versatile, unassuming, modest and 
largely unrecognisable offstage, she often boasted that she could go shopping 
without being spotted, and lived quietly with her mathematician husband, Alan 
Stephenson, in Blackheath, south-east London. She could play kind, benign, a 
pillar of the empire (such as Lady Bruton in Marleen Gorris's 1997 film of 
Virginia Woolf's Mrs Dalloway) or in the latter years of her career, a 
show-stealing, fur-clad battleaxe in His Girl Friday, John Guare's stage 
adaptation of Ben Hecht and Charles MacArthur's The Front Page (NationalTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, 2003).

While there was something endearingly naive about her role as besotted 
Winifred, and comically understated as the reactionary matriarch in Mrs 
Dalloway, her depiction of Martha displayed a ferocity previously unrevealed in 
earlier roles that tended towards either the respectable, down to earth, or 
emotionally obsessive, sad or caring. In her later career, she seemed to 
acquire even greater force and magnetism with a trio of superb roles in Auntie 
and Me at Wyndham's (2003), opposite Alan Davies, Southwark Fair at the 
National (2006) and The Chalk Garden.

Tyzack was born in Essex, brought up in Plaistow, east London, daughter of a 
Tate & Lyle foreman, and educated at St Angela's Ursuline convent in Forest 
Gate. She once said she had become an actor by chance. "Really, I'm a refugee 
from the typing pool. That would have been the alternative. Or maybe selling 
something in Harrods." She once mused on becoming a nurse. "A fortune teller," 
she noted, "used to tell me I had healing in my hands."

She was saved by a "wonderful drama teacher" who came to her school and took 
an interest in her. She went on to train at Rada, where she won a prize for 
comedy – forgoing her first choice, speech training, through lack of the 
required academic qualifications. She then went into repertory in Chesterfield, 
Derbyshire, where she made her first stage appearance, as a bystander in Shaw's 
Pygmalion in 1951. Further work followed at the Royal Court and Nottingham 
Playhouse.

In 1969 she won her first acting award, a Bafta for her role as Queen Anne in 
the BBC's The First Churchills. Two years later she took over from Eileen 
Atkins as Elizabeth I in Robert Bolt's Vivat! Vivat Regina! at the Piccadilly. 
The following year, with the Royal Shakespeare Company, she appeared as 
Volumnia in Coriolanus, Portia in Julius Caesar and Tamora in Titus Andronicus. 
As Volumnia, she was towering, a terrifying tigress fighting for her son's life 
but also reducing Ian Hogg's athletic warrior general to shuddering, childhood 
impotence.

Tyzack was in the US in 1971, winning another award for her performance in the 
title role of a television version of Balzac's Cousin Bette. Then in 1976 came 
the landmark TV drama I, Claudius, followed by three years at Stratford, 
Ontario, where she took on roles as Mrs Alving in Ibsen's Ghosts, Queen 
Margaret in Richard III and the Countess in All's Well That Ends Well.

If much of the early 1980s saw her exploiting her TV range, she also came even 
more into her own on stage. In 1983 she received a Tony nomination for her 
reprised role as the Countess in Trevor Nunn's RSC production of All's Well 
That Ends Well when it visited Broadway, and two years later was again picked 
out by New York'sDrama <https://www.theguardian.com/film/drama> Desk critics 
for her performance as Rose, Viv's mother, in Tom and Viv, Michael Hastings's 
1984 play about the tortured marriage between TS Eliot and Vivienne Haigh-Wood, 
when it travelled to Broadway.

Some of Tyzack's best work, however, was still to come. In 1987, she starred 
alongside Maggie Smith in Peter Shaffer's quirky two-hander, Lettice and 
Lovage, a strange, whimsical tale of two women, one a fantasist, the other, 
Tyzack, a strict traditionalist, who are at first enemies, but forge an odd 
kind of friendship. With her dry humour, Tyzack proved the perfect foil to 
Smith's high camp. The play ran for two years in London before moving to 
Broadway, where Tyzack received another Tony. Her partnership with Smith was 
revived in 1993 when she played Miss Prism to Smith's Lady Bracknell in The 
Importance of Being Earnest at the Aldwych, a characterisation marked by its 
originality. For once Prism was no fusty spinster but, in Tyzack's hands, an 
attractive and clever woman.

Other major roles at that time included the older sister to Felicity Kendal's 
adventure-seeking Fiona, reminiscing about her younger sister's Indian 
exploits, in Tom Stoppard's Indian Ink at the Aldwych in 1995, and an imperious 
Lady Monchensey in Adrian Noble's much admired revival of TS Eliot's The Family 
Reunion, at the RSC (2000), where one critic described her face as "nothing 
less than a tragic mask when Harry, her pride and joy, relates his 
'unspeakable' sorrow". In 1993, she played Sybil Birling in Stephen Daldry's 
mould-breaking revival of JB Priestley's An Inspector Calls at the Aldwych, and 
in 1996, scored one of her biggest successes in Alan Bennett's Soldiering On 
(Chichester Festival Theatre, then at the Comedy Theatre in the West End). 
Playing Muriel, she conveyed the infinite distress of a woman whose lifetime 
code of denial was gradually being stripped away.

As the almost mute aunt to Alan Davies's garrulous nephew in Auntie and Me, 
she was required only to lie in bed, but still managed to convey a wealth of 
meanings, switching between beatific smiles and nods. In between times, her TV 
and film work continued to flourish. Two particularly heavy years, 1980 and 
1981, saw her appear in seven different television productions, including 
Paulina in Jane Howell's adaptation of A Winter's Tale.

In 1987, she appeared as Madame Lambert in Stephen Frears's film of the 
ill-fated relationship between Joe Orton and Kenneth Halliwell, in Prick Up 
Your Ears. She was also Miss Helen Seymour in Paramount's television series The 
Young Indiana Jones Chronicles, during the 1990s. Other television series in 
which she appeared included Miss Marple, Thacker, the dramatisation of Our 
Mutual Friend, Dalziel & Pascoe and Midsomer Murders. In 2005 she was the 
narrator's grandmother in Radio 4's all-star cast adaptation of Proust's In 
Search of Lost Time.

Film appearances included The Whisperers (1967), two films for Stanley Kubrick 
– as Elena in 2001: Space Odyssey (1968) and a conspirator in A Clockwork 
Orange (1971) – Bright Young Things (2003), directed by Stephen Fry, and 
Richard Claus's The Thief Lord (2005).

One lament, expressed early on in her career, was that because of the 
respectable parts she played, she never seemed to inspire the kind of salacious 
fan mail some of her peers received, but, she added, prophetically: "If my 
health and strength keep up, I shall go on until I'm fairly aged." She went on 
to do precisely that, her last London stage appearance being as nurse to Helen 
Mirren's Phèdre at the National in 2009, and her last anywhere as Mrs Higgins 
in My Fair Lady at the Théâtre du Chatelet, Paris, last Christmas. Illness 
compelled her to withdraw from a role in the television soapEastEnders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/eastenders> in April.

In 1970 she was appointed OBE, and in 2010 CBE. She is survived by Alan and 
her son Matthew.

• Margaret Maud Tyzack, actor, born 9 September 1931; died 25 June 2011

•  This article was amended on 28 June 2011. The original said that Margaret 
Tyzack's last stage appearance was as nurse to Helen Mirren's Phèdre at the 
National in 2009. This has been corrected.
 