
Sometimes it was hard to listen, sometimes it was impossible not to laugh, and 
by the time Marieke Vervoort was done, everyone inside the press room at the 
Aquatics Centre had a different perspective on life after spending an hour 
contemplating what it means to die. It was one of the rawest press conferences 
that anyone will ever attend. It was also one of the most enriching.

Paralympians like me are inspirational – and there’s nothing wrong with that | 
Elizabeth Wright
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/09/inspiration-porn-disabled-paralympian-inspire-as-swimmer-athlete>
That was how Vervoort, who wanted to set the record straight following reports 
that she was planning to kill herself after theParalympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics>, wanted it. The Belgian 
wheelchair athlete showed her captive audience her silver medal from Saturday’s 
T52 400m and revealed the motto that keeps her going. “Believe you can!” she 
shouted. “Yes, you can!”

Vervoort’s race on Saturday was dominated by the chilling possibility that she 
might be gone for ever in a fortnight. However, while the 37-year-old signed 
euthanasia papers in 2008 because of the relentless pain of living with an 
incurable and degenerative spinal condition, she has no plans to say goodbye 
yet.

She wants to educate the world about euthanasia, which is legal in Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/belgium>.

 “It is really difficult to get those papers,” Vervoort said. “You have to see 
different doctors for them to see that you have a progressive disease or a 
mental disease. You need three different signatures from doctors and to talk 
with a psychiatrist to see if it is really what you want.”

Vervoort, who was 15 when she was diagnosed with a rare progressive muscle 
condition that resulted in paraplegia, will have to seek further approval from 
doctors when she decides that the pain is too much. She explained that her 
papers gave her hope and control.

“I am more busy with Buddhism and feeling Zen,” she said. “When I didn’t have 
those papers, I would have committed suicide. I hope other countries like 
Brazil can talk about it. It makes people live longer. It doesn’t mean that 
when people sign the papers, they have to die two weeks later. I signed my 
papers in 2008. Look now, 2016 and I won the silver medal.”

Vervoort, who kept smiling, disagreed with the suggestion that assisted dying 
was dangerous for disabled people. “I have a progressive disease,” she said. 
“Every year, it is worse. Every time, I give things away. If you see me years 
ago, I could draw beautiful art. Now it is impossible. I see 20%. What’s the 
next thing coming? I am really scared.”

There are times when she cannot eat because of her suffering. The cold winters 
in Belgium are bad for Vervoort. She loves training in the warmth of Lanzarote 
and wants to stay there.

“There was a woman who was used to staying with palliative patients,” she 
said. “She lost consciousness because she couldn’t watch me suffering. I feel 
good now. In half an hour, it can be that I am suffering a lot.”

Vervoort has a bucket list. She wants to go skydiving, fly in an F16 jet, open 
a museum and compete in a rally race.

“Now my fear of death is gone,” she said. “Assisted death is something like 
they operate on you, you go to sleep and never wake. It feels like it will be 
peaceful. I don’t want to suffer when I die.”

This is Vervoort’s final Paralympics. She cried during the opening ceremony 
and said that she would push her arms out of her body when she defended her T52 
100m title this Saturday.

“Money means nothing to me,” Vervoort said. “But I am a rich person. I want 
people to remember me as the lady who is also laughing. And when I am 
suffering, that I am still looking at the good things.”
 