
Recently, my 13-year-old daughter was asked by a teacher to imagine the advice 
that an 18-year-old her would give to her current self. She sighed and said, 
“What a bloody waste of time,” before producing a fantastic list that could, if 
put into practice, help her to get out of certain stuck-in-a-rut situations. 

In this, my penultimate column, I want to talk about things I have learned in 
the past couple of years. My list reminds me of the things I need to remember 
in order to stay relatively sane.

• It doesn’t really matter what addiction is called. A disease, illness, weak 
will or choice? Opinion hasn’t altered how I have lived with somebody else’s 
alcoholism. Naming can be useful if you need help, but it shouldn’t define a 
person. I don’t want to be known as “the woman married to the alcoholic” and my 
husband doesn’t want to be known simply as “the alcoholic”.

• People only change if they want to. I am powerless over my husband’s 
drinking. Every time I try to control him, I ask myself this: have I ever 
changed my behaviour simply because he’s asked me to? All the tactics – from 
tipping booze down the sink, to pointing him in the direction of rehab – have 
been a waste of energy. It’s a shame that Sting had to write these lyrics, but 
they are true: “If you love somebody, set them free.”

• Look at yourself before you criticise others. Most people are hypocrites, 
but that’s OK. I recognise that when I accuse my husband of being a hideous, 
grumpy old git, I can behave – at times – like a hideous, grumpy old git.

• Live in the present and stop regretting what once was but will probably 
never be again. Gone are the days when my husband and I were young, drunk and 
rubbish at adult life (in a fun way). This sometimes makes me sad and 
sentimental. But then life is full of much sadder, harsher realities for many 
people.

• If you’re finding life hard, get help. When I realised I couldn’t cope with 
my husband’s alcoholism, I went toAl-Anon <http://www.al-anonuk.org.uk/>. I 
almost talked myself out of a first meeting, fearing cold church halls, 
lukewarm tea, and the mention of God. But now I draw strength from the support 
I’ve received and the people I’ve met.

• Most people have some sort of addiction – active or dormant. I am addicted 
to lots of things: food, relationships, the lives of others as seen through 
Twitter. Recognise your weaknesses and try to talk about them with friends.

• Compare and be forever miserable.

• Avoid so-called-friends who, when they listen to you, say “Me too” all the 
time. These people will not make you feel better.

• Remember, children are resilient, but arguing in front of them 
regularly, staying in a loveless or bad relationship for the sake of them, or 
trying to keep anything that is painful a secret – means they’ll inevitably pay 
for it later.

• Progress not perfection. How long did I struggle with trying to live life 
the other way around?

• Make your anger productive. If not, it turns into resentment, and resentment 
is bad for your looks, and your health.

• Be brave about the small things: open your bank statements, call the doctor, 
face the people you’ve pissed off. Running away will not simply make the 
problem disappear.

• Demanding absolute trust from a recovering alcoholic will only make you feel 
disappointed and tired. Besides, can anyone (including yourself) be trusted all 
of the time?

• You don’t have to always be all right. People who are always all right are 
usually quite insane.

• You can change your mind. I said I’d never get back with my husband while he 
was still drinking, but now we’re together again despite the fact that he 
sometimes drinks. This is why grand ultimatums, unless you mean them, are 
pointless.

• Sex, a walk, a long bath, chips, daytime naps, a favourite book, dancing, 
the cinema. Keep revisiting the things you enjoy. Maintain a level of self-care 
and kindness when life is going well and you’ll feel stronger when times are 
harder.

• Too many aphorisms kill the message. I realise that this is starting to read 
like an inspirational greeting card, so I’ll stop.
 