
My parents' number shows on the screen and I put the phone to my ear. "I've 
been thinking about you," I say. "Hi, darling," my father says. "Oh, I thought 
it was Mum," I say awkwardly, aware that I don't want to sound disappointed. I 
do think about my father, but we rarely speak on the phone.

There would usually be a specific reason: "What are we going to do about your 
lazy brother?" or "Do you think your mother needs a new handbag? I've seen a 
beautiful one in the sales." But today, as the conversation comes to an end 
with no particular point having been reached at all – it seems that he just 
wanted a chat. Which is surprising, but also lovely.

To call our relationship complicated would be an understatement. He went back 
and forth and in and out of his marriage to my mother during my childhood, and 
by my teens I harboured potent hate and anger towards him. I was really rude – 
vile, in fact – because vitriol was the only way I knew how to express any sort 
of emotion. "I wouldn't mind if he died," I told my friend one night when we 
were about 15. "You would," she kept saying. "Oh no I wouldn't," I replied, 
like Punch to Judy. But now, I keep having dreams that he is dying and I wake 
up almost in tears.

This is because in the past couple of years I have learned to really like him. 
Until recently, I never thought I could feel real love for him, even. But now I 
do: intense love and forgiveness and empathy. It perhaps helps that I am 
sifting through my own problems, and I can see that life is not so cut and 
dried, adults not so far removed from the damaged children they might once have 
been.

I'm living with a kind, clever and loving recovering alcoholic. But my 
father's father was a handsome, explosive, misogynistic drunk. My father's 
mother was trying to raise four children on her own during years of chaos 
caused by her husband's alcoholism. After she left the marriage, she was on her 
own: her parents had disowned her for marrying below her class and her sister 
was a fall-down drunk who died from the disease. My father and his siblings 
went into care for a time, and although he doesn't disclose much about his 
childhood, it is clear that it was tough for them all.

The love I have for my father now – and his commitment to having always cared 
for me, however imperfect at times – is an edifying reminder that feelings 
change, and so have we.

Later, I tell R about my father calling. "Is that strange?" he says. He speaks 
to his dad on the phone all the time. "Anyway, have you told him or your mum 
yet?"

The answer is no. We are back together, sleeping in the same bed again, R's 
clothes already taking on the familiar sandalwood smell of our old chest of 
drawers. Life all looks how it used to, but it feels distinctly different, 
distinctly better. And I'm too scared to say anything to my parents.

Thinking always gets in the way of doing. I am a less grandiose, less 
father-obsessed, but equally indecisive female version of Hamlet. I look at a 
wall in my house and think, that needs to be painted; and the niggling desire 
to do something gets bigger and more pressing as time passes and I add 
qualifiers such as really and desperately and seriously to the words "needs to 
be painted" in a vague attempt to spur me into some sort of action.

And because I've thought too much about the hassle of it all, I do nothing.

Finding the right moment to tell my parents that R and I are back together is 
something I've been mulling over for days. The way in which I can so frequently 
feel like a child – despite being an adult – tells me something about how I 
interact with the world. I love talking about things when they are new and 
untarnished, but I don't know how to deal with the more oblique stages that 
can't be simply described as fantastic or catastrophic.

But the children and I are going to stay with my parents in a couple of weeks, 
so it seems crucial that I call them. Our elder son seems eager to share the 
fact that his parents are back together. When we told him, it made him smile 
beatifically. "So you'll be sleeping in the same bed as Mummy now, every 
night?" he asked R. What we shared was so much more pleasing than when we had 
to tell the children – only a few short months ago – that we were separating. 
My son's joyous reaction has broken my heart all over again – if it is at all 
possible to have your heart broken in a good way.
 