
"Well that's good," my mother says when I tell her over the phone that R and I 
are back together. I ask her to pass the news on to my father because one 
slightly awkward conversation is enough for a morning.

We say goodbye and I feel an immense sense of relief – the type I get when 
I've let go of something big and can breathe easily again because the phase of 
"telling everybody that needs to know what's going on" is over.

Now I'm trying for "good enough" in all areas of life. Yes, the catastrophic, 
brilliant or intensely dull phases will still occur, but the good enough will 
hopefully bring everything back into balance when times are erratic. Often, 
helpful advice I've had from others takes more than a decade to sink in.

Years ago, I chatted to my lovely, now-retired GP, during an appointment for 
eczema that had appeared on my face. "Do you find being a mother stressful?" he 
asked, examining my skin. "No! Not at all!" I replied, through gritted, 
euphoric teeth.

But looking back, I was as tight as a clenched fist. I wanted everything to be 
fabulous. I wanted more than anything to be an excellent mother. The doctor was 
kind and could probably sense my neurosis by the fact that I had brought 
home-baked mini-scones in a Tupperware box for my daughter's snack. He wrote me 
a prescription for some cream and as I left he said, "Aim for good enough in 
life. Everything else is a waste of energy."

I get that now. It means dressing when I need to go out, making sure the 
children do their teeth, even if, in a perfunctory manner, that means they miss 
the back ones occasionally. It means checking on my friends every now and then 
and not always trying to bring the conversation back to me. It means, in all, 
aiming for good enough, rather than good, and I hope it will be something I can 
remember now that R and I are back together.

We've told our friends. Initially I imagined they'd think I was crazy because 
I asked R to come home. But now, I wonder if they think we were both bonkers 
for breaking up in the first place – what with all the kerfuffle of moving 
furniture and having to tell everyone we'd separated. If R and I ever split 
again, our relationship – albeit the pleb version – would be in the same 
category as the "is it on/is it off?" marriage between Elizabeth Taylor and 
Richard Burton.

The separation was important for me, though. I didn't feel much love or 
empathy for R a few months ago, and I can't say how he felt about me at all 
because his thoughts were so pickled in booze. I needed, therefore, to take 
responsibility for my own sense of welfare.

Now he's back, R has no need to people-please, self-flagellate or hand out 
empty promises because I'm backing off, refraining from handing out any threats 
or ultimatums because they never worked and only made him feel like a child, 
and made a martyr out of me. We're certainly both happier for it. We haven't 
talked much about the drink recently, which is refreshing because drink – and 
my compulsion to talk about it – has dominated our lives for years and is 
becoming rather dull. We've done plenty of self-analysis in therapy and have to 
get on with actually being together. "The onus is on me to stay sober now, and 
that's both scary and liberating," R said recently.

Our daughter is reticent about R being back in the house; angry too, and 
that's totally understandable. She's lived through much of the chaos that has 
arisen from my peripatetic relationships (she is estranged from her birth 
father, and that fact looms large in her mind sometimes; a father who is alive, 
but whom she never sees because his behaviour is unpredictable).

"Why did you have to get married again and have more children?" she often asks 
me, because she can picture an alternative life, just me and her, wealthier, 
with a tidy hallway, better holidays and no one else to disturb the peace. I 
can very much relate to this. As a teen I used to look at my mother, children 
at her feet, and think, "Why did you allow yourself to get pregnant so many 
times? It could just be us two if you'd only used contraception."

The idea of the only child was something I was envious of, the entry to a 
flawless adult life unsullied by imperfection and mess. But I'm very glad of my 
siblings now – which makes me think that the things that once seemed bad, have 
in fact turned out all right.
 