
Whoever thought I'd find solace in a television programme about God? OK, so 
Rev is not strictly a show about religion, but it manages to connect with me on 
all sorts of levels: tricky relationships, addiction, money problems and 
child-rearing are a neat summation of my life at the moment.

A recent episode saw Adam, the inner-city vicar, commit a laughably inept act 
of adultery – a kiss and grope with local headmistress Ellie. In the following 
episode, he is spooked when he arrives home to find his wife, Alex, drinking 
wine with Ellie.

Alex smells a rat because of his odd behaviour and presses him until he 
confesses. She is upset and tells him to shove off, so he ends up sharing a 
hostel room with cheerful community drunk and churchgoer Colin.

Ha, I thought! Of course, Adam is a man of God, so the audience expect his 
honesty to be whole-hearted, his feelings of wretchedness to be played out in 
the programme with suitable expressions of remorse and regret, until which time 
Alex can forgive him.

It made me think of R in the same situation. (I do this probably a bit more 
regularly than is healthy – swap characters in film or television shows for 
people I know, or myself) and think, would I say that? Would he behave like 
that? In this scenario, R and I would behave very differently.

I would grill him in the same way Alex grilled Adam, at first. "Spit it out!" 
I would say, and R would reply, "What do you mean?" and I would repeat my 
demand, and he would get more and more irate and say, "Nothing has happened, 
you're going mad," and I would say, "I know you're hiding something from me" 
and storm off to bed, flat with the disappointment that I hadn't gleaned any 
information from him.

I would feel uneasy about the future of our relationship and R would be full 
of loathing for me for continuing my line of questioning, and hate for himself 
at not being able to tell the truth.

When quizzed, I always spill the beans because I'm a useless liar and 
somewhere in my semi-religious primary school education I believed that God 
made my teeth wonky because I once lied about stealing my friend's T'Pau 
cassette album. She asked me if I'd taken it and I said no, despite having slid 
it into my Walkman when she'd gone to the loo.

There is, of course, a big difference between withholding information (ie not 
telling somebody something if not asked) and telling an out and out lie in 
reply to a question. I sometimes do the former, but I'd really struggle to go 
through with the latter now.

R is incapable of telling the truth about things he finds painful. He's 
admitted as much, which is, ironically, telling the truth for once. In a sense, 
he's being thoughtful because he doesn't want to inflict the pain that he feels 
from the truth on to others. And although I'm convinced I've sussed out R's 
lying tics – the manic stroking of his chin, his eyes not meeting mine, the 
irresolute anger at my innocuous questions – it doesn't help to alleviate my 
feelings of frustration.

So where does this leave us? R never asks me much about anything personal, and 
this makes him wonder why I care so much about things he sees as the small, 
irrelevant truths I can obsess about. But I'm intrinsically nosey and I can't 
really change that.

I did for a while fantasise recently that I was married to Rev. Such an honest 
partner would be a novelty. But then I'm living with a man I love and a choice 
that I made, faced with uncertainties I was aware of when I made my decision: 
that R may or may not be drinking (that's again something I'll never be sure 
about) and that he may or may not be telling the truth about something.

Trying to sift the truth from the lies is exhausting. And sometimes I cry at 
the futility of it all because a lie built on a lie becomes a very complex, 
messy thing indeed. So I'm trying – but not always succeeding – to choose to 
trust. I remember very distinctly somebody saying, "Trust is a choice. That's 
all."

And if I have an inkling that something is a lie, I'm trying hard to resist 
searching for the truth because if something needs to be uncovered, it will 
eventually come out. The fact is, when R wants to hide something, the battle 
that commences when I try to dig as frantically as he tries to cover up makes 
fools of us both.
 