
Theatre director Peter Sellars, in his dramatic response to Kapoor's 
sculpture, chooses a text by Antonin Artaud: For an End to the Judgment of God. 
Artaud's own techniques - best encapsulated in his so-called Theatre of Cruelty 
- were extreme and politically motivated. Here, Sellars explains his own 
motivation.

Why did you choose Antonin Artaud's text? In a certain stratum of the art 
world it is very difficult for political content to be acknowledged. Few have 
responded to Marsyas politically, but this sculpture, about a person skinned 
alive, make it a Guernica for the 21st century: three gigantic mouths are 
screaming from the flayed skin in a great howl of pain. Which is why I wanted 
the voice of Artaud, that voice coming from a man who spent years in asylums. 
His voice is at that extreme pitch. I wanted that voice to echo through the 
sculpture.

What made you stage this as a Pentagon press conference? Artaud's piece was 
made in response to the climate of 1930s Germany. It asked: why are the German 
people silent? So I ask: why are the American people silent now?

Is this where your ideas and Artaud's meet?
 We are surrounded by spindoctoring and propaganda. The purpose of my art is 
to reach more deeply and challenge the public discourse. Artaud's work was so 
repellent: its terror plunging you into an area you don't know. It's one of the 
all-time difficult pieces and these times call for something difficult, not the 
dumbed-down, predigested works we are being fed.

Artaud is famous for his methods of eclipsing the distance between art and 
life. How do you aim to do that?
 This piece meets with uncanny accuracy policies coming from the Pentagon at 
this moment.

Artaud believed that theatre should not merely criticise or politicise, but 
revolutionise. What can the people do?
 In America we are living through one of the darkest periods in our history. 
We are seeing an erosion of principles that democracies are based on. In the 
last 10 months we have seen serious threats to democracy and the world, not 
from al-Qaida but from our own government. So we are all asking ourselves: how 
do we get the government to hear us?

June Jordan's poem Kissing God Goodbye comes at the end of the performance. 
Why?
 Jordan wrote it as a response to anti-abortionists shooting workers at an 
abortion clinic in Boston "in the name of God". She asks: which God gave you 
the right to shoot someone? She takes a set of ideological questions and brings 
them home with the refreshing power of a feminist voice. After Artaud's 
ravings, the use of the poem is deliberate. Jordan's words are about the hope 
of a new politics.

 Also presented as a double bill LamenTate on Feb 7 & 8.
· For an End to the Judgment of God
 09.02.03 & 11.02.03
 Tate Modern
 