
The thing you have to remember is that Alf Ramsey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alf-ramsey> and I came from the same 
place. We were both cockneys. The other thing is that Alf tended to speak in a 
very poncey plum-in-the-mouth way. It was all "Oh hello Rodney and how are 
you?". To me it was all complete bollocks. The last time I was picked by him 
for England we had a team talk before the game and Alf told me we all had to 
work harder. "Rodney you in particular," he said in his accent. Then he said: 
"if you don't work hard I'm going to pull you off at half time." And I said: 
"Christ, at Man City all we get is a cup of tea and an orange."

Nobody laughed. And not only that, but it was the last time I ever got picked. 
There was a direct correlation between that sarcastic remark and me not playing 
again. But to be fair to Alf I also hadn't played well forEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england>. That's not an excuse or a 
reason; it's just an explanation.

Still, I had a good run: I think Stan Bowles only played twice. People like 
Charlie George and Tony Currie only got a couple of games. But I don't blame 
Alf Ramsey; I blame myself.

All that stuff about maverick players, it was the culture of British football 
at the time and I don't regret for one minute my attitude towards football. I'm 
not speaking for any other player but I was born a free spirit and I played the 
game the same way. You either loved it or you hated it. I make no excuses for 
that and I wouldn't change a thing. Did that contribute to me to only getting 
nine caps? Probably.

English football has always been scared to do the outrageous. I think you 
could name on one hand people like Paul Gascoigne, Rodney Marsh, Matt Le 
Tissier, Peter Osgood of that ilk who have been given a chance. The average 
England player has a great engine, hard-working. You could argue that Wayne 
Rooney could be that Maverick-type player and, probably, the big difference is 
that Wayne Rooney runs himself into the ground for the team, and I never did 
that, I always felt there were other players to do that. One of the biggest 
compliments paid to me was in Alfredo di Stéfano's book where he says that 
Rodney Marsh was the most gifted footballer outside of Brazil. That made me 
feel good. I played against his Valencia team twice and we fucking murdered 
them.

But you couldn't have a team of Rodney Marshes. You'd never get the ball. I 
would hold my hand up and say that I was a luxury player and I make no bones 
about that. But I would argue the point that my generation of player 
underachieved. Why players like Bowles and George didn't get more caps you'd 
have to ask Ramsey. But I would say one thing: If you count the caps of Frank 
Worthington, Bowles, Tony Currie, Peter Osgood, Rodney Marsh and Alan Hudson, 
Carlton Palmer has got more caps than all those players combined. I think that 
tells you something. During Graham Taylor's time England had a midfield with 
Andy Sinton, David Batty, Carlton Palmer and Geoff Thomas. How the fuck are you 
going to win a World Cup with a team like that?

• Rodney Marsh's website can be found at rodneymarsh.net
 