
From the air, the Museum aan de Stroom in Antwerp looks like a stack of red 
Lego bricks. Large, expensive Lego bricks, dropped by some tired giant child 
and stuck together with what could conceivably be great swathes of Sellotape. 
The city's newest museum, designed by the Dutch architects Willem Jan 
Neutelings and Michiel Riedijk opened this month and looks more solid but no 
less fanciful from the ground. The Sellotape is in fact wide panels of 
undulating glass separating 10 giant stone containers, stacked one on top of 
the other and clad in violent red Indian sandstone.

It's an idiosyncratic design that contrasts with the city's predominant 
architectural styles – the traditional Flemish ziggurat roofs of the pretty 
historic centre and the port's brutalist industrial sprawl. But this is exactly 
the point:Museum aan de Stroom 
<http://www.mas.be/MAS-EN/Publicatiekanalen/Stad/Musea/Musea-MAS/MAS-EN/Startpagina-MAS-EN.html>
 (which is known as MAS and translates as Museum by the River) is intended to 
be a bridge between the city centre and the port.

This is meant both literally and metaphorically: the museum is in a dockside 
area called Het Eilandje (the little island) sitting between the two, and it 
contains more than 470,000 exhibits relating to the history of Antwerp's port 
and its people.

It's not just the exhibitions and architecture that will draw the crowds; on 
MAS's top floor is 't Zilte (tzilte.be <http://www.tzilte.be>), a double 
Michelin-starred restaurant which has just moved here from Mol, a small town 
nearby. Here, chef Viki Geunes serves creative haute cuisine – includingpoulet 
de Bressewith shiitake mushrooms, a prawn mousse with foie gras that is 
presented in a glass ball, and his award-winningdame blanche dessert, a sort of 
skilfully deconstructed choc ice. There is a six-week waiting list for a table.
 Inside the Museum aan de Stroom. Photograph: Filip Dujardin 
The museum's exhibitions are laid out thematically, floor by floor. The 
Visible Storage section on the second floor is particularly absorbing: here, 
you get a rare chance to see the thousands of objects that would be hidden away 
in storage in other museums. I opened drawers at random to find armoured 
breastplates lying alongside a set of intricately carved ivory Madonnas; it was 
like having the run of some brilliantly eccentric collector's back room.

The first temporary exhibition, Masterpieces in the MAS, runs until 30 
December and features artworks produced in or near Antwerp over the past four 
centuries – from paintings by Peter Paul Rubens and Jan van Eyck to 
contemporary pieces by Flemish artists such as Jan Fabre, who makes oddly 
appealing sculptures out of insect carapaces.

Those who can't afford the Michelin-starred food should at least visit the 
ninth floor's spectacular terrace: it has amazing views across the city, the 
port and the river Scheldt. It's free to get up here (entry to the exhibitions 
costs up to €10), though you're likely to share it with restaurant diners 
sipping pricey aperitifs. There's a more affordable cafe, Storm, on the ground 
floor.

MAS is a clear indicator that Het Eilandje has finally completed its 
transition from neglected dockside to fashionable district. This regeneration 
has been masterminded by the city council and propelled by its decision, 10 
years ago, to build the museum here in an area dubbed "Siberia" by locals 
because it takes a good half-hour to walk here from the centre.

The docks were constructed for Napoleon in 1811, as a base for his planned 
naval invasion of London, but by the middle of the last century had fallen into 
disrepair. The whole Het Eilandje area – which includes Antwerp's two oldest 
docks, Bonaparte and Willem, and a grid of streets stretching between the red 
light district and the main harbour – has undergone massive reconstruction and 
is now a lovely place for a stroll.

Most tourists come to Antwerp to stock up on chocolate, beer or diamonds (the 
city is one of the biggest diamond markets in the world) or to test its 
reputation as Belgium's funky hub for fashion and design. But Het Eilandje is 
another good reason to make the trip. Yachts and sailboats bob prettily in 
Willemdok; there's a line of trendy bars and restaurants opposite MAS; and a 
few blocks away is the Felix Pakhuis (Godefriduskaai 30, +32 3 203 0330,
felixpakhuis.nu <http://www.felixpakhuis.nu>), a meticulously restored 
warehouse that now houses the city's national archive and another artfully 
minimalist fusion restaurant where you can eat tandoori chicken while sitting 
out by the water.
 Dries Van Noten's Het Eilandje base. Photograph: Johannes Vande Voorde 
The fashion designer Dries Van Noten has just moved his atelier to another 
warehouse conversion next door; and just round the corner is Marcel (Van 
Schoonbekeplein 13, +32 3 336 3302,restaurantmarcel.be 
<http://www.restaurantmarcel.be>), an excellent bistro housed in a former 
American presbyterian church. Its beige walls, brass bar and sanded floors lend 
it an elegant, Parisian feel.

So far, so gentrified – but much of Het Eilandje feels like it's still holding 
its breath. The upper floors of many of the apartment buildings are plastered 
with adverts for luxury loft conversions, but most of them still appear to be 
empty. I pass one front door, left hanging open on its hinges, and see that it 
leads on to a dank-smelling front room piled with old blankets and mattresses.

But with the opening of the MAS and several major construction projects 
planned – including the complete remodelling of several of the ugly high-rises 
and overly trafficked streets, and a new Zaha Hadid-designed port authority 
headquarters at the mouth of the harbour, surmounted by a huge glass diamond – 
the area is soon sure to lose its forgotten, industrial feel.

The Royal Ballet of Flanders recently moved into a new corrugated-iron 
headquarters on the corner of Kattendijkdok and Westkaai, next to a 
dilapidated, semi-roofless building from which millions of emigrants once left 
for America aboard Red Star Line ships. A museum dedicated to the Red Star Line 
will open here in 2012.

And a 20-minute walk from MAS there is another renowned restaurant, Het 
Pomphuis (Siberiastraat z/n, +32 3 770 8625,hetpomphuis.be 
<http://www.hetpomphuis.be>), set in a former dry-dock pumping station. The 
three-storey building is spectacular: in the basement stand the three huge iron 
pumps that could once empty the neighbouring dry dock in two hours; while 
upstairs, under the soaring glass roof, you can enjoy a cocktail and some 
fantastic fish dishes, which range from lobster to yellowfin tuna and cod stew.

Food, art and culture can all be found in Het Eilandje, but there's nowhere in 
the area to stay just yet, apart from aHoliday Inn Express on Italiëlei 
<http://www.hiexpress.com/hotels/gb/en/antwerp/anrhe/hoteldetail>, a busy main 
road. Happily, there are dozens of gorgeous boutique hotels and B&Bs in the 
city centre, such as Boulevard Leopold (+32 3 225 5218,boulevard-leopold.be 
<http://www.boulevard-leopold.be/>; doubles from €110 B&B).

The other thing the area lacks, at least for now, is decent shopping. However, 
Antwerp is renowned for its fashion and design, so this is bound to change – 
but apart from the MAS shop, which sells a good selection of hefty tomes on 
art, photography and fashion, I found just one (excellent) travel bookshop, 
Alta Via (Nassaustraat 29, +32 3 293 8733,altaviatravelbooks.be 
<http://www.altaviatravelbooks.be>), which owner Xavier Lietaer has lovingly 
constructed entirely out of recycled materials, and one rather lonely boutique, 
Y di Cassanova (Westkaai 45), selling frilly knickers out of the ground floor 
of a tower block.

Its other shops veer between expensive retailers of flooring and bathrooms 
clearly aimed at prospective loft owners and dark little places selling fire 
extinguishers and barometers and sou'westers and anything else you might need 
for life aboard an oil tanker.

Places like this are sure to disappear soon – so it's worth taking your time 
to stroll around Het Eilandje and commit to memory a place that, within five 
years, is likely to have been completely transformed. As an area in transition, 
it is fascinating.

• To get to Antwerp by train, take the Eurostar <http://www.eurostar.co.uk> 
from London to Brussels (two hours), and from there it is 40 minutes by train 
to Antwerp Centraal station. Rail Europe has returns from £80 (0844 848 4064,
raileurope.co.uk <http://www.raileurope.co.uk>). For further information, see 
mas.be 
<http://www.mas.be/MAS-EN/Publicatiekanalen/Stad/Musea/Musea-MAS/MAS-EN/Startpagina-MAS-EN.html>
 and Tourism Flanders-Brussels (020-7307 7738,visitflanders.co.uk 
<http://www.visitflanders.co.uk>)
 