
The disappointment was tangible here as news filtered through that one of the 
NFL’s biggest stars, Calvin Johnson, had been ruled out of Sunday’s game 
between the Detroit Lions andAtlanta Falcons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atlanta-falcons>. But a capacity crowd would 
ultimately get to savour something far more satisfying: a genuinely competitive 
game.

Three of the last four London match-ups had been blow-outs, settled by a 
margin of 24 points or more. The expectation was for another such lopsided 
encounter between a Detroit team that had won five of its first seven games, 
and an Atlanta group who had won only twice over the same span.

Instead Wembley was treated to an all-American take on one of British 
football’s most cherished cliches. By recovering from a three-touchdown deficit 
to win 22-21, the Lions had triumphed in a classic game of two halves.

For the first two quarters Atlanta were in total control. “Rise up” read the 
words on the Falcons-branded flags distributed to every fan. Atlanta answered 
the call, scoring touchdowns on both of their opening two possessions. They had 
reached the end zone only twice in their previous two games combined.

The first score arrived on a seven-yard swing pass from quarterback Matt Ryan 
to running back Devonta Freeman. The second was a feather-soft flick to the 
tight end Bear Pascoe after a well-executed play-action fake from the one-yard 
line.

Missing their star receiver, Johnson – who has been out for three weeks now 
with a sprained ankle – and starting running back Reggie Bush, the Lions were 
initially unable to get anything going on offense. Their woes were compounded 
on the other side of the ball when Nick Fairley left with a knee injury in the 
second quarter. His legs had been pinned awkwardly underneath him when he 
collided with fellow defensive tackle Ndamukong Suh, subjecting his joints to 
their combined weight of more than 600lb.

Detroit were already short-manned at the position, after sending Fairley’s 
back-up, CJ Mosley, home on the eve of this game for an undisclosed violation 
of team rules. Not that Ryan will have felt too much sympathy. The Falcons 
quarterback was himself playing behind a decimated offensive line, which has 
lost four starters to season-ending injuries.

The assortment of replacements struggled to protect him at times, but still 
got enough push to help Steven Jackson trundle into the end zone for a one-yard 
rushing touchdown in the second quarter. He might not be as glamorous a name as 
Johnson, but the 31-year-old running back is anNFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> treasure in his own right. At Wembley 
he became the 19th player to rush for more than 11,000 yards in a career.

How different things might have been, though, if Detroit had not seen an 
interception wiped out by offsetting penalties shortly before his touchdown. 
The cornerback Rashean Mathis had run the ball back more than 100 yards to 
Atlanta’s end zone, only to learn his efforts were for nought.

Instead it was not until the second half that Detroit began to display the 
qualities that have made them playoff contenders. A Matt Prater field goal was 
followed quickly by a 59-yard touchdown pass from Matthew Stafford to Golden 
Tate. Cassius Vaughn then picked off Ryan to set up another Prater kick.

Next came a five-yard touchdown pass from Stafford to the running back Theo 
Riddick. But the Lions’ game-tying two-point conversion attempt failed.

Unable to run the remaining time off the clock, Atlanta punted back to Detroit 
with 1min 46sec remaining. It was enough for Stafford to move the Lions into 
range for one last kick. Or, as it turned out, two. Prater’s initial attempt 
sailed wide right, only to be annulled by a delay-of-game penalty. He took full 
advantage of the reprieve, nailing the now 48-yarder through the uprights, as 
Wembley erupted in cheers and boos.

“Whoo – my heart’s still beating pretty fast,” said Tate when asked to re-live 
that conclusion more than half an hour after the game had ended. “Thankfully we 
had the football gods on our side. We would have loved to have had the first 
kick, without the delay of game, but it happened. We didn’t make the same 
mistake twice.”

To many it felt like an unjust conclusion. But certainly a thrilling one.
 