
Max Minghella insists he never really wanted to be an actor. Growing up, he 
thought it was a faintly ridiculous thing to do. "I wanted to write in film or 
something like that," he says now. "I thought acting was an embarrassing thing 
to say you wanted to do, especially when you're young. It seemed really uncool."

Even as a teenager, Minghella had more experience than most about what such a 
profession might entail. As the son of the late, Academy Award-winning director
Anthony Minghella <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthonyminghella>, he spent 
much of his youth traipsing around film sets.

When he finally did decide to become an actor, after seeing This Is Our Youth 
at the National and "falling in love" with the play, his debut on-screen 
appearance was as an uncredited extra in his father's 2003 American civil war 
epic,Cold Mountain. His first professional role came two years later, as the 
neglected older sibling of a spelling prodigy inBee Season, alongside Richard 
Gere and Juliette Binoche.

Now, at the age of 26, Minghella Jr has been quietly making a name for himself 
in a series of scene-stealing minor roles in major movies. Last year, he 
appeared inThe Social Network, David Fincher's highly acclaimed take on the 
founding of Facebook, as one of the students who attempted to sue Mark 
Zuckerberg for stealing his ideas. (Minghella is not on Facebook: "I'm on 
Twitter. I love Twitter because I'm kind of voyeuristic. I don't tweet, but I 
look at other people's.")

This week sees the release of The Ides of March, a gripping political saga 
directed byGeorge Clooney <https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgeclooney>, in 
which Minghella plays an ambitious campaign press officer caught up in the 
throes of a scandal that threatens to upset the presidential election. In both 
films, Minghella exudes a quiet intensity punctuated by outbursts of passion: 
he is an actor capable of treading the careful line between control and 
instinctive spontaneity.

"I've always found that acting has been quite a hard thing to pre-manage 
because so much of it is spontaneous and the circumstances so uncontrolled," he 
explains, over the phone from his home in Los Angeles (Minghella splits his 
time between the States, where his girlfriend, actress Kate Mara is based, and 
north London, where his family still lives). "There's a set, people you're 
working with, the days will have a certain tone: people will be tired some days 
and excited on others. All of these things affect a performance… all that stuff 
is stuff I absorb. I don't think it's as simple as just thinking about a 
character."

Was he ever worried that, given his surname, people would assume he'd had an 
easy ride? "I think they would have thought that until I got my first job," 
Minghella admits. "It was about a year before I booked anything [after deciding 
to become an actor] and it was quite difficult to be taken seriously then, 
because I hadn't done anything. It was quite hard to convince people and for 
them to believe that it wasn't just Dad picking up the phone. Once I started 
working, that problem disappeared."

If there are any lingering doubts, Minghella's accomplished performance in The 
Ides of March (or "Ides" as he refers to it, in fluent showbiz-ese) should 
silence them. The film, adapted from the playFarragut North by Beau Willimon, 
features a veritable roll-call of heavyweight Hollywood talent, includingRyan 
Gosling <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ryan-gosling>, Philip Seymour Hoffman 
and Paul Giamatti as the political campaign junkies circling around Clooney's 
flawed Democratic presidential candidate.

Minghella says he was "obsessed" with the original play and so decided to 
track down the script of the film as soon as he heard Clooney was working on 
it. "I read the script, found a scene I thought was good and then I did it on 
tape. I did it psychotically, in 50 different ways, then I chose the one I 
liked most and sent it in. It was the most strenuous audition I've ever done in 
terms of process and then the nicest after that when I got the phone call."

Was he intimidated by the prospect of working alongside such respected actors? 
"I don't know if that's the right word. It's surreal working with people you 
admire. I don't think it ever goes away, no matter how human people are; 
there's always that moment of 'Oh wow, that's still George Clooney!' But I find 
that the most talented people tend to be the nicest."

Clooney, he says, has been "amazingly supportive. I think he'd like me to 
direct a film at some point". What kind of film could Minghella see himself 
directing? "I'm not sure." A rom-com? He laughs. "Actually, I love romantic 
comedies."

If he ever were to go down that particular route, he could do worse than 
casting hisIdes co-star Ryan Gosling in the lead. "He's a massive teddy bear of 
a person," says Minghella of Gosling. "He's very warm, has been very generous 
to me and has become a great friend." I tell him that a growing number of men 
have admitted to having a man-crush on Gosling – does he? "I don't, but I 
definitely understand people's love for him. He's a very masculine movie star 
and not a huge number of them are."

Minghella, by contrast, is slight in stature but with striking, semi-oriental 
looks (inherited in part from his mother, Hong Kong-born choreographer Carolyn 
Choa) and an elegantly fluid way of moving in and out of a scene.

In life, too, he has found it natural to flit between different countries. 
Although he was born and raised in Hampstead, north London, he chose to attend 
Columbia University in New York, working on films in his summer holidays. "I 
never felt particularly alienated as an English person in America. It doesn't 
feel culturally like a massive gap to me."

If there is one thing he misses, though, it is the British media. "The media 
in the States can be quite self-reflective. When I lived in England, I was much 
more aware of the day-to-day politics that were happening. Living somewhere 
where the media involvement is greater and so omnipresent, you become pulled 
into it and, at the same time, because of that, politics changes and the way 
it's handled changes.Ides explores that soundbite element in a really 
interesting way."

Shortly before we speak, Sarah Palin announces she is not intending to stand 
for the 2012 presidential election. Is he relieved? "Yes, but I don't think she 
would have won," he replies, a touch curtly.

A lot of Minghella's answers can be a bit like this: brief and slightly 
humourless. It might be because we are speaking on the phone rather than face 
to face, but I suspect it is also because he is dreading the inevitable 
question about his father's death. When Anthony Minghella died three years ago 
of a haemorrhage after an operation for cancer of the tonsils and neck, there 
was a collective  of shock. The director, who won an Oscar forThe English 
Patient and worked with some of the finest actors of his generation, was only 
54. Tributes poured forth in the aftermath of his death with Gordon Brown 
calling him "one of Britain's greatest creative talents".

When I ask Minghella how he coped with losing his father so young, he politely 
declines to answer. "If the interview could go in a different direction…" he 
says, then waits for the next question. It's a horrible moment and still 
clearly an experience that is far too painful to talk about. But there are 
other ways in which Anthony Minghella keeps slipping into the conversation.

Later, when Max says he has started producing, he explains: "My dad had a 
company and there were various films that hadn't gone into production that I'm 
trying to nurture."

There is an acknowledgement there, perhaps, that he feels it is important to 
finish what his father started. He says he'd like to explore other avenues of 
film-making behind the camera rather than in front of it. Maybe it's that he 
still feels acting is a bit uncool. But if Max Minghella ever does decide to 
direct, there can be little doubt he will have learned from the best.
 