
• Click on the safety advice for staff section of the BBC website 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/safety/contact>, specifically the “myRisks information” 
page, and who do you find but … Jeremy Clarkson! Mysteriously using an 
old-fashioned scarlet telephone box, Jezza is pictured apparently either asking 
the Beeb’s safety experts what his risks might be (if, for example, he has got 
involved in horseplay some might deem a fracas), or in the very act of shopping 
himself after his recent reaction to a hotel’s cold spread. As the other BBC 
idols shown supposedly making phone calls about safety on the same page are 
David Brent and Chrissie from Holby City – whose personal risk record included 
being taken hostage by a boyfriend, getting caught up in a triple crossbow 
attack, and promiscuous unprotected sex – you can’t help wondering if the 
person in charge of the site is a Richard Littlejohn-esque satirist determined 
to undermine the cause of health and safety.

• While the Goves and Lord Rothermere go back a long way, so too do the Mail’s 
owner and the Osbornes. When he testified at the Leveson inquiry in 2012,
Rothermere declared a weekend he and Lady R spent with the Osbornes 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/node/49289>in 2009, and said that he had met the 
chancellor several times over the course of 2010. It must be assumed that the 
same chummy pattern has continued, though as Osborne is not required to 
identify weekend guests at Dorneywood it’s impossible to know if there have 
been further sleepover parties involving the biggest man in politics and the 
richest British press baron.

• The Times, meanwhile, was equally ardent post-budget - and without the 
bizarre, would-be humorous attempt made (with its “epic strut” image) by its 
stablemate, the Sun, to suggest all the sycophancy might be tongue-in-cheek – 
calling Osborne “The comeback king” in its splash headline with no 
question-mark or irony. But inside (despite a group photo depicting the paper’s 
election comment squad as one big happy family) a lone dissident voice was 
permitted. “We need more than this dull, simplistic budget”, argued Tim 
Montgomerie, suggesting one possible reason for his still-unexplained demotion 
from comment editor to rank-and-file ranter.

• Will Peter “Pinch ‘em” Fincham, the ITV television boss known for coveting 
BBC shows and talent, commission a mystery drama called Table No 9 in homage to 
BBC2’s black comedy Room No 9? Monkey only asks because the great puzzle of 
Tuesday’s Royal Television Society awards bash was what became of the said 
table – booked by an ITV group including Ant and Dec and entertainment and 
comedy tsarina Elaine Bedell, it was cancelled at the last minute, leaving 
banquet guests wondering as they took their places why the table plan skipped 
straight from 8 to 10. Simian inquiries to ITV failed to elicit an explanation, 
leaving the cynical to infer that Ant and Dec & co decamped because they heard 
an advance whisper of the broadcaster’s humiliating Tuesday Night Takeaway: 
after five RTS awards in 2014, Fincham’s fistful of channels picked up just one 
gong (two if you include Melvyn Bragg’s lifetime award) out of 27.Doomed, 
cash-strapped, evening-only BBC3 collected three 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/18/bbc3-wins-three-rts-awards-despite-threat-of-tv-closure>
.

• While argument continues to rage over whether the broadcasters or David 
Cameron and his hapless spinner Craig Oliver “blinked first” over election 
debates, it’s easier to say which journalists are left with reddest faces now 
that some debates look set to happen. It gives Monkey no pleasure to report 
that the winners are among Fleet Street’s most senior political commentators 
and share a reputation for reliability and shrewdness: the biggest buffoons 
were the Independent on Sunday’s John Rentoul (“I agree with Dave - there’ll be 
no TV debates” 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/i-agree-with-david-cameron--there-will-be-no-tv-debates-9970232.html>
) and the Observer’s Andrew Rawnsley (“Chances of an election debate? Choose 
between zilch and nada” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/11/tv-election-debate-wont-happen-david-cameron-determined>
), both on the weekend of 10-11 January when other pundits were sensibly being 
a little warier of making such definite forecasts.

• Monkey waits with trepidation to hear what Radio 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-1> will do in response to the demand 
in last week’s BBC Trust’s report on the Beeb’s radio services that it must 
find “more regular opportunities for enriching daytime speech”. Essayettes on 
current affairs by the likes of Robert Peston or Simon Schama could soon be 
popping up between pop tracks instead of DJ gush, as the station hurries to 
meet this retro-Birtist requirement for more differentiation from commercial 
radio; but a better solution is near at hand in the form of Friday’s 
appointment to the BBC Trust of former Radio 4 controller Mark Damazer. Look 
out for beefed-up speech Damazer-style such as a 26-part history of the 
Americas by a Cambridge prof, or the complete works of Dostoevsky across every 
week of 2016. Possibly in Russian (with subtitles on the website) to be even 
more enriching, unless Fearne Cotton is fiercely opposed.

At the launch of former TV producer and Channel 4 and Sky exec Jacquie 
Lawrence’s book Different for Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2014/may/25/times-ruth-gledhill-bbc-radio-4-james-naughtie>
 - held at the offices of Yahoo executive Dawn Airey, whom Lawrence married 
last year - it emerged that the novel originally began life as a script for 
Channel 4. Lawrence revealed it was so long ago that Ben Stephenson, now BBC 
drama supremo, was a junior on it. However The L Word came along and “blew my 
drama out of the window”. She shelved it for a while, then decided to turn it 
into a novel centring on a mixture of heterosexual and same-sex couples in 
affluent west London. First Ladies author and Sky News presenter Kay Burley, 
who attended the launch, “gave feedback to her on it”. Apparently there has 
been interest from a well-known US actor and producer, “so you may see it on TV 
screens after all”.

• Wolf Hall star Mark Rylance has emerged as the catalyst for former Fleet 
Street journalist Mark Jagasia’s first play Clarion - a black comedy about 
“free speech, nationalism and the state of the British media in 2015” and 
starring Doctor Who star Clare Higgins. It is set in “the office of Britain’s 
worst newspaper, the Daily Clarion” but former Daily Express hack Jagasia says 
it came about after he met Rylance at an aftershow party at The Globe around 13 
years ago. The actor told him to defect, leave tabloid journalism and do 
something sensible like work in theatre. He didn’t take the advice for a decade 
but when he did and wrote Clarion he was struggling to find an agent and a home 
for his play so he sent it to Rylance. Jagasia says: “I was pretty staggered to 
get a text from him a couple of months later - he’d actually read it, loved it 
and went out of his way to open some significant doors for the play. He is 
definitely a very nice bloke – not many actors of his calibre would bother to 
read unsolicited manuscript and then actually do something about it.” Reviewers 
are likely to be able to identify the model for “egomaniacal editor” Morris 
Honeyspoon when the play opens in London next month, but will it be so easy to 
see who inspired Higgins’s character, “washed-up” senior foreign correspondent 
Verity Stokes?

• In what it calls “a round-up of priceless insights”, Press Gazette shares 
some of the tips given by leading editors 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/content/editors-rusbridger-dacre-witherow-and-others-reveal-what-it-takes-be-good-journalist>
 to the press marketing body Newsbrands. Some are indeed priceless, such as the 
Telegraph’s editor-in-chief Jason Seiken (flattered by being treated as if that 
was still more than a paper title) choosing “any headline from BuzzFeed” as his 
favourite 2014 headline - on the negative basis that “they remind us of what 
the world would be like without quality newspapers”, a choice clearly intended 
to counter the idea that people he recruited introduced BuzzFeedery to the 
Torygraph. And then there’s No 2 in Paul Dacre’s “qualities of a good 
journalist”: “an ability NEVER to forget that the rich and powerful only want 
to befriend you for two reasons: to get stuff into your paper or, far more 
likely, to keep stuff out.” This laudable standing up to famous fatcats and the 
business-political elite has its limits, of course: Lord Rothermere is clearly 
exempt, for instance, and so currently is George Osborne, while hostility to 
David Cameron is reportedly why Simon Heffer lost his Saturday column in the 
Mail. Plus there’s all the celebs at once teased and feted by Mail Online: 
aren’t most of them “rich and powerful”?

• Rarely does the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> simply admit 
it’s bang to rights over an on-screen blunder, but that was the case - or at 
least a production company was obliged to cough up to its mistake - with BBC2’s 
Nelson In His Own Words. “I was shocked to see,” writes a Radio Times reader, 
“that Nelson’s missing arm had changed from the correct right side to the 
left!” Flipping the shot resulted in a “schoolboy error”, conceded an unnamed 
spokesman from Oxford Scientific Films.
 