
• Monkey’s awkward moment of the festival: when culture secretary John 
Whittingdale looked around and realised that all around him were getting to 
their feet to give a standing ovation to Armando Iannucci’s MacTaggart speech 
in which he accused ministers of effectively trying to kill off theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>. Ever politically astute, Whittingdale 
also stood up.

• Iannucci circulated his lecture, with an excoriating attack on Whittingdale, 
shortly before delivering it. The Thatcherite ideologue wanted to dictate every 
programme the BBC made and then destroy the organisation, Iannucci was set to 
thunder. However the minister took the stage first, emolliently declaring 
himself a supporter of the BBC and backing its right to make Strictly Come 
Dancing. Cue a swift rewrite of the speech, with the festival alerting the 
media that the words “Dismantling [the BBC] is madness” had been replaced by 
the far less apocalyptic “Tampering with it is madness”.

• It wasn’t until the penultimate session that Ofcom chief executive Sharon 
White appeared on stage (revealing details of a new diversity scheme) after 
spending several days in Edinburgh. In the audience when Whittingdale went 
further on the suitability of the media regulator to consider the BBC and 
impartiality than the green paper had, White said she would respond properly 
once the government actually spelt out its view. With complaints to all other 
broadcasters adding up to a tenth of the 250,000 complaints to the BBC, there 
will be quite a lot of work to do before then.

• A bunch of bananas to Sky entertainment channels director Stuart Murphy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/stuart-murphy> for keeping his sense of 
humour during the Leaders’ Debate session. The acoustics on stage were so bad 
that the TV honchos could hardly hear each other. As they paused while 
technicians tried to improve the sound, Smurph looked down the row of the five 
top British execs at their podiums and said “It’s like One Direction”. ITV 
director Peter Fincham said he could hear so little that, for all he knew, they 
be could asking each other what they were doing this weekend. “One Direction”, 
quipped Murphy with an enigmatic snigger.

• Things got a bit heated during the Is the BBC Under Siege? session, when Hat 
Trick co-founder Jimmy Mulville challenged BBC director of strategy James 
Purnell about the decision to make BBC3 online only. After a frank exchange of 
views, Mulville – who has made a bid to buy BBC3 with Avalon’s Jon Thoday – 
hurled at Purnell: “I just hope when you’re off doing one of your other jobs 
with other people, that your long-term strategy was right.” As the former 
Labour cabinet minister tried to come back, Mulville added: “I noticed you 
voted in favour of the Iraq war, that went down well didn’t it?” Saucer of milk 
for Mr Mulville.

• Since Tony Hall became director general we’ve had many “those crazy Birt 
days are back” flashbacks. But now Monkey hears those crazy Greg Dyke days may 
be back too. According to simian sources the Daily Mail’s Katherine Rushton was 
not asked last week to a briefing by BBC director of television Danny Cohen. 
Hacks from the other major nationals were, but not Rushton. Could this perhaps 
be related to the Mail’s recent series of disobliging articles about senior BBC 
bosses including him, and also about Cohen’s wife Noreena Hertz, Monkey 
wonders? As long as the Beeb doesn’t “do a Dyke” by banning ordering copies of 
the Mail, however, things might calm down.

• A channel that was unrepresented at the festival’s awards event was 
nevertheless Frankie Boyle’s main theme as he gave away the gongs. “I found out 
that Channel 5 would be happy to give me an hour-long special,” said the 
stand-up, “but unfortunately I wasn’t prepared to put on 19 stone and become a 
paedophile.” Its ratings, he continued, “are always higher than I expect, I 
suspect because a lot of their viewers think they are watching Channel 4+1”.

• Next time you see Martin Freeman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/martin-freeman> and are tempted to ask the 
Sherlock star for an autograph or a selfie, think again. “I don’t complain 
about earning a good living,” said the Sherlock star, but the drawback of fame 
is “the stopping and the constant pictures and signing. It’s not why you get 
into it at all. [You’re in trouble] if you want to go and buy some milk and 
you’ve allowed yourself five minutes for that and not an hour … It’s not a 
terrible thing but it’s not my favourite thing in the world.” Perhaps in future 
he should tell them to hobbit.

• Television execs and hacks at GEITF were in shock at learning that their 
usual late-night watering hole and networking/pitching venue The George was 
closed for refurbishment until November. Some were spotted sadly wandering the 
streets like itinerant youths trying to find somewhere to drink. Fortunately 
their thirst was quenched at the party on the last night at the Why Not 
nightclub. Infamous in Edinburgh for being a place where students burn £50 
notes on the dance floor, it was packed with grateful bosses and stars on 
Thursday night. Monkey’s favourite shapes were thrown by former BBC1 boss 
Lorraine Heggessey and Sky presenter Ross Kemp. Coming next to Sky, Ross Kemp: 
Extreme Dance.

• Festival quotes

“Looking back to 1976, we can see how far the TV landscape has changed. Then, 
the big classics were Thunderbirds, David Attenborough and Poldark: let’s 
congratulate ourselves on how far we’ve come”

Armando Iannucci, in his MacTaggart lecture

“If the BBC were a weapons system, half the cabinet would be on the way to 
Saudi Arabia to tell them how brilliant it was. And yet it’s quite the reverse 
... They talk of cutting down to size, reining in imperialist ambitions”

Iannucci

“John Whittingdale recently said in an interview, “arguably, I’d keep David 
Attenborough’. I’m not sure how practical that is, given the natural life cycle 
of the human presenter. Unless we’re prepared to preserve him like the Russians 
do Lenin”

Iannucci

“Where does it come from, this spooky force bending the ear of chancellors and 
ministers and civil servants and asking them to cull the BBC? Let’s for the 
sake of argument call this force M for Mysterious”

Iannucci, who later said M could be “the Murdochs, the Daily Mail, a cabal 
within the Department of Culture, backbench MPs, newspaper editors, I honestly 
don’t know”

“I’m sorry to disappoint but [Jon Snow] is absolutely dead”

HBO’s Michael Ellenberg confirms the Game of Thrones character’s demise; 
meanwhile Channel 4’s non-fictionalJon Snow confirmed his continuing vitality 
by reportedly denouncing Tony Blair as a “war criminal” during a dinner in 
Edinburgh

“I believe the BBC is frankly killing itself. It is clinging to the tit and at 
some point has to go on to solids”

Veteran presenter Nick Ross condemns the corporation for sticking stubbornly 
to the licence fee rather than being open to other funding options

“[Benefits TV] is not all about scumbags cheating the system. If we made shit 
programmes about horrible people, people wouldn’t keep watching.”

Channel 5 director of television Ben Frow, who has been dubbed “the poverty 
pornographer in chief”

“I said you will take my points on board otherwise I will kiss you into a 
horrific submission and with that he shut up sharpish”

Great British Bake Off co-host Sue Perkins on Whittingdale

“The idea that it was somehow dictated from New York by Rupert Murdoch is 
lunacy”

John Whittingdale on the government’s recent licence fee deal with the BBC

“Are we going to sacrifice The Voice on the altar of charter renewal? 
Absolutely not”

James Purnell

“All they need to do is put on horse racing [and he’ll watch]”

Scotland’s first minister Nicola Sturgeon jokingly pooh-poohs the idea of her 
predecessor Alex Salmond boycotting the BBC after his rows with it.

“I don’t think what happened [at the rally where Salmond and BBC political 
editor Nick Robinson clashed] was Alex Salmond’s fault ... Nick has reflected 
honestly on the mistakes he made in his coverage of the referendum”

Sturgeon

“BBC creating a new post – Scotland Editor for network news based in Glasgow. 
Wonder if @AlexSalmond would act as my referee ?”

Tweet during festival by @bbcnickrobinson

“One of the stories of the year was Jeremy Clarkson leaving the BBC. Why would 
you punch a producer when you’ve got Richard Hammond in the same room?”

Frankie Boyle

“Television is such a sophisticated technology, seeing it in the hands of ITV 
is like watching a monkey trying to bang in a nail with a microscope”

Boyle
 