
• Whether or not Sue Inglish is the BBC’s election supremo 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/aboutthebbc/insidethebbc/managementstructure/biographies/inglish_sue>
, she is a pivotal figure in its TV campaign coverage as the head of political 
programmes, as was recognised when she led the broadcasters’ team negotiating 
with the parties over election debates. So Monkey was interested to take a peek 
at the declaration of personal interests made by Inglish (who is ex-ITN, like 
the Beeb’s political editor and head of newsgathering) when senior managers’ 
expenses and interests were recently released. Although she joined the BBC back 
in 2002, rising to her present position 10 years ago, it seems she has retained 
1,662 shares in ITV. Comparing this to a general having a side-bet on the enemy 
would surely be too harsh, however.

• If you believe you belong to “the cream of world journalism”, then there’s 
only a week left to apply fora place on Mail Online’s six-month Editors’ 
Programme, 
<http://www.jobs4journalists.co.uk/jobs/6643/become+a+mailonline+editor.html> 
in the course of which the elite trainees will “learn the secrets” of digital 
news and be groomed to be the site’s “next generation of leaders”. Noticeably 
lacking the word “celebrity”, or indeed “sideboob”, the job ad is tantalisingly 
abstract but does give some hint of the, ahem, special stresses of the MO 
working environment in requiring in candidates a “flexible approach to shift 
patterns” and an “ability to thrive in a past-paced digital environment” (which 
may or may not mean “ability to turn around all stories for all platforms 
within three minutes despite having someone standing behind you continually 
shouting aggressively”). Especially fascinating is the prospect of successful 
candidates winning jobs in the expanding Rothermere empire’s “global network of 
bureaus”, which for now is confined to “London, New York, Los Angeles and 
Sydney” but excitingly if enigmatically will advance into “other geographies as 
we expand”. The sci-fi phrasing suggests that in the near-future Mail Online 
boss Martin Clarke could be planting a flag on Mars; but with imperial plans 
frustratingly under wraps the other geographies might equally be Westeros, or 
Skaro, or Discworld.

• An endorsement, or just a tease? With Jeremy Clarkson away, the Sunday Times 
intriguingly chose for his replacement as its Driving section’s cover star and 
car reviewerthe motorcycle racer and Channel 4 presenter Guy Martin 
<https://www.facebook.com/GuyMartinRacing>, who is among those named as 
possible Top Gear hosts (Paddy Power has him at 5/1 
<http://www.paddypower.com/bet/tv-specials/bbc-specials/Next-Top-Gear-Presenter-7735997.html>
). Martin would have the advantage of being a genuine petrolhead like Clarkson, 
rather than a utility presenter like Sue Perkins, Jodie Kidd and some other 
contenders.

• The New Statesman’s current “anniversary issue” 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/magazine> (it’s, erm, 102 years old) has a cover 
modelled on Sgt. Pepper’s, with the Beatles’ collage of idols replaced by an 
idiosyncratic pantheon made up of Statesman types, political heavyweights and 
literary greats. They include: some former editors but not others (incumbent 
Jason Cowley and once-red now-right turncoat Paul Johnson are in, John Lloyd 
and John Kampfner are among those left out); some current columnists but not 
others (you look in vain for, say, Kevin Maguire, Ed Smith and Felicity 
Cloake); several pongy pontificators including Fabian devotees of eugenics, 
alleged rapist Arthur Koestler and the militaristic Christabel Pankhurst 
(rather than left-wing Sylvia); someone called “Melvin Bragg”; ex-NS guest 
editor Jemima Goldsmith under the name she no longer uses; and a bizarre, 
presumably provocative selection of politicians that omits British left heroes 
such as Hardie, Attlee, Bevan, Foot and Benn, but does feature Stalin, Mao and 
Thatcher. Much sulking and stropping inside the Statesman office and beyond it 
can be expected to ensue.

• The Staggers’ biggest snub, however, is to the originator of the cover 
concept: there’s nothing on the image itself or in the contents pages (which 
just credits someone for “cover art direction”, as if it was all their own 
idea) to indicate the debt to Peter Blake, designer of the 60s album sleeve. 
Has the socialist weekly celebrated its birthday by ripping off the fruits of a 
working class artist’s labour?

• On top of getting it in the neck for messing up ITV’s breakfast offering, 
alienating Champions League viewers and being the presenter chiefly responsible 
for Radio 5 Live’s current ratings slump, Adrian Chiles has now been fingered 
for a long-ago celebrity interview fiasco - and sadly the fingerer is his 
former joined-at-the-hip sofa partner Christine Bleakley (who on this evidence 
is no longer even on “Adrian” terms). “I remember on The One Show, Morrissey 
came on,” she tells Radio Times. “His mum was a big fan of ours. ButAdrian 
Chiles <https://www.theguardian.com/media/adrian-chiles> called his mum by the 
wrong name and he was quite upset! It was a complete and utter disaster after 
that.”
 