
Blue Monday as the most depressing day of the year might be completely 
spurious, but even so, the day was not a particularly cheery one for investors 
inMeggitt.

The engineering group fell 7.8p to 429.4p in the wake of the grounding of 
Boeing's 787 Dreamliner airliners. A US subsidiary ofMeggitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/meggitt>, Securaplane Technologies, makes 
a charger for batteries used on the plane. US investigators said over the 
weekend they were looking into battery issues on the Dreamliners. Meggitt's 
shares have had a good run this year up until now, lifted by analyst 
recommendations. The latest came just last week when Barclays raised its target 
price from 450p to 520p. Ben Bourne at Liberum Capital said:
 Boeing has said they will continue to build the aircraft but deliveries will 
cease while the investigation is ongoing. Expect [Meggitt's] shares to be down 
relative today especially after a strong run year to date. 
Sandy Morris at Jefferies added:
 It is possible that Meggitt, as supplier of the B787 BCU [battery unit 
charger], will be affected by some negative sentiment in the short term. We 
believe, however, that it would still be premature and quite possibly mistaken 
to identify lithium-ion battery technology as the villain of the piece.

Meggitt's near 2% decline still left it better off that Pearson. The 
publishing group fell 36p to £12.02 or nearly 3% after warning a weak fourth 
quarter would hit full year earnings.

Overall though the mood was fairly positive, with the FTSE 100 finishing 26.57 
points higher at 6180.98. This is yet another new high since the 6181.56 level 
reached on 22 May 2008. Traders said volumes were thin thanks to snow 
disrupting the City of London, while there was no guidance from Wall Street 
which was closed for Martin Luther King day.

But hopes of a - perhaps temporary - resolution to the US budget problems 
gained ground as the Republicans said the House would consider a bill to raise 
the debt ceiling for three months to give more time for an agreement. There was 
also talk of possible monetary easing in Japan, where the central bank is 
holding a two day meeting. Capital Economics said:
 The Bank of Japan has decided to start today's policy board meeting earlier 
than usual, raising hopes of a major announcement. We expect the meeting to 
conclude with a joint statement on policy cooperation between the Bank and the 
government, the unveiling of a "new" inflation target of 2%, and another 
increase of at least ¥10trn in the ceiling on the asset purchase program. 
Anything less and the markets would now be sorely disappointed, but even these 
announcements may be less substantial than they first appear. 
Admiral was in demand after a positive note from Goldman Sachs. The bank 
upgraded its rating from neutral to buy and added the car insurer to its 
conviction list (a good thing for the company). Goldman said:
 Softening premium rates and regulatory intervention have seen the shares 
underperform over the past three to six months. However, we see potential for 
claims inflation to decline faster than the market anticipates.

That was enough to send Admiral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/admiralgroup> soaring around 5%, up 57p 
to £12.11, making it the biggest riser in the leading index.

Another insurer, Aviva, also benefited from a positive note from the bank, 
adding 8.7p to 374.9p. Goldman said:
 Following four significant disposals, Aviva is in a significantly better 
position with regards to its capital and liquidity. We believe the shares have 
failed to reflect the much better position of the company and the potential for 
earning growth; buy. 
Anglo American, which came under pressure last week after controversial 
restructuring plans at its South African platinum subsidiary Amplats, recovered 
14p to 1899.5p. But away from Amplats, the mining group could face other 
problems, with analysts at JP Morgan warning of write-offs at the company's 
Minas Rio iron ore mine in Brazil:
 At the 2012 full year results we expect a $6bn Minas Rio write down and a 
risk of negative surprises on net debt and future dividend growth 
sustainability. With Minas Rio's "all-in" cost likely to be around $14b to 
$15bn versus our $2.9bn net present value, we believe write downs could 
ultimately exceed $10bn, or over 25% of Anglo American's market capitalisation. 
Aggreko fell 24p to £18.06 after Bank of America Merrill Lynch moved its 
recommendation on the temporary power supplier from buy to neutral and its 
price target from £27 to £19.50. It said:
 We now look set for a period of lower invested capital and international 
power products growth and returns are unlikely to return to the 20% plus levels 
achieved between 2009 and 2011.

Luxury goods group Burberry lost 19p to £13.67 following news that peer 
Richemont, known for its Cartier watches, had warned of a slowdown in the key 
Asia-Pacific region.

Diageo dropped 23.5p to 1819.5p on worries about weaker spirits growth in the 
US and the loss of a key tequila deal.

Analysts at UBS have cut their earnings forecasts for next year, and moved 
their recommendation from buy to neutral.

In December Diageo pulled out of talks to buy tequila group Jose Cuervo, which 
leavesDiageo <https://www.theguardian.com/business/diageo> without a major 
tequila brand once its distribution deal with Cuervo ends in June this year. 
UBS also pointed to a short term weakening in US trading.

Among the mid-caps Easyjet fell 14.5p to 857.5p after founder Sir Stelios 
Haji-Ioannou revealed he had sold 200,000 shares in the market last week, with 
his brother and sister each selling the same amount, taking the family's stake 
to just below 37%. He said the "token disposal of shares" was sending a clear 
message to the directors, with whom he disagrees over strategy, and threatened 
to sell more of his stake.

But WH Smith added 30.5p to 646p as Numis moved from hold to add ahead of the 
retailer's trading update this week.

Finally healthcare group Ark Therapeutics lost almost half its value, losing 
1.5p to 1.6p after it revealed failed fundraising proposals. It is now looking 
at other options, but said shareholders were likely to see their holdings 
diluted.
 