
Five men charged with terrorism-related offences over their alleged plan to 
leave Australia in a fishing boat and join Islamic State in Syria will be 
extradited from Cairns to Melbourne.


The five, who are all from Melbourne and include Islamic preacher Musa 
Cerantonio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/07/australian-isis-sympathiser-preaching-online-again-after-2014-arrest>
, were arrested near Cairns last Tuesday towing the seven-metre vessel en route 
to the tip of Cape York.

They allegedly planned to go by boat to Indonesia and then on to Syria.

Rapid radicalisation: the case of Numan Haider shocks family and experts alike
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/25/rapid-radicalisation-the-case-of-numan-haider-shocks-family-and-experts-alike>
The attorney general, George Brandis, confirmed on Sunday that each of the men 
had had their passports cancelled several months ago by the foreign affairs 
minister, Julie Bishop.

They had also been under surveillance for some time, including when they 
allegedly attempted to leave the country, he said.

Over the weekend, the five were charged with making preparations for 
incursions into foreign countries to engage in hostile activities. They face a 
maximum penalty of life in jail if found guilty.

The men appeared before Cairns magistrates court on Monday, where the 
Australian federal police (AFP) successfully applied for their extradition to 
Victoria. The group is expected to appear before a Melbourne magistrate on 
Thursday.

An AFP spokeswoman was unable to confirm any details about the matter and 
directed questions to previously released media statements. Police have said 
the investigation was focused on “keeping Australians safe”.

“There is no current or impending threat of a terrorist act to the Australian 
community arising from this investigation,” they said in a statement last week.

Brandis said 10 search warrants had been executed in Melbourne and far north 
Queensland as part of the investigation.

The men were being extradited to Victoria because that was where they 
allegedly plotted the trip to Syria, he said.
 