
Mental health care will remain “a Cinderella service” and not get its 
long-planned equality with physical health in the NHS because theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> will deny it the money it 
needs, the MP who was the minister for mental health until the election is 
warning.

Significant recent progress to improve mental health will stall, and a 
“historic opportunity” to ditch its status as the “poor relation” of physical 
ailments will be lost, if ministers do not put more than the promised £8bn 
extra into the NHS by 2020,Norman Lamb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/norman-lamb> said.

The Liberal Democrat leadership candidate fears plans for new waiting time 
targets for people with conditions such as anxiety and depression to access 
treatment will be scrapped unless ministers plough £3.5bn into mental health 
over the next five years.

He was praised by leading charities in the sector during his time as the 
coalition’s care services minister for helping to drive through a series of 
improvements to mental health. They included the first waiting times for mental 
health treatment, an extra £1.25bn for children and adolescent mental health 
services, making talking therapies available to 15% of those who may benefit by 
2015, better care for those undergoing a crisis and improved diversion of 
people with mental health problems from the criminal justice system.

“I fear the Tories lack the commitment to make the necessary investment in 
mental health. While [health secretary] Jeremy Hunt has made clear that he 
wants to build on my legacy in mental health, it won’t be possible without the 
necessary investment – and the Tories have not given any indication that it 
will be forthcoming”, Lamb told the Guardian.

“My big worry is that with the enormous pressure on health and social care 
budgets over the next few years, all of the momentum we have built on mental 
health could be lost unless there is a clear and unambiguous commitment to 
extra resources for theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>.”
 Norman Lamb, MP for North Norfolk. Photograph: Martin Argles for the Guardian 
During the election campaign, the Lib Dems said mental health needed to 
receive £3.5bn more during this parliament to ensure that patients would have 
equal rights of access to mental health services as physical health care.

“The Tories haven’t made that commitment. Without it, and with the NHS under 
such massive pressure, mental health services will lose out, and our chance of 
securing equality will be lost”, Lamb said. “My concern is that unless we grasp 
the nettle of NHS funding, we will lose the opportunity to secure real equality 
for mental health with physical equality in the NHS and that mental health will 
yet again be treated as a Cinderella service.”

Lamb is worried that pledges he and then deputy prime minister Nick Clegg made 
to introduce a waiting time target for patients needing treatment for eating 
disorders may not be honoured. The target, announced last year, was due to 
start in April 2016.

However, the Department of Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
said although new access and waiting time standards for mental health had been 
promised to start in 2015-20, no fresh targets were planned.

Unless we grasp the nettle of NHS funding, we will lose the opportunity to 
secure real equality for mental health
Norman Lamb 
“When we secured £125m for eating disorders in last year’s autumn statement we 
were clear that we planned to introduce a waiting time standard for that from 
April next year. So they are right to say that no additional standard has been 
fixed, but the objective is clear. So this concerns me a lot.”

The Mental Health Policy Group, which includes charities and the Royal College 
of Psychiatrists, is concerned that the £1.25bn earmarked in the budget in 
March for children’s mental health services may not be found and mental health 
may be less of a priority under the Conservatives. They want the chancellor to 
recommit to providing the money in his emergency budget on 8 July.

Lamb revealed how he almost quit as a coalition minister because of government 
plans to backtrack on a major breakthrough in mental health care. He said he 
had to threaten to resign to prevent the promised introduction of the first 
patient waiting times for treatment being abandoned.

“It emerged that there was a risk that because of financial pressures in the 
NHS that it wouldn’t happen under the coalition, even though we’d committed to 
it in the Department of Health’s mandate to NHS England. I was told that it 
would have to be a Lib Dem manifesto commitment in 2015. I said that wasn’t 
good enough”, Lamb said. “I made clear that I’d resign if it was scrapped. I 
couldn’t countenance that. Once people understood that, it then happened.”

Jeremy Hunt and the Tories: a scary prospect for Britain's mental health
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/13/jeremy-hunt-health-secretary-conservatives-government-scary-prospect-britains-mental-health>
The plan for those with common mental health conditions such as depression to 
see a therapist within 18 weeks, and for people having their first episode of 
psychosis to get help within two weeks, came into force on 1 April. Meanwhile, 
it has emerged that Clegg’s pan-Whitehall ministerial taskforce on mental 
health, set up last November, has also been wound up.

The Department of Health confirmed that it no longer exists. “The deputy prime 
minister’s taskforce has finished its work. It was a cross-government taskforce 
which looked at children and adolescent mental health services, employment and 
how to reduce the number of people with mental health problems in prisons and 
police cells,” a spokeswoman said.

Lamb said: “I’m disappointed that the taskforce has been wound up. Improving 
mental health should mean it continues to drive progress across government.”

It would be “extraordinary” if the government backtracked on plans in Clegg’s 
taskforce report on mental health in March to bring in waiting times for 
children needing mental health care, especially given David Cameron and Hunt’s 
pledges to improve mental health, he said.

The prime minister last week highlighted the coalition’s “bold decisions” on 
mental health and pledged to make further progress in a major speech on the 
future of the NHS.

Andy Bell, deputy director of the Centre for Mental Health, said the £1.25bn 
“has to be just the start of a rebalancing of the NHS towards treating mental 
health equally with physical health and towards earlier intervention rather 
than waiting until problems have escalated into a crisis”. Setting further 
access and waiting standards for mental health, and ensuring NHS organisations 
introduce parity of esteem, was vital to help patients, he added.

Brian Dow, director of external affairs at Rethink Mental Illness, said many 
mental health workers “acknowledge Norman Lamb has been a fantastic champion 
for mental health. But that’s been as a minister in a coalition government, and 
it’s important to recognise that the Conservatives have also made a number of 
significant commitments on mental health.”

While encouraged by the new government’s commitment to improve crisis care 
“that has to be just the start. We need a transformative approach and urgent 
investment right across the mental health system, because it’s failing too many 
people,” he said.

A spokesman for Hunt pledged that equality and extra waiting times would be 
delivered by 2020. “The secretary of state worked closely with Norman Lamb 
during the last parliament to secure historic advances in mental health 
treatment. Making further progress in this area was set out as a key priority 
by the prime minister in his first major speech since the election,” he said.

“The five-year forward view, which we are funding in full with an additional 
£8bn, sets out the ambition to achieve genuine parity of esteem by 2020 and 
introduce waiting times standards for young people.”
 