
Djamel Beghal, who has emerged as a mentor to two of the gunmen involved in 
last week’s attacks in Paris, has been on the radar of western intelligence 
agencies for more than 15 years.

The French-Algerian moved from France to Britain in 1997, and became a regular 
worshipper at London’s Finsbury Park mosque and a disciple of the radical 
preachers Abu Hamza andAbu Qatada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-qatada>
. He came to be seen by UK and French intelligence as one of al-Qaida’s leading 
recruiters in Europe.

He was back in the news last week after it emerged that he was one of the 
links between Chérif Kouachi, one of the brothers behind the Charlie Hebdo 
massacre, and Amedy Coulibaly, who killed four hostages in a Paris kosher 
supermarket and also a policewoman.

French investigators believe Kouachi was radicalised by Beghal in prison, 
where he was serving a 10-year sentence for a plot to bomb the US embassy in 
Paris. Kouachi later visited Beghal when he was under house arrest in the 
Auvergne region of southernFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>. 
So did Coulibaly and his partner, Hayat Boumeddiene. She told police that they 
had gone there for “crossbow practice”.

Beghal left Algeria to study in France when he was 22. He married Sylvie, a 
French citizen, in 1990, while working as a youth worker and attempting to 
recruit Islamic converts in Corbeil-Essonnes, a small town on the river Seine 
south of Paris.

His first known contact with the authorities dates back to 1996, when he was 
questioned in France because his phone number had been found in the possession 
of a suspected terrorist. He was allowed to go free but remained under close 
surveillance in France.

In 1997, Beghal moved his family to Leicester, apparently earning money by 
making sandwiches and working for a homeless charity while studying information 
technology. But he made frequent trips to London and the Finsbury Park mosque.

According to legal documents in the case against Abu Qatada, who was deported 
from Britain after an 11-year battle, Beghal became an “extremist” under the 
influence of the preacher and was a member of a group involved in “distributing 
propaganda material” around Britain with Abu Qatada. Abu Qatada is also 
believed to have inspired him to move to Jalalabad in Afghanistan in November 
2000.

When he was arrested at Abu Dhabi airport in July the next year, he claimed to 
have been travelling from Pakistan to Morocco with the wife and children of a 
friend. But he was suspected of returning toEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> to lead Osama bin Laden’s war 
on the west after a year of training with senior al-Qaida commanders in 
Afghanistan.

In a vivid account of his interrogation in Abu Dhabi 
<http://cageuk.org/sites/default/files/reports/Djamel_Beghal.pdf> given to the 
campaign groupCage <http://www.cageuk.org/> in 2011, Beghal claimed he had been 
forced to endure deafening sounds and suffocating smells while being deprived 
of sleep, food and light.

Beghal said he had been interrogated and beaten by a British-accented agent 
who asked him solely about his connections with the UK. He said he was 
questioned about Leicester and prominent Muslims in London – chiefly Abu 
Qatada. “They wanted me to accuse Abu Qatada at any cost,” Beghal told Cage. 
“He would insist with brutality to reveal the link between Abu Qatada and Osama 
bin Laden, whom he called Abu Abdallah.”

Under interrogation, Beghal admitted to receiving training in Afghanistan, to 
meeting Abu Zubaydah – a key lieutenant of Bin Laden – and to travelling back 
to France to attack the US embassy in Paris.

Back in France he withdrew this confession but was convicted in March 2005 on 
terrorism charges and was sentenced to 10 years’ imprisonment.

He was released in 2009 but put under house arrest in the village of Murat, in 
the Auvergne, where he appears to have been visited by several aspiring jihadis 
including Kouachi and Coulibaly. They were all arrested in May 2010, accused of 
attempting to free Smaïn Aït Ali Belkacem, a convicted terrorist jailed for a 
1995 bombing of the Paris metro.

Beghal’s wife, Sylvie, still lives in Leicester with their four children in a 
four-bedroom terraced house overlooking a park. She is mounting a supreme court 
challenge to anti-terrorist legislation after she was questioned by police on 4 
January 2011 at East Midlands airport.

She was cautioned for failing to disclose information requested by officers 
under Schedule 7 of the Terrorism Act.

She pleaded guilty at Leicester magistrates court, but later brought 
unsuccessful appeals to the high court and court of appeal. In November 2014, 
she took her legal challenge to the supreme court, supported by the Muslim 
Council of Britain, Islamic Human Rights Commission and Cage.

In a statement after one court hearing, Sylvia Beghal said: “Once again my 
husband is punished for something he didn’t do … We just want to be left alone 
and live a peaceful life.”
 