
Adam Sampson's electronic diary is flickering on his computer screen. If it 
were a person, it would look anxious. The screen is packed with shaded squares 
alerting him to the multitude of meetings in the week ahead. "I've got just 15 
minutes free today," he says with a resigned shrug. "Busy. I'm just always so 
busy."

Since taking up his role as director of Shelter, the country's largest 
homelessness charity, just over two years ago, he has been especially active, 
an almost ubiquitous presence, popping up regularly in the media to comment on 
every conceivable aspect of housing policy and homelessness, as well as to 
launch a swath of new campaigns.

He has also been attempting to navigate the charity through a critical stage 
in its development. Sampson says he joined it at a time of great uncertainty. 
The number of people living rough on the streets - "the image people have 
traditionally equated with homelessness" - has fallen dramatically in recent 
years. The result is that charities in the homelessness field have had to 
confront uncomfortable questions about their purpose and role. Shelter, he 
says, has had no choice but to reinvent itself.

Under Sampson, Shelter's response has been to embrace a wider remit. In the 
past year in particular, it has been campaigning on "middle England" concerns, 
such as the effects of rampant house price inflation on first time buyers, and 
rural housing shortages. The charity has also, through its persistent lobbying, 
played a key role in shaping the deputy prime minister's house-building 
initiatives.

Charting a new direction has been anything but smooth. For example, it is 
clearly not in Shelter's interest that while it estimates there to be a quarter 
of a million people currently homeless in the UK, its rival, Crisis -with whom 
an attempted merger in 2001 failed acrimoniously - puts the figure at double 
that, while the government's estimate is 100,000. Sampson admits it does not 
look good to be disagreeing on such a fundamental point.

The biggest hiccup came last month when a linchpin of his strategy came in for 
some scathing criticism from the environmental charity, Friends of the Earth. 
The group accused Sampson of allowing Shelter to be "duped" by big business - 
large construction firms - into becoming part of a coalition promoting the 
building of more private houses in south-east England.

The coalition, backed by the deputy prime minster, John Prescott, and which 
also includes the Confederation of British Industry and housebuilders George 
Wimpey and Wilson Bowden, came together at the end of last year to persuade the 
government to implement the Barker report. It recommended 120,000 new private 
homes be built annually for the next five years.

FOE, in alliance with the Campaign to Protect Rural England, savaged Shelter's 
involvement and ridiculed Sampson for jumping on board, claiming the 
coalition's proposals were nothing more than "Mickey Mouse" economics and a 
threat to the countryside. "Shelter has been duped into thinking that simply 
building more houses will lead to the removal of people from housing and 
homelessness lists," an FOE spokesman said. "There is a need for more social 
housing but builders want to build executive homes that do not address this 
need."

Sampson refutes the implication that he has in some way sold out. FOE "is 
entitled to its point of view", he says. "I don't want to pick a fight. We 
share many of its environmental concerns." The coalition is "just a starting 
point", he suggests. "The fact is that there is a severe housing shortage. When 
it comes to building new homes, the big questions remain: should money be being 
spent on social housing for the poorest, or should it be spent on facilitating 
low-cost homeownership for key workers?"

But don't the critics have a valid point? Shouldn't Shelter be focused on 
campaigning for more social housing? Sampson says the charity has been 
vociferous in its criticism of the government's failure to dramatically 
increase spending on social housing. A dialogue with builders, he says, is "a 
necessary part of reaching a solution to the wider crisis".

Sampson is open to listening to his critics, but is certainly not shaken by 
them. He has experience of tackling challenging jobs and rolling with 
inconvenient political punches. His first job after university was "an 
extremely draining experience" as a probation officer for Winston Silcott, 
jailed for the killing of PC Keith Blakelock in 1987 and cleared almost five 
years later.

During his three-and-a-half years as deputy prisons ombudsman at the Home 
Office in the mid-1990s - when Michael Howard, the then home secretary, 
identified him as as potential troublemaker and tried to sack him before he'd 
even started - Sampson survived what he calls the "daily grind" of battling 
with bureaucracy.

His periods "inside the system" have proved valuable, Sampson says, but he 
relishes what he sees as his true calling: campaigning. He feels he was meant 
to do the job at Shelter and has no intention of being distracted from taking 
the charity in a new direction. "I am conscious that, over the few years before 
I arrived, Shelter had been very effective [at lobbying behind the scenes]," he 
says. "My predecessor [Chris Holmes] had huge reach into the upper echelon of 
government, and Shelter's ability to arm-twist ministers was unparalleled.

"What I've been trying to do, while hanging on to that, is to refresh the 
public campaign face of the organisation. Sooner or later, you have to beat up 
ministers publicly. To be effective, you have to show that you speak for a wide 
constituency of potential voters."

So is this partly where the decision to go down the route of campaigning on 
broader housing issues came from? "Absolutely," Sampson says. "What we are 
trying to show is that the housing crisis has manifestations beyond one 
marginalised group in society. It also has manifestations for mainstream 
voters. The social and political consequences of poor or overcrowded housing 
are far reaching."

Sampson insists that all this is not a distraction from Shelter's core ethos 
of campaigning for people who are destitute and living rough. A key part of 
Shelter's role in the coming months and years, he says, will be to point out to 
government that housing policy is inextricably linked to other social policies 
and has a function in helping to reduce social exclusion.

"If people are living in poor housing conditions it has an impact on child 
poverty, on educational attainment and on many other areas," he says. "The 
images that launched Shelter were not of teenagers in cardboard boxes. They 
were images such as the final scene of Cathy Come Home, where the kids are 
being taken into care. It is images like this that are closer to what we are 
having to deal with today."

Sampson's vision for Shelter is rooted in changes facing the whole voluntary 
sector. He says that as the sector as a whole moves increasingly towards 
"centre stage in delivering social care", charities need to ensure that they 
"don't lose sight of their purpose" and stay focused on campaigning for what 
people need.

"It is the job of voluntary organisations to offer solutions, not just to 
point out the problem," he says. "The battle now in housing is to establish the 
priorities for action. An adequate supply of good quality, affordable housing 
that is sustainable, and that has proper infrastructure around it, is what is 
needed."

Shelter says £3.5bn a year is needed to get to grips with the current 
shortages. "It is up to us to give Prescott better weapons with which to fight 
for more money from [the chancellor, Gordon] Brown," Sampson concludes. "In the 
meantime, the situation only gets worse."

The CV

 Age 44 

 Status  Married, with two kids. 

 Lives  King's Cross, north London. 

 Education Maidstone grammar school, Kent; Brasenose College, Oxford: degree 
in Classics, Masters in psychology and social policy; brief spell as junior 
dean of the college.

 Career  1987-89: system probation officer, Probation Service; 1989-94: deputy 
director, Prison Reform Trust; 1994-97: deputy prisons ombudsman, Home Office; 
1998-2003: chief executive, Rehabilitation of Addicted Prisoners Trust (Rapt); 
2003: director, Shelter.

 Interests  "It's a sad and bitter fact that I am interested in all the sorts 
of things you'd expect. A mixture of low and high brow: cinema, football, 
music. Sleeping is an aspiration."

·  Homes for All; Renewing our Communities, a special pullout in the centre 
pages of today's Society Guardian
 