
Michael Cheika is confident Australia will be on the edge when they arrive in 
Europe next month for their grand slam tour of the four home unions and France 
but they have spent most of the year on the edge of a cliff and ascruffy 
victory over Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/argentina-australia-rugby-championship-match-report>
 in the first Rugby Championship match outside the southern hemisphere did 
little to suggest they will be all-conquering.

Australia’s Samu Kerevi takes advantage as Argentina miss home comforts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/argentina-australia-rugby-championship-match-report>
Argentina enjoyed 66% of possession in front of the biggest “home” crowd they 
have attracted for a championship match against Australia – the organisers were 
so surprised at the number of spectators who bought tickets on the night that a 
number missed the start – but their cavalier approach led to mistakes, four of 
which were followed by the Wallabies’ tries.

“Our maul was pretty good against Argentina and our scrum stood up,” said 
Cheika, Australia’s coach. “When we return to Europe next month [after another 
joust with the All Blacks] we will want a little more edge around everything. I 
think we need to start chasing what we want out of the game a little harder.”

Australia have not enjoyed continuity this year: only seven of the side who 
startedlast year’s World Cup final against New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/31/new-zealand-australia-rugby-world-cup-final-match-report>
 ran out on Saturday evening. Their back division have continually changed, 
mainly because of injuries, and if there has been salvation for Cheika in a 
year in which the Wallabies, Argentina and South Africa fought to avoid 
finishing last in the table,with the All Blacks romping to the title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/17/rugby-championship-nz-south-africa-match-report>
, it is that he has more depth now.

“I did not realise the team would change as much,” Cheika said. “Looking at 
the side that finished against Argentina, if you had predicted that a year ago 
people would have said you were mad. A number of guys have stood up, especially 
the young ones, and we are creating some competition. That should help us bring 
the edge I am looking for in what will be a special tour for us.”

While Australia’s defence held up for the most part to Argentina’s offloading, 
high tempo and improvisation, their discipline was suspect. Michael Hooper and 
Adam Coleman received first-half yellow cards for high tackles, although the 
worst offender, Rory Arnold, remained on the pitch. In the second period the 
replacement scrum-half Nick Phipps lunged at one of Argentina’s medical team, 
who was jogging off the pitch after treating a player, and shoved him to the 
ground, believing he was going to pick up the ball, which was not in play.

Phipps, who in an earlier championship match against New Zealand threw away 
the boot of an opponent, was reprimanded by the referee but not sent to the 
sin-bin and after the match received a warning from the citing commissioner for 
an act that was deemed “contrary to good sportsmanship”.

New Zealand had earlier in the day shown how far they were away from the 
chasing pack witha record 57-15 victory in South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/south-africa-new-zealand-rugby-championship-match-report>
 and if there is a consolation for Australia, Argentina and the Springboks 
before their tours next month, it is that the game in Europe is less quick and 
skilful, and they will meet teams much closer to them. Australia start in 
Cardiff on 5 November, having made a bonfire of Wales’s aspirations in the past 
eight years.

Argentina could pose the greatest problems of the three because they attack in 
a manner rarely seen in Europe. When they clicked on Saturday, they were 
irrepressible but they lacked a general to steer them around the pitch and they 
too often tried to make things happen rather than scent opportunity.

Ultimately, the difference between the sides was the two tries the Pumas gave 
away through careless passes in their own half but they looked to have more 
potential than Australia. It was nous they lacked but that should come as their 
players gain more experience in theRugby Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-championship> and they were missing 
six players through injury.

In Samu Kerevi, Australia had a centre who thought on his feet and scored two 
tries. “We will be a lot more confident against England in December than we 
were in the summer, when we were a young team with a number of debutants,” he 
said. “We will be a different team and we showed our defensive structures have 
improved when we held our line on the two occasions we had a player in the 
sin-bin.”

Argentina Tuculet; Moroni, Orlando, De la Fuente, Moyano (Cubelli, 57); 
Iglesias, Landajo; Noguera (García Botta, 67), Creevy (capt; Montoya, 65), 
Herrera (Pieretto, 67), Petti (Kremer, 74), Alemanno, Ortega Desio, Matera, 
Senatore (Leguizamon, 50).

Tries Alemanno, De la Fuente. Con Iglesias. Pens Iglesias 3.

Australia Folau (Kuridrani, 78); Haylett-Petty, Kerevi, Foley, Hodge; Cooper, 
Genia (Phipps, 63); Sio (Robertson, 60), Moore (capt; Hanson, 74), Kepu 
(Ala’alatoa, 60), Arnold (Fardy, 55), Coleman (Douglas, 60), Mumm, Hooper, 
Timani (Houston, 69).

Tries Coleman, Kerevi 2, Mumm. Cons Foley 2. Pens Foley 3.

Sin-bin Hooper 16, Coleman 30.

Referee M Raynal (Fr). Attendance 48,515.
 