
There is a strong appetite in the Middle East for high-quality news content 
and a desire to see trustworthy reporting from a range of different 
perspectives,according to a new survey conducted for the Associated Press 
<http://marketing.ap.org/videonewsinsightsMENA> (AP).

Entitled "Spring tide: the new era for video news in the Middle East and North 
Africa," the report reveals a thriving market where 97% of consumers regularly 
discuss news and current affairs in their daily lives.

The survey, conducted by Ipsos Mori, surveyed the views of people aged 18 to 
45 in Egypt, Saudi Arabia and theUnited Arab Emirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/united-arab-emirates>.

Evidently, news is consumed by audiences in the three countries for an average 
of 72 minutes a day, longer than their counterparts in the UK, Germany and 
Japan.

But the research also shows that the Middle East audience is not always well 
served by the existing news suppliers, presenting a substantial opportunity for 
news organisations.

Trust is regarded as most important to the Middle East consumers, with almost 
a third of respondents identifying it as paramount when choosing a news 
provider. Previous survey respondents in Europe and Asia considered speed to be 
more significant.

Quality is also important. Although they indicate a preference for locally 
produced content, more than half of respondents like international TV content 
because of its better quality video clips.

As for content itself, 63% of consumers expressed a desire for increased 
coverage of regionally-focused stories.

The findings also suggest - unsurprisingly - that social media is increasingly 
popular and also changing consumers' behaviour, with 59% discovering the 
majority of news via social media.

But TV remains important for finding out more about a story once it has 
broken, with 43% accessing it first to get more information.

"The new study gives us a much deeper understanding of Middle East news 
consumers and how the industry needs to adapt to meet their needs," said Ian 
Phillips, Middle East director of news for AP.

"The demand for better quality video and more regional news also presents a 
number of opportunities, while the increased use of social media suggests the 
need for new and innovative strategies to drive audiences back to online news 
sites."

The report is produced by Deloitte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/deloitte>. Its European head of digital 
strategy, Matthew Guest, said: "The findings highlight a series of exciting 
opportunities for news providers, particularly for local outlets that are in a 
position to produce a richer, more cultural output for audiences.

Source: Associated Press <http://marketing.ap.org/videonewsinsightsMENA>
 