
Joe Shaw, the Saracens assistant coach, was left excited by Mike Ellery after 
the wing’s superb second-half try helped his side into the LV Cup final. Saints 
led 13-5 at the interval but Ellery’s brilliant score two minutes into the 
second half saw momentum shift toSaracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens>.

Shaw, Saracens’ skills coach, said of the powerful wideman: “He came to us 
from sevens and was extremely raw. He works very hard on the training ground 
and is very analytical but we are really excited about this player as he has 
magical ability.

“We would have liked to have fired off more shots before the interval but we 
played the elements very well as there was a strong wind out there.”

The victory puts Saracens through to next Sunday’s final at Franklin’s 
Gardens, where they will meet either Exeter or Leicester, who play on Sunday.

Shaw said: “It was a very tough game against an incredibly strong pack so we 
are chuffed to be in the final as it will continue to be a learning curve for 
this group.”

Maro Itoje, the Saracens captain who won the man of the match award, said: 
“It’s was all about the result and it’s a special moment to be in the final. We 
knew at half-time that it would be easier in the second half with the wind in 
our favour.”

The Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> coach, 
Jim Mallinder, pinpointed Ellery’s try as the “killer blow” as his side’s hopes 
of a final on their own ground went up in smoke. He also rued Saints’ inability 
to build a bigger lead before the break. “To have the final at Franklin’s 
Gardens would have been ideal, it’s something we have been targeting,” he said.

“We should have been further ahead at the interval and to concede Ellery’s try 
so soon after the interval was the killer blow.

“Sarries played well in slowing our ball down but we didn’t play well enough 
over the whole 80 minutes.”

Before the interval, Northampton had been totally dominant and looked in 
control of the match, building up a 13-5 half-time lead. However, the home 
side, aided by the wind, were able to launch a rally to run out narrow winners.

David Strettle and Ellery scored tries for Saracens. Ben Spencer converted one 
and kicked three penalties. Northampton threatened a comeback but a late drop 
goal from Nils Mordt put Saracens through to the final despite Northampton’s 
desperate efforts near the end.

Sam Olver scored all Saints’ first-half points with a converted try and two 
penalties. Lee Dickson scored their second try, which was converted by Stephen 
Myler.
 