
BBC Radio 1 chart show presenter Jameela Jamil has told how she was subject to 
"terrifying" death and sexual threats on Twitter after she criticisedMiley Cyrus
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/miley-cyrus>.

Jamil said pop stars such as Cyrus, who provoked outrage with her twerking 
performance opposite Robin Thicke at last year's MTV video music awards, were 
contributing to the objectification of women's bodies.

Jamil, who also makes documentaries for BBC3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc3>, criticised the BBC's decision to 
close down the TV channel, making it online-only next year, saying young people 
always "got the short end of the bargain".

In a discussion about trolling at Ad Week Europe in London on Tuesday, Jamil 
said: "I have had quite a lot of those death threats, really scary sexual 
threats, all because I might have touched on Miley Cyrus and her overt use of 
her sexuality and her vagina to give her more of a platform in the media.

"I debated whether it was the right way to go necessarily for the progression 
of woman and it was just terrifying, the onslaught that you receive."

Jamil, who took over Radio 1's official chart last year from Reggie Yates, 
part of the station's move to attract a younger audience, said women in the 
mainstream media should do more to support other women.

"You don't always see that in magazines and in all publications," she said. 
"You see women tearing down other women, women publishing unflattering 
photographs of other women, chastising other women. It's time to encourage one 
another," she told the conference.

"The media which criticises young people are the same media who are guilty of 
turning us against each other."

On the increasing sexualisation of women in the media and in music videos, 
Jamil said: "Women, especially a lot of pop stars, tend to treat it as if they 
are using it to empower themselves, taking ownership [of their bodies], taking 
the taboo out of it, when in fact what they are doing is perpetuating something 
created by men.

"Women's bodies have always been used as a spectacle and objectified. This 
further perpetuates that. It's a bit of a shame because they have the platform 
to make a difference and to shape a generation's minds. It should not be abused 
and taken for granted."

Jamil said the generation of so-called "millennials" – people born in the 
1980s and 1990s – were portrayed in the media as "spoiled and hard done by".

"We don't get nearly as much good press as we deserve," she said. "I get 
particularly depressed by the way teenagers are portrayed in the media. They 
are massively underestimated. They are bright, intelligent people who are given 
less and less opportunity. They are an ignored generation."

With BBC3, the corporation's dedicated youth channel due to close as a TV 
channel next year, replaced by an online-only service, Jamil said: "It's so 
often the young people who get the short end of the bargain.

"Look at T4 [on Channel 4] – it went away, now there is very little youth 
programming going on. BBC3 was something that … of course there was the odd 
questionable title, as there is with any channel, but it was really 
specifically targeted at making documentaries for young people.

"It was educating them, nurturing them, saying you are important, we are 
gifting you with knowledge that will arm you in later life. We are not doing 
that, we are expecting them to find it for themselves and everything is online 
now. Everyone is becoming very separated in the next generation, chatting on 
Facebook and Twitter. They are becoming isolated."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 