
4.29pm BST 

Afternoon summary

Here are the main points from the afternoon session of the conference. 

• Sir Roger Carr, the chairman of BAE Systems, hit out at Labour's plans to 
impose a cap on energy prices.

The best way to create a long-term outlook [for business] is to give business 
a sense of long-term stability in the policies that are imposed by government. 
And if one sees extremes developing such that what was an interesting place to 
invest becomes a dangerous place to invest, ultimately that's bad for the 
economy. And although it's maybe controversial, I would say energy is a very 
good example of where that has happened in recent times. And that's not in the 
interests of the United Kingdom.

In remarks that seemed particularly aimed at Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>, he also said that politicians 
should stop "the demonisation of business" and that they should not lurch back 
to the policies of the past.

In politics those in power have got to stop the demonisation of business, and 
businessmen and particularly big business, because the support of small and 
medium sized businesses is very good, and very important for growth, but they 
need big business to help that growth occur ...

The watchword for the politicians is not to lurch back to moods and practices 
of the past in the misguided belief that it holds a key to future success. Only 
honing our national competitive edge is going to deliver a sustainable platform 
for inclusive prosperity in the future.

• A former adviser to Barack Obama said that David Cameron's decision to hold 
a referendum on membership of the EU was "a very, very serious mistake". Gene 
Sperling, who was director of Obama's national economic council until earlier 
this year, said that n the era of globalisation countries had to work together.

I think it is a very, very serious mistake for the current government to even 
flirt with the idea of walking away from the table of the EU when what you need 
more than ever is a Britain with their sleeves rolled up at the table, 
responsible, pushing for the right policies. The world does not allow you to 
isolate yourself any more. The economy will not isolate you any more. So either 
you have to choose: are you going to be engaged in the shaping of European 
economic policy, or are you going to walk away from the table?

• Lord Mandelson suggested the case for government action to tackle inequality 
was stronger now than it was during the 1990s.

I think that we took for granted in the 1990s, perhaps more than we can now, 
that self-evident and continuing economic growth will result in rising living 
standards, without our needing to make quite so many interventions. That is not 
to say we didn't, as a Labour government, intervene in so many ways to tackle 
poverty and tackle inequality. But, politically, these issues of inequality and 
fairness have become quite sharp since the financial crisis, and we have to 
address them, both in politics and in business.

• Rachel Reeves <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/rachel-reeves>, the 
shadow work and pensions secretary, said the welfare state should not be 
expected to do so much redistribution.Wages should be fairer before the 
benefits system kicks in, she said.

The welfare state on its own cannot deliver a distribution of income and 
wealth that we think is fair. In fact, I think we ask the welfare state on its 
own to do too much. We expect the tax and benefit system to redistribute income 
and wealth after the market has delivered its outcome. Actually, it would be 
much better if the market in the first place distributed income and wealth more 
fairly.

She also said she wanted to control welfare spending because high welfare 
spending was not a always sign of success.

I don't think that spending more on welfare is a sign of success; in many 
cases, it's a sign of failure.

• Ed Balls <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edballs> said it was 
important to "love" people who created jobs.Referring to a comment Gene 
Sperling made in his speech, Balls aaid he endorsed it.


As you [Sperling] put it in a very simple way, you can't love the jobs unless 
you love the people who create the jobs. And we want to work with the people 
here who create the hjobs so that we can create more good jobs for the people 
in Britain in the coming years.

That's all from me for today.

Thanks for the comments.

Updated at 4.39pm BST

3.21pm BST 

Ed Balls is winding up now.

Don't worry, he says. He's not going to give a speech. His speech from Monday 
has been included in the delegates pack, so we can read that on the way home, 
he tells us.

He says he endorses Gene Sperling's point about how you can't love the jobs 
unless you appreciate the people who create the jobs.

And that's it. 

I'll post a summary shortly.

3.18pm BST 

Sperling says, on global taxation, there is merit in the idea of a minimum tax 
rate - a rate that all firms would have to pay, regardless of where they are 
based.

If that were introduced, a country like the US would not have to worry about 
tax competition. If a firm moved to a country with a lower tax rate, say 7%, it 
would have to repay the difference between that rate and the minimum rate to 
the US.

And that's it.

3.15pm BST 

Sperling says he and Ed Balls have discussing tax credits for 20 years.

Bill Clinton introduced earned income tax credits. Clinton said no parent who 
worked full time should have to raise their child in poverty. That line always 
resonated with people in his speeches.

But at the time they did not realise how tax credits would benefit the economy 
generally.

The US poverty rate does not include tax credits. When you factor it in, it 
has gone from raising 1.5m people out of poverty to 12m, he says.

And tax credits protected people during the recession, he says.

Tax credits are beneficial morally and economically. And, because they revolve 
around work, they have widespread support, he says.

3.07pm BST 

Sperling says you should not just look at overall government spending levels. 
It is also important to look at what the government is spending money on too, 
he says.

In the US the government did not focus enough on the composition of its 
spending.

It is important to control debt, while also securing growth and keeping 
investment in measures necessary for the future, he says.

In the US the government has not done enough to tackle entitlements, he says.

He also says the government has not done enough to tackle long-term 
unemployment.

One study involved sending out two sets of job applications. They were 
identical apart from one difference; one said the person had been unemployed 
for a month, and the other said the person had been unemployed for a year. The 
former were 15 times more likely to get accepted.

And long-term unemployment can be terrible for someone's health, he says. It 
can be even worse for someone than cancer, he says.

2.59pm BST 

Sperling says that one of the lessons of recent years is that no one is immune 
from what happens elsewhere in the world.

It is a big mistake for Britain to even flirt with the idea of leaving the EU, 
he says.

The world does not allow you to isolate yourself any more, he says.

(This gets a round of applause. Pro-EU comments are about the only ones that 
have generated spontaneous applause today.)

2.51pm BST 

Sperling praises Ed Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> 
for recognising that there will not be a protectionist solution to the problems 
facing the economy.

And Miliband recognises that you cannot have more jobs if you disparage the 
people who create jobs, he says.

2.50pm BST 

Sperling says growth on its own does not necessarily further the goals he has 
identified.

Growth could lead to a hollowing out of the middle class, he says.

But you could also imagine a positive competition, where countries like the US 
and the UK do ensure that their growth is inclusive.

2.44pm BST 

Sperling says people who set economic goals should have to explain why they 
are choosing those goals.

He suggests three goals for economic policy makers.

1. Having a larger, stronger middle class.

2. Allowing people do better for themselves.

3. Allowing people to work and live and retire with dignity.
Chuka Umunna (@ChukaUmunna) 
Fmr head of @billclinton <https://twitter.com/billclinton> and @BarackObama 
<https://twitter.com/BarackObama>'s National Economic Council, Gene Sperling, 
speaking at@policynetwork <https://twitter.com/policynetwork> now 
pic.twitter.com/vfQ9mnawtV <http://t.co/vfQ9mnawtV>
 <https://twitter.com/ChukaUmunna/statuses/484693491688435712> July 3, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/ChukaUmunna/statuses/484693491688435712> 
Updated at 2.46pm BST

2.41pm BST 

Gene Sperling's speech

Gene Sperling is speaking now.

He thanks Ed Balls for his introduction. Balls said Sperling was an economic 
adviser to two presidents (Clinton and Obama). Sperling says normally when he 
is introduced, they also mention that he was also an a consultant to West Wing. 
People are nomally more impressed by this than the fact that he spent 11 years 
advising real presidents, he says.

Sperling says he played a big role in writing the Shut Down episode.

When he was advising Obama, during the showdown with Congress over the budget, 
Obama at one point said he should do what President Bartlett did, Sperling 
says. Sperling says he has to say he helped write that episode.

2.37pm BST 

Ed Balls is now introducing Gene Sperling, the next speaker. This is what 
Patrick Wintour wrote about Sperling this morning.

The theme of shared prosperity that will dominate his speech derives from The 
Pro-Growth Progressive 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Pro-growth-Progressive-Economic-Prosperity/dp/0743237536>
, a book written by Gene Sperling, the key Clinton and Obama economic adviser.

Sperling quit his job as White House national economic adviser in the spring, 
but has spent almost 20 years at the heart of Democratic party economics, 
advocating policies to share economic prosperity, including in the Clinton-era 
a tight deficit reduction programme.

2.35pm BST 

Mandelson turns to pay.

He has not taken questions from the audience. He prefers his own questions 
(which are good ones, to be fair.)

Q: Should we change the way the minimum wage operates? And do we need a high 
pay commission?

O'Grady says she sat on the high pay commission. It said there should be a 
statutory high pay commission.

Lambert ays he shares the IFS criticism of Labour's plan for tax breaks for 
the living wage. Firms would game that, he says.

Having a statutory high pay commision would be ridiculous.

Carr says using legislation to tackle high pay would be ridiculous.

A member of the audience intervenes. People at the top are getting far too 
much. And expecting shareholders to control executive pay does not work.

Asmussen says Germany has just passed minimum wage legislation today. Some 4m 
people will benefit, he says.

Mandelson asks Reeves to respond to Lambert's point about the living wage tax 
relief. Ed Miliband spoke about this this morning. (See 10.44am.) Reeves 
repeats his argument.

If the minimum wage had kept pace with directors' pay, it would be worth £19 
an hour, she says.

And that's it. That session is over.

2.26pm BST 

Mandelson asks Reeves what Labour would do differently.

Reeves says government can lead the way by taking on more apprentices itself.

Q: And what about the private sector?

Reeves says you cannot tell the private sector what to do if the public sector 
is not leading.

Mandelson says that's a politician's answer.

Q: And after that? What would the government do if the private sector still 
refused to take on more apprentices?

Reeves says she would prefer a voluntary approach.

Updated at 2.27pm BST

2.23pm BST 

Frances O'Grady asks Sir Roger Carr asks how he thinks change can happen.

We have had a problem with lack of skills for years, she says.

She says you do not necessarily have to change the law. But unions and 
business must work together.

Carr says in the past industry produced excellent apprenticeship schemes. They 
shrank. But they could be brought back.

Business wants them, unions want them, and the government too.

Mandelson says there was a business secretary in the last Labour goverment (I 
wonder who?) who introduced modern apprenticeships.

2.19pm BST 

Sir Richard Lambert says we should make the system work better.

Why is it more tax efficient to borrow than to issue equity? Change the rules.

And do something about high-velocity trading, he says.

And you should create more competition in the banking system. There is no 
point just having lots of small banks.

2.17pm BST 

Sir Roger Carr says now there are more people wanting to go into engineering 
than before the crash. But the economy should develop engineering and finance, 
he says.

Business needs long-term stability.

If what was a good place to invest starts to look like a bad place to invest, 
that causes a problem, he says. He says energy is an example of this.

2.15pm BST 

Lord Mandelson says there seems to be a consensus; everyone is saying if we 
have better skills, people will get better jobs and better pay.

Frances O'Grady says she is not saying skills are enough on their own.

One problem is that people train as engineers and then go into banking, she 
says.

And there is an issue in relation to power. You need to give workers more 
voice, she says.

However much we invest in skills and training, important though that is, that 
will not address the underlying problem. Most people are not feeling the 
benefits of the recovery.

Mandelson asks a question.

Q: Is it possible the new banking regulation could makes banks more risk 
averse, and that this could have a negative effect on lending? And might they 
view poorer people as a bigger risk, and lend them less money?

(It is not clear whether Mandelson is arguing this proposition, or whether he 
is playing devil's advocate.)

O'Grady says the TUC favours a state investment bank. And it wants regional 
banks too.

2.10pm BST 

Rachel Reeves says spending more on welfare is not a sign of success. It is a 
sign of failure.

On its own the welfare state cannot deliver a fair distribution of income, she 
says.

We asks the welfare state to do to much. It would be better if we got the 
market and the economy to distribute wealth fairly before the welfare state 
starts redistributing money, she says.

Skills are at the heart of this. We need to follow the German direction.

When she left school, the government continued to invest in her, she says. She 
got a degree and masters.

But people who left school with her got no further investment in their 
education.

2.05pm BST 

Lord Mandelson says he remembers Gordon Brown making a speech, when he was 
chancellor, about the deficiencies of "Rhineland capitalism", and how Germany 
would do better following Britain.

Now Jorg Asmussen has a chance to to respond to Brown and show how Germany is 
doing well without following his advice.

Asmussen says Germany is doing well now. But 10 years ago it was seen as the 
sick man of Europe, he says.

Germany has rising income inequality. And, in terms of wealth, it is the most 
unequal country in Europe, he says.

He says vocational training is deeply embedded in Germany. You cannot adopt it 
quickly.

There are 214 types of apprenticeship in Germany. They are updated constantly, 
according to what firms needs.

He says co-determination works. Unions work with business, and they know what 
business needs.

He says Germany wants Britain to stay in the EU. That is not just for economic 
reasons; it is because of the British influence on issues like human rights, he 
says.

1.55pm BST 

Sir Roger Carr says only business can generate the wealth which will guarantee 
far shares for all.

He says we should resist the belief that increasing tax on business is the 
best way to help those who are not doing so well.

There is a "challenged middle group", he says. Their position has been made 
more difficult by technological change. And there are those at the bottom who 
are doing badly.

These problems have to be addressed, he says.

In education, STEM cells subjects are critical.

There should be more real apprenticeships, not token apprenticeships. At BAE 
Systems he has seen how this can be a real step up towards a high-wage job, he 
says.

It should be recognised that having skills can be as important as having 
academic qualifications.

And business and politics need to respect each other.

"Undeserved reward" at the top has to be addressed, he says.

But the demonisation of business, and especially big business, by politicians 
needs to stop. Small businesses are important. But they need big business to 
succeed too.

There has been great cooperation between government, unions and business at a 
time of adversity. That should be preserved.

Politicians should not "lurch back" to the policies of the past in the hope 
that that will provide a solution, he says.

Carr gets a round of applause.

Updated at 2.01pm BST

1.47pm BST 

Frances O'Grady says papers do not report good relationships where they exist 
between unions and employers. These relationship could form the bones of a new 
consensus.

She was at the BMW plant at Cowley recently, she says. Industrial relations 
there were far better than in the days when her dad worked there.

She says all businesses need to pay their fare share of tax.

We need fair pay, she says. Too much money is going into executive pay. We 
need new institutions to deliver this, she says.

And we need new rules to address short-termism. The corporate governance 
regime is no longer fit for purpose, she says.

If German workers can have voice in the boardroom, why shouldn't British 
workers have a voice there too?

1.42pm BST 

Sir Richard Lambert says there is a risk Britain is turning into a low-risk, 
low-skill economy.

Why aren't there more decent jobs?

In the long-term, the causes of low pay are low productivity and/or 
exploitation of workers by firms abusing market power.

Lambert says he is going to focus on productivity.

Old people were in the top three in an OECD study of skills, he says. But 
young people were in the bottom group.

And the UK was the only place where older people had better skills than 
younger people.

There needs to be a bipartisan approach, he says. In Germany they have changed 
vocational education about once in the last 50 years. Here it happens every 
three and a half years. No wonder no one knows what is going on.

1.37pm BST 

Mandelson is not introducing the panel.

They are: Jorg Asmussen, a German labour minister; Sir Roger Carr, chairman of 
BAE Systems;Sir Richard Lambert, the former CBI director general and now 
chancellor of the University of Warwick,Frances O'Grady, the TUC general 
secretary; and Rachel Reeves, the shadow work and pensions secretary.

Introducing O'Grady, Mandelson said that he started his working life at the 
TUC, as the most junior official in the economic division.

Introducing Asmussen, Mandelson said he used to work for the European Central 
Bank. He was one of the technocrats who saved the eurozone.

He says Reeves will be "a great success in the next Labour government".

(update at 5.40pm: I have corrected this to make it clear that Mandelson's 
first job was with the TUC - by mistake, I originally said the CBI)

Chuka Umunna (@ChukaUmunna) 
Panel at @policynetwork <https://twitter.com/policynetwork>: Richard Lambert, 
Francis O'Grady,Lord Mandelson,Roger Carr, Jorg Asmussen &@RachelReevesMP 
<https://twitter.com/RachelReevesMP> pic.twitter.com/WPoniAca9s 
<http://t.co/WPoniAca9s>
 <https://twitter.com/ChukaUmunna/statuses/484687628093358080> July 3, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/ChukaUmunna/statuses/484687628093358080> 
Updated at 5.41pm BST

1.33pm BST 

Mandleson says issues if equality are more important now then they were in the 
1990s.

In the 1990s it was thought that growth would lead to rising living standards 
without as much government intervention as people now realise is necessary.

The biggest change has been the arrival of a vast labour force in the global 
market, from China and elsewhere.

So the challenge is to find policies that reduce the negative impact of 
inequality, he says.

1.30pm BST 

Lord Mandelson, the former Labour business secretary, is hosting the next 
session. It is just starting now.

He says Ed Miliband's speech was "practical and gritty, and therefore, from a 
business point of view, very welcome."

1.25pm BST 

Lunchtime summary

• Ed Miliband has said that successful, profit-making businesses will play an 
essential part in Labour's drive to transform Britain. In a speech to at Policy 
Network's Inclusive Prosperity conference, he sought to counter claims that 
Labour has a poor relationship with business by stressing how much he valued it.

The resilience you have shown in the last few years, in keeping on producing 
the wealth our country needs has been a true sign of your strength even in 
tough times.

There is no way for our country to succeed without you - businesses big and 
small -succeeding ...

So we can build a prosperity, in which all can share fairly, right across 
Britain.

 To create the high paying, high skilled jobs that are central to improving 
the condition of Britain.

But the only way we can realise this mission is through your success. 

The great, dynamic businesses of our country.

Creating the jobs and making the profits.

(Miliband was speaking to a business audience, or at least a business-ish 
audience. No self-respecting entrepreneur would be at a political conference 
when he or she could be turning a profit, and many of the questions came from 
people representing trade organisations, but the people who asked the questions 
were all business-orientated. It was like the crowd that turns up at the CBI 
annual conference.)

• Lord Sainsbury, the former Labour science minister, has said that voters and 
businesses do not know enough about how a Miliband government would treat 
business.He made the comment in his opening speech, explaining why today's 
conference was needed.

While the general election is less than a year away, the challenge today is 
that neither industry nor the voters feel they fully know how the Labour party 
views its relationship with industry.

• Miliband has reaffirmed his opposition to having an in/out referendum on 
Europe in the next parliament. In his speech he said:

I am absolutely convinced that our future lies in the EU. I am not going to 
follow others in saying that we should commit to spending the next three years 
focusing on an EU referendum in 2017 ... It is not the priority for the country.

This line got more applause than anything else Milband said. 

• Miliband has committed Labour to creating a national infrastructure 
commission. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jul/03/labour-ed-miliband-national-infrastructure-commission>
Richard Threlfall, UK head of infrastructure at KPMG, welcomed the announcement.

The single biggest challenge facing our country is its need to sustain 
economic growth in a fiercely competitive global economy in the coming decades. 
To do that we must invest continuously in our infrastructure - our energy, 
transport and water networks, in our cities, schools, hospitals and housing. 
Importantly, to do this without wasting time and money, we need an investment 
plan focused on ensuring that every pound we spend drives the most economic 
growth for UK PLC. That is why the proposed infrastructure commission put 
forward by Sir John Armitt is so essential.

• The CBI has said that more needs to be done to tackle low pay and to ensure 
that all people benefit from the recovery. Katja Hall, the CBI deputy director 
general, made the point as she publisheda report on making the recovery work 
for everyone 
<http://www.cbi.org.uk/media-centre/press-releases/2014/07/we-need-to-make-sure-growth-makes-a-difference-to-everyone-cbi-deputy-director-general-katja-hall/>
, timed to coincide with the conference.

We must make sure growth makes a difference to everyone and we need long-term 
solutions that lead to long-term prosperity. Policies with short-term appeal 
are unlikely to deliver growth for all in the future.

Our labour market has a strong history of delivering new jobs and pay rises, 
but some people are still being left behind. And who you are has far too much 
influence on your ability to find a job and progress in your career.

We need to help groups at risk of disadvantage in the jobs market through 
better routes into higher-skilled, higher-paid work.

Businesses must also do more to raise productivity to drive long-term growth 
and make higher pay rises possible. The UK is the only developed nation where 
productivity hasn’t been restored to pre-recession levels.
 Ed Miliband speaking at the Inclusive Prosperity conference Photograph: Oli 
Scarff/Getty Images 
Updated at 4.42pm BST

12.54pm BST 

Sajid Javid, the Conservative culture secretary, has put out this statement 
about Ed Miliband's speech.

It's the same old Labour, just offering more spending, more borrowing and more 
taxes. When even his own top adviser says he's not up to the job, it's clear Ed 
Miliband is too weak to take the difficult decisions needed to secure Britain's 
future.

Rather than playing short-term political games with the new north-south 
railway - HS2 - Labour should back it, back HS3 in the North, and back our 
national infrastructure plan.


12.46pm BST 

Hall says the CBI has today published a report on how to make the recovery 
work for everyone.

We should not be worrying about people in low-paid jobs as well as there are 
routes out of those jobs, she says.

There are more details of the CBI report here. 
<http://www.cbi.org.uk/media-centre/press-releases/2014/07/we-need-to-make-sure-growth-makes-a-difference-to-everyone-cbi-deputy-director-general-katja-hall/>

And that's it. They have broken up for lunch.

I'll post a summary shortly.

12.42pm BST 

Umunna is now taking questions.

Q: [From a Prince's Trust entrepeneur] We all need an A level in work ethic.

Cochrane says he has a factory in Todmorden, in West Yorkshire. When it takes 
on apprentices, it interviews the parents, because there attitude is important.

Q: [From AutoAnalysis] Labour does not have many MPs with experience of 
investment decisions.


Umunna says Liam Byrne ran his own business, as did Toby Perkins and Ian 
Murray. So Labour does have people like this.

And Charles Allen 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Allen_%28businessman%29> has become a 
Labour peer.

Q: [From an Intern Aware trustee] What would Labour do to stop people having 
to do unpaid internships?

Umunna says he used to take unpaid interns in his office. But then he stopped, 
because he felt it was the wrong thing do to.

Feeney says when she started, she worked for nothing. But people should not be 
doing that now. Companies should be able to have at least one paid internship.

People should be interviewed for them as if they are being interviewed for a 
job.

12.28pm BST 

Peace says the Standard Chartered Bank accounts for 1.5% of GDP in sub-Saharan 
Africa.

Leveraging your network will be increasingly important, he says. Big firms are 
good at this. But smaller firms find this harder.

12.25pm BST 

Turning away from the panel for a moment, two Ed Miliband articles in today's 
papers are worth flagging up.

Intriguingly, Miliband is being strongly praised by a writer on the right (the 
Telegraph's Peter Oborne), while being attacked quite bluntly by a writer 
associated with the left (Jenni Russell, who once wasone of the first 
journalists to promote Miliband as a future leader). 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/wintour-and-watt/2010/sep/26/edmiliband-labourleadership>

• Peter Oborne in the Daily Telegraph says Miliband does not deserve the press 
he is getting. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/ed-miliband/10940839/Labours-much-maligned-leader-has-a-big-decision-to-make.html>

 Political journalism is, in general, an unattractive profession which becomes 
especially unpleasant when reporters, taking advantage of safety in numbers, 
gang up with each other to turn a decent and honourable individual into a 
figure of ridicule.

 I have seen this happen again and again, and (I am ashamed to admit) have 
occasionally joined in myself. Neil Kinnock, for instance, was abused and 
misrepresented when he was leader of the opposition in the Eighties. As prime 
minister, John Major, now viewed with growing respect by political historians, 
was treated with contempt. The same treatment was meted out to William Hague 
after 1997 ...

 Let’s pause a moment. Here are some statements about the Labour leader which 
I believe any fair-minded human being would accept. He is a decent, patriotic, 
trustworthy and honourable man. According to one startling assault earlier this 
week, questions now surround his “character”. This worthless slur should be 
dismissed with particular scorn.

 Anyone who has endured an incessant barrage of vitriol and deeply personal 
and deliberately wounding invective while retaining his good humour, as Mr 
Miliband has most certainly done, may be lacking in a number of departments. 
But character is not one of them. Every day Mr Miliband arrives in his office, 
takes off his coat, and takes the bullets. I salute him.

• Jenni Russell in the Times (paywall) says that Miliband lacks authority and 
that his team is "alarmingly unprofessional". 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/opinion/columnists/article4137016.ece>

When the Labour party found that it had elected Ed as leader, even the 
doubters hoped that he would be transformed from awkward chrysalis to confident 
butterfly. He hasn’t done it. Nearly four years on he stands taller and has 
private charm, but he doesn’t exude competence, and charisma eludes him. His 
personal ratings have ben falling steadily and now stand at -39, a record low. 
Only a fifth of voters think he is doing a good job; three fifths say he isn’t. 
Mr Cameron scores far better at -5 ...

Another senior figure despaired of the contrast between the stifling sterility 
of Mr Miliband’s lack of interest in discussions now, and the intellectual 
ferment before Mr Blair took power. “We were so hungry for ideas, we were 
talking to everyone from 1995 to ’97, taking so many people on board . . . But 
Ed’s not interested in reaching out. He thinks he’s right, so doesn’t expect to 
learn.”

This strategy might just win Mr Miliband the election, but it is a hopeless 
strategy for government. A leader who can’t inspire confidence, build alliances 
or enthuse his colleagues will fall apart in No 10. One shadow minister told me 
that there was little time left to change. He was afraid of losing, but winning 
might be worse.

“What some of us fear is that we’re going to win, but Ed could be such a 
terrible leader we’ll be out for a generation after that.”

12.09pm BST 

Umunna turns to education. China has a good education system. But there are 
complaints it is too regimented. Turning to Peace, he asks him what he thinks?

Peace says Britain has great strengths in creativity.

But we should not just measure UK by a UK benchmark. It is important to 
measure what happens in the UK alongside what happen globally.

12.03pm BST 

Back to the panel.

Mayfield says all the evidence is that, when firms are employee-owned (like 
John Lewis), they do better.

11.57am BST 

The British Chambers of Commerce has given a guarded welcome to Ed Miliband's 
infrastracture announcement. This is from Adam Marshall, its director of policy.

Businesses would support the creation of a national infrastructure commission 
if it delivers quicker decisions, more certainty for investors, and faster 
action on the ground.

However, we’ve been here before. Britain’s creaking business infrastructure is 
the result of short-term thinking and constant u-turns by politicians of all 
parties. On aviation, roads, rail, energy generation and digital connectivity, 
we have a lot of ground to make up. A national infrastructure commission will 
only work if its assessments are not constantly undermined by Westminster petty 
politicking.

11.50am BST 

Chuka Umunna, the shadow business secretary, is chairing the next session. It 
is starting now.

The contributors are: Keith Cochrane, chief executive of the Weir Group; 
Michelle Feeney, former chief executive of PZ Cussons Beauty; Katja Hall, the 
CBI deputy director general;Sir Charlie Mayfield, chairman of the John Lewis 
Partnership; andSir John Peace, chairman of Standard Chartered Bank.

Umunna starts with a question. How do you see the market?

Mayfield says conditions are generally benign. But the food sector is facing 
problems.

Peace says the "global pie" will grow this year. But it will be turbulent. 
Globally, over 40 elections are taking place this year.

The Chinese economy is forecast to grow by about 7%. The US economy is picking 
up. But arguably it could be doing better.

11.41am BST 

Gail Rebuk, the Random House chief executive and widow of Philip Gould, Tony 
Blair's polling guru, liked Ed Miliband's speech.
Gail Rebuck (@gailrebuck) 
Excellent rousing speech from Ed Miliband talking workforce skills industrial 
policy long term strategy market reform & imp of exports & EU
 <https://twitter.com/gailrebuck/statuses/484631983990267904> July 3, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/gailrebuck/statuses/484631983990267904> 
11.37am BST 

Here is CCHQ on the Miliband speech.
CCHQ Press Office (@CCHQPress) 
.@Ed_Miliband <https://twitter.com/Ed_Miliband> giving speech at Policy 
Network - who only yesterday slammed his anti-business, anti-jobs stance
http://t.co/FwpKpJfCPS <http://t.co/FwpKpJfCPS>
 <https://twitter.com/CCHQPress/statuses/484624467394822146> July 3, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/CCHQPress/statuses/484624467394822146> 
11.22am BST 

Here's the full text of Ed Miliband's speech. 
<http://press.labour.org.uk/post/90646112699/ed-milibands-speech-to-the-policy-network-inclusive>

11.18am BST 

Roger Liddle, Policy Network's chair, thanks Ed Miliband.

Many people invited here are not natural Labour supporters, he says.

If you are a businessman who just wants low taxes and government off your 
back, you won't be interested, he says.

But if you are committed to changing, you might be interested in working with 
Labour, he says.

11.16am BST 

Q: I'm concerned there is too much emphasis on affluence. There are plenty of 
low-skilled jobs we still need. We need to raise their pay. Don't just focus on 
high-tech jobs?

Miliband says the challenge of the future is tackling inequality with business 
success.

Mark Carney is talking about inequality, not just because he cares about 
social justice, but because he recognises inequality damages the economy,

He says there is a brilliant book from India's central bank governor, Fault 
Lines, 
<http://www.amazon.in/Fault-Lines-Fractures-Threaten-Economy/dp/0691152632>
which says inequality contributed to the global recession.

Q: [From Disability Rights UK] Would you come on a visit to look at the 
entrepreneurial talents of the disabled?


Yes, says Miliband, even if he gets in trouble with the people who run his 
diary. This is an important one nation point

Q: [From redhotcurry.com] What would you do to get more black and ethnic 
minority people at the top of the labour market? Would you back quotas?

Milband says he is not in favour of quotas.

But we need to be a country that reflects the talent of the country. This 
starts in schools, he says. Having successful role models is important.

Miliband says he does not have any easy answers.

But government can pay close attention to the appointment it makes. Labour had 
a system to do this, he says. But the coalition got rid of it.

Q: What is your view on urban foreign policies? In Germany, cities can make 
deals with other cities abroad.

Miliband says that sounds like a planted question from Andrew Adonis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-adonis>. This is what his report 
is about.

Oppositions are good at promising devolution, he says. But in government they 
often do the opposite.

He says when he published the Adonis Review he tried to show how Labour would 
deliver this in government.

11.03am BST 

Q: [From the Good Business Alliance] You have not had any questions yet from 
entrepreneurs or business people. Your agenda is good. But what about 
inequality?

Miliband says everyone should read Mark Carney's speech on inequality from a 
few weeks ago. 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/news/carney-warns-of-rising-inequality-as-average-us-chiefs-pay-tops-10m-9442505.html>
 It was the most radical speech he has read from a central bank governor. It 
shows how inequality has become a mainstream concern.

Miiband says the new inequality is leaving a lot of people behind. Lots of 
people are concerned about this issue. It is a government responsibility and a 
business responsibility.

And it is important to change the way the economy works. This is not just a 
question of tax and benefits, he says.

Q: {From 6w2x, a social entreprise] What is the role of social entreprise in 
your agenda?

Miliband says he is passionate about this; he used to be social enterprise 
minister, he says.

Social entreprises can show people how it is possible to run businesss in a 
different way, he says.

Q: What is your view on the ageing of the population? 

Miliband says this is a huge issue. The health service has many problems; many 
are caused by having to deal with 80 and 90-year-olds who it did not have to 
deal with before.

And's why Andy Burnham's plans to integrate health and social care are 
important, he says.

And people will have to work longer. Although he acknowledges there is an 
issue with manual workers being expected to work longer. He does not have an 
answer to that at this point, he says.

10.53am BST 

Q: [From the Institute of Occupational Safety and Health] How can we ensure 
safety is enshrined in infrastructure projects?

Miliband says the Olympics show how this can be achieved successfully.

10.52am BST 

Q: What can the government do to promote the role of women in finance?

Miliband says any decent country should want to ensure that women are properly 
repesented in its insitutions, including in business and in politics. There is 
a long way to go, he says.

He wants 50% of Labour MPs to be women and 50% of a Labour cabinet to be 
female. The shadow cabinet is 45% female, he says.

He also says Britain is still "a long way away" from where it needs to be in 
terms of family-friendly working.

And role models make a big difference too.

10.49am BST 

Q: [From UK Inbound, a trade body for inbound tourism] Will there be an early 
decision on a new airport?

Miliband says he will await the recommendations of the Davies report.

In the past he has said he is "sceptical" about Heathrow.

10.47am BST 

Q: How can we help young people set up a business?

Miliband says there should be more focus on business in schools. Pupils should 
be taught that science and maths are a route to business.

The government has gone backwards on work experience, he says.

10.45am BST 

Q: [From someone from Social Living Alliance] Should the government award 
contracts to firms that do not pay the living wage?

Miliband says Labour is looking at this. But there are issues around cost, and 
the impact on small firms.

But some councils are doing this, he says.

10.44am BST 

Q: [From a man working for a company called Happy, which creates Happy 
workplaces] I resent having competitors who do not pay the living wage. What 
would Labour do about it?

Miliband says he wants to raise the minimum wage over the course of a 
parliament, in consultation with business.

On the living wage, he says for every £1 towards the living wage a company 
pays above the minimum wage, the government saves 50p.

He says not all firms can pay the living wage. But he would want to share some 
of that saving, so firms have an incentive to pay the living wage.

10.42am BST 

Miliband's Q&A

Miliband is taking questions now.

He hopes to take his first question from a business figure. But he picks 
Michael Settle from the (Glasgow) Herald instead. Settle (as usual) asks about 
Scottish independence.

Miliband reaffirms his opposition to Scottish independence. It would be harder 
to build inclusive prosperity without Scotland in the UK, he says.

10.39am BST 

Miliband is wrapping up now.

I know we won't always agree on everything, he says.

But British business is vital to his mission to change Britain, he says. 
Through your entrepreneurship, you can change lives.

And that's it.

10.38am BST 

Miliband on Britain looking outward

Miliband turns to his fifth point.

He says Britain will never succeed if it does not remain outward-looking.

Many businesses are worried about Britain leaving the EU.

Miliband says he is "absolutely convinced" that Britain's future lies in the 
EU.

(This gets a round of applause - the first he's had during the speech.)

I have no truck with those who say we should cut ourselves off from the rest 
of the world. Our focus must not be on drifting toward exit but on acting now 
to reform the European Union so it works for Britain. That means working with 
our allies to reform the things that aren’t right: the budget, rules on 
immigration and benefits, and giving more powers to national parliaments.

This gets another round of applause. And Miliband says keeping Britain in the 
EU means building alliances, not burning them. That gets a third round of 
applause.

Miliband says he welcomes high-skilled immigration.

And it would tackle the exploitation of low-wage immigrants.

10.34am BST 

Miliband on marktets

Miliband says government should ensure markets work so that business can 
thrive.

But in some areas the market is not working.

In financial services, more reform is needed, he says. He says many businesses 
have told him they cannot get finance. Reforming banking would be in the 
interests of business, he says.

And energy needs to be reformed too, he says. This would help customers and 
business.

He says people have focused on his price cap. But Labour's plans to open up 
the energy market, in its green paper, are just as important.

10.32am BST 

Miliband on long-termism

Miliband says business needs a long-term commitment from government.

That would apply to economic stability. That's why Labour would balance the 
books in the next parliament, and keep corporate tax rates low.

He says Labour's decison to reform local enterprise partnerships, not go back 
to regional development agencies, should be seen as a sign that Labour will not 
just tear up everything the coalition has done.

He turns to the Armitt review.

Today I am accepting Sir John’s recommendation that we establish an 
independent National Infrastructure Commission to identify the UK’s long-term 
infrastructure needs and hold governments to account.

And I am calling on the other political parties to join us in accepting his 
recommendation because agreement is vital to delivering the long-term 
infrastructure business needs to succeed.

Miliband says foreign investment helps Britain. Look at Tartar's bid for 
Jaguar Land Rover.

But the AstraZeneca bid for Pfizer was different, he says. There should have 
been a proper national interest test.

In future a mechanism for such a public interest test should be in place.

10.28am BST 

Miliband on industrial policy

Miliband says central government has a role to play in promoting industrial 
policy.

But there is a decades-long problem that needs to be addressed: 
over-centralisation.

He says many businesses have told him that too many decisions are made away 
from where they should be.

As prime minister, he would champion the idea of devolution of power, he says.

10.26am BST 

Milband on skills

Miliband starts with skills.

We need good qualifications for the 50% of young people who do not to to 
university, he says.

At 14, young people should know what they can aspire to academically or 
vocationally.

Young people know what the "gold standard' is academically. But they don't 
know what it is vocationally.

Labour would give employers more say over how training money is spent, he says.

And local entreprise partnerships would have a role ensuring skills needed 
locally are taught.

Miliband says he will do everything he can as prime minister to end the 
culture that says academic options are always best.

10.23am BST 

Miliband identifies five challenges

How do we achieve high-value jobs?

Miliband says there must be big reform, not big spending.

Today he wants to focus on five challenges: creating a skilled workforce; 
creating an industrial policy; supporting a culture of long-termism; reforming 
markets, so they work in the public interest; and ensuring Britain does not 
turn inwards.
Hannah (@hannoir) 
Hearing from @Ed_Miliband <https://twitter.com/Ed_Miliband> at the Inclusive 
Prosperity conference on the challenges faced by Britain
pic.twitter.com/H8l9k85HBT <http://t.co/H8l9k85HBT>
 <https://twitter.com/hannoir/statuses/484627650628308992> July 3, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/hannoir/statuses/484627650628308992> 
10.20am BST 

Miliband says the problems began before the recession. And that means the 
solutions won't just come with recovery, he says.

10.20am BST 

Miliband says his shorthand for the crisis Britain faces is "the cost of 
living crisis".

But the problem goes much deeper than that, he says.

10.19am BST 

Miliband says he wants to talk about the challenges to the established 
institutions of this country.

Politics still faces a massive problem with trust, he says.

And business is worried about the anti-business mood in the country, he says.

Some business figures think politicians contribute to this.

Miliband says he wants to celebrate the great work businesses do.

He knows business does not lay the blame for the economic crisis with 
politicians.

The problems Britain face pre-date the recession, he says.

10.17am BST 

Ed Miliband's speech

Ed Miliband says these conferences have a history.

Twenty years ago there was one where the term "post neo-classical endogenous 
growth theory" was coined. It did not make it into the manifesto, he says.

(That's a joke about Balls, who wrote the phrased which was much-mocked when 
Gordon Brown used it in a speech.)

10.14am BST 

Ed Balls is introducing Miliband.

This is the highlight of the day, he says. He says he and Miliband have been 
good friends and colleagues for 20 years.

Miliband has led the argument that we must have an inclusive prosperity, he 
says.

10.13am BST 

Lord Adonis is speaking now.

He says that, in carrying out the research for his review, he established that 
there are fundamental problems in the economy that need to be addressed.

We need "far more" science and maths teacher. And there should be entreprise 
and employment directors in schools, he says.

We need more FE colleges focusing on technical skills.

We need "far more" applied innovation centres, he says.

And we need small firms to have better access to government procurement 
contracts. This happens in the US, he says.

As well as action at the national level, there must be action at the city 
region level. That is why he wants local authorities to combine so that they 
work together on strategic issues.

The Greater London Authority has shown how this approach can work.

Adonis has two final points.

First, this will not happen without strong partnership between local and 
central government, he says.

And, second, there is a difference between the parties. There is a difference 
between action and inaction. You need an optimistic attitude, the attitude of 
the great Victorians who built this museum, he says.

That is Labour's attitude, he says.

10.07am BST 

Maggie Philbin is speaking now.

She says she will be publishing a report, Digital Skills for Tomorrow's World, 
shortly.

The new computer curriculum is a "really important first step", she says. But 
there have been concerns about whether schools are ready to teach it.

9.59am BST 

Sir John Armitt is speaking now.

He produced a report for Labour saying that a national infrastructure 
commission should be set up to take charge of long-term infrastructure planning.
 <http://www.armittreview.org/>

This is a vital issue, he says. Britain needs better infrastructure. It is 
currently 28th in the world.

He summarises his plans. He is proposing the creation of a commission that 
would have to consider Britain's 30-year infrastructure needs. The plan would 
go to the chancellor, who would have to put it before parliament for approval.

This process would be repeated every 10 years, he says.

Some people have interpreted this as taking the politics out of 
infrastructure, he says. But that's wrong. You cannot take the politics out of 
infrastructure.

But you do need cross-party support. The Olympics were a very good example, he 
says.

He says today he is publishing a draft bill to show how his plan could be 
implemented.

9.52am BST 

There is now a panel discussion.

The speakers are: Mike Wright, executive director of Jaguar Land Rover; Sir 
John Armitt, former chairman of the Olympic Delivery Authority; Maggie Philbin, 
chief executive of Teen-Tech; andLord Adonis, the former transport secretary.

All four have been conducting policy reviews for Labour.

Wright says there is a problem with productivity in the UK. And there is a 
need for urgent intervention on skills, he says.

9.47am BST 

Sainsbury says these are the types of questions to which industry wants 
answers.

If government and industry are to form an effective parternship, there must be 
a shared view of how they meet the challenges posed by today's economy.

And that's it. Sainsbury has finished.

• Sainsbury says business needs a clearer understanding of Labour's economic 
policies.(See 9.40am.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2014/jul/03/milibands-speech-and-labours-inclusive-prosperity-conference-politics-live-blog#block-53b51616e4b025532af23483>
Peter John (@peterjohn6) 
Inclusive Prosperity Conference at Science Museum - David Sainsbury explaining 
Labour's relationship with industrypic.twitter.com/pmSrlTU4VE 
<http://t.co/pmSrlTU4VE>
 <https://twitter.com/peterjohn6/statuses/484616982067961856> July 3, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/peterjohn6/statuses/484616982067961856> 
Updated at 9.51am BST

9.44am BST 

Sainsbury says industry wants to see practical policies that fix failures in 
the system.

Vince Cable and David Willetts deserve credit for preserving some of Labour's 
changes, he says.

But their decision to get rid of regional development agencies, and replace 
them with local enterprise partnerships, was a mistake, as Cable and Willetts 
would probably agree, he says.

9.42am BST 

Sainsbury is still speaking.

Third, business needs to know that Labour will support big business, he says. 
A lot of "heavy lifting" is done by big business, he says.

Fourth, the system needs to change. But that does not mean that the government 
should oppose business. Entrepreneurs should be applauded, he says.

9.40am BST 

Lord Sainsbury, the former science minister, is speaking now.

He says neither industry nor the voters fully know how Labour sees its 
relationship with industry.

That is why he and Ed Balls thought it was good for Policy Network to hold 
this conference.

There are four questions Labour needs to address.

First, how will it provide the conditions that will enable Britain to compete. 
All countries are involved in a race to the top. As a result of progress in 
China and India, 1.5bn more workers have entered the global labour market.

Countries have to compete by moving up the value chain. Science and innovation 
are central, he says.

Second, government has to do more than just provide a stable macroeconomic 
environment. It has to promote research and development. Britain's record on 
R&D is "appalling."

9.36am BST 

Ed Balls is opening the conference now. He says it is very appropriate that 
it's being held in the Science Museum.

Balls says he and Lord Sainsbury are members of an inclusive prosperity 
commission, along with Larry Summers, the former US Treasury secretary.

9.33am BST 

The conference is at the Science Museum, and we're in the big Imax cinema. 
There are 400 seats and it is more or less full. It is due to start any minute 
now. Ed Balls is on stage checking his notes, and talking to Lord Sainsbury.

9.25am BST 

As Patrick Wintour reports, Ed Miliband will use his speech today to commit 
Labour to setting up a new independent national body to fast track and plan 
infrastructure investment in the UK. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jul/03/miliband-step-up-pro-business-message-senior-figures>

A host of senior business people, including Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/barack-obama>'s most trusted economic 
adviser, will hearLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader 
Ed Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> step up his 
pro-business message by promising to set up a new independent national body to 
fast track and plan infrastructure investment in the UK.

The idea has been put to Labour by Sir John Armitt, the former director of the 
Olympic Delivery Authority, and is designed to end the short termism that has 
bedevilled major capital spending in the UK, leading to delays in Cross Rail, 
airport expansion and power plants over decades.

On Thursday Miliband will publish a draft bill on how the national 
infrastructure commission will work and call for cross-party support for the 
idea.

It will look 25-30 years ahead to identify the country's infrastructure needs 
from climate change, schools, energy and transport, as well publish a 10-yearly 
assessment of progress.

A parliamentary vote on the evidence-based infrastructure priorities would 
have to take place within six months of their publication, to avoid delays. 
Within 12 months of this vote, government departments would have to form 
detailed 10-year sector plans of how they will deliver and fund work towards 
these priorities. Parliament would then vote on these 10-year plans.

The Financial Times's story previewing the speech (subscription) 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/2f237532-0200-11e4-9af7-00144feab7de.html?siteedition=uk#axzz36OSCTf00>
 focuses on the tone Miliband is adopting towards business.

Ed Miliband will celebrate profit and wealth creation and laud the “great, 
dynamic businesses of our country”, in a speech on Thursday that marks a sharp 
change of tone towards corporate ­Britain.

The Labour leader’s relations with big business have been strained for some 
time following his sustained attacks on “predatory” behaviour, corporate greed 
and poor ethical standards.

8.57am BST 

Chuka Umunna tells Today Labour is pro-enterprise

Chuka Umunna, the shadow business secretary, is on the Today programme now 
talking about Labour's relationship with business.

He says it is no surprise that energy companies don't like Labour's plans for 
a cap on energy bills. But nearly 5m businesses will benefit, he says.

In truth, you cannot be anything other than a pro-business, pro-enterprise 
party, he says, because the economy needs to grow.

Q: So Labour is pro-business and pro-enterprise?

Absolutely, says Umunna.

He says Labour is only proposing to intervene in the market where the market 
is not functioning.

In most areas, the market is functioning, he says.

Q: It has been claimed that you have been frustrated by the party's failure to 
grasp a pro-business message.

Umunna says Labour has been the most united opposition in history. He does not 
accept this pro-business proposals are being blocked.

8.51am BST 

This week it's been Labour's "hug a capitalist" week. On Monday Ed Balls, the 
shadow chancellor, gave a major speech promising to keep corporation tax low. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jun/29/labour-olive-branch-business-corporation-tax-investment>
On Tuesday Ed Miliband published the Adonis Review, a major blueprint for 
promoting economic growth, particularly in the regions, that was warmly 
welcomed by business. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2014/jul/01/miliband-and-adonis-publish-regional-growth-review-politics-live-blog>
 And today the week is culminating in an all-day conference in London with the 
title "Inclusive Prosperity", where Miliband and some of the most senior 
members of the shadow cabinet will be speaking alongside an impressive 
collection of business heavyweights.

Until now it has been hard to find senior business figures enthusiastic about 
the idea of Miliband becoming prime minister. Many people assume that Labour 
can't win the general election without at least some business support, and this 
week's initiatives are intended to improve relations and to show, as Miliband 
himself as put it, that he's not anti business, just anti business-as-usual. 
Today we might get a chance to see if he's making any progress.

And we might learn something about his relations with the New Labour faction 
of his party too. Policy Network is a Blairite, international thinktank. It was 
closely associated with Tony Blair's "Third Way" (over which Balls performed 
that last rites on Monday), and its president is Lord Mandelson. Mandelson is 
speaking today, as is Lord Sainsbury, another leading New Labour figure who, 
like Mandelson, has made no secret of the fact that he's not wildly 
enthusiastic about Miliband. It will be interesting to see how they call get on.

I'll be at the conference all day, and I'll be focusing largely, or 
exclusively, on what happens here. Here's the agenda.

9.25am: Ed Balls, the shadow chancellor, and Lord Sainsbury, the former trade 
minister, open the conference.

9.45am: Session on the challenge for Britain, with contributors including Lord 
Adonis, the former transport secretary, and Sir John Armitt, former chairman of 
the Olympic Delivery Authority.
10.05am: Ed Miliband speaks.

11.15am: Session on business and growth chaired by Chuka Umunna, the shadow 
business secretary.
1.15pm: Session on business and fairness chaired by Lord Mandelson, the former 
business secretary, with contributors includingFrances O'Grady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/frances-o-grady>, the TUC general 
secretary, Rachel Reeves, the shadow work and pensions secretary, and Sir 
Richard Lambert, the former CBI director general.

2.30pm: Speech from Gene Sperling, director of the White House national 
economic council under Bill Clinton and Barack Obama.



3pm: Balls closes the conference.


If you want to follow me on Twitter, I'm on @AndrewSparrow. 
<https://twitter.com/AndrewSparrow>
 