 The Oscar-winning British playwright and film director Anthony Minghella is to 
write the libretto for a new work that he will also direct at New York's 
Metropolitan Opera in the 2011-12 season.
Minghella is to enter into a collaboration with the Argentinian composer 
Osvaldo Golijov as part of an injection of new talent at the Met under its 
general manager, Peter Gelb. Mr Gelb is seeking to reverse the trends of ageing 
audiences and falling attendances that have troubled the Met in recent years.

Minghella's Madam Butterfly made a splash in 2005 when it opened at English 
National Opera. It transferred to the Met last year and was broadcast in Times 
Square.

The arrival in the New York opera world of the director of Cold Mountain, The 
Talented Mr Ripley and The English Patient, was greeted ecstatically by 
critics. The influential New York Times writer Anthony Tommasini described the 
production as "a hot ticket. Everyone will be talking about the Met. When was 
the last time you could say that?"

Minghella, currently in Botswana filming an adaptation of the Alexander McCall 
Smith series of novels, No.1 Ladies' Detective Agency, said at the time he was 
directing Madam Butterfly that he hoped he would get the chance to work on the 
world premiere of a new work.

Golijov recently flew out to talk to the director on set, and they have plans 
to begin collaborating on the new opera in London in September.

Golijov, raised in a family of eastern European Jews in Argentina, rose to 
prominence in the US in 2000 with his version of the St Mark Passion. In a 
reverse collaboration, he has written the music score for Francis Ford 
Coppola's much awaited film Youth Without Youth - the director's first in 
almost 10 years. Golijov is also writing a piece for the opening ceremony of 
the Beijing Olympics next year.

He told the Associated Press that he still had not written a single note of 
his opera for the Met, though he and Minghella did have a concept for it. "The 
great fear when you work for an elephant like the Met, being there for the 
first time, is whether you can create poetry and emotion." He said Minghella 
achieved that with Madam Butterfly, "and that gave me great hope that we can do 
something and not be crushed by the machinery".

Golijov's work is among a number of operas commissioned by Mr Gelb as part of 
his shake-up at the Met. Other works include Prima Donna, by the 
singer-songwriter Rufus Wainwright.
 