
Ireland's finance minister has forced one of the country's debt-ridden banks 
not to pay a controversial €40m (£34m) bonus to its top staff.

Allied Irish Banks <https://www.theguardian.com/business/allied-irish-bank> 
(AIB) announced this evening that it would no longer pay out the money, news of 
which had caused widespread outrage across the Republic at the weekend. 
Opposition politicians had threatened to introduce emergency legislation to the 
Dáil to take more than 90% of the bonus had the bank gone ahead.

In a letter to AIB, finance minister Brian Lenihan warned the bank that state 
support to shore it up was conditional on the non-payment of the bonus fund. 
Lenihan told AIB that "no matter when they have been earned" there would be no 
bonus payments to around 2,500 staff.

Lenihan said: "I appreciate that AIB was not in a position to put up a sworn 
defence in the high court proceedings and that the executive chairman and the 
board have acted with complete propriety in this matter."

The health minister, Mary Harney, also criticised the AIB's original decision 
on the bonus payments. She said: "Clearly the bank's ability to pay is very 
much in doubt given the state of the bank and the huge amount of capital the 
exchequer, on behalf of the taxpayer, have had to invest in the bank.

"At a time when the exchequer is putting a huge amount of capital into AIB, 
everyone has to be mindful of their responsibilities, and that includes 
management, the board and the government."

The bank said that its legal advice had been that it was obliged to pay the 
bonuses, but that the minister's intervention overtook that obligation.

"The bank very much appreciates the support it has received to date from the 
state and the Irish taxpayers and acknowledges that it will continue to rely on 
this support for some time to come," AIB's statement said. "Accordingly, the 
board has decided not to pay the bonuses."

AIB's executive chairman, David Hodgkinson, said the bank was "relieved" to be 
in a position not to pay the bonuses.

The bank, which has received €3.5bn from the government in assistance, was due 
to pay the bonuses for 2008 as a result of a high court ruling earlier this 
year. A staff member had taken a legal action all the way to the Dublin high 
court to force the bank to pay him his bonus.

AIB is already 19% owned by the Irish state but has been told it needs to 
raise a further €5.2bn by the end of February, although this is likely to come 
from the €85bn International Monetary Fund and European Union rescue package for
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> rather than the private 
sector.

This will take the bank almost entirely into state ownership and the discovery 
that bankers were to receive bonuses deferred from 2008 – when the problems at 
the bank surfaced – prompted a furious reaction from opposition MPs.

Tonight the main opposition party Fine Gael said the Irish government should 
now use its powers to call an extraordinary general meeting of the bank to 
discuss the bonus issue.

Dr James Reilly, Fine Gael's deputy leader, pointed out that since the state 
will own more than 90% of AIB, the finance minister was now a major shareholder 
in the troubled bank.

"As an AIB shareholder he could call on fellow stakeholders to support our 
call for an emergency general meeting so the full facts of the €40m in bonuses 
could be fully explored," he said.

Irish Labour leader Eamon Gilmore went further and said that the board of AIB 
should be fired if it was party to the decision not to contest the legal action.
 