
Mining shares surged and led the market to a six month high, after the US 
Federal Reserve became the latest bank to attempt to boost the flagging global 
economy.

Thursday's announcement of a third round of quantitative easing by Fed 
chairman Ben Bernanke helped lift the price of commodities, with copper hitting 
a five month high on the prospect of increased demand for metals. The Fed's 
action came a week after the European Central Bank unveiled a bond buying 
programme to help struggling eurozone countries, with investors hoping China 
would soon follow suit and cut its interest rates or enact other stimulus 
measures. UBS said:
 The Fed's announcement of QE3 is clearly bullish for commodities and the 
miners. Copper is well positioned to benefit after destocking with speculative 
interest. We expect iron ore prices to recover with seasonal demand towards the 
end of October; QE3, with China stimulus/steel mill destocking, increases 
confidence in our 2013 forecasts. 
Kazakhmys closed 93p higher at 773p while Russian steel group Evraz, 
controlled by Chelsea owner Roman Abramovich, ended up 34.3p at 293.7p.Vedanta 
Resources rose 128.5p to £10.90, despite having to halt iron ore production in 
Goa this week amid an investigation into the legality of mining operations in 
the area.

Xstrata added 67.5p to 1060.5p, ahead of a decision by its board about whether 
to recommend a revised $34bn bid fromGlencore, up 25.55p at 378.85p. Xstrata 
also shook off problems at Rustenburg in South Africa, where striking miners 
have been protesting against wage restraints.Xstrata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/xstrata>, Anglo American, up 175p at 
£20.84,Aquarius Platinum, 7.7p higher at 48.8p, and Lonmin, 29p better at 
614.5p, have all been forced to shut down mines as tensions escalated following 
the killing last month of 34 miners.

The top ten risers in the FTSE 100 were commodity companies, helping lift the 
leading index 95.63 points higher to 5915.55, its best level since 19 March. 
The leading index has added more than 120 points in a week which, apart from 
the Fed move, saw progress in the eurozone crisis, with a pro-euro vote in the 
Dutch elections, Germany's constitutional court backing the eurozone bailout 
fund and hopes that Spain will receive bailout assistance.

The week also saw a spate of takeover rumours. Software group Sage edged up 
another 1p to 318.1p - a near 5% rise on the week following talk of a potential 
450p a share offer from private equity. Microsoft and SAP have also been named 
as potential predators forSage <https://www.theguardian.com/business/sagegroup> 
in the past, but some in the City remain sceptical. George O'Connor of Panmure 
Gordon issued a sell note, saying:
 We dispute the take-over chit chat, hence we encourage investors to bank some 
profit, before trading news gets in the way.

J Sainsbury added 3.5p to 341p on revived chatter that 26% shareholder the 
Qatari Investment Authority might be considering another bid after its failed 
attempt with a 600p offer five years ago.

One longstanding takeover tale came good. BAE Systems confirmed it was in 
merger talks with Airbus maker EADS. BAE closed 9.9p higher at 347p.

Apple's launch of its new iPhone helped one of its suppliers, chip designer Arm
, up 20p at 582p.Imagination Technologies, another Apple supplier which fell 
back on Thursday after an uninspiring trading update, recovered 24p to 590p.

Elsewhere Reckitt Benckiser fell 62p to £35.72 after analysts at Liberum 
Capital issued a sell note:
 For the buy case to work one would have to assume earnings from [Reckitt 
Benkiser's pharmaceuticals division] at least doubles; given the threat of 
generics and potential alternative treatments we think that is not realistic. 
Intertek lost 11p to £2718 after HSBC cut its target price on the testing and 
inspection group from £29.65 to £29.40 and moved from overweight to neutral.

With risk back on the agenda, defensive stocks were unwanted. GlaxoSmithKline 
fell 22p to 1417.5p, andAstraZeneca dropped 19.5p to £28.93.

A couple of consumer businesses that rarely disappoint investors, managed to 
do just that during the week.Next fell sharply after it reported a slowdown in 
sales in August and early September on Thursday but regained 40p to £33.60.
Burberry added 44p to £10.94 but failed to regain all of the losses made since 
Tuesday's profit warning, which prompted fears the boom in the luxury goods 
market had finally run out of steam.

But Ocado added 1.2p to 74.05p, despite a downbeat note on the online grocer 
from analysts at Barclays:
 After a disruptive Jubilee weekend in the second quarter, Ocado's chief 
executive sensibly erred on the side of caution and commented that the effect 
of the Olympic Games "was uncertain." Now that the summer's sporting events are 
over, we suspect that the Olympic Games will have been unhelpful on balance for 
Ocado and expect slower sales growth in the third quarter (around 11%).

Given a lack of market share indicators for Ocado we would not be surprised to 
see a even more significant slowdown in sales growth. [Note that Ocado reported 
second quarter growth of 13% and first quarter growth of 10.9%]. It is worth 
nothing that the third quarter is a one off given the Olympics, so it would not 
be fair to draw a strong long-term implication from this trading statement, 
however it is likely to weigh on short term sentiment. Such a performance would 
imply that Ocado needs to have a very strong fourth quarter to meet second half 
consensus sales estimates. 
BSkyB, beaten by BT to a £152m rugby television rights deal, dropped 24p to 
720pp despite news it had bought back another 350,000 shares for cancellation.

Lower down the market Pace slumped nearly 10% to 162.5p following a report 
that BT had decided not to use the company's set top boxes for the YouView 
service. Pace later said the outcome of its discussions with BT would not have 
a material impact on its earnings, but this did little to calm investors' 
nerves.
 