
When Andrew Hegerty started investigating how automation could improve his 
engineering business in Mackay seven months ago, a few eyebrows were raised.

Various economists predict automation is on the cusp of destroying millions of 
Australian jobs and Hegerty’s was a labour-intensive workplace.

 For Hegerty, fear has been replaced by a belief that automation not only 
holds the key to long-term survival but it can create better jobs than those 
replaced.

More to the point, he says there is simply no choice – businesses like his can 
embrace automation or disappear. “I believe that automation will be the 
cornerstone of our business within the next five years,” he says. “Manual 
fabrication will become the exception rather than the rule.”

Hegerty’s company, the Mackay-based Team Group (Australia), provides 
engineering, fabrication, maintenance and other services to the mining 
industry, mainly in nearby centralQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland>, but now also to some 
overseas clients.

 North and central Queensland are exactly the sort of locations economists say 
could be savaged by workplace automation if the right policies are not put in 
place to foster innovation and skills for a new marketplace.

Examples of automation are popping up regularly in regional Australia. 
Driverless trucks have been operating above ground for some time, particularly 
in Western Australia, and now Queensland University of Technology is working 
with Caterpillar to develop driverless trucks that can operate in underground 
mines.

Our careers education is flawed: we need to think about skills not jobs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/24/our-careers-education-is-flawed-we-need-to-think-about-skills-not-jobs>
The Community for Economic Development of Australia released a report  
<http://www.ceda.com.au/research-and-policy/policy-priorities/workforce>last 
year that found more than 5 million current Australian jobs, or 40% of the 
workforce, have a moderate to high likelihood of disappearing in the next 10 to 
15 years owing to technological advancements. For regional areas with a focus 
on mining or manufacturing, the figure is 60%.

The wording of these predictions is important. The experts say 5 million 
current jobs will be replaced but they do not claim that will be the total 
decline in Australian employment. They say there is a need to ensure those jobs 
can be replaced by different ones, with new skill sets.

Ceda’s chief executive officer, Prof Stephen Martin, says although mining and 
manufacturing jobs are most at risk from automation, the impact will spread 
much further, affecting jobs that involve low levels of social interaction, low 
levels of creativity, or low levels of mobility and dexterity.

These could include brokers, mechanics, cashiers, construction workers, 
accountants and real estate agents.

Computers are becoming increasingly capable in all these roles. “Our labour 
market will be fundamentally reshaped by the scope and breadth of technological 
change, and if we do not embrace massive economic reform and focus on 
incentivising innovation, we will simply be left behind in an increasingly 
competitive global marketplace,” Martin says.

 This industrial revolution, like others before it, will bring the opportunity 
to create new and more exciting jobs – but only if the policy settings and 
workplace culture are in place.

 Mackay is a classic example of a region with plenty at stake as automation 
looms on the horizon. A huge percentage of its workers are either in the mines 
(on drive-in-drive-out or fly-in-fly-out arrangements) or in workplaces 
providing services to the mining sector. The region’s employment figures have d 
been dented by low coal prices, forcing a degree of introspection and 
adaptation.

Hegerty travelled to the US to learn more about how robotics and automation 
could improve his workplace. What he discovered there strengthened his resolve 
and he says once the first mental step is taken beyond the fear of job losses.

Android clone v human: will you be able to tell the difference at work?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/03/android-clone-v-human-will-you-be-able-to-tell-the-difference-at-work>
“I think not viewing this progression as exciting is counterproductive,” he 
says. “With Australia’s relatively high wage rates and competition for overseas 
markets, if we are going to be viable as a business, it has to be for more than 
the price of freight [otherwise foreign competitors will take over.]”

On his US trip, Hegerty saw manufacturing businesses performing tasks with 
automation that his workers in Mackay were doing manually.

He also discovered that “very few” workplaces had made a successful transition 
with the sort of processes he would require, so there were no illusions about 
the difficulties ahead. “We met with representatives of the Lincoln Electric 
Company and their subsidiaries to discuss robotic automation for our business,” 
he says.

 “While the technology that we were shown was mind blowing, it was the process 
support that we received that was the kicker of our trip.”

Not only does Hegerty believe this transition will ensure the survival of his 
business in a global market where productivity and competitiveness are crucial, 
he has also noticed enthusiasm building among his employees. They want to know 
what the future holds and what they can learn to be part of the process.

His belief that automation could safeguard the region’s economy, rather than 
destroy it, is shared by others in the city. Mackay’s deputy mayor, Amanda 
Camm, is chair of the council’s economic development committee and believes 
automation offers a “real opportunity”.

She points to the city’s status as a hub for high-skilled mining services, as 
well as a geographical location that will allow it to capitalise on remote 
operations, such as driverless machinery.

Regional hubs for mining services, such as Mackay, can create jobs from 
innovation, but can the same be said for the mines themselves and the smaller 
towns around them? Martin says there is no clear answer to that question.

No politician can keep a promise to bring back jobs – especially not Donald 
Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/14/no-politician-can-keep-a-promise-to-bring-back-jobs-especially-not-donald-trump>
He says the risk to Australian jobs is significant because if the rest of the 
world moves ahead of Australia the nation’s businesses will become 
uncompetitive. Governments must start preparing the right policies to 
incentivise innovation and provide retraining opportunities for workers.

 Martin also says the private sector must take responsibility. “Businesses 
need to accept change is happening and be looking for opportunities for how 
they can adapt and innovate in their business to keep pace and embrace the 
opportunities that technological advancement brings,” he says.

“For example, technology is making it easier to tap into global supply chains 
and sell to a much wider customer base and that can be done from anywhere.

 Martin also points out that the jobs of the future in Australia are likely to 
be in the service sector, a significant shift from the years of the mining 
boom, and this will require a “serious rethink of how we train and retrain our 
workforce”.

One Australian already building robotic technologies for the workplace is the 
Queensland University of Technology researcher Prof Peter Corke. For one of his 
current projects, he has developed robots to perform a task most people would 
assume requires the softness of a human hand – fruit picking. In this case, his 
robots are in active trials picking capsicums.

Down on the farm: Australia at war with its backpacker workforce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/05/australia-cherry-picking-backpacker-tax-agriculture>
While a robotic picker might be expected to bruise fruit and vegetables, the 
technology is now so intelligent – so millimetre-perfect – it can do the job as 
well as or better than humans.

It is a project with obvious relevance now, as the horticulture sector 
grapples with theshortage and high cost of human labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/05/australia-cherry-picking-backpacker-tax-agriculture>
.

 Corke acknowledges that the development of such technology raises existential 
questions about employment but he is optimistic about how new, more prosperous 
jobs can be created to replace those lost.

He agrees that setting government policies to foster innovation industries is 
the key but he also throws the challenge down to Australia’s universities, 
claiming they must change their mindset.

“We need to encourage our PhD students to think their future isn’t to become 
another academic, but it’s perfectly respectable or maybe even a better option 
to go out and join industry, or even create an industry,” he says.

“We really need to be training our graduate students to be thinking that 
success doesn’t look like, ‘I’ve written a paper and someone else is reading 
it.’

 “We need to train them to think success is, ‘I’ve got a really awesome idea, 
I raise some money, I start a company and employ lots of people.’”
 