
Weeks after the shooting dead of nine black worshippers in a Charleston church 
in June, by an alleged gunman who appeared online brandishing the Confederate 
battle flag, South Carolina lawmakersvoted to remove the banner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/10/south-carolina-confederate-flag-goes-down-as-history-of-hate-meets-modernity>
 from the statehouse grounds in Columbia.

South Carolina's Confederate flag comes down as history of hate meets modernity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/10/south-carolina-confederate-flag-goes-down-as-history-of-hate-meets-modernity>
Critics also called for Mississippi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mississippi> to remove the rebel emblem 
from its state flag. Midway through October, that has not happened.

Mississippi’s top elected officials have largely ignored the state flag, which 
has flown since 1894 and which features the Confederate battle emblem in the 
upper-left corner.

Republican governor Phil Bryant is seeking a second term in a 3 November 
election, and has said he will not call Mississippi legislators into special 
session to debate the flag. Legislators ended their regular session in early 
April, more than two months before what police said was a racially motivated 
attack at Emanuel African American Episcopal Church in Charleston.

“If the legislature had been in session at the time the Mother Emanuel tragedy 
happened, I think the momentum and the pressure to remove the symbol at that 
time would have carried the day,” said Susan Glisson, director of the William 
Winter Institute for Racial Reconciliation at the University of Mississippi.

“The emotion and the shock of that was very powerful … It’s easy for emotions 
to subside.”

A few politicians have called for change, including Philip Gunn, Mississippi’s 
first Republican House speaker since Reconstruction. Gunn is a leader in his 
local Baptist church, and said faith caused him to see the flag as “a point of 
offense that needs to be removed”.

Flag supporters, including some Sons of Confederate Veterans, responded with 
yard signs and bumper stickers emblazoned with “Keep the Flag. Change the 
Speaker”.

Several Mississippi cities and counties have stopped flying the state flag, 
citing it as a racially divisive symbol in a state where nearly 38% of 2.9 
million residents are African American.

A Jackson resident is starting a petition drive to put a change-the-flag 
initiative on the statewide ballot, and flag supporters hope to start their own 
keep-the-flag initiative – but the earliest either proposal could go to voters 
is in 2018. Many are hoping for some sort of resolution to the public debate 
before then.

Bryant and Republican lieutenant governor Tate Reeves are challenged by 
Democrats running low-budget campaigns, and both incumbents say if the flag 
design is to be reconsidered it should be done by a statewide vote, and not by 
legislators. Both Democrats are calling for change.



Robert Gray, a truck driver who won the Democratic gubernatorial nomination 
after not even voting for himself, said the Confederate emblem on the state 
flag was like a sign for people to stay away.

“If you have 50 bottles of wine and you take a warning label and put it on one 
of the bottles, which one could people go to first? They’re not going to go to 
the bottle with the warning label on it, at all,” Gray said.

Tim Johnson, a former state senator who switched from Republican to Democrat 
to run for lieutenant governor, said he voted to keep the Confederate emblem in 
2001 but now thinks it should be removed.

“You don’t hold on to something that’s holding you back,” he said. 

Bryant said: “I’ve never had a company say, ‘We can’t come to Mississippi 
because of the flag.’”

Progressive rebels in the American south fight a flag – and the Klansman next 
door
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/04/progressive-american-south-flag-klansman-next-door>
Lieutenant Governor Reeves, like Bryant, said the flag has never been an 
obstacle to job creation.

“The people of Mississippi voted, overwhelmingly, in 2001 to keep our state 
flag as it currently exists. And I believe the only way the flag should be 
changed is if the people of our state decide to change it,” Reeves said.

The Mississippi supreme court ruled in 2000 that the flag, while widely used, 
had not been enshrined in state law since code books were updated in 1906. A 
flag commission held several public hearings that devolved into shouting 
matches in the fall of 2000.

After that, legislators put the matter to a statewide vote in April 2001, with 
two choices: the 1894 flag and an alternative that would have replaced the 
rebel emblem with circles of stars to represent Mississippi as the 20th state. 
By a nearly two-to-one margin, voters kept the old flag.

Fourteen years later, some Mississippi residents still embrace the 
Confederate-themed banner.

“I think it should stay the same. It’s part of our heritage,” said Cynthia 
Moak, a 33-year-old white homemaker in the southern Mississippi city of McComb.

Others said it was beyond time to find a unifying flag. 

“This is a new era now. That flag kind of reminds us of the past,” said Myrtle 
Alexander, 45, of McComb, who is black and works as a district manager for a 
food company.

McComb, a small city about 80 miles south of Jackson, has a significant 
history regarding civil rights. For much of the 1950s and 60s, McComb was 
controlled by the Ku Klux Klan and earned a reputation as a bombing capital 
because of violent resistance to black voting rights and integration.

Alexander said her parents remained in McComb through those times, but “it was 
very hard for them”.

The Mississippi flag still flutters outside McComb city hall. 

“Whenever you see that flag,” Alexander said, “it kind of brings back bad 
memories.”
 