
First and most importantly, if your results aren't what you hoped for, don't 
panic. Of course, that's easy to say but it's probably the single most 
important piece of advice. Any decision made in the heat of the moment, can 
effect your career for years to come.

Unfortunately, there isn't a single path of advice that works for everyone – 
each situation is unique. But anyone faced with the unexpected should consider 
the following:

ABB or above?

For the first time this year, higher education institutions aren't limited on 
the number of students achieving one A and two B grades (or equivalent) that 
they can admit. This means that universities in demand from highly-qualified 
candidates will be able to accept extra students if they wish. So you may still 
have a chance of being accepted even if you didn't quite achieve your predicted 
grades.

If you've just narrowly missed your grades, first check on UCAS Track 
<http://ucasprogres.com/students/track/> (available from 8am today) to see if 
you've secured your place nonetheless. It's also worth making contact with the 
institution in question as the personal touch sometimes works wonders – just be 
careful not to be too pushy.

If it transpires that you haven't made it in to either your first choice or 
insurance institutions, seek guidance from your school or college to find out 
how close to the grade boundary you were. If it was a close call, you may wish 
to consider a re-mark. This will incur some costs, but it can be done quickly 
and, on occasion, uncovers administrative errors that sway things favourably.

Consider your options

Worse-than-hoped-for results can create a sense of needing to find a solution 
now, but it's often wiser to use the time to step back and consider your 
long-term options.

While clearing is an option for some students, be careful. It can be foolish 
to accept a place at a university you haven't visited, or on a course that 
isn't quite what you wanted. Added to this, you may find yourself at the bottom 
of the pile for accommodation choices, and not all universities offer the same 
in terms of extra-curricular activities, on-site facilities, or social scene. 
If you're away from home for the first time, these factors can make or break a 
happy experience.

Perhaps your results allow you a chance to step off a train towards university 
that you weren't entirely comfortable with? Perhaps you were on board simply 
because your contemporaries were doing likewise and you felt pressure to follow 
suit? Would a college course, foundation degree or apprenticeship better suit 
you and the career you wish to pursue?

Contrary to popular belief, not all apprenticeships are focused on skilled 
trades, and each year a number of the leading accountancy and consultancy firms 
recruit enthusiastic students straight from school. Or perhaps a gap year would 
allow you to gain skills that would bolster re-application next year?

Resits are another option and can be taken during a year out while you gain 
additional and valuable work experience.

Don't be afraid to seek advice

It's a strong student who acknowledges university isn't for them after all and 
instead takes the time to consider their next steps. It's never too late to 
seek advice from an impartial specialist. Meeting with, or arranging to talk to 
a careers adviser – preferably outside of your school environment – can open 
your mind to options you may not have otherwise considered and allow you to 
review the broadest range of paths to follow.

In this instance it may also be worth taking a psychometric profile test to 
get a more rounded picture of yourself and what you're suited to.

Virginia Isaac is the chief executive of The Inspiring Futures Foundation 
<http://www.inspiringfutures.org.uk/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly Careers update 
<https://register.theguardian.com/careers/?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>.
 