
The Ministry of Defence <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ministry-of-defence> 
has made dozens of allegations of bribery and corruption involving Britain’s 
multibillion-pound defence budget, prompting warnings that more should be done 
to tackle the problem.

Forty-four allegations have been referred to law enforcement agencies by the 
Ministry of Defence since 2011, according to figures released to parliament by 
defence minister Harriett Baldwin.

Four of these involved the bribing of foreign public officials.

The MoD has not excluded any companies from bidding for contracts under 
procurement law, as none have been found guilty of bribery or corruption.

With nearly £24bn of MoD money going to British and foreign companies last 
year, Corruption Watch’s Susan Hawley said: “The lack of any effective action 
against contractors alleged to have been involved in bribery and corruption is 
deeply worrying.

“It is time that the MoD used its powers to deny companies involved in 
wrongdoing the right to bid for its contracts.”

Figures released to Labour MP Roger Godsiff show that of the four allegations 
relating to bribery of foreign public officials, one prompted action by the 
police.

The statistics also show that 29 allegations related to UK firms, while four 
involved companies based overseas.

MoD policy is that its teams must obtain information from potential suppliers 
on bribery, corruption or misconduct, and decide whether to exclude them from 
bidding.

But an allegation of corruption is not enough to exclude a supplier, with only 
a conviction warranting this action under the relevant legislation.

Arab states pose 'critical' risk of defence corruption
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/29/arab-states-critical-risk-defence-corruption-arms-dealing>
“This means a court would have had to make a final judgment as to whether the 
supplier has acted illegally,” a defence source said.

The UK has been the world’s second biggest defence exporter over the past 
decade, selling about $122bn (£98bn) of equipment.

Last year, 63% of its defence exports were sold to the Middle East.

Godsiff, who uncovered the figures through a series of written parliamentary 
questions, said: “I am concerned that serious allegations of bribery and 
corruption have not been properly looked into, and that sufficient action has 
not been taken to ensure that the UK’s defence sales are held to the highest 
standards.

“I do not believe that the UK government should permit weapons sales to 
regimes such as Saudi Arabia which use them against civilians, but if they do 
so then they must at the very least ensure that UK taxpayers’ money is not 
spent on bribing foreign officials who are part of corrupt regimes.

“For the UK to fail to uphold standards on corruption and transparency erodes 
both our good reputation abroad and our ability to be a positive influence 
around the world.

Cutting defence ties with Saudi Arabia would come at a price | Rosemary Hollis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/defence-ties-saudi-arabia-yemen-british-cluster-bombs>
“Our interactions with other countries should prioritise human rights and the 
public good, which does not involve bribing dodgy regimes to buy weapons from 
us which they will then use in contravention of international law.”

Defence minister Mark Lancaster, in an answer to Godsiff, said: “The Ministry 
of Defence takes allegations of fraud, theft, corruption and bribery seriously 
and works hard to detect and deter it.

“There are robust processes in place to raise awareness of the need for 
vigilance and we actively encourage individuals to report fraud, theft, 
corruption and bribery.

“The MoD routinely carries out checks on potential contractors prior to 
contract award, including on criminal activity, such as convictions for tax 
evasion, bribery or fraud, and a review of a company’s audited accounts.”

The Cabinet Office, which coordinates procurement of public sector contracts, 
says it has made the process more open and transparent, becoming the first G7 
country to commit to standards that will ensure every part of the process is 
visible to the public.

Cabinet Office minister Ben Gummer said the government “is committed to being 
the most transparent government in the world”.
 