
Turner Prize 2015
7.30pm, Channel 4

“Like calling bubblegum caviar.” That was the opinion of Billy Childish, in 
2000, of the “ongoing national joke” that is the Turner Prize. Now in its 31st 
year, the divisive jamboree shows no signs of stopping. In fact, this year 
promises to stretch the idea of what constitutes art even further: among the 
works in contention are Janice Kerbel’s Doug – an operatic musical piece in 
nine songs for six voices. Lauren Laverne hosts the live coverage from the 
Tramway in Glasgow where Sonic Youth’sSonic Youth’s Kim Gordon names the winner.
Ali Catterall

London Spy
9pm, BBC2

The dark, stylish, increasingly odd London Spy reaches its final curtain, as 
Ben Whishaw’s Danny closes in on the truth about his murdered lover, former MI6 
collaborator Alex. After cracking the code in the USB drive, he’s now armed 
with Alex’s “lies analysis” theory, the ultimate lie detector, which he had 
hoped would “change the world” rather than get him killed. The truth of what 
happened on the night of his murder is revealed in shocking fashion.Ben Arnold

Las Vegas With Trevor McDonald
9pm, ITV

What is it like to live and work in the “shadow capital” of the US? Over two 
documentaries, Trevor McDonald meets some of those who have made Las Vegas 
home. The dark side of Sin City soon comes to the fore as ex-sex worker Annie 
Lobert, who now runs a safehouse for those trying to escape violent pimps, 
discusses her experiences. Elsewhere, McDonald joins bondsman Jon Foster on a 
mission to bring in a minor criminal who has jumped bail, and chats with a 
mellow Mike Tyson.Jonathan Wright

Hunting the Paedophiles: Inside the National Crime Agency
9pm, Channel 4


A stated aim of the NCA is to show the public that crime doesn’t pay, seizing 
assets of organised criminals and winning a hearts-and-minds battle. One of 
director Keith Bristow’s priorities is cybercrime, and this documentary focuses 
on one such case, detailing how the NCA worked across international borders to 
track the perpetrators of a crime that lured teenage boys into sending indecent 
images of themselves to a threatening online abuser.John Robinson

Storyville: The Six Day War – Censored Voices
9pm, BBC4

A fine addition to our understanding of the 1967 conflict between Israel and 
its Arab neighbours – a war that, to some extent, the Middle East has been 
fighting ever since. The film is built around a series of previously censored 
interviews, fully released for the first time here, conducted with Israeli 
soldiers back from the battlefields. The interviewers were a group 
of kibbutzniks led by a young Amos Oz, at the beginning of his career as his 
country’s literary conscience.Andrew Mueller

Reggie Yates’ Extreme UK: Gay and Under Attack
9pm, BBC3

Yates delivers a typically measured exploration of ingrained homophobia in 
black and Asian communities. The title overstates how distressing it is: we’re 
talking attitudes and assumptions rather than violence, although that’s no 
consolation to the young adults Yates meets who have been spurned by their 
families. Indoctrination by religion or tradition throws up anomalies, such as 
a DJ at a night for gay people of colour who still plays homophobic dancehall 
records.Jack Seale

Crackanory
10pm, Dave

The sadistic storytelling series returns with a new selection of fables for 
adults. Paul Whitehouse narrates the tale of a “fully immersive battle 
re-enactment” that inevitably gets out of hand. Next, Carrie Fisher’s soothing 
presence contrasts with a story about a young couple who check into a 
mysterious B&B. Why is it the only place in the town with a vacancy? It’s not 
just because of the three-minute shower rule. The twisted lovechild of 
Jackanory and Tales of the Unexpected delivers darkness and laughs.Hannah 
Verdier

Film Choice


Play (Ruben Ostlund, 2011) 1.55am, Channel 4

Swedish film-maker Ruben Östlund’s uncomfortable drama is based on a real-life 
case of teenage bullying in Gothenburg. A gang of black youngsters coaxes white 
kids into their orbit and proceeds to humiliate and rob them. It came in for 
much critical flak, but the main target appears to be the ineffective, 
overly-PC adults.Paul Howlett

Today’s best live sport


Test Cricket: India v South Africa The final day of the series from Delhi. 
6am, Sky Sports 1

Premier League Football: Everton v Crystal Palace The Toffees v the 
unexpectedly high-flying Eagles at Goodison Park. 7pm, Sky Sports 1

FA Cup Football: Grimsby Town v Shrewsbury Town Coverage of the second-round 
match from Blundell Park. 7pm, BT Sport 2

Badminton: Loughborough Sport v Team Derby Matchday three at the Sir David 
Wallace Arena. 7.30pm, Sky Sports 3
 