
More teenagers are trying or using e-cigarettes than tobacco products, 
according to a US study that has prompted fresh concerns among some scientists 
about a new generation of nicotine addicts. The report is the first to claim 
such high rates of e-cigarette use among 12- to 18-year-olds, though the study 
did not distinguish between those who had had one puff and never tried them 
again and more regular users.


“This is an early warning sign, not the final story,” Wilson Compton, deputy 
director of the US National Institute on Drug Abuse, said at an American 
Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in San Jose.


Advocates believe that e-cigarettes – which do not contain tobacco – have an 
enormous potential to improve public health by replacing traditional 
cigarettes, which contain hundreds of harmful chemicals. But some critics fear 
that the products could draw more people into nicotine addiction and possibly 
act as a gateway to smoking tobacco.


Figures from an annual survey of more than 40,000 students in 400 US secondary 
schools showed that 8.7% of 14-year-olds had smoked an e-cigarette in the 
previous month. Among 16- and 18-year-olds, the figures were higher, at 16.2% 
and 17.1% respectively. By comparison, the survey found that 4% of 
14-year-olds, 7% of 16-year-olds and 14% of 18-year-olds reported using a 
tobacco cigarette.


Compton said: “It is quite surprising that a larger number of teenagers in the 
US are now reporting current use of e-cigarettes than traditional tobacco 
cigarettes.”


The same survey, based on spring 2014 data compiled by the University of 
Michigan, found that 36% of 14-year-olds who had tried e-cigarettes in the past 
month had never tried smoking or chewing tobacco. Among the older teens, 30% 
and 21% of e-cigarette smokers aged 16 and 18 respectively said they had not 
previously tried tobacco products.


“That’s a concern, because this may be a unique and new pathway to nicotine 
exposure and could open up the potential for the development of addiction to 
nicotine, with the potential for long-lasting complications and progression to 
the use of absolutely harmful forms of tobacco,” said Compton. He said the use 
of e-cigarettes by teenagers was a particular issue because adolescence seemed 
to be a critical time for the seeds of addiction to be sown.


But other experts said children trying e-cigarettes instead of traditional 
cigarettes was no bad thing. “Smoking prevalence in youth is showing an 
unprecedented decline and it is now lower than ever before,” said Peter Hajek, 
director of the tobacco dependence research unit at Barts and the London school 
of medicine. “The fact that young people are trying e-cigarettes instead of 
cigarettes is a cause for relief rather than alarm.”

Hajek added: “A lot of adolescents try e-cigarettes by taking a puff from 
someone’s device, but, crucially, they do not progress to regular use. In fact, 
they usually do not try them again, and there is even some evidence that this 
may protect them from picking up smoking.”

In the UK, about 80,000 people a year die from tobacco smoke-related diseases 
– nearly a fifth of all deaths in the over-35s. The most damaging health 
effects – cancer and heart disease – are linked to inhaling tar and other 
chemicals produced when the tobacco burns. Though e-cigarettes produce fewer 
noxious chemicals, tests have found the vapour from some to contain 
cancer-causing substances such as formaldehyde and acetaldehyde.

Deborah Arnott, head of Action on Smoking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/smoking> and Health (Ash), said: “Nicotine 
can be harmful to the growing brain, so it’s best if young people avoid it. But 
if they’re going to experiment, it’s better to use e-cigarettes, as vaping is 
far less dangerous than smoking and much less addictive. We need to keep track, 
but so far in the UK and the US smoking rates are going down more than 
e-cigarette use is growing. This would not be the case if vaping really were a 
gateway into smoking.”


Estimates from Ash suggest that 2 million people in the UK use electronic 
cigarettes, with about 700,000 people using them instead of traditional 
cigarettes and the remainder using both.


Roy Harrison, professor of environmental health at Birmingham University, 
said: “There are likely public health benefits from e-cigarettes if they 
provide a pathway for smokers to give up tobacco use. There is evidence that 
this can happen, and little doubt that e-cigarettes are much less harmful to 
the smoker than tobacco. However, if adolescents who have never used tobacco 
take up e-cigarette use, this is a matter of profound concern as they are 
deliberately exposing themselves to a highly addictive substance.”


• This article was amended on 16 February 2015 to update figures from Ash for 
the number of people using electronic cigarettes.
 