
The mother of Bailey Gwynne, the Aberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/aberdeen> schoolboy stabbed to death last 
October, has paid tribute to “Bailey-Bazza”, her “sweet boy with a big dream”.

Bailey Gwynne trial: boy, 16, found guilty of culpable homicide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/07/bailey-gwynne-trial-boy-16-guilty-culpable-homicide>
In a tenderly worded statement, Kate Gwynne spoke for the first time about her 
relationship with her 16-year-old son “who would come with me on an evening run 
just to keep me company in the dark even though he could finish it in half the 
time”.

On Monday, another 16-year-old boy, who cannot be named for legal reasons, was 
cleared of murdering Bailey but found guilty of a lesser charge of culpable 
homicide after a five-day trial at Aberdeen high court. Kate Gwynne attended 
the court daily along with Bailey’s other close family.

She said: “Whatever the outcome was to be in this trial, nothing will give us 
back what has been taken and the only thing that we truly want. That is 
something that we as a family must try to live with.

“Our priority through the time of this trial was to be there for Bailey. That 
remains our priority along with guiding our sons, his brothers, through this. 
That is inevitably a long road, but we will never lose sight of Bailey while 
walking it.”

Thanking police, court staff and prosecuting counsel for their support, 
fairness and integrity, she went on to remind the media that her son was not 
just another news item.

“We understand in these circumstances why there is press interest to hear a 
story. But Bailey is not a story. Bailey is our child. He is our son, and our 
heart, our brother, our grandson, our nephew, cousin and our friend and beloved 
master of Teddy the Pug.

“Our sweet boy with a big dream working hard to make it happen. A boy who was 
never happier than when chilling out with his friends and his dog after a 
session in the gym.”

Describing the integral role Bailey played as the eldest brother of five 
siblings, she said: “The boy who would carry his brothers to the top on a hill 
walk when their own legs failed them, who dutifully cut the grass for his Dad 
or rescued his Nonna’s shopping and the boy who would come with me on an 
evening run just to keep me company in the dark even though he could finish it 
in half the time.

“We will always be immensely proud that Bailey is our son. We now need time 
and space to come to terms with what has happened and to continue to care for 
our family and those dear to Bailey.

“Lastly, it has always been a true blessing and a privilege to have Bailey and 
to share the honour of knowing, raising and loving him. That is not something 
that time or our parting will ever change.

“Bailey-Bazza, my true gent. With love we hold you in our hearts. Walk tall 
Bailey-Boy.”

Bailey’s killer will be sentenced on 1 April at the high court in Edinburgh.
 