
A man and a woman have been found murdered after police were called to a 
disturbance at a tower block in Aberdeen, which also resulted in the death of a 
second man who is believed to have fallen from a balcony after emergency 
services attended the scene.

Police confirmed they are investigating reports that one of the men fell to 
his death from a balcony of the 19-storey Donside Court flats in the Tillydrone 
area, north of the city centre.

The police investigations and review commissioner has been asked to review the 
circumstances, as officers were present at the time the man died.

Neighbours reported that dozens of officers attended the scene after emergency 
services were called to reports of a disturbance in a flat at about 8.15pm on 
Tuesday.

A blue forensics tent has been erected inside a police cordon at the foot of 
the building, close to the main entrance.

Neighbour Susan Smith told BBC Scotland that police had initially gone up to 
the flat carrying what looked like a battering ram. “There were loads and loads 
of police cars. I’ve never seen so many police cars. Four ambulance vans,” she 
said.

“They took a lassie out and they were still trying to give the guy CPR. Then 
they put a tent up and the next thing forensics arrived. The police actually 
went in with a great thing like a battering ram at one point. Then they went in 
with stretchers and a chair thing – and came out with them empty.”

DCI Keith Hardie from the major investigation team said: “We have launched a 
thorough investigation to establish the full circumstances of what happened 
last night.

“Officers attended at Donside Court following reports of a disturbance and 
found the bodies of a man and a woman within a flat. Both of these deaths are 
being investigated and treated as murder.

“At this stage, we can also confirm that a second man died at the scene a 
short time after officers attended. The circumstances of this death are 
likewise being investigated. Given that officers were present at the time of 
the death, the procurator fiscal has instructed the police investigations and 
review commissioner to review the circumstances.

“I would like to reiterate that at this stage we are not looking for anyone 
else in relation to these deaths and I would like to reassure the public that 
this is a contained incident and there is no wider threat to the community. 
There will continue to be a police presence in the area as we continue with our 
investigation into this incident and I want to thank the community for their 
patience.”





 