
Q I am writing to seek advice on behalf of a friend. My friend purchased a 
mobile phone in 1997, which was connected to the BT Connect Service. Since then 
her husband, who has moved out of the family home, has taken the phone with him.

Her husband has continued to use the phone and has run up a huge bill, which 
my friend could not afford to pay, even if she were willing to. She has 
recently received a demand from a debt collecting company for the amount owed, 
which exceeds £1,000.

As the telephone account is in my friend's name, she is obviously extremely 
upset and worried about this state of affairs. I would be very grateful for any 
advice or suggestions you may have which I can pass on to her.

DB

A When relationships break down it can be very difficult to sort out financial 
matters, particularly shared bank accounts or phone contracts. If your friend 
is still on speaking terms with her husband, I suggest she contacts him and 
explains the situation. Building up debts which she cannot pay will affect her 
credit rating, and may also have an adverse affect on his - so she could 
explain that the current situation is doing neither of them any financial 
favours.

If this is not an option, then she needs to speak to BT as soon as possible. 
At this stage, it is probably best for her to freeze the contract while the 
matter is sorted out, and to ask BT to block outbound calls. She could cancel 
the deal altogether, provided she won't be landed with large penalties.

She could offer to repay the debt in instalments, or to provide BT with a 
final settlement of the debt which won't be as much as £1,000, but will be a 
gesture towards settling her debt. Companies often prefer to have some money 
from customers, rather than none at all. Although £1,000 may seem a lot for a 
phone bill, it is not worth her declaring herself bankrupt for, particularly as 
she may have assets, including her home, which she would not want to put at 
risk.

A good way for her to explore her options is to talk to a money counsellor at 
her local Citizens Advice Bureau. They will be able to look at the small print 
of the contract and advise her on the best course of action. If she is 
contemplating divorce then they will also be able to help her draw up a budget 
to manage the household based on any maintenance she may receive from her 
husband.
 