
Shirley Lowe on Alexandra Shulman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alexandra-shulman> 

I met Alexandra in the early 80s when I was editor of Over 21 
<http://www.magforum.com/glossies/new.htm>. It was a woman's monthly magazine, 
intended to be like a young British version of Vanity Fair. Before that, I'd 
worked for years as a features writer at the Daily Express, where Alexandra's 
mother, Drusilla Beyfus <http://showstudio.com/contributor/drusilla_beyfus>, 
sat opposite me. I also knew her father, Milton Shulman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/may/25/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries2>
, a very illustrious journalist.

Over 21 was owned by a publisher called Morgan Grampian that otherwise 
published lads' magazines. Our title stood out among publications like that. 
I advertised for a secretary and Alexandra kind of drifted in in what I thought 
to be a very vague way and said, "Oh, hello, I'm Alex and I'd like a job as 
your secretary." But she struck me as being very airy-fairy, not the kind 
of crisp and to-the-point person I was after. I told her I didn't think she'd 
be right for the position, but she was determined, telling me how much she 
wanted the job and saying, "Give me a chance. I will work and you will see how 
good I am."

In the end, I thought, "She's right – she could do this." And I'm glad I did, 
because she turned out to be brilliant at everything she turned her hand to. 
She was organised, good with people, very grown up and quickly proved herself 
to be indispensable. How wrong I was about her vague nature: Alex showed 
herself to be one of the most efficient, most effective and nicest people I 
know.

One key period of the two years she worked with me sticks in my mind. Morgan 
Grampian was a particularly unhappy publisher. Nobody liked them and all the 
lads' magazines were keen to go on strike over pay, which they did. It affected 
the whole group, and I ended up having to produce Over 21 with an ex-art 
director friend, sitting in a pub down the road. Alex kept us going. She would 
bring all the things we needed out of the office; she was totally loyal. The 
three of us alone produced one issue, but Alex was the backbone of 
the operation.

I have nothing but admiration for her. Despite having such a big job at Vogue, 
she's so easygoing, never appears to be stressed (although I'm sure she feels 
so at times) and she's not what I'd call Vogue-ish or grand in any way.

We still see each other. We'll occasionally have lunch together and it's 
always lovely.

Alexandra Shulman on Shirley Lowe

I recently asked Shirley if she would ever have called herself my "mentor" 
when we worked together. "Ghastly word," she barked. "Of course not." That's 
not to say she didn't provide mentor-like qualities – encouragement, 
information, teaching and future contacts – but one of the reasons we got on 
so well (and still do) was that neither of us had much interest or time for 
terminology that reduces normal human activity to workplace jargon.

Over 21 was my first job in magazines. Before that, I'd been fired from two 
jobs in the music industry, so I was feeling quite unsure of myself. I wasn't 
particularly interested in working in magazines; I was just looking for a job – 
any job – to pay the rent.

Shirley hired me initially for a couple of weeks as a temp, while she 
continued searching for a replacement. She thought I'd be bored by the admin, 
but in fact I was still there after she left, around a year later. We just got 
on incredibly well from day one and, although I was reasonably efficient, 
I think our personalities clicked.

We sat at adjoining desks in a trio that included the deputy editor Penny 
Perrick <http://www.randomhouse.co.uk/authors/penny-perrick>. I took dictation, 
manned the switchboard, typed out the monthly contributors' payments, opened 
mail, ran errands and generally supported the pair. My filing system consisted 
of two files, one marked "Boring" and one marked "Not Boring", which as Shirley 
remarked the other day was successful only because we shared similar ideas 
of what would be suitable for which file.

She would commission many of the features in the magazine, and when the 
articles arrived and needed editing, she would cut them up with a pair of 
scissors and stick them back together in a new order with Sellotape, adding 
subbing marks before handing them to me to type up. It was a great way of 
learning about what made a good piece.

Her response to letters from freelancers pitching ideas taught me how to pitch 
my own, and her conversational but straightforward way of communicating has, I 
hope, been something I have copied. She was a great spotter of talent, 
and contributors would often come into the office for a chat;Mario Testino  
<http://www.mariotestino.com/>shot early fashion for the fashion editor Liz 
Connell,Craig Brown  <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Craig_Brown_%28satirist%29>
became music critic and Deborah Moggach 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deborah_Moggach> was a regular contributor.

In spite of the fact that the magazine was unionised and, as a secretary, I 
was not a member, Shirley let me write small pieces for it. It was a wonderful 
opportunity.

Shirley could be pretty impatient with those she didn't much like, but she was 
heavenly to me; appreciative, interested in my life but not intrusive, and 
impressive without being overbearing. When I am asked who I consider a role 
model (another ghastly word), Shirley usually comes to mind.

Ultimately it was from her incredibly funny anecdotes about her beloved 
husband Michael and their family and friends that taught me the most important 
thing: that you could have a big job and care a lot about it, but that you 
could also have a rich and fun life outside, one that would still be there when 
the job ends.
 