
Mylan will start selling a cheaper version of its EpiPen as criticism mounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/27/mylan-ceo-sold-stock-epipen-price-hike-heather-bresch>
 over a list price for the emergency allergy treatment that has grown to $608 
for a two-pack, making it unaffordable for many patients.

Mylan CEO sold $5m worth of stock while EpiPen price drew scrutiny
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/27/mylan-ceo-sold-stock-epipen-price-hike-heather-bresch>
The drugmaker said on Monday it will launch in several weeks a generic EpiPen 
version that is identical to the branded option but will have a list price of 
$300 for a two-pack. It will be available in both 0.15-milligram and 
0.30-milligram strengths, like the current version on the market.

EpiPens are used in emergencies to treat severe allergies to insect bites and 
foods such as nuts and eggs that can lead to anaphylactic shock. People usually 
keep a number of EpiPens handy at home, school or work. The syringes, prefilled 
with the hormone epinephrine, expire after a year.

Consumers and politicians have accused the company of price-gouging, since the 
list price for a pair of EpiPens has climbed repeatedly from around $94 in 
2007, when Mylan acquired the product.

Mylan’s chief executive, Heather Bresch, defended the price hikes last week, 
saying the company only received $274 of the total price for a twin-package 
while insurers, pharmacies and other parties divvy up the rest.

Last week, Mylan said it was expanding programs that help people pay for 
EpiPens. It doubled the limit for eligibility for its patient assistance 
program, so a family of four making up to $97,200 would pay nothing out of 
pocket. It also said it will offer $300 copay cards, up from the current 
$100-a-prescription savings.

A company representative said on Monday that the $300 cards would be available 
only for the branded version, but patients could use its assistance program for 
both the branded and generic versions of the medicine.

How much an individual pays for an EpiPen prescription can depend on insurance 
coverage. Pharmacy benefits managers negotiate drug prices for insurers and 
employers and often get discounts off a drug’s list price, and patient 
out-of-pocket costs can vary by plan. For instance, customers of Express 
Scripts, the nation’s largest prescription benefits manager, pay $73.50 on 
average, a price the company has kept fairly stable for a couple of years.

Mylan said that last year, nearly 80% of its patients with commercial 
insurance paid nothing out of pocket for an EpiPen prescription due to its 
savings card.

Uninsured patients or those with high-deductible coverage might be stuck 
paying the full price for the prescription, if they are unaware of Mylan’s 
savings options. High-deductible coverage can require patients to pay thousands 
of dollars toward medical care or prescriptions before most coverage kicks in.

Mylan specializes in selling generic drugs, which are lower-priced equivalents 
to branded medications. Launching a generic version of the EpiPen can help the 
drugmaker protect its market share from competition.

Mylan’s announcement on Monday came a few days after the compounding pharmacy 
Imprimis Pharmaceuticals said it might be able to sell a version of the allergy 
treatment in a few months and would probably charge about $100 for two 
injectors.

Who is to blame for the EpiPen hike? Drug monopolies – not evil CEOs | Colin 
Holtz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/29/epipen-price-drug-monopolies-mylan>
There is currently little competition for EpiPen, with the only rival product 
being Adrenaclick, which carries a list price of $461. But that could change. 
At least two companies are trying to get US approval to sell a rival brand or 
generic version of EpiPen. None is likely to hit the US market until well into 
next year.

Numerous members of Congress and other politicians have called for 
congressional hearings on Mylan’s pricing, an investigation by the Federal 
Trade Commission and action by the Food and Drug Administration to increase 
competition by speeding up approvals of any rival products.

Shares of Mylan slipped 34 cents to $42.69 in morning trading on Monday, while 
broader indexes rose slightly.
 