
Algeria clinched a place in the last eight at the Africa Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> with a 2-0 win over 
Senegal that eliminated their opponents in their Group C match on Tuesday.

A superb late Nabil Bentaleb goal wrapped up the victory after an early Riyad 
Mahrez goal set the Algerians on their way, leavingSenegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/senegal>, who needed a draw to advance, 
heartbroken.

Algeria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/algeria> finished as runners-up 
level on six points with the group winners Ghana who secured a 2-1 victory over 
South Africa in the other group game with a late goal in Mongomo.

On Sunday, Ghana will play the Group D runners-up in Mongomo while Algeria 
face the Group D winners in Malabo.

Algeria began the game with Senegal under pressure following their lethargic 
showing and late defeat by Ghana on Friday. Nerves were evident in their 
defence as the Senegalese sought to attack with pace down the flanks in the 
early stages.

However, it was the Algerians who broke the deadlock when Mahrez was picked 
out by Madjid Bougherra and he finished calmly underneath goalkeeper Bouna 
Coundoul.

Senegal had several chances to equalise in the first half but failed to find 
the net.

Sadio Mane’s pace and darting runs were of particular concern to Bougherra and 
his defensive partner Carl Medjani, while Papy Djilobodji went close with a 
long-range free kick after 30 minutes. Mame Biram Diouf was then thwarted by 
Rais M’Bolhi six minutes later when he was beaten to the ball.

Algeria sought to close the game down in the second half and stoppages became 
increasingly frequent. M’Bolhi was booked for time-wasting after 76 minutes, 
although Algeria did go close when Kara Mbodji was forced into a goal-line 
block.

The defeat sends Senegal out of the tournament following Ghana’s victory in 
Mongomo after late goals from John Boye and Andre Ayew cancelled out Mandla 
Masango’s opener and sent Avram Grant’s side into the quarter-finals.

The quarter-final involving the host Equatorial Guinea has been moved from the 
small town of Ebebiyin to the country’s biggest city, Bata.

The African Football Confederation also decided the quarter-final in Mongomo 
would be moved to Malabo, the capital city. “These two pitches have been 
adversely affected by a combination of wear and tear from the six games played 
or to be played in each of them, and the unstable weather conditions seen 
lately,” CAF said in a statement.
 