
Nadine Dorries must wait until Sunday to make her debutin the 12th series of 
the reality TV showI'm a Celebrity ... 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/i-m-a-celebrity> Get Me Out of Here, 
but in one respect at least – bringing a new image of politicians to an 
audience of millions – the Conservative MP for Mid Bedfordshire has already 
amply succeeded in her ambitions.

The last time Dorries commanded a rash of newspaper headlines was a little 
over a year ago, when she proposed an amendment to the health and social care 
bill to strip independent abortion providers of their role in counselling 
pregnant women. On Thursday, she was pictured semi-naked on the cover of the 
Daily Star, a cut out of the heads of presenters Ant and Dec over each of her 
breasts, above a smirking caption claiming that "NaughtyNadine Dorries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nadine-dorries> has boobed again!"

In fact the 55-year-old MP was not topless, as the paper claimed, but had been 
snapped furtively by a long-lens paparazzo while changing next to a hotel 
swimming pool. But as an illustration of the gulf between how Dorries doubtless 
hoped to come across by taking part in the show and the likely reality of her 
portrayal, the Star's story could scarcely have been more apt. Before departing 
for the Australian jungle, where the programme is filmed, Dorries said David 
Cameron would probably be "relieved" she had gone. Instead, the prime minister 
has suspended the party whip, and stressed to a TV audience, "She's no longer a 
Conservative MP while this is going on."

The office of the parliamentary commissioner for standards has confirmed that 
it has received a complaint against Dorries and is considering whether to 
investigate. A clutch of Conservative MPs rushed to criticise her involvement 
in the show, which – dependent on the will of the British electorate – could 
keep her away from Westminster for up to a month.

"Taking leave for a month from parliament shows utter contempt," tweeted Alec 
Shelbrooke <https://twitter.com/AlecShelbrooke/status/265885112233766912>, MP 
for Elmet and Rothwell. The veteran member for Lichfield Michael Fabricant 
judged she had "let down her colleagues and her constituency".Claire Perry, 
elected in 2010 to represent Devizes, offered 
<https://twitter.com/claire4devizes/status/265893818606436352> "a new slogan 
for rebellious, recalcitrant members: 'I'm not fit to be an MP – kick me out of 
here.'"

In one respect, the MP, who has rarely shied from the spotlight since her 
election to parliament in 2005, will welcome the media storm – even though, 
having been shut off from all news media, she will be entirely unaware of it or 
of her party suspension. Dorries has said she decided to do the show "because 
16 million people watch it. If people are watching I'm a Celebrity, that's 
where politicians should be going." Her appearance on the show could prove that 
MPs could be "normal", she said, adding: "Maybe [the public] will trust us 
more." (The fee of up to £40,000 may be another factor.)

The exposure would offer a platform for her to argue her position on abortion, 
shetold her local paper 
<http://www.bedfordtoday.co.uk/news/local/exclusive-interview-with-nadine-dorries-on-her-i-m-a-celebrity-appearance-1-4457615>
, allowing her to "burst through" the "extreme zealots" who oppose her lobbying 
for a reduction in the legal limit to 20 weeks. Asked about her absence from 
parliament, she cited the example of fellow MP Alastair Burt who "has had 20 
weeks abroad this year". That these trips were in his role as a foreign office 
minister evidently did not strike her as a different case to her own.

In a party burdened with a posh-boy image, Dorries' "normalness" should be one 
of her major assets. The daughter of a bus driver and teacher who grew up in a 
council house in Liverpool, she is one of relatively few northern working-class 
Tories in parliament. A divorced mother of three, she traces her opposition to 
abortion at 24 weeks to her experiences working as a nurse for three years, 
during which time she assisted at a termination. She worked for a year at a 
community school in Africa before setting up a medical company, and working for 
Oliver Letwin before seeking election herself in 2001, and succeeding in 2005.

But while she unquestionably adds colour to Westminster, the outspoken MP has 
also shown a repeated facility for self-sabotage. She escaped censure in the 
expenses scandal (which she called a "witch-hunt") only by claiming that her 
blog, in which she named her parliamentary address as home despite living 50 
miles away, was "70% fiction". In 2010 she introduced an"abstinence" bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/jan/20/nadine-dorries-sexual-abstinence-bill-withdrawn>
, which would see teenage girls – but not boys – lectured on the importance of 
abstaining from sex.

Her proposed amendment to the health bill last year was roundly defeated, 
following a long, incoherent speech to the House which even the amendment's 
co-sponsor, Labour's Frank Field, pleaded with her to bring to a close. 
Opponents have pointed out that while Dorries has called for a 20-week limit 
and calls herself pro-choice, she has variously said she would prefer a limit 
of nine or 13 weeks. "I find her approach incredibly dishonest," said Kate 
Smurthwaite, vice chair ofAbortion Rights UK <http://www.abortionrights.org.uk/>
. "If you scratch the surface you realise that she's opposed [to abortion] in 
all cases. She's just trying to find populist hangers to hang her message on."

The MP has also proved an increasingly outspoken – and highly personal – 
critic of her party leadership. She has said she was partly motivated by 
"revenge" for her treatment on the day she introduced her amendment, when in a 
dismissive innuendo during PMQs, Cameron called her "extremely frustrated". Her 
response has been bitter: Cameron and Osborne, whom she blames personally for 
the failure of the amendment, are "two arrogant posh boys who show no remorse, 
no contrition, and no passion to want to understand the lives of others", she 
has said.

Dorries is not unique in her party in disliking the leadership, but 
parliamentary patience is wearing thin with her self-styled outsider status. 
"It would be wrong of me to criticise someone for having a view that's 
different from yours," fellow Conservative MP Mark Garnier saidon Thursday, 
before adding that Dorries' interventions were often "less than helpful". It 
was "absolutely right" to remove the whip, he said. "The point is that [as a 
party] we're doing our best. Important things, all of which we feel strongly 
are the right thing to do. For someone to decide they don't want to be a team 
player and take a month's holiday, well, it's a bit of a slap in the face."

At her constituency office on Thursday there was a fervently expressed hope, 
almost certainly forlorn, that the story would soon blow over. Why? "Because 
it's an embarrassment to all of us," said Budge Wells, deputy chair of the 
local Conservative association, before correcting himself a little to say: 
"It's something we wish hadn't happened." Local members, he said, were "rather 
upset", but would delay any decision until Dorries returned from the jungle.

He described her as a hardworking constituency MP with a "high moral standard" 
who had beaten a large field of candidates to be selected by the local party in 
2005. She had lobbied effectively on a number of local conservation causes, he 
said, and "dealt with a lot of people's problems". As for her outspoken nature 
and self-styled "maverick" persona: "We didn't know that when we picked her."

Even friends said that Dorries was unlikely to have anticipated the reaction 
to her decision. "Most people going to the jungle have no idea of the size it 
is, or the impact it could make," said her friendLembit Opik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lembitopik>, who took part in the show in 
2010 after losing his own parliamentary seat. "I certainly didn't." Dorries, he 
acknowledged, had probably been "naive". He condemned the "kangaroo court" 
decision to remove the party whip.

"Nadine Dorries is a maverick, an independent-minded maverick. Rather than 
celebrating her diversity they simply try to suppress it." She had been 
subjected to "persecution, patronisation and ridicule in a very public way from 
her own colleagues", he said, adding that though he did not know of her plans 
to participate, "she is probably so sick of being ridiculed in parliament that 
she decided to take her arguments directly to the country".

Ann Widdecombe <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ann-widdecombe>, who took 
part in Strictly Come Dancing after retiring as an MP, but has resisted 
repeated invites to I'm a Celebrity, would have urged Dorries not to take part, 
she told the Guardian. "You have no control at all in those programmes. It's 
entirely up to the editor which parts are shown." Withdrawing the whip, all the 
same, was "a gross overreaction".

Dorries had taken "the most tremendous gamble", and yet, "it may well work for 
her if she does manage to open politics to people who are more likely to vote 
in reality shows than in general elections.

"And what if she pulls it off and comes back in glory? What exactly is the 
party going to do then?"

• This article was amended on 9 November 2012 because it said the 
"parliamentary commissioner for standards has confirmed it was investigating a 
complaint against [Nadine] Dorries". While the commissioner's office has 
received a complaint, he has yet to rule on whether he will investigate.
 