
Two people killed during a disturbance in a block of flats in Aberdeen have 
been named. The bodies of Keith Taylor, 43, and Tracy Gabriel, 40, were found 
after police responded to a call on Tuesday evening. A second man is understood 
to have died after falling from a balcony in the building. Taylor and Gabriel’s 
deaths are being treated as murder.

The trio are believed to have been socialising together and drinking in 
Gabriel’s flat in the Tillydrone area before the deaths occurred. Neighbours 
called 999 when they heard a woman shouting and screaming for help, and police 
attended the scene. Shortly afterwards, the second man, who has still not 
officially been named, fell to his death, despite police efforts to save him.

After entering the flat, officers discovered the bodies of Gabriel and Taylor, 
who was believed to have lived with his wife, Linda, next door.

The families of the victims paid tribute to them on Thursday. Gabriel’s family 
said in a statement: “Tracy was a much-loved daughter, sister, mother, aunt and 
cousin. Born in Aberdeen, she spent most of her younger years in the Alford and 
Huntly areas.


“She then moved to Aberdeen whilst in her 20s, and latterly lived in the 
Tillydrone area. She was well known in the community and well liked by her 
friends and family. She will be sadly missed.”


Taylor’s family said: “Keith was a happy-go-lucky lad. He had a great sense of 
humour and was always laughing and joking. His dad taught him to scuba dive and 
they enjoyed many diving trips in and around the Moray coast.


“Keith met his wife when he worked in Holland in the oil and gas sector. They 
then moved to Aberdeen and got married in 2013. He was a loving husband and was 
devoted to his mum and dad plus his older brother.”

Ross Grant, a Labour councillor for Tillydrone, said several residents had 
been struggling to come to terms with the tragedy. “Tillydrone is a community 
in deep shock in light of the horrific incident which was witnessed by many 
nearby residents and families who were out enjoying the last of the summer 
sunshine on 19 July,” he said. “It is a close-knit community, everybody knows 
everybody, and residents love staying here. That makes an incident like this 
all the more upsetting.

“I know that many residents have had trouble sleeping, and are dealing with 
vivid memories of what they saw and heard. But it is that same closeness in the 
area that will help residents to come to terms with the circumstances and move 
forward. My thoughts are very much with the loved ones of those caught up in 
this horrific incident.”

The identity of the third person who died is expected to be officially 
confirmed by police on Friday. The case will be reviewed by the Police 
Investigations and Review Commissioner because officers were in attendance when 
the second man died. A report has been submitted to the procurator fiscal in 
relation to all three deaths.

 