 Nancy Spero in 1990. Photograph: A Frajndlich/Anthony Reynolds Gallery 
As Nancy Spero saw it, art in postwar New York was a male institution. Women 
could join if they played by men's rules. She refused, and was cast into outer 
darkness. Her husband,Leon Golub 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2004/aug/13/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>, 
was a figurative painter too, so he was out of the big picture. In 1956 Spero 
and Golub took off for Europe in disgust and protest. That was where her 
rebellion found teeth and claws.

In Italy, Spero, who has died aged 83 of respiratory complications, discovered 
the vigour and immediacy of ancient Etruscan art; in Paris, where she and Golub 
settled in 1959, she discovered the troubled art and writings of the 
manic-depressive artist and inventor of the so-called theatre of cruelty,
Antonin Artaud <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/artaud>. Artaud's language – 
semi-coherent, as though he were inventing it from scratch – his alienation 
from society (from the human race even), his savage portraits, more like the 
bloodied ghosts of Banquo and his successors, and, perhaps most of all, the 
indeterminate sex of the figures he scratched on to paper, became her lodestar.

It took several years before she absorbed Artaud's influence and her move with 
Golub back to New York in 1964. Then, over four years from 1969, she produced 
two sequences of work, the Artaud paintings and the Codex Artaud, which were 
her first fully-fledged commitment to what is now loosely called 
first-generation feminism. She built her own language of weirdly articulated 
human forms, hybrids, dismembered limbs and grisly heads separated from bodies, 
black sockets for eyes and mouth, or with tongues doubling as livid penises, 
disembodied phalluses ejaculating blood, women-men and howling banshees warning 
of death and disaster. Unlike Artaud's images, painfully born from his long 
years of confinement in mental clinics, Spero's were drawn from the surrounding 
nightmare of America's war in Vietnam, shouting from the newspaper headlines 
and flickering on the TV set in the corner. Later, possibly with a nice sense 
of irony, she joined the feminist group Women Artists in Revolution (War).

Spero was born in Cleveland, Ohio; her family moved to Chicago when she was a 
year old. After graduating from high school, she studied at theArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Institute of Chicago, where she 
met Golub, a war veteran and fellow student. She married him after her return 
from Paris, where she spent several months in 1949 continuing her studies at 
the École des Beaux-Arts and, like so many expatriate painters, working in the 
studio of André Lhote, an unsuccessful cubist but successful teacher.

Golub and Spero worked in partnership all their lives, sometimes sharing a 
polemical platform, always working together, in later years in a big loft in 
Greenwich Village, New York, which they divided in two. He would scrape the 
surfaces of his paintings raw with a meat cleaver. Her surfaces were equally 
scarified, but the effect was more subtly obtained. When he died in 2004, she 
kept the partition, with a big Golub war painting nailed to the wall dominating 
his half.

Spero's first mature work featured dimly discerned figures swimming in the 
black amniotic fluid of her darkest imagining. One painting of 1960 is 
inscribed and entitled, with something like Artaud's semi-coherent rage, Les 
Anges, Merde, Fuck You. Later, in the Codex Artaud, she imagined a figure bent 
like a square arch and hung with teats, like the Etruscan bronze of the 
she-wolf that suckled Romulus and Remus.

Her figures, she said, came from many cultures, but would often coexist on the 
same surface. They might be hieroglyphs, frenzied maenads or black serpents 
with men's heads and menacing tongues – for stinging, perhaps, for uttering 
untruths, for screaming fury. Incensed by the Pentagon's double-speak over 
Vietnam, she created her ultimate images of death. As Spero herself put it: "I 
thought the terminology and slogans like 'pacification' coming out of the 
Pentagon were really an obscene use of language. 'Pacification.' They would 
firebomb whole villages and then the peasants would be relocated into refugee 
camps … In some of these paintings, the image of the helicopter has breasts 
hanging down and people are hanging on with their teeth, like a circus act. 
There are bloody bodies, skulls and remains. I collected all kinds of horrific 
images … The helicopter is eating and shitting on people, just like an 
efficient war machine."

She called her images her "cast of characters", and she deployed them on 
polymer printing plates and in paper chains of sheets collaged with selected 
cut-out figures, her "paper dolls", that littered the studio and stretched into 
enormous scrolls. Finally, the figures leapt on to walls, printed directly on 
to brick or plaster, earlier this year spectacularly in a tunnel-vaulted 
gallery of the Reina Sofía museum in Madrid.

Is it possible to rage against the dying of the light through a lifetime? 
Spero sustained it for the whole of her long career. There were occasional 
later lyric notes to her feminism, when figures from Greek vases might be 
joined by fashion plates or lingerie ads: non-hierarchical figures as she would 
say; not great, but they pointed up the intensity of her central work.
 Sky Goddess/Egyptian Acrobat 1987-88, handprinting and printed collage on 
paper Photograph: Anthony Reynolds Gallery 
Spero is survived by her three sons, two of whom live in Paris, several 
grandchildren and a sister.

Jon Bird writes: If angry resistance to a world defined and regulated by men 
characterised Nancy Spero's early art works, then an exuberant and joyful 
playfulness came to dominate her scrolls and printed installations over the 
last three decades as her lexicon of cavorting female figures soared across 
paper and wall. She made the gesture of sticking out her tongue a personal 
symbol of resistance and refusal, but she also exulted in the possibility of 
liberation from all oppression. Like all truly great artists, she fashioned a 
world of the imagination and invited the viewer to enter – quite literally, 
given the scale of some of her scrolls, which stretched over 200ft, while her 
installations covered floors, walls and ceilings.

Spero's art reached across centuries and cultures to construct a visual 
language that described how the world we inhabit and struggle with and against 
in our daily lives is, simultaneously, a world of myth, belief and history – of 
the sacred and the profane. Never a doctrinaire feminist and widely versed in 
literature, poetry, theory and politics, shared, until his death in 2004, with 
her husband, she invented an aesthetic of redemption: a narrative of the 
feminine from victimisation to empowerment. Her unique signature style, 
composed of hand-printed texts and images arranged across backgrounds that 
shifted from the off-white tonalities of the paper or wall surface to vibrantly 
coloured and contrasting hues, created visual scenarios that incorporated the 
body in pain to dance as a symbolic image of freedom and choice.

• Nancy Spero <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/nancy-spero>, artist, 
born 24 August 1926; died 18 October 2009
 