
Nancy Spero's death on Sunday took a great artistic conscience from the world. 
The last time I visited her in the LaGuardia Place studio she shared with her 
partner Leon Golub – Leon died in 2004 – she looked frail but indomitable, 
though surrounded by a galaxy of medications, and getting about only with 
extreme difficulty. Cursed with arthritis, over the years she had developed 
strategies to make her art, getting studio assistants to cut and stamp out the 
stencils she made, printing them on paper, on walls, and even as a maypole of 
severed heads. This last was one of the most memorable works at the 2007Venice 
Biennale <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/venice-biennale>, greeting 
viewers as they entered the Italian pavilion where the keynote show was held. 
Spero said the work, Maypole/Take No Prisoners, was "all about victimage", 
though its grotesque aspect was leavened by her wit.

Often in art this sort of talk is mere platitude, but Spero's work was 
determined and unerring. During the 1960s she focused on the Vietnam War: 
helicopters whined overhead, bombers emptied their loads on an undefeated 
populace. She developed a cast of characters and a repertoire of images which 
she repeated and recombined in different ways every time they were shown. These 
included burlesque troupes of ancient dildo dancers, pagan and Neolithic 
goddesses, Amazon warriors and phalanxes of female, spear-wielding hunters; 
even Superwoman was in there somewhere. Her figures danced and raved around the 
walls of galleries and museums worldwide, swarming in a cacophonous, 
mischievous, floor-to-ceiling choreography.

There was a memorable series devoted to Antonin Artaud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/artaud>, which included the phrase: "Artaud 
I couldn't have borne to know you alive your despair". Her art could also be 
riotously funny and sexy as well as macabre, and she made many works which 
dealt with female jouissance and eroticism, pleasure and pain. Spero was a 
spearhead of feminist art in the 1960s, calling for greater recognition of 
women artists and women in the New York art world. A recent show, Wack! Art and 
the Feminist Revolution, which I saw in New York a couple of years ago, 
revisited those turbulent times, and Spero's place in them. It should have come 
to Europe.

Spero was a vital, energetic artist. She never lost her curiosity in the 
world, nor her sense of anger at its injustices, and she found a way of making 
work which combined the graphic with installation, relevance and timelessness. 
She and Golub were partners for over half a century. I knew them since my first 
visits to New York in the late 1970s, and they were a unique and unguardedly 
generous double act. I owe something of my formation to this couple, who I once 
described as the conscience of the art world. And so they were.
 