
Oscar-winner Natalie Portman has been accused 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/haredim-to-protest-natalie-portman-filming-in-nahlaot/>
 of mounting a "foreign invasion" by protesters from Israel's ultra-orthodox 
community after arriving in Jerusalem to shoot her directorial debut, reports 
the Times of Israel.

Portman is in the city to work on a film adaptation of Israeli novelist Amos 
Oz's acclaimed memoir A Tale of Love and Darkness, which has been translated 
into 28 languages and has sold over a million copies worldwide. The film 
details Oz's childhood in Jerusalem in the chaotic period at the end of the 
British mandate for Palestine, as well as the writer's experiences during the 
early years of the state ofIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> 
and teenage years on a kibbutz. Portman, who was born in Jerusalem to an 
Israeli father and an American mother, will also take a supporting role as Oz's 
mother.

Ultra-orthodox residents of the city's Nahlaot district have written to 
Jerusalem deputy mayor Rachel Azaria in protest at the decision to shoot scenes 
there. "The film shooting is set to take place on several sensitive streets 
close to synagogues and yeshivas, and the scenes being filmed should have been 
examined first to make sure they don't offend anybody's sensitivities," the 
letter reads. It insists authorities failed to inform residents about the 
shoot, and suggests they only discovered it was happening in recent days.

The Times also reports incidents of ultra-orthodox protest graffiti in the 
district labelling Portman's film a "foreign invasion". Authorities said all 
actors involved in the shoot for A Tale of love and Darkness would dress 
modestly, and pointed out the difficulty of balancing the cultural interests of 
the city as a whole with those of local religious groups.

"There is a constant tension between the desire to celebrate diverse and 
interesting Jerusalem and the attempts by extremist groups to prevent this," 
Azaria said. "The attraction of the city, its unique architecture and the 
efforts of the film and television industry will triumph and the cinematic 
growth we've seen in Jerusalem in recent years will continue to flourish with
Natalie Portman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/natalie-portman> in Nahlaot."

Portman, received 1.6m Israeli New Shekel (£276,500) from the Jerusalem 
Development Authority to bring her film to the city. Observers report scenes 
featuring schoolchildren dressed in traditional 1940s clothing – wool 
knee-length shorts for the boys and pinafore dresses for the girls – have 
already been shot. Portman, who left Israel for the US at the age of three, 
will speak Hebrew in the film.
 