
Labour's 1983 manifesto


The traditional "top secret" briefing materials prepared for an incoming prime 
minister should Labour's Michael Foot have won the 1983 election did not even 
bother to spell out how the party's manifesto, famously described by Gerald 
Kaufman as the "longest suicide note in history", might be implemented.

"In the light of the current disagreement within the Labour party leadership 
about defence policy, I do not think it would be either sensible or practicable 
to try to prepare a detailed brief on how under aLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> government we might move towards 
'a non-nuclear defence policy' or get rid of United States bases in this 
country," wrote Sir David Goodall, a senior cabinet office official on 26 May – 
two weeks before the election.

Thumbs down

 Plans were afoot to use indelible ink on voters' thumbs to help beat an 
alleged Sinn Féin multiple voter scam. Photograph: Rex Features 
Jim Prior, the then Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> secretary, proposed 
legislation to the cabinet in September 1983, requiring the thumbs of Northern 
Irish voters to be marked with indelible ink in an attempt to halt Sinn Féin 
"vote early, vote often" impersonation at the ballot box. Prior claimed that up 
to 25% of Sinn Féin's electoral support was based on such practices.

The cabinet, however, postponed introducing such a measure into its crowded 
legislative programme.

University challenge

 Margaret Thatcher and Sir Keith Joseph at a press conference after a meeting 
with a TUC delegation at No. 10 Downing Street. Photograph: PA/PA Archive/Press 
Association Ima 
The cabinet minutes for 10 November 1983 show that the then education 
secretary, Sir Keith Joseph, said he would have to introduce legislation to 
"close one or two universities" if he was expected to go ahead with planned 
£50m cuts to higher education.

The savings were approved only after it was argued that they could be found 
through unfilled vacancies caused by the natural wastage of academic staff. At 
the cabinet meeting, extra money was found to put the Royal Opera House and the 
Royal Shakespeare Company "on a sound footing".

Laser guidance

 The UK had a laser weapon to deter Argentinian pilots attacking the Royal; 
Navy in the Falklands war. Photograph: Martin Cleaver/PA Archive/Press 
Association Ima 
Britain developed a top secret laser weapon for use against Argentina during 
the Falklands war, but it never saw action, released Ministry of Defence files 
reveal. The gun was designed to dazzle low-flying Argentinian pilots attacking 
ships that were part of the taskforce sent to retake the islands in 1982.

Michael Heseltine <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michael-heseltine>, 
then defence secretary, revealed the existence of the weapon in a "top secret" 
memo to Margaret Thatcher sent in January 1983.

"Knowledge of it has been kept to a very restricted circle," he said.

The UK had a programme of developing laser weapons and was concerned about the 
impact of Soviet lasers on its military hardware and personnel when they were 
aimed at troops' eyes and optical sensors on equipment.

Heseltine told Thatcher that the Russians might have already deployed a laser 
weapon on its cruiser, Kirov.

There was also serious US concern at the Russian's progress in developing 
non-nuclear electromagnetic pulse weapons, which could knock out the 
electronics of low-flying planes or debilitate soldiers' central nervous 
systems.

Spiritual firmness

 Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn. Photograph: Steve Liss/Time & Life Pictures/Getty 
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn <https://www.theguardian.com/books/solzhenitsyn>, the 
dissident Russian novelist who was expelled from the USSR in 1974, warned 
Margaret Thatcher that Moscow would inevitably launch an attack and only a 
rediscovery of the west's "spiritual firmness" could prevent disaster.

The author of The Gulag Archipelago met Thatcher for an hour at Downing Street 
on 11 May 1983, where they exchanged ideas about ending the Soviet system and 
defending the west against inevitable Moscow expansionism.

In an analysis that the prime minister described as "disturbing", the author 
said "a moment would come when the Russians would not be able to prevent their 
rockets being used", adding: "Britain, Europe and the whole world would have to 
live through terrible, unprecedented experiences."

Thatcher admired the Nobel prizewinner, who sold more than 30m books 
worldwide, and appreciated his recent public description of supporters of 
unilateral disarmament as "naive".

"The terrible feature of current demonstrations in the west against nuclear 
weapons was that the demonstrators were opposed to any defence – they were 
prepared to surrender," he told her.

He said that one of Britain's great moments was at hand. It was necessary to 
state openly that the country was in a most dangerous situation [that] might be 
worse than that of 1940.

He offered a way out because communists were afraid of "courageous resistance".

"If they saw that the situation in Britain had changed and that we were if 
necessary prepared to sacrifice and die, they would not touch Britain but would 
instead consider moves against other countries," he said.

"If the west could rediscover spiritual firmness, the struggle could continue 
for a long time."

Panda pandering

 Margaret Thatcher was asked to bring back a fertile female panda after her 
trip to meet Deng Xiaoping in 1983. Photograph: Steve Bloom Images/Alamy 
Margaret Thatcher <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> was 
urged by her top aide to use a sensitive trip to Beijing to meet the Chinese 
premier, Deng Xiaoping, to acquire a female giant panda for London Zoo.

The previous Conservative prime minister, Edward Heath, had brought home a 
pair of pandas in 1974 as a gift from China to the British people, but the 
female turned out to be infertile.

After a meeting with Lord Zuckerman, president of the Zoological Society of 
London, Robert Armstrong, the cabinet secretary wrote in a memo: "I think Lord 
Zuckerman hopes that, if the prime minister were to be offered a female giant 
panda for the British people, she might feel able to accept it."

The panda question was inserted in otherwise delicate negotiations with Deng 
in 1982 over the future of Hong Kong, wider Sino-US relations and trade with 
the UK.

A briefing note on Deng described the leader as "older and deafer though still 
mentally alert", while officials also included "a hasty guide to the history of 
China".
 