
Electricity, water and gas meters are in every home and each year in the UK 
around 1.4m of them are removed and replaced.

Last year, the National Grid opened a purpose-built meter assessment and 
recycling centre (Marc) and is pioneering ways of refurbishing or recycling old 
meters to keep scrap out of landfill.

The expertise the centre is developing means it is now able to refurbish more 
than a quarter of all the returned meters and recycle around 3,000 tonnes of 
waste.

National Grid owns more than 15m gas meters in the UK and a significant 
proportion of them will be replaced in favour of smart metering.

The centre is specialising to such a degree that it can now offer its services 
to other energy suppliers too. It's important at a time when smart metering is 
being rolled out nationally and the number of returned meters will rise to 
around 1.8m a year.

When a meter can't be refurbished, Marc reclaims a wide range of materials.

Plastics are used to manufacture alarms and electrical fuse covers, meter caps 
are reused or sold, connectors and springs are reused by battery suppliers and 
brass, aluminium, steel and batteries are sold. Marc is saving the National 
Grid £5m a year and bringing in £500,000 in income.

Located at the national distribution centre in Birmingham, the centre is 
delivering benefits locally, too, by employing staff through Remploy, which 
helps people with complex issues into work, and the young offenders programme.

Since it opened, the number of meters being identified for refurbishment has 
risen by nearly a quarter and 100% more material is being recycled.

Marc ensures National Grid is well placed to provide sustainable solutions to 
process the old meters and directly support its carbon, landfill and ethical 
business conduct strategies.

Jackie Wills is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 