
The Australian federal police commissioner says his decision to raid the 
parliamentary office of the shadow minister for communications, Stephen Conroy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/19/australian-federal-police-raid-labor-party-offices-in-melbourne>
, and the home of a Labor staffer on Thursday night was taken independently of 
government, but Labor insists the raid was extraordinary and it shouldn’t have 
happened in an election campaign.

Labor also says the documents seized by police overnight are covered by 
parliamentary privilege, because Conroy was sitting on a senate committee 
enquiring into the mismanagement of the National Broadband Network (NBN), so 
the AFP’s investigation will have to be on hold for some time anyway.

Andrew Colvin, AFP commissioner, said on Friday morning that the AFP’s 
investigation and raids had been undertaken independently of government, and he 
flatly rejected accusations of political interference.

“There has been no influence, no influence on the AFP in the conduct of this 
investigation,” Colvin said.

“In fact, the government first became aware of this investigation shortly 
after the commencement of the operational activity yesterday.”

He also said police could no longer access the documents that were seized 
overnight because parliamentary privilege had been claimed on them.

“As documents are sealed, the AFP does not have access to the documents. They 
will be lodged in the Senate and a process will be put into play by the 
parliament to determine if parliamentary privilege is afforded to those 
documents,” he said.

“[But] it is not necessarily the case that parliamentary privilege will be 
afforded to those documents.”

Today's campaign: Police raid Labor offices over alleged NBN leak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/20/australian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-briefing>
The AFP warrant, seen by the Guardian Australia, shows officers were seeking 
documents or other material relating to the NBN which it believes were handed 
to Labor staffer Andrew Byrne from an “as yet unidentified commonwealth 
officer,” between 1 August 2014 and 27 February 2016.

The warrant names the Sydney Morning Herald, the Australian Financial Review, 
the Australian, and the ABC, as media outlets that have published stories 
containing leaked material.

The shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mark-dreyfus>, said the AFP’s 
investigation raised serious questions because it was started at the behest of 
NBN Co, which is a government agency.

“What we need to know is, what did the PM or his ministers, or their staff, 
have to do with the commencement of this investigation and what do they know 
about that?” Dreyfus said.

“Has the PM or his ministers or their staff had conversations with executives 
of NBN Co, a Government agency I would stress again, about the conduct of this 
investigation and [have they] sought updates from NBN Co?”

He also said the investigation raised serious questions about whistleblower 
protection.

“It’s now become apparent that this search warrant process is directed not 
merely at opposition frontbenchers and their staff, but directed also at the 
media. It raises questions about not only the public’s right to know, but the 
right of the media to publish,” he said.

On Thursday night, the prime minister Malcolm Turnbull said the raids were 
“entirely a matter for the AFP”.


“They operate entirely independent of government and the Labor Party knows 
that as well as I do,” Turnbull said.

But on Friday, Dreyfus said the raids were a very bad look for the government 
and the AFP, raising serious questions about political interference in federal 
police matters.

Mark Scott denies ABC let political pressure influence NBN coverage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/09/mark-scott-denies-abc-let-political-pressure-influence-nbn-coverage>
“We’re in the second week of an eight-week election campaign, the police must 
know that,” Dreyfus said.

“They should have, I think, thought more and been more cautious about what the 
appearance of this might have been, because there are obvious political 
connotations. It is obviously something that is directed at a Labor shadow 
minister and a Labor staffer,” he said.


“At all times we need to make that the Australian Federal Police and all our 
agencies are absolutely independent of political interference ... we also need 
to be concerned about the “appearance” of police work,” he said.

The shadow finance minister, Penny Wong, said the issue of parliamentary 
privilege was “central” and “critical” to consideration of this matter.

“What does parliamentary privilege go to? It goes to ensuring a 
parliamentarian can do their job, can shine a light on the truth ... free from 
government interference with their work,” Wong said.

Australian federal police raid Labor senator's office over alleged NBN leaks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/19/australian-federal-police-raid-labor-party-offices-in-melbourne>
“It is a critical part of our democracy and it is a protection which is 
applied under the Westminster system for a very long time.”

Labor frontbencher Anthony Albanese said on Friday morning it was “quite 
extraordinary” that the AFP left one staffer’s home just half an hour earlier.

“What that means is that it has been quite an extraordinary raid, over an 
extensive period of time, in extraordinary circumstances during an election 
campaign,” he told the Nine Network.

Cabinet minister Christopher Pyne said the government found out about the 
raids after they began, and accused Labor of trying to politicise the AFP 
investigation.

The idea that the AFP would time its raid on Senator Conroy’s office and Labor 
staffers was “nothing short of loopy”, Pyne said.

“If you are suggesting that the government has organised raids by the AFP 
against theLabor party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party>
, that is an extraordinary allegation,” he said.

On Friday, the former Liberal party leader John Hewson said the Labor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> would milk this event 
for all its worth because it would take the attention away from the 
embarrassing revelations about David Feeney’s negative gearing

In a statement on Thursday, the NBN Co confirmed it was assisting the AFP with 
an “ongoing investigation.”
 