
Alexandra Shulman <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alexandra-shulman>, as 
befits a woman who has been editor ofVogue for 20 years, lives in an impeccably 
stylish house overlooking Queen's Park in northwest London. The floorboards are 
painted white and there is pretty wallpaper featuring birds in cages. Various 
mid-century chairs, upholstered in bright turquoise, are nonchalantly placed 
hither and thither. Even the black-and-white cat is called Coco (as in Chanel, 
one presumes).

In the midst of this paean to good taste stands 54-year-old Shulman, brewing 
strong coffee in the expansive kitchen (sand-coloured flagstone tiles; 
floor-to-ceiling glass). But despite the lightly worn sophistication of her 
house, Shulman herself is not what you might expect. Most of us imagineVogue 
editors as groomed and terrifying, like the icy Meryl Streep character inThe 
Devil Wears Prada who never had a hair out of place, but Shulman has already 
cracked a smile at least once this morning and her hair – well, how can I put 
this kindly? – her hair is an untamed mishmash of outgrown highlights. Her 
clothes are discreetly fashionable but unintimidating: a navy-blue cardigan, a 
knee-length patterned skirt and comfortable-looking Anya Hindmarch heels. And – 
shock, horror! – she eats. Actual, real, fattening stuff. "Would you like a 
croissant or something?" she asks, casually gesturing to a plate piled with 
pastries.

We are here to talk about Shulman's hotly anticipated first novel, Can We 
Still Be Friends, which charts the lives and loves of three female 
20-somethings in 1980s London, but it proves impossible, after the croissants, 
not to get waylaid into a discussion about the culture of extreme thinness in 
the fashion industry. Shulman, by her own admission, is not model skinny – in 
ballet classes as a child, she was always cast as "the thunderstorm" while her 
friends were raindrops. Does she worry about her part in perpetuating a culture 
where skinniness is equated with beauty?

"I think it's one of the real blinkered aspects of the fashion industry," she 
admits, "and I find it very frustrating and I don't know quite where it comes 
from, but I think if I had to absolutely nail it, [it's] probably the 
designers, because they're the ones who are cutting the clothes so small. And 
if the girl can't fit into the clothes, then they won't get booked. So then 
you've got the model agent saying: 'You've got to lose weight.' And then, when 
it comes down the wire, the photographers – and to some extent the fashion 
editors – want to use the girls that they think are the cool girls, and the 
cool girls are the ones who have got to be working with the designers, so it 
kind of feeds itself."

In June 2009, Shulman wrote a letter to major international fashion houses 
including Karl Lagerfeld, John Galliano, Prada and Versace, complaining that 
their "minuscule" sample sizes were forcing fashion editors to use models with 
"jutting bones" and "no breasts or hips". And yet, Shulman concedes, not much 
seems to have changed in the three years since.

"I'm pleased I wrote it. Did it make any difference? I don't think so. But at 
least I tried to do something and… um, yeah, I mean, there's no doubt that 
clothes to our kind of western eye look better on a thinner frame, but there is 
a difference between a thin frame and an emaciated young girl and I do talk to 
designers about it all the time and I just think they can't see it, a lot of 
them."

Female as well as male designers?

She looks dispirited. "Yeah, probably."

Interestingly, although Shulman's novel features three female protagonists, 
two of whom work in the media, none of them is ever shown worrying about their 
weight. Is she sick of talking about body image? She smiles. "No. I know I have 
to."

Writing the novel was something Shulman had always wanted to do, but for years 
she put it off. "I didn't have the time or an idea or think I could do it," she 
says. In the end, an agent approached her and she rattled off the manuscript for
Can We Still Be Friends over 18 months, writing it in early mornings, over 
weekends and during holidays. The process was not without its upsets – she 
wrote 30,000 words of an earlier story only to be told by her agent "how 
rubbish it was. So I dumped it."

Can We Still Be Friends is definitely not rubbish. It's enjoyable and Shulman 
has a terrific eye for the small yet telling detail – the female newspaper 
journalist who gets into work early and hides her bag of shopping under her 
desk, for instance, or the Sloaney, country-house mother with "plastic hair" 
who patronises her domestic staff. But for someone who has been a jobbing 
journalist since her 20s and at the top of her profession for more than two 
decades, she displays a remarkable lack of self-confidence about her writing. 
"I find plot and dialogue extremely difficult," she says. "Hopefully one 
improves at it."
 Drusilla Beyfus. Photograph: Kurt Hutton/Getty Images 
The book is dedicated to Shulman's mother, the former journalist and author of 
a book on etiquette, Drusilla Beyfus. "I don't think she particularly likes 
it," says Shulman baldly. "I mean nobody says to you: 'I don't like your book', 
but I think you can kind of tell the people who do and the people who don't and 
it's not really her thing. I'm sure she thinks bits of it are fine. But she's 
always been very judgmental of all of our work so it doesn't come as any 
surprise."

It doesn't seem to bother her; in fact there seems to be an expectation on 
Shulman's part that anything she does will never be quite good enough. 
According to some of her friends, she has always been insecure. "She's never 
had the greatest self-esteem," says one acquaintance. Another, who knows her in 
a professional capacity, adds: "She's guarded and very private. There are 
people who've worked with her for years who had no clue how she felt about them 
until they left and she'd thrown them lavish parties. I think she's driven by 
the need to succeed. Writing a book, when you're the editor ofVogue and you 
know everyone's going to read it so you're sticking your head above the parapet 
– that's a pretty ballsy thing to do."

Does she feel successful? Shulman hesitates. "Um, I'm very happy. Yes, I'm 
sure I'm a success." Pause. "But it doesn't feel that way to me."


Shulman is the eldest of three children who grew up in a Belgravia household 
filled with the sound of clacking typewriters. Her father, Milton Shulman, 
arrived in London from Canada during the war and became theatre critic for the
Evening Standard. Her mother contributed to Vogue, among other publications. 
Having two parents who were journalists meant that becoming a writer "was my 
idea of a nightmare. I wanted to be a hairdresser."

At St Paul's Girls' School, Shulman was resolutely unacademic (her sister, 
Nicola, was deemed the bright one and recently published a highly acclaimed 
biography of the Tudor poet Thomas Wyatt – a copy of which lies on Shulman's 
coffee table alongside a dog-eared final edition of theNews of the World). She 
studied social anthropology at Sussex University and then "really more by 
accident than design" found herself falling into journalism when she got a 
temporary job as an editorial secretary onOver 21 magazine.

"I loved being in a magazine office and I think from that point I knew what I 
was going to do," she says. Hairdressing's loss was journalism's gain: Shulman 
went to work forTatler before editing the women's pages for the Sunday Telegraph
and becoming features editor ofVogue. She was made editor of British GQ in 
1990. Two years later, at the precocious age of 34, she took the helm atVogue. 
At the time, her appointment raised some eyebrows within the industry. "She 
wasn't very 'fashion'," remembers one editor. "She looked like a rock chick – 
and not in a good way. She didn't have much experience in that world. But then 
you look at what she's done…"
 Alexandra Shulman. Photograph: Julian Broad for the Observer 
Circulation rose considerably under her tenure – no doubt aided by the 
brouhaha surrounding an early Kate Moss shoot which was criticised for 
encouraging "heroin chic" – and now hovers consistently around the 200,000 
mark, which is no mean feat for a glossy, high-end product that costs £4.10 in 
a time of economic austerity.

But it wasn't all plain sailing. Along the way, Shulman married and divorced 
the American writer Paul Spike, with whom she had a son, Sam, in 1995. For a 
while, she experienced panic attacks after the break-up of her relationship – a 
recurring problem ever since she fell ill with glandular fever in her second 
year at Sussex. "When I first got them, I thought I was going to die. I 
literally thought I was dying. And then you've got this odd thing where half of 
your brain is going: 'This is a panic attack, it's fine, keep calm, it'll pass' 
and half of you is saying: 'I am going to die.' And it's so frightening that 
your body and your brain are out of sync with each other."

Does she still get them? "Well I don't have them at the moment. But I think if 
you have a susceptibility to it, it isn't something that you can eradicate 
completely so I'm sort of aware of a vulnerability to it. "I have a certain 
amount of coping mechanisms – for lack of a better word. I know about trying to 
breathe properly and I have Xanax which I take everywhere with me in case it 
happens – it's like my lucky charm."

I'm pleasantly surprised by her willingness to talk about this. Has she ever 
felt a stigma attached to discussing mental illness? "Probably, but it's not 
something that I find difficult… I'm sure some people think, 'Oh God, it makes 
you sound like you're mad,' but I don't feel that. I feel quite the reverse 
actually. I feel that it shows that one's life – which probably to outsiders 
appears like everything's sort of lovely and easy and it's nothing but free 
designer clothes and lovely meals and everyone being nice to you all the time – 
I think it's quite good to show you've had bad things happen as well."
 'I’m a real girls’ girl ... ' Shulman with designer Stella McCartney at 
Vogue’s gold party at the Ritz. Photograph: Richard Young/Rex Features 
None of this dented her formidable work ethic: she has always worked a 
five-day week and when Sam was younger he was looked after by a nanny. "When he 
was really little, my mother remembers him saying: 'I hate, hate, hate that
magzarine, I wish it would die.'" She laughs, guiltily. "Umm, I've somehow 
blanked that out." Sam is now nearly 17 and a sixth-former at Westminster 
school – he lives at home with Shulman and her partner, the journalist David 
Jenkins. These days, she says: "I think Sam probably rather dreads me not being 
at work."

Her own experiences have, by her own admission, left her with a rather 
"brutal" attitude to women in the workplace. "The reality is, if you take time 
out and have children, it does damage your trajectory in some way. I know it 
shouldn't, I know there should be a way round it, but I think it's really hard. 
We have a lot of people [atVogue] who have been fantastic all through their 
pregnancy, then gone off, had the baby, not known how long they were going to 
be away, decided to take the full year and either come back pregnant or come 
back and be pregnant again very quickly. So effectively, you're sort of out, 
really, for two or three years and that does make a difference. You can't 
pretend it doesn't."

So does she think that the chasm between male and female salaries is 
justified? "I'm kind of interested that in my own company – which is a company 
that sells mainly women's magazines to women – the men still run the company by 
quite a large factor… We ought to get paid absolutely equally for the work that 
we do, absolutely no question about it – I don't think women are so good at 
fighting their corner as men."

In fact, the most pronounced change she has noticed during her time at Vogue 
is not in pay equality – or lack of – but in the increased control exerted by 
PRs and celebrities. "Somebody like Jennifer Aniston will only do an interview 
with copy approval and picture approval," she says. "I've never had anybody on 
the cover, ever, who's had copy approval and picture approval. I just don't 
think it's a proper thing if you do.

"It's this thing of people just basically treating you as if you're bound to 
be doing something that is in some way going to be insulting to their client. I 
just find that so offensive."

Perhaps because she knows how hard it can be, Shulman proves a delight to 
interview – open, warm, interesting and insistent that I should have enough 
time to cover whatever I want. Of the three main characters in her novel, she 
thinks she is most like Annie – "a real girls' girl" – and she is so seemingly 
relaxed about being asked almost anything, that, just before our time comes to 
an end, I blurt out an entirely unexpected question.

You describe yourself as a feminist, I say. Would you ever have a vajazzle?

Shulman doesn't flinch. "Definitely not," she says. "I'm just so pleased I'm 
not a young woman now. I feel very grateful that, at the time I started having 
sex with men, I didn't even have a bikini wax and men were lovely. Now I just 
think: how terrifying to be a 20-year-old and feel that you've got to be 
perfect and hairless and immaculate and that it's really awful. I just – eurgh 
– I would never have got undressed."

And with that, she clip-clops down the white-painted corridor in her heels and 
her sensible cardigan to have her picture taken – untamed hair and all.


Can We Still Be Friends by Alexandra Shulman is published by Fig Tree on 12 
April, at £12.99. To order a copy for £10.39 with free UK p&p go to
guardian.co.uk/bookshop <http://guardian.co.uk/bookshop> or call 0330 333 6846
 