
As southern statehouses and cities debate the legitimacy of flying the 
Confederate flag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/10/south-carolina-confederate-flag-goes-down-as-history-of-hate-meets-modernity>
, the mayor of New Orleans is proposing the most comprehensive plan yet to 
achieve lasting racial reconciliation in the wake of last month’s mass shooting 
in a South Carolina black church. Mitch Landrieu wants to dismantle a historic 
city statuary that honors key figures of the civil war, and rename a major 
parkway whose namesake led the Confederacy.

South Carolina's Confederate flag comes down as history of hate meets modernity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/10/south-carolina-confederate-flag-goes-down-as-history-of-hate-meets-modernity>
Last week, Landrieu instructed the city council to begin the legal process to 
remove statues of Jefferson Davis, the president of the Confederacy; General 
Robert E Lee; General PGT Beauregard; and a monument honoring soldiers in the 
Battle of Liberty Place, an uprising of former Confederate soldiers in 1874. 
Landrieu also wants Jefferson Davis Parkway renamed to honor Dr Norman C 
Francis, the long-time president of Xavier University, an all-black Catholic 
institution.

Landrieu, the first white mayor of New Orleans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-orleans> since his father, Moon 
Landrieu, who left office in 1978, says the statuary does not represent a city 
rebounding from the devastation of Hurricane Katrina into one he insists is 
more inclusive of all races and identities.

In a statement, he said New Orleans was “a place a where we celebrate life, 
liberty and the pursuit of happiness, not death, war and slavery” and that the 
statutes were “symbols of supremacy from places of reverence that no longer, if 
ever, reflect who we are”.

All of the statues are prominent, and some have stood for more than a century. 
The 16ft Lee statute was erected in 1884 and sits atop a tall marble column in 
the middle of Lee Circle, a busy turnaround in the museum district.

Proponents of the plan say now is the time for Landrieu to act, in step with 
political pressure to eradicate public symbols associated with Confederate 
history that contemporary hate groups have adopted.

In the weeks following the Charleston killings, protesters in New Orleans 
targeted the statues. Dozens of activists burned a Confederate flag at Lee 
Circle and the Beauregard statue was vandalized: “Black Lives Matter” appeared 
on its side.

Susan Glisson, executive director of the Winter Institute of Racial 
Reconciliation at the University of Mississippi <http://winterinstitute.org/>, 
which Landrieu tasked to conduct public forums on the statuary, said: “Symbols 
that are conflicting to some or perceived to be outright hateful are damaging 
to the public good.

“It can create an environment that doesn’t feel welcoming to everyone. 
Especially in public spaces where we need to thoughtful to represent who we are 
as a people.”

However, Ben Jones, a spokesman for the Sons of Confederate Veterans, said 
Landrieu’s proposal was “a massive insult”.

“Does it do anything about racism?” Jones asked. “No. This is a phony 
Band-Aid. All it has done is make people angry. It assumes we’re not sensitive 
to the plight of slavery and those who descended from slavery. We have a right 
to our feelings and to pay our respects to our ancestors.”

Jones is a former congressman from Georgia who acted in the hit 1980s 
television series The Dukes of Hazzard, which has been condemned for its use of 
the Confederate flag. He considers such criticism a form of “cultural cleansing 
of southern culture” and a distraction from greater recognition that the whole 
country’s wealth was created through slavery.

“When you start renaming things, you may avoid certain conversations, but when 
does it end?” he asked.

Terrence Fitzmorris, a historian at Tulane University in New Orleans, said the 
debate in New Orleans represents “a flawed understanding of southern history” 
from both sides.

“There are multiple souths,” said Fitzmorris, adding that critics often 
neglect the fact there were abolitionists in the south or that figures like 
Lee, who sought to bring both sides together after the war, were multifaceted 
people.

“Both sides have a single version of southern history and that is what driving 
the shrillness” of the current debate, he said.

Fitzmorris agreed that the statues were hurtful to black southerners and 
should be dealt with, but he also worried about eradicating historical 
artifacts.

“Whether they stay or go, that’s a political decision,” he said of the 
statues. “But removing them will tamper our ability to reconcile ourselves with 
our past. I think they need to be understood; they need to be talked about and 
discussed and dissected.”

Glisson said her forums would foster such conversations but admitted that 
Landrieu was committed to removing the statuary nonetheless. The city council 
will make its final vote in September.
 