
Hometown: Washington DC.

The lineup: D’Anthony Carlos (vocals).

The background: GoldLink is a 21-year-old rapper whose work, roughly speaking, 
fits under the rubric of “electronic hip-hop”, with sonic allusions to house, 
garage, EDM and most forms of dance music in general. And his raps are a 
torrent of stream-of-consciousness, delivered with a sort of spaced-out 
urgency. Think intricate but infectious blissed-out club bangers with fast 
BPMs, based on classic soul samples, skittering beats and modern synth sounds, 
from a hyperactive, over-stimulated, angsty Andre 3000.

Whatever it is he does, it’s been drawing admirers. Earlier this year, he went 
into the studio with Rick Rubin; he’s been touring with SBTRKT, Mac Miller, 
Flume and others. He’s had more than 11m plays and 65,000 followers on 
SoundCloud, and he was named a member ofXXL’s 2015 Freshman Class 
<http://freshmen.xxlmag.com/>, that prestigious annual who’s-gonna-be-who of 
the hip-hop world, alongside Fetty Wap, Vince Staples, Raury and Tink, the 
latter only a year after we featured her (do keep up, XXL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jan/07/tink>). When asked for a 
catchall to describe what he does, he came up with “future bounce”; then, with 
more time to consider, he added, ”Rick James meets Justin Timberlake – ’N Sync 
days – with Backstreet Boys and a little D12 and Tupac.”

His 2014 debut mixtape was called The God Complex, its title reflecting the 
quote on his SoundCloud, from Christian philosopher Rob Bell: “The moment God 
is figured out with nice neat lines and definitions, we are no longer dealing 
with God.” He’s prone to philosophical or poetic musings: the very first tweet 
on his Twitter account reads: “The unreal is more powerful than the real. 
Because nothing is as perfect as you can imagine it.” Not that he’s 
particularly religious or god-fearing; just that he believes in a higher power, 
and its name is imagination. That’s his credo – the power of the imagination – 
and his ambition is the search for perfection.

The God Complex finds GoldLink exploring themes of sex, violence, family, love 
and addiction, through simultaneous self-adoration and self-loathing and 
filtered through a penchant for old rappers (from Big L to KRS-One to Canibus 
to Kurupt) and even older poets (Edgar Allan Poe and Maya Angelou are 
particular favourites). Factor in a love of Pink Floyd, Grimes and Lykke Li, 
draft in some largely unknown producers – Louie Lastic, Fingalick, Teklun, 
Lakim, Bunx – and you’ve got a recipe for someone multifaceted and maverick. 
And that is what this character with the nose ring, head scarves, Jesus and 
Mary medallion and alias that pays homage to 60s pimp culture, is. The fact 
that he doesn’t have a single producer – a Clams Casino, an Illangelo – means 
it’s hard to get a fix on his agenda, let alone his identity, but in a way 
that’s half the fun: his fluidity. By turns beatific and braggadocian, 
sex-fixated and spiritual, he’s rap’s new thought-provoking wunderkind. And you 
can dance to him.

The buzz: “Masterfully updates 90s boom-bap, while also offering a compelling 
path to the dancefloors of the future” – Billboard.

The truth: He’s rap’s new gold standard. 

Most likely to: Go ’bap to the future. 

Least likely to: Go to church. 

What to buy: His debut LP And After That, We Didn’t Talk is released by Black 
Butter on 13 November.

File next to: Kid Cudi, Andre 3000, A$AP Rocky, Daye Jack. 

Links: soundcloud.com/goldlink <https://soundcloud.com/goldlink>. 

Ones to watch: The Prettiots, Bror Forsgren, Andy Shauf, Lionlimb, London 
O’Connor.
 