
Jury selection begins on Monday in the trial of a disabled Egyptian Islamic 
preacher who was extradited from Britain on charges he conspired to support 
al-Qaida, in part by trying to create a training camp in Oregon 15 years ago.

The trial of Mustafa Kamel Mustafa – who is also known as also known as Abu 
Hamza al-Masri, or simplyAbu Hamza <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza>
 – occurs a month after a Manhattan jury convictedSulaiman Abu Ghaith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/26/osama-bin-laden-son-in-law-found-guilty>
, Osama bin Laden's son-in-law and al-Qaida's spokesman after the 2001 
terrorist attacks, of charges that will likely result in a life sentence.

Mustafa, 55, has alerted his lawyers and US district judge Katherine Forrest 
that he will testify on his own behalf. At a pretrial hearing last week, he 
told the judge: "I think I am innocent. I need to go through it, have a chance 
to defend myself."

Prosecutors say Mustafa conspired to support al-Qaida by trying in 1999 to set 
up a terrorist training camp in Bly, Oregon, by arranging for others to attend 
an al-Qaida training camp in Afghanistan, and by ensuring there was satellite 
phone service for hostage takers in Yemen in 1998 who abducted two American 
tourists and 14 others.

Three Britons and an Australian were killed as the Yemeni military attempted 
to rescue the hostages. Two women, an American and a Briton, were wounded. 
Officials said the hostages were seized as demands were made to release two 
Islamic militant leaders.

Assistant US attorney Ian Patrick McGinley said the government had plenty of 
evidence to sift through, including media interviews and recordings of 
Mustafa's weekly speeches. "We culled it down from thousands of hours to less 
than an hour's worth of recordings that we intend to play," McGinley told the 
judge.

Still, defence attorney Jeremy Schneider said the jury will be subjected to 
references by his client and others to Osama bin Laden and al-Qaida, along with 
repeated mentions of the September 11 2001 attacks and the 2000 suicide bombing 
of the USS Cole in Aden harbor in Yemen.

He said the statements were chosen by prosecutors "because these statements 
are the ones that are the most unduly prejudicial".

Schneider also has belittled the government's portrayal of plans to open an 
al-Qaida training camp on 360 acres in Bly, saying the effort in late 1999 and 
early 2000 resembled a retreat, with "just a few people shooting at targets, 
riding horseback, having fun at the farm".

Assistant US attorney Edward Kim said Schneider's description was false. He 
said guns found in the homes of participants in the Bly training "tends to 
disprove … that this was all just a lark in the woods”.

Assistant US attorney John Cronan said prosecutors plan to show jurors that 
Mustafa supported acts committed by al-Qaida such as the Cole attack and that 
he said the World Trade Center was a legitimate target.

The white-haired Mustafa, also known as Abu Hamza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza> al-Masri, turned London's 
Finsbury Park Mosque in the 1990s into a training ground for Islamic 
extremists, attracting men including September 11 conspirator Zacarias 
Moussaoui and shoe bomber Richard Reid. Mustafa has one eye and claims to have 
lost his hands fighting the Soviets in Afghanistan.

Jailed since 2004 in Britain on separate charges of inciting racial hatred and 
encouraging followers to kill non-Muslims, Mustafa was brought to the United 
States for trial in fall 2012.
 