
Nine seasons after the Saints’ Steve Gleason blocked a punt in New Orleans’ 
emotional return to the Superdome after Hurricane Katrina, another blunder by 
Atlanta’s punt team cost the Falcons in the latest edition of this NFC South 
rivalry.

New Orleans blocked a first-quarter punt by Matt Bosher, returned it for a 
touchdown and the Falcons never recovered, losing 31-21 Thursday night and 
falling for the first time this season.

Matt Ryan threw for 295 yards and two touchdowns, and Devonta Freeman added 
100 yards on 13 rushes, but it wasn’t enough to overcome the blocked punt and 
three lost fumbles, including two in the red zone.

“It’s just ball security,” Ryan said. “I thought we moved the ball pretty 
efficiently the entire night. We had a couple of scoring chances where we ended 
up turning the football over. When you do that in this building, going against 
this team, it’s extremely difficult to overcome.”

The Falcons (5-1) fell to 1-7 against New Orleans in night games since 2006 
and 5-14 overall against the Saints in that same period.

Atlanta entered the game with three wins by less than a touchdown, including 
last week’s overtime victory over Washington, and was one of six remaining 
undefeated teams in theNFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl>.

New Orleans, meanwhile, was coming off a 39-17 loss at Philadelphia and was 
last in the league in total defense, giving up 409 yards per game.

But it was Atlanta that didn’t have any answers in its first nationally 
televised game of the season, though first-year coach Dan Quinn didn’t think 
there was any pressure on his young team.

“I don’t sense that was the case coming in where we had to put more pressure 
on ourselves to really play well,” he said. “But at the end of it, I think it 
was really the mistakes that cost us tonight -- the turnovers in the red zone, 
the blocked punt and then defensively not generating any turnovers.”

New Orleans (2-4) found the end zone first as running back Mark Ingram capped 
a 12-play, 80-yard opening drive with a 2-yard touchdown run.

The Falcons got the ball back after turning it over on downs and forcing a New 
Orleans punt.

That’s when the echoes of Gleason, who was at the Superdome watching Thursday 
night, rang.

New Orleans linebacker Michael Mauti bulled through the middle of the Atlanta 
line on fourth down and knocked the ball off of Bosher’s foot. Mauti quickly 
jumped on the ball and lunged into the end zone for a 14-0 lead.

“We wanted to rush the first punt and it just happened it was backed up a 
little bit and obviously, there is some significance in that it happened here 
against Atlanta,” Saints coach Sean Payton said. “That was a pretty important 
play, I think, early in the game.”

Atlanta pulled within 14-7 early in the second quarter when Ryan found Roddy 
White for a 7-yard touchdown.

It was as close as Atlanta would get.

Freeman pulled the Falcons to 24-14 early in the fourth quarter, but the 
Saints answered with Ingram’s second touchdown of the game.

New Orleans’ Drew Brees finished 30 of 39 passing for 312 yards and a 
touchdown. Atlanta had no answer for Saints tight end Benjamin Watson, who 
finished with a career-high 127 yards receiving and a touchdown. The Saints, 
for the second time this season, didn’t turn the ball over.

“We are a team that focuses on getting the ball back to our offense as much as 
possible and we just didn’t do that today,” Falcons defensive end Tyson Jackson 
said.
 