
Why does your CV need to have a wow factor? Research by the National Citizen 
Service is thatrecruiters are now taking an average nine seconds 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/employers-sifting-through-applications-likened-to-swiping-through-tinder-as-research-shows-people-9988512.html>
 (well 8.8 to be exact) to look at a CV when shortlisting. This poses two 
important questions – how can they tell anything valuable about a candidate in 
such a short amount of time? And how can you show that you are fit for the job?

Let’s get some perspective: first it’s an average, and second it is highly 
likely that most internal recruiters take longer. Recruitment consultants are 
the skim shortlisters – they can probably see key points quicker because they 
do it all the time.

However, what this research does emphasise is the need to think carefully 
about how you can make your CV stand out so it ends up on the “invite to 
interview” pile, whether read for nine or 90 seconds. Here’s how to do that:

Get into the head of the employer

Your potential boss needs to see the benefit of you working for them. They 
need to see you have what they need – skills, qualities, abilities – and that 
you work hard and add value to the organisation. So imagine you are recruiting 
for your job, and ask yourself: “What would I like to see to know this person 
could do the job well?”

The answer is a small number of really exciting benefits and results, backed 
up by examples that are relevant to the job you are applying for.

Think about the impact you have in your current job. Did you increase income? 
Save the company money? Create an innovative procedure or product? Increase 
social media presence? Build a team? Increase reputation? Provide exceptional 
support or mentoring to others? What did you do really well?

Then craft some powerful bullet points that demonstrate your impact in a 
company – don’t forget to explain what it was like before, so your potential 
boss can understand the changes you affected. For example: “Developed a social 
media campaign that increased Twitter followers from 500 to 1500 in three 
months using targeted themes such as …”

Make your profile special

Your profile is the three to four sentences at the top of the first page of 
your CV. They are possibly the most important sentences on your CV as the 
strength of your profile determines whether the hiring manager or recruiter 
will carry on reading. That can make it the hardest thing to write – it needs 
to be a summation of you and what you bring to the job but without lots of 
vague generic adjectives.

Staying in the head of your prospective employer, ask yourself: “What are my 
unique selling points in relation to this job?” This can be specific skills, 
experience, interests, qualifications or passions. For example, a profile for a 
project manager applying for a job in the arts sector could be:

“Versatile project manager, with over 10 years’ experience of delivering 
multiple complex projects, engaging with key stakeholders, clients and third 
parties within the financial and arts sectors. Particular expertise in 
delivering innovative solutions, assimilating business needs, translating it 
into tangible requirements and engaging people to deliver positive outcomes. 
Prince II qualified with experience using Agile methodology. Strong interest in 
cultural art and making art accessible for all.”

Top tips: how to write a perfect CV and cover letter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/cv-cover-letter-tips-how-to-write-perfect>
Add some frills

While the wow factor is not about curly fonts, colour or a wacky layout, it is 
about being different to all the other candidates out there. You can do this by 
showing some extras that tell your prospective employer more about you 
(remember it has to be relevant to the role).

 * Show you can spot trends and have opinions in your area of expertise – if 
you’ve written a blog, had something published or spoken at an event, relevant 
to your work life, include a link on your CV so they can check it out. 
 * Demonstrate you are connected – show you attend networking events in your 
field, have relevant connections on LinkedIn and participate in online group 
discussions. 
 * Add a link to your LinkedIn profile where they can see recommendations, 
your group activity, any Pulse blogposts you’ve made, etc. 
 * If you have a portfolio of work either on Tumblr or your own webpage then 
include a link so they can view your creative work easily. 
Don’t forget the basics

Don’t lessen the impact of the content of your CV by not paying attention to 
the basic rules – here’s a reminder:

 * No more than two pages. 
 * Less is more – make sure it is not text dense, and allow plenty of white 
space around the text to make it easy to read. 
 * Use bullet points and headings to give it a clear structure. 
 * No spelling or grammatical errors – check, check and check again. 
Having a CV that stands out will increase your confidence, create the right 
mindset for your job search, give you pride in what you’ve achieved and should 
land you an interview.

Sarah Archer is a qualified career coach and co-founder of CareerTree 
<http://www.careertree.org.uk/>

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 