
When is principles-based regulation not principles-based regulation? When it's 
outcomes-focused regulation (OFR) and you want to avoid association with the 
collapse of the financial system perhaps.

That is what is coming the way of solicitors, for whom the big countdown has 
begun. In six months, not only will they have alternative business structures 
(ABSs) to contend with, but they will have a new rulebook governing their 
actions. They got first sight of it on Wednesday when the Solicitors Regulation 
Authority (SRA) published theSolicitors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/solicitors> Handbook.

It is the first time that all of the regulatory requirements of solicitors 
have been brought together in one place and runs to 563 pages (it will also 
apply to ABSs regulated by the SRA). At its heart is a new solicitor's code of 
conduct, which is just 54 pages, a document that not too long ago was a book of 
hundreds of closely typed pages.

The changes are because the SRA is fundamentally altering the way it 
regulates. Encouraged by the Legal Services Board, which oversees regulation of 
the profession, it is introducing the less prescriptive OFR. Under this, the 
emphasis is on the outcomes that solicitors need to deliver for their clients, 
rather than the processes by which they achieve them, guided by 10 overarching 
principles against which their actions will be judged.

Despite the experience of the banking crisis, the SRA argues that there is 
nothing inherently flawed with principles-based regulation – where it can go 
wrong is in its application and enforcement. This is the SRA's challenge.

OFR, says the SRA, will be "proportionate, transparent and consistent". It is 
risk based, it explains, focusing resources on the areas it judges pose the 
greatest risk to the public and to clients, rather than nitpicking every 
technical breach, as happens now. The intention is that where firms are trying 
to comply and co-operate over mistakes they make, the SRA will work with them 
constructively, only coming down hard on those who deliberately flout the rules.

It will be for the SRA to prove to the profession that it can change years of 
pettifogging – this is particularly important as in future it expects law firms 
to share far more financial information with their regulator.

The SRA has undergone a major restructuring as a result, with some staff 
currently going through a process of reapplying for jobs that are changing 
under the new regime, and a third at risk of redundancy (although only around 
80 of the 640-strong Redditch and Leamington Spa-based workforce are expected 
to lose their jobs).

What OFR is not about, emphasises the SRA chief executive, Antony Townsend, is 
"light touch" regulation. In fact "it actually strengthens the regulatory 
system", he says. OFR brings together law firms with their regulator to provide 
"a more responsive service, better tailored to client needs".

There are potential advantages to law firms – a big City law firm should not 
have to provide the general counsel of a global investment bank with the same 
type of client-care information that a high street firm has to give a pensioner 
making her will, as both do under the current regime. The likelihood is, 
however, that many firms will initially stick with what they do now, on the 
basis that current compliance will mean future compliance.

It should, in theory, be a better, more flexible and less confrontational 
regulatory system than now. But the SRA isn't gaily throwing all the old ways 
in the bin – the rules around holding client money, such is their importance, 
remain detailed and largely unaffected by OFR.

On a related note, today also marks the first six months of the Legal 
Ombudsman (LeO), which deals with complaints about poor service by lawyers 
(essentially conduct issues). It has received more than 38,000 "contacts" in 
that time, only 10% of which fall within its jurisdiction – the main reason 
complaints are not accepted is because clients have first to complain to their 
lawyer, who has eight weeks to resolve it.

Of those cases which have entered the system, more than 60% have been resolved 
informally, with 7% so far making it to a formal ombudsman's decision. As 
expected, conveyancing and family law are the main areas of practice about 
which people have complained, with poor communication and lack of costs 
information being common issues that arise.

Elizabeth France, who chairs LeO's board, says she is "really pleased" with 
how smoothly the operation has begun – and certainly there has been no sign of 
a backlash from the profession so far. The levels of co-operation from lawyers 
"have on the whole been excellent", she says, although LeO has gone to court to 
force one solicitor to provide access to documents.

But sadly we will not find out whether LeO will name those law firms subject 
to complaints for another year. It announced last week – to the dismay of the 
Legal Services Consumer Panel – that it needs more time to gather and analyse 
its data on what impact naming might have.

Lawyers working in areas particularly vulnerable to complaints, such as family 
law, warn that naming could have a chilling effect on their willingness to work 
in the area, and France says LeO needs more time to judge whether this and 
other arguments hold water. This is not as easy a decision as it may look, she 
insists. "I'm pretty sure we'll be naming some," France says, "but what we 
don't know is what the trigger point should be."

* Neil Rose is the editor of  legalfutures.co.uk 
<http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/>
 