
Scientists have discovered a previously unknown link between the brain and the 
immune system that could help explain links between poor physical health and 
brain disorders including Alzheimer’s and depression.

The discovery of vessels, nestled just beneath the skull, overturns decades of 
textbook teaching and could pave the way for new approaches to treating brain 
diseases. The scientists behind the discovery described their surprise at 
having uncovered a major anatomical structure that until now had been entirely 
overlooked.

“These vessels were just not supposed to be there based on what we know,” said 
Jonathan Kipnis, who led the work at the University of Virginia. “I thought the 
body was mapped and that these discoveries ended somewhere around the middle of 
the last century. But apparently they have not.”

Anti-inflammatory drugs ‘could fight depression’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/dec/20/anti-inflammatory-drugs-could-fight-depression-immune-disorders>
The finding could provide a firm biological basis for growing evidence that 
mental health and the state of the immune system are closely intertwined.

People with diabetes, an auto-immune disease, are 65% more likely to develop 
dementia, astudy  
<http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/scripts/press_article.php?pressReleaseID=1213>
early this year revealed. Other recentresearch 
<http://www.neurology.org/content/73/10/768.abstract> showed that Alzheimer’s 
patients who suffered regular infections, such as coughs and colds, had a 
fourfold greater decline in memory tests during a six-month period compared 
with patients with the lowest infection levels.

However, it has not been clear whether the findings had real physiological 
underpinnings or whether they simply reflected lifestyle factors, such as diet 
and sedentary lifestyles, that degraded both mental and physical health 
independently.

“We believe that for every neurological disease that has an immune component 
to it, these vessels may play a major role,” said Kipnis. “In Alzheimer’s, 
there are accumulations of big protein chunks in the brain. We think they may 
be accumulating in the brain because they’re not being efficiently removed by 
these vessels.”

A condition like diabetes, he added, which impacts the immune system 
throughout the body, could also be impairing the brain’s ability to clear away 
the toxic proteins that are the hallmarks of the disease. The precise role of 
the vessels, the scientists said, remains speculation at this stage, and 
putting these questions to the test will be the focus of the next phase of 
their research.

 The new anatomy is an extension of the lymphatic system, a network of vessels 
that runs in parallel to the body’s vasculature, carrying immune cells rather 
than blood. Rather than stopping at the base of the skull, the vessels were 
discovered to extend throughout the meninges, a membrane that envelops the 
brain and the spinal cord. The vessels were probably overlooked, Kipnis said, 
because the meninges is often regarded as the brain’s shrink-wrap packaging, 
rather than a piece of anatomy in its own right.

 “In your medical handbook as a student, the first instruction is ‘remove 
meninges’,” he said. “People aren’t that interested in this area of the brain.”.

 The discovery came after the scientists developed a way to mount a mouse’s 
meninges on a single slide so that it could be examined as a whole. After 
noticing vessel-like patterns in the distribution of immune cells on the slides 
under the microscope, they embarked on a series of tests which proved they were 
looking at lymphatic vessels that served the cerebral spinal fluid, the liquid 
that cushions the brain and spinal cord.

 Preliminary experiments suggest the same anatomy exists in people, according 
to the research published this week in the journalNature 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nature14432.html>.

 “We’re pretty confident that they’re there in humans as well,” said Kipnis.

Kevin Lee, a neuroscientist at the University of Virginia and a co-author of 
the paper, said: “The first time these guys showed me the basic result, I just 
said one sentence: ‘They’ll have to change the textbooks.’ There has never been 
a lymphatic system for the central nervous system, and it was very clear from 
that first singular observation.”

The discovery of a new piece of brain anatomy was met with excitement by 
fellow scientists, although some were more cautious about the potential role of 
the vessels in disease.

Nick Fox, a professor of neurology at University College London, said the 
possibility of links between immune disease and Alzheimer’s is rapidly beoming 
a “hot topic and quite contentious”.

“It’s right to be cautious about findings from epidemiological studies on this 
where you can’t be sure about causation and correlation,” he said. “And it’s 
worth noting that trials of anti-inflammatory drugs [targeting the immune 
response] have not been successful in Alzheimer’s, but perhaps they weren’t 
given to patients early enough.”

The latest finding, he said, could help investigate the true nature of any 
link.

James Nicoll, professor of neuropathology at the University of Southampton, 
said: “This is likely to be an important finding in relation to understanding 
of infectious and inflammatory conditions of the brain provided the findings 
are confirmed by others and in humans.”

He was disappointed, though, that the authors had not more thoroughly verified 
the findings in people. “Not all of the experiments they did could be done on 
humans but enough could have been done to confirm the presence of similar 
channels,” he said.

Roxana Carare, an associate professor of cerebrovascular ageing at the 
University of Southampton, said: “The connections described are between the 
coverings of the brain and the immune system, rather than the brain itself and 
the immune system. The methodology is very impressive, but the findings need to 
be interpreted with caution in the context of diseases affecting the brain 
tissue itself.”
 