
Newton's equation first appeared in the Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia 
Mathematica, July 1687. It describes why that apple fell from that tree in that 
orchard in Lincolnshire. Whether or not that apple actually landed on Isaac 
Newton's head, as some stories would have it, this equation describes why you 
stay rooted to the ground, what locks the Earth in orbit around the sun and was 
used by Nasa engineers to send men to the moon.

It encapsulates the idea that all the particles of matter in the universe 
attract each other through the force of gravity – Newton's law tells us how 
strong that attraction is. The equation says that the force (F) between two 
objects is proportional to the product of their masses (m1 and m2), divided by 
the square of the distance between them. The remaining term in the equation, G, 
is the gravitational constant, which has to be measured by experiment and, as 
of 2007, US scientists have measured it at 6.693 × 10−11 cubic metres per 
kilogram second squared.

Newton came to the formula after studying the centuries of measurements from 
astronomers before him. Stargazers had spent millennia cataloguing the 
positions of the stars and planets in the night sky and, by the 17th century, 
the German astronomer and mathematician Johannes Kepler had worked out the 
geometry of these movements. By looking at the movement of Mars, Kepler had 
calculated that planets orbited the sun in elliptical paths and, in a kind of 
celestial clockwork, his three laws of planetary motion allowed astronomers to 
work out the position of the planets in the future based on data from past 
records.

Kepler's laws explain how the planets moved around the sun but not why. Newton 
filled in that gap by supposing there was a force acting between the bodies 
that were moving around each other.

The story goes that Newton saw an apple fall to the ground and it made him 
wonder why the fruit always fell straight to the ground; why did it not veer 
off to the left or right? According to his own laws of motion, anything that 
begins moving from a standing start is undergoing acceleration and, where there 
is acceleration, there must be a force. The apple started in the tree and 
landed on the Earth, which means there must be a force of attraction between 
the apple and the Earth.

And even if the apple were higher up in the tree, it would still feel this 
force of attraction with the Earth, reasoned Newton. In fact, the attraction 
shouldn't even stop at the top of a tree but carry on way up into the heavens. 
Which raised the question: if everything around the Earth should feel this 
force of attraction, including the moon, why doesn't our nearest neighbour fall 
and crash onto the surface of our planet in the same way as the apple did?

Newton concluded that the moon did feel the effect of the Earth's attractive 
force and that it was indeed falling towards Earth, but there was a very good 
reason why it didn't crash down. He used a thought experiment to explain his 
thinking: imagine you fired a cannonball horizontally from the top of a 
mountain on Earth. The ball would follow a curved trajectory as it moved 
forward and was attracted, by gravity, towards the ground at the same time. 
Fire the cannonball with more energy and it would land further away from the 
mountain, but it still would follow a curved trajectory in doing so.

Newton proposed that, if you fired the cannonball with enough energy, it could 
fly all the way around the Earth and never land, because the Earth would be 
curving away underneath the ball at the same rate as the ball fell. In other 
words, the ball would now be in orbit around the Earth.

And this is what happens with the moon – it is in freefall around the Earth 
but it moves fast enough so that the Earth's surface never quite "catches" it.

Newton's law tells us that the strength of the gravitational force between two 
objects drops off in the same way that a light gets dimmer as you move away 
from it, a relationship known mathematically as an inverse square law.

Another way to visualise the drop-off in the field is to imagine the 
gravitational field around an object as a series of concentric spheres. Each 
sphere represents the same "amount" of gravitational field but the spheres 
further from the object are bigger, so that same amount of field is spread 
thinner, over a larger area. The field thus gets weaker as you move away from 
the object, in proportion to the surface areas of these spheres.

The m1 and m2 could be planets and stars or they could be you and the Earth. 
Compute the equation using numbers for your mass and that of the Earth, and you 
will get your weight, measured in Newtons. Weight, in true scientific terms, is 
the gravitational force acting on your mass (which is measured in kilograms) at 
any point in time. Your mass will stay the same wherever you go in the universe 
but your weight will fluctuate depending on the mass and position of the 
objects around you.

Newton's law of gravitation is simple equation, but devastatingly effective: 
plug in the numbers and you can predict the positions of all the planets, moons 
and comets you might ever want to watch, anywhere in the solar system and 
beyond.

And it allowed us to add to those celestial bodies too, heralding the space 
age. Newton's formula helped engineers work out how much energy we needed to 
break the gravitational bonds of Earth. The path of every astronaut and the 
orbit of every satellite from which we benefit – whether for communications, 
Earth observation, scientific research around Earth or other planets, global 
positioning information – was calculated using this simple formula.
 