
Can Carolina keep Cam Newton from getting Blind Sided?

 Do you see what we did there? Blind Sided? Because the Panthers signed 
Michael Oher, whose compelling real-life story was told in 2006 Michael Lewis 
book The Blind Side, and subsequently adapted into a Hollywood movie starring 
Sandra Bullock, to play as their starting left tackle?

 OK, good, let’s move on. Lame puns aside, the question of whether Carolina 
can do a better job of keeping Cam Newton upright this season is a crucial one. 
The Panthers handed their quarterback a new $103.8m contract extension this 
offseason, so it’s about time they started trying to protect him.

 Newton was sacked 38 times last season and found himself under pressure on 
more than one-third of his dropbacks. He might hold onto the ball too long 
occasionally, but that is not the root cause of this problem. Carolina’s pass 
blocking was atrocious. Indeed, according to Pro Football Focus’s grades,it was 
third-worst of any team in the league 
<https://www.profootballfocus.com/data/by_team.php?tab=by_team&season=2014&teamid=-1&stats=&gameid=&pre=REG>
.

 Oher was signed to address this issue, but whether he will succeed is open to 
doubt. The lineman has broadly failed to deliver on the potential that made him 
a first-round pick in 2009 and seemed to regress further in Tennessee last year.

 Meanwhile, center Ryan Kalil – the best of a bad bunch in 2014 – has sprained 
his knee, obliging coaches to consider moving right tackle Mike Remmers inside. 
His spot, in turn, may be occupied by rookie fourth-round pick Daryl Williams. 
Such uncertainty does not bode well so close to the season.

 On top of which, Newton has now lost his No1 receiver. Kelvin Benjamin’s 
season-ending knee injury deprives the quarterback of a target that he felt 
good throwing the ball up for when shabby blocking did put him in a tight spot. 
Devin Funchess has the size to take on a similar role, but only time will tell 
if the rookie is ready to thrive at this level.


NFC North preview: will injuries cost Green Bay a Super Bowl run?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/sep/02/nfc-north-preview-will-injuries-cost-green-bay-a-super-bowl-run>
 Whatever happens, the Panthers are unlikely to be pushovers. Running back 
Jonathan Stewart is a handful when healthy (admittedly, less often than the 
team would like) and the defense is stout, even if the secondary still looks 
patchy despite the Charles Tillman pick-up. Carolina’s pass rush did OK without 
Greg Hardy last year and first-round pick Shaq Thompson looks like a playmaker. 
Luke Kuechly remains a monster.

 But there is a difference between being a solid team and a good one. The 
Panthers became the first team ever to win back-to-back NFC South titles when 
they finished top of this division last year, but they did so with a losing 
record. Have they got significantly stronger doing so? If so, it is hard to see 
where.

 It would be possible for this team to make substantial gains simply by 
protecting Newton better. Signing Oher was supposed to be a step in the right 
direction, but it looks more like a shuffle to the (blind) side.

What will the Saints look like without Jimmy Graham? 

 Nobody could accuse the Saints of being content with mediocrity. They reacted 
to a 7-9 finish by thoroughly refreshing their coaching staff, bidding farewell 
to five assistants and welcoming in seven more. They followed that up by 
trading away one of the best tight ends ever to play the game, plus a 
fourth-round draft pick, in return for a center and a first-rounder.

 New Orleans had not lost faith in Jimmy Graham. Last season was statistically 
his worst since his rookie year, but the tight end still hauled in 85 passes 
for 885 yards and 10 touchdowns despite a shoulder complaint. At 28 years old, 
the Saints knew he still had plenty to give, but – lacking the salary cap room 
to address weaknesses on the offensive line and on defense – accepted that 
something had to give.

 If the trade appears to damage Drew Brees, coaches may argue that they made 
it with him in mind. The quarterback has lost his favourite target as well as a 
team-mate whom he described as “like a brother to me”, but he has gained 
superior protection. Max Unger missed a large chunk of last season due to 
injury but when healthy he is one of the best starting centers in the league.

 Unger’s arrival was supplemented with the drafting of offensive tackle Andrus 
Peat in the first round, though his performances through preseason suggest he 
might not be ready to start for a while yet. Either way, coaches intend to 
relieve the pressure on Brees by increasing their focus on the running game.


AFC West preview: Maclin can spur Chiefs to top Manning's fading Broncos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/sep/01/afc-west-kansas-city-jeremy-maclin-peyton-manning>
 Mark Ingram did a solid enough job as a feature back in 2014 and free agent 
signing CJ Spiller brings a change of pace. Khiry Robinson returns as the 
back-up bruiser on first and second downs. This is not a group to set fans’ 
pulses racing but it might be one that is capable of sustaining drives and 
keeping the Saints’ defense off the field.

 That much is imperative because New Orleans still do not look good on that 
side of the ball. Junior Galette, responsible for 10 of the team’s 34 sacks 
last season,was cut over off-field incidents 
<http://espn.go.com/nfl/story/_/id/13313271/new-orleans-saints-release-linebacker-junior-galette>
. It is not especially clear how the Saints intend to pick up the pass-rushing 
slack. Free agent pick-up Anthony Spencer was a Pro Bowler under Rob Ryan in 
Dallas, but that was three years ago. He has managed half a sack in the past 
two, injury-ravaged, seasons combined.

 Ryan has simplified the defensive playbook, giving him more time to explain 
to Brandon Browner what pass interference means, and perhaps also accelerating 
the integration of rookies on that side of the ball. New Orleans spent six 
draft picks on defensive players, with linebackers Stephone Anthony (taken with 
Seattle’s first-rounder) and Hau’oli Kikaha, as well as defensive tackle Tyeler 
Davison, all expected to contribute right away.

 This Saints team will look very different. With the likes of Pierre Thomas, 
Kenny Stills, Curtis Lofton and even kicker Shayne Graham all departing there 
will not be much familiarity here. The fear is that through all this change the 
results will get worse, or even just stay exactly the same.

Are the Falcons contenders under Ray Quinn?

There was a time when running back Leroy Hoard stood as the model of NFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> consistency. The story goes that he 
once told Vikings coach Dennis Green: “if you ask me to get you one yard, I’m 
going to get you three. If you ask me to get you five, I’m going to get you 
three.”

 Sixteen years on from Hoard’s retirement, perhaps it is time we anointed a 
successor – one more representative of the modern NFL’s status as a passing 
league. Step forward Matt Ryan. If you need a 65% completion rate, 4,500 yards 
and 25 touchdowns in a season he’s got you more than covered. But if you need a 
quarterback who can drag a subpar roster into the postseason single-handedly, 
well, you’d better look elsewhere.

 For the Falcons to lose 22 games in two years despite such reliable play at 
the most important position makes clear what a mess things have been. A dismal 
offensive line has been backed up by a stable of ancient or anonymous running 
backs and complemented by a defense that made Jarius Wright look like Jerry 
Rice last September.


AFC South preview: are the Texans wasting JJ Watt's best years?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/sep/03/afc-south-preview-are-the-texans-wasting-jj-watts-best-years>
 Head coach Mike Smith carried the can, losing his job at the end of the 
season and presumably watching with bemusement as the team failed to fire 
Thomas Dimitroff as well. The general manager who had helped put together this 
inadequate roster instead survived to oversee the construction of an improved 
one for Smith’s replacement, Dan Quinn.

 Fixing the defense has, unsurprisingly, been the priority. As co-ordinator of 
the league’s best scoring defense in Seattle these past two years, Quinn brings 
good experience to the table and some useful talent as well – having persuaded 
linebacker O’Brien Schofield to follow him over from the Seahawks. Better yet, 
Quinn also got defensive end Adrian Clayborn to jump ship from division rivals 
Tampa Bay.

 Both Schofield and Clayborn know how to rush the passer, and so does the 
team’s No1 draft pick, Vic Beasley. With Quinn at the helm, something would 
need to go very seriously wrong for the Falcons not to improve on the 22 sacks 
they managed last season.

 Even a little bit of pressure on opposing quarterbacks could go a long way. 
The Falcons are not as bad as you might assume in the secondary, with Desmond 
Trufant a legitimately solid cover corner, and second-round draft pick Jalen 
Collins now pushing Robert Alford on the other side.

 If the rush defense, too, can improve, then Atlanta should be competitive. 
The offense remains a work in progress, with so-so guard Chris Chester the only 
new starter on the line and still no clarity over who will carry the load at 
running back between this year’s third round pick Tevin Coleman and last year’s 
fourth-rounder Devonta Freeman.

 But amidst it all, you can be pretty confident that Ryan will carry on making 
two-thirds of his passes (many of them to the newly re-signed Julio Jones), for 
more than 4,000 yards and 25 touchdowns. If Quinn can even achieve even a small 
measure of improvement elsewhere, the Falcons will have a good chance to float 
back to the top of a weak division. It might be a little too soon to expect 
much more than that.

Will the Bucs be better with Jameis Winston taking snaps? 

 Quarterbacks do not typically thrive as rookies. There have been plenty of 
exceptions – be it Dan Marino making the Pro Bowl or Russell Wilson steering 
his team to within three points of the NFC Championship game – but for every 
success story there are plenty more tales of players who just were not ready 
yet.

 Last season offers some indication. Of the three quarterbacks taken in the 
first round of the 2014 draft, only Teddy Bridgewater threw more scores than 
interceptions, and even he did not really get going until late in the year – 
with 10 of his 14 touchdown passes arriving in the final six weeks. Blake 
Bortles started 14 games in Jacksonville but averaged a mere 6.12 yards per 
attempt. You won’t need a reminder of how the Johnny Manziel story went.

 So what can we expect from Jameis Winston? Annoyingly, we may not get a good 
indication before opening night. The No1 pick has had a mixed preseason but 
caution would still be required if he had been setting the world alight. After 
all,Ryan Leaf outperformed Peyton Manning in August 1998 
<http://www.footballperspective.com/the-preseason-is-meaningless/>. 

 Winston has at least been provided with a viable supporting cast. Mike Evans 
and Vincent Jackson are both big, physical receivers who achieved 1,000-yard 
seasons with Josh McCown and Mike Glennon throwing the passes in 2014. If 
Winston does struggle it will not be for want of viable targets.

 A sub-par offensive line (though by no means the weakest in the division) has 
been strengthened with second-round draft picks Donovan Smith and Ali Marpet. 
Both appear to be on course to win starting spots come opening weekend, at left 
tackle and right guard respectively.

 The running game has impressed in preseason, Doug Martin hinting at some of 
the decisiveness and power that went missing over the last two years. Again, 
though, the key word here may be ‘preseason’. If nothing else, Martin will not 
be short of motivation in a contract year.

 Tampa Bay will hope for improvement on defense in Lovie Smith’s second season 
as head coach. He has emphasised turnovers throughout training camp – something 
that his teams used to excel at in Chicago – but attempts to strengthen in free 
agency were underwhelming. Linebacker Bruce Carter never lived up to his 
potential in Dallas and safety Chris Conte was a liability for the Bears.

 The greatest reason to believe the Bucs may be better is simply that we can 
expect some regression to the mean. Grantland’s Bill Barnwell did a good job 
earlier this month of outlining how Tampa Bay had been unfortunate to finish 
2-14 last year – citing their points differential and unfortunate habit of
coming out on the wrong side of close games 
<http://grantland.com/the-triangle/and-the-bucs-shall-rise-again/>. 

 Throw in the fact that the Bucs have one of the softest schedules in the 
league 
<http://www.buccaneers.com/news/article-1/Bucs-2015-Schedule-Ranks-Fourth-Easiest/e60d8a83-085d-41a1-a6af-3ce4dbf9a2f8>
 and it is reasonable to expect that they should be better – but not 
necessarily because of Winston.

Projected final standings

1) Atlanta Falcons <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atlanta-falcons>

2) Carolina Panthers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/carolina-panthers>

3) New Orleans Saints <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-orleans-saints>

4) Tampa Bay Buccaneers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tampa-bay-buccaneers>
 