
Let’s jump right in with the bad news: nobody called all six games correctly 
in our Pick Six contest last week. It would have been pretty remarkable if they 
had, given that Arizona’s matchup with Seattle ended in a tie.

Roger Goodell's incompetent NFL reign is as rock solid as ever
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/26/roger-goodell-nfl-commissioner>
One person, carloscontrole, did ask what would happen if they predicted such 
an outcome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/21/nfl-weekend-preview-cardinals-to-beat-the-seahawks-despite-palmers-struggles#comment-85919978>
. The answer is that they would have been correct, and picked up a point that 
nobody else got. Instead, in the end, they went for a Seattle win and get 
nothing, just like the rest of us.

Full standings below the line shortly. For now, here are this week’s games:

Washington @ Cincinnati Bengals (Sunday 9.30am ET/1.30pm GMT)

The final London game of 2016 has the makings of another close one. Indeed, 
the headline statistics for these teams are strikingly similar. The Bengals 
average 392.6 yards of total offense per game, of which 276.9 come through the 
air and 115.7 on the ground. Washington’s corresponding numbers are 391.4, 
277.7 and 113.7. The two defenses are just as hard to separate – from a 
production standpoint, at least – so where do we find an edge? The one big 
concern I have from Washington’s standpoint regards the availability of Josh 
Norman, who has travelled to London with his team-mates but still needs to clear
NFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> concussion protocol before he being 
allowed to play on Sunday. Without him, the already daunting task of slowing 
down AJ Green would start to look even more ominous.

Bengals to win

Detroit Lions @ Houston Texans (Sunday 1pm ET/5pm GMT)

Brock Osweiler’s return to Denver went just about as badly as it could: the 
Texans signal-caller averaged a pathetic 3.2 yards per passing attempt against 
his former employers. But the Broncos’ defense, at its best, can make even the 
most talented quarterbacks seem inadequate. The same cannot be said for 
Detroit, who recently gave up 321 yards and three touchdowns to Case Keenum. 
Osweiler would not need to match those numbers to give his team a chance, but 
he might need to take on a more prominent role than he has thus far in order to 
help his coaches reduce the workload for the team’s banged up tailback, Lamar 
Miller. Houston’s own No2-ranked pass defense will present Matthew Stafford 
with a sterner test than he has faced all season, but he hasn’t had many bad 
games yet, since pairing up with Jim Bob Cooter.

Lions to win

Seattle Seahawks @ New Orleans Saints (Sunday 1pm ET/5pm GMT)

I know some of you will look at this game and wonder why I’ve included it. Few 
would disagree that the Seahawks are a better team than New Orleans. But allow 
me to sow a seed of doubt in your minds, by observing that Russell Wilson has 
won only nine out of 19 career games that kick off at 1pm ET (playoffs 
included). It is an extraordinary statistic, when you consider that his overall 
record as an NFL starter is 57-22-1. The discrepancy is not all down to 
Wilson’s performance, of course, but reflects the challenge all west coast 
teams face when travelling to play games that would be kicking off at 10am back 
home. One imagines that Drew Brees might feature pretty highly on the list of 
quarterbacks that defenders wouldn’t want to face when they’re still rubbing 
the sleep out of their eyes. Is it enough to make me pick New Orleans? Not 
quite, but I do expect this to be a close one.

Seahawks to win

Oakland Raiders @ Tampa Bay Buccaneers (Sunday 1pm ET/5pm GMT)

Another west coast team facing a road game in the early time slot, the 
Raiders’ body clocks should be in better shape, given that they have been 
staying out in Florida since before their win in Jacksonville last weekend. A 
perfect 4-0 on the road, Oakland will hardly fear a visit to Raymond James 
Stadium, but might have some concerns about how to slow down the well-balanced 
offense that the Bucs have rolled out these last couple of weeks. Jacquizz 
Rodgers has run the ball better than Tampa had any right to expect since 
stepping into the lineup – he made an astonishing 97 yards after contact 
against the 49ers – and might be the greatest beneficiary of an ankle injury to 
Raiders defensive tackle Stacy McGee. I also like Jameis Winston’s prospects of 
having a big day against what remains statistically the worst pass defense in 
the league.

Buccaneers to win 

New England Patriots @ Buffalo Bills (Sunday 1pm ET/5pm GMT)

At the start of this month, the Bills beat the Patriots 16-0 in New England. 
Now all they need to do is to repeat the trick at home. Ah, if only it were as 
straightforward as that sounds. The Patriots who got shut out in that first 
meeting had Jacoby Brissett at quarterback and an undercooked version of Rob 
Gronkowski at tight end. The Bills themselves will get an important player back 
on Sunday, as two-time Pro Bowl defensive tackle Marcell Dareus makes his 
season debut. But to stand a chance against New England, they will need to 
control the clock as they did in that first meeting. That would be no small 
task under any circumstances, but only looks trickier for the fact that both of 
their top two running backs – LeSean McCoy and Mike Gillislee – have been 
limited in practice this week by injuries.

Patriots to win

Green Bay Packers @ Atlanta Falcons (Sunday 4.25pm ET/8.25pm GMT)

A year ago, the Falcons started 5-0 before collapsing to finish 8-8. This 
season, they raced out to an impressive 4-1 start but have since lost two games 
on the bounce. Is this the start of another maddening slide into mediocrity, or 
merely a bump on the road? For now, I am inclined to give them the benefit of 
the doubt. The Falcons lost by just two points in Seattle – one week after a 
draining road win over Denver – and in overtime at home to San Diego. There is 
still a lot to like about a team boasting the league’s most prolific offense 
(for both yards and points scored), but certainly there is pressure on Atlanta 
to win this week and stop familiar doubts from creeping back in. In years gone 
by, I could not have backed Matt Ryan to win a shootout with Aaron Rodgers 
under such conditions. But the simple fact is, this season, he has been the 
better quarterback.

Falcons to win 
 