
The finish line is in sight. Only three weeks remain in the NFL’s regular 
season, and that means you only have three more shots at a clean sweep in our 
Pick Six contest. Nobody managed it in week 14, althoughcastigers did make a 
big move up to the top of our overall leaderboard with a solid five out of six.

How the Seattle Seahawks became the NFL's most outspoken team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/15/how-the-seattle-seahawks-became-the-nfls-most-outspoken-team>
I’ll post the full standings in the comments section shortly. Until then, here 
is your next slate of games.

Detroit Lions @ New York Giants (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT)

The Lions are riding a five-game winning streak. The Giants have lost only 
once in their last eight games, and just overwhelmed the conference’s No1 seed. 
These teams share 9-4 records, but their similarities extend beyond the form 
guide. Both have been impressive on defense lately, Detroit intercepting Drew 
Brees three times in a victory over the Saints earlier this month, before New 
York held the Cowboys to a single score. Neither, though, has been able to run 
the ball with any consistency – a concern, with temperatures dropping and both 
struggling to make plays through the air last weekend. Eli Manning turned the 
ball over three times against Dallas, his day rescued only by some brilliant 
after-the-catch running from Odell Beckham Jr, who turned a quick slant into a 
61-yard score. More concerning for me, though, is the state of Matthew 
Stafford’s middle finger, which he dislocated during the Lions win over 
Chicago. He has experimented with different gloves and supports in practice 
this week, and will certainly play on Sunday. But this is the time of year when 
fine margins make all the difference.

Giants to win

Indianapolis Colts @ Minnesota Vikings (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT)

Adrian Peterson was back at practice on Wednesday, but will his return come 
too late for Minnesota? He has not yet been ruled out of this game, but 
suggested in an interview that he was hoping to get back on the field in next 
week’s showdown with the Packers. Realistically, the Vikings would need to win 
this Sunday to still have a realistic shot at the playoffs by then. The Colts 
have delivered some of their best recent performances on the road – winning in 
Green Bay and Tennessee before humiliating the Jets at MetLife Stadium. But 
after watching Andrew Luck get clobbered by Houston, who hit him 13 times, it’s 
hard to feel good about his prospects against opponents whose 35 sacks rank 
third in theNFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl>.

Vikings to win

Pittsburgh Steelers @ Cincinnati Bengals (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT)

There are still convoluted paths by which the Bengals (5-7-1) can reach the 
postseason, but they could hardly be short of motivation against Pittsburgh in 
any case. This has become an increasingly bitter and bad-tempered rivalry in 
recent years. The likely return of AJ Green is a boon for the Bengals, even if 
they have just put together their first two-game winning streak of the season 
without him. Some alternative to the running game will certainly be required 
against opponents who just restricted LeSean McCoy to 27 yards. The Steelers 
themselves are likely to lean heavily on Le’Veon Bell, who outgained the Bills 
on his own in week 14, and whose four-game suspension to start this year might 
ultimately have served to keep him fresh for this part of the season. Most of 
all, though, the Bengals need to overcome their own recent history: since 
Marvin Lewis took over as head coach, in 2003, they have won just two out of 15 
home matchups against Pittsburgh.

Steelers to win

New Orleans Saints @ Arizona Cardinals (Sunday 4.05pm ET/9.05pm GMT)

Honestly, I tried to avoid including this game. Not because it’s a meaningless 
encounter between two teams who won’t make the playoffs (although it is), but 
because I’m tired of trying to second-guess whether this will be one of those 
weeks when Arizona’s talent wins out, or another of those when they contrive to 
lose a game on the back of some special teams calamity. Don’t get me wrong, the 
Cardinals have plenty of flaws – from poor pass protection, to Carson Palmer’s 
declining arm strength and some woeful wide receiver play – but the Miami 
defeat can be added to those against New England (botched snap on potential 
game-winning field goal), Minnesota (kickoff returned for a touchdown) and Los 
Angeles (late punt return sets up Rams win), as well as the tie against Seattle 
(blocked punt, blocked field goal, missed field goal from 24 yards) on the list 
of games they really should have won. Do I think they are a better team than 
New Orleans? Yes. Do I trust them to demonstrate that on Sunday? Not one bit. 
But Drew Brees hasn’t thrown a touchdown pass in two games, and – despite a 
lengthy injury list – Arizona’s defense remains one of the best in the league.

Cardinals to win

New England Patriots @ Denver Broncos (Sunday 4.25pm ET/9.25pm GMT)

Even by his standards, Tom Brady is having an extraordinary year. In nine 
games since his suspension, he has thrown 22 touchdowns against just two 
interceptions. Only once in his career – back in 2007 – has he finished a 
season with a passer rating higher than his current mark of 113.6. And yet, 
Denver has rarely been a happy place for him to visit. He is 2-7 all-time at 
Mile High Stadium, and was clobbered relentlessly during defeats there in both 
the regular season and AFC title game last year. Some of the Broncos’ personnel 
has changed since, but they still own the NFL’s top-ranked pass defense, and 
second-most prolific pass rush. I have no trouble with the idea that a team 
starring Trevor Siemian at quarterback could beat Brady and company (after all, 
Brock Osweiler was taking the snaps during the first win over New England last 
season…), but what bothers me more is Denver’s lack of a running game. CJ 
Anderson played a prominent role in both of the Broncos’ 2015-16 victories, and 
they have struggled to keep the chains moving without him over these last few 
weeks.

Broncos to win

Tampa Bay Buccaneers @ Dallas Cowboys (Sunday 8.30pm ET/Monday 1.30am GMT)

Has Dak Prescott collided with the mythical ‘rookie wall’? He has not thrown 
for more than 200 yards in any of his past three games but, in fairness, he did 
not need to in wins over Washington and Minnesota. He still completed more than 
69% of his passes across those two games – with a touchdown and no 
interceptions in each. Last week, against the Giants, was different, but Dallas 
struggled against them in week one, too. Could this just be an opponent that 
has offensive co-ordinator Scott Linehan’s number? One way or another, this 
week provides a significant test for Dallas. The Buccaneers have won five 
straight and surrendered a league-low 12.8 points per game since week 10. They 
have beaten Seattle and beaten Kansas City on the road during this stretch. I 
think people might be underestimating them.

Buccaneers to win
 