
Christmas time, mistletoe and wine / Guardian journalist trying to rhyme / 
Playoffs approaching, who will get in? / Two spots still open, six teams want 
in.

 OK, that’s enough of that. Merry Christmas everyone, hope you are all as well 
fed and well rested as I intend to be by the time this article gets published. 
Just remember that the holidays are no excuse for slacking off on competitive 
commitments. This is the final weekend of the NFL’s regular season, which means 
it is also the final round in our annual Pick Six contest.

 We will, of course, be inviting you to Pick the Playoffs over the next month, 
but this is your last chance to achieve a six-game sweep until September 2015. 
Nobody managed it in week 16.

 The overall title race is also coming down to the wire. aojigbo leads the way 
with 68 correct predictions from 96 games, giving him a massive .708 hit rate, 
but 18 others are still in the running. I shall post the overall standings in 
the comments section shortly, but before that, here are this week’s games:

San Diego Chargers @ Kansas City Chiefs (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT)

 For San Diego, the playoffs begin a week early. A victory over Kansas City 
would take the Chargers through to the Wild Card round, but a loss would 
immediately eliminate them. Things are not so straightforward for the Chiefs, 
who could win on Sunday and still fall short (see our ‘playoff picture’ section 
below for full details), but it would be a mistake to presume that they are 
less of a threat as a consequence. Kansas City have beaten both the Patriots 
and Seahawks at Arrowhead Stadium, and give up just 17 points per game on their 
own turf. The Chargers’ struggling offensive line lost its starting right 
guard, Johnnie Troutman, to injury last weekend, and could be without center 
Chris Watt on Sunday, too. Against a potent Kansas City pass rush, such 
absences do not bode well.Chiefs to win

Philadelphia Eagles @ New York Giants (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT)

 Odell Beckham Jr was named as an alternate for the Pro Bowl this week. If he 
had not missed the first month of the season with a hamstring injury, he would 
surely have made it into the main roster pool. The rookie has racked up 1,120 
receiving yards in just 11 professional games, with 1,014 of those coming after 
the Giants’ week eight bye. He should enjoy another productive afternoon 
against opponents who rank 25th in the league against the pass. The Eagles have 
lost three games in a row since the start of December, while New York are 
undefeated over the same stretch.Giants to win

Carolina Panthers @ Atlanta Falcons (Sunday 4.25pm ET/9.25pm GMT)

 An all-or-nothing decider. Neither team will finish with a winning record, 
but one will host a playoff game next month. The Falcons looked sharp as they 
walloped the Saints 30-14 in New Orleans last week, but that was just their 
second triumph in five weeks. Carolina, meanwhile, have won three straight, but 
their last two victories came by a combined margin of six points. The Panthers 
have rediscovered their running game of late, Jonathan Stewart piling up 437 
yards in four games, but even with Cam Newton back under center, I am not 
convinced they have the tools to exploit Atlanta’s greatest weaknesses in the 
secondary.Falcons to win

Detroit Lions @ Green Bay Packers (Sunday 4.25pm ET/9.25pm GMT)

 As Packers coach Mike McCarthy said on Tuesday, “this is what it’s all 
about”. A one-off game between two of the NFL’s oldest rivals to decide which 
of them will finish top of the NFC North. Both have 11-4 records, and each is 
guaranteed a playoff berth, but while the winner will receive a first-round 
bye, the loser could very well wind up as the conference’s sixth seed. And that 
might mean making a trip to Dallas on Wild Card weekend. The Lions will draw 
confidence from the fact they have won both of their last two matchups against 
the Packers, but those games were played in Detroit. They have not won in Green 
Bay since 1991. Even more troubling for the road team is the fact that they 
will be without their starting center, Dominic Raiola, who is serving a 
one-game suspension for stamping on an opponent last weekend.Packers to win

Arizona Cardinals @ San Francisco 49ers (Sunday 4.25pm ET/9.25pm GMT)

 The Cardinals could yet finish top of the NFC West, if they win and Seattle 
fluff their lines against St Louis. Given that the Rams have beaten the 
Seahawks once already this season, we should not dismiss that scenario 
entirely. But Arizona will have a tough time holding up their end of the 
bargain with yet another new quarterback under center. Rookie Logan Thomas has 
been named as the team’s fourth starter at the position this season, after Ryan 
Lindley struggled badly against Seattle. The 49ers have lost four in a row, but 
will at least have enjoyed an extra day of rest after playing on Saturday 
against San Diego. Arizona, by contrast, took a physical battering against 
Seattle. It is no coincidence that the Seahawks’ last nine opponents have all 
gone on to lose their next game.49ers to win

Cincinnati Bengals @ Pittsburgh Steelers (Sunday 8.30pm ET/Monday 1.30am GMT)

 Yet another division decider. Baltimore’s loss to Houston last week means 
both teams have made it into the postseason, but only the winner will get to 
play another home game. Bengals quarterback Andy Dalton might feel that he 
answered criticisms of his prime-time record by helping Cincinnati to a victory 
over Denver on Monday Night Football, but his personal performance was only 
so-so. With wide receiver AJ Green limited by an arm injury, Dalton limited 
himself mostly to short passes aimed at his running backs and tight end. 
Greater things might be required against a Steelers offense that averages more 
than 415 yards and 27 points per game. Unless Cincinnati’s defense can achieve 
a repeat of the four interceptions they snared against Denver, that is.Steelers 
to win

And the rest

 Here are the remainder of this weekend’s games. These are not included in the 
Pick Six, but feel free to post your winners for them as well. If you do so, 
please keep them separate from your Pick Six predictions, as it will make life 
a lot easier when adding up your scores.

Sunday

1pm ET/6pm GMT

 Cleveland Browns @ Baltimore Ravens

 Dallas Cowboys @ Washington

 Indianapolis Colts @ Tennessee Titans

 Jacksonville Jaguars @ Houston Texans

 New York Jets @ Miami Dolphins

 Chicago Bears @ Minnesota Vikings

 Buffalo Bills @ New England Patriots

 New Orleans Saints @ Tampa Bay Buccaneers

4.25pm ET/9.25pm GMT

 Oakland Raiders @ Denver Broncos

 St Louis Rams @ Seattle Seahawks

Playoff picture

 And before we go, here is a complete look at the playoff picture going into 
week 17:

AFC 

Current seedings:

 1) New England Patriots (12-3) – Guaranteed top seeding in the AFC. 

 2) Denver Broncos (11-4) – Will secure a first-round bye with a win over 
Oakland. A loss will still be enough if Cincinnati also lose (or, less 
probably, if the Bengals tie and the Colts win).

3) Cincinnati Bengals <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cincinnati-bengals> 
(10-4-1) – Will win the AFC North if they avoid defeat to the Steelers. A 
victory would also earn them a first-round bye if Denver fail to win.

 4) Indianapolis Colts (10-5) – Effectively locked into the fourth seed. Only 
if the Bengals and Steelers tie could the Colts could move up to the third 
seed, by beating Tennessee.

5) Pittsburgh Steelers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pittsburgh-steelers> 
(10-5) – Guaranteed a Wild Card berth. Will win the AFC North, and claim the 
third seed, if they beat Cincinnati.

6) San Diego Chargers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/san-diego-chargers> 
(9-6) – Will secure the AFC’s final playoff berth with a win. A tie would be 
sufficient if the Ravens fail to win.

Still in the hunt: 

 Baltimore Ravens (9-6) – Must better the Chargers’ result to leapfrog them 
into the final Wild Card spot.

 Houston Texans (8-7) – Will make the playoffs if they win and both the 
Chargers and Ravens lose.

Kansas City Chiefs <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kansas-city-chiefs> 
(8-7) – Will make the playoffs if they beat San Diego, Baltimore lose, and 
Houston fail to win. (Given that the latter two are facing Cleveland and 
Jacksonville, respectively, it’s probably a long shot.)

NFC 

Current seedings: 

 1) Seattle Seahawks (11-4) – Will finish top of the NFC West as long as they 
better Arizona’s result on Sunday. A victory at home to the Rams would also 
seal a first-round bye, and almost certainly top seeding in the NFC. (Seattle 
could, theoretically, drop to No2 despite winning if Green Bay and Detroit tie, 
while Dallas beat Washington.)

2) Detroit Lions <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/detroit-lions> (11-4) – 
Must avoid defeat against Green Bay in order to win the NFC North. Could also 
finish as the NFC’s top seed if they beat the Packers, while both Seattle and 
Arizona slip up.

 3) Dallas Cowboys (11-4) – Guaranteed to finish top of the NFC East, and will 
claim a first-round bye if they better the results of both Seattle and Arizona. 
A tie between Green Bay and Detroit would open up an improbable opportunity for 
Dallas to snatch the conference’s top seed.

4) Carolina Panthers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/carolina-panthers> 
(6-8-1) – Must avoid defeat against Atlanta to win the NFC South and claim a 
Wild Card berth.

5) Green Bay Packers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/green-bay-packers> 
(11-5) – Guaranteed a playoff spot, but must beat the Lions to finish top of 
the NFC North. The Packers could then also claim the NFC’s top seed, if the 
Seahawks lose.

6) Arizona Cardinals <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arizona-cardinals> 
(11-5) – Guaranteed a playoff berth, but would need to better Seattle’s result 
to win the NFC West and take a first-round bye. Could claim top seeding, if 
they win and both Seattle and Green Bay slip up.

 Still in the hunt

Atlanta Falcons <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atlanta-falcons> (6-9) – 
Must beat Carolina to win the NFC South and claim a Wild Card berth.
 