
The New York Jets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-jets> fired 
their head coach, Rex Ryan, on Monday. The decision was expected after the team 
finished the NFL regular season with a 4-12 record, though they won their last 
game against the Miami Dolphins on Sunday.

Ryan joins Jim Harbaugh of the San Francisco 49ers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/29/jim-harbaugh-and-san-francisco-49ers-officially-part-ways>
, Marc Trestman of the Chicago Bears andMike Smith of the Atlanta Falcons 
<http://espn.go.com/nfl/story/_/id/12091459/atlanta-falcons-fire-mike-smith> in 
leaving his role on what has become known as Black Monday for NFL coaches and 
general managers. Harbaugh and the 49ers agreed to part company on Sunday, at 
the conclusion of an 8-8 season which saw San Francisco miss the playoffs.

Jets general manager John Idzik was also fired early on Monday. Ryan had been 
in the role for six seasons and Izdik for two.

Ryan took the Jets to two AFC Championship games and finished with a 50-52 
record, 4-2 in the postseason. But he never had the support of a strong 
quarterback, with both Mark Sanchez and Geno Smith struggling under the intense 
scrutiny of the New York market.


“Both Rex and John made significant contributions to the team”, said Jets 
owner Woody Johnson in a statement, “and they have my appreciation and 
gratitude for their efforts and commitment. Over the years, Rex brought the 
Jets a bold confidence and a couple of great post-season runs, which all of us 
will remember.

“I am beginning our search for new football leadership, effective immediately, 
with guidance and support from respected football experts, including Charley 
Casserly and Ron Wolf, two Super Bowl winners with decades of valuable 
experience.”

While Idzik was an unpopular figure with Jets fans, Ryan’s firing will prove 
unpopular with large parts of the team’s support. He was popular with his 
players, displayed brilliant defensive instincts and many felt he was let down 
by poor recruitment on the part of his general manager.


Discussing Harbaugh’s departure, the 49ers owner Jed York said: “Jim and I 
have come to the conclusion that it is in our mutual best interest to move in 
different directions.

“We thank Jim for bringing a tremendous competitive nature and a great passion 
for the game to the 49ers. He and his staff restored a winning culture that has 
been the standard for our franchise throughout its history.”

Harbaugh is believed to have accepted an offer to coach the University of 
Michigan. He will earn up to $9m a year, the highest salary for any college 
football coach.


Trestman was fired alongside the Bears general manager, Phil Emery. The Bears’ 
traditional strength in defense has faded in the past couple of seasons – 
Chicago were ranked 30th in 2013 and 2014. There were also issues at 
quarterback. Jay Cutler was handed a seven-year contract extension, believed to 
be worth $126m but threw 18 interceptions and was benched for week 16.


Smith had been with the Falcons for seven seasons, helping his team reach the 
playoffs four times. But despite heavy investment in the team’s passing game – 
Matt Ryan and Julio Jones in particular – the Falcons could not make the Super 
Bowl. This year they failed to make the playoffs in the league’s weakest 
division, the NFC South. The Panthers won the division despite not posting a 
winning record.

“Smitty’s contributions to our club, team and city over the last seven years 
are numerous,” said the Falcons owner, Arthur Blank, in a statement. “His 
accomplishments on the field made him the most successful coach in the 49-year 
history of the Falcons, and we are grateful for the foundation he has laid for 
us for the future.”
 