
With two weeks left to go in the regular season, no fewer than 21 teams are, 
mathematically-speaking, still in with a chance of reaching the playoffs. Less  
More importantly, exactly 92 people have a shout of winning our Pick Six 
contest. Overall standings will be posted shortly, but for now I can tell you 
thataojigbo and DevonGiant continue to share first place. 

 The competition is hotting up, though, as we enter the final stretch – with 
no fewer than 10 people calling all six games correctly last week. Please join 
me in raising a digital toast toAnythingButPenalties, bms355, Chappers67, 
ciuffoleo, Dougal, GhostDog808, JohnJesseWood, lebronfromdowntown, MisterHorse
and TedBovis. And when you are done with that, get on and see if you can match 
them by picking this week’s games:

Atlanta Falcons @ New Orleans Saints (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT)

 There was a time when New Orleans were thought to enjoy the greatest 
homefield advantage in the league. Not so much lately. The Saints have lost 
four straight at the Superdome, most recently suffering a 41-10 humiliation at 
the hands of Carolina. Now they welcome another NFC South rival with the 
division title hanging in the balance. A New Orleans defeat, coupled with a 
Carolina victory, would eliminate the Saints. But a New Orleans win would 
eliminate the Falcons – and could do the same to the Panthers, if they were to 
lose in Cleveland. Injuries to two of Atlanta’s top three receivers – Julio 
Jones and Harry Douglas – should give me pause (even if both could yet play on 
Sunday), but for some reason, I still like the road team.Falcons to win

Cleveland Browns @ Carolina Panthers (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT)

 It did not take long for the wheels to come off the Johnny Manziel bandwagon. 
A woeful performance from the rookie during Cleveland’s 30-0 rout by Cincinnati 
was enough for some commentators to start asking if he could ever succeed in 
the pros. Such reactions are aggressively premature, but illustrate how poorly 
Manziel played. He has a chance for redemption this Sunday against another 
modest defense, and his Browns team may be helped by Carolina’s own uncertainty 
under center. Cam Newton returned to practice on Wednesday for the first time 
since his car accident, but at time of writing it is not yet clear whether he 
or backup Derek Anderson will start on Sunday. Perhaps I, too, am guilty of 
overreacting to one game, but right now I would take either of them over the 
rookie.Panthers to win

Minnesota Vikings @ Miami Dolphins (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT)

 Miami, at 7-7, are technically still in the playoff hunt, even if they would 
require a lot of help to get in. Minnesota have been out of the running for 
some time. And yet it was the Vikings who looked like the more competitive team 
last weekend, leading the Lions from the first quarter to the fourth, only to 
eventually lose by two points. Were it not for three missed field goals from 
Blair Walsh, they might easily have won. The Dolphins, by contrast, were 
crushed by the Patriots, and have now lost five of their past seven games. They 
have scored only one touchdown per game over the last three. Perhaps head coach 
Joe Philbin, with his job on the line, can get a reaction from his players over 
these last two games. But right now I have a hard time seeing it.Vikings to win

Kansas City Chiefs @ Pittsburgh Steelers (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT)

 The loser of this game will not necessarily be eliminated from postseason 
contention, but their chances will take a huge blow. Kansas City’s position is 
slightly more precarious, at 8-6, but a victory for them would do substantial 
damage to the Steelers (9-5) due to the head-to-head tiebreaker. Pittsburgh are 
unlikely to be fazed. Ben Roethlisberger said this week that he and his 
team-mates had been operating in a “playoff atmosphere here for a while”, and 
so far they seem to be playing up to it. The Steelers have shown impressive 
offensive balance during the second half of the season, but it is the running 
game that should come to the fore on Sunday. Le’Veon Bell is the league’s 
second-leading rusher and has found the end zone six times in his last four 
games. The Chiefs rank 28th in the league against the run.Steelers to win. You 
can follow the game with the Guardian’s live minute-by-minute blog from 1pm 
GMT/6pm ET on Sunday.


Indianapolis Colts @ Dallas Cowboys (Sunday 4.25pm ET/9.25pm GMT)

 Will DeMarco Murray be ready to go? At time of writing, that remains unclear, 
although the Cowboys running back did return to practice on Wednesday. 
Instinctively it feels improbable that a ball-carrier could play within six 
days of undergoing surgery to repair a broken metacarpal, although the injury 
was at least to his weaker left hand. Murray’s availability is clearly a major 
factor for the Cowboys’ offense, and the uncertainty makes this game a tough 
one to call. His backups Joseph Randle and Lance Dunbar might also make inroads 
against Indianapolis’s soft run defense, but no team could lose a bona fide MVP 
candidate and not suffer for it. Despite that uncertainty, though, I am going 
to take the Cowboys at home. The Colts’ offense has stuttered in its last two 
games, while Dallas have scored 30+ in four of their last five.Cowboys to win

Denver Broncos @ Cincinnati Bengals (Monday 8.30pm ET/Tuesday 1.30am GMT) 

 The omens are not good for Cincinnati. Their quarterback, Andy Dalton, has a 
miserable 2-6 record in prime time, while his Denver counterpart, Peyton 
Manning, has won all eight games that he has played against the Bengals in his 
career. But runs like those are made to be broken, and Cincy are in with a shot 
against a Broncos team that has not exactly been blowing opponents away lately. 
Manning, in particular, has slowed down, throwing just one touchdown and a pair 
of interceptions over the last two weeks. The big question for the Bengals will 
be whether they can establish their ground game against a defense that ranks 
second in the league against the run. Because if this were to become a 
shootout, it is hard to imagine Dalton coming out on top.Broncos to win

And the rest

 Here are the remainder of this weekend’s games. These are not included in the 
Pick Six, but feel free to post your winners for them as well. If you do so, 
please keep them separate from your Pick Six predictions, as it will make life 
a lot easier when adding up your scores.

Saturday

4.30pm ET/9.30pm GMT

 Philadelphia Eagles @ Washington

 San Diego Chargers @ San Francisco 49ers

Sunday

1pm ET/6pm GMT

 Baltimore Ravens @ Houston Texans

 Detroit Lions @ Chicago Bears

 Green Bay Packers @ Tampa Bay Buccaneers

 New England Patriots @ New York Jets

4.05pm ET/9.05pm GMT

 New York Giants @ St Louis Rams

4.25pm ET/9.25pm GMT

 Buffalo Bills @ Oakland Raiders 

8.30pm ET/Sunday 1.30am GMT

 Seattle Seahawks @ Arizona Cardinals
 