
The NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> is on the brink of winter 
crisis after a larger than expected increase in patient numbers caused nearly a 
third of hospital trusts in England to warn they needed urgent action to cope.

The BBC commissioned the Nuffield Trust health thinktank to look at four weeks 
of hospital data in the run-up to Christmas and found that 50 of the 152 
English trusts were at the highest or second-highest level of pressure.

NHS hospitals facing toughest winter yet, say health experts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/21/nhs-hospitals-facing-toughest-winter-yet-say-health-experts>
During the time period, seven trusts had to declare the highest level of 
emergency 15 times, meaning they were unable to give patients comprehensive 
care.

Official NHS figures published on Friday showed that for the period from 28 
December to 2 January, two trusts declared the highest level of emergency on 
one day each and 17 trusts declared the second highest level, indicating they 
were experiencing major pressures and “urgent action” was needed, on at least 
one occasion.

Nigel Edwards, the chief executive of the Nuffield Trust, said the situation 
could deteriorate further in the next two weeks when the NHS was usually most 
stretched.

“The real crunch point generally comes in week two or three after the 
Christmas break … there are early signs that there is a problem,” he told BBC 
Radio 4’s Today programme.

NHS England insisted hospitals were coping, but Edwards said “there are 
reasons to be really quite concerned”.

He pointed out that hospitals were having to cope with a 4% increase in A&E 
attendance, which is more than expected from population growth. At the same 
time problems in social care were making it “really tricky” for hospitals to 
free up beds, he said.

Send patients to private sector to avert winter crisis, hospitals told
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/26/send-patients-to-private-sector-to-avert-winter-crisis-hospitals-told>
“If you can’t get patients out of the back of the hospital [to] home, then 
obviously, the whole system begins to seize up,” he told Today.

“Anecdotally, what you are hearing from chief executives of trusts is that 
they are experiencing very, very high levels of pressure in their A&E 
departments.”

The Nuffield Trust found that some of the worst problems were in Berkshire, 
the West Country and parts of the east Midlands. But Edwards pointed out: “This 
pattern of increase demand is spread right across the country.”

Further highlighting the strain trusts are under, there were 42 cases of newly 
arrived patients being diverted from emergency departments to other hospitals 
last week, more than twice as many as in the previous week and in the 
equivalent period last year.

NHS 111 had its busiest week on record with 457,084 calls and outbreaks of 
diarrhoea and vomiting, 1,012 hospital beds a day closed – up from 699 the 
previous week and from 677 at the same point last year. However, the bed 
occupancy rate was down on the equivalent period last year from 92.4% to 91.2%. 
A&E attendances were up 40,000 (12%) last week to 372,000 compared with the 
previous week.

Dr Taj Hassan, president of the Royal College of Emergency Medicine, warned 
that hospital emergency departments were “in an absolute acute state of 
distress”. “This is on the background of chronic underfunding, understaffing, 
both in health and social care and failures in the wider urgent emergency care 
system,” he added.

Hassan said the issue was the “number one item on the agenda” in a meeting the 
college had on Thursday with the NHS chief executive, Simon Stevens. “Our 
four-hour performance in A&E departments is the worst in 15 years. We entered 
this winter in the worst state of affairs possible and we predicted that this 
situation would arise,” he told Today.

Hassan called for emergency funding to resolve problems in social care to help 
free up hospital beds. He said: “There is an absolute and urgent need to 
address the patients who are fit to be discharged from hospital, which in some 
systems is running between 10% or 20%.

“We need to move those patients back into the community so that we can create 
flow in our hospitals and our significantly overcrowded emergency departments 
which are struggling badly.”

In a statement, NHS England said: “The NHS’s tried and tested plan is 
currently managing the ongoing pressures of winter. The public can play their 
part avoiding going to A&E and using their local pharmacy and NHS 111.”
 