
“If you have a child with cancer, you wouldn’t wait until they had reached 
stage four cancer before starting treatment. It’s no different with an eating 
disorder, because if you delay treatment, then the illness becomes more 
ingrained and more difficult to treat.”

Ulrike Schmidt <https://kclpure.kcl.ac.uk/portal/ulrike.schmidt.html>, 
professor of eating disorders at King’s College London (KCL), is explaining why 
she and a team of medical personnel have begun helping young adults suffering 
from anorexia and bulimia to start specialist treatment within weeks rather 
than the months of delay that are so common across the NHS. Thefirst episode 
and rapid early intervention for eating disorders (Freed) 
<http://www.health.org.uk/programmes/shine-2014/projects/first-episode-and-rapid-early-intervention-eating-disorders-freed>
trial has only been going for nine months but has so far given patients – 
mainly young women – access to vital treatment in an average of 33 days rather 
than the usual time of between four and eight months.

It’s unusual to find eating disorders sufferers who take part in treatment as 
willingly – parents are utterly delighted
Prof Ulrike Schmidt 
Its initial results show that cutting long waiting times makes patients much 
more likely to engage with the treatment; reduces the high dropout rate from 
such care; helps patients recover more quickly than normal; and is hugely 
appreciated by patients and their parents. Although only 45 patients have so 
far benefitted from this innovative approach at the South London and Maudsley 
(Slam)NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> foundation trust, it has 
the potential to help end what Schmidt calls intolerable waits for urgent 
treatment.

“We have transformed the care and lives of these young people. We can already 
see that this is really making a difference,” said Schmidt. “People’s recovery 
is brought forward so much, patients actually engage in treatment – it’s 
unusual to find eating disorders sufferers who take part in treatment as 
willingly – and parents are utterly delighted.Eating disorders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/eating-disorders> are such a burden on 
families, in which every meal is a battle and you worry that your child might 
drop dead because of the sudden death associated with anorexia, that parents 
are very glad to have such expert help so early and to be so involved.”


In most eating disorder services, up to 40% of patients drop out for complex 
psychological reasons, and the risk of that happening is higher the longer they 
have to wait to start. Dropout used to be 30% from Slam’s eating disorders 
service; it is down to 13% among Freed patients.

Funded by a £75,000 grant from the Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Foundation charity, Freed offers 
speedy treatment to 18- to 25-year-olds whose anorexia or bulimia has begun 
within the past three years. It is delivered by Schmidt, a psychiatrist, two 
clinical psychologists and two nurses.

“It’s vital to get in there and tackle an eating disorder as early as 
possible. That’s what we’re trying to do. People with longer illnesses have 
structural and functional changes in the brain so that the brain can appear 
shrunken. The longer starvation goes on, the more it makes behavioural patterns 
relating to eating habits more ingrained. This can cause extreme fluctuation in 
blood salts that lead to fits and also high levels of stress hormones that can 
be toxic to the brain.” Rapid treatment was particularly important for 
anorexics – about half Freed’s caseload – because their health could 
deteriorate the most sharply without specialist help.

Preliminary analyses by the Freed team suggested that its early intervention 
helped patients with anorexia normalise weight more rapidly compared with 
patients from a clinical trial undertaken in Slam’s eating disorders service, 
where patients had to wait for treatment, said Schmidt. “The numbers are, as 
yet, small but it looks like Freed patients achieved full weight recovery at 
six months after starting treatment, whereas the patients in the clinical trial 
had not quite caught up at 12 months,” she added.

Prof Sir Simon Wessely, president of the Royal College of Psychiatrists, 
welcomed Freed’s early results, which could ultimately speed up eating disorder 
treatment across the NHS. “This is an important pilot initiative which 
acknowledges that time is of the essence when treating young people with eating 
disorders. It is a novel service built around the patient, rather than 
expecting patients and their families to fit into the service. It is a model of 
good practice that should be made widely available so other young people can 
benefit beyond south London,” he said.

How I got back from anorexia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/30/how-i-got-back-from-anorexia-nancy-tucker>
Wessely, who is also a professor at KCL and an honorary consultant at Slam, 
added: “The weight loss and starvation that comes with severe eating disorder 
have serious physical effects, including on brain development, which can reduce 
the chance of recovery. So preventing this from happening is a major priority.”

Recent research by Beat, the eating disorders charity, found that 41% of 
patients had to wait more than six months to get diagnosed and start treatment, 
and 19% at least a year. Lorna Garner, Beat’s interim chief executive, urged 
ministers tointroduce maximum waiting times for treatment, given those already 
exist for patients awaiting planned care in hospital for physical health 
problems.

“While there is a powerfully enforced 18-week waiting time target for physical 
health, with financial and political incentives and penalties, there is no such 
guarantee for mental health conditions.Mental health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/mental-health> conditions are no less 
serious than physical ones. Why shouldn’t they receive the same priority?” 
Garner said.
 