
NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> England does have the power to 
pay for drugs to protect thousands of people against HIV, the appeal court has 
ruled, but they may still miss out if it decides it does not have enough money 
to prioritise them over treatments for other conditions.

The court upheld an earlier judgment that it is within the power of NHS 
England to fund treatment known as PrEP – pre-exposure prophylaxis – which can 
protect the partners of people with HIV from infection. The case was brought by 
the National Aids Trust (NAT) after NHS England said responsibility for public 
health, including HIV prevention, had been passed to local authorities.

The potential bill for treatment is high, because the drugs are expensive, 
estimated at up to £20m a year to treat all those who could benefit. The local 
authorities have said they cannot afford to pay.

The ruling opens the way for men whose sexual partners have HIV to be given 
the drug, Truvada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/24/daily-pill-truvada-cuts-spread-of-hiv-by-86-study-shows>
, by the NHS – trials have not been done on women in the UK as yet – but they 
may still face disappointment. NHS England will have to put the drug on the 
list of specialised treatments it could potentially fund – but it will then 
decide which of them it can afford. Also on the list, the high court earlier 
heard, are drugs for children with cystic fibrosis and a form of stem cell 
transplantation.

Deborah Gold, the chief executive of NAT, said: “We are delighted to have been 
vindicated by the court a second time. HIV is a critical issue in the UK where 
over 4,000 people acquire HIV every year.


“PrEP works, it saves money, and most importantly it has the power to prevent 
HIV acquisition for thousands of people, at the same time as beginning to end 
the HIV epidemic. This judgment brings that possibility one step closer.

“We look forward to what we hope will be a balanced and evidence-based 
decision on PrEP by NHS England, as well the opportunity to work alongside NHS 
England collaboratively for the benefit of people living with and at risk of 
HIV.”

PrEP HIV drugs: fight for limited NHS funds takes unedifying turn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/03/prep-hiv-drugs-fight-for-limited-nhs-funds-takes-unedifying-turn>
Ian Green, chief executive of the HIV charity Terrence Higgins Trust 
<http://www.tht.org.uk/>, said it was time for NHS England to “do the right 
thing”. “PrEP is nothing short of a game-changer and, if used alongside 
condoms, regular testing and treatment, it could be the vital piece of the 
puzzle to help end the HIV epidemic for good.

“The conduct of NHS England around the funding of this treatment has reminded 
us that, 30 years on, HIV is still stigmatised in a way that many other health 
conditions are not.

“Every day the NHS delays access to PrEP, 17 people are diagnosed with HIV – 
and the lifetime cost to the NHS for each diagnosis of HIV is £360,000. PrEP 
must be prioritised and made available now to those at risk. There is still a 
long way to go before people at risk have access to this groundbreaking pill 
that will protect them from HIV – but thanks to today’s decision, we are a step 
closer to a world without HIV transmissions.”

NHS England has said it will not appeal further, but even though PrEP will go 
on the list of specialised treatments it will consider funding, it has said the 
price is excessive and it must weigh up the value of the drugs against other 
treatments for other conditions.

Dr Jonathan Fielden, NHS England’s director of specialised commissioning and 
deputy national medical director, said after the earlier ruling that the 
organisation was setting the ball rolling in case the appeal court judgment 
went against it, and he hoped the drug company might reduce its prices.

“This does not imply that PrEP – at what could be a cost of £10m to £20m a 
year – would actually succeed as a candidate for funding when ranked against 
other interventions,”he said in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/02/nhs-can-fund-game-changing-prep-hiv-drug-court-says>
. “But in those circumstances, Gilead – the pharmaceutical company marketing 
the PrEP drug Truvada – will be asked to submit better prices, which would 
clearly affect the likelihood that their drug could be commissioned.”
 