
For five years, governor Nikki Haley dismissed calls to remove the Confederate 
battle flag from theSouth Carolina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/south-carolina> statehouse lawn as a 
divisive issue far from her agenda.

Nikki Haley and the Confederate flag: the latest battle in career that defies 
the odds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/30/nikki-haley-south-carolina-governor-confederate-flag-charleston-shooting>
In her 2010 campaign, the state’s first minority governor said the two-thirds 
legislative approval required to move the flag from its 30ft perch was too high 
a hurdle to allow for real debate. When her re-election opponent called last 
fall for it to be removed, she branded it a desperate stunt.

None of that mattered, she said, after nine people were killed last month at a 
black church in Charleston, including its pastor, state senator Clementa 
Pinckney, in a crime she said was an act of “pure hate”. When Haley arrived at 
the church, she found strangers hugging and weeping, and the grief was 
overwhelming.

At the 19 June bond hearing for suspected gunman Dylann Roof, the victims’ 
families offered him forgiveness. That night, Haley said, she made a decision.

“That flag needed to come down,” she said in an emotional interview on 
Wednesday. “I could not look my kids in the face and justify that flag anymore.”

The surfacing of a website showing Roof holding Confederate flags alongside a 
racist manifesto deepened her resolve, she said.

“I could not have been more disgusted,” she said. “The flag didn’t kill those 
families, but let’s honor every person in South Carolina so no one drives by 
this statehouse and feels pain.”

But Haley said nothing publicly for several more days, waiting as calls for 
the flag’s removal built, even among her fellow Republicans. Before her 
announcement on 22 June, she met legislators and community leaders, including 
Lonnie Randolph, president of South Carolina’s chapter of the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People, which has long fought to 
remove the flag.

Randolph said Haley had little choice. With the world watching, he said: 
“There was nowhere else to go.”

She then publicly called on legislators to send the battle flag to a museum.

“I give her credit for stepping out there and doing what’s right,” said 
statehouse minority leader Todd Rutherford, who stood with Haley during the 
announcement. “I wish it had been done a long time ago.”

While the flag for many South Carolinians stood for noble traditions of 
history, heritage and ancestry, Haley said in her speech, for many others it 
was a “deeply offensive symbol of a brutally oppressive past”.

Lewis Gossett, president of the state manufacturers alliance, said he began 
speaking with his board members about pushing to bring the flag down following 
a memorial to the victims but didn’t notify Haley about it until after her 
announcement.

“The governor got out in front. I’m glad she did,” he said. “She helped define 
the issue in our terms and not somebody else’s.”

Last Saturday, the flag was taken down by an activist who scaled the flagpole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/27/woman-removes-confederate-flag-south-carolina-statehouse>
. It was immediately reflown

Activist pulls down Confederate flag in front of South Carolina statehouse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/27/woman-removes-confederate-flag-south-carolina-statehouse>
But the day after Haley’s speech, the legislature agreed, by the required 
two-thirds majority, to add the issue to its special session. The debate begins 
on Monday. The manufacturers alliance and state chamber of commerce have been 
encouraging legislators to remove the flag quickly.

Haley has spent much of the last week surrounded by grief as she attended 
funerals for all nine church shooting victims.

“These were good, honest, hard-working, God-fearing people who died because of 
hate,” she said.

She was struck, she said, by Cynthia Hurd’s life motto: be kinder than 
necessary. She said she wakes up thinking of Ethel Lance’s favorite song, One 
Day at a Time, Sweet Jesus. She took each funeral programme home to tell her 
two children about each victim, she said.

“These people are forever ingrained in my soul – what they went through,” she 
said, amid tears. “It will forever change the way I live my life … Every parent 
needs to understand we have a responsibility to show our children, because hate 
is not born. Hate is taught.”

Haley, the daughter of Indian immigrants, grew up in the tiny town of Bamberg 
in the Sikh faith. She didn’t look like her classmates and went through 
hardships because of it, she said, but her parents wouldn’t let her complain.

“They always put the responsibility on me: ‘You have to show how you’re 
similar. Don’t let people define you as different,’” said Haley, who later 
converted to Christianity.

During her 2010 campaign, she eschewed questions about the historic nature of 
her candidacy. In the wake of the church shootings, she seems ready to discuss 
racial reconciliation in the state. She says she plans to visit schools to talk 
to children about the “Emanuel nine” and why the flag had to come down.

Since taking office, Haley said, a goal has been to change how people outside 
the state view South Carolina.

“There is nothing I could ever do as governor that did what those families 
did,” she said. “They have totally changed the perception by how they responded 
to this – through the love and care and forgiveness they’ve shown. That gives 
us hope. That gives us something to build on.”
 