
To feel fulfilled at work, think about the type of environment you want to 
work in. This could be as simple as whether it's a competitive or collaborative 
working environment, but also more complex as regards the sort of attributes 
that you'd need to bring to the organisation, or the values they work to. Where 
do you get the greatest buzz and satisfaction? Doing what sort of job, in what 
sort of organisation? It's also worth thinking about the environments where 
you're more likely to flourish and to avoid those which would make you bored or 
miserable.

– Clare Whitmell, Guardian contributor and qualified business communication 
trainer

To keep your new year career resolutions you need to: first, write them down 
and stick them to the fridge or in a prominent place so you can see them 
easily. Second: have a plan. How are you going to turn your resolutions into 
reality? Third, find a friend who can support you along the way and keep you 
accountable to your career plan (and you could do the same for them).

– Sarah Archer, co-founder, CareerTree

To break into your chosen sector, here's what you do: go to your local library 
as much as possible. Stay there everyday from open to close. Learn as much as 
you can about what you want to do and move forward with it. Stay motivated. 
Obtain a skillset that you want and can use for the role. Network with people 
(in person and online) and doors will begin to open.

– Drew Roark, certified professional resume writer, Career Igniter

If you're looking to change career, go out and talk to the people who already 
work in that type of role. Ask them how they got there, ask them what the work 
is like, ask them what makes them good at their jobs. Really build up your 
insight into what's involved in the work in that field and then make sure you 
have those skills when opportunities arise. (If you don't, build up that 
experience.) Obviously, along the way, you'll be building up a range of highly 
useful contacts inside the organisations you ultimately hope to work for.

– Jon Gregory, job search, application and interview coach, win-that-job.com

When writing a CV for a career change, state your desire for opportunities 
that utilise relevant industry experience.Then provide information on your 
skills and experience and qualifications in that field. Next, complete the CV 
with your work experience in chronological order (with your most recent first). 
Go into more detail with any of your more relevant experience.

– Matthew Shaw-Cotterill, regional sales manager, ReThink Recruitment London

For the application process, getting better at psychometric tests requires 
careful planning. Dedicate at least one hour a day for practice tests (there 
are a lot of good free ones online and some high-quality paid for ones). 
Numerical tests tend to test basic maths skills and speed of thinking – the 
former you have proven at the interview and the latter is simply developed by 
everyday practice.

– Dasha Amron, founder and managing director, Career Coaching Ventures

Changing career isn't impossible. First, start getting some voluntary or work 
experience in the sectors you are interested in. This will help you make 
connections, new skills, and beef up your experience to add to your CV. Second, 
start connecting with people who work in these sectors. Attend any relevant 
events, ask to have informal chats with people who work in relevant 
organisations about their sector, even suggest to help out on a campaign or 
short-term project. This can help you make useful connections, find out about 
job opportunities, and can be a way to keep you in their minds should a 
potential opening come up.

– Sarah Byrne, online editor, Careershifters

To capture the attention of a recruiter: first start with a well-crafted cover 
letter that highlights how you match the required skills and experience and 
your long-term interest in the area. Second, a CV with a strong career profile 
at the start and a key skills section below that demonstrates both the value 
your previous experience brings as well as the transferable and relevant skills 
from your experience. Then a chronological career history again focusing on 
outcomes and where you have added value rather than responsibilities.

– Jo Thurman, regional director, Personal Career Management

How to stick to your career resolutions in 2015: let those closest to you know 
your plans. By spelling it out for family and friends, you are making a firm 
commitment. Second, break down your career resolutions into smaller pieces. Put 
dates next to your actionable items. It's okay to change them later, but this 
will get you started. Third, don't be too hard on yourself. It's very easy to 
get mired into negativity or just give up. Give yourself some slack to redefine 
your goals as part of your personal growth and advancement.

– Lynn Taylor is a career author, blogger and chief executive, Lynn Taylor 
Consulting

The career inspiration hub is funded by Guardian Jobs. All content is 
editorially independent except for pieces labelled "brought to you by". Find 
out morehere <https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 