
Nine employees of a former adviser to David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> have been charged with 60 
offences of fraud, the Crown Prosecution Services announced on Thursday.

The nine suspects worked for A4e, a training company that was contracted by 
the government to help unemployed people find work.Emma Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/emma-harrison>, the founder and chairwoman of 
A4e, served as an adviser to the prime minister on problem families until she 
resigned in 2012, when police began an investigation into her company.

Sue Patten, head of fraud at the Crown Prosecution Service, said that charges 
were authorised following an investigation by the Thames Valley Police economic 
crime unit into six women and three men in connection with alleged fraudulent 
activity at A4E, a company contracted by the Department of Work and Pensions 
(DWP) to deliver the "Inspire to Aspire" employment and training scheme.

"It is alleged that between February 2009 and February 2013, nine A4E 
employees, including one contract manager, seven recruiters and an 
administrator, employed across three A4E offices in the south-east of England, 
committed numerous offences of fraud," she said.

The nine allegedly forged documentation to support fraudulent claims to the 
DWP for reward payments which, under the terms of the contract, were paid out 
when the scheme successfully placed individuals in employment, according to 
Patten.

"It is alleged that many of the reward payments related either to people who 
never attended A4E, or to clients whom A4E had not successfully placed in 
employment," said Patten. "The contract was to deliver motivation and training 
and to assist people to find employment.

"The nine individuals are charged with a total of 60 offences, including 
conspiracy to defraud, multiple counts of forgery, and making and possessing 
articles for use in fraud."

All nine will appear at Slough magistrates court on 14 October 2013.

Harrison faced criticism in 2011 for receiving £8.6m in share dividends in 
2011 in addition to her £385,000 salary. She resigned as chairwoman ofA4e 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/a4e> last year, but remains a part owner of the 
company, which continues to work with the DWP.

A4e said in a statement that it has made radical changes to its business 
practices in the last year. "The investigation by Thames Valley police relates 
to alleged incidents which date back to 2009 and were uncovered by A4e's own 
internal controls. We referred the matter to the Department for Work and 
Pensions, which then referred the allegations to the police," the statement 
said.

A DWP spokesperson said: "The department takes matters of fraud extremely 
seriously. DWP continues to provide full support to the ongoing investigation 
by Thames Valley Police, which is at an advanced stage.

"As today's charges are the result of a police investigation it would be 
inappropriate for the department to comment further during the criminal process.

"These allegations relate to a contract let by the previous government, which 
ended in 2011.

"Our independent audit in 2012 looked at all of our current contractual 
relationships with A4e and found no evidence of fraud within current contracts."
 