
Cowboy Joe was as dry as the desert we were clip-clopping through, but not 
quite as prickly.

When my horse decided to trot briskly, I asked Joe: 'Er, am I supposed to sort 
of bounce up and down?'.

'Hell, no, that's English riding! Just stand up in your stirrups and git 
goin',' he called from under his large moustache and 10 gallon hat.

It was time to erase images of Badminton, Gatcombe, dressage and stiff upper 
lip and instead jam the sunglasses on a bit harder, feel the wind in the hair 
and hang on.

But it was not yet time to feel like Annie Oakley. As an equine novice who had 
barely sat on a horse for more than a minute in my life, I was having a crash 
course before being allowed out with the other women - most of whom seemed to 
have been brought up on horses - taking part in the Giddy Up Gals weekend.

With riding twice a day on rock-hard Western saddles, rounding up cattle and 
learning to lasso, the women-only weekend is a sort of cowgirl bootcamp.

Though instead of having to sleep on the cold, hard ground under scratchy 
ponchos à la Clint Eastwood, we were billeted in a Santa Fe-style casita 
bungalow with feathery beds on the Rancho de los Caballeros in Arizona. To find 
the ranch you travel from Phoenix towards the Grand Canyon, turn left on 
Carefree Highway and keep going until you reach Vulture Mine Road. The nearest 
small town, Wickenburg, was built on the gold rush and the location is deep in 
the Sonoran Desert with its crimson sunsets and giant cartoon cacti.

The talk in the bar on the first night was of shopping rather than shoot-outs, 
but the next morning it was up at sunrise and straight into the saddle. We rode 
out under a cloudless blue sky, the distant red rock hills glowing in the sun, 
to witness the Running of the Horses.

In a cloud of dust and with a whoop to urge the nags along, the wrangler in 
chaps and neckerchief made quite a sight on her steed, driving several dozen 
horses from their overnight pasture to the stables.

Although the ranch is called los Caballeros, meaning 'gentlemen', the two main 
wranglers for the Giddy Up Gals weekends are Caroline and Maria. Both are 
veterans of tough working ranches miles from anywhere in Montana, Wyoming, 
Colorado and Illinois where cattle are herded - sometimes 1,000 at a time - out 
to summer grazing or for market, not for the tourists.

Los Caballeros is what is known in America as a 'dude ranch' - ie a holiday 
resort with ranch activities alongside the golf course, swimming pool and 
luxury buffet lunches. But all the wranglers at Los Caballeros know their stuff 
from working on the ranches, and some of the guys have done rodeo and can 
wrestle a calf down to brand it. When they coach you, you listen.

Caroline, 47, is also, incredibly, a trained opera singer and could not come 
riding with us that weekend because she was singing with the Phoenix Bach Choir.

So it was over to 25-year-old Maria, with her easy chat and ever-ready smile 
and her hair flying behind her when her horse gets going.

Giddy Up Gals weekends usually have a dozen women from all over at the height 
of the season, but the ranch had just opened for the winter and there were only 
four of us: Pat, a retired buyer for a food company, lawyer Michele and her 
teenage daughter Katie, all from Arizona, and me.

Pat was rusty, Katie was a champion rider, Michele an expert and me a beginner.

But the hilly desert around the ranch is a great leveller because there is 
only scope for trotting and cantering - or what they charmingly call 'loping' 
out west - along dried, sandy stream beds.

So it is not full-belt galloping across the plains, although I learnt so much 
in one weekend that after returning to Phoenix I went riding on a local Native 
American reservation and easily went straight into long, vigorous canters.

Back at los Caballeros, my crash course had gone well enough for me to ride 
out with the gals on the second day.

Maria talked about the desert wildlife as our horses trekked up and down on 
twisting trails across hills with their towering cacti and prickly pears (which 
the ranch puts in its cocktails and cooking) and views to the mountains. And 
whenever there was a dry stream bed, or wash, we would canter along it one 
behind the other in a wonderful rhythm.

The horses had long, wild manes, the saddles western-style horns and it was 
clear that riding hats and jodhpurs were for English riders, not cowgirls.

I was in the groove. The other women were constantly encouraging, but my 
inexperience really let me down in the cattle herding contest.

Everyone at the ranch - men, women and children - that weekend took part and 
we were divided into eight teams.

The ranch has a large corral with a dozen or so hapless cattle for the 
tourists' sport - some with large horns. Each team had to separate out one, two 
or three cattle under orders and drive them the length of the corral into a pen 
against the clock.

It was essential to work as a team. But on the Gals' first go, Katie and I 
were driving one cow up the side of the pen when the silly thing decided it was 
not playing and turned on me, trying to get past.

The cow was scared, I was scared and, when I pulled my dear horse Santana's 
reins too tight in my panic, he could tell I was clueless and then he got 
scared.

So Santana was freaked, the cow was free and we were flunked. The only 
consolation was not falling off.

Next go, we drove them as tightly as a bunch of synchronised swimmers. When 
the animals were quickly in the pen and Maria high-fived us all, I felt 
positively Olympian.

With go three, we had the chance to win the competition. But, what do you 
know? When you've had the good and the bad, the only thing left is the ugly. I 
let that heifer go again and we bombed out. Poor Santana almost disowned me.

But what a learning experience. One of the cowboys even showed me the 
rudiments of lassoing and got me twirling a long rope and hurling it vainly at 
a model bull. After five minutes my arm was killing me and I failed to hoop-la 
a wooden bull from 10 feet while standing on the ground. I could only marvel at 
the expertise and stamina needed to gallop around on a horse every day, roping 
animals on the run.

Then all too quickly, we were having our last meal, saying goodbye to Maria 
and heading back to the city. No more prickly pear margaritas. No more giddy-up.

It's enough to make you want to up sticks and open a 'dude' ranch for gals.

Factfile

Accomodation in Phoenix area: Caleo Resort, Scottsdale: www.caleoresort.com 
<http://www.caleoresort.com> 001 480 945 7666, room rates from £140 pppn; and 
Sheraton Wild Horse Pass Resort hotel, spa and equestrian centre:
www.wildhorsepassresort.com <http://www.wildhorsepassresort.com> 001 602 225 
0100, room rates from £138 pppn.

Rancho de los Caballeros (www.sunc.com <http://www.sunc.com>; 00 1 928 684 
5484). Giddy Up Gals weekends in 2006: 27-29 January; 10-12 March; 12-14 May. 
Price is £345 for single occupancy or £555 based on double occupancy, for two 
nights, full board and activities. Prices are subject to 7 per cent sales tax 
and 15 per cent gratuity charge.

The ranch is 90 minutes north-west of Phoenix. Guests can either hire a car (
www.dollar.co.uk <http://www.dollar.co.uk>; 0800 252 897, weekly rates from 
£135, including insurance), or Los Caballeros can arrange a transfer for £69 
each way.

BA (www.ba.com <http://www.ba.com>; 0870 850 9850) flies directly to Phoenix 
from London from £332 return including taxes.
 