
I christened the marble kitchen bench in my new flat with an olive oil stain 
that has soaked in and left a dark mark. Is there anything I can do after the 
event? And what else should I be careful of? It seems marble isn't really the 
most practical surface. Rose Murphy


Marble, while lovely, does stain very easily in the kitchen or bathroom. In 
general I wouldn't advise treating your marble surfaces as you would a bowl of 
lettuce - please cut out the olive oils, and as for the 
balsamic/mayonnaise/ranch dressing... well need I say more? To remove the 
stain, you will need to apply a poultice powder (mixed with some thick bleach) 
to the surface, wrap with clingfilm and then leave to dry for 24 hours. This 
will remove the stain and the top protective surface layer of the stone, which 
will then need to be resealed and repolished. Marble Master (
www.marblemasteruk.com <http://www.marblemasteruk.com>) can supply the cleaning 
products and polishes, or even diamond-grind the surface should the stain be 
more difficult to remove.


I'm tying to get an electric fire inset [with convection heat and glowing 
coals]. The fireplace is 'bedroom size', ie, the inset space is smaller than 
standard. Can you suggest a company that deals with unusual sizes or bespoke? 
Barbara Holden


Reinstating the fireplace in a period property will bring warmth back into 
your bedroom without the mess of coal and ash, and if done carefully can look 
suitably authentic. Artisan Design deal in off-the-shelf and bespoke electric 
convection fireplaces for both contemporary and period designs. You will need 
to take careful measurements or make a cardboard template of the space the fire 
is to fill. Send this (and some photos would help) towww.artisan-design.co.uk 
<http://www.artisan-design.co.uk>, who will take you through the process. Have 
a good look at the website for tips on materials and finishing details to give 
the final piece a cohesive feel with the existing design. Prices for fires will 
start from around £199. A qualified electrician will have to fit it, connecting 
a fused spur into your mains.


· If you have an interior design question for Oliver, email 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
 