 "I am Ayaan, the daughter of Hirsi, the son of Magan." In the first scene of 
Infidel, Ayaan Hirsi Ali is a child of five and her grandmother is teaching her 
to recite the names of her ancestors, as all Somali children must learn to do. 
"Get it right," her grandmother warns. "They are your bloodline . . . If you 
dishonour them you will be forsaken. You will be nothing. You will lead a 
wretched life and die alone."
Thus begins the story of a woman born into a family of desert nomads, 
circumcised as a child, educated by radical imams in Kenya and Saudi Arabia and 
taught to believe that if she uncovered her hair, terrible tragedies would 
ensue. It's a story that could have led to a wretched life and a lonely death. 
But Hirsi Ali escaped and transformed herself into an internationally renowned 
spokeswoman for the rights of Muslim women.

She slipped away from her family on her way to a forced marriage in Canada and 
talked herself into political asylum in the Netherlands, using a story she 
calls "an invention". Soon after arriving, she removed her scarf to see if God 
would strike her dead. He did not. Nor were there divine consequences when she 
donned jeans, rode a bicycle, enrolled in university, became a Dutch citizen, 
began to speak publicly about the mistreatment of Muslim women in the 
Netherlands and won election to the Dutch parliament.

In 2004 Hirsi Ali helped a Dutch director, Theo van Gogh, make a controversial 
film, Submission, about Muslim women suffering from forced marriages and 
wife-beating. Van Gogh was murdered by an angry Muslim radical. Hirsi Ali went 
into hiding. The press began to explore her past, discovering her "inventions". 
The Dutch threatened to revoke her citizenship; the American Enterprise 
Institute offered her a job in Washington.

Even the bare facts of this life would make fascinating reading. But this book 
is something more than an ordinary autobiography: Infidel describes a unique 
intellectual journey, from the tribal customs of a Somali childhood through the 
harsh fundamentalism of Saudi Arabia and into the contemporary West.

Along the way Hirsi Ali displays her gift, her talent for recalling, 
describing and honestly analysing the precise state of her feelings at each 
stage of that journey. She describes how she felt as a teenager, voluntarily 
wearing a black cloak that hid her body: "It sent out a message of superiority: 
I was the one true Muslim. All those other little girls with their little white 
headscarves were children, hypocrites." She writes of meeting her 
husband-to-be's family: "I concentrated on behaving properly: speaking softly, 
being polite, avoiding shame to my parents. I felt empty."

She also describes how horrified she felt after September 11, 2001, reaching 
for the Qur'an to find out whether some of Osama bin Laden's more 
blood-curdling statements - "when you meet the unbelievers, strike them in the 
neck" - were direct quotations. "I hated to do it," she wrote, "because I knew 
that I would find Bin Laden's quotations in there."

There were consequences: "The little shutter at the back of my mind, where I 
pushed all my dissonant thoughts, snapped open after the 9/11 attacks, and it 
refused to close again. I found myself thinking that the Qur'an is not a holy 
document. It is a historical record, written by humans . . . And it is a very 
tribal and Arab version of events. It spreads a culture that is brutal, 
bigoted, fixated on controlling women, and harsh in war."

That led Hirsi Ali to her most profound conclusion: that the mistreatment of 
women is not an incidental problem in the Muslim world, a side issue that can 
be dealt with once the more important political problems are out of the way. 
Rather, she believes that the enslavement of women lies at the heart of all of 
the most fanatical interpretations of Islam, creating "a culture that generates 
more backwardness with every generation".

Ultimately it led to her most controversial conclusion, that Islam is in a 
period of transition, that the religion as it is currently practised is often 
incompatible with modernity and democracy and must radically transform itself. 
"We in the West," she writes, "would be wrong to prolong the pain of that 
transition unnecessarily, by elevating cultures full of bigotry and hatred 
toward women to the stature of respectable alternative ways of life."

That sentiment, when first expressed in the Netherlands, infuriated not only 
Hirsi Ali's compatriots but also Dutch intellectuals uneasy about criticising 
the immigrants in their midst. Thanks to this belief in female equality, Hirsi 
Ali now requires permanent bodyguards.

But having "moved from the world of faith to the world of reason", Hirsi Ali 
says she cannot go back. She describes herself as lucky: "How many girls born 
in Digfeer Hospital in Mogadishu in November 1969 are even alive today?" she 
asks rhetorically. "And how many have a real voice?"
 