
Staff working in a troubled A&E unit have criticised it as “unsafe, 
unsupported and relentless” because its care is putting patients at such 
serious risk, a secretNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> report 
reveals.


Treatment at North Middlesex hospital’s emergency department is allegedly so 
poor that none of the doctors interviewed who work in it would advise their 
friends or relatives to seek medical help there, according to the unpublished 
report byHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Education England 
(HEE), the NHS’s workforce agency.


The report goes into extraordinary detail about the alarming responses 
hospital staff gave to HEE inspectors, and led the agency to warn of “numerous 
examples of patient safety potentially being compromised” by a list of failings 
at the unit, which treats 181,000 patients a year.


Inexperienced trainee doctors were reportedly left in charge at night of both 
the main A&E unit and a separate emergency department that looks after 
children, because there were no middle-grade medics or consultants to help and 
give advice, the inspectors were told.


Four patients died after mistakes at North Middlesex – report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/17/four-patients-died--errors-north-middlesex-hospital-report>
“Most trainees reported having to deal with situations beyond their competence 
without appropriate supervision on a regular basis,” says the document, which 
the Guardian has seen.


The hospital, however, denied that junior doctors had been left in charge of 
the unit. “There is and always has been at least one and usually two or more 
middle-grade doctors or consultants on duty,” a spokesman said. “Junior, 
unqualified staff were never left in charge of the A&E department overnight or 
at any other time.” The discrepancy between the hospital’s denial and some 
staff’s detailed testimonies remained unexplained.

The report, drawn up by HEE’s quality and regulation team for London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> and the south-east, says: “Issues were 
raised about the competency of some staff. As a result of this, there were 
concerns about patient safety. This was exacerbated by the high volume of 
patients coming through the department. The department was reported to be 
‘unsafe, unsupported and relentless’.”


It alleges that some junior staff were “being left unsupported in the 
emergency department at night with neither middle-grade nor senior on-site 
presence”.


The document, which is based on interviews with 24 staff , also discloses that:

 * Some doctors found working in the A&E unit so stressful that they cried 
when they finished their shifts. “Foundation doctors had been reduced to tears 
by the sheer volume of patients they had to deal with, for example 200 patients 
and a six-hour wait, and they felt that they regularly had to send children 
home without having discussed their case with anyone senior,” the report 
states. “They often finished their shift and returned home full of anxiety that 
they had not been able to provide care at an appropriate level.” 
 * Some trainee medics expressed serious misgivings about the competence of 
some more senior colleagues, including one who misdiagnosed a patient. 
 * They also said they had difficulty getting expert help overnight. 
 * Handovers of patients from doctors on one shift to their replacements did 
not always happen, despite being standard medical practice. 
 * Vital equipment, including some needed to resuscitate patients, was missing.
MPs round on Jeremy Hunt over 'meltdown' at North Middlesex hospital
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/15/mps-round-on-jeremy-hunt-over-situation-at-north-middlesex-hospital>
The findings have raised further alarm about an A&E unit that the Guardian 
revealed last weekcould be shut down within weeks because of fears that 
patients could be harmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/14/north-middlesex-hospital-ae-faces-closure-on-safety-grounds>
.

MPs whose constituents use the hospital have demanded urgent changes, 
including a clearout of senior figures. Kate Osamor, the Labour MP whose 
Edmonton seat includes the hospital, said she was horrified by the report. 
“HEE’s findings make me very, very worried. For HEE to find that medical staff 
at the unit saying such things tells me that the hospital is in crisis”, she 
said. She also expressed fears that the unit was not safe for constituents.


“They tell me they don’t want to use it but they feel they have no choice. 
They are over-reliant on it because there’s a chronic shortage of GPs in the 
area,” she said.


The disclosure of the 18-page report comes as the General Medical Council, 
which regulates the medical profession and ensures the safety of hospital units 
where trainee doctors are working, prepares to start inspecting the unit on 
Monday. The Guardian disclosed last week that, in a move unprecedented in NHS 
history, the GMC and HEE were so worried about conditions at the A&E unit that 
both had threatened to withdraw junior doctors from working there, which would 
lead to it having to close and patients being treated elsewhere.


Osamor and the Labour MP for Enfield North, Joan Ryan, will meet the North 
Middlesex chief executive, Julie Lowe, on Tuesday. They want a new board and 
new senior management team installed at the hospital to get a grip of its 
problems, Osamor said. “We are going to ask her to ensure that there are 
changes urgently, [and if not] then she should resign,” she said.


David Lammy, the Labour MP for nearby Tottenham, said: “These revelations 
demonstrate an extraordinary collapse at this hospital that has been largely 
covered up for almost a year. There are questions to be asked about the role of 
NHS England, NHS Improvement, the Department of Health and the local clinical 
commissioning group. Why has nothing been done? My view is that heads should 
roll.”


The hospital spokesman said: “We apologise for the concerns about our A&E 
caused by the shortage of middle-grade doctors and consultants.”


The Department of Health last week said that patients had been seriously let 
down by the standard of care at North Middlesex. It added: “This situation must 
change and NHS Improvement is supporting the trust so patient care is quickly 
improved.”

 