
As we slink the RV into the campground, Dad, several weeks from retirement but 
still solid, is already on the phone. "No, nothing really … Just that we've 
arrived at the middle of nowhere, and that tomorrow we're headed somewhere, but 
nowhere in particular." Our days driving the Alcan Highway seem to exist for 
the sole purpose of cracking Abbott and Costello punch lines. The corny phone 
calls to Mum are starting to grate on me.

In a car-smitten continent of service-stop strip malls and turnpike Wal-Marts, 
The Alaska-Canadian Highway – the Alcan – is a curiosity: a true wilderness 
thoroughfare. From Dawson Creek, British Columbia, to Fairbanks, Alaska, the 
asphalt and gravel road hurtles and plunges through 1,500 miles of alpine 
buttes, black spruce forests and carpeted plains of tussock and tundra. 
Chuckholes, ripples and washboard humps created by the perennial freezing and 
thawing of the surrounding land make for roller-coaster driving.

Fifty years ago, just after the US Senate voted to make Alaska the 49th state, 
Dad drove the Alcan with Grandpa in an orange Volkswagen camper. The stories 
from that trip – fishing for sockeye salmon, swimming in the Yukon, roasting 
caribou under the stars – had long drawn me to this part of the world. I've 
returned with Dad to retrace their journey, upping the ante with a vehicle that 
makes the VW look like a Vespa. The innards of our rented mega-RV include a 
shower, toilet, microwave, toaster, full-size beds and two kitchen sinks. If 
you've ever helmed an oil tanker, manning a vehicle this size won't feel too 
foreign.

At the wheel, Dad prefers slow-paced driving on cruise control; my motorus 
operandi is pedal to the metal. And we each take turns at backseat driving. 
"Slow and steady wins the race," he'll caution me as I hightail it through the 
Canadian hinterland. "He who hesitates is lost," I'll snark back at him as 
river salmon outpace us.

When not trading platitudes, we share in the wonder of the North, OHH-ing and 
WOW-ing at the otherworldly landscapes, as families of Dall sheep and moose 
wander moon-like glacial hills and S-shaped rivers. It's an experience 
amplified by the extended summer hours of near-Arctic daylight, an unsettling 
phenomenon that deceives the senses: driving without headlamps at 10pm; a 
glowing red sunset at midnight; waking up to a "dawn" chorus of birdsong at 3am.

Intended to facilitate better military access to Japanese targets, The Alcan 
was carved out by the US Army in a record eight months during the second world 
war. Left for dead after the war ended, towns up here aren't so much towns as 
they are oversized service stations with excessively large selections of 
moose-related trinkets and corny bumper stickers. Their oddball names are the 
functional (Carcross), the droll (Chicken), and the apocalyptic (Destruction 
Bay).

Leaving behind the Chilkoot trail, the mountainous coastal region at the foot 
of Alaska where thousands of men came to strike it rich in the 1890s – and 
where Dad hiked with Grandpa in the 1950s – Dad points towards the 
mountainside, declaiming for the third time that day, "There's gold in them 
thar hills!" I pretend not to hear.

Dad and I bound across mountain crests above the expansive Klondike plateau. 
Just past midnight, we roll up to a chalet that doubles as the continent's 
northernmost border crossing, where the latched gate reads: US BORDER STATION. 
HOURS OF OPERATION 8AM–8PM. Exhausted, we backtrack to a bluff with a light 
breeze and the occasional glimmer of the midnight sun. "Skeeters!" Dad cries 
out. At the windshield, a single portly mosquito, Alaska's state bird, has 
earmarked us for a midnight snack. Too tired to swat, we spray ourselves with 
OFF! and drift off to sleep.

With its Scandinavian climate, Himalayan landscape and small-town disposition, 
Alaska is all that's left of America's Wild Wild North. When Alaskans travel to 
other states, they head "Outside". When parking in the winter, they plug their 
cars into power outlets to protect the engines from hypothermia. The day we 
arrive, the front page of the Anchorage Daily News declares "Dog Wins in Tussle 
with Bear." Highway culture is different here, too: truckers are polite and 
drivers slow down to let others pass but road signs are punched through with 
bullet holes – souvenirs of wild, shotgun-giddy nights.

The next morning, after America has opened for business, we encounter our 
first live Alaskans – goldpanners! Bill and his 16-year-old son Trey are camped 
out at the end of a gulch scouting for whatever the Klondike speculators might 
have missed. "Gold," I muse, sloshing around in the creek with a tin plate, 
"Hah!" Five minutes later, Trey emerges from the water in full diving gear 
clutching an M&M-sized pebble worth about $450. Bill beams at his son, then 
shakes his head, incredulous, "For some reason there's a shitload of gold right 
here."

By the end of the trip, Dad and I have perfected our routine: parking by 
afternoon in a light thicket, broiling fresh halibut or salmon and playing 
cribbage. We finish our journey way up in the permafrost of Prudhoe Bay, an 
industrious oil settlement at the tippity top of North America that juts into 
the Arctic Ocean.

I'm praying for silence. But as we dip our feet in the icy water, Dad has 
already dialled Mum. "Well, looks like we've finally made it to the end of the 
world. It's pretty. Really nowhere else to go now but–"

I snatch the phone away from his ear. "Hi Mum! Gotta ring you back." I unlatch 
the battery, set the phone down on the sand, put my arm around my father's 
shoulder and direct his gaze out towards nothing really – just the silent, 
shivery Arctic.

Getting there

British Airways offers daily flights from Heathrow to Vancouver, BC from £647 
return including taxes. To book visitba.com <http://www.ba.com> or call British 
Airways on 0844 4930787. Daily connecting flights to Anchorage, Alaska are 
offered by Air Canada (aircanada.com <http://www.aircanada.com>). 

Best of Alaska Travel (bestofalaskatravel.com 
<http://www.bestofalaskatravel.com>) has caravan and RV hire in Alaska from £50 
per day. Northern Alaska Tour Company (northernalaska.com 
<http://www.northernalaska.com>) offers an extensive selection of tours in 
Alaska's Arctic region, including Prudhoe Bay.

For information on Canada, visit canada.travel <http://www.canada.travel>; for 
Alaska visittravel-alaska.co.uk <http://www.travel-alaska.co.uk>
 