
Residents in parts of north-east Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> have been advised to prepare for 
“residual impacts” from the recent floods after heavy rain caused record river 
levels and severe flooding.

Dozens of homes were evacuated in Inverurie, Port Elphinstone and Ellon in 
Aberdeenshire as the swollen river Don sent flood waters racing down the 
streets on Thursday night and Friday morning.

The river Ythan has also breached its banks, prompting the emergency services 
to mount an operation to rescue residents. The Keith, Huntly, Turriff and 
Kintore areas, as well as parts ofAberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/aberdeen>, were among those affected by the 
flooding.
Aberdeenshire flood risk graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/aberdeen_floods/giv-27167CXkM99XZ9qh9>
Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said she would visit the area on 
Saturday to outline details of government support for those affected. “My 
thoughts continue to be with all those affected by flooding,” she tweeted.

The Scottish Environment Protection Agency (Sepa) said it expected river 
levels to ease. But a spokesman warned there was a possibility of “residual 
impacts” in Kintore and Inverurie, where two severe flood warnings remain in 
place.


Scotland hit by further flooding and travel disruption
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/08/scotland-flooding-travel-disruption-aberdeen>
Aberdeen city council has urged residents to keep alert, despite the area 
expecting some respite from the bad weather over the weekend.

The river Don reached 5.6 metres (18.4ft) – the highest level for 45 years – 
at Gauges in Haughton, near Inverurie, and 5.5 metres at Parkhill in Aberdeen. 
In Ellon, the Ythan peaked at 4.4 metres, 1.2 metres above the previous record 
level in 1983, according to Sepa figures.

Flooding <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/flooding> in the north-east 
also brought travel disruption, with usually busy roads closed and trains south 
from Aberdeen cancelled. Two schools closed as a result of flooding – Kirkhall 
and Culter.

Part of the runway at the city’s airport was damaged by the “unprecedented” 
rainfall and some passengers spent the night in the terminal as flights were 
cancelled. The affected area has since been repaired and flights have resumed.

The flooding in Inverurie brought out the “great community spirit”, as people 
forced from their homes were put up in a local hotel. About 40 people stayed at 
the Strathburn free of charge after the owners, David and Elizabeth Barrack, 
opened their doors to those in need.

All 27 rooms – which can cost up to £125 a night – were used, with some local 
residents sleeping in lounge chairs and the floor of the hotel.

David Barrack approached police on Thursday afternoon to tell them there was 
accommodation at his hotel if necessary for local people. He said: “We’ve had 
people sleeping here, there and everywhere. A pregnant woman arrived at about 
1am and we had no more rooms but a young man at the bar said he would move his 
stuff and slept on the floor to give her the room.

“There is great community spirit, everyone is talking to each other and it’s 
been very good actually. I went down to the police station yesterday and told 
them if anyone needed accommodation to send them up to us and the emergency 
services have done a good job.”

Police Scotland, which declared the flooding a major incident, confirmed that 
rest centres in Aberdeen and other parts of Aberdeenshire were being stood 
down. “Everyone in the affected areas has been accounted for and there have 
been no serious injuries,” a spokesman said.

The latest emergencies came as work continued to support the recovery effort 
in Deeside, particularly in the Ballater and Braemar areas, after the impact of 
Storm Frank.

In the north of England, people were taking stock of the damage caused by 
recent flooding. In Calderdale, West Yorkshire, which bore the brunt of the 
Boxing Day storm, officials said more than 100 bridges were being monitored 
because of concerns they could collapse with further heavy downpours.

“It’s going to take a huge amount of work and new investment to get things 
back to normal,” said Barry Collins, Labour deputy leader of the local council. 
“We are monitoring the key ones – that’s about 118 bridges regularly at the 
moment in the aftermath of the floods. The flood was just a total calamity in 
Calderdale from one end to the other.”

There were 10 flood warnings, meaning immediate action was advised, in the 
north-east and north-west England on Friday morning, plus 53 less serious flood 
alerts from already swollen rivers and saturated ground.

Many of the warnings have been in place since Boxing Day and include the river 
Ouse in York, which caused scores of homes to be evacuated when it burst its 
banks after Christmas, and the river Derwent in parts of North Yorkshire.
 