
Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> say they are 
"bound to consider the merits of an appeal" after their back-row forward Calum 
Clark was banned for 32 weeks.

The rugby career of the England hopeful is on hold after Clark was made to pay 
a hefty price for foul play during a showpiece cup final.

The England elite squad member cannot play again until 2 November following a 
Rugby Football Union <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-football-union> 
hearing on Thursday night.

Clark, 22, was cited after an incident during Northampton's LV Cup final 
defeat againstLeicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> 12 
days ago, and then suspended indefinitely by his club.

Clark, who captained Saints in the final, was reported for an act contrary to 
good sportsmanship, allegedly hyperextending the right arm of the Leicester 
hooker Rob Hawkins. It left Hawkins with a broken elbow and requiring surgery, 
sidelining him for the rest of this season.

Clark's suspension of more than seven months is among the longest handed out 
to a senior English player during rugby union's 16-and-a-half-year professional 
era.

In a statement, Saints said: "The disciplinary panel found that Calum Clark 
had not intended to injure Rob Hawkins in the course of moving his arm. 
Accordingly, the unfortunate injury suffered by Rob Hawkins was unintentional.

"In the light of that finding of the disciplinary panel, Northampton Saints is 
bound to express concern and disappointment at the imposition of such a long 
suspension, even after significant mitigation in recognition in what was 
accepted to be Calum Clark's genuine remorse.

"Accordingly, the club is bound to consider the merits of an appeal. No 
further comment will be made at this time."

Television footage of the incident at Sixways, though, could have left few 
people in any doubt about its severity. Pictures showed the former Bath forward 
Hawkins reeling away in agony from a 21st-minute ruck. It was an incident that 
enraged the Leicester rugby director, Richard Cockerill.

In a statement the RFU said: "Calum Clark of Northampton Saints was suspended 
for 32 weeks for an act contrary to good sportsmanship – Law 10(4) (M).

"Clark pleaded guilty to hyperextending the right arm of Leicester Tigers' Rob 
Hawkins during the LV Cup final at Sixways on 18 March.

"The suspension will run from 22 March to 1 November. He is free to play again 
on 2 November 2012. Clark is ordered to pay hearing costs of £500."

The full judgment of Clark's hearing is expected to be made available later on 
Friday.
 