
Esther Birungi's fiance, Solomon Rwabakama, considers himself a very lucky 
man. It's 10.30am and the wedding service is due to start in half an hour but 
he is relaxed as his best man helps him put on a brand new pair of white socks 
and adjusts his tie.

There is nowhere better for Solomon, 30, to get ready than this, his family 
home, hidden deep among banana trees in Fort Portal, in western Uganda.

"I am feeling happy because it has been quite long waiting. I have been in 
courtship with that madam for years," he confides.

But he is also relieved because he's survived the Kwanjula, the traditional 
Ugandan negotiations where a young man haggles with his prospective 
father-in-law over the price of a woman's hand in marriage.

"They asked for four cows," says Mr Kahiigwa, one of the elders who helped 
Solomon with the negotiations. "But as we pleaded they ended up forgiving us 
the bride price and we gave whatever Solomon could afford."

In the end Esther's hand in marriage cost 1m Ugandan shillings – around £300. 
Even that was hard, but pride prevented Solomon from haggling further. "I feel 
my empty pockets but I couldn't dodge it!" he laughs.

In the countryside many fathers continue to receive livestock when they allow 
their daughters to marry. But in town young men commonly pay their prospective 
fathers-in-law handsomely with cash, groceries and, these days, even sofas and 
washing machines. Some men take out loans to impress the in-laws, while others 
share bargaining tactics on the internet. As Uganda modernises, the bride price 
practice shows little sign of dying out.

Five miles away, along a dusty track through the banana trees and into town, 
20-year-old Esther is waiting for the signal to go to church. She's been an 
orphan since the age of 10, but today she is a princess. Her wedding dress is a 
white cloud of satin obscuring the plastic chair on which she sits, regal and 
ready. "I'm expecting to have children," she says. "Not a lot. Like, just five."

She also hopes to be able to make a bit of money for the family. "I will get 
time and start working. Maybe I will run a small shop," she says. "Solomon will 
be happy with that."

If she does start a shop she will be one of a minority of African women 
earning money outside the agricultural sector. Just one in three paid 
non-farming jobs in sub-Saharan Africa is held by a woman. Increasing this 
proportion is one of the targets of the United Nations' Millennium Development 
Goal 1, which aims to eradicate extreme poverty by 2015.

But there are many barriers facing women who wish to work outside the home. 
Ugandan women, on average, have more than six children. Most are too busy 
caring for their families and subsistence farming to develop their own business 
or take a job.

Women typically work on land that is owned and controlled by their husbands or 
fathers. According to the Ugandan government, women do 80% of the agricultural 
work but only own 7% of the land. If there is a surplus of food to sell, women 
rarely control the proceeds and many are bypassed by the cash economy.

Research by the Ugandan Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 
also suggests many women are discouraged from undertaking paid work by their 
husbands, who feel threatened by their financial independence.

Ugandan MP, Winifred Kiiza, believes the problem traces back to the paying of 
a bride price – a tradition also common in several other southern African 
countries. "It's because of this price that a man thinks his wife is part of 
his property," she says.

Having paid, explains the MP, many men see it as their right to recoup the 
cost of the bride price either through unpaid work or by controlling their 
wife's earnings. This reduces a woman's incentive to work.

She and other women parliamentarians are campaigning for an end to the bride 
price in Uganda as part of a marriage and divorce bill.

However, it will be an uphill battle. A legal petition by the Ugandan charity, 
Mifumi, to declare the bride price as unconstitutional was unsuccessful earlier 
this year. The court argued that the country's constitution gives Ugandans the 
right to enjoy, practice, maintain and promote any culture, and that the bride 
price is intended to show appreciation to a woman's parents for taking care of 
her.

A different, economic, argument may be required if the Ugandan government is 
to change its mind. According to the World Bank, the low status of women is an 
important reason why sub-Saharan Africa has struggled to grow. It estimates 
that if women were allowed full participation in the Ugandan economy, the 
country could increase its growth rate by two percentage points a year. It also 
makes an explicit link between women's exclusion from the economy and the bride 
price tradition.

Of course, economic arguments alone will not change what happens in Esther's 
home town. However, the bride's own views may give hope to those who believe a 
woman should never have a price tag.

Esther thinks a gift might be better than a price. As long as the gifts remain 
a significant transfer of wealth the difference is a subtle one, but still 
potentially important. "A gift is not a matter of negotiation," says Esther. 
"It's just what the man wants to give."

However, she admits, her main concern is that Solomon hasn't blown all his 
modest wealth on her hand in marriage. "If the groom pays lots of money, I'll 
go back to find nothing left at his house. But Solomon did not pay too much. In 
other clans you have to pay eight or 10 cows!"

Meanwhile, back at his home, and now more than an hour late for the wedding, 
Solomon is thrilled that Esther wants to marry him. The price has been paid and 
is now to be forgotten. "It's been a long wait," he beams.

Honey means hope

Kipura Gad carefully lifts the lid of one of her beehives and peers in. It is 
empty. Not a bee in sight.

Eighteen months ago the UK charity, Hives Save Lives, gave 50 beehives to Gad 
and the other women in her village – enough to produce about £3,000 worth of 
honey per year.

The women's need for help was clear. HIV has devastated the village of 
Bughumba in western Uganda and the surviving women bear huge responsibilities. 
Gad, at just 30 years old, is supporting 10 orphans alongside five of her own 
children.

Hives Save Lives has transformed the lives of many in the region. However, 
with so many children to look after, the Bughumba women have been too busy to 
maintain the hives and, so far, the bees have not come.

"As a married woman it is a bit difficult to leave the children to go to 
harvest and check on the honey," explains Gad.

The Ugandan government estimates women spend an average of 10 hours a day on 
domestic chores and care work, and a further six hours on farming.

But Bughumba's village chief, Mr Maate, thinks there's more to the story than 
lack of time. "The men here still believe a woman should never be found outside 
her home," he says wearily. He says he is trying to modernise his village and 
promises Hives Save Lives that he will talk to the husbands.

Bughumba women's group wants to give beekeeping another go. With help from the 
project they may soon discover that keeping bees is easier than keeping 
children.

Electric dreams

Sarah pulls on her blue overalls and heavy boots. She grabs a spanner from the 
kitchen table, kisses her daughter goodbye and heads off to work.

It's the night shift at Mpanga tea factory, western Uganda. Sarah, a senior 
electrician, ensures the green leaves travel safely along a bewildering array 
of conveyer belts, funnels and sifters, to produce Britain's favourite drink. 
She loves making the processing plant buzz.

Female electricians are no more common in Uganda than they are in the UK, but 
this hasn't held Sarah back. "They treat me nicely," she says of her male 
colleagues. "The problem is lifting the machines – for the rest you just use 
your mind."

It's a mind that's already looking for the next challenge. "I would like to 
know what renewable energy is all about." the 28-year-old says, her eyes 
sparkling. "And be an energy auditor at the highest level."

But stepping up the career ladder would mean going back to college, which she 
can't afford. She spends every penny of her £60-a-month salary on her 
daughter's school fees and on support for her mother, sister, nephews and 
nieces.

It's a common problem. Uganda has the highest dependency ratio in the world. 
For every nine people of working age in Uganda, there are 10 children or old 
people.

Sarah would rather spend money on her family than save to advance her own 
career. Her daughter's education comes first. "I want her to be at least 
a doctor!" she says.

Veronica Oakeshott's assignment in Uganda was hosted by Hives Save Lives Africa
 