
The government is to double the number of people required to have a biometric 
residence permit (BRP) to stay in the UK, raising the number to 400,000 a year.

The system is being expanded to include refugees and those given the right to 
live in the UK permanently. It will mean that all non-EEA (European Economic 
Area) nationals applying to remain in the UK for more than six months will now 
need the compulsory permits.

BRPs hold a person's fingerprints and photograph on a secure chip, and can be 
used to confirm information on each individual's work and benefits 
entitlements. From June,an online Employers' Checking Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/government-computing-network/2012/feb/22/home-office-ukba-employers-checking-service-atos>
 for BRPs will enable employers, and later in the year public authorities, to 
run real time checks on whether individuals are eligible to work or access 
services in the UK.

Most of the 650,000 BRPs issued since their introduction in 2008 have gone to 
workers or students from outside the EEA wanting to stay in the UK for more 
than six months.

The new move extends the requirement to people applying for refugee status, 
humanitarian protection or discretionary leave settlement or indefinite leave 
to remain; those asking for temporary leave to remain; 'No Time Limit' 
applicants (migrants who require evidence of settled status to be re-issued); 
and applicants for a Home Office travel document, if they do not already hold a 
valid biometric residence permit.

The Post Office is to support the extension by rolling out a network of 
biometric enrolment sites, with the aim of adding 87 to the existing 17 sites 
by mid April. The sites will collect fingerprints, a digital photograph and an 
electronic signature and send them through a secure channel to the UK Border 
Agency.

The Post Office is also setting up a mobile fingerprint enrolment service. 

Immigration minister Damian Green said the move is aimed at reducing 
immigration abuse by proving people's right to work or access services.

"This will help ensure only those with the right to be here can take a job 
legally in the UK and enjoy the services to which they are entitled," he said. 
"The new measures are a deterrent to all foreign nationals who are looking to 
exploit the UK for personal gain by breaking the law."

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For weekly updates on 
news, debate and best practice on public sector IT,join the Guardian Government 
Computing network here. 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing/start.php>
 