
A federal appellate court's publication on Monday of the so-called "drone memo"
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/23/us-justification-drone-killing-american-citizen-awlaki>
 finally allows the American public to evaluate the legal theories that were 
the basis for one of the Obama administration's most controversial acts – the 
extrajudicial killing of an American citizen.

Authored three years ago by the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel 
(OLC),the 41-page memo 
<https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/files/assets/2014-06-23_barron-memorandum.pdf>
 contends that the president has broad power to carry out the targeted killing 
of terrorism suspects, even in geographic areas far removed from conventional 
battlefields.

The publication of the memo is a victory for transparency – the result of 
hard-fought litigation <http://justsecurity.org/11986/drone-memo-cometh/> by 
the American Civil Liberties Union and the New York Times. (I argued the ACLU's 
case before the appellate court.) It is a very rare thing for a federal court 
in the United States to order the release of information that the government 
contends is properly classified. In transparency litigation in the 
national-security sphere, the courts almost invariably defer. That the court 
declined to defer here suggests that it found the arguments from the Obama 
administration to be not simply unpersuasive but wholly without foundation.

But despite the release of the drone memo, the American public still does not 
have the information it needs in order to evaluate the lawfulness and wisdom of 
its government's policies. Indeed, to read through the memo is to be reminded 
of how successful theObama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> has been at 
rationing even the most basic information.

Large parts of the memo – almost a third of it – have been redacted. The first 
11 pages, which describe the government's allegations against al-Awlaki, are 
redacted in their entirety. Throughout the remainder of the memo, citations, 
sentences and even whole paragraphs have been stripped out, in some cases to 
protect genuine sources and methods but in others to obscure the precedents 
underlying the government's legal arguments. The redactions in the drone memo's 
footnotes are perhaps the most disturbing, because they suggest the existence 
of an entire body of secret law, a veritable library of authoritative legal 
opinions produced by Justice Department lawyers but withheld from the American 
public.

In one instance, the long sought-after drone memo references another legal 
memo that concluded that al-Awlaki's American citizenship did not "preclude the 
contemplated lethal action." From this reference, we can deduce that the OLC 
authored aseparate drone memo assessing – and dispensing with – the proposition 
that an American citizen had the right not to be deprived of his life without 
some form of judicial process. But that earlier memo, treated by the executive 
branch as binding law, is still secret.

The American public will not be able to evaluate the lethal drone program 
without far more information:

 * The government should disclose the list of countries in which it has 
carried out targeted killings.

 * It should disclose records relating to bystander casualties, so that the 
public can judge for itself whether the government's targeting decision are as 
discriminating as the government says they are. 
 * It should disclose its investigative reports into past strikes – at least 
into those strikes that are reported to have resulted in bystander casualties. 
 * It should also disclose the OLC's other memos relating to the 
targeted-killing program – including the memos that relate to targets who arenot
 American citizens. (The court that published the drone memo, notably, also 
ordered the government to submit other OLC memos for review and possible 
disclosure.) 
 * And it should disclose the factual record that led the OLC to conclude that 
the extrajudicial killing of Anwar al-Awlaki – again, an American citizen who 
was located far from any conventional battlefield – would be lawful. 
But the release of the drone memo should not obscure the reality: we still 
know scandalously little about who the American government is killing, and why. 
Monday's ruling was a step forward – a gesture toward transparency – but unless 
it leads to much, much more from the drone files, it will be only that: a 
gesture.

 