Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FkBIMUZC0TYo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FkBIMUZC0TYo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FkBIMUZC0TYo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Was Arthur Lucan 
<http://www.britmovie.co.uk/2007/01/19/old-mother-riley-the-life-and-career-of-arthur-lucan/>
 the best drag act that ever lived? No one else affects me with such wonder and 
strangeness, and few ever saw him out of costume as Old Mother Riley: Lucan 
arrived for work already in full makeup.

A spin-off from the music hall stage, his character, as scrawny as seaweed, 
appeared in 15 films in the 30s and 40s, having adventures in the army, in 
circuses, in jungles, in parliament; in an unmade project, she was to go to 
Mars.

To watch the material today is to be struck not by grossness or coarseness, as 
one might expect, but by an odd kind of beauty. Old Mother Riley is in constant 
motion: arms, fists, elbows, knees, wrists – like a dancer.Robert Helpmann 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0375818/> comes to mind. She's pale and wispy, 
emanating wistfulness not sourness. In her bonnet with the elastic chinstrap – 
amid the ribbons, the shawl, the clogs – her chief attribute is speed.

Lucan was born in Lincolnshire in 1885 and began his career as a member of 
Will Pepper's White Coons Concert Party in Skegness. Old Mother Riley came 
about when he was cast as a pantomime dame in Dublin – where, in 1913, he 
married the colleen Kitty McShane. She was 15, and ever afterwards played her 
husband's daughter.

The structure of the act never varied. Old Mother Riley would be waiting for 
her wayward Kitty to return home: "She's left me all alone and she knows I can 
only read the clock when it strikes." There was always a lot of smashing plates 
and flying crockery.

Though Old Mother Riley was militant and uproarious, I agree with the reviewer 
in Liverpool who, in 1935, commended Lucan for combining – in method and in 
effect – "realistic acting with excursions into slapstick comedy". And it's the 
realism that's remarkable, the grace and dignity, despite the derangement and 
capering.

Sitting on a hard chair before a weak fire, Old Mother Riley exists in the 
shadow of the workhouse. She is somehow desolate and oppressed – and terrified 
that Kitty too will fall. I look at the character shouting insults and I always 
wonder what injustices, wrongs, torments she – or Lucan – has endured. As the 
decades passed, the most grotesque spectacle wasn't Lucan in drag but Kitty 
still believing she was glamorous, despite looking stout in bombazine frocks 
and lacquered hairdos.

The onstage rows as mother and daughter became the real rows of husband and 
wife, and in 1951 they separated. Kitty left to run a beauty parlour, and 
promptly lost their life savings of £30,000. The Inland Revenue compelled Lucan 
to appear before the London bankruptcy court, as he owed £10,000 in taxes.
 A publicity shot for Lugosi's 1951 British tour as Dracula. 
At this point, he found a new creative partner: Bela Lugosi. In Old Mother 
Riley Meets the Vampire, horror and comedy finally come together – though the 
sinister and disturbing dimension of comedy had been apparent in Lucan from the 
beginning. It was filmed at Nettlefold Studios, Walton-on-Thames, between 
October and December 1951. Lugosi had been in Britain since the previous April, 
touring the provinces in a stage production ofDracula.

Producers and managers had expected audiences to gasp and faint – St John 
Ambulance personnel were stationed in the stalls – but the few people who 
turned up openly scoffed. The opening night in Lewisham was a disaster. Van 
Helsing was indisposed and the understudy read from a script, which he kept 
dropping. The rubber bat knocked into the scenery.

Throughout it all – Eastbourne, Middlesbrough, Leicester, Sheffield – Lugosi 
retained his curdling menace. He came before the footlights at the end to 
remind patrons: "Remember, when you get home tonight, look behind the curtains, 
for such things as vampires do exist."

On 16 August, Lugosi, billed as the "celebrated American film star", 
officially opened the Gillingham Park fete; Count Dracula at a flower show. 
Perhaps with the war a recent memory, the facts and romance of a horror fantasy 
didn't appeal to people – and were even a source of embarrassment. In 
Manchester, theEvening News said that "mocking giggles greeted what used to be 
the more horrific moments of this ancient thriller".

Nor, in 1951, did audiences have any sophisticated camp appreciation, or 
imagination, or respect, or irony, or nostalgia; at least, not as such 
qualities would be understood today. Live theatre was vanishing. The movies 
would soon be eclipsed by television.

It is heartbreaking to hear how Lugosi, a proud man, would tell reporters that 
in Budapest he'd been an important stage actor and that, even with this duff 
tour, "you know,Dracula is Hamlet to me". The poor box office meant the show 
wasn't to transfer to the West End. In any event, after 229 performances 
kissing and biting, Lugosi's health was not up to it. He'd been drinking Fernet 
Branca in his hotel every night, and in his dressing room, before curtain up, 
his wife would give him morphine injections – which he alleged were insulin 
injections for diabetes. The final performance was in Portsmouth on 13 October.
 'The vampire and the transvestite': 1952 film poster for Old Mother Riley 
Meets the Vampire. 
With nearly two months to go before he took his booked passage home, Lugosi 
agreed to play Professor Von Housen inOld Mother Riley Meets the Vampire. Of 
the plot, nothing makes any sense. Women are going missing and being mummified, 
but this strand is never resolved. The Professor seems to want to collect 
uranium samples. We don't find out why. A robot appears ("a man all done up 
like a tin of Russian crab"), which Old Mother Riley wallops and easily 
dismantles. Von Housen, the internationally renowned evil mastermind, spends 
his time twiddling knobs and throwing switches in his laboratory.

What you do notice is Lugosi's musical voice – lilting and rasping, foreign, 
obviously, and exotic. (I have no doubt that such lines as "To die, to be 
really dead, that must be glorious" could seem Shakespearean.) He has wonderful 
spidery hands – those twitching fingers, clawing their way into shot to detain 
a departing shoulder or grasp a throat – and he brings with him the suggestion 
of strange landscapes, of Hungary and Transylvania, wolves and frozen forests. 
Lucan's Old Mother Riley, too, is suggestive of her background, in the mildewy 
chill of boarding houses, and when she and Lugosi meet, there is a kind of 
accord between them, an affinity or tenderness.

The initial appeal of the dreadful film is frankly bizarre and almost 
voyeuristic: to see the desperation of two fallen, sozzled artistes at the end 
of their careers; artistes who might be forgiven for giving up on the roots of 
life. But in the way they play their big scene together, Lucan and Lugosi 
approach the sublime.

Old Mother Riley begins warily. "I must be going now," she says. "You see, I 
left a bit of scrag end on to simmer." But soon she's caving in to Von Housen's 
charm and blandishments, skipping about the castle, complete with its secret 
passageways, with a feather duster. "I'll just give it a quick flick," she 
says. It's as if she's found true love.
 Lucan and Lugosi in a still from Old Mother Riley Meets the Vampires. 
Lugosi and Lucan transcend the junk script, the music hall frivolity, the 
piffle of popular entertainment, and as actors show the confidence their famous 
characters feel in being themselves, their natural awareness and familiarity. 
The vampire and the transvestite – both disturbingly ambivalent creatures when 
you think about it (the one half dead and half alive, the other half man and 
half woman) – enter each other's loneliness. There seems to be a link between 
their psychological nature and activities and the confusion of what is going on 
around them.

You expect Old Mother Riley to be bickering and pitiless, trapped in a room 
with the undead, but there's a romantic mournfulness. As pale and dry as straw, 
she seems to have no weight or colour, as if she is already fading before our 
eyes. Lugosi, meanwhile, is all east European heaviness, lugubriousness, with 
his white face and stained black teeth.

It's fleeting, this sequence – a midnight moment. But it's enough for us to 
glimpse, or sense, the lonely pathos of injured spirits. Then it's back to the 
antic plot, a crude, back-projected car chase, and a shootout on board a ship 
in Tilbury. It is odd seeing Lugosi in daylight.

Lugosi returned to New York on 11 December. He got divorced, married for the 
fifth time, appeared inGlen or Glenda <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0045826/> – 
the cult film about, coincidentally, transvestism – and died, a drug fiend, in 
1956. "Dracula never ends," he'd told a dockside television crew.

Lucan dropped dead backstage at the Tivoli theatre, Hull, in May 1954. Thirty 
years later,Alan Plater <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanplater> wrote a 
play about him,On Your Way, Riley <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yUzqa-ZEnPg>, 
which starred Brian Murphy. Murphy's understudy was Frank Seaton. Seaton had 
been Arthur Lucan's understudy, and went on for him the night he died.

The robot costume was auctioned at Bonhams in 2010 and sold for £1,680.
 