
Robert Downey Jnr, no stranger to nocturnal excess, once observed how an 
evening out withOliver Stone <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oliver-stone> 
was 'like pagan Rome, 26AD'. When I meet the director at lunchtime in a hotel 
room in Edinburgh he looks very much as if he is regretting just such a 
night-before. His eyes seem wary of the light; his big gap-toothed grin could 
equally be a wince; he reaches with some fervour for coffee.

In fact, Stone's fatigue is innocently explained. He has, he says, flown in 
the previous night from Bangkok where he has been scouting locations for his 
life of Alexander the Great, starring Colin Farrell, which goes into production 
next month. (Stone is not a man to shy away from the big subject: having made 
his obsessive epics on JFK and Nixon, there are not that many ways to up the 
stakes, butAlexander <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexander> is possibly 
one.)

'We're doing the stage work in England,' he says, 'a lot of other stuff in 
Thailand and Morocco. It's a fast shoot. We have to do the whole thing in a 
hundred days. So it's going to be like an old-fashioned military machine.'

In the past year, Stone has had a good deal of first-hand experience of how 
just such an operation might work. He is in Edinburgh to launch the documentary 
film he has made about Castro's Cuba, Comandante, the result of an 
unprecedented three days of interviews with the dictator. The film was 
scheduled to be shown by the HBO network in America in May. 'But 
unfortunately,' Stone explains, apparently surprised, 'it got politicised by 
the Cuban American lobby in Miami. Millions of emails were sent to HBO. They 
really pounded it. And, of course,' he adds, 'Castro gave them some juice by 
arresting these dissidents in April.' HBO pulled the film.

The irony of this is, Stone suggests, straightfaced, that he was not at all 
trying to make anything 'political'. 'I mean, I ask him a few questions. But it 
was a broad picture of a strong man, a comandante. I wanted to ask him his 
feelings about life and death, about the future, about globalisation, 
philosophy rather than politics...'

The best moments of their encounter offer little human insights, as Stone's 
neurotic camera dwells on the detail of Castro's life: the dictator's boots 
with a Nike logo, the exercise regime he undergoes in his office, keeping in 
shape, at 75, for his people; his coy admission of having enjoyed Titanic and 
Gladiator and how Sophia Loren was his pin-up. Sometimes, too, Stone's bluff 
line of questioning works. 'Everyone seems to like you, Fidel. Why don't you 
hold an election?'

Often though, Stone's film threatens to take its place alongside the key 
sycophantic interviews of our times, Clive James on Barbra Streisand, say, or 
Tony Benn on Saddam Hussein. In part this seems a technical fault. The intimacy 
Stone is afforded by the use of digital cameras does not sit well with his love 
of bold gesture and grand emotion; he struggles with subtlety and contradiction 
and wit. Damien Hirst, oddly, once said that 'Oliver Stone had no irony, and I 
applaud him for that'. That lack is very much to the fore in Comandante.

Stone the interviewer is predictably anxious to be a co-star, sporting a 
dictator's moustache, and stranded somewhere between acolyte and best buddy. 
Much of the fascination of Comandante thus comes from his increasingly clumsy 
efforts to establish a kind of locker-room banter with Castro.

At one point Stone, with a leery grin, offers to break the American blockade 
by smuggling Castro some Viagra (as if, we are invited to understand, either 
man would ever require it?). In a limo, Stone becomes Ruby Wax and starts 
rummaging through the stuff on the back seat. Inevitably, he comes up with a 
gun. 'Do you still know how to use it, Fidel?' he wonders, his arm around the 
older man's shoulder. Just for a moment Castro looks tempted to remind himself.

Despite appearances, the pair had met only once before, in 1989 at the Havana 
film festival, which featured Salvador, Stone's first film. 'I thought he was a 
charming man,' he recalls, 'and a movie star, no question about it. The hard 
part of Comandante was cutting. We could have used almost anything from the 30 
hours of film. I was amazed at his inner strength. His morality. He really 
believes in a dream. It's like Don Quixote.'

And is he as naive as Quixote at times, too? 

'No, he reads voluminously. He reads the internet, he reads books, he loves 
writers, he's friends with [Gabriel García] Márquez. He's an introspective man. 
He talks about the terrible effects of global warming...'

And he also would have sanctioned a nuclear war... 

'He had a good life, but he chose a hard path, and he has stuck with it. 
Stayed in power. The truth is, it seems to me, the people like him.'

In conversation, as in his work, Stone is not inclined to shades of grey. In 
the film he happily lets Castro get away with his assertion that Cuba is the 
'most democratic country on earth' and explain how he has furthered the cause 
of gay liberation (Castro expelled many gays, along with 'other scum' in 1980, 
and they are not allowed to join his party). I wonder whether Stone decided not 
to press him on these issues because he thought it important simply to give 
Castro a platform?

'Whether he is in denial or not, my job is not to judge the veracity of his 
answers,' Stone says. 'My job is to try to open him up, really like a movie 
director tries to open up an actor. If you see deception, it is up to you. If 
you see him lying about torture or about gays, then that is up to you. I did 
not see it, but I present it for you to judge.'

He suggests there are some freedoms in Cuba that are not enjoyed in America, 
the freedom to see his film for a start. Could he work there, live there, do a 
Hemingway?

'No,' he says, with slightly belligerent illogic, 'because I was raised in the 
North, in North America. But if I grew up in Cuba I would grow up healthy, with 
an education, no doubt a foreign language, whereas if I grew up in Honduras or 
Guatemala I would probably get sick, likely die before I was three. I'd be 
scared shitless of government troops coming through and taking my mom and dad 
out and saying, "Who did you vote for in the last election?"'

But Castro has been in a position to create proper democracy? 

'The people in these places do not care about elections,' Stone says. 'They 
care about good water and healthcare. The things of life. The things that Iraq 
for example needs now. No one there is wondering about voting, they want 
electric ity and sanitation. That's what matters.'

It would be fair to say that Stone, the Vietnam veteran, has never run away 
from a controversy. (Rather, he's prepared to fly half way around the world to 
promote one.) Comandante, of course, offers him another chance to expose some 
raw nerves at home, and for good measure he has just completed a similar film 
about Yasser Arafat. These are the latest chapters in a career in which he has 
spent Oscar night with Mexico's Zapatista guerrillas and been sued for 
responsibility in the murders committed in America by a young pair of teenage 
lovers who had stayed up all night watching his film Natural Born Killers. (The 
case was thrown out, but the film, a glamorously violent 'attack' on glamorised 
violence, struggled to recover.)

Though he is reluctant to say so, Stone's element is this kind of scandal. It 
allows him to indulge his maverick self-image. In some respects he proves, 
according to Michael Douglas (who won an Oscar in his film Wall Street) 'that 
in Hollywood you can be an artist and a capitalist at the same time', though 
Stone's critics would dispute the first description and he would take exception 
to the latter.

For a while, at least, he seemed to have understood the trick of making 
powerful issue-led films (Salvador, Born on the Fourth of July) that also 
appealed to the box office. (Platoon, his 'anti-establishment' Vietnam film, 
made $160 million.) He says he sees all of his films as coming out of the same 
place. 'I work from a need to dramatise what I see in the world around me,' he 
says, a vision that typically involves an element of megalomania, a dose of 
paranoia, and a liberated relationship with historical fact.

Are his insights about Castro feeding into his idea of Alexander the Great? 

'Being with a world leader, seeing him work, has given me more insight into 
power, certainly. It is interesting to feel it, that power. The thing about 
these people, be it JFK or Nixon or Castro, is that the things that they are 
dealing with are the things we all deal with except on a much grander scale. I 
mean Nixon's government, it seemed to me, was a result of his childhood demons. 
Castro had a very happy childhood. And that seems to be the root of his sense 
of morality. He has married just one time; he may have many other children, but 
he has stayed true to that idea of marriage.'

In this (arguable) propriety, Stone has suggested, Castro reminded him of his 
late father, Louis. If he were making a film of his own life - and perhaps all 
his films are that to a degree - you are left in little doubt that his father 
would figure centrally in it. Louis was a successful Wall Street broker; the 
family had Jewish roots, a fact which Oliver was told to deny because of his 
father's fears of persecution. Pointedly, Stone dedicated both Nixon , his 
study in paranoia, and Wall Street , his morality play on greed, to his father 
(whose evening Scotch Oliver once laced with LSD); the films could be seen, in 
turn, as a working through of his own demons.

Despite his apparent obsession with powerful men, though, Stone does not 
believe that he is in thrall to power himself, still less trying to force the 
world to fit his idea of it. 'I don't for one second assume I have any power,' 
he says. 'I can make a movie that has an effect on the world, like JFK say. But 
real power is something you build on, can hold on to. In movies you start over 
every fucking time. I am concerned about power, but I have no power.'

I quote to him something his wife once said - 'I don't think Oliver could make 
a movie without being completely in love with the main character' - and wonder 
if that applied to Castro?

'To a degree,' he says. 'But that does not mean that I would be in love with a 
dictator if I did not admire him. I mean I'm not going to fall for Saddam 
Hussein. But I would try to humanise him. Nixon was the greatest liar of all. 
But I tried to humanise him. We should not get into the Hollywood thing of 
always having a sympathetic hero, because it undermines drama. Can we really 
say we like Oedipus? Or Lear? But they make great drama. America 
sentimentalises drama.'

There must, given his engagement in the here and now, be a temptation to bring 
his own American vision up to date? Has he thought about doing an Iraq film, or 
an al-Qaeda film?

'Well, I think a terrorist film would be an important thing to do,' he says, 
'but you know even Comandante can't get on the air in America. The British are 
much more independent-minded: you see that in this inquiry that is going on. In 
America it is much more easy to float a stupid idea - you know, Iraq is the 
source of the 9/11 attacks - and people in the main will buy into that without 
questioning it too much.'

The great challenge for someone like him, in this environment is, he says, to 
stay true to himself. He hopes that, in 20 years' time, at 75, he will still 
stand for something, like Castro. 'It is very hard to maintain a vision and a 
voice. Nobody wants singular statements.'

Stone is pessimistic about his prospects of getting his own singular 
statements financed because he believes these attitudes are hardening. 'There's 
a danger,' he says, 'that we are turning into a giant lynch mob, you know, that 
mentality. The greatest film to be made at the moment would be a version of The 
Ox-Bow Incident, that Henry Fonda movie. A movie about hanging three people in 
a cowboy town. That blind vigilantism is what you see everywhere in America 
now, in the media, in the people. America wants to see Schwarzenegger wiping up 
the baddies. They wanted vengeance for 9/11. They wanted to kill Arabs. That 
was why Bush got away with it. It was a lie, that war, and as Goebbels I think 
said, the bigger the lie, the more they will believe it.'

However much you think that phrase could happily sum up the director's career, 
Stone is one of the few Americans prepared, eager, to say that the reaction to 
11 September was 'disproportionate and hysterical'. What we need, he says, is a 
Costa-Gavras to come along and make a big film about terrorism and imperialism. 
Part of him certainly wishes he could do it but he believes there 'would be so 
much pre-judgment of it, no one would want to go near it'.

Instead, Stone is looking forward to finding some contemporary resonance in 
Alexander the Great's imperial progress. Baz Luhrmann is making a film about 
Alexander too (with Leonardo DiCaprio as the lead) and you imagine the pair 
will offer, if nothing else, a compelling contrast in style: Stone's polemical 
realism against Luhrmann's insistent light-footedness.

Stone says, of course, that there is no element of competition, though it is 
hard to imagine him not relishing it. The only thing he admits to be racing 
against is the script. 'You could tell any number of stories about Alexander 
because he is such a powerful character. But we are going to make an attempt at 
one. It's a big-budget movie, but of course,' he says, grinning, 'I will be 
shooting it like a guerrilla, I guess.' He likes that idea. 'No rest for one 
hundred days!' For a moment, the prospect seems to wake him up.

· Comandante is released on 10 October

His life and films

 Born 15 September, 1946 in New York City. 

 Dropped out of Yale in 1965 after a year and moved to Vietnam where he taught 
English. Stone enlisted in the US army in 1967. He served 15 months in the 25th 
Infantry Division in Vietnam, winning the Bronze Star and Purple Heart. These 
experiences later inspired his films, Platoon (1986) and Born on the Fourth of 
July (1989).

 The first film Stone directed was Seizure, in 1973. 

 Won his first Academy Award for his 1978 adaptation of Midnight Express (best 
adapted screenplay).

 Obsessed by Jim Morrison, whose life story he filmed in The Doors (1991): 'I 
identified with Morrison.... He was a shaman. He was a god for me, a Dionysian 
figure, a poet, a philospher.'

 Relationships:  first marriage to Majwa Sarkis in 1971 ended in 1977. Second 
marriage to Elizabeth Birkit Cox in 1983 ended in 1993. His current partner is 
Chong son Chong, whom Stone has been with since 1993. They have a daughter.

 Baz Lurhmann on Stone: 'He is one of the great American maverick directors. 
But I am not in any race. I only know how to make things in my time and not to 
deadline. All I could guarantee is that if I got into that dance, the work 
would suffer.'

 Novelist John Grisham hates Oliver Stone for his 'socially reckless' 
obsession with violence.
 