
The editor of British Vogue since 1992, Alexandra Shulman originally pursued a 
career in the music industry before following in her parents' footsteps as a 
journalist, working forTatler, the Sunday Telegraph and GQ. With Shulman at the 
helm,Vogue courted controversy by publishing photographs of a young, extremely 
slim Kate Moss, but Shulman also championed positive changes in the fashion 
industry by writing an open letter to designers in 2009 arguing for larger 
sample sizes. Her 2012 debut novel,Can We Still Be Friends 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780241953839>
, has just been published as a Penguin paperback.

FILM

Zero Dark Thirty
 Zero Dark Thirty. Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
I saw Kathryn Bigelow's film last week and thought it was a wonderful example 
of how to create suspense, even though everybody knows the outcome. It's very 
well edited, particularly the storming of the terrorists' compound.

MUSIC

Natalie Merchant: Space Oddity
 Photograph: Sarah Lee 
The V&A are doing a big Bowie exhibition in March, and he released a new 
single recently, so I was surfing my iTunes and found this live acoustic cover. 
Having a female singer do it at a different tempo, using her powerful voice, 
draws out the song's narrative.

EXHIBITION

Amongst Heroes – The Artist in Working Cornwall, at Two Temple Place, London

I love the light that you get in Cornwall, how it differs depending on the 
area you're in, so I'm looking forward to an exhibition displaying historical 
work from the two artists' colonies of St Ives and Newlyn.

THEATRE

The Judas Kiss
 Photograph: Manuel Harlan 
David Hare's play about Oscar Wilde, with Rupert Everett as Wilde and Freddie 
Fox as the destructive Bosie, has just transferred to the Duke of York's. I'm 
not a great Wilde fan but I've heard that Everett gives an incredible 
performance, really inhabiting the role, so I want to go and see that.

BOOK

The Examined Life, by Stephen Grosz

I haven't had psychoanalysis but I'm intrigued by this collection of case 
studies from a successful analyst. His interpretation of the reasons behind his 
clients' problems are often as weird as their behaviour. Each one is a 
mini-story, some interesting, some less so.

PHOTOGRAPHY

Juergen Teller: Woo!
 Photograph: Juergen Teller 
I've worked with Juergen for 20 years so I'm very keen to visit this 
exhibition of portraiture and personal work at the ICA. He has a singular 
viewpoint; whether he's photographing a flower, a couture dress or an old man, 
you would know the image was by him.
 