
Jack Huston, 30, is the grandson of the Hollywood film director John Huston 
and nephew to actors Anjelica and Danny Huston. He is best known for his role 
as Richard Harrow, a disfigured war veteran turned assassin, in the HBO 
Prohibition dramaBoardwalk Empire. Huston was born in London in 1982, the son 
of Lady Margot Lavinia Cholmondeley and Walter Anthony (Tony) Huston. He 
decided he wanted to be an actor at the age of six after playing the lead role 
in a school production ofPeter Pan. He began to get major film roles in his 
early 20s and has since appeared in 19 films and almost every episode of
Boardwalk Empire's four seasons. He can currently be seen in Strangers on a 
Train 
<http://www.delfontmackintosh.co.uk/Tickets/StrangersOnATrain/StrangersOnATrain.asp>
 by Craig Warner. Directed by Robert Allan Ackerman and produced by Barbara 
(James Bond) Broccoli, the play is being staged at the Gielgud theatre in 
London's West End. He also plays Jack Kerouac in the forthcomingKill Your 
Darlings <http://www.sonyclassics.com/killyourdarlings/>, a film about the beat 
poets.

Comedy
 Veep: 'A satanic version of The West Wing.' Photograph: Lacey Terrell 
Veep <http://www.hbo.com/veep>
I think it's safe to say that I am obsessed with the work of Armando Iannucci, 
Steve Coogan and Chris Morris. I will happily watch anything these guys have 
done. I can go back and listen toThe Day Today, or watch I'm Alan Partridge, my 
favourite comedy of all time, orBrass Eye, and they still feel inventive. These 
guys really did invent a new form of satire.Veep is Iannucci's attempt to do 
for American politics whatThe Thick of It and In the Loop did for British 
politics. It is brilliantly funny, a sort of antidote toThe West Wing, or a 
satanic version ofThe West Wing. With Veep, rather than striving young 
idealists, you have cowardly egomaniacs and bunglers who are involved in 
endless arse-covering exercises. I am fairly certain Iannucci's version of 
politics is the more accurate.

Gig
 Guns N' Roses: 'Your first band is like your first love. Unforgettable.' 
Photograph: Rex Features 
Guns N' Roses
I love plain, old-fashioned rock'n'roll. I'm very old-fashioned like that. I 
have a good friend in New York who runs a few bars and clubs and he is always 
introducing me to new bands. But my favourites are the old ones. I went to see 
the Who recently, which was fantastic, but the band I truly love has to be the 
one I first got into, Guns N' Roses. Your first band is like your first love. 
Unforgettable. I went to see them the other day and had a brilliant time. 
Obviously it's only really Axl [the singer] who is left from the original 
line-up but the songs still sound great. It was a pretty special moment in my 
life because I was too young to have seen them the first time round. I first 
heard them when I was seven or eight and I loved them immediately. I remember 
every word to every song, every guitar break, every melody. I was a properGuns 
N' Roses <https://www.theguardian.com/music/gunsnroses> fan, but because of my 
age I never got to see them. So yeah, it was a very special night.

Theatre
 Orphans by Lyle Kessler: 'Beautifully written, beautifully acted and hugely 
inspirational.' Photograph: Walter McBride/Corbis 
Orphans by Lyle Kessler <http://www.broadway.com/shows/orphans/>
I saw it in New York – it really is a must see. It's about two brothers, one 
with a mental disability, the other a violent guy who will do pretty much 
anything to look after his brother. They take a man hostage, the character 
played by Alec Baldwin, but the tables get turned in the sense that he takes 
the two brothers under his wing and gives them a second chance in life. Ben 
Foster and Tom Sturridge, who was rightly nominated for a Tony, are also in it. 
It is wonderful. It is beautifully written, beautifully acted and hugely 
inspirational.

Art
 Eric Roux-Fontaine: 'His stuff has this wonderful, dreamlike quality.' 
Eric Roux-Fontaine <http://www.rouxfontaine.com/>
My grandfather [John Huston] used to paint and collect art, and my mother is 
quite a keen collector. I have sort of followed in their footsteps. I went to 
see this show at the Axelle gallery in New York, which is a favourite haunt of 
mine. Fontaine works in lots of different media and his stuff has this 
wonderful, dreamlike quality to it. He is apparently inspired by travelling 
around Central and South America and eastern Europe, where he spent a lot of 
time with Romany communities. But he is also clearly very inspired by film 
directors like Wim Wenders, which I guess is in part why he appeals to me so 
much. I wanted to buy my girlfriend something for her birthday. Initially I had 
my eye on a smaller piece, but eventually I went for this much larger 
installation. She was absolutely delighted with it.

Television
 The Wire: 'It is now easy to see just how influential it has been.' 
Photograph: HBO 
The Wire, complete box set
Television is where it's at. The best writing in the world right now is the 
writing done for television. And the men and women who write for TV are the 
brightest and hardest-working in all of entertainment. There is so much that I 
could talk about, not leastBreaking Bad, which really is one of the greatest 
dramas ever made. But I want to talk aboutThe Wire, which to my shame I came to 
somewhat late, despite the fact that Michael K Williams [who plays shakedown 
artist Omar inThe Wire] and I are both in Boardwalk together [Williams plays 
nightclub owner and gangster Chalky White].The Wire is, from the off, 
breathtaking. Quite incredible drama. It is now easy to see just how 
influential it has been. It not only showed what was possible to do on TV, it 
made you realise that TV would never be the same again. It eschews the quick 
fix for intricate and beautiful character development. As others have said, it 
was as if television had reinvented the great Victorian novel. It is that 
ambitious, that penetrating, that intricate and immersive. What David Chase [
The Sopranos], David Simon and Ed Burns [The Wire] and Vince Gilligan [Breaking 
Bad] have done is nothing short of revolutionising television and drama.

Travel
 The Turks and Caicos Islands: 'A lot of places get called tropical paradises 
but this actually merits the title.' Photograph: Getty Images 
Turks and Caicos Islands
I don't get to go on holiday often because I am so busy. But the last place I 
truly fell in love with was theTurks and Caicos 
<http://www.turksandcaicostourism.com/> Islands in the Caribbean. I went there 
with my girlfriend and a friend of mine from New York. It really is 
extraordinary. I know a lot of places get called tropical paradises but this 
actually merits the title. It has long, white sandy beaches, palm trees, 
beautiful weather and is perfect in every respect. It is almost impossibly, 
indescribably romantic and really does rank as a once-in-a-lifetime holiday. I 
would recommend it as a place for the most idyllic honeymoon – it is certainly 
a place I will never, ever forget.
 