
Bieber in space. Lost in Showbiz heard the fateful news 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/jun/07/justin-bieber-space-virgin-galactic>
 last week and has not slept since. For the benefit of those who have been 
remiss with their Justin Bieber monitors, let us recap: in the manner 
of Superman, Dr Manhattan and a thousand other messianic superpowers before 
him, the almighty teen sensation has grown weary of our tawdry planet's sham, 
drudgery and broken dreams and sought momentary respite beyond the suffocating 
reach of Earth's atmosphere.

The star and his manager Scooter Braun – there, presumably, on the off-chance 
some cheeky extraterrestrial Simon Cowell tries to lure the kid off to break 
the lucrative teen-pop market in Betelgeuse – are the latest "future 
astronauts" to sign up for a glimpse of the great beyond with Richard Branson's 
space tour company, Virgin Galactic. On the logic, Lost in Showbiz boldly 
assumes, that for once – after what has been four years now of saying "Baby, 
no!" to Beliebers' pleas for hugs, kisses and leprosy cures – in space, at 
least, our boy saviour won't be able to hear fans scream.

But Lost in Showbiz's sleepless nights have little to do with the purpose of 
the trip. Bieber has earned himself a break from the mewling of mere 
earthlings. Nor does it toss and turn at the thought of living, even for just 
one day, on a planet no longer graced by the teeny one's presence. (Though it 
begs you all: when that day is upon us, do not ask LiS to fight the tears.) It 
is a deeper fear that has kept this column bleary-eyed and barely functioning 
since it heard: the fear that Bieber does not fully know the dangers of 
celebrity space flight. For those dangers are legion.

Bieber need only ask actor and Twittersphere behemoth Ashton Kutcher 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/ashton-kutcher>, who knows all too well the 
true price of becoming a celebronaut. He and girlfriend Mila Kunis have been 
paying it for at least a fortnight now, not in dollars, but in double dates 
with Princess Beatrice and her long-term love, Dave Clark,caught by snappers in 
St Tropez <http://www.people.com/people/mobile/article/0,,20707595,00.html>. A 
price that, let's be clear, was never advertised, and for which even space 
flight seems too little to gain in return. Clark, you see, works at Virgin 
Galactic in the "astronaut relations" department, and Kutcher – as his 
followers will know well – has always held fast to the ancient Greek maxim, 
from Epictetus, "Keep company only with people who can send you into space".

Others have it still worse. Take Leonardo DiCaprio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/leonardodicaprio>, who will be forced to make 
nice with one of his most financially reckless fans during his own trip to the 
stars, after the seat next to his was sold at a charity auction in Cannes last 
month for €1.2m (£1m). Lost in Showbiz finds it difficult not to read an 
implicit "teeheehee" into the quote from Harvey Weinstein: "We're going to get 
someone to bid on a seat next to him." LiS imagines an enthusiastic sheikh 
unleashing a barrage of "What was Titanic like? Is Quentin Tarantino nice? 
Where do films come from?", halted abruptly by DiCaprio with: "Please! You're 
invading my personal space time."

The greatest danger is not, however, the company, but the danger of 
disappointment. For let us remind ourselves what the celebronauts can expect – 
beyond, of course, the chance to stare into the unfathomably vast expanse of 
Princess Beatrice's face – in return for handing over their $250,000 deposit. 
According to the Sun, the trip "is a two-hour flight to 60 miles above Earth". 
Two hours, and 60 miles. That's a slow drive from Leeds to Hull. Albeit one 
with weightlessness in the middle, in place of the manifold sights and smells 
of the towns of Gilberdyke and Snaith, but hardly intergalactic in its 
ambition. The average distance to the moon, by comparison, is about 240,000 
miles. So Apollo 13 this surely ain't.

Few are as at risk of disappointment as physicist Stephen Hawking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/hawking>, who has dreamed of visiting 
space since childhood – at least if you're willing to treat his Specsavers ad 
as a prologue to a future autobiography, as it must surely have been intended. 
Branson has offered the great man a free trip to the Hull beyond the clouds, 
but he should be prepared to suffer the fate of Kutcher and DiCaprio and spend 
some time in unexpected company, since the six-man shuttle is unlikely to go 
anywhere with five empty seats. Blast off on the wrong day and Hawking could 
find himself sharing his boyhood dream with Justin Bieber.

If he does, Bieber won't be sitting quietly. The young celebronaut has already 
shared his plan for the trip with followers. It is a simple but ambitious one: 
"Let's shoot a music video in SPACE!!" His fellow fliers – be they physicists 
or bothered film stars – are unlikely to be obliging. Two hours is a very short 
time for anything more than a single take. He may even have to double-date a 
royal. Lost in Showbiz prays he understands the risks.
 