
In case you missed the memo, legal services are changing. You no longer need 
to be a lawyer to own a law firm, which means legal advice has become an 
exciting new commodity for big-brand employers.

Alternative business structures (ABS) have been denounced as threatening the 
integrity of the legal profession by some lawyers, who believe that competitors 
from outside the profession introduce a risk of conflict of interests.

A recent viral ad campaign by the high street franchise Quality Solicitors 
featuring "faceless solicitors" with tyres, spring onions and pound coins for 
heads, demonstrates, perhaps rather crudely, the kind of criticism that ABSs 
are up against.

So are ABSs as threatening as the old guard would have us believe? Judging by 
the sorry statistics that came out of arecent College of Law survey 
<http://www.college-of-law.co.uk/futurelawyers/stay-open-minded-abs/>, students 
are wary. Just 1% said they would choose to work for an ABS over a traditional 
law firm and 56% thought the new structures would drive down salaries.

Rachel Harris, director of employability at the College of Law contradicts the 
results, saying that "students are seeing ABSs as places they might apply to 
for training contracts, equally with law firms, and seem to be taking the 
development in their stride."

It is perhaps unsurprising to hear that the director of Co-op Legal Services 
Christina Blacklaws believes it is a fundamental misunderstanding of the nature 
of ABSs that has led to negative reactions from students.

"One chap asked if we would be the death of the high street", she says, before 
citing the conveyancing collapse, double dip recession and disappearance of 
legal aid as the true cause of the decline felt by high street firms in recent 
years.

The Co-op, which is not strictly a new entrant, actually established its legal 
services division in 2006. The difference since being granted ABS status by the 
SRA on the 28 March is that it can now offer services that you have to be 
regulated to provide, such as advocacy and litigation for the first time, 
mainly in the form it's new family law service, which launched in September.

The Co-op currently has four training contracts, which are offered to internal 
candidates after a minimum qualifying period of 12 months but Blacklaws says 
that a recruitment drive to take on 3000 lawyers is planned over the next four 
to five years. Although 90% of the staff at the family law service consists of 
fully qualified solicitors, Blacklaws insists they are keen to start growing 
their own talent.

She says that the Co-op will offer a range of career paths "to become either 
very senior, almost academic, solicitors who do highly complex work at the top 
of their professions or more managerial careers".

Salaries will be based on the type of role that trainees qualify into but we 
are told that the training contract salary is above theminimum level set by the 
SRA 
<http://www.sra.org.uk/sra/news/trainee-minimum-salary-levels-for-2011-2014.page#l1>
.

The Co-op is arguably a different beast from the majority of ABSs, which so 
far appear to be small firms that just happen to want to take advantage of the 
investment opportunities and flexibility that ABS status offers.

James Naylor set up Crabtree Law jointly with a property management company. 
By doing this he secures the majority of his work from the partner company and 
they see a return on the work themselves. It's a great way to secure revenue in 
the early stages of a new enterprise but as Naylor highlights, there are times 
when this presents a conflict of interests.

Still, he says that about 100 people applied for the paralegal role he 
advertised recently and his concerns over how they would react to the firm 
being an ABS turned out to be unfounded.

"I was worried that they would think it was something less than a traditional 
law firm but if anything I've found the opposite, everyone thinks it sounds 
modern and new", he says.

Talking alongside Blacklaws at a College of Law panel event, Naylor told 
students that one of the greatest benefits of ABSs was the innovation being 
introduced by non-lawyer partners, such as new approaches to billing. 
Proponents of fixed-fee models argue that transparent pricing increases the 
market by appealing to consumers who perceived legal services as expensive and 
intimidating. In theory this means more clients, more work, more jobs and a 
more profitable sector.

Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> are used to hearing 
that commercial nous is key but it is more the case now than ever. These 
changes are not going to go away, in fact, 2013 is set to introduce yet more 
change. As the Jackson reforms take hold to control costs and more lawyers feel 
the pinch, it is likely that traditional values will quickly give way to 
commercial imperatives. When that happens, you won't want to be behind the 
curve.
 