
A bad meal out might ruin your night, but the ordeal could leave you 
traumatised too, according to linguists who analysed hundreds of thousands of 
online reviews.

Diners who left one-star reviews on the website Yelp adopted the same phrases 
as trauma victims, using the past tense to distance themselves from the event, 
and terms such as “we” and “us” to share the pain, researchers said.

Daniel Jurafsky, a linguistics and computer science professor at Stanford 
University, studied the language in nearly a million online reviews of 6,500 
restaurants across seven US cities, including New York, Los Angeles, Chicago 
and San Francisco.

He found that disastrous meals out were more often down to shoddy service than 
bad food, prompting reviewers to post scathing accounts filled with past tense 
narratives and first-person plural personal pronouns.

“These are exactly the same characteristics we see in people’s writing after 
they’ve been traumatised,” Jurafsky told the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science annual meeting in San Jose. “These people have suffered 
minor traumas from bad service, rudeness, or being cheated.

“When fans of Princess Diana were writing after her death, or when people were 
blogging after a campus tragedy, people talked in the past tense to distance 
themselves from the bad event, and referred to ‘us as a group’ and that ‘we are 
going to get through it together’,” he explained.

Having pored over the negative reviews, the Stanford team turned to the most 
gushing reviews of the same 6,500 restaurants. This time people’s language 
depended on the prices at the restaurant. Expensive food was often described in 
sexual terms, while cheap food reviews were infused with drugs references.


“People who liked the expensive restaurants referred to ‘orgasmic pastry’, 
‘seductively-seared foie gras’ and even ‘very naughty deep-fried pork belly’,” 
Jurafsky said, quoting from some of the reviews he studied.

But the language shifted dramatically in diners’ reviews of the cheaper 
establishments. People talked of craving, being addicted, and needing a fix of 
items on the menus. One described garlic noodles as their drug of choice. All 
manner of food, from chips to cupcakes, was likened to crack.

Junk food, such as pizzas, chips and desserts, drew the most drug references 
from reviewers. “It’s as if they are feeling guilty, and that talking about the 
food as a drug, as an addiction, makes them feel less guilty, because they 
cannot help themselves. It’s like ‘the cupcake made me eat it’,” Jurafsky said.

Quite why people use sexual phrases to describe expensive food is more of a 
puzzle he conceded. “Obviously food and sex are linked, they are both oral 
pleasures, but why do we use these words for expensive foods? Maybe people at 
these flashy restaurants are on dates and already thinking about sex,” he said.

Jay Rayner, the food critic, said: “It is one of the curiosities of food 
reviewing that while we mock the cliches of dirty food – dirty burgers, pimped 
fried chicken and so forth – that we often use the same language, of addiction 
and pharmaceuticals, when trying to describe that stuff. The language of 
addiction is very good at describing the appeal of food we suspect we shouldn’t 
be eating.”

In another experiment, the Stanford scientists analysed words used on 
restaurant menus. Fancier places filled their menus with terms many people 
might never have come across, such as tonnarelli, persillade, and bastilla. The 
average length of the words on the posh menus were longer too. While cheaper 
places had “decaf” and “sides”, the finer restaurants used “decaffeinated” and 
“accompaniments”. When Jurafsky looked at how prices changed with average word 
length on menus, he found that every additional letter added 10p to the cost of 
a main course.
 