
It is one of life’s little ironies that your pop star fandom peaks at a time 
when you have neither the time nor the money to properly indulge it.

For every One Direction fan who was free, either by coincidence or design, to 
meet the British boyband at Sydney airport on Tuesday, there would have been 
many morestuck in a school 
<https://twitter.com/twerksforpayne/status/537015949103091712> classroom.

The band are guests of honour at the Aria awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aria-awards> on Wednesday evening. Just 
before 10am on the day of the ceremony a substantial crowd is packed into the 
pen outside the Star casino, perky and alert like meerkats, but just as quiet. 
1D aren’t due to appear until at least 2pm, a girl tells me, with one hand 
protectively on the metal barrier separating her and the red carpet.

On either side of entrance are about 60 people, overwhelmingly female, mostly 
under 20. Most have brought snack food. Some have brought collapsible chairs. 
“Any rubbish?” calls out a security guard, arms full of McDonald’s takeaway 
trays, with a fatherly tolerance.

I tell the girl next to me I’m a journalist. “Can you get us in?” she says 
urgently, gesturing towards the barrier.

She and her five friends, from schools in western Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> and the northern beaches, 
are laden with carrier bags of Krispy Kreme donuts. “We’ve got, like, 24,” says 
Sonya Chand, 18. “We’re hoping we can bribe our way to the front … When I’m 
excited I can’t eat.”

That’s just part of the game plan. Far from the headless teenage hysteria I 
was expecting, they assess their surroundings with military precision. Do they 
risk losing their spot by sitting down? The band will probably pose for photos 
outside the Star sign; is that within iPhone shooting distance?

“I’m not using my phone till 2pm, to save battery,” says Chandra Sudiarta, who 
turns 18 on Thursday. “I’d put it on airplane mode, but my parents get worried 
sometimes.”

Every now and then a scream erupts from the other side of the casino. Heads 
turn and just as quickly turn away. “False alarm times 10,” sighs Jess 
Woodcock, 18. “You know what would be funny? If someone just yelled ‘Harry 
Styles’.”

Her friends immediately dare her to do just that, before agreeing it would be 
cruel. “Oh, like Harry Styles just comes along and sticks his hand out,” says 
Derya Fernando, 18.

They readily admit to being fans first, “Directioners” second. One 17-year-old 
says she didn’t make it to the airport on Tuesday but has previously staked out 
celebrities such as the British X Factor finalist Cher Lloyd on arrival; 
Sudiarta reminisces about meeting the X Factor judge Redfoo of LMFAO.

The goal is a selfie with a star, the motive, proximity to celebrity – but the 
enthusiasm and excitement is genuine. They like the new 1D album, Four (“It’s 
more mature,” says the 17-year-old), and Styles, though the most famous member 
of the band, is by no means the crowd favourite. There’s one vote for Louis, 
one for Liam, and one opts out of the decision altogether. (I can relate; 
there’s no more compelling case for polygamy than the band documentary This Is 
Us.)

Woodcock is more pragmatic. “Whichever comes nearest to me today.”
 