
Designers have propelled Antwerp into Europe's fashion fast lane. What began a 
few years ago, when a handful of hip local talent took the international 
fashion world by storm, has turned the city into a cutting-edge symbol of 
style. You'll see this vibrant creativity not just in the dozens of couture 
showrooms, but in a host of chic restaurants where the decor is as innovative 
as the cuisine, and in a nightlife scene that begins with cool lounges 
featuring in-house DJs and ends with high-voltage techno parties for clubbers.

Antwerp's big drawback was always its lack of decent hotels, but that's 
changing too, as fashion-conscious locals rework their homes into designer B&Bs 
- over the past year, at least a dozen hip hotels have opened. And with a major 
new exhibition opening at fashion museum MoMu this weekend, now is the perfect 
time for a short break in Belgium's dedicated capital of fashion.

Top five restaurants


Although it is always tempting to head straight for a typical brasserie and 
order a huge meal of steamed mussels and piles of crispy frites, Antwerp is a 
serious gourmet destination. Take Absoluut Zweeds (Wijngaardstraat 12; 00 32 
3237 2843), the hottest restaurant in town right now. The chef is Swedish, and 
the cuisine an eclectic mix of Scandinavian, French, Japanese and Italian 
influences. Begin a meal with his trademark wappaz - a Swedish version of sushi 
- followed by a classic French Rossini steak, but be warned that he prepares 
the Rossini with reindeer meat.

Fashion-model wannabes wanting to catch a glimpse of the town's famous 
designers book a table at the chic Coco C (Volkstraat 58; 00 32 3216 9643), a 
sleek restaurant serving light French-fusion dishes; a more fun address, just 
off the main town square, is Mata Mata & Pili Pili (Hoogstraat 44; 00 32 3213 
1928), a hip diner and late-night bar, with a menu featuring exotic African 
cooking and barmen renowned for mixing even more exotic cocktails.

 The Grand Cafe Horta (Hopland 2; 00 32 3232 7213) is named after the great 
Art Nouveau architect Victor Horta, and is worth visiting as much for its 
stunning design as for the food. Right next door to the Rubenshuis, this is a 
good place to sample hearty Belgian fare such as rabbit braised with chicory or 
a rich carbonade stew of beef slowly cooked in beer.

Just opened, casual bistro  Confituur (Volkstraat 45; 00 32 3237 0337) 
symbolises Antwerp's cool designer style. The dining room doubles as a lounge 
bar, where you can drink while reclining on comfy old sofas, and delicious, 
reasonably priced home cooking is served at minimalist tables. Then browse its 
art gallery and contemporary furniture boutique at the back.

Top five shops


This city has something for every shopper: splashing out on a diamond, picking 
up high-quality antiques, ogling irresistible gourmet chocolates and biscuits, 
browsing art in galleries showcasing young local talent or, of course, numerous 
showrooms of high-profile designers - the main reason why the city has made its 
mark on the world's fashion map. You'll find most of the famous names - Dries 
Van Noten, Ann Demeulemeester, Martin Margiela - in boutiques dotted around 
MoMu, the fashion museum on Nationalestraat.

If you only have time for one, seek out  Walter (St Antoniusstraat 12), the 
dazzling showroom of the bad boy of Belgian fashion, Walter Van Beirendonck, 
who looks more like a member of ZZ Top than a hot stylist. To showcase his 
creations and those of selected friends he has reworked an enormous old garage 
into something that resembles less a clothes shop than an installation 
exhibition space.

There is the possibility of bargain fashion shopping too, particularly in the 
tiny Pi-Nuts boutique (Nationalestraat 146), a designer-label store which 
specialises in quality second-hand and ex-runway outfits; alternatively at 
Episode (Steenhouwersvest 34), a cavernous vintage-clothes shop packed with 
tempting bargain-basement-priced outfits.

For highly original accessories and lingerie, don't miss  Baby Beluga 
(Volkstraat 1). It is filled with innovative items sourced by the owner from 
all over Europe. And if you want to go home with a box of Belgian chocolates, 
forsake the predictable Godiva and Leonidas brands and make straight for the 
most famous artisan chocolatier in Antwerp,Burie (Korte Gasthuisstraat 3).

Top five B&Bs


The cutting-edge address for anyone interested in design is  Slapenenzo  
(Karel Rogierstraat 20, 00 32 3216 2785;slapenenzo.be <http://www.slapenenzo.be>
, double €130 B&B). The watchword here is minimalism, be it the monochrome 
colours of the guestrooms - choose between black, white or brown - or the chic 
decor of faux-fur bedspreads, matt black marble bath and zen Japanese lamps.

Recently opened, The Big Sleep (Kromme Elleboogstraat 4, 00 32 4748 49565; 
intro04.be/thebigsleep <http://www.intro04.be/thebigsleep>; €65) lives up to 
its name, as guests have the use of a spacious apartment, covering the whole 
ground floor of a family house, stretching through a breakfast salon, lounge 
area and bedroom onto a wood-decked terrace. Set in a quiet backstreet near the 
Schelde river, this is in the heart of the antiques shop neighbourhood.

The friendly owners of Bed, Bath and Bread (Justitiestraat 43; 00 32 3248 1539,
bedandbreakfast-antwerp.com <http://www.bedandbreakfast-antwerp.com>; €60) 
offer probably the best deal in Antwerp - the rate for a tasteful room in this 
grand Art Deco mansion is very reasonable indeed. Their two cats are a regular 
feature, roaming around the house. This is a favourite address for visiting 
fashion designers, actors and musicians. Reckon on a hearty, but ecologically 
sound, breakfast of cheeses, ham, sausages and fresh fruits.

Expectations will not be very high for newcomers getting out of the taxi at the
 Vandepitte B&B (Britslei 49; 00 32 3288 6695; gastenkamer.com 
<http://www.gastenkamer.com>; doubles €62, penthouse suite €100): you arrive at 
a frankly ugly 1960s apartment block which doesn't appear in the least 
'designer'. In fact this is one of the most desirable addresses in Antwerp. 
Take the lift up to the sixth floor and you enter a smart duplex apartment. 
Clued-up visitors will have reserved the penthouse suite, an oasis of luxury 
and privacy that covers the whole of the top floor with a panoramic wooden 
terrace that's tailor-made for sunset cocktails.

The newest addition to the Antwerp B&B scene, Het Luxepaard (Lamorinièrestraat 
250; 00 32 3290 5641;luxepaard.be <http://www.luxepaard.be>; doubles €70, suite 
€95) certainly takes the first prize for the weirdest name, which means 'The 
Fancy Horse', which is apparently very amusing in Flemish even though the joke 
doesn't translate into any other language. The property is run by two 
eccentric-seeming Dutch artists, Hubert and Henk, who have renovated this 
sprawling 19th-century townhouse beautifully, decorating the guest rooms with 
their own artworks. The main suite has a funky bedroom painted in burning red 
and illuminated with lamps they have designed personally, made from reptile 
skins.

Top five bars and clubs


Belgians love to drink, so it comes as no surprise to discover that this is a 
brilliant city for a pub crawl - choose between a host of bars open any time of 
the day or night, from old-fashioned beer halls serving a vast choice of 
Belgian brews, to elegant cocktail bars, wine bars, DJ lounges, and local cafes 
where regulars are friendly and invariably keen to try out their English.

Start the evening in relaxed style at  l'Entrepot du Congo (Vlaamse Kaai 42; 
00 32 3238 9232), a smart cafe housed in a wonderfully renovated Victorian 
industrial space that reflects Belgium's (rather dubious) colonial past. Then 
try Antwerp's version of a shot bar, the traditional 'estaminet' pub,De Vagant 
(Reyndersstraat 25; 00 32 3233 1538), specialising in 100 different flavours of 
Genievre gin - shots as lethal as tequila.

If all this sounds too much like serious drinking, the mood is much more 
laid-back at Soeki (Volkstraat 21; 00 32 3238 7505), a psychedelic 
Seventies-style lounge, which serves a selection of tapas and chilled cava. The 
DJ spins a memorable collection of mambo and reggae. Meanwhile, over at the 
Cafe Hopper (Léopold de Wael Place 2; 00 32 3248 4933), you'll discover the 
city's favourite jazz bar, packed till the early hours.

Antwerp can claim to be the birthplace of techno - at least that is what 
everyone dances to at the ultimate rave club to end a night out, the wild Cafe 
d'Anvers (Verversrui 15; 00 32 3226 3870).

Top five things to do


Antwerp was the birthplace of Rubens. It is impossible to come here and not 
devote some time to the artist. Instead of tracking down his paintings in the 
city's churches, a better idea is to visit the Rubenshuis (Wapper 9-11), the 
baroque mansion in which he lived. Preserved as a museum, it offers a 
fascinating insight into the painter's personal life.

The fashion museum known as  MoMu (Nationalestraat) is the nerve centre of 
Antwerp's booming design trade - not just an exhibition space but an academy to 
train new designers. MoMu has an international reputation for hosting 
innovative exhibitions, and the latest blockbuster, 'Malign Muses, When Fashion 
Turns Back' (until 30 January 2005, thereafter transferring to the Victoria & 
Albert Museum in London; more details atmomu.be) <http://www.momu.be>, examines 
the influences behind design by the likes of Dior, Lacroix and Gaultier.

For an unforgettable slice of local life, stop off for a drink any time of the 
day or night at Antwerp's most famous bar,Den Engel (Grote Markt 5) which looks 
out over the Grote Markt, the town square, lined with opulent Renaissance 
guildhouses.

The city's flea market, the Vrijdagmarkt (just west of the cathedral) has been 
held every Friday since the 16th century, and is quite an experience. 
Everything is sold by auction, in seemingly anarchic fashion, and although the 
sales are conducted in incomprehensible Flemish, the dealers are quite ready 
for bids in English, should you find an irresistible antique.

Just by the imposing Central Station, wander down Havenstraat. Don't be 
surprised to see armed guards everywhere, as this is the heart of thediamond 
district, where dealers scurry around with briefcases cuffed to their hand.

Getting there


 Tourist information
 Tourism Antwerp, Grote Markt 15; 00 32 3232 0103; visitantwerpen.be 
<http://www.visitantwerpen.be> and use-it.be <http://www.use-it.be> For 
comprehensive details of the city's B&Bs trybedandbreakfast-antwerp.com 
<http://www.bedandbreakfast-antwerp.com> It is worth checking out 
outinantwerp.be <http://www.outinantwerp.be> - although the site is in French - 
for the latest on eating out.

 Getting there
 The quickest and simplest way is by Eurostar (08705 186186; eurostar.com) 
<http://www.eurostar.com>: return fares to Brussels (two hours and 20 minutes 
from London Waterloo) start from £59, which includes onward travel to and from 
any station in Belgium within 24 hours of Eurostar travel. Antwerp is 40-45 
minutes from the capital.

 Getting around
 Antwerp's city centre is pedestrian-friendly and small, so the best way to 
explore it is on foot.
 