
 From dead cows to Myra Hindley, 1990s art made headlines, but it didn't seem 
to matter whether the art in question was in a gallery or in the street. In 
some sense the gallery became the street. Museums became public spaces in a way 
they had not been since the 19th century when public debates raged about art 
scandals such as the unveiling of Manet's tough modern nude Olympia. All art 
today is public art, in the sense that it's addressed more than ever to a 
popular audience.

Meanwhile the older genre of "public art", meaning art commissioned and 
devised to occupy public space, has struggled to keep up. Some of the rows 
surrounding 90s British art concerned public art in the old sense, notably the 
violent arguments over whether Rachel Whiteread's House (1993), a cast of a 
demolished house on the edge of a park in Bow, east London, should be 
preserved. The change in attitudes since then is clear; today it's unimaginable 
that the work would be demolished, as it was then by Bow Council. Antony 
Gormley's Angel of the North, on the other hand, turned out not to be 
controversial at all, winning near-universal popularity.

It is only in the last two or three years, with the fourth plinth in Trafalgar 
Square and publicly sited works across the country, from James Turrell's light 
space in Kielder Forest to Alison Wilding's floating sculpture in Sunderland, 
that Britain's love affair with art has resulted in major public works in the 
conventional sense.

Yet here's the paradox of art in public spaces. If it is widely accepted and 
settles in as a fixture, the danger is that no one looks at it all. American 
plazas are full of bland abstract works that constitute a kind of visual muzak, 
no more intrinsically interesting than a Victorian figurative statue - in some 
cases much less.

The public artworks that are most genuinely effective as art - arousing 
emotions, controversies, getting under skins - are often the ones that end up 
being abused, vandalised, demolished, and labelled "failures". I doubt if many 
people would say they love Richard Serra's twisted tower of steel outside 
Liverpool Street Station - over the years it has been pissed on, used as a 
shelter and as a venue for commercial displays - but it has a presence in its 
bloody-mindedness. Serra's most controversial public work, Tilted Arc, was 
demolished after complaints from office workers in New York in the 1980s; this 
"failure" was also a success in making art a charged public event. The same 
goes for Whiteread's House - a pale scab of history on the London landscape. 
And yet its memory lingers.

We no more need tame contemporary art in our squares than statues of Margaret 
Thatcher. What we do need is for art to be truly public, for it to have the 
largeness of vision to engage imaginations and the intelligence to speak of 
matters that concern us all. An example of excellent practice has been set by 
Artangel, the organisation dedicated to helping artists make public 
interventions. This summer, Artangel helped artist Jeremy Deller restage the 
Battle of Orgreave, the notorious confrontation between police and pickets 
during the 1984-5 miners' strike, which included ex-strikers.

Charles Jagger's Royal Artillery Memorial (1921-5) at Hyde Park Corner and 
Jake and Dinos Chapman's tableau Hell (2000), shown last year at the Royal 
Academy, are examples - one permanent and in a public space, the other a 
temporary gallery installation that made a huge public impact - that in 
different ways square up to history. It's this passion to find an audience that 
underlies the only worthwhile public art, whether that turns out to be in the 
street or in the gallery.
 