
It has been billed as the world’s greatest emerging economy: a $2.4tn (£1.5tn) 
south-east Asian marketplace home to 620 million people poised to follow the 
European Union’s lead and declare itself a single market this year.

But as some in the 10-nation Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Asean) 
anticipate lucrative benefits from deeper trade and economic integration, there 
are mounting warnings that some communities and even whole countries may lose 
out because of the risk of human rights being sacrificed to the imperatives of 
big business.

The EU-styled economic market aims to ease tariffs, increase investment flows 
and open borders by December across 10 countries: Burma, Brunei, Cambodia, 
Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, thePhilippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines>, Singapore, Thailand and 
Vietnam – a move that has already attracted significant investment to the 
region.

The world’s seventh largest market, home to 10% of the world’s population, 
Asean is expected to grow 5% each year by 2018, surpassing the US, EU and 
Japan. But the scope of each individual country in the bloc varies wildly, 
prompting scepticism that a single market can be successfully created by the 
end of the year. In the poorest member state, Burma, three-quarters of the 
population still lack electricity after half a century of dictatorship; in the 
richest,Singapore <https://www.theguardian.com/world/singapore>, citizens are 
among the wealthiest in the world.

“The business community wants Asean to be integrated as one entity,” says 
Mustapa Mohamed, Malaysia’s trade minister. “The fact is that there are border 
issues, customs, immigration and different regulations.”

Malaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> – a global exporter of 
electronics and electric appliances – is chairing the rotating presidency of 
the bloc, and has warned that free movement of goods and services should not be 
expected before 2020. Until then, the group will merely be “laying the stage 
for bigger things to come”.

While the vast differences in language, culture, political and economic models 
among Asean member states may make some investors wary, Asean is not likely to 
suffer the same debt concerns as the EU , primarily because the bloc has never 
planned to adopt a single currency or parliament.

The variance among its economies, however, means certain countries already 
benefit more from the united marketplace than others, a report has found. 
Singapore remains the preferred regional base for 80% of multinational 
companies thanks to its international finance hub and open markets, according to
recent findings from global law firm Baker & McKenzie 
<http://www.bakermckenzie.com/aec>. Up-and-coming economies with strong 
manufacturing pulls such as Indonesia and Burma are expected to profit as well, 
with companies naming them as their preferred factory locations over the next 
five years.

Once a highly competitive business hub, Thailand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/thailand> has lost out to the region’s more 
politically stable emerging markets where low-cost labour and favourable 
business regulations reign, says IHS’s Asia-Pacific chief economist, Rajiv 
Biswas.

“Recent political turmoil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/22/yingluck-shinawatra-impeachment-verdict-thailand>
 has increased country risk and made some multinationals more reluctant to put 
new investments into Thailand,” Biswas says. “In contrast, foreign investment 
into Vietnam is showing a strong recovery, helped by the improving 
macroeconomic environment and the very competitive wage levels in Vietnam 
compared to coastal China.”

A budding middle class across the region also means healthy domestic markets, 
and as the cost of labour in China rises, the potential for Asean – and its 
pool of both skilled and unskilled workers – increases as well.

But Asean’s focus on trade could ultimately prove problematic for the region’s 
620 million citizens, say activists, who underline the tenuousness of the 
sociopolitical landscape in south-east Asia, and how little the organisation 
seeks to address regional challenges such as religious extremism and human 
trafficking.

In a recent statement <http://aseanpeople.org/reclaiming-the-asean-community/> 
the Asean People’s Forum (APF) – Asean’s largest civil society group – listed a 
number of problems in the region, among them grave human rights violations; 
corruption and poor governance; state-sanctioned land grabs; authoritarian and 
military regimes; police brutality, torture and enforced disappearances; 
modern-day slavery and lack of corporate responsibility and accountability.

Even more worryingly, APF says, companies are profiting from 
investment-friendly protection measures at the expense of citizens – with 
certain member states allowing corporations to sue governments over local laws 
that may hinder their business.

“What’s potentially at risk in such an arrangement are national regulations 
protecting rights of local communities, extending protection to workers, and 
stopping industrial pollution that make people near factories or mines sick,” 
says Phil Robertson, of Human Rights Watch. “This is a recipe for serious 
conflict between governments, companies and grassroots communities all over the 
region.”

While Asean’s move towards a united market has long been seen as a set date 
with set pros and cons, analysts on the ground say the move is likely to bring 
sustained growth and communication to the region, and should be welcomed rather 
than feared.

“I don’t see AEC integration as a date, rather a natural economic and cultural 
evolution which takes place over decades: a fusion of geographically close 
neighbours, now accelerated by globalisation and technologies,” says Burma’s 
leading media entrepreneur, Thaung Su Nyein. “I think we should welcome change 
and see this as progress, and retool our economies, train our workers better, 
and reorganise our businesses to be more competitive.”
 