
While two Anglo Irish bankers stare down the barrel of up to five years in 
jail for handing out illegal loans to save their bank from collapse, up to 
12,000 mortgage holders acrossIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> face arguably an even more 
uncertain future.

Pat Whelan and William McAteer await sentence after being found guilty on 
Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/apr/17/former-anglo-irish-executives-found-guilty>
 of concocting an illegal loan scheme to prop up the financial institution 
whose reckless lending took an entire nation to the edge of bankruptcy. In 2010 
the Irish state had to pay out more than €30bn in taxpayers' money to pull the 
bank back from the precipice.

But beyond the high financiers who broke the law and famous clients such as 
Sean Quinn, whose own gambling on Anglo Irish shares cost him his fortune, 
there are thousands of ordinary citizens with homes now at risk thanks to the 
bank.

They have been described as the "forgotten victims" of Anglo's ignominious 
downfall – those who took out mortgages while the bank was focused on 
multimillion-euro loans to big-time builders and property speculators.

David Hall of the Irish Mortgage Holders Organisation warned this weekend that 
some of Anglo Irish's 8,000 home borrowers are already in grave danger of 
having their properties repossessed if they are in arrears.

Hall points out that, two months ago, Anglo Irish – now nationalised as the 
Irish Bank Resolution Corporation (IBRC) – was allowed to sell off 8,000 of its 
12,000 residential mortgages to US-based funds.

"One of the byproducts of the scandal is the 'outsourcing of repossessions' by 
selling off their residential mortgage loans," Hall says. "I don't think it's a 
coincidence that before new legislation going through parliament, which would 
make it harder in Ireland for banks to repossess homes from people in mortgage 
distress, some home loans are shipped over to US investment firms that are not 
subject to the same consumer protection laws.

"It would be much easier for these American firms to take homes from people 
than for an Irish bank that was saved with Irish taxpayers' money. There are 
8,000 ordinary citizens who do not know what is going to happen next to their 
family homes."

Hall says his organisation fears that the transfer of Anglo Irish/IBRC 
residential mortgages will be "an experiment" that might allow other Irish 
pillar banks to follow suit and transfer some home loans in distress to similar 
US firms: "This might just be the final toxic legacy of the Anglo Irish Bank 
scandal – the outsourcing of repossessions in this country using ordinary Anglo 
customers as the guinea pigs."

Politically, the impact of the convictions could be mixed for both the Fine 
Gael-Labour coalition and the main opposition party, Fianna Fáil. The 
wheeler-dealer banking at Anglo took place while Fianna Fáil was in power, and 
questions will be raised as to why that administration and the country's 
financial regulator at the time never expressed any concerns about the bank's 
behaviour.

For the current government the outcome of the trial could have been much 
worse. One insider in the main ruling party says that if Whelan and McAteer had 
walked away as free men, as former Anglo chairman Sean Fitzpatrick had done, 
"it would have knocked another five percentage points at least off our poll 
ratings". Local and European elections are looming, and the governing parties 
are already losing support as austerity cuts continue.

The end of the Anglo trial has also opened up the possibility of other related 
criminal cases on both sides of the Irish border. Northern Irish businessman 
Peter Curistan, who built the Odyssey entertainment complex on Belfast Lough, 
told theObserver that "the gloves are now off" following the guilty verdicts.

Curistan has already reported to both the republic's Garda Síochána and the 
Police Service of Northern Ireland that he was offered an alleged €1m "bribe" 
to dissolve his company and drop legal actions against the now state-owned bank.

Among those Curistan had been pursuing in Anglo was the convicted Whelan, over 
alleged attempts by the bank to liquidate his £25m share in the Odyssey centre.

"I have played by the book and waited for the trial in Dublin to run its 
course," Curistan says. "Once sentencing is complete I am going on the 
offensive, and among the questions I will be raising with my legal team is why 
the PSNI have not acted upon my complaint about the bribe, which I can prove. 
They were given the evidence three-and-a-half years ago."

The one-time Hong Kong-based property developer says he is encouraged that at 
least two of the Anglo bosses have been found guilty: "At least in Dublin they 
have finally dealt with the dodgy dealings of bankers that helped wreck the 
economy. There is a lesson here for the UK surely, given all the scandals 
surrounding banking both inside and outside the City of London."

Fitzpatrick, who was acquitted on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/apr/16/anglo-irish-bank-trial-fitzpatrick-not-guilty>
 of all charges against him, will now engage in his passion for golf while his 
colleagues Whelan and McAteer await their fate.

One of the world's prime pieces of real estate during the Celtic tiger boom 
years, the old Anglo building where the guilty bankers dreamed up their 2008 
plan to use €450m in loans to buy shares owned by Quinn and his family, now has 
a new owner. Last month the sign for global coffee giant Starbucks replaced the 
name of a bank infamous around the world for greed, profligacy and sharp 
practices.

• The caption to Pat Whelan's photograph was amended on 26 April 2014. It had 
originally incorrectly described him as chief financial officer of Anglo Irish 
Bank.
 