
Al-Qaida's leader, Ayman al-Zawahiri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayman-al-zawahiri>, has revealed that his 
predecessor, Osama bin Laden, was blind in one eye and confirmed that in his 
youth he had been a member of the Saudi Arabian branch of the Muslim 
Brotherhood.

In a video posted on a jihadi website, the third in a series entitled Days 
with the Imam, Zawahiri narrates stories about Bin Laden, who was killed by US 
navy commandos in May 2011 at his compound in the Pakistani town of Abbottabad.

Dressed in a white cloak and turban, Zawahiri revealed "for those who do not 
know" that the Saudi-born Bin Laden was left blind in the right eye after an 
unspecified accident in his youth.

According to al-Arabiya TV 
<http://english.alarabiya.net/articles/2012/09/26/240372.html>, Zawahiri 
confirmed that Bin Laden was a member of the Saudi branch of the Muslim 
Brotherhood before being ejected for insisting on waging jihad against the 
Soviet Union in Afghanistan in the late 1980s.

Acquaintances of Bin Laden have described in the past how he was formally 
recruited into the brotherhood as an adolescent in Jeddah and thrown out over 
disagreements about Afghanistan.

But Zawahiri's testimony has special value because he was there at the time as 
a leader of the Egyptian jihad organisation, which became part of al-Qaida in 
1988.

Zawahiri said Bin Laden had travelled to Pakistan to deliver cash to jihadis 
in Peshawar but had defied orders from the Brotherhood and joined the armed 
struggle.

The Muslim Brotherhood, the world's oldest Islamist movement, has eschewed 
violence in recent years and now counts itself as a democratic movement that is 
one of the big winners of the uprisings of the Arab spring. It dominates the 
political scene in Tunisia and Egypt and is highly influential from Libya to 
Syria.

Zawahiri is thought to be in hiding in Pakistan's tribal areas and apparently 
experiencing the difficulties of communication that have plagued what security 
experts call "al-Qaida central" in recent years.

The latest video appeared to be around two months old as he offered greetings 
to Muslims for the start of Ramadan, which ended on 20 August.

On 11 September, Zawahiri appeared in a video that was released on the 
anniversary of the 2001 attacks, declaring that the United States was at war 
with Islam and that American Muslims should prepare for a "holocaust".

Earlier Zawahiri issued a video confirming the death of his deputy, Abu Yahya 
al-Libi, who was killed in a US drone strike in June.
 