
The World Cup rather interrupted the Welsh autumn, spreading a gloom over a 
land only too prone to sporting the shroud, a despond that stretched way beyond 
Christmas. But 2008 arrived, as did Warren Gatland, and the mood swung with 
almost alarming suddenness, especially in the Neath-Swansea area.

Since the Ospreys <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> bailiwick became 
more or less Wales in the grand-slam Six Nations, local joy at the arrival, at 
last, of a professional Welsh franchise became a cause for national 
celebration. Last week's nasty blip at Saracens - a defeat that means not every 
cross-border trophy will be presented to the Welsh - can be forgiven.

The Ospreys rebounded after last Sunday with purpose and intensity. The 
sloppiness of their performance in Watford was replaced by a level of 
concentration, particularly in defence, that carried them to emphatic victory 
over the side that beat them here in this same final last year.

Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> were 
unrecognisable from the side of 2007. They left out Tom Varndell, replacing him 
with squat centre Ollie Smith, and it showed. There was no pace to their game 
out wide and no drive up front.

They were solid at the scrum, but wasted minutes of play scraping the ball 
back to Harry Ellis at scum-half. When they tried to break up the diet of 
kicking from a frustrated Andy Goode - James Hook kept running past him - they 
passed time after time into the hands of players standing stock still.

It was not as if the Ospreys had all shared the grand slam experience. True, 
Ryan Jones led from the front and Alun Wyn Jones was back to his athletic best. 
But lesser known players rose to the occasion. Richard Hibbard has been around 
the fringes for a few seasons now, but is rapidly driving his way into the 
starting seat in the middle of the front row. He was industrious in the loose, 
large at the tackle and fairly accurate at the line-out.

The one thing the Ospreys/Wales have not mastered yet is the start of a game. 
They obviously have nothing against Twickenham, but only once they have 
reacquainted themselves with the open acres.

The opening quarter was the only time Leicester were in control, a penalty and 
drop goal by Goode very nearly complemented by a try for Dan Hipkiss. If the 
centre had not lost the ball, it might have been too much for their opponents.

Instead, the Ospreys found their feet and Hook launched a counterattack that 
was stopped only by a flying cover tackle by Ellis. There was nothing the 
scrum-half could do when Filo Tiatia, a right handful at No 8, and then Hibbard 
dented the set-piece defence from a five-metre scrum.

When the ball was given, rather simply, to Andrew Bishop on the scissors, the 
stand-in for Gavin Henson proved a more than handy replacement. He cut through 
George Chuter and Goode and then dived through three remaining tacklers near 
the line. The Ospreys had put behind them their stodgy start and taken the lead.

If there was one doubt over their recovery it was the kicking form of Hook. He 
was gliding well, but missed another penalty. It was to be supposed that, in a 
game of tight margins, such inaccuracy might cost dear.

It might have, but we shall never know. Hook adjusted his sights in the second 
half and kicked superbly in sunshine and late rain. And Leicester failed to 
keep the margins narrow.

Inexplicably, the masters of resilience lost their grip. It started before 
Shane Williams launched a counterattack with a high kick that bounced loose and 
ended up being handed by Hook, in perfectly controlled conditions, to Alun Wyn 
Jones.

That was seven minutes into the second half. But Leicester rarely mounted any 
sort of serious challenge. Even when they set up camp on the Ospreys' goalline 
they thumped away without any real menace. It was that formula of no threat 
outside, no drive inside and a lot of ball-carriers standing still.

At the World Cup, Marcelo Loffreda's Argentina rampaged their way on a simple 
diet to third place. What a difference there is between a side at ease with his 
game and Leicester, who are obviously struggling to adapt to his new patterns. 
The Tigers have never exactly been sophisticated, but there is obviously more 
to swapping one simple game-plan for another than we might expect.

The lack of pace and wit on the one side meant the game quickly ran out of 
steam. The Ospreys kept their line well guarded, broke out and Hook landed two 
penalties.

It would have been sweet for the resurgent Welsh team to score at the end, but 
the ground was wet, Shane chucked a try-delivering pass forward and there was 
no need to crank up the pressure. That it was one-sided was as big a surprise 
as the whole Welsh renaissance. The Ospreys, who can win nothing more, have had 
hell of a 10 weeks.

Man of the match: Filo Tiatia

Restored to his No 8 position, the New Zealander gave his team a balance that 
is not always apparent when Lyn Jones tries to accommodate his Welsh players. 
Nothing wrong with Jonathan Thomas, but Tiatia- Holah-Ryan Jones played 
extremely well together.

Leicester J Murphy; Smith, Hipkiss, Mauger, Tuilagi (Varndell 76); Goode, 
Ellis; Stankovich (White 53), Chuter, Castrogiovanni (Kayser 75), L Deacon, 
Kay, Corry (capt), Herring (Croft 58), Crane

Pen Goode Drop goal Goode

Ospreys Byrne; Vaughton (Brew 78), Parker, Bishop (Spratt 75), S Williams; 
Hook (Owen 78), Marshall; James (D Jones 73), Hibbard (Bennett 67), A Jones, AW 
Jones, Evans (Gough 69), R Jones (capt), Holah, Tiatia (Thomas 69)

Tries Bishop, AW Jones Cons Hook 2

Pens Hook 3

Referee A Rolland (Ireland) Twickenham 65,756
 