
Whatever happens at Wembley next month, this has been an extraordinary few 
months for Welsh sport. Victory over England, a Six Nations grand slam and now 
a first cross-border cup success in the modern era are all sizeable rugby 
achievements - and Cardiff City's big day in the FA Cup final is still to come. 
It does not need Joe Calzaghe's fists to punch home the message that the 
sporting life has rarely been sweeter to the west of Offa's Dyke.

Anyone within earshot of Lyn Jones, the Ospreys' head coach, on Saturday night 
also went home in no doubt that, in rugby terms, the year of the dragon could 
be prolonged indefinitely. It is his belief that his team has loads of room for 
further improvement and he is already predicting the 2009 Lions squad to South 
Africa will have a strong element of Ospreylia about it. "For me Ryan Jones is 
already captain of the Lions for next year," he said, describing his impressive 
back-row forward's leadership as "fantastic".

He went on to stress that 15 of the Ospreys' 22 are homegrown, with the 
27-year-old prop Adam Jones easily the oldest player in an all-Wales front 
five. The hooker Richard Hibbard and lock Alun Wyn Jones look more than capable 
of joining their captain in Lions' jerseys next year, likewise James Hook, 
Gavin Henson, Shane Williams and Lee Byrne. It makes their capitulation to 
Saracens the previous weekend all the more inexplicable.

Jones the coach admitted to four days "when I couldn't get my head off the 
pillow" after that Watford debacle but on Saturday his players fronted up, 
albeit against aLeicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> 
side who could scarcely have played less rugby had they locked their 
dressing-room door and refused to come out. "It is a breakthrough result," 
Jones added. "You are going to get dips and thunderbolts as the season goes on 
and we took a kick in the pants last week. But we had to have it to understand 
what the things we've talked about actually mean. All week I knew we were going 
to win. If you keep improving, one day you're going to cross the line."

Not everybody in Wales shares such euphoria but this is simply a consequence 
of the parochial east-west rivalry which shows little sign of abating. The
Ospreys <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> continue to detect an 
element of jealousy among some of their less well-resourced rivals and Jones's 
diplomatic denial of such a suggestion - "I'm not saying that at all" - was 
comically undermined by a vigorous nod of the head as he spoke. Up in the West 
Stand the watching Wales coach Warren Gatland's mind will have instead flashed 
back to the Six Nations' triumph at Twickenham in February, the trigger point 
for so much of what has happened since.

In contrast, from middle England's point of view, alarm bells should be 
ringing: if you tolerate this, your children will be next, to quote the Manic 
Street Preachers. Leicester were awful, bereft of imagination and toothless in 
attack, with the exception of the full-back Johne Murphy and scrum-half Harry 
Ellis. At their best they play with a directness and assurance that confounded 
Wasps in the Cardiff semi-final; at worst they are about as fluent as Fabio 
Capello's English.

It leaves Marcelo Loffreda's team in a deepening hole. Tomorrow night some 
limping Tigers are due in Bath for a league game which could have profound 
implications for their domestic play-off hopes. They sit outside the top four 
and defeat at the Rec would leave them struggling to make the end-of-season 
cut. "In every facet of the game we underperformed," said their captain, Martin 
Corry. "We are under the cosh but we can't start feeling sorry for ourselves."

Such was the barren nature of Leicester's performance, however, that their 
campaign will be difficult to rejuvenate. There is no point signing Aaron 
Mauger if he is going to be involved so sporadically and Alesana Tuilagi, so 
potent this time last year, looks a blunt instrument. Tom Varndell, shaking his 
head in frustration as Loffreda declined to put him on until late, appears set 
for total humour failure.

Loffreda is certainly finding his squad a tougher animal to handle than a 
Pumas side he knew backwards. He insists his "trust" in his players remains 
unshaken but will not have enjoyed the sight of four Leicester men being 
bounced aside by Andrew Bishop, Henson's forceful replacement, in the 23rd 
minute.

When Hook invited Alun Wyn Jones to crash past Louis Deacon eight minutes 
after the interval the game was virtually up, with Leicester even failing to 
capitalise when Corry opted for a five-metre scrum with the clear aim of 
splintering the Ospreys pack. Nothing came of it and the nearest thing to a 
Tiger touchdown was a cross-kick from Andy Goode towards Ollie Smith. Alas for 
Smith, it has never been as hard to keep up with the Joneses.

Leicester J Murphy; Smith, Hipkiss, Mauger, Tuilagi (Varndell, 77); Goode, 
Ellis; Stankovich (White, 52), Chuter (Kayser, 76), Castrogiovanni (Stankovich, 
72), L Deacon, Kay, Corry (capt), Herring (Croft, 58), Crane.

Pen Goode. Drop-goal Goode.

Ospreys Byrne; Vaughton (Brew, 77), Parker, Bishop (Spratt, 76), Williams; 
Hook (Owen, 77), Marshall; James (D Jones, 72), Hibbard (Bennett, 67), A Jones, 
AW Jones, Evans (Gough, 70), R Jones (capt), Holah, Tiatia (Thomas, 70).

Tries Bishop, AW Jones. Cons Hook 2. Pens Hook 3.

Referee A Rolland (Ireland). Attendance 65,756.
 