
Our dishwasher broke last week. I bought a replacement that scores triple-A 
for energy ratings, but also for general shitness: if anything heavier than a 
teaspoon is placed on the cutlery tray it implodes and the rinse-blade won’t 
rotate if anything larger than a side plate is loaded into the rack. There is 
only one lesson to be learned: I should have gone to John Lewis.

It would be convenient if you could buy children, partners or pets from John 
Lewis. They’d be installed in the home with uncompromised skill, guaranteed for 
five or even 10 years at no extra cost and when things went wrong you could 
call up and say, “I’d like this fixed”, and a kindly person would come around 
within 48 hours and bring spare parts or a replacement.

But people are not white goods and John Lewis doesn’t protect things that 
breathe. The Co-op sells funerals, but providing care for life? The minutiae, 
the chaos, the things that are not necessarily tangible or even really 
explainable, like kids or relationships when they are difficult? No supermarket 
or department store offers that kind of cover.

So I want to say thank you to John Lewis for failing to tend to my every need. 
I’m sure, in murkier water, I would have traded my husband in if it had been 
easy, and I’m sure he would have had me fixed tri-annually if a phone call to 
customer services was all it took. But our marriage – frayed a little, 
threadbare in areas, but largely intact – is happier than it’s ever been. And I 
feel it’s because, rather than in spite of, the alcoholism.

If I carry on with the shonky analogy of dishwasher and marriage, the 
alcoholism could be seen as limescale in the pipes. We’re deftly chipping away 
at it, and while it’s slowly shrinking, it still exists. But our marriage is 
more than serviceable; in fact, it seems to be working better than ever.

Once the alcoholism seemed to be the only named problem in our relationship, 
the major area of despair. In trying to eradicate it with no real guidance, a 
lot of finger-pointing and an avoidance of seeing it for what it was, we acted 
like idiots. It was, and still is, just a symptom of other difficulties, of 
which there can be many in life: just one component of a complicated but by no 
means unsalvageable marriage.

Unwittingly, I’ve always been attracted to alcoholics, and my husband had 
always been attracted to alcohol. To accept this, and work with what we know, 
is the first step.

When we came to realise that the alcohol was not the cause of all suffering in 
our life, we understood that we could stay married if the desire was strong 
enough. Besides, we had children and a mortgage together, still fancied one 
other, liked the same films, and were both born with large noses that we have 
finally grown into (hence being greatly pleased at similar stages in adulthood 
that getting older, for us, has some nice surprises). We realised that the 
mechanics of our relationship could be adjusted; sometimes fixed; at other 
times left alone.

If I look back to when this column started 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/may/18/stop-husband-drinking>, 
shortly after my husband came out of rehab for the first time, I can see how 
things have changed. Even then, the golden days of his new sobriety – similar 
to the first hours of motherhood, when holding my daughter felt like I’d taken 
the best hallucinogenic in the world – were already fading. We were approaching 
the adolescent stage of our relationship, but with the added pressure of 
relapse. And then, unsurprisingly, boom.

My husband started drinking again and I went slightly bonkers and the 
temporary bubble of hope went splat and we separated. After a while, I started 
to get help. Then R followed, but of his own accord. Now we’re here, eyes wider 
open, together again. I can’t really tell you exactly how my husband is because 
that’s his business. But on the outside he seems very well; of course he 
occasionally gets over-anxious or very down, and sometimes he picks up a drink. 
But he no longer runs away. All I can say is that I love him very much.

And me? I thought this column would mainly focus on our relationship, but it 
fast became a shameless but useful exercise in self-awareness and 
introspection. I had to take responsibility for my life – the high, lows and 
everything in between – regardless of what my husband was doing. I’ll keep on 
trucking, checking myself, looking inwards, outwards, forwards, occasionally 
backwards, but hopefully not go around in circles. Goodbye, and thank you.
 