
The fourth industrial revolution isn’t just near – it’s here.


The world of work is already in a massive transition to a more global, 
technology-driven, flexible economy in which whole career progressions are 
being altered, new professions are coming into existence and traditional jobs 
are being swallowed by automation. The conditions are less predictable and the 
steps needed to succeed less obvious.

For young people in particular these changes will have – and to some extent 
already are having – a huge impact.

Since 2015, the Foundation for Young Australians (FYA) 
<https://www.fya.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/The-New-Basics_Update_Web.pdf>
 has released a series of reports calledThe New Work Order 
<http://www.fya.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/fya-future-of-work-report-final-lr.pdf>
, exploring the economic forces (automation, globalisation, collaboration) 
shaping the future of work, changing education to employment pathways and the 
transferrable skills and capabilities required to survive in the changing world 
of employment.

The crux of the issue: nearly 60% of Australia students –71% of those in 
vocational education and training (VET) – are currently studying or training 
for occupations where the vast majority of jobs will be radically altered by 
automation. Many of the jobs they’re studying for could vanish in 10 to 15 
years’ time.

Just as these disappear however, new and different ones will be created 
simultaneously. Consider the advent of the iPhone in 2007, for example, that 
created an entirely new industry of app development virtually overnight.

Why teaching graduates to be flexible is more important than worrying about 
jobs that don't yet exist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/14/why-teaching-graduates-to-be-flexible-is-more-important-than-worrying-about-jobs-that-dont-yet-exist>
Despite all these coming changes, our mindset about work and the resulting 
advice we provide to young people remains largely the same.

We rely on stereotypes of jobs we know have always been there, and suggest 
training or educational pathways that will secure a job in these occupations. 
Yet in this new work order where young people are predicted to have 17 jobs 
over 5 careers, it’s clear that this traditional, linear career advice is no 
longer relevant or helpful.

To help young Australians navigate this more complex and uncertain world of 
work, understand where future jobs will exist and ensure they are equipped with 
the right skill set, FYA has turned to big data.

In our latest report, The New Work Mindset 
<http://www.fya.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/The-New-Work-Mindset.pdf>, we 
have analysed more than 2.7m job advertisements using a clustering algorithm 
that looked at the skills requested for each job and how similar they are to 
skills requested for other jobs. Over 600 occupations were grouped based on 
demand for similar skill sets, with over 4,600 diverse skills requested.

Our analysis shows that there are seven new job clusters in the Australian 
economy where the required technical and enterprise skills are closely related 
and more portable than previously thought. These jobs clusters include the 
Generators, the Artisans, the Carers, the Informers, the Technologists, the 
Designers and the Coordinators.

Is the fourth industrial revolution bad news for migrants and refugees?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/20/is-the-fourth-industrial-revolution-bad-news-for-migrants-and-refugees>
What we have found through this analysis is that when a young person trains or 
works at one job, they acquire skills and capabilities that will help them get 
13 other jobs. In other words, skills are more portable than we once thought.

For example, the data reveals that the technical and enterprise skills 
commonly required for an environmental research scientist, part of the 
Informers jobs cluster, are portable into at least 13 other jobs such as fire 
officer, life science technician, and medical administrator where skills 
overlap. The common skills and capabilities between these jobs include data 
analysis, resource management, contract management and natural resource 
management.

Not all jobs switches are an overnight exercise – some will require additional 
formal or on-the-job training, such as the transition from a nurse to an 
anaesthetist. The job clusters provide the opportunity to identify skill gaps 
however, and find ways to fill them by taking short courses, further study, or 
seeking on-the-job training.

Our report also identified which of the job clusters offer greater long term 
security than others on average.

What these findings reinforce is that the way careers education is currently 
provided to young people is flawed.

Automation will embed gender inequality at work – unless we fix it now
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/09/automation-will-embed-gender-inequality-at-work-unless-we-fix-it-now>
So what kind of information do young people need to succeed in this new work 
order?

We need to shift the way we approach our working lives – to think in terms of 
skills instead of jobs.

To ensure this can happen we believe our existing systems including careers 
education, curriculums, courses and career information need to focus on 
building a portfolio of applicable skills and capabilities over their lifetime.

Instead of focusing on a so-called “dream job” it may be more useful for young 
people to think about the “dream cluster” based on their skills and interests 
and where they are likely to have the most longevity. Developing a portfolio of 
applicable skills and capabilities based on the requirements of the job cluster 
will help ensure young people are able to easily move between roles.

This could include our government, educators, parents and young people coming 
together to look at what else we can do to provide tools and support, as well 
as information which will help them to deliver careers advice more effectively.

Throughout our New Work Order report series, FYA has consistently called for 
investment in a national enterprise skills and careers education strategy to 
help shape education in Australia.

By investing in the next generation to equip and inspire them for a radically 
different future of work, we will ensure they are able to not only survive, but 
thrive in this new work order – and ultimately ensure Australia’s future 
prosperity.
 