
A power cut affecting 2,400 Cardiff homes left many without supply overnight 
after an electrical fault.

The problem occurred just after midnight and 1,500 homes had to wait until 9am 
to see their power restored - causing some to miss wake-up alam calls.

Western Power Distribution confirmed supplies to 2,400 homes in Adamsdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cardiff/adamsdown> and Cardiff east had been cut 
off after a high voltage underground cable fault.

The company said 900 customers saw their power restored within an hour of the 
cut off – with the rest of homes back on supply by 9am.

Areas affected included Davis Street, Adamsdown Road and Windsor Road – and 
according to our readers some parts of Splott and Cardiff Bay were also 
affected.

Some residents contacted us to say they had missed their alarm for work and 
were unable to have a shower this morning after the supply cut off overnight.

Green Party Candidate for South Wales Central and Adamsdown resident Matt 
Townsend, said:

"Parts of Adamsdown were without power all night. This is the second time in 
two weeks that parts of Adamsdown have been without electricity.

"What was particularly dangerous was that this morning the traffic lights on 
major junctions such as between Beresford Road, Broadway and Newport Road were 
not working for some time.

"Residents of Adamsdown need to know that the electricity company are doing 
everything they can to prevent this happening again and I'm hoping we as a 
community will be receiving an apology and an explanation about why this has 
happened."

South Wales Police said no incidents relating to the power cuts had been 
recorded. See what people were saying below.
 [ View the story "Power cut in Adamsdown" on Storify] 
<http://storify.com/gdncardiff/power-cut-in-adamsdown> 
Update Wednesday, 23 Feb, 11:38: Reports today suggest further power cuts have 
occurred in the Splott and Adamsdown areas. WPD said this was due to work to 
reconnect homes to the power supply following Monday night's fault. A 
spokesperson said:

"Our engineers were carrying out repairs on Tuesday in the area to enable us 
to reconnect customers back to our main electricity network.

"Whilst the changeover from generator to mains electricity took place, some 
customers may have experienced short term interruption to their supply but this 
would have been just a few minutes.

"All customers were back on mains electricity supply by 10pm on Tuesday."

Some of the areas affected included Davis St, Adamscroft Road, Windsor Road, 
Pearl St, Metal St and Bradley St.

Were you affected by the power cut? Leave your comments below.
 