
Lots of universities have spent lots of money over the past 10 years on access 
– with mixed results. Oxford is no exception. With the changed fees regime, 
access is more important than ever. So we're pleased that our flagship scheme,
UNIQ summer school 
<http://www.ox.ac.uk/admissions/undergraduate_courses/working_with_schools_and_colleges/uniq//>
, is showing some tangible results – this is in part because we're putting into 
practice some of the things we've learned over the past ten years.

UNIQ is a big undertaking. Over five weeks this summer, 750 students from all 
over the UK will come to Oxford – and that's just the student participants. 
There are another 100-plus student mentors, along with 27 departments and 15 
colleges all playing their part in making UNIQ happen.

All this activity must be targeted at the right students in order to see 
successful results. Oxford is committed to merit-based admissions, which means 
we're keen to identify and reach students from less-advantaged backgrounds who 
show the potential to succeed at Oxford. This raised two issues when we were 
designing UNIQ: how to define 'less-advantaged' and how to identify ability and 
potential to succeed at Oxford.

When selecting successful UNIQ applicants, we prioritise state school students 
who have achieved highly in their GCSEs – but crucially we take into account 
the context in which that achievement happened. For example, does the student 
come from a high-performing sixth-form school that sends lots of students to 
Oxford already? If not, the applicant is more likely to get a place on the 
summer schools. We also take into account the applicant's socioeconomic status, 
giving priority to those from areas identified as the most deprived.

This may sound straightforward, but it is a departure from how we previously 
ran our summer schools and other outreach programmes, and it took some careful 
thinking, as how we select participants affects the programme we are able to 
run. It would make sense to work with students at a younger age, so that the 
benefits to students come earlier and potentially have an impact on their exam 
scores and ability to prepare for study at a place like Oxford. But it is very 
difficult to compare students academically before they have undertaken GCSEs. 
As UNIQ is targeted at students with the potential to study at Oxford, it is 
necessary to run the programme for year 12 students, in spite of the benefits 
of working with younger students.

Then of course there is the question of how to measure 'disadvantage' in a way 
that can differentiate among a large group of applicants, while still treating 
each student and his or her circumstances individually. We looked at other 
access programmes and the criteria they used, such as students receiving 
educational maintenance allowance or free school meals or the occupation of 
their parents, along with various socio-economic categorisation tools. But some 
things are more verifiable than others – a parent who is a police officer could 
be a part-time community support officer or chief constable, for example. And 
many measures of deprivation (such as free school meals) are not as inclusive 
as they seem – many poor students don't actually take up free school meals, and 
others aren't eligible simply because they attend the wrong kind of school 
(sixth-form or further education colleges, for example). EMA was a good 
indicator of household income, but it no longer exists. So we ultimately opted 
for school attainment and progression rates, as well as certain socioeconomic 
indicators (using the POLAR2 and ACORN postcode data sets).

Getting the right content and activities at the summer school is as important 
as getting a good mix of students. Students are only here for a week, but they 
get a realistic sense of academic life at Oxford, as well as other activities 
designed to address as directly as possible some of the barriers they might 
face in deciding to apply here. These include the practicalities of the 
tutorial system and admissions process, particularly the infamous admissions 
interview. But indirectly, the summer school also brings together academically 
strong students who come from schools or backgrounds where they may be in the 
minority, and establishes a sense of community that exists long after the 
trains depart Oxford for the journey home.

So what are the tangible results we can point to? To put it simply: two years' 
worth of undergraduate admissions figures show that UNIQ has been hugely 
successful helping students from underrepresented backgrounds get into Oxford. 
Around 70% of UNIQ participants over the past two years have applied to Oxford, 
and about 40% of those applicants are then made a conditional offer. The 
average success rate for all applicants to Oxford is around 20%.

Given these striking figures, we were disappointed that very few people have 
reported on them in the last two admissions rounds. Perhaps this isn't so 
surprising, when it comes to Oxford media prejudice prevails. But it is 
precisely this type of highly targeted and evidence-based approach to access 
the higher education sector has been criticised for failing to provide in the 
past, so we feel it is important to share the lessons learned from our 
experience with as wide an audience as possible.

And we want others involved in access work to do the same – there is some 
interesting research out there about the impact of different access projects, 
but the sector also needs to share practical advice. With increased fees 
universities are currently investing significantly in their access work, and we 
as a sector must avoid the impatience and tendency to throw resources at quick 
fixes that plagues Premier League football managers and owners – and we must 
resist pressure for quick wins from external agencies. There's arguably a lot 
more at stake in widening access work than football (money aside), but there's 
also a lot more to be gained by everyone from sharing practical experience, 
tactics and good results.

Sinead Gallagher is head of access at Oxford University

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network <https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network>.
 