
Nowadays there is one essential prerequisite for any Argentinian wishing to 
play top-level rugby, aside from skill and stamina. “If you’re a nervous flyer 
you can’t play for us,” says the muscular flanker Pablo Matera on the eve of 
the first Rugby Championship gamestaged at Twickenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/05/argentina-australia-twickenham-rugby-championship>
. “I’ve never counted how many miles we’ve flown but it’s lots. I think we’ve 
already taken more than 30 planes this year – and we still have five more 
matches to come.”

Argentina’s Daniel Hourcade urges World Rugby to tighten residency rule
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/06/argentina-daniel-hourcade-residency-rule>
Welcome to rugby’s wandering blue-and-white minstrels, who even decamp to 
Europe for a scheduled home game. Matera, like many of his team-mates, plays 
Super Rugby for the Jaguares, who commute to South Africa, New Zealand, 
Australia and Japan. Last month the Pumas were in Hamilton and Perth, last week 
Buenos Aires and now London to face a similarly nomadic Australia side on 
Saturday. Next month Argentina will be playing Tests in Tokyo, Cardiff, 
Edinburgh and London, again.

“We get to travel the world but we don’t get to know the places because we are 
always training and playing,” says Matera, a touch wistfully.

It is the unavoidable long-haul price of joining the global elite. Not so long 
ago the Pumas led a competitive half-life, with their leading stars all based 
overseas and no Super Rugby avenue for their developing players. Now they have 
lurched the other way, having committed to a time zone-defying schedule that 
would disorientate the most experienced cabin steward. “It’s difficult 
sometimes because the trips make you a little tired,” concedes Matera, 
employing a nice line in understatement.

The boys from the pampas could probably do with some pampering rather than 
contesting a dead rubber on a foreign field with several top men unavailable. 
There is a bigger picture, though, and to listen to the impressive 23-year-old, 
once of Leicester, and his sharp-eyed coach Daniel Hourcade, was to marvel 
again at the unquenchable spirit that makes the Pumas such passionately popular 
visitors wherever they play.

True, they conceded four tries before half-time against New Zealand last week 
but the All Blacks, attempting to equal the world record for consecutive Test 
wins when playing in South Africa on Saturday, are a cut above all their 
opponents. There is also the political calculation that requires the Pumas, for 
now, to operate without their best European-based players, such as Racing 92’s 
Juan Imhoff and Leicester’s Marcos Ayerza. “It is a political decision but we 
support it,” says Hourcade, preferring to dwell on the future benefits of 
exposing home-based players to the game’s ultimate examinations.

The end goal is clear enough: Argentina do not just want to be makeweights, 
propping up the Rugby Championship, winning the odd game here and there. “This 
is the first year we have set ourselves specific objectives,” Matera says. “We 
wanted to win two games in theRugby Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-championship>, so this is our last 
chance to make that happen. We also wanted to win three of our four autumn 
games. In November we want to be in the top eight in the world rankings to have 
a better chance of a good group at the 2019 World Cup. That’s our last 
objective: to play in the World Cup final. We’re setting ourself little 
objectives now to help us achieve that.”

With emerging young figureheads like the bullocking Matera and the wildly 
promising No8 Facundo Isa (rested this weekend), there is clear hope of growth 
from a group who earned global admiration for their freewheeling rugby en route 
to last year’s World Cup semi-final, where theylost 29-15 to the Wallabies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/25/argentina-australia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
. The great Juan Martín Hernández is injured but could be back to face England 
next month; in time Argentina may follow Australia’s example and give 
selectorial exemptions to Pumas with a high number of caps plying their trade 
in Europe. “I think Argentina is going to do that in the future but I don’t 
know,” Matera says.

“We have lost some players because they have stayed in Europe. Now we have the 
chance to play in a really good tournament at home but playing in Europe is 
still a real interest for players.”

He is honest enough to concede that choosing between the Pumas and a juicy 
European club contract remains “very difficult” for all. “I have chosen to play 
for Argentina and in Super Rugby because playing internationally is the best 
level a player can play at. But we’re always watching what’s happening in 
Europe and thinking it could be good as well.”

The flip side is the chance to elevate rugby in South America to a new level, 
building on the promising foundations of last year’s World Cup, when football 
was briefly shoved out of the limelight. “Rugby in Argentina is getting really 
popular,” Matera says. “There are lots more young kids starting to play rugby 
and looking for a club and I think that is because of the World Cup. When I 
first started playing it was after the 2007 World Cup when we were third in the 
world. Now we have more games at home because of Super Rugby, with big teams 
coming to play in Argentina. It’s making more people interested in rugby.”

With a healthy crowd of around 50,000 expected at Twickenham, the Pumas’ 
profile is also rising abroad. This week came confirmation Argentina are 
looking to bid to host the 2027 Rugby World Cup; what a gloriously colourful 
and unmissable event that would be. They would also love, at some stage, to 
welcome the British & Irish Lions to Buenos Aires, Tucuman, Rosario, Salta and 
beyond. Matera, for one, reckons the prospect would attract travelling fans as 
well as players: “I think the Lions would have more chance to win against us 
than against New Zealand.”

With the inspirational and smooth-taking Gus Pichot now in situ as World 
Rugby’s vice-chairman, they are also lobbying for tighter eligibility rules 
that would make it harder for many of Argentina’s rivals to strengthen their 
squads by recruiting players from overseas.

“It’s difficult to understand that some countries with one million players 
have to go after players from other countries,” Hourcade muttered. “New Zealand 
represent four countries.” His battered, jet-lagged squad may be weary but, 
longer-term, they are a steadily growing force.
 