
Pakistan's prime minister has insisted his country had not been "complicit" in 
shelteringOsama bin Laden <https://www.theguardian.com/world/osamabinladen> and 
said the fact the late al-Qaida leader was able to live undetected for so long 
in Pakistan was down to a universal "intelligence failure".

Speaking after the one-year anniversary of Bin Laden's killing, Yousaf Raza 
Gilani rejected claimsPakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> had 
secretly known he was living in the garrison city of Abbottabad. US special 
forces killed Bin Laden on 5 May last year during a raid on his heavily 
fortified villa.

"There is no complicity. I think it's an intelligence failure from all over 
the world," Gilani said in an interview with the Guardian. He denied 
suggestions that elements within Pakistan's military may have been aware of Bin 
Laden's hideout. He added: "Why should we do that? We have suffered the most."

Gilani declined to say exactly what his intelligence services had gleaned from 
Bin Laden's wives and children, who left Pakistan for Saudi Arabia last month 
after a year in Pakistani custody. Nor would he comment on 17 documents seized 
at the Abbottabad compound and selectively released by Washington last week. 
"We have a judicial commission probing into that," he said.

On Monday Hillary Clinton said she believed Ayman al-Zawahiri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayman-al-zawahiri>, who inherited the 
al-Qaida leadership after Bin Laden's death, was hiding "somewhere in 
Pakistan". The US secretary of state said Washington was intent on "going 
after" al-Qaida's active leadership and said it was in Pakistan's interests to 
do the same.

On Wednesday, however, Gilani intimated that he didn't know whether 
al-Zawahiri was in Pakistan. "If there is any credible information please share 
it with us, so we can be quick and achieve our targets," he said. Asked if 
Mullah Omar, the Taliban leader, might also be in the country, the prime 
minister replied: "I don't know. Please tell us." The CIA was far more 
"powerful" than Pakistan's ISI intelligence service, and would have a better 
idea, he said.

Gilani is on a five-day visit to London. He is to meet David Cameron on 
Thursday. Relations with the UK were "excellent", he observed. He argued that 
Pakistan was "part of the solution, not part of the problem" when it came to 
the "global issue" of fighting terrorism. "Osama bin Laden wasn't a Pakistani," 
he pointed out. The prime minister said the US had fuelled the problem by 
abandoning its ally Pakistan once the Soviets had been driven from Afghanistan. 
"The vacuum was filled by militants," he said.

Gilani also made clear his country had been the biggest loser from two decades 
of war and turmoil in neighbouring Afghanistan, and from the growing menace of 
Islamist extremism at home: "Pakistan has paid a huge price. Some 35,000 people 
have been martyred. 5,000 police and soldiers have been killed." In addition, 
Pakistan was now "catering for the needs" of 3.6 million Afghan refugees.

Gilani was upbeat about relations with Washington, which have been under 
severe strain since US-led Nato forces killed 24 Pakistani soldiers last 
November. The US has not formally apologised for the incident. Gilani admitted 
recent relations with the Obama administration hadn't been "too normal" but 
said the CIA and ISI were still working hard together to wipe out – or 
"achieve", as he put it – high-level targets. But he claimed it was practically 
impossible to police the mountainous Afghan-Pakistan border, where thousands 
crossed every day. "We don't know if they are tourists or militants," he said.

The prime minister refused to say whether the Taliban should play a role in a 
future national unity government in Kabul, or were integral to a political 
solution in Afghanistan. Instead, he said, Islamabad supported political 
reconciliation in Afghanistan so long as it was "Afghan-owned and Afghan-led." 
Of Pakistan's role, he said: "We are a facilitator." He was surprisingly upbeat 
about relations with Delhi and spoke warmly of India's prime minister, Manmohan 
Singh. Islamabad was "serious" about resolving all core issues with India, 
including Kashmir and the heavily militarised Siachen glacier, where 139 
Pakistani soldiers were tragically buried in an avalanche last month.

Gilani is the longest serving prime minister in Pakistan's history, having 
been in office since 2008. But his government has become increasingly 
unpopular, with Gilani given a token jail sentence last month by the country's 
supreme court. Today Gilani shrugged off his ongoing legal woes, which stem 
from his refusal to reopen a money laundering investigation into the country's 
president, Asif Ali Zardari.

The prime minister was amusingly scathing about Imran Khan, the cricketer 
turned politician, who will challenge Gilani's Pakistani People's party (PPP) 
in next year's elections, and has a growing following among young people. Asked 
whether Khan might eventually become Pakistan's prime minister, he replied: "If 
he [Khan] wins his own seat." He added: "He's a good cricketer. But he has no 
future in Pakistan."
 