
At last year's Cannes film festival, there was an outcry: there was not a 
single woman in competition for the Palme d'Or. British director Alicia Duffy 
screened her debut feature in the Directors' Fortnight strand, and British 
directors Sophie Fiennes and Lucy Walker both took documentaries, but the main 
competition was an all-male affair: Mike Leigh, Ken Loach and 17 others. This 
year – perhaps by chance, perhaps as a corrective measure taken by the 
selectors – there are four female film-makers in contention:Lynne Ramsay 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0708903/>, the British director of We Need to Talk 
About Kevin; AustralianJulia Leigh <http://www.faber.co.uk/author/julia-leigh/>
; France'sMaïwenn Le Besco <http://www.imdb.com/news/ni9902810/>; and Japan's 
Naomi Kawase <http://www.kawasenaomi.com/en/>. This is still only four out of 
20 directors – depressingly, the largest number of women ever to have competed 
for the Palme in a single year since the festival began in 1946.

Ramsay describes this as "shocking". "There is a huge inequality in the 
numbers," she tells me. Le Besco, who directs and stars in her third feature, 
Polisse, screening in Cannes tomorrow, says she has encountered sexism in 
the film industry "totally and permanently". "Let's be clear – men don't like 
having a woman on their back, and someone who is younger than them . . . they 
feel unmanned, manipulated, judged. Whereas if it is a man at the helm, they 
feel simply that they are being directed." Ramsay's experience is different: 
she says she has never encountered overt sexism, but observes that when male 
directors are demanding and exacting "they can be seen as artistic and creative 
and having huge integrity, whereas women can be seen as difficult and 
problematic". The gender imbalance in directing, she says, is "a bit like a 
country not being filmed – and that country not having a voice. It really does 
matter."

Why the imbalance? Clearly, the film industry cannot be separated from the 
world at large; just as there is an imbalance in other demanding leadership 
roles – in politics, in business – so there is when it comes to film directing. 
"Women are somewhat excluded in the world, and this is just one platform," as 
documentary-maker Sophie Fiennes puts it. (Her film about the artist Anselm 
Kiefer,Over Your Cities Grass Will Grow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2010/may/19/cannes-film-festival-anselm-kiefer?INTCMP=SRCH>
, screened at Cannes last year.) Fiennes says she can remember distinctly the 
first time she knew she wanted to become a director. "I was 14, and I was 
babysitting. I watched [Werner Herzog's] The Enigma of Kaspar Hauser, and I had 
an absolute clarity that this is what I wanted to do. I remember thinking, 'How 
can I do this?' I thought perhaps I'd have to dress up as a man – almost in a 
Shakespearean sense, like Viola – to enter the court."

Director Penny Woolcock, whose work includes a film of John Adams's opera The 
Death of Klinghoffer, thinks the answer is straightforward. "Women have 
children, and I don't think it's any more complicated than that. You find that 
women directors either had children very young, like me – I didn't start 
directing until my 30s – or are childless, or can afford childcare and don't 
mind not seeing their children for long periods of time." She describes 
directing as a "brutal" regime, requiring a monomaniac attention to the project 
before and after filming, and a shoot that requires its director to be on set 
12 hours a day, six days a week. Ramsay talks of "a vocation, an all-consuming 
job that becomes your life". Danish directorFrederikke Aspöck 
<http://www.dfi.dk/Service/English/News-and-publications/News/April-2011/Von-Trier-Refn-and-Aspoeck-to-Cannes.aspx>
, whose debut feature Out of Bounds is being given a special screening at 
Cannes, says there is a growing excitement about women film directors in 
Denmark: earlier this year, Susanne Bier's In a Better World won the Oscar for 
best foreign language film, whileLone Scherfig 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0771054/>'s 2009 An Education was nominated for 
every award going. Still, Aspöck acknowledges that without her "fantastic" 
husband to care for their two young children, her work would be impossible. 
"For some women in the film world, it becomes more attractive to have an office 
job in the industry," Aspöck says.

And she is right that there is no shortage of powerful women in other parts of 
the film world, particularly as producers and funders. (There remain very few 
critics: the Times's Kate Muir is the only first-string female critic on a 
quality British newspaper.) In Britain, Film4 is run by Tessa Ross, and BBC 
Films by Christine Langan. The major public funding body, the BFI, is run by 
Amanda Nevill, with Tanya Seghatchian head of its film fund. Julia Leigh, whose 
"erotic fairytale" Sleeping Beauty is already attracting a frisson of 
excitement ahead of its premiere tomorrow, says there were a significant number 
of women behind her film debut (she is adapting her own novel): Leigh's 
producer, and the purse-string-holders at the Australian funding bodies, are 
female. She has also had the good fortune to have been mentored by fellow 
Australian Jane Campion, whose The Piano is the only film by a woman to have 
won the Palme d'Or (and even then not outright: the accolade was shared with 
Kaige Chen's Farewell My Concubine). Campion "reminded me to stay attuned to my 
instinct, to respond energetically, to service the film," Leigh says. "There 
were many occasions when I was being battered in the high seas. Her 
encouragement was vital comfort and ballast."

Know your chops, get respect

Mention of Campion is germane: the extent to which her career was boosted by 
The Piano's success at Cannes is a reminder of just how crucial a launchpad 
this annual gathering of the film tribes can be.Andrea Arnold 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrea_Arnold> had already won an Oscar for a 
short film when her first feature, Red Road, premiered at Cannes in 2006: the 
international exposure, and the fact she came home clutching the jury prize, 
proved extremely significant in her elevation to European arthouse royalty. (Le 
Besco namechecks Arnold as a role model: "She's a genius," she says – though 
interestingly Arnold's new adaptation of Wuthering Heights is not coming to 
Cannes but will instead premiere at Venice in September.)

If there are so many women producing and funding films, what is the problem 
with directing? Is there more to it than the demands of childcare and family? 
Few directors, with the exception of Le Besco, feel there is a problem when it 
comes to commanding authority on set. Ramsay, who was a cinematographer before 
she made the leap into directing, talks of "knowing your chops technically – 
then you tend to get respect". Woolcock laughs at herself for, as a young 
director, reading the journal American Cinematographer "cover to cover for 
three years", so that she felt she had the expertise to boss around her male 
directors of photography. But being a leader on set, she says, "has never been 
an issue" – particularly once she worked out that "you don't have to work with 
people you don't like".

Rachel Millward, director of Birds Eye View <http://www.birds-eye-view.co.uk/>
, a British film festival that celebrates film-making by women, thinks there is 
something else at play. "Yes, as a director you need to work on location, yes 
it's insecure, yes you have to work stupidly intensely. But that doesn't 
account for another inequality in the film world – that there are so few women
writing for film. There is something about the industry that does have 
barriers; there are still things in the industry that are hard to crack for 
women." She talks about the fact that screenwriting demands an intense amount 
of work at the business level: "You have to know people, network, write for the 
market."

The same is true, and more so, for directors, she argues. "When it comes to 
raising money for a film you need vast amounts of confidence to get through all 
those doors, and phenomenal amounts of persuasiveness and leadership skills. 
And, in a wider societal way, women are not encouraged to acquire those skills. 
Film has a funny interplay between business and art that makes it quite 
different from being a painter or a novelist." Campion, asked about the issue 
when she brought her film Bright Star to Cannes two years ago, said: "I don't 
think women grow up with the world of criticism that men grow up with. It's 
quite harsh when they experience the world of film-making and have to develop 
tough skins. But they must put on their coats of armour and get going. Because 
we need them."

There is, perhaps, the grounds for a sliver of optimism in the face of the 
still-grim statistics. Britain has a growing number of internationally 
acclaimed film-makers: as well as Ramsay and Arnold, there is Joanna Hogg, Sam 
Taylor-Wood,Antonia Bird <https://www.theguardian.com/film/antonia-bird>, 
Beeban Kidron, Phyllida Lloyd and Gurinder Chadha. Amanda Nevill, director of 
the BFI, talks about a "door having been opened" and a gradual change in the 
culture of an industry, aided by the number of women "gatekeepers" – the 
funders and executives. "Women are on the rise, definitely," says Ramsay. 
"There are many more interesting women film-makers out there, and there will be 
great women film-makers in the future." According to Leigh: "I'm grateful to 
the women who have gone before me and have proven – without a doubt – that 
women are more than capable of making great films, all kinds of great films." 
Her last remark is pointed: "I suspect," she says, "male film-makers are rarely 
asked how they feel about being a male director."
 