
Three years ago, Shaliya was so shy she didn’t want to leave her house. Like 
many of the 64 million people living in India’s sprawling slums, her home in 
New Delhi’s Sanjay camp had no toilet, and she dreaded the lewd comments from 
men loitering on the street if she had to walk to the public toilets yards away.


Shaliya has worked hard in the last three years, setting herself up as a youth 
leader and trying to tackle the problem of women’s safety in her neighbourhood. 
She runs an online map that shows areas that aren’t safe or that have no 
lighting, and tries to educate parents about why girls and boys must study and 
play together, and respect each other. And she advises other shy young girls 
how to deal with intimidating comments or threats from men on the street, 
trying to make their own walk to the public toilet slightly more safe.

Women walk alone to reclaim India's streets from fear and harassment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/26/women-walk-alone-blank-noise-india-reclaim-streets-fear-harrassment>
India’s national crime statistics <http://ncrb.nic.in/> make for grim reading. 
There were 82,422 recorded assaults against women in 2015, including sexual 
harassment, voyeurism and stalking and another 34,651 reported rapes. Many 
other assaults and rapes are believed to be unreported. The brutal rape and 
subsequent death of a young woman by five men in New Delhi in December 2012 
shocked India and the world. In the aftermath of the attack one question arose: 
how could women stay safe in public spaces? And perhaps inevitably, many turned 
to technology to try and create a solution.

First came a wave of online maps, which women could access in public internet 
cafes. When affordable mobile phones became widespread, attention shifted to 
dedicated apps, most of which combined a reporting system for unsafe areas with 
and the ability to share location with friends or family, or a panic alarm 
feature for emergencies.

An app launched by the Delhi police called Himmat, or “courage” in Hindi, 
sends out the user’s location to the police control room. It is just one of 40 
different safety apps currently available for women in India. Yet many of them 
went the same way as Hawk Eye, an app launched and promoted by police in 
Hyderabad in 2013. It had good intentions but simply didn’t do the job; nota 
single genuine alarm 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/hyderabad/In-2-yrs-not-once-panic-button-on-womens-safety-app-pressed/articleshow/49532368.cms>
 was raised through the app, which has come to represent the futility of 
tackling a complex social and cultural problem with crude technology.

This wave of apps is referred to by some as “saviour” apps. Osama Manzar, 
creator of the Digital Empowerment Foundation, says that in the hurry to try 
and rush out a service to help, not much strategic consideration was given to 
how connect services to the government. “For some others it is just a feel-good 
project and only a few are serious about real solutions,” he says.

The campaign group Red Elephant <http://www.redelephantfoundation.org/> was 
set up to coordinate safety efforts and provide emotional and legal support to 
women who have experienced violent on the streets or at home. Its research in 
early 2016 found that of 4,300 women, 2,547 had a safety app installed on their 
mobile phone, yet 72% said they had not used it at all. Separate research by 
the women’s safety charity Akshara found that 95% of women in India have faced 
sexual harassment on the streets.

Many of these issues were highlighted in the 2011 book Why Loiter? Women & 
Risk on Mumbai Streets 
<http://www.amazon.in/Why-Loiter-Shilpa-Phadke/dp/0143415956>, which explored 
women’s right to use public spaces in safety. It led to an empowerment campaign 
by women who “loitered” in public spaces in Mumbai, Jaipur and Aligarh. 
Co-author Sameera Khan says she is concerned about an over-reliance on 
technology to help women feel safe, not least because it means private 
companies are gathering personal data on their location.

“The plethora of tech-based solutions seem to assume that women don’t do 
anything for their safety, when in reality, without any assured state or 
institutional support, women and girls are always strategising and producing 
safety for themselves in a multitude of ways,” said Khan.

Akshara’s co-director Dr Nandita Gandhi says there are both technological and 
social challenges in tackling this epidemic of violence and aggression against 
women. Many app projects simply don’t have enough funding for the staff or 
resources needed to keep the service updated, yet developers have to create 
apps that work across a huge number of different handsets, and many cheap 
handsets have poor battery life, slow processors and outdated operating 
systems. There’s also poor connectivity in many regions and inaccurate GPS – 
all of which make safety apps harder to use and less reliable. And while the 
Indiangovernment <http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-36139985> has ruled that 
all mobile phones sold from 2017 must have a built-in panic button, this will 
also lead to an increase in the price of handsets.

Female tourists should not wear skirts in India, says tourism minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/29/india-female-tourists-skirts-safety-advice>
Other problems are more profound, including lack of education among some 
police forces that collaborate on safety apps. Akshara’sHarassMap 
<https://akshara.crowdmap.com/feeds?page=3> project crowdsourced women’s 
experiences from across Mumbai. “When we collaborated with the police, they 
asked us to verify every complaint that we received – that’s simply not 
possible because majority of the complaints are reported anonymously,” said 
Gandhi, whose work has focused on improving the relationship between the 
community and the police, many of whom are often coloured bytheir own moral 
judgments <http://www.tehelka.com/2012/04/the-rapes-will-go-on/> about how 
women should behave and whether they should be out after dark. “The tendency 
has been to ignore stalking and lewd remarks. Women feel that their complaints 
won’t be taken seriously by the police, and just want to move on.”

Another project, SafeCity <http://safecity.in/>, has concentrated on backing 
up its technology with workshops and education in the real world. Launched in 
December 2012 by ElsaMarie D’Silva, who left a career in the aviation industry 
to focus on social justice projects. It focuses on crowdsourced reports of 
assaults and harassment and has gathered 10,000 stories from more than 50 
cities across India, Nepal and Kenya.

D’Silva says most of the stories on the site have been the result of working 
with grassroots communities in Delhi, Mumbai, Pune and Goa, organising 
workshops for women and girls and encouraging them to discuss their safety in 
public spaces. “Women say they would rather change their walking route than 
complain to the police. In the bargain, the perpetrator becomes bolder,” she 
said. “Often in our workshops, when women start opening up, men say they didn’t 
know the extent of such incidences, because the women would keep mum than talk 
about it.” She says that bystanders also need to speak up when men act 
inappropriately or they become complicit in violence against women.

D’Silva hopes that women will be able to feel more confident in reporting 
crimes, and that safety can slowly be improved in problematic parts of the 
city. For now, the rivalry of competing safety apps isn’t helping, says Red 
Elephant founder Kirthi Jayakumar, who survived child sexual abuse herself.

“The idealist in me wants to believe that so many apps means so many people 
want to address the issue of gender-based violence,” she said. “But 
organisations are very guarded about their curriculum and data, instead of this 
information being in the public domain.”

For Shaliya, helping her local community is the most direct way to start 
making a difference. Coordinating a group of 20 young people in her New Delhi 
slum, Shaliya’s team have painted murals using Hindi words directed at men: a 
boy whistling at a girl, a crouching girl being touched by three men and three 
boys pulling at a girl’s scarf.

It seems to have helped, she says. “After about a month of those paintings, 
girls began to openly complain about certain boys, cops began to tour the 
place, and now there are hardly any boys loitering outside the toilet complex.”
 