
The producers of BBC’s Panorama must have thought they had come up with a good 
idea by sending Adrian Chiles back to his home town to discover why people 
voted to leave theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

In fact, “Why Brexiters voted to leave: Britain speaks” was a missed 
opportunity. Instead of casting light on the reasons for working class support 
for Brexit,the programme broadcast on BBC1 on Monday evening (4 July) 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b07k7m4x/panorama-why-we-voted-to-leave-britain-speaks>
 tended to confirm the prejudice it set out to combat.

Chiles, a London-based TV presenter born and raised in West Bromwich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/west-bromwich> - “the heart of England” - began 
by laying out his stall.

The general view in London, he said, was it was that “the thick, the 
uneducated” who voted leave in the EU referendum. “Well, I’m not having that... 
It just doesn’t sound right to me.”

So off he went to interview a random selection of people in an area “where 
jobs are seriously thin on the ground”. Was the joblessness due to Britain’s EU 
membership? We were not told.

According to Chiles, out-of-work father-of-six John told him that “Polish 
families get housing ahead of him” and he lost his £14-an-hour steel industry 
job “when immigrants started doing the work for less than half that.”


Was that really the case? Where was the confirmation from the council that it 
was allocating houses to incoming Poles rather than indigenous Brits? Why was 
there no check with John’s former employer about its recruitment policies?

Unsurprisingly, John said it was time to stop immigration. Having voted leave, 
he said: “This is our country now... we want more jobs and more help for poor 
people.”

We also met Katie who told Chiles: “My vote counted... I’m really proud that 
finally we’ve been listened to.” But she admitted she had never entered a 
polling booth before.

She had voted leave because “this country is falling apart... the government 
are not putting enough back into the community, into our councils.” In other 
words, her vote was a protest not against EU membership, but against the UK 
government’s policies.

Although she thought immigration “a good thing”, her underlying views were 
revealed in a further statement: “I feel like we’re helping everybody else, but 
we’re forgetting here.”

Pub landlord Ryan raised the problem of “not being able to get your child into 
a school” (another unexplored claim) and argued, more cogently, that the leave 
vote was “two fingers up to the establishment”.

Several interviewees said they had “nothing against” immigrants before going 
on to say they blamed the scale of immigration. They’re not here to contribute 
to the “social aspects of the community”, said Jim, they’re breaking the 
community apart.

Barry, a retired man, complained about the closure of factories and the 
decline of Britain’s manufacturing industry. This could be reversed, he 
suggested, by “taking control of our own destiny” outside the EU. Seriously? 
Did Chiles not think it important to challenge that?

Barry’s wife, Hazel, then offered what Chiles called “the clearest take on why 
the vote went leave’s way.” She said: “That river of all what’s wrong, what’s 
been forced on the British people, by the EU, or whatever you want to call 
them, these bodies, saying you can’t do this, you can’t do that, and all that 
river is flowing to one big massive sea.” Clear? Was he being serious?

There was an illuminating one-and-a-half-minute section devoted to interviews 
with remain voters. They offered a range of reasons for the referendum going 
against them: it was based on naivete... a massive protest vote... a reaction 
to deindustrialisation.

Panorama’s producers may well say that they did not set out to do anything 
more than let the people speak. But the validity of that intention was undone 
by the execution. Sticking a microphone in front of people and coaxing them to 
speak amounted to little more than an extended vox pop.

It is fair to say that the programme did illustrate that people suffering from 
conditions of austerity believe that their problems are the result of 
immigration. They also appear to blame immigration on the policies of the EU 
rather than those UK government.

I don’t deny that the emergence of that reality had some value. But the 
picture was not drawn well enough to be clear to the majority of viewers.

I fear that leave voters watching Panorama would have had their prejudices 
confirmed. As for remain voters, I wouldn’t be surprised if it underlined their 
belief, to quote Chiles, that Brexit was all down to “the thick, the 
uneducated.”
 