
Cam Newton threw for two touchdowns and ran for two others, and Carolina’s 
big-play defense stifled the league’s top-ranked offense in a 49-15 romp on 
Sunday for the NFC championship. It was the most points for a winner of an NFC 
title game.

The NFL’s new top man at quarterback — Newton is an All-Pro this season — will 
lead the Panthers against five-time MVP Peyton Manning and the Denver Broncos 
in two weeks.

“Playing the sheriff,” Newton said of Manning. “We’re going to live in the 
moment right now. We’re going to be excited.”

Manning tops Brady as Broncos beat Patriots to make Super Bowl 50
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/24/peyton-manning-tops-tom-brady-denver-broncos-beat-patriots-nfl-super-bowl-50>
It will be Newton’s first trip to the Super Bowl and the second trip to the 
big game for the Panthers (17-1), who lost to New England 12 years ago. Denver, 
of course, have made a habit of going to Super Bowls, reaching it for a 
record-tying eighth time.

“We won as a team,” Newton said. “We came out here and fought our tails off 
and we did what a lot of people said we couldn’t do. It’s not over yet. We’ll 
be ready to go in two weeks.”

And while the Broncos’ defense carried the team past New England 20-18 for the 
AFC crown, Carolina’s D was just as destructive. They picked off Carson Palmer 
four times, forced two fumbles by him, and never let up the assault.

Special teams also had a takeaway, and when Carolina grabbed a 24-7 halftime 
lead this time, they didn’t back off, as they did in nearly blowing a 31-point 
margin a week ago against Seattle.

When Newton flew into the end zone for a 12-yard third-quarter touchdown, 
dabbed a bit, and pointed the Panthers toward the Bay Area and Super Bowl 50.

Newton finished with 335 yards passing and 47 rushing as Carolina won their 
13th straight home game, including three in the playoffs.

One of his biggest helpers was Ted Ginn Jr, who was dumped by the Cardinals 
after last season. Ginn had a 32-yard punt return to set up his weaving 22-yard 
TD run, and chased down All-Pro cornerback Patrick Peterson to prevent a 
second-quarter touchdown. He also had 52 yards on two receptions.

Carolina’s defense did the rest, most notably making Palmer uncomfortable in 
the pocket and turning Larry Fitzgerald, the star of last week’s overtime 
victory against Green Bay, into a virtual non-entity. The unit led the league 
with 39 takeaways, and at times they made an Arizona team that gained more 
yards than anyone look amateurish.

Capping the barrage was All-Pro Luke Kuechly, who returned an interception 22 
yards for a score. The 49 points were the most this season for Carolina, who 
led theNFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> with 500 points.
 