
Al Gore <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/algore>, former US 
vice-president, Nobel laureate and chairman of theClimate Reality Project 
<https://www.climaterealityproject.org/whoweare>, has led the global discussion 
about climate change for many years. His multi-award-winning filmAn 
Inconvenient Truth <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0497116/> (2006) has been 
widely credited with changing the way world leaders and citizens think about 
the issue.Don Henry <http://sustainable.unimelb.edu.au/people/don-henry> is 
public policy fellow in environmentalism at theUniversity of Melbourne 
<http://www.unimelb.edu.au/> and is a former director of the Australian 
Conservation Foundation. He is a long-term collaborator with Gore. Their 
conversation was recorded for the Griffith Review.

Al Gore attacks CSIRO's climate cuts and praises Labor's proposals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/30/al-gore-attacks-csiros-climate-cuts-and-praises-labors-proposals>
Don Henry: The Paris climate agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/paris-climate-agreement> was recently 
concluded – what opportunities and challenges does it present to the world for 
the future?

Al Gore: This past December, 195 countries came together in Paris for the 21st 
conference of the parties (COP21) and reached a historic agreement, which 
exceeded the highest end of the range of expectations we could have had for it. 
Now the questions we face are how will we solve the climate crisis, what 
opportunities are we presented with and what challenges remain? COP21 received 
an unprecedented level of support from all sectors of society, both public and 
private, creating a window of opportunity aligning at just the right time for a 
successful agreement. We have created a major new opportunity by committing to 
a sustainable future. But we have to steer in the right direction and 
accelerate our pace because we still face challenges. We simply cannot continue 
to put 110m tons of global-warming pollution into the atmosphere every day as 
if it’s an open sewer.

The sum total of the commitments made in Paris – the intended nationally 
determined contributions – will not add up to what is necessary to keep us 
under the target set by the agreement. The emissions reductions agreements are 
not mandatory, which, I believe, was the unavoidable and right choice. But 
because of this and because we know we must change, it is exceptionally 
important that we focus on the commitments made by countries and the work 
nations are doing to implement their commitments, as well as process, visualise 
and share this information widely.

Moreover, the regular, five-year review and ratchet provision, and the 
requirement for transparency in reporting, are mandatory, and they will give 
people who care about our planet and future generations an opportunity to focus 
on the decisions being made by their leaders. This is really important. The 
success of Paris was largely due to the fact that global awareness, and the 
level and quality of global consciousness about the existential threat we face 
from the climate crisis, has risen to a point where nations that were in the 
bubble could not go home without having taken substantial action – and we need 
to keep the pressure on. Significantly, the process of “review and ratchet” set 
out in the Paris agreement will occur against the backdrop of a continuing 
sharp decline in the cost of renewable energy, energy efficiency, batteries and 
storage, and sustainable agriculture and forestry. The practical ability of 
nations five years from now to say, “we can do more” will be greatly enhanced. 
So if the people of the world really pay attention and continue to keep the 
pressure on, it will make a tremendous difference.

The rapidly declining cost of renewable energy, particularly solar 
photovoltaic (PV) energy, provides a great opportunity for nations around the 
world to embrace a sustainable, low-carbon economy. Our ability to convert 
sunshine into usable energy has become much cheaper far more quickly than 
anyone had predicted. For example, solar energy has been coming down in cost at 
a rate of 10% per year over the past 30 years.

In many parts of the world, renewable energy is already cheaper than that of 
fossil fuels and in some parts of the world renewable energy is leapfrogging 
fossil fuels altogether. These cost reductions are continuing.

But we must do more to help nations make the transition to a low- or 
zero-carbon economy. India, for example, has more people without any 
electricity at all than the entire population of the United States. And in 
order to invest in solar on the scale at which they require presently means 
borrowing money for solar farms at an interest rate of 8-12%. That is an 
absurdly high cost of capital in an era of very low interest rates. We need to 
address this on a priority basis and the public-private partnerships on which 
the Paris agreement was built need to do more and go farther.

We also need to put a price on carbon and enable markets to more effectively 
reflect the true costs of sources of energy. Though there is a growing adoption 
of direct and indirect carbon pricing at local, national and regional levels 
now being implemented in 40 countries, and 23 large city-states and provincial 
governments, we must work to make it a universal standard rather than an 
exception. We need to move faster in eliminating the massive government 
subsidies of fossil fuels.

Regardless of the challenges we still face, there was a powerful signal of 
opportunity sent from Paris by business leaders and investors, civil society 
leaders and society in general. That signal is being received around the world: 
we can and we will solve the climate crisis.

The Guardian view on the UN climate change treaty: now for some action | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/24/the-guardian-view-on-the-un-climate-change-treaty-now-for-some-action>
Henry: In your book The Future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/31/the-future-al-gore-review>, you 
examine six drivers of global change. With fresh insights from the last two 
years, do you still see these as the key drivers of change for the future? 
Would you add, subtract and emphasise any?

Gore: Much has changed since I wrote The Future but the forces that are 
driving that change have not. For example, our world is becoming increasingly 
globalised, the biotech revolution is speeding up, the internet has continued 
to serve as an open public square and there appear to be no signs of these 
advancements slowing down.

This is evident when we witness the ongoing struggle to balance cyber security 
and surveillance, and when we see automation changing the way we produce goods 
and services. It’s clear as we watch countries around the world confront the 
balance of political, economic and military powers, as they shift faster than 
we have seen at any time in the last 500 years and as advancements in synthetic 
biology continue to reinvent life and death.

If I were to emphasise any key driver of global change, it would be the rapid 
transformation of renewable energy to fulfil our energy needs and solve the 
climate crisis. Since The Future was published, we have seen the development of 
renewable energy continue to progress faster than I could have imagined, along 
with a stunningly sharp decline in the price of renewable energy. In 2000, 
analysts predicted that wind capacity would reach 30GW by 2010. In reality, 
that was exceeded by 14.5 times in 2015. In 2002, analysts predicted the solar 
energy market would grow 1GW per year by 2010. That was exceeded by 17 times; 
in 2015 it was exceeded by 58 times and it is predicted to be exceeded by as 
much as 68 times in 2016. And there are no signs of these trends stopping.

I also certainly hoped for, but could not have predicted, the willingness of 
global leaders to come together so eagerly to chart a path forward to solve the 
climate crisis this past December. Actors in every part of our global society 
are recognising not only the challenges we face due to these key drivers but 
also the opportunities they provide. And they are actively working together to 
take advantage of these opportunities. We also cannot ignore the speed with 
which many of these changes are taking place and having an impact on our 
society as a whole. We can, we will and we are working to minimise their 
negative impacts and take hold of the opportunities they present us with – but 
we cannot wait and we must do more.

Henry: You refer to the beginning of a massive global transformation to 
re-establish a healthy balance between human civilisation and the future. What 
could this look like in 2050? 

Gore: The good news is that establishing a healthy balance between human 
civilisation and the future is within our reach but it will require a highly 
functioning global ideology – and ours currently needs substantial reforms.

Capitalism must incorporate reforms to show complete and accurate measurements 
of the full spectrum of “value”, including both positive and negative 
“externalities”, so that we can effectively respond to threatening crises like 
climate change. As for democracy, which until recent history has served as a 
beacon of hope and leadership for the world, it has been hacked by large 
corporations and special interests. It no longer reflects the ideals it was 
established to embody and instead is dominated by the unchecked influence of 
money in politics. This must be changed urgently so that we can once again 
harvest “the wisdom of crowds” in self-governance.

If we are to have the healthy balance that is well within our reach, we’ll 
need to re-evaluate our current reliance on gross domestic product, fully 
recognise the value of public goods, redesign growth, agriculture and forestry 
with sustainability as a guide, and firmly establish leadership based on the 
deepest human values. But there is hope.

Technology, for its part – particularly the internet – is giving voice to the 
growing movement for reform. Social media, blogs and digital journalism are 
leveling the playing field and serving as the foundation for broader 
participation in democracy, and the elevation of reason over wealth and power. 
And, as income inequality persists throughout the world, more calls are being 
made to ensure that our measurements of growth are fair and logical. The Paris 
agreement shows us that we can do the collaborative work necessary for a 
healthy, sustainable future. 2050 could be dominated by clean, efficient energy 
and a zero-carbon, commonsense economy, which utilises a long-term view and 
protects the planet for future generations. Developing nations like India and 
Bangladesh, where they are installing nearly two new rooftop photovoltaic 
systems every minute, and countries in west and east Africa are already 
embracing a future powered by clean energy. We have all the tools we need to 
solve the climate crisis and ensure a sustainable future; the only question is 
how dramatically we can accelerate this transition.

Henry: Reflections for Australia – what could this look like in Australia in 
2050? Where are Australia’s strengths and weaknesses for this transformed 
future?

Gore: Australia is one of the world’s “canaries in the coalmine”, a place 
where we are already seeing the impacts of the climate crisis. This past year 
was one of Australia’s five hottest years of all time and annual rainfall was 
well below average. Hotter temperatures and rising sea-level projections mean 
that the climate crisis could cost Australia as much as $200bn. In the face of 
this harsh new climate reality, there have been political forces in your 
country working to prevent Australia’s ability to act as the global leader it 
once was in the effort to solve the climate crisis. The most recent example of 
this is the announcement of major cuts to Australia’sCSIRO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/csiro>, a global leader and 
reference point for climate science. These cuts will deeply affect the source 
of valuable research for the entire world at a time when such information is 
critical to solving the challenge of our changing climate. They should be 
re-evaluated at the highest level.

In 2014, I was disappointed by the repeal of Australia’s nationwide price on 
carbon. Despite [Australia’s] legacy as a world leader, this step placed 
Australia behind other major industrial nations in the growing global effort to 
reduce carbon emissions. Yet the continued public support for theRenewable 
Energy Target <http://www.cleanenergyregulator.gov.au/RET>, the Clean Energy 
Finance Corporation <http://www.cleanenergyfinancecorp.com.au/>, the Australian 
Renewable Energy Agency <http://arena.gov.au/> and the Climate Change Authority 
<http://www.climatechangeauthority.gov.au/> are encouraging signs of 
Australia’s continued effort to solve the climate crisis.

Al Gore urges world leaders to sign Paris climate deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/17/al-gore-urges-world-leaders-to-sign-paris-climate-deal>
In areas where the national government has failed to act or when political 
forces work to prevent climate action, Australia’s subnational governments and 
businesses are, in fact, proving to be a bold force. And despite government 
cuts in investment, individuals are leading the way by investing in clean 
energy like solar PV. According to a report last year, approximately 15% of 
Australian homes were equipped with solar panels. Much of this growth is due to 
important policy choices in places like South Australia and Queensland. By the 
end of 2014, more than 1.4m small-scale solar PV systems were installed across 
Australia. And there are even more encouraging signs. From June 2014 to June 
2015, annual emissions were the second lowest since 2000 and per capita 
emissions were 28.4% lower than they were in 1990. These examples, along with 
theLabor party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party>’s 
pledge to adopt a 50% renewable energy target by 2030, show that there is 
strong support and opportunity for climate action in the country.

Australia has a rich history of beating its international commitments on 
climate change, beginning with the commitment made under the Kyoto protocol. 
The country’s business and government sectors must return to the vanguard of 
solving the climate crisis and remember that political will is a renewable 
resource.

Henry: You dedicate your book The Future to your mother. What did she and your 
other mentors give you that has helped you think about change and the future? 

Gore: My mother was a pioneer in pursuing the rights of women. She was one of 
the first women to graduate fromVanderbilt <http://www.vanderbilt.edu/> law 
school in my home state of Tennessee. After graduating, she could not find 
legal work anywhere in the city of Nashville because none of the law firms 
there would hire women. She had to leave Tennessee and go elsewhere in order to 
seek employment. Even in the prime of her career she still faced this kind of 
discrimination on a regular basis.

Joe Hockey on CSIRO cuts: former treasurer's letter to the New York Times 
dissected
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/15/joe-hockey-on-csiro-cuts-former-treasurers-letter-to-the-new-york-times-dissected>
When I first encountered the history of women’s suffrage and the long struggle 
in my country for women’s rights, I imagined the difficulties in those first 
decades of the 20th century that my own mother faced, not only in finding work 
in her profession but raised in a society where the right to vote was decided 
on gender. It hit me like a bolt of lightning. I could not understand how there 
could be or have been such discrimination against women.

But I took from that realisation a message of real hope because if we could 
change so much from that time until now, it means that more change is possible. 
And the women’s suffrage movement is not the only moral cause humanity has had 
to deal with. We have seen similar struggles in the civil rights movement of my 
country, the movement against apartheid in South Africa and the movement to 
remove discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. These examples all 
demonstrate that the political will to act is, itself, a renewable resource.

They are fantastic sources of hope for all the work that must be done in order 
to realise a sustainable agenda for the future. As the great poet Wallace 
Stevens said: “After the last ‘no’ comes a ‘yes’ and on that ‘yes’ the future 
of the world depends.”

Al Gore is a former vice-president of the United States. He was awarded the 
Nobel prize for peace in 2007. Don Henry is a public policy fellow in 
environmentalism at the University of Melbourne and a former director of the 
Australian Conservation Foundation.

• Griffith Review 52: Imagining the Future 
<https://griffithreview.com/editions/imagining-the-future/>, edited by Julianne 
Schultz and Brendan Gleeson of the Melbourne Sustainable Society Institute, is 
available now.
 