
Governments may have signalled an end to the fossil fuel era, with massive 
consequences for industry, global security, financial markets and public health,
Al Gore <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/algore> and other business leaders 
have said.

“This universal and ambitious agreement sends a clear signal to governments, 
businesses, and investors everywhere: the transformation of our global economy 
from one fuelled by dirty energy to one fuelled by sustainable economic growth 
is now firmly and inevitably under way,” the former senator said in a statement.

“No agreement is perfect, and this one must be strengthened over time, but 
groups across every sector of society will now begin to reduce dangerous carbon 
pollution through the framework of this agreement,” said Gore.

Gore was joined by Paul Polman, Unilever’s chief executive, who said investors 
would now have more confidence to address the risks of having fossil fuel 
assets on their books.

“The consequences of this agreement go far beyond the actions of governments. 
They will be felt in banks, stock exchanges, boardrooms and research centres as 
the world absorbs the fact that it is embarking on an unprecedented project to 
decarbonise the global economy.

“This realisation will unlock billions of dollars. It establishes a clear path 
to decarbonise the global economy within the lifetimes of many people alive 
today, reaping the benefits of cleaner air, greater security and avoiding the 
worst effects of climate change.”

The International Investors Group on Climate Change, a network managing €13tn 
of assets, said the decision would “help trigger a shift away from fossil fuels 
and encourage greater investments in renewable energy”.

Economist Jeffrey Sachs, director of Columbia University’s Earth Institute, 
encouraged capital market leaders to act boldly. “Capital markets will be the 
main driver of the transformation and we will be on the right track when stock 
markets say ‘shame on you’, punishing those who continue to add stranded assets 
to their portfolios.”

Earlier last week, 26 public and private financial institutions with more than 
$11tn in assets, as well as stock exchanges across the world, met to agree ways 
to combat climate change.

“It is crucial to ensure that all new investment contributes to more effective 
climate action. As the world’s largest lender for climate-related investment 
the European Investment Bank is pleased to share experience with financial 
institutions from around the world,” said Jonathan Taylor, European Investment 
Bank vice-president.

Philippe Joubert, chair of the Prince of Wales’s Corporate Leaders Group, 
which represents 23 global businesses including BT and France’s EDF, said: 
“Business leaders and investors now have a clear direction of travel. The Paris 
agreement will accelerate the shift to a new sustainable, equitable and 
decarbonised world.”

Pressure is also expected to grow for a tax on major oil, gas and coal 
companies for the carbon contained in the fuel they sell. According to the 
German Heinrich Böll Foundation, 90 fossil fuel companies are responsible for 
63% of CO2 emissions from human activities. They include Chevron, ExxonMobil, 
Saudi Aramco, BP, Gazprom and Shell.

The foundation is urging governments to impose a carbon levy on all fossil 
fuel extraction and mining, with the proceeds going to help pay poorer 
countries for adapting to climate change and meeting the costs of its impacts. 
The levy would be applied to both the exploitation and the burning of fossil 
fuels, said a spokesman.

The global fossil fuel divestment campaign, which claims to have persuaded 
universities, pension funds, foundations and others to drop more than $1tnof 
assets, can expect to see many more companies sell off their shares in fossil 
fuel companies.
 