
Today, at the beginning of the 21st century, the British are more obsessed 
with nature and wildlife than any other nation on earth. Television programmes 
such as Springwatch have legions of loyal fans; the RSPB has more than one 
million members, while almost as many have joined their local wildlife trust; 
two out of three of us feed birds in our gardens.

And yet this national passion for wildlife is a very modern phenomenon. Its 
origins lie in a major change that occurred in British society around two 
centuries ago: the shift from a mainly rural society to a predominantly urban 
one, a change that at the time threatened to destroy our passion for nature 
altogether.

Until 1800, as many as three in four Britons lived in the countryside. A lucky 
few were rich landowners, living a life of leisure, but the vast majority were 
poor, and spent most of their waking hours working the land. If they thought 
about wildlife at all, it was probably with a very practical approach: was a 
particular creature dangerous, or simply good to eat? They certainly had little 
time for the appreciation of nature we take for granted today.

The industrial revolution changed our relationship with the natural world 
forever. Within a couple of generations, our ancestors moved lock, stock and 
barrel from the countryside into towns and cities. By the end of the 19th 
century, almost four out of five Britons lived in urban areas.

But they didn't forget their rural heritage. Indeed, Victorian Britons soon 
began to hanker after the life they had left behind. Excursions into the 
countryside, first by railway and later by road, became a regular part of 
people's lives. Societies such as the London Natural History Society, founded 
in 1858, and the West of Scotland Ramblers' Alliance, created in 1892, were 
formed to enable men and women to enjoy days out in the hills, woods and fields 
of rural Britain. By the beginning of the 20th century, an increase in mobility 
and leisure time saw a surge of interest in outdoor hobbies such as rambling 
and birdwatching; pastimes that would see an even more rapid growth after the 
second world war. 

Yet, for many people, the occasional visit to the countryside was not enough; 
they also wanted to bring nature into their daily lives. Town and city parks 
were created, where on summer evenings and weekends they could enjoy a breath 
of fresh air in a green space. Later, towards the end of the 19th century and 
during the early years of the 20th, the demand for private green spaces created 
a growing network of urban gardens. As time went on and Britons became more 
prosperous, they sought to attract wildlife to those gardens by providing food, 
water, and places to nest. In doing so, urban dwellers were creating a vital 
refuge for the wildlife itself.

The need to be self-sufficient in food in the years during and immediately 
after the second world war led to the destruction of many of our most valuable 
natural habitats. Millions of acres of ancient hedgerows and hay meadows, fens 
and marshes were ploughed up, drained and destroyed.

Even when food rationing came to an end in the early 1950s, and 
self-sufficiency was no longer quite so crucial, the destruction of our 
countryside continued. The rise of chemical farming, driven by a demand by 
consumers for cheap food at any cost, led to vast swathes of lowland Britain 
turning into little more than a food factory. During this same post-war period, 
the rapid rise in Britain's population fuelled a demand for more houses and 
roads. This provided a vital boost for the economy, but often proved disastrous 
for Britain's wildlife.

By the closing decades of the 20th century the countryside of our 
grandparents' childhood had, to all intents and purposes, ceased to exist. In 
its place was a green desert: clean, efficient, yet in places almost totally 
devoid of wildlife.

The consequences for our rural plants and animals have been devastating. 
Bumblebees and butterflies, cuckoos and cornflowers, skylarks and lapwings – 
every one an icon of our natural heritage – are all in rapid, and in some cases 
perhaps terminal, decline. 

And yet this dark cloud does have one silver lining: the rise of what nature 
writer Richard Mabey has memorably called the "unofficial countryside" – 
Britain's roadside verges and railway cuttings, canal towpaths and brownfield 
sites. This also includes the million or so acres of private gardens – an area 
around the size of Suffolk, and bigger than all the nature reserves in Britain 
put together. 

These places – many of them in the heart of our towns and cities – provide a 
vital oasis for Britain's wild creatures, a haven as important as anywhere in 
the British Isles for supporting a diverse range of plants and animals. Perhaps 
because of the wide range of wildlife found in our urban areas, and the 
frequency with which we encounter these city creatures, urban Britons are just 
as connected to nature as – arguably sometimes more so than – their rural 
neighbours. The countryside and those who live there no longer have a monopoly 
on nature.

So, even as we have witnessed the wholesale destruction of some of our most 
precious habitats and their wildlife, our passion for nature has thrived and 
developed into something that now defines us as a nation. This has its roots in 
the events of two centuries ago, when our ancestors were wrenched away from 
life on the land, and herded together into cities. Far from losing our passion 
for nature, we city dwellers need it more than ever.

Two hundred years after the greatest change in British society, landscape and 
nature began, we and the wildlife are together again. Yet this is not in some 
bucolic, rural idyll, but in the heart of our biggest and busiest cities. These 
are the places where Britain's wild creatures can still be seen, loved and 
appreciated in all their beauty, diversity and wonder.

Stephen Moss is a naturalist, author and broadcaster. To order a copy of his 
latest book, Wild Hares and Hummingbirds: The Natural History of an English 
Village, for the limited offer price of £9.99 (RRP £14.99), visit
theguardian.com/bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224086721>
 or call 0330 333 6846
 