
Political correspondent Tania Branigan is trekking to the Arctic with a team 
of MPsRead all entries 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/news/archives/arctic_challenge/> / More on the 
Arctic challenge <https://www.theguardian.com/arcticchallenge> 


Igloo building. Photo: Tania Branigan

Day three, Ovre Soppero, Sweden: "It's the first time I've seen MPs digging 
themselves into a hole and actually enjoying it," jokes Stephen, who's on the 
trip on behalf of Cancer Research.

The group is hard at work building four igloos - their accommodation for the 
night - under the deadpan instruction of Marcus, one of our local guides. Emily 
Thornberry and Lib Dem Jenny Willott are tasked with donning snowshoes and 
tramping around in a circle as the others chuck snow onto them.

Within an hour or so they are on top of a very large, icy mound ... with no 
obvious way down. "It's a Lib Dem landslide," Emily jokes as Jenny goes head 
over heels off the heap - only to somersault after her seconds later.

In truth, the MPs are getting on pretty well so far - though there are plenty 
of jokes at the expense of each others' parties. Lib Dem beard-and-sandal 
stereotypes, Notting Hill Tories, New Labour spin are all aired at length. Over 
dinner, they fall into more serious conversation about their political leanings.

"Why are you really a Lib Dem?" Ed and Tobias Ellwood quiz Nick. "Why are you 
Tories?" he enquires in return.

The questions are half in jest ... but they're off. I seem to remember all the 
MPs assuring me that they would be "too tired" to talk politics or would think 
it "too crass" to raise it while on a charity event.

But it's amazing what a few days of enforced familiarity can achieve. I'm 
betting at least some of the really thorny issues - Labour's health service 
reforms, say, or the Lib Dem's stance on law and order, or the genuineness of 
David Cameron's green credentials - will raise their head before this week is 
out.

Either that, or they were stringing out the debate to delay their night time 
retreat to the igloos for as long as possible. I read on the net before I came 
that igloos can be as warm as 16C inside. I can only imagine those are the 
centrally heated models - ours will reach a maximum of -3C, Marcus predicts. 
Brrr.

There's a reindeer skin waiting for me now, so I'm off to investigate for 
myself. I'd been thinking how much I've missed seasons in England - the last 
few years have had such mild winters - but I've realised many of the things I 
like about cold weather are actually to do with escaping it, such as cocoa, 
cashmere sweaters and nice hot baths - none of which are going to be in 
evidence for the next few days.

But who cares? I've just fulfilled a long-held ambition by seeing the northern 
lights. They sweep across the sky at astonishing speed, dusting great swathes 
of light across the blackness. Despite my icy fingers, I was glowing as I 
watched.
 