
Age: 34.

Appearance: Hot young chemistry lecturer.

He's not, though, is he? He's a hot young movie star. That's one of his claims 
to fame. You may remember him from Dude, Where's My Car?, Just Married or What 
Happens in Vegas. He also stars in the sitcom Two and a Half Men, for which he 
is said to be earning $20m a year.

Actually, I only know him from Heat magazine. He used to be married to Demi 
Moore, you know. Technically he still is. They got hitched in 2005 and still 
haven't got beyond filing for divorce.

Is that what today's Pass notes is about? Nope.

Then perhaps we should stop wasting space with petty corrections. There's 
another bit of the paper for that. All right, then. Kutcher is going to play 
Steve Jobs! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/apr/02/ashton-kutcher-steve-jobs-biopic>

The boring snooker bloke? No, the exciting visionary who gave the world the 
iPod, the iPhone, iTunes, the iMac, the iBook and iPhoto, to name just six 
Apple products beginning with i. This film will tell a tale of courage, 
inspiration, perfectionism and tragically early death.

As well as the mistreatment of millions of Chinese factory workers? Erm … 
There may not be quite enough time for that bit of the story. Apple certainly 
never manages to squeeze it into its product launches.

Funny, that. What we will see is Jobs's journey from "wayward hippy" to "one 
of the most revered creative entrepreneurs of our time".

Sounds like a laugh a minute. Who will direct this epic production? Joshua 
Michael Stern. He's best known for Swing Vote, in which the outcome of the 
American presidential election is left in the terrifying hands of Kevin 
Costner. Stern will have to get a move on, though, as there is anotherJobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jobs> biopic in the works, this one based on 
Walter Isaacson's authorised biography.

And what can Kutcher bring to his role? He looks like the young Jobs, and 
knows a bit about waywardness, having been convicted of burglary as a teenager. 
Plus, as a former model, he shouldn't have too much trouble with Steve's 
trademark jeans and polo neck.

Do say: "It just works."

Don't say: "Dude, where's my respect for workers' rights?"
 