
Production powerhouse All3Media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media> 
has added a further independent producer to its stable after snapping up 
Objective Productions, the maker of Channel 4 comedy Peep Show, in a deal 
estimated to be worth up to £50m.

Objective, which also makes Channel 4's Star Stories, is the twelfth firm to 
be bought by All3Media, which was created in July 2003 by former Granada 
executives Steve Morrison, Jules Burns and David Liddiment.

It joins, among others: Cactus TV, the maker of Richard and Judy; Lion 
Television, which produces Castaway; Company Pictures, which is behind 
Shameless; and Hollyoaks' maker Lime Pictures.

Objective, which as well as comedy also specialises in magic and entertainment 
programming, has bases in London and Manchester and was founded by Andrew 
O'Connor and Michael Vine in 1992.

As well as its UK programming, it is also expanding abroad, particularly in 
the US, where it is developing a version of Peep Show for cable channel Spike 
while Balls of Steel has been picked up by A&E and The Real Hustle has been 
bought by Court TV.

The US VH1 has also ordered a pilot version of Star Stories and a six-part 
series featuring Derren Brown is being made for the US Sci Fi Channel.

The firm has expanded quickly over the past few years, ranking 33rd for 
revenue growth in the Sunday Times 2006 Fast Track 100 league table.

Objective's chief executive Andrew O'Connor said: "Objective is a company that 
has built its reputation on developing programmes that are funny, exciting and 
innovative.

"This is a wonderful opportunity for us, being part of All3Media will help us 
to grow the business and expand our output."

The firm's joint managing director Michael Vine added: "For a company that has 
been proud of its independence, finding the right creative partnership was key 
for us and the talent."

All3Media chief executive Steve Morrison said Objective would fit well into 
the firm's mix of production companies.

"Objective is the UK's leading producer of magic and comedy and they excel in 
their style of entertainment, one of the most sought after genres in 
broadcasters' schedules," he said.

"Their format hits are much in demand in international markets and their 
presence in the All3Media Group will help us and them grow further."

Analysts have estimated the deal is worth between £40m and £50m.

Objective had a turnover of £23m last year, up from £14.6m the year before.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 