
Her wedding to movie mogul Harvey Weinstein was described as a star-studded 
fairytale event. But pity British fashion designerGeorgina Chapman, whose new 
husband saw fit to put their honeymoon on hold so he could chase up a few 
Oscars. Since the Oscars moved from March to February, only two late-December 
releases have made the nominations: a Spielberg production and an Eastwood 
film. The Great Debaters, directed byDenzel Washington and co-produced by 
Weinstein andOprah Winfrey, was released a few weeks ago, so Weinstein has been 
spending his honeymoon ensuring that there are nightly showings of the film 
anywhere academy voters could be, be it on skiing holidays in Aspen or sun 
holidays in Maui.

Tom Hanks says that "in the life of every football fan, there comes a time 
when you have to declare your allegiance". But being a Hollywood star, he 
couldn't merely divulge his allegiance over a pint in the local. No, it was at 
the premiere of his film Charlie Wilson's War that Hanks came out as an Aston 
Villa fan when he donned the team's claret and blue scarf. And why Aston Villa? 
Wouldn't a bigger team such Man United be more his kind of thing? "Oh," shrugs 
Hanks, "I saw the name Aston Villa float by on my TV screen and liked the 
name." As good a reason as any.

Life as a brunette was looking decidedly bleak, so who can blame Amy Winehouse 
for seeing if blondes have more fun? This was no subtle highlights job: she's 
had a dramatic peroxide crop. Does this have anything to do with Mr Blackwell's 
annual list of fashion flops, released on Tuesday? Blackwell put Winehouse in 
second place, giving her "exploding beehives above, tacky polka-dots below" as 
reasons. But maybe life will be easier now that she doesn't have to balance a 
beehive.

Alex Jennings has been a busy man. Recently on BBC screens as the Rev Hutton 
in Cranford after playingPrince Charles in The Queen, he has spent the last few 
weeks at the National Theatre as Garry Essendine inNoel Coward's Present 
Laughter. June will see him playing Doctor Pangloss and Voltaire inLeonard 
Bernstein'sCandide at the London Coliseum.

cathy.heffernan@theguardian.com <mailto:cathy.heffernan@theguardian.com>
 