
At this year's festival, you'll be able to hear the music of Mali's finest the 
way it was conceived, in darkness – Amadou & Mariam are both blind. "If you 
cannot see, your sense of sound becomes richer," says Amadou Bagayoko. "I want 
the audience to hear the music just as Mariam and I hear it." This won't be the 
first time an audience has been plunged into blackness – here's a brief recent 
history of shows in the dark.

Bands in blackness

Despite being known for their flamboyant dance routines and flashy stage 
shows, Friendly Fires agreed to play a Sony Ericsson "Pitch Black" session to 
200 fans in 2009. The band performed with the aid of night goggles, which went 
some way to allaying drummer Jack Savidge's fear of the dark. New York's JACK 
Quartet were allowed no cheating when they toured the Third String Quartet by 
avant-garde composer Georg Friedrich Haas last year – they had to memorise the 
music by feel as the entire concert hall was blacked out.

Theatre for the ears 

The Playing In The Dark season at London's BAC in 2000 launched a company that 
has used darkness to develop the sound space of theatre. Sound&Fury's pitch 
black staging of Christopher Logue's War Music sold out, and the company went 
on to produce a 70-minute adaptation of Moby Dick in a blacked-out theatre. And 
theatrical visionaries Punchdrunk hosted the most talked about event of MIF 
2009, with It Felt Like A Kiss, their spooky collaboration with Adam Curtis and 
Damon Albarn – which concluded with the audience being chased down a dark 
corridor by a chainsaw-wielding maniac. 

Art in the dark

Performing arts group Extant specialise in creating art for the visually 
impaired. Their recent exhibition The Question, created in collaboration with 
the Open University's computing department, asked visitors to navigate a 
gallery by touch, with a handheld robot triggering audio when it was in close 
proximity to an artwork. In Finland, it's dark for about four months of the 
year so it's no surprise they're pioneers of pitch black art. In March this 
year, the artists Sanna Syvänen and Paula Väinämö premiered a series of 13 
artworks and a play, all intended for participants to "experience the world as 
the visually impaired do". They even organised a series of parties that took 
place in the pitch black  
 