
The Amtrak engineer whose speeding train ran off the rails in Philadelphia 
last year was apparently distracted by word that a train nearby had been hit by 
a rock, federal investigators concluded on Tuesday, pinning most of the blame 
on him for thewreck that killed eight people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/15/families-eight-amtrak-crash-victims-mourn-loved-ones>
.

“He went, in a matter of seconds, from distraction to disaster,” National 
Transportation Safety Board member Robert Sumwalt said.

At the same time, the NTSB said a contributing factor was the railroad 
industry’s decades-long failure to fully installpositive train control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/15/amtrak-crash-positive-train-control-nearly-operational>
, GPS-based technology that can automatically slow trains that are going over 
the speed limit.

Three dead after Amtrak train hits truck in California
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/13/amtrak-train-crash-california-truck-on-tracks>
Had positive train control been in use along that stretch of track, “we would 
not be here today”, said Ted Turpin, an NTSB investigator.

Engineer Brandon Bostian heard about the rock-throwing on the radio and was 
apparently so preoccupied by it that he lost track of where he was and 
accelerated full-throttle to 106 mph as he went into a sharp curve with a 50 
mph speed limit, investigators said at an NTSB hearing to pinpoint the cause of 
the 12 May 2015 derailment. About 200 people aboard the Washington-to-New York 
train that night were injured.

Bostian, who has been suspended without pay since the crash for speeding, did 
not attend the hearing. He and his lawyer did not immediately return calls and 
emails seeking comment.

Ron Kaminkow, an Amtrak <https://www.theguardian.com/business/amtrak> engineer 
who also serves as secretary of the industry union consortium Railroad Workers 
United, said the board’s conclusion underscored the need to put two engineers 
on trains. “If one buys into this theory, having another engineer or conductor 
would have prevented the wreck,” he said.

As for what this could mean for Amtrak and Bostian, the railroad has already 
taken responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/02/amtrak-ceo-crash-safety-technology>
 for the tragedy, and its liability is capped under federal law at $295m, which 
could easily be exhausted, given the number of deaths and serious injuries.

The Philadelphia <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/philadelphia> district 
attorney’s office is helping the NTSB in the investigation, but a spokesman 
would not comment on the possibility of criminal charges.

The hearing included a spirited discussion over how much blame to assign to 
the lack of positive train control. In the end, the NTSB cited that as a 
secondary factor.

But NTSB chairman Christopher Hart warned that unless the technology was put 
fully in place soon, “I’m very concerned that we’re going to be back in this 
room again, hearing investigators detail how technology that we have 
recommended for more than 45 years could have prevented yet another fatal rail 
accident”.

Among other things, the NTSB also recommended research into train seat belts 
and ways to secure luggage that can become missiles in a derailment; training 
for crew members on multitasking; and new equipment and procedures to help 
engineers keep track of their location in spots where there is no positive 
train control.

In a statement, Amtrak said it “deeply regrets the tragic derailment” and will 
carefully review the NTSB findings and recommendations and quickly adopt them 
where appropriate. Amtrak noted that positive train control was already in 
place on most of its portion of the north-east corridor.

The problem of people throwing rocks at trains is so common that train crews 
have a term for it: “getting rocked”. But it is a danger railroads are almost 
powerless to stop. No one was ever arrested in the rock-throwing in 
Philadelphia.

Bostian told investigators that just before the wreck, he was listening to 
radio traffic from a Philadelphia commuter train operator who said a rock had 
shattered his windshield. At one point, Bostian passed the commuter train on an 
adjoining track.

He told the NTSB that he was concerned about the welfare of the commuter 
train’s engineer and “a little bit concerned” for his own safety, but he never 
indicated his own train had been struck, too. And the NTSB concluded it wasn’t 
hit, despite early suspicions triggered by a dent discovered in Bostian’s 
windshield.

Investigators said they believed Bostian was accelerating because he thought 
he had already passed the sharp Frankford junction curve. After the curve is a 
straightaway where the speed limit climbs to 110mph.

Authorities ruled out cellphone use on Bostian’s part, as well as drugs or 
alcohol.

“Excluding all the other suspects that we looked at, the best we could come up 
with was that he was distracted from this radio conversation about the damaged 
train and forgot where he was,” Hart said.

Bostian told investigators he couldn’t remember some of what happened that 
night – probably because of a blow to the head suffered when his locomotive 
overturned, said NTSB medical officer Mary Pat McKay.

Thomas Kline, a lawyer for passengers injured in the crash, questioned the 
NTSB findings and said he wondered whether the engineer sped up to get through 
the area quickly and avoid getting “rocked”.

Duy Nguyen, of Teaneck, New Jersey, a passenger who suffered a cut on his head 
and fractures in his back, attended the NTSB hearing. The Temple University 
professor said he was puzzled by the findings.

“The part that doesn’t make sense is: how does one accelerate when you’re 
distracted?” Nguyen said. “The inclination is to slow down.”

Bostian was known among his friends for his safety-mindedness and love of 
railroading. Before the crash, he apparently commented in an online forum for 
train enthusiasts, lamenting that railroads hadn’t been fast enough to adopt 
positive train control.

The NTSB has pushed for positive train control (PTC) since the 1970s. Over the 
past 20 years, the board has cited the lack of such technology as a 
contributing factor in 25 crashes, including deadly wrecks in Chatsworth, 
California, in 2008 and New York City in 2013.

Amtrak has now installed PTC on all the track it owns on the north-east 
corridor from Boston to Washington. A 56-mile stretch from New Rochelle, New 
York, to New Haven, Connecticut, is owned by other railroads and is expected to 
have automatic controls by the end-of-2018 deadline.

Amtrak crash: two dead and dozens injured after train derails near Philadelphia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/03/amtrak-philadelphia-train-crash>
At the time of the Philadelphia crash, the technology had been installed at 
the accident site but was still being tested.

Before the NTSB voted on its conclusions, T Bella Dinh-Zarr, the board’s 
vice-chairman, strongly urged the panel to put more blame on the lack of PTC.

“Eight people have died, dozens more have been injured – life-changing 
injuries – because the government and industry have not acted for decades on a 
well-known safety hazard,” Dinh-Zarr said. “I ask: why does our probable cause 
focus on a human’s mistake and what he may have been distracted by?”

The investigation also pointed up the need to make passenger trains safer. In 
the derailment, the train’s emergency windows dislodged as the cars slid on 
their sides, and four people were ejected and killed, according to 
investigators.
 