
ITV board member Sir Bob Phillis has resigned after deciding that the role 
conflicted with his chairmanship of production companyAll3Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media>.

Sir Bob, whose resignation is effective from today, played a key role during 
ITV's leadership troubles following the departure of former chief executive 
Charles Allen and the arrival of executive chairman Michael Grade.

He sat on the broadcaster's nomination committee, which gave the go-ahead to 
appoint Grade, as well as chairing the remuneration committee.

Sir Bob, who joined the board of ITV plc 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ITV> in February 2005, said he had decided 
to step down after Grade's strategic review last month put more emphasis on 
ITV's content business.

As chairman of All3Media, which made dramas Wild at Heart and Ultimate Force 
for ITV, the firm will be in direct competition with the broadcaster's in-house 
production division.

"I have very much enjoyed my time as a director of ITV PLC and seeing the 
company establish a sound strategic plan for its future development," Sir Bob 
said in a statement.

"However, a key part of that plan, announced on 12 September 2007, is the 
development of ITV's global content business and a doubling in content revenues.

"In my role as chairman of All3Media, I have concluded that, in the light of 
this new plan, it is now inappropriate for me to continue to serve on the 
boards of both companies.

"Accordingly, I am stepping down from the board of ITV.

"I am sure that ITV's strategy is both the right one and will benefit its 
shareholders and I look forward to a continuing relationship with ITV through 
All3Media as a programme supplier to the network."

Grade said "We are all extremely grateful to Bob for his tremendous 
contribution to the board and committees of ITV, and we shall miss him in our 
board discussions."

Grade announced that ITV board member Baroness Prashar would succeed Phillis 
as chairwoman of the remuneration committee.

Sir Bob retired as chief executive of the Guardian Media Group, publisher of 
MediaGuardian.co.uk, last year.

His departure comes after Grade refreshed ITV's board with the appointment of 
Heather Killen and Agnës Touraine as non-executive directors in August.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 