
The name Phoebe Philo dominated conversation at the Vogue Festival on Saturday 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/special-events/vogue-festival-2014/vogue-festival-2014/saturday>
, when the famously press-shy creative director of Céline gave Vogue editor 
Alexandra Shulman a rare interview live on stage.

Philo's influence was immediately apparent in the audience of fashion PRs, 
bloggers and fashion fans, many of whom wore mannish trousers, trainers and 
oversized white shirts – a look that echoes Philo's own androgynous style – or 
carriedCéline <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/celine> trapeze bags. Though 
many in the audience had never heard their heroine speak before, their devotion 
was uncompromising. "I love Phoebe," said one fashion PR, a sentiment that was 
echoed in doodles and drawings on the comments boards in the foyer.
 Fans of the designer pinned heartfelt doodles to comment boards. Photograph: 
Hannah Marriott 
When Philo appeared – wearing snakeskin skater shoes, a blush silk shirt and 
blue tailored trousers 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/special-events/vogue-festival-2014/vogue-festival-2014/saturday/the-philo-factor-reinventing-cool>
 – her voice wobbled with nerves at first. She said that, when she started at 
Céline five years ago, "what I found attractive was that it wasn't an iconic 
brand, it didn't have a very strong silhouette or a very famous historical 
designer, and I found that quite liberating – I didn't have the follow a path 
that had been trodden. But it did stand for quality – it had never licensed 
itself out, in the 70s, 80s and 90s, like so many other companies."

She spoke passionately about her mission at Céline. "I hope when women wear 
Céline they feel confident and strong," she said. "I guess there is a bit of a 
political statement behind Céline, which is that we should be teaching young 
girls to feel good ... I am not a big fan of women being sexualised through 
clothes, as you can probably tell from my work. I have no problem with a woman 
wearing anything as long as she has chosen to wear it for herself. But I do 
think there are too many images of women that are sexualised and too many 
examples of women dressing for other people and disempowering themselves in the 
process."

She was frank about her uncompromising attitude to work, saying: "I find 
mediocrity hard. I find that whole area difficult as I care very much about 
what I do."

Philo joined Céline after a three-year break from fashion to raise her 
children, before which she was the creative director at Chloé. "I am very 
privileged," she said. "I know most people are not in a position to say 'I'm 
not working for 3 years' … that's why I would like to give a bit back." She 
later spoke of a desire to set up a Céline foundation, and to help people less 
fortunate than herself.

Philo was also keen to discuss the fashion industry's attitude to women's 
bodies. "I think it would be unrealistic to think that human beings are not 
going to have some kind of worshipping for beautiful people, because they 
always have. I think it's unrealistic to think that the fashion industry, the 
film industry, the sex industry are not going to have extreme ideas of beauty 
as a way of selling themselves. I don't really like it sometimes. I thoughtRick 
Owens's show, a couple of seasons ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2013/sep/27/rick-owens-models-dancers-paris-fashion-week>
, when he used all large ladies – strong athletic, dancing – was one of the 
most exciting, energising things I have seen for a long time … It's got me 
thinking, I've never done anything like that before but maybe I will.

"What I really do believe is that anybody – and it really doesn't matter what 
shape your body is – can be seductive and sexy and gorgeous and beautiful. I 
use an extreme idea of beauty as a way of showing Céline but I don't believe it 
has to be like that outside of the fashion show."

Philo seemed nervous and wary, and conversation felt awkward at times. When 
asked by Shulman about the role of print magazines, for example, she tried to 
avoid the question, saying: "I'm not going to tell you how to do your job – 
what colours do you think I should do next season?" Despite her much-copied 
personal style, she would not be drawn on how she, as a person, exemplified the 
Céline brand. "I don't know, and I don't really think about it, Alex. I can't 
think about it. I don't find it helpful. When I am confronted with things like 
that or asked that question, I just do what I do." She continued: "I have an 
innate fear of fame. I don't know where it comes from, but I have never thought 
that being famous looked like a good place to be. I love being incognito. I 
very much value my freedom."

When Shulman asked her about the control she had over her own image, she said: 
"Of course. I have a strong opinion about that. I am a person, I have feelings, 
I have values, and if they're not respected, guess what? I don't like it."

On her reasons for leaving Chloé, she said: "it was very clear from the 
beginning that there was a Chloé aesthetic and my job was to continue doing 
that … That was one of the reasons I left Chloé. Going back, I was very clear 
that I wanted to do something that was absolutely something I believed in. It 
couldn't be to somebody else's brief." Later, she said: "I have complete 
creative control – that's why I work at Céline."
 