
The legal element of buying a house is regarded as a necessary evil, the part 
that always slows the transaction down. This isn't necessarily true, of course. 
But conveyancing is proving to be just as much of a pain to the legal 
profession as it can be to the public.

Back in the 1960s conveyancing accounted for around half of the profession's 
income; now it is probably less than 10%, even though most legal practices in 
England and Wales register at least one dealing at the Land Registry each year. 
The recession is not the only thing to blame. Lawyers have not been slow to 
undercut each other and drive down fees, especially with a growing number of 
volume conveyancing operations that are able to process straightforward 
transactions in a systemised, low-cost manner.

The challenge of licensed conveyancers – a 1980s creation to break solicitors' 
monopoly – is also significant and indeed two firms of licensed conveyancers,
MyHomeMove <https://www.myhomemove.com/> and Countrywide Property Lawyers 
<https://www.cwpl.co.uk/>, handle more transactions than any solicitors' 
practice. And the relatively recent practice of paying estate agents for 
referrals has eaten into profit margins, and conveyancers want the government 
to extend its proposed ban on referral fees in personal injury work to cover 
them as well.

Generally the same solicitor acts for both the buyer and their lender – given 
that their interests are aligned – but a rise in property fraud has prompted 
lenders to manage those who act for them more actively. This has turned out to 
put the screws on small law firms, which are statistically more likely to be 
involved in fraud, wittingly or not.

The most radical example of this came earlier this month from HSBC, which has 
introduced a panel of just 43 approved conveyancers (the bigger lenders have 
hundreds or even thousands) and now tells customers that while they are free to 
choose a different lawyer, theywill have to pay HSBC's separate legal costs on 
top 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/jan/11/hsbc-approved-solicitors-panel-conveyancing>
, rather than a single price for both. In fact, some within the profession 
argue that separate representation of borrower and lender should become the 
norm.

All in all this makes conveyancers feel a pretty bruised and battered bunch: 
constantly sore that estate agents typically earn ten times or more what they 
do for a less skilled and, in particular, less risky job – when mortgage 
lenders start losing money, they often try and sue the solicitors who handled 
the transaction for negligence (or the surveyors who valued the property) 
rather than look to their own lending practices. As some solicitors have become 
slapdash because they are being paid so little for the work, such claims can 
succeed. The upshot is soaring professional indemnity insurance premiums for 
conveyancers.

So what can be done for this beleaguered part of the profession? The Law 
Society has gone down the quality mark road, introducing theConveyancing 
Quality Scheme 
<http://www.lawsociety.org.uk/productsandservices/accreditation/conveyancingqualityscheme.page>
 to embed best practice. With the advent of alternative business structures, we 
are likely to see some of the new entrants to the legal market targeting 
conveyancing, seen as the prime example of a 'commoditisable' legal service. 
AlreadyIn-Deed <http://www.in-deed.net/>, an AIM-listed online conveyancing 
business headed by Rightmove founder Harry Hill, has said it wants to invest in 
law firms.

It would seem both sensible and lucrative for conveyancers to offer a one-stop 
property shop of estate agency, conveyancing and financial services advice. 
Indeed, once upon a time solicitors in England and Wales did sell property, but 
they surrendered this role many decades ago. This is in sharp contrast to 
Scottish solicitors, particularly in the east of the country, for whom selling 
property is a normal part of legal practice.

Though there is the odd example in England and Wales of the successful 
solicitor-run estate agency, efforts a decade ago to encourage the profession 
to embrace it more widely failed – in part, out of fear of losing work from 
estate agents – and a property slump is not the best time to give it another go.

But it's not all doom and gloom. A recent poll of 1,959 consumers for legal 
indemnity provider First Title Insurance found that people are generally happy 
with high street conveyancers and by contrast very cool about the idea of going 
to a big brand to help them move house. The company urged high street 
conveyancers to have more confidence in themselves.Another survey 
<http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/latest-news/conveyancers-dream-of-other-jobs-amid-worries-over-the-future>
, from property search provider Searches UK, found that 76% of conveyancers 
were at least somewhat satisfied in their jobs.

At the same time, most were open to the idea of working in other fields. If 
things stay as they are and the property market continues to flatline, they may 
not have much choice.

Neil Rose is the editor of Legal Futures <http://www.legalfutures.co.uk>
 