 The wives and daughters of the playwright Anthony Shaffer fought off an 
attempt by his mistress to claim a share of his multi-million pound estate 
yesterday.
A high court judge in London upheld argument by Shaffer's widow, the actor 
Diane Cilento, his former wife Carolyn, and her daughters Claudia, 40, and 
Cressida, 37, that at the time of his death he was domiciled in Queensland, 
Australia, where his assets are not subject to claims by other "dependents". 
His mistress, Jo Capece Minutolo, claimed that Shaffer was domiciled in England 
when he died in London on November 6 2001, aged 75 and that therefore she could 
claim under the Inheritance (Provision for Family and Dependents) Act.

Mr Justice Lewison said he did not doubt that the Liverpool-born Shaffer - who 
wrote the award-winning thriller Sleuth- had formed "an intimate and loving 
relationship" with Ms Minutolo in London.

But the place he regarded as home was Karnak, the estate in Queensland where 
he and Ms Cilento had built their matrimonial "dream home" and established a 
theatre, the Karnak Playhouse.

The judge said Ms Minutolo's lawyer had argued that the importance of women to 
Shaffer - and specifically his relationship with her - had caused him by the 
end of his life to regard London as his permanent home.

"I do not doubt that rela tionships with women were important to Anthony, but 
I do not consider they were geographically fixed," he said.

In his 1999 will Shaffer divided his estate between Diane, Carolyn, the 
daughters, and his brothers Peter and Brian. He left nothing to Ms Minutolo and 
did not mention her to his lawyer.

Peter, his playwright twin who wrote Equus and Amadeus, was named as executor. 

He took a neutral stance on the legal row about domicile, although another 
consequence of yesterday's ruling is that the tax liability of Anthony's estate 
will be much smaller because Queensland does not levy inheritance tax.

The judge said Anthony Shaffer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/anthonyshaffer> had formed a "passionate 
relationship" with Ms Cilento - an Australian once married to Sean Connery - 
while they were working on the film The Wicker Man in Scotland in 1972.

In 1975 Ms Cilento returned to Australia and Shaffer made his home with her 
there, despite his "peripatetic" life as a film scriptwriter. They were married 
at Karnak in 1985.

Their home, The Castle, contained a library of 18,000 books, windows depicting 
the nine muses and posters of Shaffer's plays, pride of place going to a large 
painting by the Australian artist Arthur Boyd.

Shaffer transferred his financial management company from California to 
Australia and voted in Australian elections.
 