
The Department for Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/government-computing-network/transport> (DfT) has 
awarded 27 police forces across England £2.7m worth of funding for the 
implementation of 3D laser scanning technology.

The government hopes that the technology will shorten motorway closures after 
crashes as the scanners will save time by quickly making a 3D image of the 
whole crash site, rather than investigators having to survey multiple sections 
of a scene. The digital image of the site can then be viewed on a computer 
screen remotely allowing investigators to take measurements of where vehicles 
are in relation to each other and examine important evidence.

Police forces and the National Policing Improvement Agency (NPIA) will also 
make financial contributions to the project, which will allow the purchase of 
37 scanners. Thames Valley and Hampshire police authorities, which share ICT 
services, will receive the most scanner units. The forces will implement five 
scanners after receiving a grant of £395,675 from the DfT.

The wider roll out of 3D laser scanning technology is part of a government-led 
initiative known as Clear (Collision, lead, evaluate, act, re-open). The 
project aims to reduce delays caused by incidents in order to keep traffic 
moving.

Mike Penning, roads minister, said: "There is nothing more frustrating than 
being stuck in a traffic jam for hours on end. But even worse than that is the 
shocking £1bn cost of those lost hours for our economy. That is why we are 
determined to improve the clear-up of accidents so we can get our motorways 
re-opened as quickly as possible.

"Today's £2.7m DfT funding award will see 3D laser scanners rolled out quickly 
where they are needed most. This will benefit drivers by reducing incident 
clear up times by 39 minutes on average."

According to the DfT, there were more than 18,000 full or partial motorway 
closures lasting a total of more than 20,000 hours in 2010. The government 
hopes that its strategy will help drive down the £1bn annual cost to the 
economy.

Successful police force bidders will start to receive their grants this month, 
with the aim of putting out the scanning technology on motorways and 'A' roads 
a quickly as possible.

Commenting on the project, chief constable Nick Gargan, chief executive of the 
NPIA, said: "The project also supports a standardised approach to surveying 
motorway incident scenes, in line with the police service's Information Systems 
Improvement Strategy (ISIS) strategy of using IT to enable business change 
within the service."

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For weekly updates on 
news, debate and best practice on public sector IT,join the Government 
Computing Network here. 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing/start.php>
 