
A complaint from the construction union to the commonwealth ombudsman paints 
an extraordinary picture of heavy-handed tactics by special police taskforces, 
including a police officer allegedly warning one unionist he knew his 
children’s names and what time he dropped them off to school.

The letter, sent by the Construction Forestry Mining and Energy Union (CFMEU) 
on Tuesday, complains that police repeatedly attempted to question witnesses 
without their lawyers present and, in one case, demanded a junior employee 
grant access to union headquarters during a raid without first showing her a 
warrant.

The union’s complaint alleges that when the Australian federal police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-federal-police> searched 
the ACT branch’s headquarters on 25 August, one officer told the branch 
secretary Dean Hall, “I do know about your family things”, to explain how he 
knew his wife’s name.

“Like, I know your kids’ names and their ages and where they go to school and 
when you drop them off,” the officer is said to have told Hall. “What do you 
expect? I am profiling you.”

The union’s lawyer, Phillip Pasfield, told the ombudsman these alleged 
statements were intimidatory, unwarranted and designed to threaten Hall, who 
was “extremely upset” about the incident.

In December the Australian Capital Territory supreme court ruled that the raid 
was unlawful 
<http://www.canberratimes.com.au/act-news/australian-federal-police-raid-of-cfmeu-canberra-headquarters-ruled-illegal-20151201-gld32v.html>
because police withheld information from the magistrate in order to get the 
warrant.

The CFMEU complained that the officer in charge of the raid told building 
industry participants thathe would prefer to make workplace agreements with the 
Master Builders Association, not the CFMEU 
<http://www.canberratimes.com.au/act-news/questions-raised-over-police-conduct-on-union-taskforce-20151204-glfoe4.html>
.

“The CFMEU is extremely concerned that the officer concerned ... has engaged 
in taking sides in industrial matters between employers and the CFMEU,” the 
union said.

That politicised any possible legitimate investigations, the union said.

Police accidentally gave victim's details to alleged attacker, documents show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/19/police-accidentally-gave-victims-details-to-alleged-attacker-documents-show>
The union said that in a search of the CFMEU’s Queensland headquarters on 19 
November, police demanded to be let in by a junior employee at 7.30am, refused 
to allow her to call officials and did not show a warrant until after forcing 
entry.

When the employee went inside to search for the branch’s officials and make a 
telephone call, five or six police officers entered the office by removing 
security bars and stepping over the reception counter, the letter said.

“The police officers began shouting at the female employee to get off the 
phone,” the union said.

Only then, after the employee “was extremely traumatised and frightened”, did 
the police produce a warrant, the letter said.

The union said the officers’ actions were inappropriate intimidation and 
bullying of the employee, and it should have been obvious she was not in a 
position of authority and merely wanted to clarify with an official what she 
should do.

The CFMEU’s complaint included details of police interrogations of witnesses 
in Queensland during investigations into alleged document destruction by other 
officials at the branch.

The union included its submissions in reply to the royal commission 
<https://www.tradeunionroyalcommission.gov.au/Submissions/Documents/2015-Submissions/CFMEU-Submissions/Interested-parties/Submissions-on-behalf-of-CFMEU.pdf>
, which allege police told at least two witnesses they did not need to speak to 
their lawyers after the union employees asked to do so.

There were further allegations that in one case, police then questioned a 
witness for 75 minutes without lawyers present and without warning her she was 
not required to answer questions. In the second case, it was alleged the police 
terminated the interview when the witness insisted on a lawyer being present.

On 14 May a builder objected to CFMEU Queensland organiser Justin Steele 
attempting to access a site.

While the AFP investigated and prosecuted Steele for assault over the 
incident, charges that were later dropped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/23/fifth-set-of-criminal-charges-from-union-royal-commission-taskforce-dropped>
, officers wrongly gave him the impression he was obliged to attend the police 
station and did not warn him he would be charged if he refused an interview, 
the union claimed.

Fifth set of criminal charges from union royal commission taskforce dropped
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/23/fifth-set-of-criminal-charges-from-union-royal-commission-taskforce-dropped>
Police even allegedly executed a search warrant on Steele’s lawyers to 
investigate whether they had engaged in criminal extortion by warning the 
builder they were considering bringing proceedings to show the builder had 
unlawfully denied Steele entry to the site. Pasfield described the alleged 
extortion as a “scandalous accusation”.

The union claimed the AFP deliberately misled a Fairfax Media journalist by 
saying a CFMEU official had been “raided” on 2 December then changed its story 
to say the raid related to the official but was not a raid on his or her 
property. This was done to “destroy the reputation of the official involved”, 
it said.

In another incident, the CFMEU said the union police taskforce provided false 
information or failed to correct journalist Stephen Drill,who incorrectly 
reported Victoria police’s union taskforce Heracles had raided the CFMEU’s 
Victorian headquarters 
<http://www.presscouncil.org.au/document-search/adj-1669/>.

Special taskforces investigating unions were set up in the AFP, and 
Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria police to support the trade union 
royal commission. After the royal commission concluded in December 2015, these 
taskforces continued to operate.

The union explained it had addressed the complaint to the ombudsman because 
“given the antagonism exhibited by certain members of the AFP [it had] no 
confidence AFP professional standards would deal with the complaints in a fair, 
unbiased and independent manner”.

Pasfield asked the ombudsman to investigate the serious complaint against the 
AFP “as soon as practicable, given the ongoing operations of the trade union 
taskforce”.

An AFP spokeswoman told Guardian Australia: “This matter is with the 
Commonwealth Ombudsman and it would not be appropriate for the AFP to comment.”

Queensland and Victoria police have been contacted for comment.
 