
David Willetts and Vince Cable are aggressively talking up the role that FE 
colleges can play in driving value, dynamism and competition in higher 
education.

They have announced that the majority of "core and margin" places have been 
awarded to colleges and that they won't stand idly by if universities obstruct 
further competition. But for many, the role of FE colleges delivering higher 
education is neither new nor hostile and the facts tell a rather different 
story.

Some 10% or so of higher education in England is already offered within FE 
colleges, with many long established and some offering unique specialist 
provision. Many more offer higher education in geographical "coldspots", where 
the nearest universities are a long way off.

Difference and diversity are the key messages; different types of students, in 
different types of places, doing different subjects and qualifications, and 
usually taught in different ways too. Students studying HE in FE tend to be 
older, much more likely to be part-time, to live locally and to be from lower 
socio-economic groups.

So it is easy to see why FE colleges are a vitally important and specialist 
part of the higher education sector – and to be celebrated and supported for 
their contribution to the economy, to local communities and to social mobility.

But HE offered in FE colleges is rarely about competition and we shouldn't be 
easily lulled into such a view by ministers. Equally, we shouldn't be swayed by 
those in FE who wish to compete, engage in mission stretch and to offer many of 
the same courses already available elsewhere. Of course, there is some 
competition on price and on student experience but it is simply wrong to assume 
that this is the dominant behaviour in universities or colleges.

This is a particular problem with current policy and it is jeopardising 
long-standing and hugely successful relationships. Ministers are clearly 
concerned that some universities might be restricting competition from FECs by 
withdrawing accreditation or franchised places from college partners. This case 
is then made to and by ministers, but at best it is a partial picture.

In strategic terms, relationships between HE and FE institutions can be either 
transactional or transformational. The first is a consequence of increased 
competition and the policies that rely on it to deliver improvements in 
quality, price and choice.

Many colleges look for a simple cost-based deal to accredit their HE 
programmes shopping around in the way that they might for services like IT, 
construction or energy supply. Some universities will inevitably act the same 
in return, often based on their international experiences. But neither can then 
cry foul if relationships end because of competitive behaviour or restricted 
numbers. And neither can ministers, because this is how markets and market 
based competition always works.

Transformational relationships are something quite different. They draw on 
ambitions for a community or a place – sometimes for a specialist sector of the 
economy – partners working together for a common good that might not be 
achieved by working independently or competitively.

Often this has included support to achieve degree awarding powers, to secure 
additional funding or to improve the quality of the student experience as well 
as their progression and ultimate ambitions. This was a clear aim of many of 
the associate college arrangements developed in the 1990s and indeed by the 
Hefce fundedLifelong Learning Networks 
<http://www.hefce.ac.uk/widen/lln/funded/networks/> initiative, that built 
local partnerships based on progression and vocational programmes transforming 
and boosting opportunities and economic development.

In Wolverhampton, where partnerships between the university and surrounding 
colleges are strong, the issue with current number allocations is not about who 
gets more but about how best to maximise collective numbers across the city and 
the broader Black Country. The same is also true of colleges and universities 
working together in places such as Salford, Manchester, Northampton, High 
Wycombe and Aylesbury. But we need to acknowledge that transformational 
relationships are likely to be more expensive, more time-consuming but also 
longer term and more resilient to policy and other changes.

Neither transactional nor transformational relationships are necessarily good 
or bad. There are examples of both that work well and some that do not. But 
they are very clearly different and tensions will continue to arise between 
universities and colleges and for ministers – if they continue to confuse the 
two. Policy-making needs to be evidence-based and better informed so that the 
differences between HEIs and FECs are recognisable and clear.Reforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/reforms> such as "core 
and margin", simplified accreditation and more competition for awarding powers 
all need to be delivered with both types of relationship in mind.

It's also worth remembering that nowhere in the OECD will you find FE and HE 
sectors run on such different grounds. The differences – especially in 
governance, funding, accreditation and inspection are also problematic. 
Additional confusion arises because of the contrasts between the clear autonomy 
and sector-owned quality processes in HE and the more directed and managed 
sector in FE. Where there are restrictions in HE – in awarding powers and in 
number controls, this further complicates tension between the two sectors – 
except of course, where relationships are strong.

In time, politicians would like to see the end of central control over higher 
education, but they should also give colleges the same level of autonomy as 
universities. Then they should not cry foul when they see competition (or 
collaboration) between them, instead enabling mature, independent institutions 
to make and to live by their own strategic choices. Having called for more 
competition and its consequences, they should not complain when it takes place. 
But perhaps more importantly they should not underplay the significance of 
partnership between universities and colleges and the impact they can have on 
the transformation of communities and local economies over the long term.

Geoff Layer is a professor in lifelong learning and VC at University of 
Wolverhampton <http://www.wlv.ac.uk/>.

Andy Westwood is CEO of GuildHE <http://www.guildhe.ac.uk/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 