
Police have been called in to investigate an "extensive and systematic" fraud 
at the slate quarrying business of construction firmAlfred McAlpine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alfredmcalpine>.

The company confirmed yesterday that profits had been hit and announced the 
closure of its quarries at Cwt y Bugail with the loss of 166 jobs. It is 
moth-balling the division's architectural business at Ffestiniog quarry in 
north Wales.

The construction firm has fired the managing director of its slate division, 
while the operations director is facing disciplinary action and other senior 
managers have left the business.

McAlpine's finance director, Dominic Lavelle, while not implicated in the 
irregularities, has decided to stand down with immediate effect. Mark 
Greenwood, the finance director of project services, will cover his role until 
a permanent replacement has been found.

The chief executive, Ian Grice, said: "The extent of the fraud and cover-up 
within Slate has been a shock to us all and is most disappointing.

"Dominic has recognised that this situation took place on his watch, and that 
it is in the best interests of the business for him to resign so we can draw a 
line under the issue." Mr Grice declined to say whether he had considered his 
own position.

The company warned in February that an internal audit had found evidence that 
its slate production volumes and sales were systematically overstated. Those 
involved concealed the financial implications of their actions through selling 
slate at discounted prices.

The law firm Ashurst and accountant Deloitte conducted an investigation into 
the accounting irregularities, which are understood to have been going on for 
about six years.

Mr Grice said he was hopeful the future of the slate operations could be 
secured through the job losses and quarry closures announced yesterday. He 
admitted there was little hope of recovering any money through the civil courts 
as personal gain was not the underlying motive. When asked what the motive may 
have been, he indicated it could have been prompted by "ego or arrogance".

"It may have started with a few people doing a few things wrong, then the 
situation got bigger, and then they found themselves in a hole that was too big 
to get out of," he suggested.

McAlpine said the probe had confirmed an "extensive and systematic fraud by 
senior managers within this business dating back a number of years".

The company, which focuses on outsourced management and maintenance of 
buildings and infrastructure as well as civil engineering, said pre-tax profits 
tumbled to £18.7m last year from £24.7m the previous year.

The impact of the fraud investigation and restructuring on profits and sales 
is put at £22.9m. The slate business is expected to make an operating loss of 
£5m in 2007.
 