
Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> officers have urged ministers 
to call time on 24-hour licensing, after three-quarters of police officers and 
50% of ambulance staff told a survey they had been injured while handling 
drink-related violence.

Respondents to the survey by the Institute of Alcohol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/alcohol> Studies said there was a culture 
of fear among emergency service workers about being attacked when dealing with 
alcohol-related incidents. Just more than half of the ambulance staff said 
drunken patients had sexually harassed or assaulted them.

The study <http://www.ias.org.uk/uploads/IAS%20report%20low%20res.pdf>, which 
surveyed nearly 5,000 police officers, ambulance staff, NHS medics and 
firefighters, found that alcohol-related incidents place extra strain on 
already under-pressure emergency services.

Police officers also said that 53% of their time was spent dealing with 
drink-related crime, and ambulance staff said 37% of their time was taken up 
tackling problems arising from alcohol.

The majority (68%) of police officers surveyed blamed the introduction of 
24-hour licensing in 2005 for alcohol-related crime, and many called for a 
return to the traditional closing times of 11pm for pubs and 2-3am for clubs.

Bars, clubs, pubs and supermarkets in England and Wales are currently allowed 
to apply for later licences under the 2003 legislation that paved the way for 
24-hour licensing.

Alcohol and emergency stats 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/10/emergency_services_abuse/giv-311141nVKZfuYgIQQ/>
The move had changed policing forever, a sergeant told the survey. The 
majority of police time was now spent “dealing with the fallout from the night 
time economy,” he said. “No longer are we able to patrol residential areas to 
catch burglars etc.”

Katherine Brown, the director of the Institute of Alcohol Studies, said: “Our 
report shows how alcohol takes up a disproportionate share of emergency service 
time, costing taxpayers billions of pounds each year.


“Many of these incidents are preventable, and alcohol therefore creates 
unnecessary problems for front line staff, increasing their workload and 
preventing them from dealing with other important issues.”

The survey found that alcohol-fuelled violence against emergency service 
workers was “ubiquitous”. Between a third and a half of all respondents said 
drunken people had sexual harassed or abused them, with the figure rising to 
52% among the 398 ambulance staff surveyed.

It also revealed a “culture of fear” among frontline staff, with 78% of police 
officers and 65% of ambulance staff saying they felt at risk of drunken 
assaults. Ninety-six percent of ambulance staff said drunken patients had 
threatened or verbally abused them while on duty.

One police sergeant told the survey: “As officer numbers reduce there seems to 
be a propensity by drunken and drugged people to assault officers who are 
routinely single-crewed now ... I fear as officers get injured or are off work 
recuperating the thin blue line will break.”

Brown said: “Police officers we spoke to would far rather be dealing with 
burglaries than Friday night drunks. We call on the government to better 
support our emergency services and implement policies to ease this burden, such 
as minimum unit pricing for alcohol.”


She said local authorities needed to use their licensing powers to bring 
forward closing times at troublesome bars and pubs. The institute also 
recommended a more widespread trial of alcohol treatment centres, mobile 
facilities dubbed “drunk tanks” that help to relieve pressure on emergency 
services.

The study found surprisingly broad support among ambulance and A&E staff for 
charging drunk people if they require emergency treatment solely because they 
are intoxicated.

The proposal was backed by 76% of ambulance staff and 54% of A&E doctors, but 
strongly opposed by 28% of emergency doctors who described it as “the first 
step in a slippery slope towards the end of the NHS”.

One unnamed consultant told the survey he had seen a huge number of 
drink-related admissions, but added: “I feel strongly that charging people for 
alcohol-related admission would cause severe cases to be missed through 
non-presentation, and would also represent a betrayal of the fundamental 
free-at-the-point-of-entry nature of theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>. I believed we need an enormous 
national public health campaign and stronger minimum alcohol pricing.”

Dr Cliff Mann, the president of the Royal College of Emergency Medicine, said 
he was extremely concerned about the damaging impact of alcohol on hard-pressed 
emergency departments.


“Fellows and members of the college are confronted daily with the health 
impacts of alcohol use, and also experience the effects of alcohol intoxication 
on behaviour, including social disorder and lawlessness which sometimes spills 
over into the hospital environment in general, and emergency departments in 
particular,” he said.

“The steps laid out in this report will go a long way to tackling these 
challenges.”
 