
If Judge John Deed ever returned to our television screens, the passionate 
crusader for justice would be presiding over an unrecognisable courtroom scene.

A cast of poorly-motivated barristers, their polyester gowns emblazoned with 
supermarket logos and cut-price offers, would be stumbling through a hubbub of 
semi-comprehended legal terms.

In a speech at Lincoln's Inn Fields on Tuesday evening, Martin Shaw, the actor 
who played the lead role in the defunct BBC series, will summon up such an 
unappealing and lugubrious scene. It might be from an episode entitled "The 
Death of the Bar".

The veteran actor's portrayal of romantic life on the bench has been rewarded 
by his election as an honorary bencher of Gray's Inn. His stepdaughter is 
training at the bar.

Delivering the annual Kalisher lecture <http://www.thekalishertrust.org/>, 
Shaw pays tribute to all he learned in perfecting his red-robed role. His 
identification with the part is complete, voicing opinions that some judges 
might, in unguarded moments, volunteer.

His praise of the glory days of the bar is affectionate. The legal profession, 
he maintains, "as well as our courts, has an unrivalled international 
reputation. Why else do Russian oligarchs want to fight their legal battles 
here?

"That blend of courage, independence and rugged individualism largely defines 
the popular image of the advocate."

But it is the vision he presents of the threat to the traditional bar from 
cut-price,mass-market competitors 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/law/2012/oct/12/brands-alternative-business-structures>
 - inspired perhaps by firms becoming ABSs, or alternative business structures 
(nicknamed Tesco law), cuts in legal aid and theimminent launch of Quality 
Assurance Schemes for Advocates 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/law/2012/jul/11/qasa-regulators-unqualified-advocates>
 - that chills.

Shaw, whose speech is supported by the Criminal Bar Association, declares: 
"There appears to be a feeling in government that legal services are well down 
the pecking order of priorities. Fees for lawyers are not a popular cause."
 "... What will happen if proposals for your future are not halted? Big 
beasts, of differing hue, will bid for publicly funded work – your work - at 
fixed prices. Industrial scale rather than personal service will be the order 
of the day.
"Never mind the lament for the high street butcher, cheesemonger, baker, 
ironmonger. You'll struggle to find a high street solicitor before long. How is 
he going to survive if BeastCoLegal can offer advocacy on the same basis that 
Tesco sells sugar?"

"Commerce will mean low-cost in-house advocates. ... If 'scale' becomes the 
motif for the profession, it takes little imagination to see the direction of 
travel. Hardy souls hungry for advancement and for recognition – and every one 
of them self-employed – will become historic, and not in a good way.
"What is contemplated would be a no-frills, cheap and cheerful bulk legal 
service. Tesco Law, Asda Legal, and, if you need the cachet of a Silk, Waitrose 
Lex. And this risk, this real risk, the profession rightly views as deeply 
suspicious and damaging."

The damage is already apparent, he warns, in "good solicitors leaving the 
profession, those who remain are under intense commercial pressure and they 
survive only by bringing more and more advocacy in-house."
 "It is misery for the young bar. It is strangling training. One generation is 
becoming disillusioned and giving up. Another generation is being turned away. 
It is no less than disaster for the criminal justice system. [It is] a 
potential catastrophe of which the general public is presently completely 
oblivious." 
Maybe that's why the BBC will never make another Judge John Deed episode: not 
only poor ratings without a star cast, but just think about all that 
advertising in court.
 