
As flat denials go, "Hahahaha!" isn't really up there with, say, "There is no 
truth whatsoever to this story." But we should know by now never to 
underestimate cage fighter, stripper and – with a new single and furniture 
range on the horizon – popcultural polymathAlex Reid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alex-reid>. In fact "Hahahaha!" is just one 
of the highlights from Reid's latest statement.

"It's such a funny, funny story, hilarious in fact!" he solemnly noted on his 
website 
<http://alexreid.co/alex-reid-cross-dressing-rumours-official-statement/> last 
week. "Hahahaha! We were rolling around on the floor laughing, hahaha!" The 
statement concludes by signing off: "Brilliant stuff, next!!!!"

What is he denying? Well, it's the classic story of heavily pregnant woman – 
in this instance the fragrant Chantelle Houghton – arriving home early from a 
tooth-whitening launch party to discover her fiance, dressed as his female 
alter-ego Roxanne, in the middle of a marathon solo sex session.

An insider of one sort or another told New! magazine 
<http://www.new-magazine.co.uk/latestnews/view/41349/Chantelle-Houghton-and-Alex-Reid-The-truth-In-new-magazine-this-week-/>
 this week that Reid "was indulging his fantasies" – the mind boggles, 
particularly since even Jordan once claimed to be alarmed by Reid's "issues" – 
"and there were sex toys in the house". Houghton described Reid's eyes as "wild 
and scary", which prompts a minor blip on the euphemismometer, but the main 
point, buried in the copy, is that Reid remained in the house, by himself, for 
a further four days. Whichever way you look at it, there must have been 
chafing, although as feats of endurance go it's still nowhere near the grim 
challenge posed by the harrowing 3:47 duration of Reid's debut singleStardust 
<http://youtu.be/OROVdHCTyZg>.

Mercifully, New! magazine's coverage of Chafegate does not end with its 
three-page cover story. Turn the page, and it's Chantelle's Pregnancy Diary, 
which includes a box headlined "Sorting things out". Addressing claims (on 
the previous page) that she had moved out of the flat, she notes: "It's nice 
that people care, but I don't really want to talk about it." But what about 
Reid's statement? "Alex has released a statement about cross-dressing," 
Chantelle accepts, adding helpfully: "but I don't want to comment on 
that either."

It's a bit like a real-life version of Viz's letters page, with a missive on 
page 10 furiously disagreeing with the letter writer on the previous page. But 
that, surely, is the end of that? Not quite! Turn the pageagain and there's 
a riotous full-pageinterview with Alex 
<http://www.new-magazine.co.uk/celebrityinterview/view/41383/Alex-Reid-My-new-song-is-all-about-my-missus-/>
 himself. Also present in this interview is Reid's "PR man Richard", who helps 
Reid when he gets stuck. At one point, Reid is discussing his musical 
collaborators, who inexplicably opt not to go under their real names, but under 
the pseudonym of Shelter. "Help me out here, Richard," Alex says. "How do I 
explain Shelter?"

"Shelter are writers and producers who have worked with you on the lyrics and 
produced music to suit your voice," offers Richard.

"Exactly," decides Alex.

Things come back to the matter in hand, as it were, at the end of Reid's 
interview, with a question about why Chantelle left him. "We're not answering 
that question," Richard helpfully announces. This is an opportunity for you to 
give your side, offers New! journalist Patrick Strudwick. "No comment. It's an 
irrelevant question because it's not valid," Richard confusingly decides.

Celebrities turn on each other so frequently that we're quite familiar with 
the spectacle of couples playing out their lives, their loves and their 
squabbles in the pages of magazines, but it's hard to recall a similar instance 
of the story unfolding across successive pages of thesame magazine. It is 
disappointing, really, that New! allows this particular storyline to end on 
page 13. One half expects the Coronation Street preview, which begins: 
"Weddings rarely go smoothly in Weatherfield," to be interrupted by Chantelle 
screaming: "BUT AT LEAST NORIS DOESN'T TURN UP IN FISHNETS!", or for the 
horoscopes page to offer up some thinly veiled advice to Reid. Mind you, it 
doesn't take a psychic to predict that of the three people in Alex and 
Chantelle's forthcoming marriage, it's Roxanne who will dominate the headlines.
 