
Ireland's borrowing costs rose dramatically today in rumour-driven markets as 
speculation mounted thatPortugal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/portugal> 
was also edging towards a bailout from its European partners.

Troubled Allied Irish Banks was forced  
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/Article.aspx?id=201103221652474287D>to officially 
denounce widespread rumours that it was set to miss a crucial repayment on one 
of its bonds, due on Wednesday, after the difference between Ireland's and 
Germany's borrowing costs exploded to record levels on talk that a default was 
imminent.

While investors were concerned about the plight of Ireland, Portugal was also 
being battered ahead of a key vote on an austerity budget on Wednesday, which 
the prime minister José Sócrates is expected to lose. Sócrates is expected to 
call a snap general election if the main opposition Social Democrats carry 
through their threat to oppose the budget.

The move could force the country further down the route of a bailout – first 
trodden by Greece last spring and then by Ireland at the end of last year.

Portugal has been resisting asking for a rescue but economists and market 
experts believe its battle could be ending – even as the country raises taxes 
and embarks on the biggest spending cuts for three decades.

Emilie Gay, economist at Capital Economics, said: "With bond yields stubbornly 
high and heavy debt redemptions due over the next few months, it appears all 
but inevitable that Portugal will be forced to follow Greece and Ireland in 
accepting financial support from the EU and IMF."

She said it now seemed a "matter of when rather than if" Portugal would accept 
a bailout as the yields – interest rates – on 10-year bonds have hovered around 
7% for more than a month; Greece and Ireland asked for help within four weeks 
of being pushed to such levels.

Portugal has just €4bn (£3.4bn) in cash reserves and €9bn of debt to mature in 
April and June, she said. Portugal's benchmark 10-year bond yield rose to 7.69% 
today – not quite the record levels of 7.81% – pushing the premium investors 
demand to hold Portuguese bonds over German bonds, regarded as the safest in 
the eurozone, to 4.43 percentage points.

The differential – or yield spread – between two-year Irish and German bonds 
reached 8.42 percentage points as the rumours of a default by AIB swirled. The 
gap later narrowed to 7.81 percentage points after AIB issued a statement in 
which it said the coupon due on Wednesday "will be made".

The fresh turmoil came just hours before an EU summit that will discuss the 
mechanics of a €440bn fund for troubled European economies. Ireland's new prime 
minster, Enda Kenny, is expected to ask for more flexibility on dealing with 
banks such as AIB, which have been largely nationalised sincethe €85bn bailout 
by the EU and IMF 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/nov/21/ireland-asks-70bn-eu-bailout> 
in November. Around €35bn was earmarked to recapitalise the banks – crippled by 
lax lending on property before the credit bubble burst – but even more might be 
needed once new stress tests are conducted across Europe's banking sector in 
the coming weeks.

Ireland's banks had already been injected with €50bn before the November 
bailout. Jane Foley, senior currency strategist at Rabobank, said that while 
there was "a real risk the Portuguese minority government could fall apart this 
week", fears that the crisis would spread to neighbouring Spain had abated. 
"The general consensus is that, irrespective of who is leading the Portuguese 
government, and whether or not the country bows to an EU bailout, this is an 
isolated crisis which will not bring EMU to its knees," she said.
 