
No matter how extreme a traveller you are, there aren't many times that a 
night's accommodation has a Guinness Book of Records feel to it. However, as I 
woke up to the crack and fizz of waves far below and a green glow inside my 
tent that I knew meant bright sunshine outside, I let myself imagine the entry: 
"Dixe Wills – the British mainland's most north-westerly inhabitant." If you 
fancy grabbing the title yourself all you need is a tent and a good head for 
heights. It's getting toCape Wrath  <http://www.capewrath.org.uk/> in the first 
place that's the tricky bit.
 Photograph: Dixe Wills 
For days I had been inching along the Sutherland coast courtesy of a series of 
postbuses <http://www.undiscoveredscotland.co.uk/usscotfax/trv/postbuses.html>. 
These are not buses in the conventional sense: the postie is merely giving 
people a lift in his or her vehicle – often just a car – while doing the daily 
pick up and drop at remote post offices. The scenery – 
mountain-coast-mountain-coast-mountain – is such that when we made slight 
detours to drop off a newspaper and some turnips or pick up some bags of 
freshly gathered oysters, it was a delight rather than an annoyance.

However, it was a real bus – albeit a small minibus in which I was the sole 
passenger – that brought me into Durness <http://www.durness.org>, my jumping 
off point for Cape Wrath. The final plunge down the hill towards the straggly 
cliffside village was a familiar sight to the teenage John Lennon who came here 
every summer to stay with his aunt and uncle. Later in the day I wended my way 
to a memorial garden with its three stone slabs bearing words from In My Life, 
the Beatles' song claimed to be based on a poem Lennon wrote about the area.

With England apparently now blessed with over a thousand inhabitants per 
square mile visitors might be surprised to learn that, on average, each square 
mile of Sutherland lays claim to just a single solitary person. It means that 
Durness, with a population of around 320, is reckoned as something of a major 
hub. It even has two grocers and a campsite. The three joys of Durness, 
however, are spread evenly just outside the village, so I set off east to the 
first of them,Smoo Cave <http://www.smoocave.org/Archeology.htm>. 

With the largest entrance of any sea cave in the British Isles, Smoo has been 
home and workshop to locals for 7,000 years, and fishermen were still using it 
as a storehouse in the last century. Nowadays it serves as a spectacular 
backdrop to the occasional musical event but the day I visited it was just me 
and an amiable young German couple disappointed that the dry weather in 
Scotland (it happens, believe me) had reduced the usually impressive waterfall 
within to a plangent drip.
 Photograph: Dixe Wills 
To make up for it, I indulged in some meandering amongst the mighty dunes of 
Faraid Head <http://www.undiscoveredscotland.co.uk/durness/balnakeil/index.html>
. Carpeted with short spiky grass the colour of emeralds and flecked with the 
odd wild pansy, these are small hills rather than large dunes and it was just 
as well I happened across a local farmer who was able to show me my way or I 
could still be there today. As it was, I finally made it to my destination, a 
clifftop overlooking a sandy outcrop on which lives a colony of puffins. Now, I 
don't know about you, but I could watch puffins until the nuns come home. Often 
cited as a proof that God has a sense of humour, their attempted penguin 
costumes – spoilt only by thumping great orange beaks – their stubby wings 
better suited to tap dancing moves than flight, and their eternally 
enthusiastic burrowing make them natural comedians. Yet watching them dive like 
jet-propelled missiles into the water, I could see why fish would not share the 
joke.

It was several hours later that I made it back through the sandhills to a 
colony of a rather more bohemian ilk. I first knew I was nearing Balnakeil 
Craft Village <http://www.durness.org/Balnakeil%20Craft%20Village.htm> when I 
caught sight of a crop of bizarre stumpy white towers. What has been, since the 
1960s, a thriving multi-national community of artists and craftspeople creating 
and selling work ranging from ceramics and musical instruments to aromatherapy 
oils and handmade chocolate, was once a radar station. Or at least it would 
have been if the Soviet Union hadn't craftily invented missiles that flew so 
fast they made the station obsolete before it had a chance to open. I chatted 
with Jenny Andrew, a Yorkshire woman who has been at Balnakeil making baskets, 
bags and beads for the last 15 years. "Why would I leave," she asked with a 
smile, "when we have the best beaches in Britain just outside the door?"

Just south of Durness even the sea loch has glorious golden beaches. John 
Morrison <http://www.durness.org/cape%20wrath.htm>'s tiny boat – the only craft 
that can get across at low tide – took me carefully over the Stygian waters 
with a group of Italians entirely undone by the bluff skipper's accent and, 
when faced with mechanical difficulties, beguilingly short fuse (make hast to 
cover the ears of any children present if the engine starts spluttering).

The land from the stone jetty on the far side to the lighthouse at Cape Wrath 
is known as the Parph and comprises over 100 square miles of deserted moorland. 
It's deserted for a very good reason, too – the vast majority of it is an MoD 
bombing range. Having checked with the powers that be that we weren't scheduled 
for obliteration that day, a minibus took us to the lighthouse along the worst 
road in Britain. My heart went out to the competitors in the following day's
Cape Wrath Challenges <http://www.capewrathchallenge.co.uk/>: 11 miles up and 
down to the lighthouse, 11 miles back over hills that have somehow grown in the 
interim, across the river on the ferry nursing fast-tightening muscles, and a 
final four miles to Durness, uphill all the way.

The route ensures the runners don't even get a chance to look in at Clo Mor, 
the tallest cliffs on the British mainland with a giddying 900ft drop to the 
festering sea below; or Britain's highest waterfall,Eas an Chual Aluinn 
<http://www.barbersasa.co.uk/scotland/assynt/eca_fall.htm>, nearly four times 
taller than Niagara.
 Photograph: Dixe Wills 
Having pitched my tent below the towering lighthouse I called in at the old 
signal station next door – now home to John and Kay and their six English 
springer spaniels and one tortoiseshell cat – and was promptly invited to 
dinner. Though without running water or mains electricity, John told me that 
they hope to open a café there. Several hours and many whiskies later, I 
slipped past the slumbering spaniels out into the intermittent dark (the 
lighthouse was blazing away by then) to my tiny home on the cliffs, the most 
north-westerly and the most content inhabitant on the mainland.

Getting there

Tim Dearman: Family-run daily bus service from Inverness until September 27; 
single £16.85; +44 (0)1349 883585

Postbus <http://tinyurl.com/4g5lu5>: Several services around north-west 
Scotland; +44 (0)8457 740740

John Morrison's Ferry: Across the Kyle of Durness from May to September 
inclusive; return tickets – adult £5, child £2.50; +44 (0)1971 511376

Cape Wrath Minibus: May to September inclusive; return tickets – adult £9, 
child £6; +44 (0)1971 511287.

Smoo Cave Inner caves boat tour; adult £3, child £2; +44 (0)1971 511 704. The 
waterfall cavern is free to enter at any time

Mackay's Roomsand Restaurant <http://www.visitmackays.com> A casually cool 
four-star 19th-century hotel; doubles from £100; +44 (0)1971 511202.

Lazy Crofter <http://www.durnesshostel.com> Mackay's thriftier nextdoor 
neighbour, if your budget is a bit tighter; £14 pp; +44 (0)1971 511202

· Dixe Wills is the author of Places to Hide in England, Scotland and Wales 
(Icon, £7.99)
 