
Is Oscar Wilde <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/oscar-wilde> about be 
posthumously pardoned? In a symbolic gesture announced by the government on 
Thursday, deceased gay and bisexual men convicted of sexual offences that are 
no longer illegal will have their criminal records wiped.

Family of Alan Turing to demand government pardon 49,000 other men
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/feb/22/family-alan-turing-government-petition-pardons-gross-indecency-homosexuality>
Announcing the initiative, the Ministry of Justice (MoJ) said that no 
individuals would be named or singled out – leaving the status of past scandals 
unresolved.

If the historical homosexual crime is no longer illegal and involved a 
consensual act with someone over the age of 16, then those convicted will be 
deemed to have received a posthumous pardon.


The complexity of the evidence that led to Wilde’s conviction in 1895 for 
gross indecency – including evidence of procuring male prostitutes – would make 
it difficult to assess. The gay rights organisation Stonewall suggested that 
the playwright and author, who was sentenced to two years hard labour in 
Reading jail, should now be entitled to a pardon.


The justice minister, Sam Gyimah, said that a clause would be introduced into 
the policing and crime bill. “It is hugely important that we pardon people 
convicted of historical sexual offences who would be innocent of any crime 
today,” he said. “Through pardons and the existing disregard process we will 
meet our manifesto commitment to put right these wrongs.”


The disregard process is already open to those who are alive and wish to 
remove from their criminal record any past sexual offences that are no longer 
illegal. They will be entitled to a statutory pardon under the new legislation.

In 2013 Alan Turing <https://www.theguardian.com/science/alan-turing>, the gay 
mathematician who broke the German Enigma codes, was posthumously pardoned by 
the Queen. He killed himself by taking cyanide in 1954, at the age of 41, 
following his conviction for gross indecency.

The MoJ said it would partially follow Lord Sharkey’s amendment 
<https://lgbt.libdems.org.uk/en/article/2014/0877787/lord-sharkey-calls-for-convictions-for-homosexuality-to-be-post-humously-disregarded>
 to the Protection of Freedoms Act 2012 although it would grant a blanket 
pardon for those who have died and not investigate individual historical cases.

Sharkey said: “This is a momentous day for thousands of families up and down 
the UK who have been campaigning on this issue for decades. I am very grateful 
for the government’s support and the support of many of my colleagues in 
parliament.”

The government has declined to support a private members’ bill on the subject, 
brought forward by an SNP MP, John Nicolson, which is due to be debated in 
parliament later this week.


Ministers said they fear that bill would allow some people to claim they have 
been cleared of offences that are still crimes – including sex with a minor and 
non-consensual sexual activity.

Gyimah said: “I understand and support the intentions behind Mr Nicolson’s 
bill, however I worry that he has not fully thought through the consequences. A 
blanket pardon, without the detailed investigations carried out by the Home 
Office under the disregard process, could see people guilty of an offence which 
is still a crime today claiming to be pardoned.”


The MoJ said there would be no historical limit in relation to past offences. 
It declined to say whether Wilde would be among those deemed posthumously 
pardoned.

Nicolson, the former BBC newsreader and front bench SNP culture spokesman, 
told the Guardian that the former justice secretary Michael Gove had promised 
him government support for his private member’s bill. His would only backdate 
pardons to 1919. “I hope that the government will sit and read my bill 
carefully,” he said. “Mine would also be a blanket pardon. A lot of those 
people [who are alive] are very old and would not want their names listed.”

Paul Twocock, director of campaigns at Stonewall, said: “We welcome the 
government announcement to issue a posthumous pardon to all gay and bi men 
unjustly prosecuted for being who they are, but we don’t think it goes far 
enough. John Nicolson MP’s proposed bill closes a loophole that means some gay 
and bi men who are still alive and living with those convictions still can’t 
have them deleted, despite them being unjust and not illegal today. We urge the 
government to look at bringing this into their proposal.

 “We also don’t agree with the government’s interpretation of John Nicolson 
MP’s bill – it explicitly excludes pardoning anyone convicted of offences that 
would still be illegal today, including non-consensual sex and sex with someone 
under 16.”




 