
If Arizona were a person, it would probably be the actor forever famed for one 
role, or the politician perennially associated with one scandal: it has a lot 
to offer, but tell people you're going there on holiday and they will 
immediately ask: "To the Grand Canyon?" Answer "no" and they might cast around 
for another cultural reference (the Coen Brothers' Raising Arizona is a popular 
one), but my pre-holiday experience suggested it's not an area that British 
people know a great deal more about.

Which is a pity for Arizona, but a great pleasure for me. During the week I 
spent driving around the south of the state with a friend, I saw almost no 
other tourists except Americans and even then many were travelling south to the 
Mexican border towns to buy medication on the cheap. Most of them visit in the 
mild winter months - avoiding the stifling 120F highs of the summer. We were 
there in October (which means you get good weather without paying the peak 
rates of the milder winter) and had an appetite-whetting taste of the Great 
American Road Trip I've always fantasised about: speeding down straight, empty 
roads, parched grasslands on either side, blue mountains in the distance and 
cactus-studded ranches up in the hills. As well as being real cowboy-and-Indian 
territory, south Arizona has its fair share of small towns with small-town 
eccentricities that made the trip unique.

We travelled south from Phoenix, visiting, on the way, the little 
artist-hamlet of Tubac as well as the wine-producing area around Sonoita and 
the popular bird-watching region of Patagonia (about 300 species inhabit the 
Patagonia-Sonoita Creek Preserve). Blink, and you'll miss most of these little 
towns - they are usually based around just one street or crossroads. But their 
tiny populations are spread over ranches for miles around - many of them rented 
for Hollywood's Westerns (John Wayne, Gary Cooper and Jimmy Stewart all shot 
films here. Even Oklahoma was filmed largely in Patagonia and south-east of 
Sonoita in nearby San Rafael valley).

My favourite was Bisbee. One of the larger towns (population: 6,000), it 
nestles in a cooling canyon and certainly has its fair share of small-town 
peculiarities. To give you a flavour: we were told - completely straight-faced 
- that "at least two ghosts inhabit the Copper Queen hotel". The local paper 
was reporting that "a well-kept chicken had been found on Cochise Row". And one 
of the locals said that Bisbee was "the sort of place people occasionally get 
escorted from by handcuffs". Another conceded: "There are a lotta freaks in 
Bisbee."

But don't let this put you off. It is, in fact, the most charming place with a 
live-and-let-live atmosphere and with an odd mix of old-town and new-ageism (as 
well as the just plain odd). Nowadays, mainly eccentric artists and writers 
live there, but it was originally founded on copper mining and for $12 you can 
take the Queen Mine tour into the gut of the Bisbee copper mine, closed since 
1945. Our guide had been a copper miner for over 30 years himself, so was well 
equipped to tell us about the dark, damp conditions of what was once of the 
richest and biggest mines in the country. You can see most of the rest of 
Bisbee by foot, but Tom at Lavender Jeep Tours ($35) knows all the gulches and 
gullies inside out and will take you on a drive that gives you a more 
comprehensive view of the area and its beautiful architecture.

It's also a great place to experience good food. By the time we reached 
Bisbee, I was about to OD on steaks (I counted 12 different types on one menu 
in Sonoita) and chillies (we stumbled across one shop with several hundred 
chilli sauces, indexed for heat-factor. You had to sign a legal waiver for the 
sauce ranked #1, said the shop assistant, as it might burn your skin). Bisbee 
local Helen Saul gave us a new way of seeing the area's food, while remaining 
faithful to traditional south-west kitchens with her Bisbee Cookery School. 
It's not glamorous - just six people working out of a small kitchen - but the 
end result tasted sublime. We made a five-course meal including a shrimp, 
avocado and cactus pear salad; a spicy chicken breast with mango habanero 
salsa; and a papaya tequila mousse, all washed down with selected Arizona 
wines. It's a brilliant place to go to give you a flavour of Bisbee cooking and 
conversation (the locals that take part are fabulous gossips) and for $40pp all 
in, it can't be beaten.

Bisbee was quite an experience. But it's barely an oddity compared to nearby 
Tombstone. Dubbed "the town too tough to die" (it has survived countless fires 
and floods) the OK Corral gunfight took place here in 1881 - with Tombstone 
cowboys Wyatt Earp and Doc Holliday emerging as victors. Those eight seconds 
over 100 years ago is basically what keeps the town alive today. The residents 
re-enact it every day in front of the swing-door saloons in their Wild West 
garb which gives the whole place a bit of a theme-park feel. But it's not all 
for show. Regular city-dwellers have been known to pitch up in Tombstone, with 
a view to living out the remainder of their days, western-style. It's not 
unusual to see women doing their shopping in a full dress/feather boa or 
cowboys swinging rifles over their shoulders as they order a cool sarsaparilla 
from the saloon bar.

We found a more moderate version of this experience at Arivaca - colloquially 
known as "The town too tough to comply" because its inhabitants fight the 
authorities on everything from taxes to parking tickets. It's miles away from 
anywhere and absolutely tiny, but has the claim to being the oldest inhabited 
town in Arizona. We visited its oldest bar, where men with big beards and 
handlebar moustaches sit around the day and say things like "Y'all not from 
around here, are ya?" when two obvious strangers walk in. The mix of cowboys, 
Indians, bikers, Mexicans and hippies looked terrifying when we arrived, but, 
characteristically, they turned out to be the friendliest of sorts, 
disbelieving that anyone would come all the way from England to visit south 
Arizona.

Arizona claims to have the lowest degree of light pollution of all the 
American states - which certainly seems feasible from our experience of the 
area. In these small towns everything seemed to shut early, with most bars and 
restaurants closing at 9pm and often next to no street lighting. Even one of 
our pre-booked B&Bs had completely shut up shop when we arrived at, we thought, 
the not completely unreasonable time of 9.30pm.

The result of the clear Arizona night-sky, is that there is state-wide 
interest in star-gazing. We were lucky enough to stay at the Skywatchers Inn - 
a remote four-room B&B attached to the Vega Bray Observatory. It's a privately 
owned observatory that houses eight major telescopes as well as a planetarium, 
science classroom and museum. At sunset, our astronomer, Mark, appeared with an 
almighty amount of enthusiasm for the night-sky in tow (his habit of late-night 
sessions, he admitted, was taking its toll on his marriage). He stayed with us 
for several hours, pointing out different constellations, clusters and planets. 
It was a wonderful location and experience, and not unreasonably priced. Rooms 
start at $85 (including one with a Star Wars theme which children - and my 
25-year-old friend - adore) and astronomy sessions start at $95 for beginners.

Of course, southern Arizona has its fair share of daylight wonders, too. One 
of the most gobsmacking is the Chiricahua mountains. Millennia of erosion has 
created a wonderland of volcanic rock formations that spread over the 
mountainsides. In some places, hundreds of 1,000ft spears rise from out of the 
grassland, supported by a base no bigger than your average tree trunk. In 
others, boulders balance on top of one another like giants have been playing 
Jenga with nature. The entrance is $5 and there are good hiking trails or a 
scenic drive to be had. Otherwise, Southern Arizona Adventures (arizonatour.com 
<http://www.arizonatour.com>) offers a mountain biking day trip for $50-$60.

The other area that left me speechless was the vast and beautiful Sonora 
desert, blanketed with cacti. We took one of the most scenic drives through it 
to visit the Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum, which is actually part zoo, part 
museum and part botanical garden. Mountain lions, bighorn sheep, pig-like 
javelinas and over 385 other animals and 1,400 species of plants live here in 
mostly natural surroundings.

But to truly roam free with nature, we stayed at the Tanque Verde ranch. One 
of America's old-time cattle ranches, it has over 140 horses trained for riding 
their 640 acres in the foothills of the Rincon mountains, east of Tuscon. It 
was on an early morning ride we saw our first rattlesnake, trying to warm 
itself in the sun. Everywhere in Arizona, you'll hear the locals' stories of 
the cold-blooded blighters, but it's nothing to worry about. According to 
Steven Curry, associate medical director of the Samaritan Regional Poison 
Control Centre, "The majority of snakebite victims are inebriated men, 
frequently unemployed, and almost universally tattooed." (About 80% of victims 
have been "messing around" with snakes.)

The Ranch was all-inclusive of activities - a bit like Butlins but with 
cowboys instead of cabaret. It's expensive though, (rooms start at $290 for a 
double) and this was the only place we met other Brits - most of them with 
children on package deals which meant this was the only place they were 
visiting during their holiday.

Which is a shame because to go all that way in order to see just one place in 
Arizona doesn't even scratch the surface of what this state has to offer. I'd 
love to go back and head to see the Betatakin ruins in the north or Lake Mead 
in the west. Who knows, I might even try to see the Grand Canyon one day.

Way to go

Getting there: British Airways (0870 8509850, ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) 
flies Heathrow-Phoenix direct from £379.10 rtn inc taxes in September and 
October.

Where to stay: Amado Territory Inn, nr Tubac (+520 398 8684, 
amado-territory-inn.com <http://amado-territory-inn.com>) doubles from $95 B&B 
plus taxes; Sonoita Inn, Sonoita (+520 455 5935 400,sonoitainn.com 
<http://www.sonoitainn.com>) from $99 B&B; Audrey's Inn (+520 432 1866); 
Skywatchers Inn, nr Tucson (+520 615 3886,skywatchersinn.com 
<http://www.skywatchersinn.com>) from $85 B&B; Tanque Verde Ranch, Tucson: 
(+520 296 6275,tanqueverderanch.com <http://www.tanqueverderanch.com>) from 
$290 per double all inclusive, plus most activities.

Activities: Lavender Jeep Tours (+520 432 5369). Bisbee Cooking School (+520 
432 3882,geocities.com/bisbeecookingschool/ 
<http://www.geocities.com/bisbeecookingschool/>).

Further information: Brochure hotline 0906 5770031, arizonaguide.com 
<http://www.arizonaguide.com>.

Country code 001.

Flight time London-Phoenix: 10hrs 35mins.

Time difference: -8hrs.

£1 = $1.76.
 