
A legal battle is being fought out in the court of appeal over who pays the 
bill for a service to block HIV infection.


The high court ruled that NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> 
England has the power to commission PrEP, which has been described as a 
“game-changer” in the fight against HIV/Aids.

PrEP HIV drugs: fight for limited NHS funds takes unedifying turn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/03/prep-hiv-drugs-fight-for-limited-nhs-funds-takes-unedifying-turn>
NHS England is appealing on the grounds that local authorities have the legal 
responsibility to arrange services to “prevent” the spread of HIV, while its 
own responsibilities are limited to treating those already assumed to be 
infected.

PrEP, short for “pre-exposure prophylaxis”, is a prevention strategy that 
involves people who are HIV-negative but at high risk of infection taking the 
anti-retroviral drug Truvada to reach optimal levels of protection.

The anticipated cost of providing PrEP services is £10m-£20m a year.

When taken consistently, it has been shown to reduce the risk of HIV infection 
in people who are at high risk by more than 90%.

The legal battle is important and urgent because of its potential impact on 
the provision of other services, including hearing implants for children with 
deficient or missing auditory nerves, prosthetics for lower limb loss, and a 
drug for treating certain mutations in children aged two to five with cystic 
fibrosis.

Nine new treatments and services NHS England had planned to make available to 
patients have been put on hold pending the outcome of the appeal.

In May this year NHS England’s specialist services commissioning committee 
decided not to commission PrEP, saying it lacked power to do so under NHS 
legislation and regulations.

But Mr Justice Green, sitting in London’s high court, ruled on 2 August that 
it did have the power under the NHS Act 2006 and under regulations made in 2012 
which came into effect in April 2013. The ruling was a victory for the National 
Aids Trust (NAT), a charity, with backing from the Local Government Association 
(LGA).

Jonathan Swift QC, appearing for NHS England, is asking the appeal judges – 
Lord Justice Longmore, Lord Justice Underhill and Lady Justice King – to rule 
the high court decision wrong in law and to conclude that provision of PrEP 
services does indeed fall outside NHS England’s legal powers.

Swift said the case was a matter of general public importance because it 
involved the balancing of the division of health responsibilities between NHS 
England, the health secretary and local authorities. The QC drew a distinction 
between “PrEP” and “PEP”. He said NHS England has provided PEP – the 
post-exposure prophylactic service – since 2013.

He described PEP as an emergency service provided in cases where there was “an 
assumption” that the person being treated was HIV-infected at the time of 
treatment – in contrast to PrEP, which was for people not infected.

Mr Swift argued the 2012 regulations only required NHS England to provide 
services, for patients already believed to be infected. Responsibility for 
funding PrEP fell to local authorities since they were under an express 
obligation to make arrangements for services to prevent the spread of sexually 
transmitted infections, including HIV.

The high court judgment which is being challenged said the case was about “the 
allocation of budgetary responsibility in the health field”.

Mr Justice Green said: “No one doubts that preventative medicine makes 
powerful sense. But one governmental body says it has no power to provide the 
service and local authorities say they have no money.

“The claimant is caught between the two and the potential victims of this 
disagreement are those who will contract HIV/Aids but who would not were the 
preventative policy to be fully implemented.

“In my judgment the answer to this conundrum is that NHS England has erred in 
deciding that it has no power to commission the preventative drugs in issue.”

Alternatively, said the judge, NHS England has “mischaracterised the PrEP 
treatment as preventative when in law it is capable of amounting to treatment 
for a person with infection”. In any event NHS England had the power to 
commission preventative treatments because that facilitated, or was incidental 
to, “the discharge of its broader statutory functions”.

NHS England is asking the appeal court to rule the high court wrong on all 
counts. Campaigners have said that while the majority of gay men use condoms to 
prevent being infected with HIV, there is also an “ethical duty” to provide 
PrEP to those who do not. And they say the drug would provide an additional 
defence against HIV, and would not be used simply as an alternative to safe sex.
 