
Primark <https://www.theguardian.com/business/primark> took market share and 
enjoyed underlying sales growth in the UK and Ireland over Christmas after it 
held its nerve and avoided joining in with Black Friday discounting.

Sales at the low-price fashion chain powered ahead 15% in the 16 weeks to 3 
January as its Spanish and Portuguese stores also saw strong rises in 
underlying sales while the company opened new stores in the Netherlands and 
Germany after expanding into France.

John Bason, finance director of Primark’s parent company Associated British 
Foods, said sales had been “sensational” in France and the company had now 
signed leases on eight stores in the US as it gears up to cross the Atlantic at 
the end of this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/08/primark-launch-200m-bid-us-clothing-market>
.

The strong performance by Primark helped to offset a difficult time at ABF’s 
sugar business, which is suffering from falling prices. Analysts trimmed annual 
profits forecasts by between 2% and 3% as ABF said it expected a “marginal 
decline” in profits for the group as a whole this year as a “large reduction” 
in profits at its sugar business was offset by growth at Primark and its 
grocery, ingredients and agriculture divisions. The company also admitted it 
would book a loss of £128m for the closure of two unprofitable sugar factories 
in China.

ABF reported a 3% rise in group revenues for the last quarter at constant 
currency rates (1% at actual exchange rates). “With the fall in EU sugar prices 
and weakness in the world sugar price, we expect a further large reduction in 
profit from AB Sugar, but this will put much of the effect of the structural 
changes in EU prices, seen over the last three years, behind us.”

In the UK, Bason said Primark had benefited from holding its nerve while many 
rival fashion chains brought out the discount banners during the warm autumn 
weather and enthusiasm for the US-inspired promotional day Black Friday.

“We did nothing for Black Friday, no special events, but we saw increased 
footfall on the high street and not surprisingly we gained from that,” he said.

“I think it’s the right thing to hold off on discounting,” he said. “Once the 
weather turned, shoppers came into stores. In fashion retail, weather affects 
sales and so we didn’t want to discount. We are confident in the Primark 
proposition and long-term growth; we don’t kneejerk around short-term weather 
effects.”

While profit margins slipped compared with the previous year, Bason said this 
was because of “exceptional trading” in 2013, when the company sold out of 
stock.

In 2014, Bason said the company had sold out of Christmas jumpers, selling 
more than 1m, while kidswear, and even womenswear, linked to the hit Disney 
film Frozen had also sold well. Whilesales in October and November were 
affected by the balmy autumn in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/05/primark-sales-trading-autumn-associated-british-foods-clothing>
, Bason said it only affected seasonal products such as coats and knitwear, 
which only make up a third of Primark’s product range so overall sales 
continued to rise.

Primark opened four stores in the Netherlands and three in Germany, including 
a big outlet in Dresden, during the quarter. The retailer’s rapid expansion in 
recent years has given it 287 stores in nine countries, with 10.7m sq ft of 
selling space. It plans to add 1m sq ft of shop space this year via new stores 
or extensions in Germany, Belgium, the UK and US.

The head of Primark’s successful Spanish operation has been put in charge of 
its venture into theUS, where it expects to open three stores before Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/20/primark-us-retail-space-deal-sears>
. Last spring, Primark set out its plans to enter the US, starting with 
north-eastern states such as New York and New Jersey, with around 10 stores 
planned for the metropolitan corridor that runs from Boston to Baltimore. It 
struck a surprise deal to take over unwanted space in shopping malls from Sears.
 