
After more than a decade as the NFL’s black hole, the Oakland Raiders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/oakland-raiders> are back in the playoffs 
and filling up the Pro Bowl.

The resurgent Raiders, enjoying their first winning season in 14 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/08/oakland-raiders-turnaround-nfl-vegas>
, lead the league with seven players selected for next month’s all-star game.

Quarterback Derek Carr, wide receiver Amari Cooper, center Rodney Hudson, 
defensive end Khalil Mack, safety Reggie Nelson, guard Kelechi Osemele and 
tackle Donald Penn were picked from the Raiders, who occupy first place in the 
AFC West going into Week 16.

The Raiders (11-3) had three players selected from their sturdy offensive 
line, a big reason the team has finally clinched their first playoff berth 
since losing the 2003 Super Bowl. “It means a lot. It’s a great honor to be 
recognized for what you do,” Hudson said. “It’s very humbling. I give a lot of 
thanks to our team-mates because you can’t do any of it by yourself.”

Not a joke: NFL adding dodgeball in attempt to liven up Pro Bowl
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/nfl-pro-bowl-schedule-dodgeball-skills-games>
Six members of the Atlanta Falcons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atlanta-falcons> (9-5) were selected, most 
among NFC teams. Outside linebacker Vic Beasley, kicker Matt Bryant, running 
back Devonta Freeman, wide receiver Julio Jones, center Alex Mack and 
quarterback Matt Ryan were chosen from the NFC South leaders.

Despite missing the first four games of the season because of his Deflategate 
suspension, New England quarterbackTom Brady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tom-brady> was picked for the 12th time in 
his career. Cleveland tackle Joe Thomas and Arizona wide receiver Larry 
Fitzgerald were honored for the 10th time. Fitzgerald’s 10 Pro Bowl selections 
are the second-most in NFL history by a wide receiver. Only Hall of Famer Jerry 
Rice (13) has more.

Twenty-six of the 32 teams had at least one player picked. Twenty players were 
chosen for the first time, including three rookies: Ezekiel Elliott and Dak 
Prescott from Dallas, and Kansas City’s Tyreek Hill.

Among the notable omissions was Detroit quarterback Matthew Stafford. The 
first-place Lions, who lead the NFC North at 9-5, did not have a single 
representative. Carolina’s Cam Newton, last season’sNFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> MVP, was not picked, either. Other star 
quarterbacks left out were New Orleans’ Drew Brees, Indianapolis’ Andrew Luck 
and Seattle’s Russell Wilson.

After the Raiders and Falcons, the Cowboys, Steelers and Titans were next with 
five players selected.

In addition to Prescott and Elliott, offensive linemen Travis Frederick, Zack 
Martin and Tyron Smith were picked from Dallas.

For the Steelers, running back Le’Veon Bell, wide receiver Antonio Brown, 
guard David DeCastro, center Maurkice Pouncey and quarterback Ben 
Roethlisberger were selected. Roethlisberger, Pouncey and Brown were all chosen 
for the fifth time.

For the surprising Titans, tied with Houston for first place in the AFC South, 
it’s their most players picked for the Pro Bowl since they had six in 2008. 
Running back DeMarco Murray leads the group. He has 1,224 yards rushing, second 
in the NFL behind Elliott. Left tackle Taylor Lewan earned his first Pro Bowl 
honor in his third season, while linebacker Brian Orakpo earned his fourth Pro 
Bowl trip overall and first since signing with Tennessee in March 2015. Tight 
end Delanie Walker and defensive lineman Jurrell Casey also were selected.

Another high-profile player chosen was wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr, one of 
four New York Giants picked along with safety Landon Collins, cornerback 
Janoris Jenkins and special teams player Dwayne Harris.

Beckham is tied for third in the NFL with 85 receptions and 10 touchdown 
catches, and is fourth with 1,173 yards receiving. He became the first Giants 
player to be voted to three consecutive Pro Bowls since guard Chris Snee from 
2008-10. “It is exciting,” Beckham said. “It is cool to be on a team with 
multiple Pro Bowlers, so it is a huge accomplishment for myself and my 
team-mates.”

The Pro Bowl will be played on Sunday 29 January, in Orlando, Florida. The 
game will return to the NFC v AFC format after three years. Former stars Jerome 
Bettis, Tony Gonzalez, Ray Lewis and Charles Woodson will serve as “Legends 
Captains.”

The Pro Bowl players were determined by the consensus votes of fans, players 
and coaches. Each group’s vote counted one-third toward determining the 
selections.
 