
With 140 manufacturing plants in 43 countries and a fleet of 30,000 trucks 
delivering to 4 billion customers, Procter & Gamble controls a complex 
transport network with a giant environmental as well geographic footprint.

Yet an ambitious project to cut delivery miles, move freight from road to rail 
and inland shipping, and to massively reduce waste, has put the company ahead 
of many of its competitors in designing a more sustainable and more 
cost-effective system of logistics.

As a result of its Project Tina – a new approach to delivering fast-moving 
consumer goods across Europe, its second biggest market – P&G has already saved 
$10m, taken 25,000km of distribution off the roads and saved some 35,000 tonnes 
of CO2.

The aim is to see those savings multiply by 2012, and 67,000 tonnes of carbon 
saved each year just by moving freight from road to rail.

The project was launched in 2009 with a trial in two countries, but has proved 
so successful it has now been rolled out across Europe. In those two years, the 
supply network has been redesigned starting from the store shelf and working 
backwards.

Distribution centres have been moved closer to the customer. Products have 
been compacted to reduce packaging and transport volumes.

Using trains and boats to move goods has proved eight times more carbon 
efficient than relying on trucks and has allowed P&G to halve the number of 
road miles in its supply chain.

Lorries are also now packed more efficiently, after the group realised trucks 
travelling from France to the UK were full of pallets but only half-full when 
it came to the vehicles' capacity for goods. That's been put right through a 
process the company calls "filling the cube".

In 2010, international transport corridors were established throughout Europe, 
down which P&G trains move not just the group's own products but goods from a 
range of non-competing brands such as Baxter, Nike, Toyota and Ikea. This 
co-operation is helping to spread best practice to other major freight shippers.

Simon Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 