
The dating website Match.com suffered a collapse in profits last year as 
fickle Britons turned to free smartphone apps to find a date.

Topline operating profits at the UK’s biggest dating website plunged by 80% to 
£1.6m in the year to 31 December. Turnover was also down more than 10% at 
£38.2m as apps such asTinder <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tinder> 
changed the nature of online dating.

Hinge app founder hopes $7 and no swiping can avert the dating apocalypse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/11/hinge-dating-app-justin-mcleod-no-swiping-tinder>
“The industry is in a bit of a crusher,” said Mark Brooks, analyst at 
consultancy Courtland Brooks. “The mobile medium has come of age and over 70% 
of internet daters in the UK are just using their smartphones. It’s an amazing 
transition that has truly roiled the dating industry. If Match is suffering, 
their competitors are suffering more.”

Match, which is part of the Nasdaq-listed US media group IAC, blamed the sales 
decline on a fall in “average member revenue”. The steep decline in underlying 
UK profits, revealed in accounts filed at Companies House, was the result of 
the “reduction in turnover without a commensurate reduction in largely fixed 
overheads” according to Karl Gregory, Match managing director for northern 
Europe.

Although it is free to post a profile on Match, which pioneered online dating 
when it launched in 1995, the site charges a subscription fee to users who wish 
to contact another member.

“Smartphone growth is an opportunity more than a challenge,” continues Brooks. 
“Laggard dating companies that have not created compelling mobile experiences 
are dying. Most old school incumbents have stumbled in this respect.”

Match declined to comment on the figures but in the notes to the accounts 
Gregory says the business has “considerable financial resources together with a 
strong customer base and the continuing support” of its parent company. IAC’s 
dating division, which has its own Nasdaq listing, consists of over 45 brands 
including Tinder and PlentyOfFish.

Love me Tinder – tales from the frontline of modern dating
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/27/tinder-online-dating-apps-blind-dates-love>
Research firm Mintel predicts that despite the current upheaval the UK online 
dating industry will grow from £165m to £225m by 2019.

“The popularity of free dating apps has made a big impact on online dating 
over the last several years by dispelling perceptions, opening up online dating 
to a new market and driving mobile usage,” says Mintel analyst Rebecca McGrath 
of the research, which found nearly 60% of people who had used a free dating 
app or site said they would not pay to use one.

Getting users to pay for apps that they have previously used for free will be 
key to the industry’s future success, added McGrath.
 