
The UK's major web publishers are predicting average growth in digital 
revenues of 16% this year, according to the Association of Online Publishers' 
2009 census. Trade bodies are expected to be optimistic but aren't these 
predictions from the association's 50 members wildly unrealistic?

AOP chair Alison Reay doesn't think so. "In the survey, AOP members, which 
include Guardian Media Group, IPC Media and the Channel 4, showed a big 
increase in efforts to make money from the web as 63% also revealed plans to 
increase investment in their digital business this year."

"Audience first, revenue later" has been the mantra for web businesses for the 
past decade, but when so many firms are consolidating and focusing on their 
most reliable, core operations, is it sensible to keep ploughing money into 
online?

Reay says: "If you take several of those digital revenue streams - e-commerce 
and subscriptions, for example - they are business models that can be proved. 
Consumers are more confident about buying online, are spending more time 
online, buying more flights and insurance online - those deals work and they do 
generate revenue. What we have seen is that there will be growth in 2009 - 
especially in video, commercial content, multimedia deals and in sponsorship."

Display ads sold on a cost-per-thousand (CPM) basis are still the most common 
charging model, used by 89% of AOP publishers compared with 73% two years ago. 
Commercial sponsorship rose from 76% to 84% during the same period. Use of 
cost-per-click, which garners revenue for each ad clicked on, has risen from 
43% of publishers last year to half this year.

For the first time publishers were asked whether they charge for access - 39% 
of them said they used subscriptions in some form, with a recent fashion for 
dating sites and crosswords. Subscriptions are key because they show publishers 
moving away from a reliance on advertising, and attempting to diversify their 
income.

Does this mean that, with the bleak economic situation continuing to pile on 
the pressure, sites are starting to charge for access to editorial? Though 
rumours of sites introducing paywalls continue, Reay says there was no 
indication of that in this survey but adds that "every publisher will consider 
trying different interest areas, like Fantasy Football, paid-for dating, or 
crosswords".

Perhaps another surprising trend is that 51% of publishers said their 
commitment to invest in training - usually one of the first victims of cutbacks 
- had not changed. A further 40% said they are actually increasing their 
training budgets while only 9% have reduced them. Publishers had indicated they 
want to re-skill existing staff rather than recruit new people, said Reay, 
adding that they are prioritising skills in audience development, advertising 
sales and technology.

While many journalism training courses are still focused on preparing students 
for the newspaper, magazine and broadcast industries, the real demand is for 
new digital editorial and production roles including search engine 
optimisation, community management and user-experience design.

The trend for integrating offline and online teams in both commercial and 
editorial is continuing with 65% of publishers planning to combine previously 
independent teams during the year, the majority in advertising. Reay, who is 
also digital and multimedia director at the Telegraph Media Group, calls 
predictions that most national newspapers will fold grossly pessimistic.

But Dan Cryan, Screen Digest's senior analyst, disagrees. "Haven't they 
noticed there's an advertising recession going on? Of course you have to 
diversify into digital - you'd be mad not to. But the problem with 
subscriptions for things like dating is that someone will come along and offer 
the same service for free. Look what happened with Friends Reunited."
 