
It's hard to admit to R that I've been eating all day. Normally, this would 
suggest that I'd been at a party, or great restaurant or market. But I have 
been at home with the children. "I feel really embarrassed telling you this, 
but I just can't lay off the biscuits," I say.

"Well, you know what to do. Just have to tell yourself to eat healthily. 
Do some exercise if you want," he says, hugging me. "You don't feel like you've 
put on any weight."

It's clear that he doesn't really get it, the fact that I'm going through a 
phase of massively over-eating. I can't blame him because the way in which I 
told him sounded a bit like a thin woman's lament about the thunderousness of 
her not-very-big thighs.

This is what's happening. R is doing brilliantly well at staying sober. It's 
been weeks, and I'm no longer counting, but his behaviour and commitment to 
everything is so apparent. I keep noticing the things that have changed: his 
reliability, his honesty and his ability to say when he's feeling off kilter. 
All of this is very new.

But my problem – an eating disorder of sorts – is old. As a teenager I spent 
years in a cycle of bingeing and throwing up. Thankfully, I don't do 
the vomiting bit now, but the bingeing – though very infrequent – is something 
I struggle with and I don't know how to deal with it.

I've been hanging around the treat cupboard in the kitchen for the past few 
days as if it were the entrance to a crack den, too scared to open it up and 
look inside because I know that there is so much inside to devour. Most things 
are for the children's packed lunches and even though I'm not hungry I know 
that once the door is open, I'll have a compulsion to eat everything inside, as 
quickly as possible.

Drinking and smoking – things that have the potential to harm – are not very 
cool when they become die-hard habits. But watch any old Hollywood film and 
there's always a male or female lead puffing away on a cigarette or loosening 
up on liquor.

You'd be hard-pushed to find a character in one of these films, however, who 
spends a scene stuffing their face with rounds of bread and butter sandwiches 
for starters, half a cake for main course and a couple of packets of biscuits 
for pudding. Overeating isn't even a medical condition like bulimia or 
anorexia. It is just plain old overeating and it is never enjoyable.

Once I confessed to a nutritionist friend that I had a dodgy relationship with 
food. I told her that during stressful times, I overate. Sharing this was a 
revelation, because she helped me realise that emotional eating is incredibly 
common. It just isn't talked about much.

So I get the shame bit. When you're doing something you wouldn't do in public, 
it's hard to discuss with others, because secret habits by their very nature 
can make you feel ashamed, abnormal. And while I love eating good food in 
company, and have always been a competent cook, it is when I'm alone that the 
thought of being around lots of food makes me uncomfortable.

As part of everything – addressing the problems that existed before I met R – 
I have to try to understand why I am overeating at the moment. Here are some 
possible reasons: a) I am the only adult in the house for most of the time. I 
can feel bored, anxious with responsibility and overwhelmed by the amount of 
domestic drudgery involved, b) A few months ago I lost weight because I was 
stressed and somebody said, "You look great, and very thin!" which did terrible 
things to my head because I started to presume that I looked better "very thin" 
than I did "normal", c) I am worried about telling everyone that R is moving 
back in. When I'm scared, I resist doing it: I eat with the abruptness of fear, 
almost like drinking to distract.

Strangely, life is relatively calm. There is a shocking lack of drama in our 
lives now R isn't drinking; the children seem content, enjoying the day-to-day 
rhythm of normality that barely existed until recently. So what is there to 
feel bad about? It's crazy, but the peace is so disarming at times that 
I grieve for the drama – at least it kept things moving, diverted my attention 
away from the uneventful days that will always exist and shed light on my flaws.

What I need to learn is how to stay sane through the smooth times, the boring 
stretches, to sit with the quiet that allows me to think straight. It's easy to 
see how R could never just stop after a couple of drinks. To continue with 
something, long after it loses its pleasure, is something I understand.
 