
Nestyn, Tuesday, pm. Not keen, to start with, when Gordon unveiled the 
post-Rawnsley election strategy. "I'm not perfect." Speak for your ­bleeding 
self you foulmouthed bastard. As for the future free for all the effing 
­fairies, or whatever: basic rule for any ­slogan, can Prescott pronounce it? 
Or, if ­Prescott's not available, can a normal human who's been socialising? 
­Investigated this, Sunday night, with a few of the lads and established that 
saying ­"AFFFA" is totally out of the ­question, even for a modest drinker, 
after ­approx 10 pints (or, in Europe/free bar, ­assuming stomach lined with 
­peanuts, 24 small glasses champagne).

But, as per instructions, start ­using some of the other lines straight away. 
On Diane, since she's with me to open Nestyn's new Adult Victims of ­Bullying 
Care & Rehabilitation Suite. Diane: "What were you up to last night? There was 
vomit everywhere!" Me: "I know I haven't done everything right and I know – 
really, I know – that I'm not ­perfect." Diane (stunned): "Come again?" In 
exchange for three minutes of this I get a free pardon plus a promise I can 
script her "Ron's the man that I love" number for the Gazette.

Same thing when the adult victims start asking why it took so long to ­answer 
their cries for help. A short burst of "I knowLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> hasn't done everything right" is 
all it takes to cheer them up before we're off to meet pensioners on about 
frostbite ("I know – really, I know – that I'm not perfect"), commuters 
whingeing about cancelled trains ("I know what I stand for"), and a bunch of 
parents wittering about Nestyn Comp "destroying our kids' life chances", blah 
blah ("my ­message to you today is simple").

There's just one spot of bother. "What about the last 13 years?" demands one 
dad, an obvious troublemaker. "What's a 'fair' future?" prods another. At this 
point, the old me might have lost it. Today, armed with the amnesia philosophy, 
I ask if I can share some words bythe ­Chinese thinker Master Oogway 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6672DziGVtQ>.

"Yesterday is history," I say. "Tomorrow is a mystery. But today is a gift, 
that's why they call it the present." Am still ­wondering who introduced 
­Gordon to Kung Fu Panda.
 