
Banks were back in demand, helping push the FTSE 100 to a four month high, as 
some of the negativity surrounding the sector in recent days began to fade.

Investors took comfort from suggestions that new rules on capital 
requirements, expected to be agreed by European regulators and bank governors 
over the weekend if all goes according to plan, may not be as tough as first 
believed. The Basel III framework is forecast to set a 7% tier one capital 
ratio, including a buffer to help protect banks against any future extreme 
economic downturn. This is less than the 8%-9% some had been demanding, and 
less than the 10% maintained by most UK banks.

On top of that, the prospect of a break-up of the banks seemed to recede, 
while the Irish government's actions on Anglo Irish bank also helped sentiment. 
SoRoyal Bank of Scotland rose 2.32p to 48.15p while Barclays, whose private 
equity business may reportedly seek its independence, was 15.35p better at 
323.35p.

Lloyds Banking Group added 2.35p to 74.67p as UBS issued a buy note on the 
bank with a 100p target andBarclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> Capital raising its 
recommendation from underweight to equal-weight. The bank is also believed to 
have sold its stake in housebuilder Crest Nicholson for a reported £150m.

Overall the FTSE 100 finished 64.42 points higher at 5494.16, its best level 
since the end of April. The mood was helped by better than expected US jobs and 
trade data, which lifted Wall Street, while the poor UK trade figures and the 
Bank of England's decision to leave interest rates on hold had little impact.

Elsewhere the takeover talk surrounding Centrica refused to die away, with 
reheated suggestions of a possible bid from Russia's Gazprom doing the rounds 
at a supposed 480p a share. The company, which benefited earlier in the week 
from positive comments by both JP Morgan Cazenove and Nomura, closed 8.1p 
higher at 346.1p.

Arm maintained its recent good run, up another 15.5p to 403.2p as the chip 
designer unveiled a new processor which could take it further into the server 
market and vague bid speculation continued.

Miners were also wanted on hopes that an upturn in the global economy would 
boost demand for commodities.Xstrata climbed 36.5p to 1138.5p, additionally 
lifted by renewed talk of interest from its major shareholder Glencore, while
Vedanta Resources rose 66p to £20.38.

Shire added 24p to £14.75 after the pharmaceutical group agreed to licence a 
treatment for duchenne muscular dystrophy from US biotechnology group 
Acceleron, giving a boost to its rare disease pipeline.Shire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/shire> will pay an initial $45m with 
further payments of up to $165m if the drug is successfully commercialised.

But retailers were under pressure after their results. Home Retail, due to 
exit the FTSE 100 this month, fell 6.2p to 215.2p, whileHMV dropped 7.25p to 
59.25p, draggingGame Group down with it. Game, another loser from the latest 
index reshuffle since it will be demoted from the FTSE 250, lost 1.55p to 
71.90p.

Vodafone dipped 0.35p to 159.45p despite announcing a restructuring which will 
leave its stakes in businesses like France's SFR - stakes investors are keen 
for the company to sell off - held outside its main subsidiaries. Its defeat in 
an Indian tax case this week helped sour sentiment a little.

Among the mid-caps Aveva dropped 78p to £14.02 as UBS cut its recommendation 
on the IT company from neutral to sell. The bank called the company "the most 
expensive software stock in our European universe" and said the current price 
seemed to be discounting 20% upgrades to profit forecasts. It added:
 Aveva is a potential M&A take-out candidate. However we note that peer 
Intergraph was bought for 11 times historic earnings. Aveva is at 14.5 times on 
the same basis – seemingly already more than pricing-in the risk of a take-out.

Finally strong demand from Japan and Asia for its measuring and calibration 
equipment has boosted sales at precision engineering groupRenishaw. The 
company's shares jumped 127p to £10.04 and Altium Securities raised its target 
price from 938p to £12.49. Analyst Steve Medlicott said: Renishaw has issued a 
very brief trading update stating that turnover in the first two months of the 
new financial year has been approximately £20m per month and that the order 
book stands at £25m with order visibility of four to five weeks. The strongest 
demand has come from Japan and the rest of Asia where sales are running at 
double the same period last year.

Prior to this update we had been forecasting £215m of turnover implying an 
average monthly rate of £17.9m. This update suggests a level of trading 
materially ahead of our previous expectations.

This is a world class business that is benefitting from underlying strong 
demand and a combination of new launches and the integration of existing 
products into a range of customer machines. The strength of demand is 
particularly encouraging as it has been achieved whilst a number of the western 
markets continuing to trade below previous levels. The statement failed to 
refer to the healthcare side. This part of the group has suffered from a slow 
ramp up but if the group is successful in this area it has the scope to be 
larger than the metrology division over the next few years – the metrology 
division accounted for 100% of group earnings in the year to June 2010.  