
Leading shares gained ground for the second day running, with banks and mining 
companies among the main risers.

Royal Bank of Scotland rose 15.6p to 304.4p as analysts became more positive 
on the company. Goldman Sachs moved from neutral to buy, saying a split into a 
good and bad bank as suggested by the chancellor's recent Mansion House speech 
could address some of the problems facing RBS, such as muted returns and 
uncertainty over its prospects.

Ian Gordon at Investec also issued a buy note, but on the basis that a split 
of RBS was less likely:
 It is too soon to declare outright victory, but the government's response to 
the Parliamentary Commission on Banking Standards, published yesterday 
lunchtime, struck a more measured, constructive approach. Despite some 
vociferous support in Parliament, the Commission's more outlandish ideas for 
breaking RBS up into small pieces have been summarily dismissed. The spectre of 
a good bank/bad bank split lives on, but it will surely fail to meet the stated 
preconditions for its implementation. This is very good news.

Overall the FTSE 100 finished 63.01 points higher at 6513.08, helped by news 
of a short term fix for Greece, with eurozone finance ministers agreeing a $3bn 
bailout loan after the usual tortuous discussions. On top of that, the IMF 
lifted its growth forecast for the UK, outweighing disappointing industrial 
production and trade figures. But in China, inflation rose by more than 
expected, putting more pressure on the central bank as economic growth shows 
signs of slowing.

The prospect of declining growth in one of the key economies for commodities 
has seen mining shares lose around a quarter of their value this year. But they 
were back in demand on Tuesday following better than expected figures from 
Alcoa. The aluminium producer kicked off the US second quarter reporting season 
with a larger than forecast profit and positive comments about future demand.

So miners dominated the risers in the leading index, with Anglo American 
adding 37p to £12.82,Fresnillo up 30p at 951p and Vedanta Resources rising 86p 
to £10.94.

Among the mid-caps, iron ore producer Ferrexpo added 16.9p to 155.6p after a 
positive update showed a 21% rise in output during the second quarter.

Among the other risers Weir added 58p to £21.62 after Morgan Stanley moved its 
rating from underweight to equal weight with a £21.50 price target. The bank 
said:
 Weir has done significantly better in oil and gas than we expected, and our 
estimates are no longer markedly different from consensus, despite our 
lingering concerns on the minerals side. The skew of risk and reward is now 
balanced. 
Reckitt Benckiser rose 73p to £49.23 despite concerns about increased 
competition for its Suboxone heroin substitute after US regulators gave their 
approval to rival Zubsolv, from Sweden's Orexo. In a sell note Pablo Zuanic at 
Liberum Capital said:
 [This approval] increases the downside risk to RB Pharma earnings in our 
judgment. So while we are appreciative of the strategic changes chief executive 
Kapoor has set in motion in the core business and realize the uncertainty 
around RB Pharma (myriad of scenarios, reflected in the wide disparity of 
consensus estimates), we see more risks weighted to the downside and hence our 
sell stance. However...we expect RB Pharma to produce a strong first half which 
will not reflect the Orexo challenges yet, which consequently may support the 
stock for now.

Marks & Spencer dropped 6.5p to 453.2p following news that like-for-like sales 
had fallen for the eighth successive quarter. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2013/jul/09/marks-spencer-clothes-food-sales-agm>

ITV lost 2.6p to 150.2p after the broadcaster's chairman Archie Norman was 
appointed to the same position at investment bank Lazard London. Earlier 
Panmure Gordon issued a buy note, following reports the company could be 
interested in a £90m deal to buy Swedish production business Nice. Analyst Alex 
DeGroote said:
 This would be consistent with the strategy of expanding in TV production, 
through acquisition. In context, ITV has net cash of around £200m. So there is 
material upside over the next 18 months from releveraging the balance sheet 
(e.g. on M&A, buybacks). We estimate ITV has more than £1bn of firepower, 
without net debt. Hence earnings per share remains in a strong upgrade cycle 
and the shares must be owned. 
Aveva led the FTSE 250 risers, up 310p to £25.78 after the IT group said it 
had made a positive start to the year in both its engineering systems and 
enterprise solutions divisions.

Lower down the market Blur, which operates an online marketplace for companies 
to buy and sell services from advertising to legal help, bounced 40p to 242.5p 
after a positive second quarter update, a two day gain of 63.5p. It announced 
its biggest single contract to date, a $3.6m project for a US transport group, 
and added 410 projects during the three months, the largest number in a 
quarter. Analyst Tintin Stormont at the company's broker N+1 Singer said:
 Blur is seeing strong traction in disrupting the traditional corporate 
services industry, a market worth $2 trillion. Execution has been strong to 
date showing the group is successfully building on its first mover advantage. 
The corporate market is clearly ready for a new model for procuring services 
and investors should continue to see significant growth going forward from Blur 
which is at the forefront of this trend. 
Finally Keywords Studios <http://www.keywordsintl.com/> is set to become the 
largest technology float on Aim so far this year. The company, which supplies 
technical services to the video games industry and counts Microsoft and 
Electronics Arts as customers, has raised £28m with an institutional placing at 
123p a share. The company's market capitalisation is expected to be around 
£49m, and dealings are due to start on Friday.
 