 Ian McEwan's bestselling novel Atonement will this summer be turned into a 
potential blockbuster film - and offer a lifeline to a fading north-east 
England resort. The film of the book by the Booker Prize-winning author will 
star Keira Knightley, best known for her Oscar-nominated role in Pride and 
Prejudice, and Scottish actor James McAvoy, who has appeared in Band of 
Brothers and the TV series Shameless.
The plot, which starts in the 1930s, involves 13-year-old Briony Tallis - 
likely to be played by Australian actress Abbie Cornish - wrongly accusing her 
older sister's boyfriend, Robbie Turner (McAvoy), of raping her glamorous 
cousin and the horrendous consequences that follow.

The film will also cover the boyfriend's horrors of the second world war 
during the evacuation of Dunkirk. It is this that has given a starring role to 
the coastal town of Redcar. The production company, Working Title, searched the 
country for a town that could still pass for Dunkirk in the 1940s - and the 
only place that fitted the bill was the undeveloped beach and esplanade at 
Redcar.

In a deal expected to be signed at the end of this week, Redcar and Cleveland 
borough council will allow the company to take over the town's beach, turn a 
terrace house into a French bar and replace railings and lampposts with 
authentic French cast iron versions. It will also be half-sinking tanks in the 
sand and bringing in a flotilla of small 60-year-old boats.

For the local Teessiders, there are 1,000 parts as film extras playing the 
departing squaddies and the chaos of war.

A spokeswoman for the council said: "We are hoping that the film becomes a 
blockbuster, attracting people to come to Redcar to see the original place where
Atonement <https://www.theguardian.com/film/atonement> was filmed. We are not 
taking any money for it."

Redcar would never have got the starring role if a controversial redevelopment 
plan on the cliffs, including 350 modern homes and a leisure centre, had gone 
ahead earlier. It would have looked too modern to serve as a stage set.
 