
Bristol officials will meet with their England hooker Mark Regan today 
following his decision to ignore a written order and lead theBarbarians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/barbarians> against South Africa at 
Twickenham on Saturday. "I think Ronnie would be advised to bring his 
cheque-book with him," said the club's director of rugby, Richard Hill, after 
yesterday's dead rubber draw against Regan's former club.

Last week Bristol <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> wrote to 
Regan telling him not to play for the Barbarians after Premier Rugby Limited 
voted unanimously not to provide any players to the invitation side. PRL has 
started an inquiry into how Regan came to break the embargo, and his club is 
expected to hand out a punishment to the World Cup finalist.

That is likely to take the form of a small fine rather than a suspension with 
back-to-back Heineken Cup group matches against Harlequins occupying the next 
two weekends. The prevailing mood in Bristol is one of embarrassment rather 
than anger, but the club could face action from PRL if it is not seen to 
discipline Regan.

"There was nothing more we could have done," said a Bristol official 
yesterday. "We told Mark we did not want him to play and we wrote him a letter 
laying out our position. But we had given him the week off and it was a 
decision he made himself. We want an explanation from him, but it is not a 
major issue."

Hill had sympathy for the predicament Regan found himself in last week after 
he had been named as captain by the Barbarians. "Ronnie is meeting the board on 
Monday and it is a matter I shall be staying out of," Hill added. "We have seen 
incidents in the past when players have been caught between club and country 
arguments, and leading the Barbarians is a big honour. I would imagine a small 
fine will be in order. Whatever, he will certainly be available for selection 
at Harlequins."

Regan was in a hospitality box yesterday, watching his stand-in David Blaney 
have an outstanding match. The Irishman scored the game's opening try, 
supporting Jason Strange's break, in one of the afternoon's few moments of 
note, and prevented Leeds from scoring in the final minutes with a smothering 
tackle on his own line. "Ronnie was standing below me and he did not shut up 
for the first 20 minutes," said Hill. "Then David scored and he went a bit 
quiet. It will do him good to have a bit of competition." But one of the 
reasons Bristol failed to take a stranglehold on the game, especially in the 
first-half when they had use of the strong wind, was an inability to secure 
their own lineout ball when it mattered.

It was a failing which could not simply be put down to the gusty conditions, 
because Leeds, largely through the second row Erik Lund, the elder brother of 
the Sale and England flanker Magnus, won all their own throws while plundering 
five of Bristol's. Fittingly, the Norwegian scored the try that gave the 
visitors the lead in the second period after they had trailed 10-3 at the 
interval, forcing his way over after a siege of the Bristol line.

Bristol Arscott; Robinson, Cox, Maggs (Eves, 76), Morgan (Barnes, 70); 
Strange, O'Riordan (Beveridge, 75); Hogan (Hilton, 60), Blaney (Linklater, 76), 
Crompton, Attwood, Llewellyn, Salter (capt), R Pennycook (G Pennycook, 75), 
Phillips.

Try Blaney. Con Strange. Pens Strange 2.

Sin-bin Attwood, 29

Leeds Goodridge; Armstrong, Hepworth, Blackett (Holtby, 64), Satala; Brooks 
(Vickerman, 70), Bedford (capt; Edwards, 72); Pala'amo (MacDonald, 54), Nilsen 
(Ma'asi, 64), Hopcroft (Cusack, 67), Lund, Bouza, Dunbar (Boyd, 57), 
Schusterman, Oakley.

Try Lund. Con Brooks. Pens Brooks.

Referee A Rowden (Berkshire). Attendance 5,751.
 