 Timothy Garton Ash (Blair must show leadership in the battle for free 
expression, December 1) wrongly implies that Ayaan Hirsi Ali and others like 
her who robustly criticise religious beliefs, customs or sacred objects would 
be silenced by the racial and religious hatred bill.
This bill has to be read with the Human Rights Act, which guarantees freedom 
of expression, subject only to restrictions that are prescribed by law and are 
necessary in a democratic society "for the prevention of disorder or crime".

The select committee on religious offences, which few of the media pundits 
have bothered to read, observed that "trenchant and even hostile criticism of 
religious tenets and beliefs has to be accepted as part of the currency of a 
democratic society, and that is not at issue. The words used would have to be 
directed at the members of a religious group and not at their beliefs or 
customs to make them criminal, but they would have to fall short of calling for 
specific criminal acts against those members to be caught by a pure incitement 
offence".

This important distinction between beliefs and believers might have become 
clearer if the House of Lords had accepted the amendment I proposed, to abolish 
the common law offence of blasphemy.

Since Timothy Garton Ash presumptuously refers defenders of the bill to JS 
Mill's On Liberty, may I remind him that Mill allowed for limits on the freedom 
of individuals where it was necessary "to prevent harm to others". This is the 
issue, and it is very tiresome that the argument in the media has been 
dominated by spurious allegations that writers, broadcasters or playwrights who 
attack particular doctrines or customs will be muzzled.
Eric Avebury
House of Lords

If only the argument about free speech were as simple as Timothy Garton Ash 
implies. In the Netherlands, where the Muslim community has been held 
collectively responsible for the murder of Theo van Gogh (the director of the 
deliberately shocking Submission), mosques and Islamic schools have been 
firebombed by neo-Nazi youth for whom Van Gogh is a national hero.

And for ordinary Muslim women, who face daily abuse for wearing the hijab, the 
"thoughtful, calm"Ayaan Hirsi Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayaan-hirsi-ali> is more provocateur than 
liberator.

The question she should ask herself is how to preserve one's freedom of speech 
without sacrificing another's freedom to life. It is a question that we should 
all apply ourselves to if we are not to sink into the comfort of a Manichean 
world of four legs good, two legs bad..
Liz Fekete
Deputy Director, Institute of Race Relations
 