
The classical "orders" describe a kind of architectural grammar, first 
developed in Greek architecture then adapted and extended by the Romans. 
Essentially, the orders determine the shape, proportion and decoration of the 
basic architectural elements: the vertical, supporting column (with its base, 
shaft and capital) and the horizontal, supported entablature (divided into 
three registers, from bottom to top: the architrave, frieze and cornice).

In a satisfyingly symmetrical fashion, the orders were rediscovered and 
codified in reverse, with a rediscovery of the Roman orders during the 
Renaissance, only for these to then be shunned in the 18th-century by purists 
who dug deeper and unearthed what they deemed to be the purer Greek orders.

The Roman orders, as defined by High Renaissance theorists from Leon Battista 
Alberti to Sebastiano Serlio, comprised the Greek orders revisited (Doric, 
Ionic and Corinthian) plus their own additions (Tuscan and Composite). They 
based their definitions on the writings of Roman architect Vitruvius and on 
first-hand observations of the buildings the latter described in his 
foundational first-century BC treatise, De Architectura (Ten Books of 
Architecture). Each successive generation came to the orders with fresh eyes 
and defined them anew. The 16th-century Italian architect, theorist and 
archaeologist Andrea Palladio was the most influential, as his I Quattro Libri 
dell'Architettura (Four Books ofArchitecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture>, 1570) were published 
and translated across Europe. Inigo Jones was highly instrumental in spreading 
and implementing his ideas in Britain.

The Tuscan order is a primitive form suspected to be older even than the Greek 
orders, but Roman sources do not mention it – only Renaissance writings make 
reference to it. It is the simplest of all the orders, with a plain smooth 
column and a simple capital. TheDoric order is characterised by squat columns 
with round capitals and a frieze decorated with alternating triglyphs (three 
vertical bands separated by grooves) and plain or sculpted metopes (rectangular 
blocks). Along with the Tuscan, it is the simplest of the orders and is often 
associated with strength – the Obelix of the pack. The Ionic order is more 
elegant and matronly – think Boticelli's Venus – with often unfluted columns, 
scrolled capitals, friezes that are sometimes adorned with elaborately sculpted 
bas-relief and dentils – a row of small blocks – below the cornices. The
Corinthian order is also very feminine in nature, characterised primarily by 
its ornate capitals, which sport two rows of sculpted acanthus leaves with 
small volutes (spiral scrolls) in the corners. TheComposite order is the most 
sophisticated, a combination of Ionic grace and Corinthian ornamentation – 
a long-legged hermaphrodite. Its columns are tall and slender, its capitals 
have bountiful acanthus leaves with big scrolls and its entablature sports an 
ostentatiously sculpted frieze and cornice.

The Renaissance reading of this classical grammar devised a hierarchy for the 
use of the orders in a building, starting on the lower floors and moving 
upwards – Doric, Ionic, Corinthian and Composite. Not all the orders had to be 
used and Doric was necessarily used for the lowest floor, but whatever you 
started with, you moved up in the correct order.
 