
On the eve of a critical Senate vote and under court order, the Obama 
administration <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> 
signaled it will publicly reveal a secret memo describing its legal 
justification for using drones to kill US citizens suspected of terrorism 
overseas.

Two administration officials told the Associated Press that the Justice 
Department has decided not to appeal a court of appeals ruling requiring 
disclosure of a redacted version of the memo under the Freedom of Information 
Act. The officials spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not 
authorized to speak publicly about the matter.

The decision to release the documents comes as the Senate is to vote Thursday 
on advancing President Barack Obama's nomination of the memo's author, Harvard 
professor and former Justice Department official David Barron, to sit on the 
first US circuit court of appeals in Boston. Senator Rand Paul had vowed to 
fight Barron's confirmation, and some Democratic senators were calling for the 
memo's public release before a final vote.

Wednesday's expected vote would allow the Senate to move ahead with a final 
vote on Barron on Thursday. "I think we'll be OK," Senate Majority Leader Harry 
Reid said earlier Tuesday.

Anwar al-Awlaki <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-al-awlaki>, an 
al-Qaida leader born in the United States, was killed after being targeted by a 
strike in Yemen in September 2011. Some legal scholars and human rights 
activists complained that it was illegal for the US to kill American citizens 
away from the battlefield without a trial.

Some senators, including those in Obama's own party, have called for the 
public release of the memo before the final confirmation vote. The White House 
agreed under the pressure to show senators unredacted copies of all written 
legal advice written by Barron regarding the potential use of lethal force 
against US citizens in counterterrorism operations.

Until now, the administration has fought in court to keep the writings from 
public view. But administration officials said that Solicitor General Donald 
Verrilli Jr decided this week not appeal an 21 April ruling requiring 
disclosure by the second US circuit court of appeals in New York and that 
Attorney General Eric Holder concurred with his opinion.

The release could take some time, since the redactions are subject to court 
approval. And the administration also is insisting that a classified ruling on 
the case also be redacted to protect information classified for national 
security, but not the legal reasoning, one of the officials said.

The drone strike that killed al-Awlaki also killed another US citizen, Samir 
Khan, an al-Qaida propagandist. Al-Awlaki's 16-year-old son, Abdulrahman, was 
killed the following month in another drone attack.

The American Civil Liberties Union and two reporters for The New York Times, 
Charlie Savage and Scott Shane, filed a Foia suit. In January 2013, US district 
court judge Colleen McMahon ruled that she had no authority to order the 
documents disclosed, although she chided the Obama administration for refusing 
to release them.

But a three-judge appeals court panel noted that after McMahon ruled, senior 
government officials spoke about the subject. The panel rejected the 
government's claim that the court could not consider official disclosures made 
after McMahon's ruling, including a 16-page Justice Department white paper on 
the subject and public comments by Obama in May in which he acknowledged his 
role in the al-Awlaki killing, saying he had "authorized the strike that took 
him out".

The ACLU urged senators in a letter Tuesday not to move forward on the 
confirmation vote until they have a chance to see any Barron memos on the 
administration's drone program, not just those involving US citizens.

Paul issued a statement Tuesday saying he still opposes Barron's nomination. 
"I rise today to say that there is no legal precedent for killing American 
citizens not directly involved in combat and that any nominee who rubber stamps 
and grants such power to a president is not worthy of being placed one step 
away from the Supreme Court," Paul said in remarks prepared for delivery on the 
Senate floor Wednesday provided by his office.

Sen. Ron Wyden has been pushing for public disclosure of Barron's writings and 
was one of several Democrats who had been refusing to say whether he'd vote for 
confirmation without it. "That's certainly very constructive," Wyden said when 
told of the decision not to appeal.
 