
At least 20 unpublished stories by Anthony Burgess, the author of A Clockwork 
Orange <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-clockwork-orange>, have been 
discovered by researchers sorting through his papers at a research centre in 
Manchester, the city in which he was born.

The short stories, unproduced film and theatre scripts and hundreds of musical 
compositions have emerged from the contents of three houses in London, Monaco 
and Italy, bequeathed to theInternational Anthony Burgess Foundation 
<http://www.anthonyburgess.org/> after the death of his widow, Liana, four 
years ago. Burgess died in 1993.

Among the archive are 50,000 books and 20,000 photographs, symphonies, poems 
and unfinished or rejected scripts for television and film projects, including 
lives of Atilla the Hun, Sigmund Freud and Michelangelo and a play about Harry 
Houdini that he collaborated on withOrson Welles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/orsonwelles>, another frustrated creator of 
unproduced projects.

Will Carr, the deputy director of the research centre, said: "We are 
discovering things all the time. There is a lot of stuff, and we are still 
unpacking cardboard boxes.

"He was a good short fiction writer and, particularly early in his career, he 
would write these things and then put them away and forget about them. They 
have never been read or published. The stories are very good, very funny and 
pungent. You can see how his writing developed."

Burgess published 33 novels in a prolific career and was also a critic, 
broadcaster, scriptwriter and composer.

Among the papers is the first completed music he wrote, his original 
screenplay for A Clockwork Orange – rejected by the film's director,Stanley 
Kubrick <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stanleykubrick>, who eventually wrote 
the script himself – an unpublished history of London, a ballet score about the 
life of Shakespeare and a musical about Leon Trotsky. There is even a script 
for another, unmade, Kubrick movie, which would have been about Napoleon. One 
of the discovered compositions, A Manchester Overture, is being played by the 
BBC Philharmonic Orchestra, and the foundation intends to publish a collection 
of the unknown short stories next year.

Andrew Biswell, the foundation's director and a Burgess biographer, told the 
BBC: "A lot of the stories are very nasty and tending towards the supernatural 
– a lot of ghost stories or stories about gods who come down to earth. The 
amount of material which people don't know about I think heavily outweighs the 
known. Even though Burgess was productive and he published a lot, a good deal 
of what we've got here has always been below the waterline. It has never been 
made available in a public way until now.

"I'm staggered by the extent of the collection sometimes. I come down into the 
basement and I look at it and I think, my God, did this man never sleep?"

Carr said: "Burgess has been forgotten about in Manchester, but people 
are excited to come here and find out about him.

"I think it happens a lot to writers – they dip out of favour after their 
death and then get rediscovered and take their place. It is the 50th 
anniversary of the publication of A Clockwork Orange next year, and we are 
expecting a resurgence of interest then."
 