
An intricate, kaleidoscopic, all-embracing history of 20th-century music from 
Mahler to La Monte Young is the winner of this year'sGuardian first book award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/guardianfirstbookaward>. Alex Ross's The 
Rest Is Noise was the clear and undisputed winner of the £10,000 prize, which 
has been presented at a ceremony in central London tonight.

The chair of the judging panel, Guardian literary editor Claire Armitstead, 
said: "In some quarters this book has been seen as not having a popular appeal. 
Our prize – which, uniquely, relies on readers' groups in the early stages of 
judging – proves that, on the contrary, there is a huge appetite among readers 
for clear, serious but accessible books."

According to one judge: "Where Ross lifts his book above the 'expert' and 
impressive to the 'good read' category is in the way he wears his learning 
lightly, never clutches for false or contrived ways of explaining music, and 
never dumbs down in order to explain."

One of the members of the Waterstone's reading groups, who helped in the 
judging process, said: "Every time I felt overwhelmed by the technicalities, 
along came a sublime metaphor or simile that would light up the prose."

Ross, who is the music critic of the New Yorker, has distilled a lifetime's 
enthusiasm and learning into a rich narrative of musical history, setting the 
works of Mahler, Schoenberg, John Cage and the rest into their cultural and 
political contexts – but also giving a vivid sense of what the music he 
describes actually sounds and feels like.

Of all the artforms, modern and contemporary classical music is often seen as 
the most rebarbative. Ross brushes aside the mythology of 20th-century music's 
"inaccessibility" as he charts its meandering histories. Along the way, 
fascinating connections are made: hip-hop has more in common with Janacek than 
you might think; Arnold Schoenberg and George Gershwin were tennis partners; 
Gershwin, in turn, was an ardent fan of Alban Berg and kept an autographed 
photo of the composer of Lulu in his apartment. If there is an overarching idea 
to the book, it is perhaps contained in Berg's pronouncement to Gershwin: "Mr 
Gershwin, music is music."

Ross, 40, was born in Washington DC, and studied English and history at 
Harvard. An enthusiastic teenage musician and student broadcaster, he began 
writing music criticism after university and in 1996 was appointed music critic 
of the New Yorker. His blog – also calledThe Rest Is Noise 
<http://www.therestisnoise.com/> – has been a trailblazer in harnessing the 
internet as a way of amplifying (often literally) his writing on music.

The New York Review of Books described The Rest Is Noise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/the-rest-is-noise> as "by far the liveliest 
and smartest popular introduction yet written to a century of diverse music". 
The Economist noted: "No other critic writing in English can so effectively 
explain why you like a piece, or beguile you to reconsider it, or prompt you to 
hurry online and buy a recording."

Nicholas Kenyon, managing director of the Barbican and a former Observer music 
critic, said: "At a time when people are still talking about 20th-century music 
as if it were a problem, here is a lucid and entertaining book about what I 
regard as some of the greatest music ever written. It's a wonderful way to 
advance the cause of 20th-century music to an ordinary, intelligent general 
reader. It's the ideal mix of enthusiasm and information."

This year's judging panel comprised novelist Roddy Doyle; broadcaster and 
novelist Francine Stock; poet Daljit Nagra; the historian David Kynaston; 
novelist Kate Mosse and Guardian deputy editor, Katharine Viner. Stuart Broom 
of Waterstone's also joined the deliberations, speaking as the representative 
of the readers' groups.

The other books on the shortlist were Mohammed Hanif's A Case of Exploding 
Mangoes; Ross Raisin's God's Own Country; Steve Toltz's A Fraction of the Whole 
(which was also shortlisted for the Man Booker prize) and Owen Matthews's 
Stalin's Children.

Previous winners of the prize have included Stuart: A Life Backwards by 
Alexander Masters (2005) and Zadie Smith's White Teeth (2000).
 