
Shaun Perry had not been seen on a pitch since the end of the first half of 
England's World Cup group match capitulation to South Africa six weeks before. 
The Bristol scrum-half has not joined in the chorus of discontent being chanted 
by members of the squad since the return from France, despite his disappearance 
from the spotlight, but any frustration he felt was taken out on Llanelli
Scarlets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets> as the opening round of 
the tournament finally yielded a victory for the Premiership in an Anglo-Welsh 
encounter.

While Bristol <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> were ruggedly 
predictable behind, turning over possession at an alarming rate through a 
mixture of basic errors, Perry's probing and prompting in the opening half 
helped them establish a sustainable lead with the Scarlets bizarrely turning 
down six opportunities to kick penalties in the second period after they had 
brought on three members of Wales's World Cup squad.

Bristol's opening try, scored by the wing Lee Robinson, was created by Perry, 
who manufactured space on the right wing. Robinson was tackled into touch by 
the full-back Morgan Stoddart a couple of yards from the Scarlets' line after 
receiving a deft pass but Bristol stole a heel against the head at a scrum less 
than a minute later and Perry combined with the centre Rob Higgitt to send over 
Robinson. The set piece yielded the home side's other try on 33 minutes when 
the No8, Andrew Blowers, was driven over and the Scarlets, for all their 
pressure, had to wait until the final move of the match to find their way over 
Bristol's line.

The Scarlets struggled in the set pieces throughout, especially in the first 
half where the inexperience of the hooker James Hayter was exploited by 
Bristol. He struggled to find his lineout targets, the Scarlets' scrum caved in 
under pressure and the expected superiority of the Welsh region behind the 
scrum never really became an issue as they found themselves dragged into a war 
of attrition they were ill equipped to fight.

Perry was in his element. From being England's leading scrum-half, his world 
collapsed last month when he found himself unable to command even a place on 
the bench. But there was no evidence yesterday that he had spent the five weeks 
feeling sorry for himself. "Shaun gives us an edge and we missed him during the 
World Cup," said Bristol's assistant coach, Paul Hull. "He was making tackles 
everywhere and constantly talking to his forwards. He takes us to another 
dimension."

Perry won his duel with the Wales scrum-half Dwayne Peel, who was ill served 
by his forwards. The Scarlets' only threat with the ball in hand was the centre 
Regan King and even he joined in with some unforced errors.

Bristol's 15-3 interval lead was ample reward for their dominance but the 
Scarlets, fed by a liberal number of penalties, started to dominate. After 
Stephen Jones and David Hill exchanged kicks at the start of the second period, 
the visitors opted for kicks to touch or scrums, even when Bristol were reduced 
to 14 men on 67 minutes with Nathan Brew in the sin-bin. It was dumb stuff and 
left their director of rugby, Phil Davies, wondering how they had mustered a 
bonus point.

Bristol Arscott; Robinson, Brew, Higgitt, Morgan; Hill, Perry; Clarke (Hogan, 
68), Blaney (Linklater, 61), Crompton, Llewellyn, Hohneck, Budgett, El Abd 
(capt), Blowers.

Tries Robinson, Blowers. Con Hill. Pens Hill 2.

Sin-bin Brew 67

Llanelli Scarlets Stoddart; M Jones, King, Evans, Watkins (James, h-t); 
Prestland (S Jones, h-t), Peel; John (Douglas, 50), Hayter (Rees, h-t), Manu, 
Cooper, Eustace (Macleod, 50), Easterby (capt), Edwards (Popham, 50), D Jones.

Try Stoddart. Pens Prestland, S Jones.

Referee T Hayes (Carmarthen). Attendance 7,139.
 