
 When George Clooney arrived at a Birmingham multiplex for a blockbuster 
premiere last year, the Times ran a leader on London's "jealous muttering". 
Since then, the north Wales town of Rhyl has joined such places as Porthmadog, 
Winchester and Stockton-on-Tees in coaxing Hollywood premieres from the West 
End. Film distributors are following the lead of regional galleries and 
theatres: audiences are prepared to travel for arts and entertainment.

The Lowry arts centre in Salford and the New Art Gallery in Walsall have 
exceeded visitor predictions by hundreds of thousands since opening last year. 
The Lowry has attracted one million people to sell-out theatre, dance and 
exhibitions. It also hosted the premiere of Peter Hall's 10-hour production of 
Tantalus, a debut once unthinkable outside London.

The New Art Gallery in Walsall, predicted to draw 180,000 exhibition-goers in 
its first year, has attracted 384,000. "People come from across the country, 
notably London, Scotland and Wales," said Chris Wilkinson at the gallery. "But 
visitors also come from Japan, the US and Europe."

This is because Walsall is often the only British venue for acclaimed 
international tours - such as the award-winning pictures of Brazilian 
photographer Sebastiao Salgado and the 2003 Mad About the Boy survey of gay 
influence on 20th-century art.

Likewise, the £46m Baltic - a contemporary art gallery opening in Gateshead 
this summer - will bypass London with many shows. "We are placed in Gateshead 
but this is an international centre for contemporary visual art," said Sune 
Nordgren, the director. Miss a show in Gateshead, he added, and you would have 
to go to Barcelona or New York to catch it.

Regional theatre is drawing audiences from greater distances because cities 
north and west of the capital have become centres for talent. "A lot of the 
best creative work is happening outside London and the capital's audiences are 
clamouring to see it," said Rachel Coles of the West Yorkshire Playhouse. Hence 
the large numbers of regional productions and co-productions that premiere 
outside London then play to sell-out runs in the West End. The Play What I 
Wrote, a Kenneth Branagh-directed tribute to Morecambe and Wise currently 
packing houses in the West End, is a northern co-production that premiered at 
the Liverpool Everyman and Playhouse. The Royal Exchange in Manchester, one of 
the biggest theatres in Britain "in the round", draws audiences from a large 
radius who want to witness the staging experience. Until 2003, Londoners will 
not have a venue to import such productions, so they have to travel. What's 
more, audiences at regional theatres have risen since September 11, while West 
End venues have complained of a dip.

Liverpool is rivalling London as the centre for film-location shooting in 
Britain, art-lovers await the multimillion-pound refurbishment of the Walker 
gallery in Liverpool and the Manchester Art Gallery, while Manchester this year 
launched a comedy festival it hopes will rival Edinburgh's.

Morale has also been boosted by the Arts Council's extra funding for regional 
theatre, museums and opera: opera companies such as Birmingham's, and 
Manchester's Hall¿, are entering a period of greater financial stability than 
they have seen for 20 years. And although there have been dissenting regional 
voices over the Arts Council's plans to bring the 11 independent regional arts 
boards under one centralised roof, the Arts Council claims that more staff will 
go out to the new regional offices, and autonomy will not be completely lost.

Britain is unique in that almost everyone lives within 50 miles of a rich and 
important regional museum. The biggest literature festival in Europe happens in 
Cheltenham - drawing 60,000 people this year - closely followed by Hay-on-Wye 
which this year featured Bill Clinton. So why should anyone still think arts 
lovers need to be in London to get what they want?
 