
On my way home from work last night, I stopped at the chemist and bought a 
small plastic tub containing what appears to be the world's first genuine 
miracle drug. Low-dose aspirin. The tub contained 100 small pills, each one 
75mg. It cost just over £1. If a team of researchers at Oxford University,
publishing today in the Lancet medical journal 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(10)62110-1/abstract>
 are to be believed, taking one of these a day for at least five years and 
preferably much longer can cut your risk of cancer by 20% or more.

You would have thought the bunting would be flying from the lamp posts and 
champagne popping in the street. The Big C is supposed to be everybody's 
biggest dread. We are constantly exhorted to stop smoking, eat more fruit and 
vegetables and cut our weight - all of which would help save us from cancer, 
but which so many of us seem to find so hard to do. And now we have a 
once-a-day pill that can substantially reduce the risk - in the case of 
gastrointestinal cancer by over 50%.

And yet the coverage has been relatively subdued, the excitement level low. 
While the BBC's Today programme led its news bulletins with the story and Sky 
News did a package, the newspapers - with the exception of the Express which 
carries a weekly miracle pill story - failed to run it on the front pages.My 
story 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2010/dec/07/asprin-cancer-health-benefits>, 
under heavy competition with the latest from WikiLeaks, made page 8.

Why is this?

Familiarity breeds contempt, they say. We already know aspirin can help 
prevent heart attacks and stroke. People may feel they have heard it all 
before. The same Oxford team has also already published its findings on 
colorectal cancer, where regular aspirin-dosing cut deaths by a third.

Nonetheless, this comprehensive assessment across many cancers, from lung to 
stomach to oesophageal and pancreatic cancers - some of which carry very high 
death rates - has not been seen before. In fact, it is really extraordinary. If 
one of the major pharmaceutical companies had invented this pill, it would have 
been launched to a massive fanfare and subjected to huge media hype. And it 
would have been launched with an astronomical price tag.

The trouble with aspirin is that it's cheap. There's no profit to be made. The 
researchers, Professor Peter Rothwell from the department of clinical neurology 
at Oxford University and colleagues, received no pharma funding. Rothwell and 
Professor Peter Elwood, a well-known medical epidemiologist who has long had an 
interest in aspirin (personal as well as professional, since he started taking 
it himself in 1974) gave a briefing at the Science Media Centre in London and 
the Lancet put out a press release. And that's it.

Rothwell (who has also been taking aspirin for two years) and Elwood, because 
they are doctors, fought shy of urging people to go out and buy aspirin. There 
are risks of stomach bleeding - although they are far outweighed by the 
benefits, they believe. But, they said, it should not be for the researchers to 
give advice.

So who will? We will have to wait for official guidelines from the likes of 
Nice (the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence) in the UK - 
which are not always observed as they should be. But, as Rothwell and Elwood 
said, the man and woman in the street are capable of sifting the evidence (and 
assessing the risks) for themselves. Will the GP surgeries be jammed or the 
chemist shelves depleted? It will be interesting to see whether a single 
scientific paper can spark a grassroots health revolution.

• This article was amended on 7 December 2010. The original referred to 75g 
aspirin tablets. This has been corrected.
 