
If anybody in Labour's upper reaches says they don't care about the 
revelations serialised in the Observer, they're fibbing. Page after page of 
detail on the dark moods that descended on ­Gordon Brown – the rages, the 
rudeness and even brutality towards aides, the shoving aside of trusted 
advisers, the punches aimed at the upholstery – is hardly ­helpful in the runup 
to an election in which the party leaders' character will be a dominant theme. 
It is damaging and few honestLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> folk will say otherwise.

What's more, Andrew Rawnsley's book returns the focus to Brown at the very 
moment when David Cameron is beginning to face harsher scrutiny.

Labour would have loved yesterday's news bulletins to have led with the fact 
that the gap between the two largest parties had shrunk to just six points – 
its narrowest in more than a year – according to a YouGov poll for the Sunday 
Times. Instead, the story of the day was a prime minister who had to be warned 
by the cabinet secretary to stop abusing the Downing Street staff – a claim 
later backed up by the head of the National Bullying Helpline, in an 
intervention which, even if it represents a stunning breach of confidentiality, 
threatens to be deeply wounding for Brown.

And yet, for all that, there will have been some relief in Labour's ruling 
­circle, which had been bracing itself for the Rawnsley book.

For one thing, there was no revelation that brought a wholly new scandal to 
light – some action or pattern of behaviour that no one had heard of before. As 
one BBC correspondent put it yesterday: "Gordon Brown's occasionally volcanic 
temper is hardly a state secret."

That fact should further limit the damage done, in that dark moods, even 
glowering rage, are already part of the picture voters have of the prime 
minister. Satirists have made gags for years about Brown's temper, delighting 
for example in the now-hoary tale of his ­stapling his own hand in fury. As the 
markets would put it, Brown's ­temperament is already "in the price", and can 
therefore be discounted.

So the Brown circle will take some comfort from the fact that these ­latest 
revelations were not worse.

They will also find consolation in the ­current political context. These 
stories would have had maximum impact at a time when Brown was vulnerable to a 
­leadership challenge. His internal ­enemies would have used them as further 
evidence that he was not fit to lead the party into an election.

Had the Rawnsley book come out, say, in that first weekend of June last year – 
­following disastrous election results and James Purnell's cabinet ­resignation 
– it might have proved fatal.

Instead it has surfaced just as Brown is at his safest, in the short period 
until polling day when the prospects of a coup against him are zero.

The result is that even those who might privately lament the Brown style were 
defending him; Jacqui Smith and Peter Mandelson insisting that if Brown is 
impatient and moody, it's only because he cares about the country.

So of course Andrew Rawnsley <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewrawnsley>
 has delivered a bumper parcel of new ­material for Cameron to use at prime 
minister's questions on Wednesday – which he will without mercy – and for his 
rivals to hurl at him during the leaders' debates that will play such a key 
part in the coming election campaign.

But Rawnsley has added to a headache that was already there. He has not 
created a new one.
 