
On the top floor of Random House's offices in London, the world's number one 
thinker – according toProspect magazine's annual poll 
<http://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/magazine/world-thinkers-2013/> – walks in 
from the roof terrace and shakes my hand. Richard Dawkins is a trim 72-year-old 
with one of those faces that, no matter the accumulation of lines, will always 
draw the adjective "boyish".

There's a smoothness to the way he carries himself – a touch of the Nigel 
Havers – that could no doubt be construed as an arrogance befitting his 
intellectual status, but in conversation he is restrained, even hesitant, and 
faultlessly modest throughout our interview.

Perhaps the renowned evolutionary biologist and the world's most famous 
atheist was feeling especially cautious. The day before I met him he had become 
embroiled in a Twitterstorm, which grew into a broader media monsoon, after he 
had tweeted the following: "All the world's Muslims have fewer Nobel prizes 
than Trinity College, Cambridge. They did great things in the middle ages, 
though."

He defended himself in the ensuing furore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/aug/08/richard-dawkins-twitter-row-muslims-cambridge>
 by saying that he was merely stating a fact. And it's true, it was a fact. 
Many objected that it was a fact used to demonise Muslims, that it was racist 
(Dawkins responded by pointing out that Islam is not a race), and that, out of 
context, it was, at the very least, mischievous and misleading.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FssHJ7VNoKow%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FssHJ7VNoKow%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FssHJ7VNoKow%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ssHJ7VNoKow>
 to watch video

I returned later to this dispute, but first of all we got down to discussing 
his memoir,An Appetite for Wonder, a sort of portrait of the scientist as a 
young man. The first of two volumes, it takes us from boyhood to the 
publication of his landmark bestseller,The Selfish Gene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/aug/31/the-selfish-gene-richard-dawkins-review>
. The story begins with his colonial childhood in Kenya and Nyasaland (now 
Malawi), and is full of dusty anecdotes of our young hero rummaging without a 
care in the great African outdoors. Does he look back with nostalgia at that 
now largely disappeared way of life?

"Yes," he says slowly, as if watchful for hidden traps. "It's now 
unfashionable and in many ways it's something we British have to live down. But 
yes, there is a nostalgia for it and, although I was never in India, I get it 
reading novels of the Raj. It's a lost era that you can't help having a certain 
affection for, even if you disapprove politically."

His parents were hardy, practical types, unflustered by war or life in the 
bush or, it seems, anything else. His father was a botanist, working in the 
agricultural office in Nyasaland, so Dawkins grew up in a family that took a 
scientific interest in living organisms, though he insists he never inherited 
his parents' extensive knowledge of flora and fauna.
 Dawkins in his first term at Oundle. Photograph: © Richard Dawkins 
He moved to England when he was nine and went through a very typical public 
school experience for the era, except that he managed to fend off the sexual 
predations of older boys. Other than in relation to genetic research, sex 
doesn't raise its titillating head at all in the book – apart from one 
occasion. We learn that at the ripe age of 22 he lost his virginity to a 
cellist in London. She "removed her skirt in order to play to me in her 
bedsitter (you can't play the cello in a tight skirt) – and then removed 
everything else."

But that's all that Dawkins allows in terms of romance.

"Well that was a little token to say, 'This is all you're going to get,' " he 
says firmly. "I wanted to announce that this is not going to be that kind of 
autobiography."

Why not? "Fear of betraying confidences," he says, shifting in his chair. 
"These things are private. Some people let it all hang out but I prefer not to."

You can say that again. Dawkins may have an appetite for wonder, but he is 
positively anorexic when it comes to personal revelation. Perhaps the most 
confessional section – and it can hardly be called exposing – deals with his 
years teaching at Berkeley in the late 60s, when the campus was a hotbed of 
countercultural revolt. Dawkins took part in protests against the Vietnam war, 
of which he remains proud, but also got caught up in a local militant 
initiative to take over some university waste ground and turn it into a 
"people's park". "With hindsight," he writes, "it was a trumped-up excuse for 
radical activism for its own sake."

I suggest that radical movements invariably function on peer pressure and he 
agrees that he succumbed to the impulse to belong. "There was a sort of feeling 
of flower power and drugs," he says. "I never actually took drugs, oddly 
enough. I never had the opportunity. But the music of the time and the 
atmosphere – there was a feeling of loyalty to the protesters: these are my 
people. The same people who marched against the Vietnam war marched for the 
people's park and it was an automatic decision to join them. One should be more 
independent-minded than that."

That's Dawkins at his most self-reflective. He avoids any details of interest 
about his first marriage – to the ethologist Marian Stamp. And according to 
him, he is unlikely to be any more forthcoming in the second volume about his 
second marriage to Eve Barham, or his third to the actress Lalla Ward, a former 
assistant to Dr Who, who was introduced to him by his late friendDouglas Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/douglasadams>.

The couple live in Oxford, where Dawkins has resided almost all of his adult 
life, and where he spent 13 years until his retirement in 2008 as the professor 
for public understanding of science. As he was free in that role to pursue his 
own interests, he says his "nominal retirement" has made no difference at all.

The memoir is strong on the professional excitement of his early years as an 
academic, but it assiduously sidesteps the rivalries and disputes that mark 
even the most unremarkable scientific careers, let alone one as distinguished 
as Dawkins's. He didn't want any score settling, he says, or to "appear 
hostile".

So although he notes that the biologists Richard Lewontin and Steven Rose were 
two of the rare voices who criticisedThe Selfish Gene on its widely acclaimed 
publication in 1976, he fails to discuss their arguments or his thoughts on 
them, other than to say that both came from the "political left". Did he think 
their case against him was political rather than scientific?

"Yes, I think politics," he says after another anxious pause. "I actually 
wrote a fairly savage review of the joint book they produced later [Not in Our 
Genes] which I suppose I'll probably mention in volume two." He weighs his 
words again and then adds, "It was sarcastic rather than savage."

Dawkins seems determined in both the memoir and our interview to present a 
calm, conciliatory side to his character that has not always been associated 
with his public image. Later the photographer, Andy Hall, will tell me that 
Dawkins requested to look at the screen on Hall's camera to see what he had 
captured during the shoot. "You've made me look too harsh," complained the 
biologist.

Hall told him he was merely giving him appropriate gravitas.

"I don't want fucking gravitas," Dawkins snapped. "I want humanity."

One senses that for all the recognition he's garnered – the world's leading 
intellectual, the bestselling books, the rapt audiences etc – Dawkins would 
like to be a little more loved. I ask him if he thinks he's misunderstood by 
the media and the general public.

"Yes," he says without hesitation. "I seem to be perceived as aggressive and 
strident and I don't actually think I am strident and aggressive. What I think 
is that we have all become so accustomed to seeing religion ring-fenced by a 
wall of special protection that when someone delivers even a mild criticism of 
religion, it's heard as aggressive when it isn't. I like to think I'm more 
thoughtful and reflective."

Although he has only written one book specifically about religion – The God 
Delusion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/sep/23/scienceandnature.richarddawkins> 
– it's the subject that has increasingly come to define Dawkins. He may have 
spread the message of evolution to millions, and he may have helped 
revolutionise our understanding of genetic biology, but it's his pronouncements 
on the irrationality and absurdity of religion that stick most prominently in 
the public's imagination. He'sthat bloke.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFaH8_Omskxg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFaH8_Omskxg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFaH8_Omskxg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FaH8_Omskxg>
 to watch video

Dawkins has long maintained that there is no real difference between his work 
on evolution and his anti-religion position as an atheist. To some extent, he 
has a point. As he puts it: "I suppose my particular branch of biology is kind 
of in the front-line trench where religion is fighting evolution. So in a way 
even my science books are forced to take a stance, not against posh theologians 
who accept evolution but surely the absolute majority of religious people in 
the world who literally believe that every species was separately created and 
even, in the case of the Abrahamic religions, believe that Adam and Eve were 
created 6,000 years ago. Chemists and other scientists don't have to battle 
with that."

While this may be true, no other evolutionary biologist has been quite as 
outspoken as Dawkins in his denunciation of religion and, indeed, the 
religious. As a consequence, he's the go-to guy for a scathing quote on 
dissembling theologies and their gullible believers. He was led into attacking 
Peter Kay (although he later said he was unaware of who Kay was) when the 
comedian said that he found religion comforting;savaged the historian Paul 
Johnson 
<http://archive.spectator.co.uk/article/19th-february-1994/24/letters-the-mystery-of-faith>
 for the "ignominious, contemptible, retarded" basis on which he held his 
religious beliefs; and described the British Airways employee who was suspended 
for wearing a gold cross at work as having "one of the most stupid faces I have 
ever seen".

His comments about religion grew noticeably less restrained after the 9/11 
attacks in America. It was those religiously inspired acts of terrorism that 
prompted Dawkins to writeThe God Delusion. He had wanted to write the book 
immediately after the twin towers were destroyed but was dissuaded by his 
agent, who told him that America would never buy a book that was so avowedly 
critical of religion. He waited several years and the book was eventually 
published in 2006. But as many observers have since noted, the people who flew 
planes into the World Trade Centre were motivated by a powerful belief in 
Islam, whileThe God Delusion was a sustained critique of Christianity.

"It concentrates on Christianity," he says, "because it's the religion I know 
a lot about, having been brought up in Christian schools."

All the same, it seemed a little perverse to be galvanised by the acts of 
followers of one religion to set about debunking the presumptions of another, 
especially as Christianity, particularly in Europe, and specifically in 
Britain, had become largely a toothless affair which had almost reformed itself 
out of existence. Did he really think that Christianity matters very much 
nowadays?

"Ayaan Hirsi Ali has at times suggested that Christianity might [in relative 
terms] be a good thing, like the Hilaire Belloc line: 'Always keep a-hold of 
nurse for fear of finding something worse'. I'm occasionally tempted by that 
view that maybe it would be a shame if Christianity died." But then he goes on 
to insist that a more muscular and sinister version of Christianity is 
flourishing in many parts of the world.

Douglas Murray, an outspoken critic of many aspects of Islam, recently 
lambasted Dawkins 
<http://www.thejc.com/comment-and-debate/comment/102653/facing-uncomfortable-truths>
 for taking the easy target of Christianity and ignoring the more problematic 
question of the Islamic world. "He can't have read anything I've actually 
written," Dawkins says. "Just this week I'm assailed mightily for going after 
Islam and had been for a very long time before that."

This "going after Islam" refers to his Twitter contribution on the number of 
Muslim Nobel laureates. But there's a distinction to be made between "going 
after Islam" – ie criticising the Koran and the Islamic prophet, Muhammad – and 
going after Muslims. The latter is likely to lead to accusations of racism and 
bigotry, which Dawkins duly received, while the former can bring far more 
threatening consequences He insists that he wasn't speaking of Muslims as an 
undifferentiated mass. He merely wanted to highlight how Islam, which produced 
algebra and kept safe the Greek philosophers of antiquity in the middle ages, 
had lost its way scientifically by focusing too much on the study of religion.

"The point I wished to make is that something about the Muslim cultural 
tradition seems to be inimical to doing science. I mean an Egyptian Muslim, a 
Pakistani Muslim and an Indonesian Muslim, they are not all the same, clearly. 
One thing they have in common is their religion. And one could make the case 
that the Islamic religion is not friendly to science. That's not saying 
anything about all Muslims."

He sounds genuinely offended that anyone could think otherwise. He does 
regret, he says, the comparison with Trinity College. He wishes he had set 
contemporary Muslim academic achievement against that of the Jews. "Something 
like between 20% and 25% of all Nobel prizes have gone to Jews, who are less 
than 1% of the world's population. That's a very embarrassing comparison."

I suggest that this may not have been wise. Leaving aside the sensitivities 
surrounding the Arab-Israeli conflict, you can also argue that Jews are a race. 
"No you can't!" he replies. "It's just total nonsense to talk about Jews being 
a race. That's precisely where Hitler went wrong."

By now my controversy seismometer is going off the Richter scale: Muslims, 
Jews, Hitler – it's like a mass invitation to every irate commentator in the 
blogosphere. For while Dawkins's arguments tend to be studiously rational, they 
are not always couched in the language of provisos, exceptions and disclaimers 
that is necessary to avoid the minefield of cultural sensitivities. Instead he 
places a high premium on clarity, which his critics often see as simplicity or 
a lack of intellectual sophistication.

In a sort of half-compliment towards his demystifying style of writing on 
evolutionary biology, Fay Weldon once called him a "poetic reductionist". 
Sometimes in his commentary on religion, the poetry can go missing. TheSpectator
rather cruelly called him "the Mary Whitehouse of our day", as if the religious 
debate had turned him into a busybody bore.

When I ask him if he's not tempted to back away from public pronouncements on 
religion, given all the grief it generates, not least for himself, he says, a 
little wearily: "No, I don't think so. It is important. I think it is 
worthwhile."

But it seems apparent that some air has gone out of the New Atheist balloon, 
particularly with the death ofChristopher Hitchens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/christopher-hitchens>. Dawkins agrees. "He 
was irreplaceable, probably the greatest orator I've ever heard. Such 
articulate cogency and a splendid voice like Richard Burton."

Of course, while there are endless ways to describe an omnipotent god, and his 
various moral commands, there are a limited number of ways to state his 
non-existence. For Hitchens, says Dawkins, the argument was political. "He saw 
god as a kind of divine North Korea." But Dawkins maintains that his own beef 
has always been scientific. "I'm passionately interested in the truth about the 
universe and I've always thought of the existence of an intelligent creator as 
a scientific hypothesis. A universe with a creator would be a totally different 
kind of universe scientifically speaking than one without."

But he also has an aesthetic opposition. "Yes," he agrees, "because I do think 
that the scientific worldview is so wonderful and poetically uplifting that the 
children who don't get it and are being fed a second-rate alternative are being 
short-changed."

It's not the most profound psychological insight to suggest that Dawkins's 
intolerance of religion may stem from his own brief period of "religious 
frenzy" as a teenager at Oundle school. His belief in a supreme creator was 
only deepened by his love of Elvis Presley, a fellow believer. What saved him 
was a schoolfriend who persuaded him of the brilliance of Darwin's idea.

Everything comes back to the science with Dawkins, and sooner or later 
everything comes back to evolution. I ask him if Darwinism informs his everyday 
apprehension of life.

"Well, in one way it does. My eyes are constantly wide open to the 
extraordinary fact of existence. Not just human existence but the existence of 
life and how this breathtakingly powerful process, which is natural selection, 
has managed to take the very simple facts of physics and chemistry and build 
them up to redwood trees and humans. That's never far from my thoughts, that 
sense of amazement. On the other hand I certainly don't allow Darwinism to 
influence my feelings about human social life."

Apart from anything else, that last sentence is a necessary defence against 
the accusation that Dawkins sees humans simply as the "survival machines" he 
described inThe Selfish Gene, organisms whose only purpose is gene 
reproduction. Dawkins argues that we as individuals can opt out of Darwinism. 
For while we may be compelled by biology, we are freed by consciousness.

This sets up a fascinating battle between, as it were, the mind and the body, 
the conscious self and the survival machine. Dawkins agrees and says that it's 
a question that requires much more research. But he cites pain as one of the 
potential battlefields that ought to be examined.

"From a Darwinian perspective it is clear what pain is doing. It's a warning: 
don't do that again. If you burn yourself you're never going to pick up a live 
coal again. But you might think a little red flag in the brain would be enough 
to do that. Why does pain have to be so damned painful?"

His answer is that our brains have evolved to treat certain things as rewards 
and others as punishments. "And those can run away so that you can become 
hedonistic to the extent that you neglect your Darwinian responsibilities, and 
we do all the time. So it could be that this tussle between the genetic 
imperative and the brain leads to pain becoming so painful that, as it were, 
the hedonistic brain can't overrule."

But clearly hedonistic consciousness is capable of overcoming our biological 
programming. The more materially successful a society becomes, the better 
educated and more physically comfortable, the less inclined its members are to 
reproduce. If we, like Dawkins, view the evolutionary determinant as the 
survival of the gene rather than the species, then is that not a problem for 
genes whose survival machines are reluctant to reproduce?

"Well this worried my dear colleague Bill Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/mar/09/guardianobituaries3>," he 
answers, "and he got a lot of stick for it. It is an unfashionable point of 
view and one of the reasons it has become unfashionable is Hitler. In 
pre-Hitler times eugenics was very much a cause of the left, and Hitler did for 
all that. It's not a view I go out of my way to espouse but it possibly is a 
worry. R A Fisher, probably the greatest Darwinian of the first half of the 
20th century, deliberately had lots of children because he knew he was bright."

This is not an accusation that could be levelled at Dawkins. He has one child, 
a 29-year-old daughter from his second marriage. But just in case I walk away 
with the wrong idea, in spite of his own example, he adds: "So while it's 
probably true that there is something a bit dysgenic about what you've just 
identified, I would absolutely hate to see any kind of draconian attempts to 
reduce the reproduction of some people at the expense of others."

That's a relief. Twitter would probably have crashed under the strain of that 
backlash and who knows what would have happened to theGuardian website. Instead 
we part company on a benign note, without controversy or dispute, the great 
humanist having succeeded in showing his humanity.

• This article was amended on 18 September 2013. The original referred to 
Dawkins as former professor for public understanding of life rather than 
science.
 