
Asha Makocho steps out from the gloom of her small one-roomed apartment into 
the Tanzanian sunlight. She holds a turquoise and yellow shawl, its vivid 
colours contrasting against her otherwise dark clothing.

For two years, Asha was trapped at home in fear and loneliness by the medical 
condition known as obstetric fistula. This is where a hole develops between the 
vagina and rectum, or vagina and bladder, as a result of the pressure of the 
baby's head against the pelvic bones during extended labour.

Asha, now 26, became pregnant for the first time at 23. Her boyfriend left her 
four months later. Alone and scared, she was in labour for four days. Like 90% 
of women who experience fistula, Asha's baby was stillborn and she was left 
with what the World Health Organisation has called "the single most dramatic 
aftermath of neglected childbirth".

Obstetric fistula is an embarrassing condition. It results in severe 
incontinence, with women leaking urine or faeces uncontrollably creating 
unpleasant odours and severe social stigma. It can also lead to infections, 
ulcers in the vaginal tract or difficulties in future childbirth, and has ended 
many marriages, according to Women's Dignity, a Tanzanian NGO. Without the 
financial support of their husbands, and unable to work, many women are plunged 
into poverty.

In Tanzania as many as 10% of pregnant women contract obstetric fistula, 
according to a study by the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare. About 3,000 
women develop the condition each year.

Social isolation

Asha paints a vivid picture of the devastating effects of extreme 
incontinence. "When I drank water it would just pour straight out of me," she 
explains. "Once my friends learnt about this, they stopped coming to visit 
because of the smell. I couldn't go out to church or to market. I tried not to 
drink water but that just made my urine so acidic I had burns on my thighs. I 
had to change my clothes every hour. I just cried and cried."

No one in her village had heard of obstetric fistula. "I was at a dead end. 
Hope was gone," she says.

However, thanks to the innovation and passion of a few small organisations, 
more women are living in hope again.

"Obstetric fistula is a treatable condition," says Dr Vindhya Pathirana, 
obstetric fistula surgeon at a disability hospital in Dar es Salaam run by the 
NGO Comprehensive Community Based Rehabilitation in Tanzania (CCBRT) and 
supported by CBM UK, the overseas disability charity, since 1997. "It can be 
treated through a simple operation under local anaesthetic." The operation 
involves stitching the torn tissue around the fistula. The CCBRT ward is full 
with women who are waiting for a few weeks for the stitches to heal.

Treatment at CCBRT is free but getting the women there is another issue. 
"Tanzania is a big country. Getting to the hospital can cost nearly a fifth of 
the average annual income," explains CCBRT deputy director Tom Vanneste. 
"Poverty is a major barrier to women getting treatment."

CBM is helping fund CCBRT's M-Pesa scheme – an innovative new project 
transporting women to the centre. M-Pesa is the phone company Vodacom's mobile 
phone money-transfer service: M stands for mobile phone,pesa is Swahili for 
money. Under this scheme, regional representatives locate women with obstetric 
fistula and alert CCBRT, which transfers the money to pay for the woman's bus 
fare by text message.

Since its inception in 2009 the number of women arriving for fistula treatment 
has increased by 40%. "The M-Pesa scheme reaches the poorest of the poor," 
explains Mike Davies, head of programme development, CBM UK. "Just £30 could 
pay to transport a vulnerable woman to a clinic."

Obstetric fistula is not just a Tanzanian problem. "There are about two 
million women suffering with fistula in the developing world," says Dr Julitta 
Onabanjo, Tanzania United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) representative. "But 
given the shame and secrecy, this figure is likely to be a gross underestimate."

Meanwhile, the condition has been virtually eliminated in developed countries. 
In the UK, for example, the Department of Health reported only 119 women with 
the condition last year.

"Obstetric fistula is an issue of poverty and of rights," says Onabanjo. 
"Birthing decisions are often taken by the husband or mother-in-law who can 
favour traditional practices. If something goes wrong it is too late… health 
education, therefore, helps women understand their rights."

However, in Tanzania, women who do seek out medical help find a health system 
in disarray. Hospitals are few and far between and severely understaffed. One 
midwife in a maternity ward in Dar es Salaam would typically oversee 60 
deliveries a day.

"The Ministry of Health has made efforts to prevent fistula by training health 
workers in emergency obstetric care and improving our hospital referral 
system," says ministry representative Dr Azayo. Despite this, the government's 
investment in health is still below the £25 a head suggested by the World 
Health Organisation.

Worldwide investment is not much better. A United Nations report released last 
month claims £473m will be needed to treat existing and new cases of fistula 
between now and 2015.

The UK government is recognising its role in eliminating fistula. 
International development secretary Andrew Mitchell explains: "This government 
has pledged to put women at the heart of our development and we are ensuring 
many more women have access to basic healthcare… It is heartbreaking that so 
many women suffering from fistula are left untreated and in isolation."

For Asha the torment is finally over. She hugs her brightly coloured shawl 
around her shoulders; it was a gift she received when she left the CCBRT ward, 
a symbol of a new start.

Concrete solutions

"When you think of ways to improve women's health, cement mixers are not the 
first things that spring to mind," says Brenda Msangi, director of community 
rehabilitation at CCBRT. "But now lorry drivers are helping to save women from 
obstetric fistula."

The clinic teamed up with the country's largest cement company, Twiga, whose 
vehicles routinely travel to the rural areas medical services fail to reach. 
During the course of their travels drivers stop at doctors' surgeries and talk 
to town leaders, spreading the word that fistula is treatable.

Women's Dignity, another fistula project, uses popular theatre to reach other 
rural locations. They sensitise local performers and create theatrical 
performances designed to raise awareness about fistula.

"In some communities literacy levels are low and theatre is a powerful way to 
transmit our message" explains head of Women's Dignity Christine Matuvo. "We 
use theatre to educate people about their health rights and dispel myths such 
as the belief that fistula is caused by witchcraft."

The project also encourages towns to start Community Emergency Funds to help 
pregnant women who must buy their own delivery kit. Kits cost just over £1 and 
contain the gloves, antiseptic and instruments needed by a midwife.

"We found many women are not planning for the costs involved in pregnancy," 
says Matuvo. "We encourage communities to open a bank account and deposit the 
equivalent of 40 pence per household. This pot of money can then be used if 
complications arise during pregnancy."

These innovative solutions are ensuring that poverty and distance are no 
longer barriers to women suffering from fistula.

Down to business

Rehema, 60, sits nervously in the CCBRT fistula ward. She has lived with 
fistula for 40 years and today will find out whether she has been cured. News 
of a cure is a happy occasion but often it is just the first step on the road 
to recovery. Having lived, as Rehema did, for decades in isolation fitting back 
into society can prove difficult and the long-term psychological effects are 
not yet fully understood. Nevertheless many organisations are working to make 
the transition back into the community easier.

"One way to aid re-integration," explains Gillian Slinger, co-ordinator of 
UNFPA's Campaign to End Fistula, "is to equip the recovering patient with the 
income generating skills to gain socio-economic security and empowerment."

The Mabinti Centre in Dar es Salaam is doing just that. In a series of small 
houses, linked by grassy gardens, ex-patients from the CCBRT fistula ward 
receive training in the skills needed to set up their own businesses.

"We train the women in sewing, screen-printing and beading as well as business 
management," says Katia Telemans, head of the centre.

Eighteen women attend the centre at a time and stay for 18 months. When they 
leave they receive a starter kit containing a sewing machine, material and 
patterns.

Sitting in the garden, sewing coloured beads on tiny angel-dolls and 
surrounded by friends after years of isolation, the women work with ambition. 
"I will become a tailor, save my money and buy a house," says 26-year-old Asha 
(left), a small beaded angel sparkling in her hand. "Now I have something to go 
back to."
 