
“I wouldn’t be happy to be a specialist.” Robert Lepage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/robert-lepage> is considering the idea of 
choosing one artform – or even general area of interest – above all others. And 
rapidly discarding it: “There are some very interesting artists in history who 
refused to be nailed down into a category: like Da Vinci or Jean Cocteau. You 
could say Cocteau was a great poet, but also a film-maker, interested in 
theatre, sculpture, and could never identify with any of these forms 
exclusively.”


Lepage, Canada’s most prominent theatre artist, and certainly one one of its 
most ubiquitous – in the last few months his productions have played in New 
York, Toronto, Montreal, Tbilisi, Tallin, Wellington and now Adelaide – 
identifies more with these polymaths, interested as much in art as in science 
or medicine.

His eclectic creations resemble avant garde movies perhaps more than they do 
theatre. He is often compared to Federico Fellini 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federico_Fellini>, with whom he shares an 
extravagant visual sense, very private thematic obsessions, and an extremely 
democratic imagery, that combines the hermetic and the mundane with a deeply 
autobiographical logic.

“Without meaning to sound crass,” Lepage laughs, “I’ve never had any 
psychological ... help. It’s because I feel my work is so revealing about who I 
am, and what I am trying to understand about myself. It’s a therapeutic 
process.”

This process also results in work that has an accessibility and extraordinary 
reach – after playing in Adelaide, he is off to Macau in May. In part, that may 
be a result of a universally appealing style that has been consciously 
considered. When Lepage started out as an artist in bilingual Canada, he 
decided early to develop shows that could overcome linguistic barriers. The two 
cornerstones of his approach became traditional storytelling and extraordinary 
visuals, freely mixing a variety of media into dramatic stage images.

Needles & Opium, the work Lepage is bringing to the Adelaide festival, is a 
reworking of one of his early shows, which cemented his reputation when it 
premiered in 1991. It connects the lives of Miles Davis and Jean Cocteau with a 
third, Lepage-like character, going through a break-up while in a hotel room in 
Paris. “It’s basically about dependence in many aspects: opium, alcohol, love. 
Addiction often tries to fill a hole. I’m playing with three characters who 
have experienced loss.”

He refers to the work as a ‘break-up story’. “If you’re going to do a show 
about somebody who dumped you, it’s much richer if you have three characters 
dealing with different aspects of that theme. There is more space for people to 
identify with it.”

Lepage believes that young artists often bump into important and interesting 
themes early in their career, when they are not fully prepared to deal with 
them artistically. “I felt there were many unturned stones, many things left 
unsaid, because I didn’t have the experience, the maturity, to fully understand 
them.”

But the other important impetus in returning to Needles & Opium was to rework 
the design into something more three-dimensional. The original work had a 
single performer standing in front of a screen. Now, Lepage believes, the work 
is simply more fleshed out: “We have more performers, more scenes. It’s more 
sensuous, more three-dimensional, the scenography is more fleshed out, the 
story more developed.”

“More, more, more” may be something of a Lepage motto. His shows are famous 
for their multiple storylines, large casts, huge sets, and technical overload. 
He devises work through improvisation, a process which can backfire – most 
infamously at the 1994 Edinburgh premiere of The Seven Streams of The River 
Ota, which overran by two hours. Lipsynch 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ChdeR--QIbw>, a show about the human voice, 
premiered as a 5-hour production in 2007, but was 9 hours long 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/05/theater/reviews/05lipsynch.html?_r=0> by the 
time it performed at the Sydney Festival in 2009.Then there were the steel 
reinforcements that The Met had to install to support his 45-tonne stage for 
Wagner’s Ring cycle 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/09/19/arts/music/19ring.html?pagewanted=all>, 
reportedly at an additional cost of about $16 million.

In between, Lepage has also found time to write an entire show for Cirque du 
Soleil <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kwtzxgpU0LA>. Most improbably, on the 
day that we speak, he has been researching Marquis de Sade for the one-man show 
he is preparing. “I’ve been doing some very odd readings!” he laughs, and 
launches into a discussion of Sade as a political philosopher. “He was 
preoccupied with the issue of faith and existentialism way before the 1950s. He 
was very ahead of his time, which is probably why Napoleon wanted him interned.”

There is something dizzying about the range of preoccupations and interests 
Lepage juggles simultaneously, both in his life and within specific artworks – 
themes that sometimes do feel amassed rather than carefully assembled. Lepage 
believes that they are all interconnected, however, by the overall 
autobiographical drive of his work; the underlying attempt to understand 
oneself. He speaks of creating a cosmos of linked pieces: “Seeing it this way 
makes everything much easier: you don’t feel propelled from one project to 
another, having to change the floppy disk each time.”

And yet this gleeful maximalism, even at its most bewilderingly unrestrained, 
always seems to come from an ultimately humble place. Lepage’s vision of 
theatre is simply as a gathering place for telling stories: “I think theatre 
must be an event, an experience, not compete with cinema. When people are able 
to download stories on Netflix, you need to give them a good reason to jump 
into the car and drive two hours. It has to be something you can only see in 
the theatre, and it has to be worth it.”

Needles & Opium runs until 16 March 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2014/theatre/needles_and_opium>
 