
Whereas the oldest generation of Hollywood stars has cheerfully challenged 
average life expectancy – Kirk Douglas, 97, Angela Lansbury, 88, Clint 
Eastwood, 84 – the relative juniors of the profession are dismayingly starting 
to mock actuarial tables in the wrong direction: within two summers, we have 
lost James Gandolfini at 51,Philip Seymour Hoffman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/philipseymourhoffman> at 46 and now Robin 
Williams, 63.

The fact that all three actors had suffered serious addictions and depression 
must be worrying for the industry and suggests that fame lessons and 
psychological counselling should perhaps be added to the curriculum of drama 
schools.

Possibly the problem is that the theory about great performing talent deriving 
from some psychic wound is often cruelly true. You didn't need to be a trained 
psychologist to diagnose a colloquially "manic" aspect in many of Williams' 
performances as a stand-up comedian and on the chat-show circuit: switching 
between different voices and characters as if too restless to settle on one way 
of being.

These improvisational skills – much more rare in American showbiz than 
Britain, where improv is a standard rehearsal tool – brought him his career 
break. In 1978, he claimed the part of Mork, an alien despatched to earth in 
the sitcom Mork and Mindy, not through the usual audition tactic of an 
inspirational rendition of the script but, when offered a chair, not to sit 
down but to stand on his head.

Such inventive energy was one of Williams' two driving qualities as an actor 
and comedian, the other being – less conventionally – sweetness. 
Characteristically, his non-human visitor in Mork and Mindy was neither 
frightening nor frightened – the two default fictional positions for tourists 
from the universe – but really nice and a little bit silly.

A similar spirit was invested in several stand-out movie roles: as an 
unconventional but inspirational English teacher in Peter Weir's Dead Poet's 
Society (1989); a homeless hobo and sort of holy fool in The Fisher King 
(1991), directed by Terry Gilliam; and a good-humoured therapist, for which he 
won an Oscar for Best Supporting Actor, in Gus Van Sant's Good Will Hunting 
(1997).

This desire to play likable guys incurred the dislike of some critics, who 
found Williams' film CV too dependent on these secular saints. And the sheer 
flexibility of his features and delivery could sometimes result in unworthy 
gurning, such as his turns as an animated statue of President Roosevelt in the 
Nights at the Museum series.

But his underlying pleasantness was key to the huge success of his stand-up 
act, which – even when dealing with darker material such as addiction or 
divorce – relied more on verbal virtuosity than vitriol.

And, if Williams could have a default formula, he consciously tried to go 
beyond it.

In common with Gandolfini and Seymour Hoffman, he set himself huge 
professional tests in what proved to be his final years, although neither his 
reputation nor his finances needed boosting. This can often be the sign of a 
performer who doubts the worth of earlier work or the endurance of his talent; 
and it was notably bold of Williams to make his Broadway acting debut in 2011, 
after fairly recent major heart surgery. (He had co-starred in a 1988 
off-Broadway Waiting for Godot withSteve Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/steve-martin>, a comedian with a similar 
sentimental-melancholic quality, which often led to confusion between them in 
the public mind.)

The vehicle for Williams' debut in major New York theatre was a 
characteristically quirky part: in Bengal Tiger at the Baghdad Zoo by Rajiv 
Joseph, he played the title character, who was not merely an animal but a 
ghost, having died before the action of the play.

Although a few small roles followed – including a neat dramatic cameo as 
President Eisenhower in the film The Butler – it seems somehow fitting that 
Williams' major acting career should have begun with an extra-terrestrial on 
television and ended with a spectral beast of prey in theatre. Such casting 
suggests a sensibility that was not quite of this world and, tragically, seems 
to have derived from a personality that was finally unable to be at ease in it.
 