
Henry Moore <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/henry-moore> considered 
Auguste Rodin's The Burghers of Calais the finest public sculpture in London, 
so it is not hard to imagine how he would feel about it turning up next to a 
beautiful willow tree at the bottom of what was his garden.

"He would have been thrilled, I'm sure," said Anita Feldman, curator of a new 
show comparing the work of two titans of modern sculpture in the gallery and 
gardens of Moore's home for more than 40 years until his death in 1986.

A cast of The Burghers of Calais has stood in the gardens next to the Houses 
of Parliament for nearly a century. On Monday it took pride of place in the 
gardens at Perry Green in Hertfordshire, now home to theHenry Moore Foundation 
<http://www.henry-moore.org/>.

"It is a very exciting day for us," said Feldman as she watched a crew winch 
the sculpture into place. "This is a unique project, there has never been an 
exhibition looking at these two artists together in dialogue."

Getting permission to borrow The Burghers of Calais involved many discussions 
and negotiations with the Royal Parks, the Houses of Parliament and the 
Department for Culture, Media and Sport.

Rodin considered The Burghers of Calais his "novel" telling the story from 
1347, during the hundred years war, when England's Edward III offered to spare 
Calais if six of its leaders surrendered. This subjugation of the French by the 
English has been a favourite in Westminster since it was unveiled by the 
government's Office of Works in 1915.

Although the two artists were from different generations – Moore was serving 
in the first world war trenches when Rodin died – and they would seem very 
different stylistically, the exhibition is able to show many parallels. Not 
least, said Feldman, both men's interest in "the tension beneath the surface, 
that pressure from within".

The show has a number of firsts. It is the first time another artist has been 
shown alongside Moore at Perry Green, with its converted gallery and 70 acres 
of gardens. And it is the first time such a large group of Rodin's works has 
been presented in the British landscape.

Eight Rodins are shown outside, including Walking Man, Large Torso 1906, the 
third maquette for The Gates of Hell 1881-82 and Adam 1881, all loaned by the 
Musée Rodin in Paris; and Eve, which normally stands outside Pizza Hut in 
nearby Harlow's Water Gardens.

The show is a continuation of a collaboration between the Moore foundation and 
theMusée Rodin <http://www.musee-rodin.fr/>, which in 2010 held a big Moore 
show that included moving the artist's studio to Paris. Feldman, head of 
collections and exhibitions at Perry Green, said: "Part of my job is to find 
new ways of looking at Henry Moore and putting his work in the context of other 
artists is a good way of examining his work. So why not start with Rodin?"

As well as the outdoor sculptures there are maquettes and drawings and 
examples of the work they collected, all helping to show the likemindedness of 
the two artists. "I have learned a huge amount about Rodin during this 
project," Feldman said. "The more I investigated Rodin's work the more I found 
parallels with some of the things that Moore was trying to do and what would 
have interested him."

Moore and Rodin will open to the public over Easter and run from 29 March 
until 27 October.
 