
Sylvester Stallone <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sylvester-stallone> 
called his copy the “flying beaver”. Lucian Freud, meanwhile, placed his at the 
end of his bed, making it the first thing he saw in the morning.


The Hollywood actor and one of Britain’s greatest painters may not have much 
in common but it has emerged that they shared a fondness for Auguste Rodin’s 
most audacious and sexually explicit sculpture. Regarded as one of the artist’s 
most daring pieces, Iris, Messenger of the Gods, was cast into several bronze 
sculptures, two of which were owned by Freud and Stallone.

The version once owned by Stallone is particularly rare and coveted because it 
was cast in Rodin’s lifetime. It is to be sold by Sotheby’s next month, a star 
lot of its impressionist and modern art auction. The actor owned his Iris in 
the 1980s, placing it in the corner of the living room of his house in Pacific 
Palisades and giving itits unfortunate nickname 
<http://www.people.com/people/archive/article/0,,20082461,00.html>.

Freud owned a different, later edition of Iris, and his was more intimately 
positioned. “Certainly towards the latter part of his life it sat physically at 
the end of his bed,” saidSotheby’s contemporary art specialist Oliver Barker 
<http://www.sothebys.com/en/specialists/oliver-barker/bio.html>. “It is one of 
the first things he would have seen as he woke up each morning.”

The 1891 figure was originally conceived by Rodin for a Victor Hugo monument 
project in Paris, honouring the French literary titan, writer of Les Misérables 
and The Hunchback of Notre-Dame. His idea was for a winged Iris to hover as a 
muse above the seated figure of Hugo, but things changed and Rodin reworked her 
as a sculpture in her own right, removing her wings, head and an arm, raising 
her leg and deliberately directing the viewer’s eyes to her genitals.

She has had many admirers. An early review came from the poet Arthur Symons, 
who wrote: “All the force of the muscle palpitates in this strenuous flesh, the 
whole splendour of her sex, unveiled, palpitates in the air, the messenger of 
the gods, bringing some divine message, pauses in flight, an embodied 
inspiration”.

Helena Newman, co-head of impressionist and modern art at Sotheby’s, said 
Rodin’s treatment of the human form, flesh and muscle was “incredibly modern 
and audacious and powerful”. She recalled selling this Iris in 2007 when it set 
a world record price for a Rodin; it was estimated at £400,000-600,000 and sold 
for £4.6m.

“It was part of an estate, part of a bigger collection,” said Newman. “It was 
a sensation at the time. I remember when the piece first arrived and we saw the 
impact of the patina and the quality of the cast. When you see it reproduced 
you don’t, in a way, get the impact because it occupies a space both vertically 
and horizontally – it’s only when you see it you get that sense of the floating 
form. It was hugely admired, and it is exciting interest this time round.”

Also being sold in the February sales is an important and intimate Freud 
painting of his teenage lover Bernardine Coverley pregnant with their unborn 
child, Bella Freud. Pregnant Girl 1960-61 is regarded as a pivotal painting, 
marking a new approach to the form. For Barker, there are striking 
commonalities with the Rodin sculpture.

Freud, in the the pregnant girl portrait, is looking at the human body afresh 
and painting like a landscape, said Barker, “with these divots and valleys and 
troughs of paint. Rodin in many ways is just as ambiguous. There is a close 
bond between the two artists in the way they were both reinventing the visual 
presentation of the female nude.

“Freud did immerse himself in everything from the Old Masters onwards and he 
would have gone to the Rodin museum. He went on these cultural tours to soak up 
the history of art.” While the connections between Rodin’s Iris and Freud are 
fascinating, they are perhaps not surprising. Both artists led bohemian, highly 
sexed lives. “Both Rodin and Freud had very priapic tendencies,” Barker said.

The Freud painting will be sold as a highlight of Sotheby’s contemporary 
auction on 10 February with an estimate of £7m-10m. Casts of Iris are mostly in 
public collections, including the Musée Rodin in Paris, Norway’s National 
Gallery in Oslo, the Metropolitan Museum ofArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> in New York and the Hirshhorn in 
Washington.

It is already attracting a great deal of interest, said Newman. “We are 
familiar with Rodin’s iconic pieces like the Thinker, Eve, and the Kiss, but 
this piece is incredibly daring in its form and impact and it is also 
incredibly rare.”

Iris will be sold on 3 February and has an estimate of £6-8m. Both the Rodin 
and the Freud can be viewed, along with wonderful Monets, Matisses and 
Picassos, for free on Friday 29 January by people who will, let’s face it, 
never quite have the money to buy them.
 