
Rolls-Royce was the leading riser in a falling market, climbing nearly 10% as 
investors welcomed a restructuring of its business which should give it a 
$1.5bn windfall and improve its trading position.

The aero-engine maker will receive the cash after agreeing to sell its share 
of IAE - which makes the V2500 engine for the A320 Airbus - to its partner 
Pratt & Whitney. At the same time the two companies have agreed a new joint 
venture to develop engines for the next generation of aircraft to replace 
existing fleets. Mark King, president of Rolls' civil aerospace business, said:
 [This] announcement charts a clear course for the future of Rolls-Royce in 
the important mid-size aircraft segment.


Rolls said the cash would be used for "general corporate purposes". But 
analysts pointed out the proceeds would offset the £1.4bn paid as Rolls' share 
of a joint bid with Daimler for German engine maker Tognum.

Rolls added that the Pratt & Whitney deal would also improve its trading 
performance, to the tune of a £140m benefit to operating profits in the first 
year, and would lock it into payments over the next 15 years linked to the 
number of aircraft flight hours.

Rolls rose 62p to 688p. Analyst Andrew Gollan of Investec issued a buy note on 
the business, saying:
 Effectively, we view this move as Rolls-Royce realising decades of investment 
in IAE. This looks a positive move, leaving Rolls aligned with a powerful 
partner to compete for the major prize of next generation narrow-body. 
Incorporating Tognum, we are looking at around 20% upgrades. 
Overall, worries about a global slowdown following Chinese trade data and the 
continuing crisis in the Eurozone helped push markets lower, despite Slovakia 
finally approving the EU bailout plan. TheFTSE 100 fell 38.42 points to 5403.38 
and Wall Street was around 100 points lower by the time London closed, despite 
reasonable US trade and weekly jobless claims data.

Banks were the leading fallers following a downgrade by ratings agency Fitch 
and a profit fall at JP Morgan. After last week's cut by Moody's, Fitch has 
reduced the credit score ofLloyds Banking Group, 1.985p lower at 34.26p, and 
Royal Bank of Scotland, down 1.65p to 24.16p on the basis the UK government was 
less likely to give them additional state aid. It also putBarclays, off 13.8p 
at 173.2p, on "rating watch negative" suggesting it too could be downgraded. 
But Ian Gordon at Evolution Securities continued his positive view of the 
sector:
 Unlike their European peers, no UK bank needs to raise a penny of additional 
capital through fresh issuance. Given that this fact is not yet fully 
recognised, grudging acceptance will in itself be sufficient to drive the UK 
bank sub-sector still higher over time. 
Miners were also a major drag on the market following the weaker than expected 
import and export data from China.Antofagasta lost 73p to £10.78 and Kazakhmys 
fell 53.5p to 878.5p.

Elsewhere there were contrasting fortunes for two investment groups. Ashmore 
dropped 13.4p to 318p after the emerging markets specialist reported a 10% 
decline in its asset value in the first quarter after recent market sell-offs.

But Hargreaves Lansdown was 18.9p higher at 500p as the investment manager 
continued to attract new money, with a 24% inflow in the three months to 
September. But it warned that clients seemed to have started delaying 
investment decisions, given the current backdrop.

Man continued its recent slump, down another 6.3p to 150p after this week's 
news of a poor performance from its key AHL fund.

ITV bucked the falling trend, up 0.7p to 64.35p on renewed hopes of a better 
advertising performance. In a buy note, Liberum Capital said a reported 5% or 
so rise in September advertising revenues implied that the third quarter was 
flat, compared to the broadcaster's guidance at its interims of a slight fall. 
Analyst Ian Whittaker said:
 [There are a] number of reasons why we are confident on the fourth quarter: 
signs advertisers are spending on TV – a few examples: supermarket price war, 
newspapers to help maintain circulation, price comparison sites online, new 
British Airways campaign, Sky to protect/grow its subscriber base. Comments on 
Monday from WPP's Chris Sweetland suggested advertisers are not cutting budgets 
and that, if full year plans are maintained, the fourth quarter should be 
healthy. 
Among the day's disasters was mid-cap engineer Renishaw, down 166p to 862p - a 
16% decline - after it reported lower than expected revenue in the first 
quarter and a decline in profits from £15.1m to £13.6m. This was partly due to 
a slowdown in products for the electronics industry. It warned about the 
current uncertainties in the global economy, and said it would be closely 
monitoring costs and recruitment strategy. It is reviewing its healthcare 
business.

Lower down the market Serviced Office Group, chaired by entrepreneur Michael 
Kingshott, jumped 6% to 2.25p after it was appointed to manage the 
refurbishment and letting of Mermaid House, near Blackfriars in London. 
Kingshott said:
 Mermaid House is a prime building in an increasingly desirable central London 
location. With the reopening of its station Blackfriars will once again become 
a high-footfall area. 
Jon Bell at house broker Shore Capital said:
 After completion of the £2.5m refurbishment programme, Mermaid House will be 
one of the largest conferencing facilities in the City of London. Serviced 
Office shares are trading on a significant discount to net asset value and 
continue to offer attractive value, in our view. 
Optos, a specialist in devices to diagnose eye disease, added 19% to 190p 
after it reported a 25% rise in underlying revenues, higher than analysts' 
forecasts. It also launched a new desktop sized product, Daytona, which it 
hoped would take it into new markets.

Finally Dominion Petroleum jumped 1.85p to 5.45p after an £118m all share 
agreed offer from oil and gas groupOphir Energy, down 6.5p to 235.7p.
 