
Rolls-Royce is the leading riser in a hesitant market, up more than 6% as 
investors had their first chance to react to a couple of major initiatives 
announced late on Wednesday.

The aero-engine maker will receive $1.5bn in cash after agreeing to sell its 
share of IAE - which makes the V2500 engine for the A320 Airbus - to its 
partner Pratt & Whitney. At the same time the two companies have agreed a new 
joint venture to develop new engines for the next generation of aircraft to 
replace existing fleets. Mark King, president of Rolls' civil aerospace 
business, said:
 [This] announcement charts a clear course for the future of Rolls-Royce in 
the important mid-size aircraft segment. 
Rolls said the cash would be used for "general corporate purposes" but 
analysts pointed out the proceeds offset the £1.4bn paid for recent acquisition 
Tognum. Rolls added that the deal would also improve its trading performance, 
to the tune of a £140m benefit to operating profits in the first year, and 
would lock it into payments over the next 15 years linked to the number of 
aircraft flight hours.

Analyst Andrew Gollan of Investec issued a buy note on the business, saying:
 Effectively, we view this move as Rolls-Royce realising decades of investment 
in IAE. This looks a positive move, leaving Rolls aligned with a powerful 
partner to compete for the major prize of next generation narrow-body. 
Incorporating Tognum, we are looking at around 20% upgrades.

Rolls shares have jumped 38p to 664p, but the rest of the market seems 
uncertain which way to move. After early falls followed by an unconvincing 
recovery, theFTSE 100 is now down 21.59 points at 5420.21. Investors are 
waiting to see if the latest plans to resolve the Eurozone crisis come to 
anything, and in the meantime comes an Italian bond auction later. The US bank 
reporting season gets underway with JP Morgan first out of the block.

Weaker than expected Chinese trade data has pushed the mining sector lower 
once more.

There were contrasting fortunes for two investment groups. Ashmore has dropped 
19.7p to 311.7p after the emerging markets specialist reported a 10% decline in 
its asset value in the first quarter after recent market sell-offs.

But Hargreaves Lansdown was 6p higher at 487.1p as the investment manager 
continued to attract new money, with a 24% inflow in the three months to 
September. But it warned that clients seemed to have started delaying 
investment decisions, given the current backdrop.

Man continued its slump, down another 6.1p to 150.2 after this week's news of 
a poor performance from its key AHL fund 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/marketforceslive/2011/oct/12/ftse-august-high-man-slumps>
.

BP has fallen 5.25p to 406.7p despite getting the go ahead from the government 
for a £4.5bn joint venture to develop the Clair Ridge project west of the 
Shetland Islands.
 