
You displease Roman Abramovich at your own peril, as several Chelsea managers 
have found out.

But analysts at Morgan Stanley have run the risk by issuing a cautious note on 
Russian steelmakerEvraz, where the billionaire oligarch owns nearly 35% and the 
bank happens to be corporate broker.

Evraz <https://www.theguardian.com/business/evraz> recently announced plans to 
deliver $5bn of earnings in 2016, up from $2.9bn in 2011. But Morgan Stanley 
reckons that is a little heroic:
 Evraz's plan looks ambitious versus our estimate of $3.1bn (our base case). 
Evraz assumes higher steel and raw material prices than we do as well as 
additional improvements in earnings from projects where we think it too soon to 
put in our base case.

Evraz assumes 2016 steel prices to be 10% above the 2011 level, on average, 
versus our estimate of a 10-20% decline. Evraz's coking coal and iron ore 
prices in 2016 are 18% and 25% above our estimates, respectively.


But the bank kept its overweight rating on the company with a 325p price 
target:
 Even if Evraz does not deliver $5bn of earnings in 2016, we continue to like 
the story due to a number of catalysts next year: [the introduction of] 
pulverized coal injection technology, product mix improvement and rising coking 
coal output. As a result, we expect Evraz's 2013 earnings to increase 57% year 
on year versus a 19% rise for other Russian peers under our coverage. 
The Morgan Stanley caution and yet more worries about a slowdown in China 
combined to send Evraz 16.3p lower to 218.1p, a near 7% decline which made it 
the biggest faller in a depressed FTSE 100.

Global markets were dominated by growing concerns about Spain, Greece and 
Italy. The growing number of Spanish regions seeking financial help from 
central government renewed fears the country could need a full bailout. 
Meanwhile ahead of the return of the Troika - the European Commission, European 
Central Bank and IMF - to Greece to report on its progress, there was 
increasing speculation the country might default and leave the eurozone. Italy 
too was in the firing line as its bond yields continued to rise.

The FTSE 100 finished down 117.9 points at 5533.87, with the eurozone concerns 
and the possible China slowdown keeping investors away from riskier assets. 
There was not a single riser in the index by the close.

Mining companies were among the main fallers, with Vedanta Resources down 
45.5p at 835p andKazakhmys closing 29p lower at 674.5p.

Aquarius Platinum, which recently decided to limit its mining activities in 
the wake of falling prices and soaring costs, dropped 3.4p to 39.07p after it 
reported a 14% drop in production in its fourth quarter.

It has put two of its mines on a care and maintenance basis, and also warned 
of possible strikes in the near future. Chief executive Stuart Murray said:
 The likelihood of industrial action over the South African winter is high. 
Aquarius is by no means immune to this threat, and intermittent unlawful 
industrial action has occurred... in July. We are working hard to resolve this 
in order to return to uninterrupted production as soon as possible. 
Dominic O'Kane at Liberum Capital said:
 Poor platinum price and industrial action continues to hamper things and it 
is clear that while Aquarius is making every effort to protect profitability 
they are by no mean out of the woods. The stock sell off is a clear reflection 
of market concern. 
Banks were under pressure again on the eurozone crisis and the continuing 
fallout from libor-fixing.Barclays lost 6.7p to 152.55p as deputy chairman Sir 
Michael Rake ruled himself out of taking the chairman's job and Nomura issued a 
negative note. Nomura suggested a new chief executive - when appointed - could 
slap on some clean-up costs which, with restructuring and difficult trading, 
could put the dividend at risk:
 We downgraded Barclays recently for a number of reasons. There is a vacuum of 
leadership at the top of the group, with external pressure to reshape the 
culture and shape of the group. There is a high likelihood that there will be 
restructuring of some sort at BarCap, with the risk of a more RBS-like 
restructuring. With a new chief executive, there are always risks of potential 
clean-up costs as well. Furthermore, the capital markets environment remains 
challenging for revenues and profitability. US investment banking results so 
far have highlighted lacklustre performance, with the second half of 2012 
outlook challenging. The dividend could also be at risk. Under such 
circumstances, we think Barclays faces potential downside risk and believe it 
will test the lows from last year. 
Insurer Aviva slid 19.5p to 275.2p as analysts at Bernstein cut their price 
target from 390p to 385p.

Hammerson, which is transforming itself into a focused retail business with 
the sale of its office portfolio, lost 3.7p to 457.3p despite saying its net 
rental income had risen 2.4% in the first half to £14.16m and its net asset 
value a share had increased by 0.9% to 535p.

It has sold 75% of its London office assets for £518m in one deal, and is 
making an additional £100m investment in designer outlets. Chief executive 
David Atkins said:
 We have created a focused retail business by accelerating our plans to sell 
the London office assets through a single transformational deal. We expect to 
deliver further growth to shareholders by building scale in our chosen retail 
sectors through extensions, developments and acquisitions.

Among the mid-caps Dialight - which makes lighting products - brightened 52p 
to £10.49 after a 21% rise in first half operating profit and a forecast that 
full year profits would be at the top end of expectations. Andrew 
Shepherd-Barron at Peel Hunt said:
 Dialight has again confirmed a confident outlook for 2012, on the back of 
revenue wins. We rate the stock a buy with a 1070p target price. 
Finally Tristel, the hygiene products group which supplies the veterinary 
market, jumped nearly 5% to 32p after reporting a better than expected 
performance since its profit warning in June. It has seen improved revenues 
after two new wholesalers took on its Anistel products, and now expects full 
year profits of more than £700,000, compared to the £650,000 it forecast in 
June.
 