
Is it the end for the romcom? You can imagine the celebrity mag headlines: 
"Romcom's relationship on the rocks?" "Com: I'm just not that into Rom" "Rom: 
Com doesn't make me laugh any more."

After all, who says romance and comedy go together like a horse and carriage? 
It seems to be a chiselled Hollywood commandment that the two shall be forever 
conjoined in cinematic matrimony, but perhaps it's time they went their 
separate ways. Sure, they got off to a great start: in those early years it was 
all fun and games and sparkling repartee, but recently they haven't quite 
looked the happy couple; the spark just hasn't been there.

They've been stuck in the same repetitive formula: boy meets girl, rom meets 
com, they all get along, something gets in the way, it all looks in doubt at 
the end of the second act, but then everyone remembers they've got to live 
happily ever after and pulls it together again. It was great when you had stars 
like Cary Grant and Katharine Hepburn, and classic directors like Ernst 
Lubitsch or Frank Capra or Preston Sturges making it all tick behind the camera.

Even in the 1970s when the likes of Woody Allen started asking difficult 
questions, the bond between rom and com got stronger than ever. But now you've 
gotJennifer Aniston <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-aniston> and 
Ashton Kutcher, and a relentless flow of stories that either reheat the glory 
years or squander their one good idea in a rush to beat the other movies who've 
also had it, hence the glut of copycat set-ups like No Strings Attached/Friends 
With Benefits, or The Bounty Hunter/One For The Money, or That Wedding Comedy 
Did Well So Here's Another One.
 Diane Keaton & Woody Allen in Annie Hall. Photograph: Allstar 
No wonder they've been spending more time apart. Rom has been hanging with the 
indie crowd, looking to recover its edge with hip and heartfelt fare likeIn 
Search Of A Midnight Kiss 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2008/jun/13/comedy.romance>, Before Sunset, 500 
Days Of Summer or, recently,Like Crazy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/jan/28/drake-doremus-like-crazy-sundance>. 
Either that or it's been sucked into deadly earnest weepies where love spans 
continents/generations/the challenged attention of a teenager, as in Nicholas 
Sparks's movies (The Notebook, Dear John, etc), and lit-lite such as The Time 
Traveler's Wife. If you're lucky, Channing Tatum will bump into a lamppost but 
otherwise, the romance comes with tears of pain, not joy.

Com, meanwhile, has been hitting the bong and hanging out with the guys far 
too much, hence theJudd Apatow  <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/juddapatow>
brand of "mostly com with a little bit of rom" (Knocked Up, etc), the Frat Pack 
"rom's coming, run in the other direction!" school, and the general rise of the 
bromance, where it's the chemistry between the leading men that must be 
settled, while the woman waits patiently at the altar. As last year'sBridesmaids
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/jun/22/bridesmaids-comedy-age-commitment> 
showed, the women have grown tired of waiting. Again, bad news for the romcom 
reconciliation.

Creatively and critically they're on the skids, but commercially, the marriage 
is still convenient. More than any other genre, romcoms are reliant on their 
stars. You don't go to see a film like The Break-Up because you're interested 
in seeing Jennifer Aniston play a Chicago art gallerist; you go because you 
want to see Jennifer Aniston playing off Vince Vaughn. All right, notyou, but 
people, generally. As such, romcom is the genre that now attracts "basically 
playing themselves" actors rather than "see how I disappear into the role" 
thespians; the type of actors you find in the pages of celeb mags. It feels 
like putting the carriage before the horse, but somehow the romcoms go on 
making money, no matter how bad they get.

But don't give up hope! If the history of romcoms was itself a romcom, right 
now we could just be in that end-of-second act bit where all is lost and it 
looks like there's no hope of them ever getting back together. We're pretending 
we haven't seen this a thousand times before, but we all know what's supposed 
to happen next. And if it doesn't, we want our money back.

Steve Rose

LESSONS IN LOVE: ROMCOMS THROUGH THE DECADES

1930s 
 Photograph: Rex 
Who fell in love?

Socialites and newspaper reporters/butlers/stowaways (The Philadelphia Story, 
It Happened One Night, Anything Goes); paleontologists (Bringing Up Baby); 
communist spies (Ninotchka)

Go-to couple

Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers (Top Hat, Swing Time, The Gay Divorce, Shall We 
Dance, Follow The Fleet, Flying Down To Rio)

1940s
 Photograph: Rex 
Who fell in love?

Exes showing up out of the blue (Too Many Husbands, My Favourite Wife); 
married lawyers (Adam's Rib); farmer's daughters and congressmen (The Farmer's 
Daughter); European princesses and American reporters (Her Highness And The 
Bellboy), confirmed bachelors (Every Girl Should Be Married); mermaids (Mr 
Peabody And The Mermaid)

Go-to wisecracking couple

Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn (Adam's Rib, The World And His Wife, Woman 
Of The Year)

1950s
 Photograph: Rex 
Who fell in love?

Interior decorators and playboys (Pillow Talk); Americans and European 
aristocrats (Royal Wedding, Roman Holiday); blondes and brunettes (Gentlemen 
Prefer Blondes, Gentlemen Marry Brunettes); bookshop clerks and fashion 
photographers (Funny Face); mountain-dwelling clans of single men (Seven Brides 
For Seven Brothers)

Go-to sweetheart

Doris Day (Pillow Talk, April In Paris, Calamity Jane)

Go-to bombshell

Marilyn Monroe (The Seven Year Itch, The Prince And The Showgirl, Some Like It 
Hot)

1960s
 Photograph: Getty 
Who fell in love?

Uptight squares and free-spirits (Barefoot In The Park, I Love You Alice B 
Toklas, Bob & Carol & Ted & Alice); society girls with vague income streams 
(Breakfast At Tiffany's); cat burglars (How To Steal A Million); matchmakers 
(Hello Dolly!); Elvis with women living in Hawaii (Blue Hawaii, Girls! Girls! 
Girls!, Paradise Hawaiian Style)

Go-to ex-GI

Elvis Presley (Blue Hawaii, Girls! Girls! Girls!, Viva Las Vegas, Paradise, 
Hawaiian Style)

Go-to gal

Shirley MacLaine (The Apartment, Can-Can, All In A Night's Work, My Geisha, 
Irma La Douce, Sweet Charity)

1970s
 Photograph: Rex 
Who fell in love?

Grown-ups having affairs (A Touch Of Class, Same Time, Next Year); neurotic 
comedians (see below); couples not overly concerned by their age gaps (Harold 
And Maude, Manhattan)

Go-to neurotics

Woody Allen and Diane Keaton (Love And Death, Sleeper, Play It Again Sam, 
Annie Hall, Manhattan)

1980s
 Photograph: Allstar 
Who fell in love?

High-school kids (Pretty In Pink, The Sure Thing, Say Anything); unpredictable 
hipster chicks (Desperately Seeking Susan, Something Wild); frenemies (When 
Harry Met Sally); computers, shop dummies, mermaids (Electric Dreams, 
Mannequin, Splash)

Go-to millionaire playboy

Dudley Moore (Arthur, Lovesick, Romantic Comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/comedy>, Micki + Maude, Unfaithfully Yours)

Go-to star

Molly Ringwald (Pretty In Pink, Sixteen Candles, The Pick-Up Artist)

1990s
 Photograph: Rex 
Who fell in love?

Reporters and the subject of their articles (Runaway Bride, Never Been 
Kissed); straights with gay friends (Chasing Amy, The Object Of My Affection); 
men with more than one chance to get it right with Andie MacDowell (Green Card, 
Four Weddings And A Funeral, Groundhog Day)

Go-to nice couple

Meg Ryan and Tom Hanks (Joe Versus The Volcano, Sleepless In Seattle, You've 
Got Mail)

2000s
 Photograph: Allstar 
Who fell in love?

Wacky girls and sad boys (Garden State, Along Came Polly, Elizabethtown); 
horny pals (No Strings Attached, Friends With Benefits); bros with bros (I Love 
You Man, The Wedding Crashers); girls with weddings (Bride Wars, 27 Dresses)

Go-to dude

Ashton Kutcher <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ashton-kutcher> (Just 
Married, My Boss's Daughter, Guess Who, What Happens In Vegas, No Strings 
Attached)

Go-to singleton

Jennifer Aniston (The Break-Up, Along Came Polly, Marley & Me, He's Just Not 
That Into You, The Switch, The Bounty Hunter, Just Go With It).

Richard Vine
 