
Wayne Rooney could be banned from Manchester United's next two Champions League
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> matches should Uefa 
open a disciplinary hearing into his apparent stamp on an Aalborg player.

Uefa confirmed last night they were investigating the incident that led to 
Kasper Risgard complaining of Rooney "jumping on my chest" and showing off a 
long, red mark where the studs had connected. Risgard said that Rooney had 
apologised after the match, which implies a certain element of guilt on the 
part of a striker who was sent off for stamping on Ricardo Carvalho in 
England's World Cup quarter-final against Portugal.

"The normal procedure is that we look at the reports from the referee and the 
match delegate and decide whether to open a disciplinary case," said the Uefa 
spokesman Rob Faulkner. "If it's seen to be blatant, if we decide it's a case 
of serious foul play and the referee has completely missed it, it will be 
considered by our disciplinary committee."

Rooney clashed with Risgard 41 minutes into a fractious 2-2 draw in which he 
was also involved in two more off-the-ball clashes, raking his studs down 
Michael Jakobsen's lower leg early in the second half and also tangling with 
the Danish team's captain, Thomas Augustinussen, leading to a reprimand from 
the French referee Laurent Duhamel. The official confirmed in his match report 
that he did not see the incident involving Risgard.

The next meeting of Uefa's control and disciplinary body is on February 13 
and, if Rooney is charged, he can expect the same two-match ban that was handed 
out to Michael Essien after his dangerous tackle on Dietmar Hamann when Chelsea 
played Liverpool in the Champions League's group stage in December 2005. Three 
years earlier, Alan Shearer was also banned for two games after Uefa acted on 
video evidence of him clashing with Fabio Cannavaro during a 4-1 defeat for 
Newcastle United against Internazionale.

"There have been cases where something that has been missed by the referee has 
later been seen as serious foul play and resulted in a suspension for the 
player," said Faulkner.

The United manager, Sir Alex Ferguson, defended Rooney immediately after the 
match, but is aware now that he might be without the England striker in both 
legs of the first knockout round. United could be pitted against, among others, 
Real Madrid or Internazionale when the draw is made next Friday and Rooney's 
absence would be a significant setback.

The player's conduct led to criticism not just from Risgard but also Aalborg's 
coach, Allan Kuhn, who described it as a deliberate act. "It's a pity that a 
fantastic footballer likeWayne Rooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wayne-rooney>, every time he gets 
emotional, does stupid things," he said. "My guys were saying he was very angry 
all through the game. If we see that he has done it on purpose, then of course 
(Uefa should take action)."

Marek Saganowski, who is on loan to the club from Southampton, was asked 
whether he could understand why Rooney was angry. "Rooney is always angry," he 
replied. "When I see him in the Premier League he is always angry."

The issue overshadowed an otherwise satisfying day for Ferguson, who is 
expected to confirm today that Edwin van der Sar will continue as the club's 
goalkeeper next season. Van der Sar was 38 in October but plans to put off 
retirement to sign a one-year contract extension.
 