
"If this was the south of France, it would be world renowned." 

The man who made this claim, a visitor from Yorkshire, threw out his left 
hand, inviting me to drink in the scene. We were on a wide promenade. A sandy 
beach sloped gracefully away below us on which happy holidaymakers strolled, 
basked and frolicked. Twin headlands stretched their arms out into the sea as 
if about to hug it. A magnificent Victorian terrace curled around the bay like 
a caressing finger, its colours bleached almost white in the sun. It was a 
fantastically handsome resort, and I had to agree: if this were snuggled in 
next door to Nice, we'd all rave about it as yet another example of things the 
French do so stylishly, but which we are never quite able to emulate.

Llandudno – for that is where we were – even has the temerity to go one better 
than its French counterparts, for should you ever tire of the sea, the 
mountains are but a yodel away. And these are not just any old mountains but 
Snowdonia, home to the highest and most glorious peaks in Wales. That's why I 
was taking a break from my coastal trip to enjoy one of Britain's classic bus 
journeys, the ride from Llandudno up to Blaenau Ffestiniog.

The attraction bagging started before we had ascended a single metre. Breezing 
along the east bank of the Afon Conwy, our eyes were drawn as if by magnets to 
the medieval splendour ofConwy Castle 
<http://www.cadw.cymru.gov.uk/default.asp?id=6&PlaceID=55>, its eight huge 
towers apparently growing out of an immense rock on the far side of the river. 
The small town that grew up beneath its walls, with its array of dazzling white 
yachts and large expanses of gleaming sand, could almost play Juan les Pins to 
Llandudno's Cannes. If only Juan les Pins had a half decent castle, the 
deception would be complete.

From here, an avenue of trees lined the road. Occasional gaps gave flashes of 
low wooded hills guarding the Conwy valley. As we began our ascent, walls of 
flint with spiky slate toppings kept our driver on the straight and 
(increasingly) narrow as the scenery dropped away below us. Then, suddenly, the 
countryside opened up and all was laid bare.

We were still merely skirting Snowdonia at this point, so we experienced the 
pleasure of having the scene set before us like a picture book, with each 
mountain topping the one next to it as we gazed southward. There was Tal-y-fan 
with its prehistoric stone circle, Foel-Fras ("bald hulk"), Foel Grach ("scabby 
hill"), and, finally, the towering Carnedd Llywelyn. Once we'd punched a hole 
westward into the national park, the ascent became so steep the bus immediately 
began to struggle. The engine was straining pitifully and I can only wonder 
what it must be like when it has a full load – as it was, including the driver, 
there were just three of us.

Our destination could hardly be more different to its coastal cousins if it 
tried. Blaenau Ffestiniog (if you're not a Welsh speaker, aim for "Bligh-nigh") 
is a small mountain town built on slate, both literally and metaphorically. 
Once upon a time, when it was The Slate Capital of North Wales, Blaenau 
exported its product all over the world and, as the bus pulled in, I couldn't 
help but notice its past piled up around it. For every tonne of slate extracted 
from the mines, 10 tonnes of spoil came out. They used to be terrible eyesores 
but now nature has begun to reclaim the waste heaps that girdle the town, 
blending them in with the real mountains beyond.
 Railway station at Blaenau Ffestiniog 
The sense of Blaenau being unadulterated Wales is in the air at every turn: 
from the children at theFfestiniog Railway <http://www.festrail.co.uk> station 
to the group of elderly men outside the high street bakery, the place is alive 
with the Welsh language. For outsiders like me, it's a great way of having a 
foreign travel experience without actually leaving Britain. As I sauntered into 
the tourist information centre to find out about visiting the nearbyLlechwedd 
Slate Caverns <http://www.llechwedd-slate-caverns.co.uk>, two locals were in 
full mellifluent flow and I felt rather ashamed about sullying the place with 
my steadfastly unmusical RP tones.

Half an hour later, the boy sitting next to me on the tiny train as it rattled 
into the darkened depths of the mountainside was all wonderment and questions. 
"Do they still mine slate here?" "Yes." (Somewhat fearfully.) "Do you think the 
train will go any deeper?" It does.

Back above ground again, the bus was a lot more content to be coasting back 
downhill. The mountains here are so forbidding that for some miles the sole 
attempt at human habitation is provided byDolwyddelan Castle 
<http://www.cadw.cymru.gov.uk/default.asp?id=6&PlaceID=68>, only the keep of 
which remains.

On the way back, I stopped off at Betws-y-Coed <http://www.betws-y-coed.co.uk> 
and all thoughts I had of the French Riviera earlier in the day were scrubbed 
from my mind because this is clearly a Swiss Alpine village. Squeezed into a 
steep-sided valley near where three rivers meet, Betws stretches itself 
sinuously along a road on which every other shop seems to offer crampons, 
carabiners and walking boots, for this is climbing and hiking country. At the 
centre of the village, a stone bridge that looks like it's been fashioned by 
some giant from pre-history spans the Pont-y-Pair Falls. Picnicking 
day-trippers happily loafed around on rocks projecting from the gushing waters 
while the more energetic plunged off a high bank into the river.

Entranced, I nearly missed the final treat of the day, a trip on the Snowdon 
Sherpa open-top bus. The evening special is perfectly timed to arrive back in 
Llandudno for an end-of-pier aperitif, just as the dying sun cast its final 
shower of glitter over the sea.

Getting there

One-day Red Rover tickets can be used on all Express Motors and Snowdon Sherpa 
services in northern Snowdonia; adult £4.95, child £2.45.
Express Motors <http://www.expressmotors.co.uk> X1 between Llandudno and 
Blaenau Ffestiniog; +44 (0)1286 881108.
Snowdon Sherpa <http://www.snowdoniagreenkey.co.uk/index2.asp?id=5> S2 
open-top bus between Betws-y-Coed and Llandudno on certain days.
Llechwedd Slate Caverns <http://www.llechwedd-slate-caverns.co.uk>, open 
daily; adult £9.25, child £7; +44 (0)1766 830306.
The Vagabond Bunkhouse <http://www.thevagabond.co.uk>, Betws-y-Coed, from the 
people behind the renowned gîteLe Vagabond <http://www.gitevagabond.com> in 
Chamonix; £14 per night; +44 (0)1690 710850.

· Dixe Wills is the author of Places to Hide in England, Scotland and Wales 
(Icon, £7.99)
 