
Non-graduate routes into retail

Just 10 years ago, most young people were encouraged to attend university. A 
privileged opportunity many of their parents had not enjoyed, it was considered 
the best way to secure a high-paying career. But with the cost of a degree 
having tripled in the last three years, andnearly half of students leaving 
university and going into non-graduate positions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/nov/07/graduate-job-prospects-decline>
, young people today are starting to consider other options.

"Before I began my apprenticeship, I was doing my A-levels," says 19-year-old 
Bruce McCullen from Sheffield. "I knew I didn't want to go to university, so 
the training I received through this scheme has given my career a good start. 
It's a different route from university, but I've found it very rewarding."

Bruce recently finished a one-year school leavers training scheme with John 
Lewis, and is now the section manager of children's wear at the department 
store's Nottingham branch. "There was a lot of on-the-job training involved as 
well as a lot of shadowing managers," he says. "What they try to do is develop 
your leadership skills. Sales and product knowledge can always be taught as you 
go along, but when you're working on a busy shift you need to know how to 
manage your team and bring out the best in them, too."

Victoria Matthews, a National Careers Service 
<https://nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk/Pages/Home.aspx> adviser, thinks 
retail apprenticeships are a great opportunity for young people who prefer a 
more hands-on approach. "If you're not an academic type, then it's a brilliant 
way to learn skills and gain experience," she says. "You also get the benefit 
of receiving a trainee wage, and your employer may even offer to pay for you to 
complete some relevant qualifications."

Fully trained retail apprentices collect wages similar to graduates trainees, 
both receiving around £20-£30,000 a year, and have the potential to earn 
performance-related bonuses. These benefits more than make up for having to 
work weekends – a standard throughout the industry. Nonetheless, young people 
who don't mind unsociable hours should start applying proactively.

"You can find details of the apprenticeships retailers offer on their 
websites," Matthews says. "The best way to get your application noticed is to 
get some experience. A weekend job or a work experience placement will both 
help. Generally speaking, customer skills and personal qualities are the most 
important things employers look for, but there are also diplomas in retail 
skills that can help you build up your knowledge."

Having just started his first managerial role, Bruce is looking forward to the 
future. "One day I would like to be a branch manager," he says. "The good thing 
about this industry is that if you perform well, there are lots of structured 
opportunities for career progression."

With young people like Bruce making waves in their career before many have 
started thinking about it, retail apprenticeships are a solid option for young 
people wanting to get ahead.

Graduate routes into retail

With nearly 85 applications for every graduate position 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-23247176>, competition to find post-degree 
employment is fierce. As such, careers that students may have previously 
ignored are beginning to attract attention. Retail is becoming an increasingly 
popular destination, despite misconceptions that the sector's employment 
opportunities begin and end on the shop floor.

"When people talk about retail jobs they automatically think of sales 
assistant roles, but there are lots of other jobs too," says Matthews. "You 
could be a visual merchandiser helping to create displays, or a fashion buyer 
responsible for selecting stock. There are also emerging opportunities in 
e-commerce and social media too. The great thing about graduate trainee schemes 
in retail is that companies tend to give you experience in all aspects of their 
business."

Hayley Owen, a 22-year-old from Oxfordshire, knows this first hand. Last year 
she graduated from Southampton Solent University with a degree in fashion 
communication. Between terms she volunteered with children's hospice, Helen & 
Douglas House, working in its head office and charity shops. After she 
completed her degree, she successfully applied to become the first person to 
enter its graduate scheme as a business developer and brand co-ordinator.

"If you'd have told me two years ago I'd be working in retail for a children's 
charity, I'd have never believed you," she says. "But I'm passionate about my 
job and very often take work home with me. And I've gained so many skills; I've 
helped with their online shop, assisted in setting up their first vintage store 
in Oxford, worked at festivals and created fundraising tools to promote their 
cause."

Having worked in retail since she was 15, Hayley says that her most important 
skill is her ability to talk openly to people. "Customer service comes 
naturally to me," she says. However, with many retailers promoting their 
schemes on their websites, applicants need to make sure they stand out from 
their peers too.

"My advice to students thinking about going into a career retail is to get 
some work experience in the sector," says Hayley. "It'll make your application 
more well-rounded and give you the chance to see if you like it. I would have 
never have applied for my job if I hadn't volunteered."

Victoria Matthews agrees: "Any knowledge or experience you can demonstrate in 
a similar setting will be an advantage," she says.

Students who complete such schemes are likely to be retained by their 
employers, although for those who wish to pursue other avenues, the 
opportunities are endless. "You learn so many skills in this sector that you 
could potentially transfer them anywhere," says Matthews. "From communication 
skills to problem solving, retail employers equip their trainees with the core 
skills that all businesses and services need."

So if you're an undergraduate struggling to decide which career path to take, 
maybe it's time you considered retail.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 