
A fresh row over pay and bonuses at stricken Allied Irish Banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/allied-irish-bank> has erupted after it 
emerged that the former managing director walked away with a package of more 
than €3m (£2.6m) after being forced out of his job.

The golden goodbye, granted after less than a year in the job, has been 
described as "outrageous" and a "staggering" reward for failure at the bank.

AIB, now nationalised, is one of Ireland's biggest banking failures and has 
had three successive bailouts which will cost the taxpayer €20.5bn. Only last 
week it reported record pre-tax losses of €12bn, much of it blamed on property 
development that turned sour.

In a leak of the annual report, due out later this week, the Irish Times  
<http://www.irishtimes.com/newspaper/breaking/2011/0419/breaking5.html>reports 
that Colm Doherty received a salary of €432,000 for January to early November 
last year.

He also received to a termination payment of €707,000 in lieu of a year's 
notice after the board of AIB was told to terminate his contract at the 
direction of the then minister for finance Brian Lenihan.

He was also paid about €2m instead of a contribution to his pension.

"I find it extraordinary when we're talking of a major restructuring of the 
industry someone who is accountable walks away with these outrageous payments. 
It's just not fair and it's just not right and it's what's wrong with Irish 
society," Larry Broderick, general secretary of the Irish Bank Officials 
Association, told Irish radio.

"This is taxpayers' money. You're getting a guy who is getting paid €3m out of 
taxpayers' money at the same time as the taxpayers are subsidising the bank for 
€12bn. It's quite staggering," said Shane Ross, independent TD (member of 
parliament).

Broderick said his union, which is facing 2,000 job losses at the bank, is not 
going to co-operate until the issue of "enhancements" for failed bosses is 
addressed once and for all.

He said junior staff at the bank were denied bonuses of as little as €200 last 
year through emergency legislation which banned bank bonuses and yet people 
like Doherty walk away with compensation to "mismanage" the bank.

"The incentive has been to pay the top executives huge salaries and on top of 
that huge incentive bonuses to mismanage the bank," he said.

"Then on foot of failure you pay them even bigger lump sums to leave because 
of what they may very well say in court to bring everyone else down. I don't 
know the rationale for this. Questions need to be asked," Broderick told RTE's 
MorningIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>.

Doherty was an inside candidate

Doherty was an inside candidate for the managing director's job when his 
predecessor Eugene Sheehy resigned and was in the job for less than a year.

His appointment was opposed by the department of finance and Lenihan back in 
2009 because it was felt an insider was not the right person to clean up the 
bank which at the time had accepted a bailout of more than €3bn.

The new finance minister Michael Noonan said the whole issue of banking pay 
needs to be re-examined. He is about to publish a new report, the Nyberg 
report, into the banking culture which led to Ireland's financial collapse.

It is the second time in six months AIB has been at the centre of a storm of 
protest over bank bonuses.

In December Broderick called on staff to defer bonuses  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/ireland-business-blog-with-lisa-ocarroll/2010/dec/10/aib-staff-defer-bank-bonuses>
until the bank had returned to profitability after it emerged that a group of 
staff were due to pick up €40m in bonuses.

One critic accused bosses of "looting" the bank 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/ireland-business-blog-with-lisa-ocarroll/2010/dec/14/ireland>
 ahead of yet another bailout.

Doherty's appointment coincided with the appointment of fellow board member 
Dan O'Connor as executive chairman.

Both were forced to resign as a condition of AIB's recapitalisation by the 
state in September which saw another €3bn pumped into the bank.

Ross said: "Nothing seems to have changed at all. It's quite extraordinary."

He said there was now a long list of executives who left banking after losses 
were laid bare. "All of them left prematurely, all of them left in 
circumstances which they didn't want and all of them left because of the 
banking fiasco."

He said two board directors, former TD Dick Spring and Dublin Airport 
Authority chief executve Declan Collier, who were there to protect the "public 
interest" were partially to blame. "How they could agree to this contract I 
simply don't know," said Ross.

The AIB annual report will also reveal that the interim executive chairman 
David Hodgkinson, a former boss at HSBC, was paid €500,000 and about €120,000 
in accommodation and related expenses, as well as compensation for any tax 
arising from this benefit.

The bank is still searching for a managing director to replace Doherty.

AIB bailouts since 2008

2011: €13.3bn
2010: €3.7bn
2008: €3.5bn
Total: €20.5bn
 