
It is a phrase embedded in the game’s vernacular, a character from a bygone 
age and a team that, somehow, overcame the odds on a weekly basis. Sixty years 
ago Roy of the Rovers was first published as a comic strip – six decades since 
Roy Race’s golden locks and debonair charm first enraptured youngsters and 
adults alike to evoke dreams of glory and unlikely tales of sporting bravura.

“He was everything you would want a footballer to be,” says Barrie Tomlinson, 
who worked on the comic strip for 30 years. “Roy was an example of how it 
should be done. I know it sounds corny but that’s how it was.”

Say the words Roy Race and Melchester Rovers to someone of a certain 
generation and the eyes mist up, a reflective pause follows before a wistful 
smile.

To many those names represent childhood, escapism and sheer joy – the weekly 
ritual of buying a comic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/gallery/2009/mar/23/roy-of-the-rovers-classic-comic>
, reading in rapid time before poring over the same pages again and again until 
the next edition hit the shelves.

It was a time before the digital age, when readers wrote letters to voice 
their disapproval of a particular storyline or merely to ask for Roy’s 
autograph. It was a time when the England manager would be asked for his 
opinions on a fictional character and responded, sincerely. It was a time when 
a comic book regularly became national news.

 Roy of the Rovers tackled issues of the day: here the comic addressed 
football hooliganism in a 1977 strip. Photograph: 2014 ©Egmont UK Ltd. All 
rights reserved 
Roy of the Rovers first appeared in Tiger magazine on 11 September 1954 and 
during its heyday had a circulation of about 400,000. After 22 years of success 
it moved from Tiger in 1976 and became its own weekly publication until 1993, 
when sales had declined to 20,000, although the story did run on a monthly 
basis until 2001in various forms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/mar/23/roy-of-the-rovers-collectors-edition>
.

The drama never stopped. Aside from Race’s nine league titles, eight FA Cup 
victories, three European Cups and many international caps, there was plenty to 
keep readers entertained off the field. Melchester were ambushed by rebels in 
South America, an assassination attempt on Roy Race failed in 1981, an 
earthquake at Mel Park and the appointment of Geoffrey Boycott as chairman were 
just a few examples of the remarkable struggles at the club.

There was also the time eight Melchester players were killed by terrorist 
activity in the Middle-East state of Basran, before the eventual demise of Race 
himself, the centre-forward turned player-manager’s career cruelly cut short 
after losing a foot in a disastrous helicopter crash.

“In the early days Melchester Rovers would always do remarkably well and 
almost win every match that they played,” says Tomlinson, a former editor of 
Tiger who launched Roy of the Rovers magazine.

“Then they changed it and it went much more true to life, the audience began 
to expect a more sophisticated storyline. Roy was the first comic book hero to 
get married and that had lots of support from the readers.

“His wife, Penny, left him because he was spending too much time at the 
football club and it was national news. Every newspaper carried the story and 
it was on TV and radio. I was whisked on to ITN to discuss the serious 
situation and then in the evening on the BBC. Roy of the Rovers issuch an 
important character in children’s comics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2009/sep/16/roy-race-comic-book-heroes>
 – I was very fortunate to be part of it for so long.”

Frank Pepper was the author of the original strip, while early stories were 
written alongside Bobby Charlton, who many associate with Race’s gentlemanly 
demeanour. Throughout the controversy that engulfed Melchester, throughout the 
myriad scandals, he remained the quintessential model professional, regularly 
emerging with his integrity intact and, quite often, with it enhanced.

Yet while Race was a constant protagonist from 1954 to 1993, the cast of 
illustrators and writers changed significantly. Joe Colquhoun was the original 
artist but was followed by Paul Trevillion, Yvonne Hutton, David Sque and 
Michael White. Derek Birnage, an early editor of Tiger, played a key writing 
role before Tom Tully.

It was in the 60s when the strip’s popularity accelerated. Trevillion, who 
illustrated the strip in a new style of comic realism between 1963-65, recalls 
one particular moment when he first realised how famous the story had become.

He said: “I was at Tottenham’s training ground one day and Danny Blanchflower 
said to Bill Nicholson as Cliff Jones went past about three players: ‘He thinks 
he’s Roy of the Rovers.’ I couldn’t believe it. Then I was told that kids were 
writing in for Roy’s autograph.”

It was at that time when Alf Ramsey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alf-ramsey> took a keen interest in 
Race’s travails. The England manager was an avid reader and often provided 
Trevillion with his constructive criticism on the illustrations, before 
becoming a character in the strip himself. “Alf was my art teacher,” joked 
Trevillion. “It was always the same argument, Alf would always call me and say: 
‘He’s in the wrong position, he’s leaning too far back and the ball would have 
gone over the bar.’ It was Alf who always said: ‘Go out and watch Bobby 
Charlton.’ ”

However, there were storylines that readers did not always appreciate, such as 
the introduction to the team of Martin Kemp and Steve Norman from Spandau 
Ballet, or Bob Wilson and Emlyn Hughes, who many associated with TV and 
celebrity culture rather than football.

Sque, the illustrator between 1974 and 1986, said: “Someone came up with the 
idea and I knew it would be the death of Roy, to make him into a ‘real 
character’. He married his secretary Penny, she had twins and it all tied in 
with Prince Charles and Diana getting married at the same time. I knew when we 
made him a real character his son would end up taking over. That put a 
time-limit on it.”

Indeed, after the helicopter crash of 1993 it was Rocky Race, Roy’s son, who 
became the driving force of the strip. However, in the face of digital 
competition, there was to be no return to the glory days of old.
 Roy Race was involved in a terrible helicopter crash onto a football pitch in 
March 1993. Photograph: 2014 ©Egmont UK Ltd.  All rights reserved 
Egmont UK currently holds the rights and is commemorating the strip’s 60th 
anniversary with a new Roy Race autobiography next month. There may be many 
young fans of the modern game for whom this will not even register, oblivious 
to a character who once was entwined in the very fabric of English football.

For some, though, Roy of the Rovers will never die. “I think it’s a tragedy 
that Roy isn’t around any more,” says Tomlinson. “Football is so much more 
dramatic now than it was in Roy’s day that the storylines would be much easier 
to write – but he’s still my best friend.”
 