
As investors play a wait and see game ahead of this week's US Federal Reserve 
meeting, leading shares have edged higher after four days of decline.

But RSA Insurance is an exception, losing 2.55p to 89.95p and heading the FTSE 
100 fallers.

Since its profit warning on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/13/rsa-insurance-chief-quits-profit-warning>
 - the third in a row - and the subsequent departure of its chief executive, 
investors have started to worry about the insurer's credit rating. The insurer 
- which has been hit by severe problems at its Irish business - is expected to 
hold meetings to try and avoid a downgrade from A which could put further 
pressure on the business. Meanwhile analysts have been unveiling their own 
downgrades, with Canaccord Genuity cutting its target price from 100p to 85p 
with a sell rating. Analyst Ben Cohen said:
 We think RSA needs to improve its solvency positions by up to £1bn, to take 
its capital strength back to the levels in 2008/9, when solvency was simply not 
an issue. We see this being achieved by a combination of a lower dividend (a 
cut by a third), new reinsurance covers (to reduce volatility of earnings going 
forward and capital consumption of the back-book) and portfolio 
adjustment/disposals, the largest of which could include Canada, in our view. A 
rights issue is also a possibility, albeit only likely a necessity if other 
reserving issues arise in coming months.

We were surprised as to the lack of details in Friday's announcement, and 
think shareholder pressure will make management come back sooner than [its full 
year results announcement in] February.

Also heading lower is Aberdeen Asset Management, down 5.8p to 450.3p following 
a report that the market is worried about its purchase of Scottish Widows and 
the uncertainty of integrating the business. 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/cbd88bf6-633b-11e3-a87d-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2nd1bpj5I>

Mining shares are weaker after an HSBC manufacturing index came in lower than 
expected, albeit still showing growth.Antofagasta has fallen 5p to 756p while 
Anglo American is 4.5p lower at £12.65, not helped by Societe Generale reducing 
its price target from £17.50 to £16 although the bank kept its buy rating 
following the miner's strategy day last week:
 Overall, we found the presentation convincing, but we are mindful that the 
bulk of the savings will be back-ended towards 2015-16.

2014 will continue to see headwinds (copper grades, Sishen's high stripping 
ratios). Because of strong capex ($7.5bn in 2014 and $6.5bn in 2015 versus 
$6.4bn in 2013), net debt is likely to increase in the next two years. We are 
cutting our 2013-2015 earnings per share forecast given 1) the group's copper 
production target (50,000 tonne cut to our forecasts), 2) higher than expected 
costs at Minas Rio, and 3) Sishen's increasing costs and relatively subdued 
production profile. However, 1) We think Anglo's savings initiatives are 
credible and will gradually kick in; 2) we like its commodities mix (iron ore, 
platinum, diamonds), and 3) most of the headwinds are now well known/contained 
(Minas Rio essentially de-risked, Sishen and Los Bronces' copper grade issues 
well flagged) and 4) Anglo's valuation is attractive relative to peers.

Chief executive Mark Cutifani made it very clear that he would not reshuffle 
Anglo as radically as some in the market would have anticipated (exit or 
restructure Anglo Platinum? reduce South African exposure?) and unlock value 
for shareholders. Instead, we expect he will favour continuity and bring the 
assets to their full potential before taking any significant initiatives. 
But temporary power supplier Aggreko - which was under pressure on Friday - 
has jumped 89p to £16.05 after saying it expected its 2013 performance to be 
slightly ahead of expectations.

Overall the FTSE 100 is currently 22.12 points higher at 6462.08, with 
uncertainty over whether the Fed will decided to turn off the money taps or not 
at this week's meeting, the last with Ben Bernanke as the central bank's 
chairman. Mike van Dulken, head of research at Accendo Markets, said:
 Yet another leg lower. This time with China PMI Manufacturing and Japanese 
business outlook disappointing, and adding to the weight of existing Fed taper 
fears which, thanks to jobs data and political progress have helped usher the 
index lower ahead of the [Fed's] last meeting of the year and chairman 
Bernanke's last press conference.

Nonetheless, the sharp overnight rebound from just below 6400 and so close to 
the long-term trendline of rising lows means we may be closer - after a 
correction of 6.2% and 6-weeks - to the bottom and thus a reversal. Could it 
coincide with another taper delay and thinner pre-holiday volumes to help 
deliver the Santa Rally that markets have been yearning for?  