
The father of the alleged Russian spy Anna Chapman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jun/30/anna-chapman?DCMP=EMC-thewrap08> 
works as a senior diplomat in Russia's ministry of foreign affairs, it was 
reported today.

Friends of 28-year-old Chapman had already confirmed that Vasily Kushchenko 
was once in the diplomatic service but according to Komsomolskaya Pravda 
newspaper he now occupies a senior position at the ministry known by its 
Russian initials MID. Today a foreign ministry spokesman refused to confirm or 
deny the report. "We can't answer this. There may be official commentary 
later," the spokesman said.

The claim adds another layer of intrigue to the spy scandal but both the 
Kremlin and the White House have stressed over the past 48 hours that it will 
not harm relations or derail the "reset" that has been under way since Barack 
Obama became US president.

Chapman's mother, Irina, 51, who lives in Moscow, has refused to comment on 
the spying claims, beyond protesting her daughter's innocence. The family's 
home is in a 17-storey block in south-west Ramenki, a once-elite district for 
KGB officials, mid-ranking diplomats and army officers. The Kushchenkos used 
the flat for six years before returning permanently to Moscow two years ago 
from a posting, it was reported.

Neighbours told Komsomolskaya Pravda that Chapman returned to Moscow from 
Britain 18 months ago, renting her own flat in the Park Kultury district. Her 
younger sister Dasha still lives at home, they said, and has just finished high 
school. Since the scandal broke there has been no sign of Dasha or of her 
father, they added, with only Chapman's mother apparently at home.

Chapman's friends

Today friends said they were astonished by Chapman's arrest, and were 
convinced she had been framed. "It was an enormous shock. Nobody believes that 
she could have been involved in such things," Dmitry Porochkin told the 
Guardian.

Several Russians today left supportive messages on her webpage on the popular 
Russian social networking siteOdnoklassniki <>. "This is a provocation! Hang on 
in there," wrote Sergei Prokopenko. Nikolai Likov added: "We are with you! I 
hope our government doesn't leave you in the lurch."

In Volgograd – the southern Russian city once known as Stalingrad – people 
were astonished to hear of the scandal engulfing Chapman, who lived in the city 
as a child with her grandmother and was known as Anna Kushchenko.

School years 

Chapman studied at a school for children suffering from scoliosis (spinal 
curvature) in a quiet suburb of the city. The buff-coloured four-storey brick 
school is known in Russian as a KhEP, meaning it specialises in creative arts.
Today, the school's director, Viktor Golovkin, sat in his office surrounded by 
children's paintings of snow-encrusted dachas, sunflowers and gold-domed 
churches. He is proud of the school's successful alumni, but he was less 
pleased to be fielding phone calls from Russian journalists about Chapman.

"We don't remember her and we don't keep records," he claimed, before 
contradicting himself, saying: "She studied here less than a year, I think from 
September to March, in 1996 and 1997."

Children at the school publish glossy brochures of their poems and perform 
plays such as Scarlet Sails, a romantic adventure story by Russian author 
Alexander Grin.

"My aim for our pupils is to make sure the boys don't become drunkards, the 
girls don't walk the streets, and that none of them end up in prison," said 
Golovkin.

Pupils did not need to be gifted to enter the school, he added. "In every 
child one can find and nurture creative talent."

He said there was no record of Chapman's endeavours but that she may not have 
been at the KhEP long enough to make an impression.

Golovkin said Chapman must have been a scoliosis sufferer to study at the 
school, which has a reputation for excellence, and where most pupils live in 
dormitories during term time.

"No one else is allowed," he said. Not even the daughter of a diplomat? "No 
chance."

The director added that he doubted the veracity of charges against Chapman: 
"If she had really been a spy she would have been a lot more professional," he 
said.

Reunion 

Tatyana Shumilina, 27, an unemployed journalist, told the Guardian she had 
known Anna (known to friends as Anya) when they studied for a year at the same 
school.

The two got in touch again a year and a half ago to discuss a school reunion 
and have exchanged messages on and off ever since via odnoklassniki.

"A friend called to tell me the news and I didn't know whether to laugh or 
cry," she said, describing Kushchenko as "unique, memorable and full of life".

"I can't believe she's a spy. It must be some kind of political intrigue, 
maybe because her father was a senior diplomat. He worked as ambassador to 
Kenya."

Shumilina added: "Anya wasn't like anyone else. She introduced me to decent 
rock music like Metallica and Nirvana at a time when everyone else was still 
listening to awful Russian boy bands like Ivanushki International.

"She left our school after a year and we lost each other. When I got back in 
touch with her again recently she was living in Moscow and running her own real 
estate agency. I think they just decided to pick on her because of her father, 
or because she travelled a lot to America and had an English husband, and that 
seemed suspicious.

"I'm really worried about Anya. Who knows what will happen next? I'm just 
hoping they will see sense in America, apologise and let her go."

Darya Mitrofanova, 27, who studied with Kushchenko at Volgograd's School 
Number 11, told the Guardian: "Anna is an intelligent, brave girl. She's 
self-sufficient and strong in her convictions."

She added: "Politics is a dark and closed subject for the average person. As 
always, the truth of all this will only become clear some time later."

One of Anna Chapman's friends, who studied with her at Moscow's Peoples' 
Friendship University, told the Guardian: "I've known her about 10 years, since 
our first year at university. Personally, I'm convinced that she's been set up. 
Anya is a clever, purposeful person – you can only say good things about her."

The friend who asked not to be identified added: "She would never have got 
caught up in such a thing, she always kept well clear of any kind of shady 
business. This whole thing seems to me like some kind of artlessly concocted 
detective story – making Anya out to be a spy! It's risible."
 