
Alexander Solzhenitsyn, the Nobel prize-winning Russian author who bowed to no 
political leader, will be buried according to his last wishes in the graveyard 
of Moscow's ancient Donskoy monastery.

The Orthodox funeral for Solzhenitsyn will take place in the monastery's 
cathedral tomorrow after an opportunity today for the public to pay their last 
respects when the open coffin will be displayed at the Russian Academy of 
Sciences. Thousands are expected to stream past the body, although it will not 
be an official lying-in-state.

"Alexander Isayevich [Solzhenitsyn] himself chose his place of rest," said 
Archpriest Nikolai Balashov of the Moscow Patriarchy. "Five years ago, in 
response to his appeal, Patriarch Alexy II gave his blessing to the allotment 
of a plot in the Donskoy monastery graveyard as Solzhenitsyn's burial place."

The writer, who exposed the crimes of the Stalinist system but also criticised 
Russia's post-Communist leaders, will avoid burial alongside former Kremlin 
leaders Nikita Khrushchev and Boris Yeltsin in the Novodevichy cemetery. The 
graveyard of the 16th-century Donskoy monastery is the last resting place of 
monks, poets and philosophers. Some victims of Joseph Stalin's secret police 
are also buried there.

Solzhenitsyn, author of A Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich, Cancer Ward and 
The Gulag Archipelago, died aged 89 of heart failure on Sunday night. His wife 
Natalya said his life ended in the way he had hoped. "He wanted to die in the 
summer and he died in the summer," she told Interfax news agency. "He wanted to 
die at home and he died at home. Alexander Isayevich lived a difficult but 
happy life."

Incarcerated in the gulags under Stalin and expelled from his homeland for 
writing about these experiences under Brezhnev, Solzhenitsyn rejected the west 
and continued to set his watch to Moscow time throughout his exile in America. 
When he returned toRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> after the 
collapse of the Soviet Union he continued to criticise the Kremlin, although he 
saw eye to eye with Vladimir Putin on matters of patriotism.

"The death of this great man and one of the major thinkers, writers and 
humanists of the 20th century is an irreparable loss for Russia and for the 
world as a whole," President Dmitry Medvedev said in a letter of condolence. 
Mikhail Gorbachev, the last Soviet leader, described Solzhenitsyn as a "man of 
unique destiny whose name will remain in Russia's history".

Literary figures also paid tribute, including the South African writer and 
fellow Nobel laureate JM Coetzee, who described Solzhenitsyn as "a colossus of 
our times" and "a great Russian patriot".

Many Russians revered Solzhenitsyn for his bravery and literary output. "Oh, I 
didn't know he had died. That's sad news," said Lyudmila Ushachova, 62, an 
engineer. "He was a great man. I will probably go and see him tomorrow."
 