
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn <https://www.theguardian.com/books/solzhenitsyn>, who 
has died aged 89, was a prolific novelist and memoirist, whose life's work, in 
the best traditions of Russian literature, transcended the realm of pure 
letters. He was a moral and spiritual leader, whose books were noted as much 
for their ethical dimension as for their aesthetic qualities. Between 1968 and 
1976, he was a towering figure in the twin worlds of literature and politics, 
expressing the pain of his long-suffering people and single-handedly 
challenging the autocratic government of one of the world's two superpowers.

Solzhenitsyn's moral authority was not easily earned. It was the fruit, in 
part, of bitter personal experience in Stalin's labour camps. But the lessons 
he drew from his experience, and the manner in which he voiced the sufferings 
of three generations of Soviet victims in powerful novels such as One Day in 
the Life of Ivan Denisovich, Cancer Ward, and The First Circle that secured for 
him the role of conscience of the nation.

Later, he showed unmatched physical and moral courage in writing and 
publishing his magnum opus, The Gulag Archipelago, a torrential narrative 
mixing history, politics, autobiography, documentary, corrosive personal 
comment and philosophical speculation into one of the most extraordinary epics 
of 20th-century literature.

Not least of Solzhenitsyn's achievements was his resurrection of the 
19th-century Russian ideal of the writer as secular prophet. A prescient reader 
once wrote to him: "No matter how things are going, we have always felt better 
when we have a Turgenev, a Tolstoy, a Chekhov. It is not enough for us for a 
writer to be a good writer, even a great writer. He has to be someone we can 
love."

The Mexican writer Octavio Paz attributed Solzhenitsyn's power to his 
continuation of an even more ancient tradition, that of Orthodox Christianity, 
which had taught him to endure sacrifice and risk even death to bear witness: 
"In a century of false testimonies, a writer becomes the witness to man."

Born in Kislovodsk in southern Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, between the Black and Caspian seas, 
Solzhenitsyn was almost the same age as the Russian Revolution. Despite some 
hard years as the sole child of a sick churchgoing mother (his father had died 
before his birth), he grew up a loyal communist and staunch supporter of the 
Soviet regime.

As a student at Rostov University, he edited the Komsomol — communist youth 
movement — newspaper with conspicuous success, and was awarded one of only 
seven Stalin scholarships for outstanding social and scholastic achievement. 
Although his degree was in mathematics and physics, he also studied on his own 
for a diploma in literature from the Moscow Institute of Philosophy, Literature 
and History, began to write short stories, and drafted the plan for an immense 
"Tolstoyan" novel intended to celebrate the October Revolution of 1917.

But it was his devotion to revolutionary purity that was to prove his undoing. 
As an artillery captain during the second world war, he wrote letters to a 
friend expressing barely disguised hostility to Stalin's autocratic rule and 
hoping for a return to socialist principles when the war was over. These 
letters were intercepted by Smersh, the Soviet counter-espionage service, and 
shortly before the war's end, Solzhenitsyn was arrested and sentenced in July 
1945 to eight years in the labour camps and three years' administrative exile 
for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda".

The shock of this arrest and the subsequent privations he endured in the 
notorious Lubyanka prison in Moscow were to lead to some of the finest pages in 
The Gulag Archipelago (three volumes, 1974-76)???: "Of all the cells you've 
been in, your first cell is a very special one, the place where you first 
encountered others like yourself, doomed to the same fate. All your life you 
will remember it with an emotion that can only be compared to memories of your 
first love. And those people with whom you shared the floor and air of that 
stone cubicle during the days when you rethought your entire life will later be 
recalled by you as members of your own family."

During his first few months in the camps, Solzhenitsyn almost died from 
starvation and overwork. He was saved by his unexpected transfer to a 
sharashka, a scientific institute devoted to the study of decoding techniques 
and staffed entirely by scientifically trained prisoners while being supervised 
and run by the MVD (the ministry of internal affairs). Here he was thrown into 
the company of a group of highly educated and intelligent fellow prisoners, who 
broadened his intellectual horizons and forced him to re-examine his earlier 
beliefs. Two friends in particular, Lev Kopelev and Dmitri Panin, involved him 
in long philosophical and political debates, while the painter Sergei 
Ivashov-Musatov opened Solzhenitsyn's eyes to the possibility of combining 
realism with symbolism in art.

These experiences were to form the core of the finest of Solzhenitsyn's longer 
novels, The First Circle (1969), whose title referred to Dante's circles of 
hell: the first circle was reserved for "the wise men of antiquity," pagans but 
not sinners of commission. A subplot in that novel reflected Solzhenitsyn's 
painful personal life at this time. After his graduation from Rostov University 
in 1940 he had married a fellow student, Natalia Reshetovskaya, who had moved 
to Moscow following his transfer to the sharashka (which was in Marfino, just 
outside the capital), and was working for her doctorate in chemistry. Her 
laboratory was classified, and she told Solzhenitsyn on one of her rare 
permitted visits that she might have to divorce him in order to keep her 
position, and they were indeed divorced in 1952.

In 1950, after three years at the sharashka Solzhenitsyn was transferred to a 
special camp at Ekibastuz in northern Kazakhstan, where he worked for three 
more years, first as a bricklayer, and then as a brigade leader in the machine 
shop. The grinding hard labour, the extremes of heat and cold, the brutality of 
the guards, and the corruption of the camp administration were later evoked 
with great brilliance in his short novel One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich 
(1962). The suffering provoked a bloody riot (not mentioned in Ivan Denisovich 
but fully described in The Gulag Archipelago), which was followed by a hunger 
strike. A commission of inquiry was appointed, and Solzhenitsyn, as a brigade 
leader, urged caution on his fellow strikers and supported compromise. But the 
prisoners were cynically deceived by the commission, and Solzhenitsyn learned 
the bitter lesson that compromise with the authorities was impossible.

It was while still in the camps that Solzhenitsyn had his first brush with 
cancer. He was rushed to the infirmary in great pain and operated on for cancer 
of the groin. The treatment was unsuccessful, and a few months later in 1954, 
in exile in southern Kazakhstan, he dragged himself to a cancer clinic in 
Tashkent for further treatment. "That autumn I learned from my own experience 
that a man can cross the threshold of death while occupying a body that is 
still not dead. Your blood still circulates and your stomach digests things, 
but psychologically you have completed all your preparations for death and 
lived through death itself … Although you have never regarded yourself as a 
Christian — sometimes, indeed, the opposite — now you suddenly notice that you 
have already forgiven everyone who has insulted you."

Solzhenitsyn's ordeal during these months became the substance of Cancer Ward 
(1968). They also provoked a spiritual crisis and a return to the Christian 
faith of his mother. He came to the conclusion that religion was superior to 
ideology, because it struggled with "the evil inside man", whereas revolutions 
destroyed the contingent carriers of evil, but embraced "the evil itself", and 
even magnified it. He also concluded that "the line separating good from evil 
runs not between states, not between classes, and not between parties — it runs 
through the heart of each and every one of us".

Solzhenitsyn's release from exile and rise to world fame is inextricably 
linked with the name and policies of Nikita Khrushchev, who encouraged the thaw 
after Stalin's death in 1953 and inaugurated a wide-ranging policy of 
de-Stalinisation. Returning from exile in 1956 to Russia a free man, 
Solzhenitsyn was reunited with Natalia, who had remarried. She left her second 
husband for Solzhenitsyn again — they were married again in 1957. He settled 
down as a schoolteacher in Ryazan, a medium-sized town about 100 miles 
south-east of Moscow.

While in exile in Kazakhstan, Solzhenitsyn had laboured to revise the numerous 
works he had composed in the camps. They included a long narrative poem of 
thousands of lines ("twice the length of Eugene Onegin"), lyric poetry, plays 
in verse and in prose, and the draft of the novel that was to become The First 
Circle. His camp experiences had taught him the Joycean virtues of "silence, 
exile, and cunning," and for several years he had little expectation that his 
writings would see the light of day. But he changed his mind after the party's 
22nd congress in October 1961, when Khrushchev vowed to erect a monument to the 
victims of Stalinism, and Alexander Tvardovsky, editor of the influential 
magazine, Novy Mir, called on writers to tell the truth about "the era of the 
personality cult".

Solzhenitsyn had just completed a short novel about a day in the life of a 
typical prisoner, which was less extreme in its political opinions than his 
early poems and plays. He arranged for it to be forwarded anonymously to 
Tvardovsky, setting in motion a chain of events that was to be compared to the 
discovery of Dostoevsky by the poet and publisher Nikolai Nekrasov a hundred 
years earlier.

Tvardovsky stayed up all night reading the manuscript, then deluged friends 
and colleagues with the news that "a great writer has been born". Tvardovsky 
was obliged to go all the way up the chain of command to Khrushchev himself to 
get the novel published. It is said that Khrushchev had to bully his politburo 
colleagues into reading it. When they declined to make a decision, Khrushchev 
allegedly said: "There's a Russian proverb that says silence is consent."

One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich caused a sensation when it appeared in 
the November 1961 issue of the literary magazine Novy Mir. So daring were its 
revelations about Stalin's policies and the evils of the labour camps that many 
Russians concluded that the censorship had suddenly been abolished. The elder 
statesman of Russian literature, Korney Chukovsky, called the book "a literary 
miracle", the famous poet Anna Akhmatova described Solzhenitsyn as "a bearer of 
light", and said his story should be read by "every one of the 200 million 
citizens of the Soviet Union".

The responses of the reading public were even more overwhelming: "I kiss your 
golden hands", "thank you for your truthfulness", "let me bow to the ground 
before you", "we love you, we believe you, we thank you."

"Thank you, dear friend, comrade and brother. Reading your story I remembered 
the frosts and blizzards, the insults and humiliations. I wept as I read. Keep 
well, dear friend."

There had been nothing like it in the entire history of Russian literature. 
Solzhenitsyn had achieved the miracle of pleasing his country's leaders, its 
critically minded intelligentsia, and the broad mass of his readers. Moreover, 
his impact on foreign readers was almost as strong: within weeks his name was 
known all over the world. In quick succession he published three more stories 
in Novy Mir, the most memorable being the much anthologised Matryona's Place 
(1963), about a saintly peasant woman, with its celebrated conclusion: "None of 
us who lived close to her perceived that she was that one righteous person 
without whom, as the saying goes, no city can stand. Nor our whole land."

Solzhenitsyn's fall from official grace was almost as precipitous as his rise. 
In 1964, Khrushchev was removed from power, and Solzhenitsyn narrowly failed to 
win the Lenin prize for literature. A year later, Leonid Brezhnev began his 
drive against the intellectuals, signalled by the arrest of Andrei Sinyavsky 
and Yuli Daniel for publishing their works clandestinely in the west, and the 
confiscation of Solzhenitsyn's The First Circle from a friend's apartment, 
together with copies of some of his early poems and plays.

By now Solzhenitsyn was half-way through Cancer Ward, but although part one 
was slated for publication by Novy Mir, it was blocked by the authorities.

Solzhenitsyn was convinced that his arrest was imminent, and went to ground 
for several weeks, but although Sinyavsky and Daniel were eventually sentenced 
to labour camp terms at a show trial in Moscow, he remained unscathed, and came 
to the conclusion that the authorities were afraid of him (a calculation that 
government documents were later to prove correct).

From 1966 to 1968, he and Tvardovsky fought doggedly to get either The First 
Circle or Cancer Ward (now in two parts) into print, and to have one or the 
other of his plays staged, but the KGB, under the leadership of Yuri Andropov, 
was just as determined to stop him. Having identified him as the author of an 
incendiary early play, Victory Celebrations, with some bitter anti-Soviet 
comments in it, the KGB circulated copies to members of the Writers' Union, and 
advocated his expulsion.

Solzhenitsyn fought back with a celebrated open letter to the Writers' Union 
congress in March 1967, citing the long line of distinguished Russian writers 
suppressed or killed by the Soviet government and calling for a complete end to 
censorship:

"A survival of the Middle Ages, censorship has managed, Methuselah-like to 
drag out its existence almost to the 21st century. Perishable, it attempts to 
arrogate to itself the prerogative of imperishable time, of separating good 
books from bad." Solzhenitsyn also appealed to the union to support his 
struggle to have his own works published — an appeal that fell on deaf ears.

The increasing repression of religious and nationalist dissent by the Brezhnev 
administration had led to the explosive growth of a dissident movement, which 
exerted leverage by appeals to the west for support. Solzhenitsyn was both a 
part of the movement and the object of several of its appeals, and he 
capitalised on his international reputation by sending copies of his 
unpublished novels abroad. In 1968 part one of Cancer Ward was published in 
English by the Bodley Head (followed by translations in other languages), and a 
year later, Harper & Row brought out The First Circle.

Both novels were old-fashioned in their panoramic reach, their huge cast of 
characters and realistic manner, but hugely innovative in their subject matter: 
the submerged and hitherto (except for Solzhenitsyn's own early novel) 
undescribed world of the labour camps. Solzhenitsyn was acknowledged as a 
"truth-teller" and a witness to the cruelties of Stalinism of unusual power and 
eloquence. His fame grew exponentially. He was hailed as a fearless chronicler 
of evil and as the greatest Russian writer of his time.

The Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 inaugurated a new push against 
dissidents, and the following year, Solzhenitsyn was expelled from the Writers' 
Union. But in 1970 he was awarded the Nobel prize for literature, and this 
greatly strengthened his position vis-a-vis the government. Other prominent 
dissidents tried to make common cause with him, but although he sympathised 
with their goals, Solzhenitsyn stayed aloof and preferred to pursue his own 
path.

The sole exception was Academician Sakharov, whose Memorandum on Progress, 
Coexistence, and Intellectual Freedom had greatly impressed him, and with whom 
he had discussed issuing a joint statement on the invasion of Czechoslovakia. 
The two men met several times, but Sakharov, the typical "westerniser", with a 
great admiration for western society and democratic norms, soon found himself 
at odds with the "Slavophile" Solzhenitsyn, who had acquired a deep regard for 
the traditions of the Orthodox church and a growing conviction that Russia 
should follow a separate path from the west. Nevertheless, the two did act in 
concert to block some aspects of the Brezhnev-Nixon policy of détente, and were 
instrumental in getting the US Senate to include a human rights plank in the 
agreement.

Solzhenitsyn's increasingly conservative and patriotic views were now 
beginning to alienate him from liberal opinion in the Soviet Union. In his 
historical novel, August 1914, published in the west in 1971, he painted a rosy 
picture of pre-revolutionary Russia, and in three essays for a samizdat 
collection inspired and masterminded by him, From Under the Rubble, he praised 
Russia's Orthodox church and authoritarian political tradition, developed the 
idea that nations, as well as individuals, should practise the Christian 
virtues of repentance and self-abnegation, and excoriated the Russian 
intelligentsia for selling out to Soviet power in exchange for material 
privileges.

In his 1973 political manifesto, Letter to the Soviet Leaders (written partly 
in response to Sakharov's Memorandum), he spelled out his views in even greater 
detail, disclosing a vision that was patriarchal and bucolic, and impelled by 
an intense aversion to modernity in all its forms.

Publication of the Letter (which Solzhenitsyn had sent personally to Brezhnev, 
without response) was delayed by another major development. The KGB had tracked 
down and confiscated a copy of The Gulag Archipelago, Solzhenitsyn's immense 
camp history that he had written in the deepest secret and concealed for years 
from all but close intimates. Copies were already in the west, and when 
Solzhenitsyn learned of the KGB's coup, he displayed great personal courage in 
ordering its immediate publication. The appearance of volume one in January 
1974 was a bombshell: the book went far beyond anything Solzhenitsyn had 
published before in revealing the abuses of the regime even as far back as the 
early twenties, and placed, in the words of one commentator, "a burning 
question mark over 50 years of Soviet power". Another wrote that "the time may 
come when we date the beginning of the collapse of the Soviet system from the 
appearance of Gulag".

The publication of The Gulag Archipelago in the west provoked the politburo to 
decree his immediate deportation, and after a sensational arrival by plane in 
West Germany in 1974, he settled in Zurich for two years. There he was joined 
by his second wife, Natalia Svetlova (whom had married in 1973, having divorced 
Reshetovskaya the previous year), and their three young sons, Yermolai, Ignat 
and Stepan. During this time he travelled widely, made speeches denouncing the 
Soviet regime, and published a fascinating memoir, The Oak and the Calf (1975), 
in which he revealed many new details about his battle with the Soviet 
authorities. Meanwhile volumes two and three of The Gulag Archipelago appeared 
to less public acclaim than volume one, but confirmed the uniqueness and 
immensity of that vast enterprise.

In 1976 Solzhenitsyn moved to Vermont, and after making a badly received 
speech at Harvard about the west's derelictions in its dealings with the Soviet 
Union swore himself to public silence while working on a series of historical 
novels that continued the story of August 1914 (1971) under the collective 
title of The Red Wheel. The original plan had called for up to 20 novels, but 
the sheer length of the next two novels in the series, October 1916 and March 
1917 (each consisting of two volumes, published in 1985 and 1998), showed that 
this would be physically impossible. Solzhenitsyn therefore concluded the cycle 
with April 1917 (1991), possibly influenced by the fact that the historical 
novels were being met with neither critical nor popular success. The consensus 
held them to be too densely packed with historical data and turgid commentary, 
and too short on artistic invention to be of great interest to readers. Since 
the appearance of August 1914, only one other volume, November 1916, has been 
translated into English so far, although others are scheduled for the future.

From the moment of his deportation Solzhenitsyn averred that he would return 
to Russia, and he was right. Having observed Gorbachev's perestroika with great 
scepticism from the vantage point of Vermont, and having remained aloof for a 
further three years after Yeltsin dismantled communism, he made a triumphal 
return in May 1994, travelling from Vladivostok to Moscow by train. He had set 
out his political views on Russia's future in two long essays, Rebuilding 
Russia and How Shall We Organise Russia, and fully expected to be consulted by 
the country's political elite, but it did not happen. He was welcomed with 
genuine warmth and gratitude, but the politicians (until Putin's 
much-publicised personal visit several years later) kept their distance, and 
his stint as host of a short-lived television show quickly ended.

Once more Solzhenitsyn retired from public view, settling in a comfortable 
villa on the outskirts of Moscow. But despite his advancing years, he kept up a 
punishing work schedule and was rarely out of the news. After publishing 
numerous fragments left over from his work on The Red Wheel, he released a 
second volume of his memoirs, Invisible Allies (1995), a sequel to The Oak and 
the Calf, describing his experiences in the west, and then a monumental history 
of the Jews in Russia, Two Hundred Years Together (2001-02). Volume one had 
provoked a bitter controversy, with many accusing Solzhenitsyn of a barely 
concealed anti-Semitism — a charge that had dogged him since the appearance of 
August 1914 — but others defended his courage in tackling such a controversial 
topic, finding it typical of Sozhenitsyn's genius for raising and examining 
"forbidden" subjects.

Solzhenitsyn was essentially an old-fashioned artist working within the 
conventions of the 19th century novel, but the pressure of his extreme subject 
matter, the passion and discipline he brought to his craft, and the exigencies 
of the times helped him to stretch the boundaries of Russian realism and find 
new expressive possibilities for it. He was a truth-teller and moralist of rare 
force, whose dedication to the ideals of freedom and justice took him beyond 
literature into the realms of history, philosophy, religion, politics and 
international affairs. One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich, Matryona's Home, 
The First Circle and Cancer Ward have already entered the pantheon of Russian 
literature. The Oak and the Calf is one of the finest memoirs ever produced by 
a Russian writer, and The Gulag Archipelago is a unique epic, whose full 
literary and historical merit remains to be weighed.

Solzhenitsyn will be remembered in the short term as the bard of the Gulag, a 
fearless tribune who exercised a crucial liberating influence at a decisive 
moment in Soviet history, but in the context of the ages, his works will be 
read so long as readers thirst for the truth about life on this planet. He is 
survived by Natalia Svetlova and their sons.

· Aleksandr Isayevich Solzhenitsyn, writer, born December 11 1918; died August 
3 2008

· This article was amended on Thursday August 7 2008. The above obituary of 
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn said that after the mid-1960s his works were never 
republished while the Soviet regime remained in power. In fact in the 
perestroika period several were republished, including The Gulag Archipelago. 
This has been corrected.
 