
A spate of takeover speculation and optimism about the banking sector helped 
push the FTSE 100 back above 5000 for the first time in just over a week.

J Sainsbury rose 16.1p to 344.3p on continuing talk about a possible bid from 
Qatar, whose investment arm Qatar Holding owns 26% of the supermarket. The 
Qatari-backed Delta Two failed with a 600p a share offer in 2007, but traders 
believe a new move on Sainsbury - which has around £9bn of property assets - 
cannot be ruled out. George Godber, fund manager at Matterley Asset Management 
which holds a small stake in the supermarket, pointed out that the dollar value 
of the company has dropped considerably since the first bid by Qatar, which is 
a dollar-based economy. He also believed a move on Sainsbury seemed to fit in 
with Qatar's recent purchase of a number of UK assets, including Harrod's and 
prime London property.

Elsewhere International Power added 9.3p to 310p on vague talk that France's 
GDF Suez could reopen talks with its UK rival about a possible merger of some 
of their operations.

Bid speculation also surrounded Northumbrian Water, up 8.4p to 318.3p on 
suggestions of interest from a partnership between Abu Dhabi investors and its 
27% shareholder, the Ontario Teachers' Pension Plan.

Lower down the market, takeover talk pushed oil and gas explorer Bowleven 10p 
higher to 144p. ButDana Petroleum dropped 44p to £14.09 on suggestions its 
suitor, Korea National Oil Corporation, may walk away rather than overpaying 
for its target. UBS said:

If the deal does not proceed, we believe Dana's share price could fall back 
to/below our prior target of £13. We do not expect a counterbid above the 
current indicated level [of around £18].

Overall, with a near 150 point rise on Wall Street by the time London closed, 
the FTSE 100 recovered from earlier losses and ended 49.82 points higher at 
5014.82. A positive trading update from US bank State Street Corporation helped 
the financial sector, as did hopes that the European stress tests would succeed 
in calming investors' nerves about the state of bank finances. Joshua Raymond, 
market strategist at City Index, said:

The [market] turnaround was driven mainly through an upbeat statement from US 
bank State Street, which forecast that its second quarter earnings would beat 
market expectations. This has raised optimism that the forthcoming bank 
earnings season in the US will tread a similar path and outperform too.

So Barclays was 17p better at 291.6p, Royal Bank of Scotland rose 1.92p to 
42.83p andLloyds Banking Group added 1.23p to 58.19p.

But Marks & Spencer was the biggest faller in the leading index, down 9.3p at 
343.4p after it adopted a cautious tone about the outlook and analysts at RBS 
began coverage with a sell note and 290p price target. They believe the 
retailer may need to raise £2bn to pay down debt and fund growth, leading to 
either a rights issue or a sale and leaseback of its properties.

As metal prices edged higher, miners recovered from earlier losses, with 
Xstrata adding 3.6p to 909.4p. The company plans a $1.47bn expansion of its 
Tintaya copper mine in Peru to boost output by 60% and extend its life by at 
least 20 years. The development will be at Antapaccay, around 10km from Tintaya 
and will use some of Tintaya's existing infrastructure. Credit Suisse said:

The [next] major copper growth project up for approval is the $4.2bn Las 
Bambas which is expected to begin production in late 2014 and take group 
production to 1.5m tons per annum (60% plus increase on 2009). We expect it to 
receive board approval in the next 3-6 months. Antapaccay and Las Bambas are 
both expected to drive a 30% real cost reduction.

Autonomy, the software search specialist, climbed 16p to £18.48 after it 
announced a US government contract and a licence agreement with Kraft. But KBC 
Peel Hunt said there could be some disappointment the company had not issued an 
upbeat trading statement at the same time. In a sell note analyst Paul Morland 
said:

If Autonomy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation> beats 
numbers for a quarter, they normally announce the fact within five trading days 
of the quarter end (ie today). Realistically, this probably means that if we 
hear nothing tomorrow or the next day, then second quarter consensus has not 
been beaten. We would see this as negative for the shares, because the second 
quarter should be benefiting from a one-off sale of $10m of stock that would 
not have been in consensus. Given this boost to sales, being in line is not 
good enough in our view.

Still with technology, data and design systems group Aveva added 14p to 
£11.99. The company issued an update indicating it was trading in line with 
expectations, but the rise was due more to rival Intergraph being bought for 
$2.125bn by Sweden's Hexagon. George O'Connor at Panmure Gordon said:

Hexagon's acquisition clearly illustrates that the industry sees value in the 
engineering design segment but the take-out valuation is ahead of Aveva's 
current valuation. Nonetheless, Aveva's superior margins, growth and geographic 
exposure are the key shareholder value drivers. Hence our continued buy 
recommendation.

Investec was also positive, saying:

Aveva has long struggled against Intergraph in the US, being its home 
territory. Aveva could exploit Intergraph's European ownership as a way of 
making some inroads into a customer base that may now be more open to 
re-evalute its buying decisions. As with any change of ownership there maybe 
some customer concern (eg, over product commitment, strategy), which Aveva 
could look to exploit on a wider basis, helping it to further its market share 
gains against Intergraph outside the US. This deal will also leaveAveva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/avevagroup> as the leading independent 
CAD/CAM and PLM provider, which could enhance its position as a potential 
target of a larger software player looking to increase its presence in Aveva's 
vertical market place and product offerings.

Finally Halfords was 12p higher at 513.5p as analysts said it could benefit 
from tomorrow's announcement about the future of analogue and digital radio. 
Jonathan Pritchard of Oriel Securities said:

The government will outline its plans for digital switch over for radios 
tomorrow: we think that this will bring Halfords potential as a winner in 
retailing car radios to the fore. It is expected that the analogue signal will 
be switched off in 2015, but the evidence of the TV switch off is that the UK 
population will start to go digital way in advance. Only a small minority of 
the UK's vehicles has a digital radio currently, butHalfords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/halfordsgroup> sells more than half of 
the UK's car radios at present. Halfords' marketing of its "we fit" scheme 
should help ensure that it secures a significant share of the digital radio 
installations required. There are 100m radios in the UK at present and there 
will clearly also be a positive impact on the electricals retailers too. 
Halfords' shares have been under pressure of late but on under 10 times PE, 
with a 10% free cash flow yield, the shares look great value.
 