
Georgios Samaras has signed a three-year contract at Celtic after impressing 
while on loan fromManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> last season. The Greek 
striker cost City £6m when he joined from Heerenveen in January 2006 but he 
failed to find a regular first-team berth.

"Last season was four really enjoyable months for me and great experience to 
play in both the Scottish Premier League and the Champions League," said 
Samaras, who scored six goals in his 21 appearances for Celtic. "I am really 
happy with this move and I think both sides are really happy. I wanted to stay 
here,Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> wanted to keep me 
here and both sides are happy with this transfer."

Samaras also revealed that the opportunity to continue working with Celtic's 
manager Gordon Strachan, rather than test the water with the new City manager 
Mark Hughes, was a major factor in his decision to sign for the Scottish 
champions. "Celtic is one of the best teams in Europe with a very distinguished 
football manager," he said. "His unique way and unconditional desire to see me 
in his squad persuaded me to sign for the club. We all respect each other and 
help each other, there is understanding and tolerance and these are all 
necessary ingredients for the success of a club and for the personal 
development of a football player.

"I didn't want to stay at Manchester City and the door was closed to other 
clubs. I never spoke officially or unofficially to any other clubs, my priority 
was Celtic and I was focused on them. I had a beautiful four months last 
season. I enjoyed the football and the attitude and mentality of the club is 
exactly how I think about football - always attacking."

Samaras was signed by former City manager Stuart Pearce but only scored 12 
goals for the club, a fact that saw him drop out of the pecking order when 
Sven-Goran Eriksson took over the reigns. He made only five appearances under 
Eriksson before moving to Glasgow on loan.

Meanwhile, the Romanian international defender Gabriel Tamas is also set to 
complete a £3.5m move to Celtic after the Bhoys received permission to speak to 
his club,Auxerre <https://www.theguardian.com/football/auxerre>. Tamas won 
plaudits for his performances at Euro 2008 where he played in all three of 
Romania's group games.

"I expected to see Gabriel back at training on Monday after he was given an 
extended break following his hectic summer with Romania," said the Auxerre 
manager Jean Fernandez. "But I got a call first thing from his agent to confirm 
he was on his way to Glasgow to talk to Celtic. If it all goes through then I 
will be delighted for Gabriel. He is a big, big player with huge ambitions in 
the game and Celtic are the right club to match them."

The 24-year-old Tamas already has experience of playing in five different 
European leagues following earlier spells with Dinamo Bucharest, Galatasaray, 
Spartak Moscow and Celta Vigo.
 