
It was entirely fitting that Pat Sanderson should score the winning try for 
Worcester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worcesterrugby>, against his 
former club no less, with six minutes remaining. For the Warriors' captain, who 
drove over from close range after a line-out, was the outstanding player in a 
distinctly mediocre match.

The two sides shared six tries, but it was a staccato affair that featured 
little fluent rugby and plenty of errors. Still, that will not bother 
Worcester, who started as clear second favourites, but played to their 
strengths. In other words, they stuck the ball up their jumpers for long 
periods and suffocated the life out ofHarlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru>. It was not pretty, but good 
for them and good for director of rugby Mike Ruddock, whose side recorded their 
first victory in any competition this season.

Defeat brought an angry response from the Quins' director of rugby, Dean 
Richards, who felt his side did not approach the game in the right manner. 'I 
don't think some of them have understood that every game is as important as the 
next,' he said. 'The best players in the world treat every game the same and 
that is what we have got to be striving for.

'I also felt they underestimated Worcester who have played some fantastic 
rugby this season and not got the rewards they deserved.'

After a cagey opening 10 minutes, Netani Talei, the Worcester No 8 who was 
making his debut for the club following his exploits with Fiji in the World 
Cup, burst through an attempted tackle by Ceri Jones and crossed unopposed 
towards the right corner.

James Brown was unable to add the conversion, whereupon Quins, thanks to no 
small part to the contribution of Chris Hala'ufia, their No 8, rapidly awoke 
from their slumber. The no-nonsense Tongan made a rampaging midfield break from 
the base of the scrum before feeding Will Skinner, who in turn gave Ugo Monye a 
35-metre canter to the line with a beautifully delayed pass.

But Hala'ufia, who is no stranger to the odd bout of controversy, quickly 
blotted his copy-book. After Chris Malone had extended the lead to 10-5 with a 
well struck penalty goal, the South Seas Islander was sent to the cooler for 10 
minutes after a clothes-line tackle on Mark Tucker, the Worcester centre. Brown 
banged over the resultant penalty to reduce the deficit to 10-8.

It got a whole lot worse for the home side when, with Hala'ufia still in the 
bin, the Warriors drove over Aleki Lutui, their hooker, from 15 metres out to 
go into a 15-10 lead. Quins, now with a full complement, responded gamely once 
again and were rewarded when Danny Care broke on the short side following a 
catch-and-drive routine before giving Monye the scoring pass, though a Loki 
Crichton penalty edged the visitors into an 18-17 interval lead.

That was how the score remained until just before the hour, when Marcel 
Garvey, the Worcester wing, compounded a missed tackle by handling so 
conspicuously at the breakdown that he was given a 10-minute compulsory break 
from the fray. From the ensuing line-out, Quins drove infield towards the posts 
before some crisp handling - and in particular a smart pass from Hal Luscombe - 
put Mike Brown in for an unconverted try in the right corner.

Monye came within a fingertip of claiming his hat-trick when he just failed to 
gather a cross-field kick from Malone and it was to prove a vital escape for 
the Warriors. With Sanderson and his fellow Worcester forwards continuing to 
ruck and maul to good effect, Quins found possession to be an increasingly 
elusive commodity as the visiting side deservedly held on by the odd point in 
45.

The Stoop 8,829

HARLEQUINS M Brown; Strettle (Keogh 38), Luscombe, Barry, Monye; Malone 
(capt), Care; Jones, Brooker, Ross (Brooks 75), Spanghero (Kohn 75) Evans, 
Robshaw, Skinner, Hala'ufia (Guest 75)

Tries Monye 2, M Brown Cons Malone 2

Pen Malone WORCESTER Crichton; Delport (Benjamin 71), Rasmussen, Tucker 
(Pennell 60), Garvey; J Brown, Powell; Morris (Windo 69), Lutui (Fortey 61), 
Taumoepeau, Murphy (Bowley 59), Gillies, Wood, Sanderson (capt), Talei

Tries Talei, Lutui, Sanderson Con Crichton

Pens J Brown, Crichton

Referee C White
 