
It was billed as a test event, even if most of the Test players in both teams 
were away preparing for the start of the Six Nations, the first match played at 
Saracens' new home, complete with its artificial surface, and there was one 
conspicuous advantage.

The day before the match, the surface had been covered in snow but the jersey 
of every player was as unstained after the final whistle as it had been at the 
start. "It should save them a bit on cleaning bills," said Phil Davies, the 
Cardiff Blues' director, who is used to seeing players come off the Arms Park 
with the colour of their kit masked by the mud that forms the surface on one 
side of the ground.

Players were able to stay on their feet in contact, the ball stayed dry and 
conducive to handling throughout and there were fewer re-set scrums than there 
are in the average game. But there are some things that are immune to changes 
in the playing surface, not least the tune a referee plays on his whistle and 
the desire of players not to give their opponents an advantage.

The playing surface was dry and mud-free but the match would have been no less 
entertaining had it been played on the largely grassless Arms Park. The first 
half was littered with 18 penalties, most coming at the breakdown where surer 
footing was not enough to prevent players from going off their feet when they 
felt it necessary to slow down opposition possession.

"The pitch was different but good," said the Blues' fly-half, Ceri Sweeney. "I 
played with full studs in my boots and they made the same impression on the 
pitch as if the grass was real. The ball stayed dry, which helped handling, and 
although there was not as much give when you planted your foot into the ground, 
it was in no way dangerous and there is nothing negative I can say about it."

There were no away supporters in the ground because the capacity in what was a 
dummy run before the official opening next month was confined to the home 
club's season-ticket holders. The stadium lies some six miles away from 
Saracens' home in the amateur era in Southgate and the end of 16 years at 
Vicarage Road is not being mourned by the faithful.

"It was a very successful day," said the club's chief executive, Edward 
Griffiths. "One elderly gentleman in a few came up to me with tears in his eyes 
and said he could not believe what had happened. It was like seeing children on 
Christmas morning when supporters were looking to see where their seats were."

The ground holds 10,000 spectators but Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> have not ruled out staging their 
Heineken Cup quarter-final against Ulster in April here, even though they need 
50% extra capacity. "We could, on an exceptional basis, take it to 15,000 by 
adding to the stands at either end of the ground," said the chairman Nigel 
Wray. "Alternatively, we could play at Twickenham. The choice will have to be 
made by the end of next week."

The day was better than the game itself and Saracens' victory, which was far 
less comfortable than it should have been, leaves them in a final-round tussle 
with London Irish for a place in the semi-final and the Exiles will be up to 
their knees in mud at the Arms Park on Friday night with a week of rain 
forecast for Cardiff.

A try looked as unlikely as a mud fight until, just before the interval, the 
Blues launched a counterattack after getting away with a knock-on to thwart a 
Saracens attack. They were awarded a penalty which they chose to kick to touch 
and baffled the opposition with the lineout call to the extent that the 
impressive No8 Robin Copeland had broken into a gallop before anyone tried to 
stop him.

It was a match neither side seemed anxious to win, as if the prize were not 
big enough to get bothered about. Saracens used their dominance up front to 
establish position and set the platform for Nils Mordt to kick four penalties, 
two in each half, but were regularly turned over on the floor.

But they did not look like scoring a try, even when the Blues lost three 
players to the sin-bin after the break and were down to 13 men for a 
four-minute spell, but Saracens finally put together a passing movement with 90 
seconds to go and James Short exploited an overlap to score in the corner and 
take his place in the club's history.

Saracens Goode (Wilson, 55); Maddock (Stanley, 65), Taylor, Powell, Short; 
Mordt, Spencer (Ali, 79); Auterac, George (Smit, 55), Nieto (Du Plessis, 25), 
Sheriff (Fearn, 76), Botha (Hargreaves, 60), Itoje (Melck, 60), Fenton-Wells, 
Jubb.

Try Short. Con Mordt. Pens Mordt 4.

Cardiff Blues Tovey (T Williams 69; Hill, 75); O Williams, Evans, Hewitt, 
Robinson; Sweeney (Davies, 59), Jones (Walker, 71); Hobbs (Trevett, 59), Dacey 
(R Williams, 69), Bourrust (Filise, 59), Paterson, Cook, Hamilton, Watts-Jones 
(Young, 59), Copeland.

Try Copeland. Pens Sweeney, Davies.

Sin-bin Hobbs, 49, Young 68, Hewitt 74.

Referee R Thomas (Wales). Attendance 3,726
 