
With 33 pints of beer inside him, Arthur Seaton fell to the bottom of the 
stairs. It was Saturday night, the best and bingiest time of the week, a 
riotous preamble to the Sabbath, and Arthur picked himself up and drank another 
nine pints while smoking 40 Woodbines before emptying the contents of his 
stomach over Brenda.

"C'mon," said Brenda, "me Jack's awa', so's you can coom back to mine and gi' 
us won." She kissed him like a tigress, picking out the carrots from between 
his teeth. "Doan't wake the kids, mind."

"Meake sum brekfass, love," Arthur said the next morning, as Brenda's kids 
jumped on the bed. "An noah goan' tellun yer Da that I been shaggun' his 
missus." Best be off now. Didn't want to risk Jack finding him.

"Ooota bed, Arthur," his father shouted. "It's half-pust fife and it's teem 
fer worek." Arthur smoked 90 Woodbines and got up. It was a fine life if you 
didn't weaken. He'd been working at the bicycle factory since he was 15 and was 
now earning £14 a week, enough to keep him in beer, cigarettes and sharp suits. 
Some people thought he was a Red, but he couldn't be too bothered with 
politics. His main concern was to drink as much as possible and make sure Jack 
didn't find out he was doing his indoors.

"Wassup?" asked Arthur, as Brenda seemed unusually glum when he slipped his 
hand inside her brassiere.

"Ahrve a bun in mer uffen," she replied. 

"Wassa point a doan a marrud wumman if you aff ter use a Frenchie? Gissa 
quickie and Ahll go roon ter mer Aunt Ada's an get 'elp."

"Yer've bean a bit careless, sun," Aunt Ada laughed, fighting off her 57 
children who were tugging at her apron. "Yer jest wanna give lass an ot baff an 
a paint o gin an sheall be fain." Arthur thanked her cheerily while cheating 23 
of her kids out of 15/- at poker.

"Ah've goat ther villige eejit, Em'ler in ter help," said Brenda. Arthur 
smiled. Maybe he could try giving her a kiss after he'd had another 123 pints. 
He dozed off while smoking 745 Woodbines, before waking to hear Jack's key 
turning in the lock.

"Heus meant ter be on naite shift," Brenda giggled. "Yer'd betta sneak hoam."

Arthur jumped over the fence and walked to the pub. Wasn't that Brenda's 
sister, Winnie, sitting on her own? He bought 33 pints and sat next to her.

"Where us yer huzban?" he asked.

"Doan hus National Service."

"Ah laike yer mooonds of mischief."

"Thun you can cum ome and gi us wun laike you gi me sister wun."

Life was good, very good if you didn't weaken.

"Ah, gotta warn you," said Jack, "Winnie's huzzban noahs yer been shaggun his 
missus and he's promised to get his swaddie friends to beat yers up. He also 
says yer been doan mi Bren, bert ah doan belief un."

Good. Jack really was as stupid as he looked. Arthur went back to the pub to 
drink 2,764 pints and smoke 346 packets of Woodbines. A car knocked him down on 
the way home. He swore loudly, pushed the car over a wall and reset his 17 
broken bones. It was just a normal Saturday night.

"Hello, Arthur," said Brenda. "Unbelievably, Jack has said notten aboot yer 
shaggun meh un Winnie. Sos yer can carry un shaggun erse berth wheneva yer 
want."

"Thass greet. Hoo boot noo un ther cornfield?"

"Noah, luv. Ahve oonly gert faive munits."

"Thun we kun do ait twarce."

Arthur laughed as the police failed to notice he had hidden the air rifle, 
with which he'd shot Mrs Bull, down his trousers. Life as an anti-hero was good 
if you didn't weaken. Those middle-class London writers could go fuck 
themselves. Who said you had to be a poncey French intellectual to be an 
existentialist?

He could tell Brenda had a new fancy man. No matter, he could still do Winnie 
an there was always that new bird Doreen.

"I'll taike yer ter Goose Fair on Thursday," he told Doreen. "I'm not takin 
yer Satday as yer havena poot out yet and ahl be goan wiv Brenda an Winnie."

The cold night air rushed past him as he hurtled down the helter-skelter, 
before landing in a heap at the bottom where two swaddies were waiting. The 
last thing he remembered before he fell unconscious was that he needed a drink.

"Wassup?" said Doreen.

"Not a lot," Arthur said, nursing 91 major fractures and 136 stab wounds. 
"Less go doon pub an haff 6,436 paints."

"Bless," his mother smiled. "Kids these days, jus doan't noah how to handle 
ther drink."

"Wot are yer doan here?" Arthur asked Sam, the black man.

"I dunno," Sam said, "I think I was parachuted in from another story to make a 
point about racism. But let's smoke 23,000 Woodbines anyway."

"In which case, ah'd best git back ter Doreen."

"Oooh, you are a wun Arthur," Doreen giggled. "Bert me Mum laikes yer an if 
yer promisss ter marry me, I'll let yer feel ma tits."

• John Crace's Digested Reads appear in G2 on Tuesdays.
 