
The defence secretary was forced to tell the Commons that British-made cluster 
bombs had been dropped bySaudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> in Yemen, prompting MPs and 
charities to say that the UK should stop supporting the Gulf state’s military 
action.

Sir Michael Fallon <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michael-fallon> said 
that a “limited number” of the controversial BL755 bombs had been used by Saudi 
Arabia, shortly after the Gulf state formally admitted it had deployed the 
weapons in the Yemeni conflict.

Although an international treaty bans the use of cluster bombs, Fallon 
defended Britain’s support for Saudi Arabia and insisted there was no breach of 
international law because they were used against “legitimate military targets”.

The UK is one of 120 countries to have signed the 2008 Ottawa convention on 
cluster munitions, banning their use or assistance with their use. Saudi Arabia 
is not a signatory to the treaty. The munitions pose an indiscriminate risk to 
civilians because they contain dozens of bomblets that can explode long after 
they are dropped.

Fallon made the statement to the House of Commons after the Guardian revealed 
he had known for around a month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/18/uk-cluster-bombs-used-in-yemen-by-saudi-arabia-finds-research>
 about a government analysis pointing to Saudi having used the UK-made bombs. 
Shortly before he spoke, Saudi Arabia made a statement overturning previous 
denials that it had used the weapons and declaring it would not deploy them 
again.

The Scottish National party, which has led calls for the UK to come clean 
about the use of cluster bombs, said it was a “shameful stain on the UK’s 
foreign policy and its relationship with Saudi Arabia, as well as a failure by 
this government to uphold its legal treaty obligations”.


Brendan O’Hara, the SNP defence spokesman, said there were more questions to 
answer and pressed the defence secretary for an independent inquiry into 
violations of international law inYemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>. “Theresa May must live up to her 
pledge to investigate any violations like this,” he said.

Earlier, Angus Robertson, the SNP Westminster leader, called on the prime 
minister to reveal what she knew about the use of the UK-made cluster bombs but 
she declined to answer.

Several Conservative MPs also brought pressure to bear on the government, 
although others backed Fallon’s defence of the military relationship. Tania 
Mathias, MP for Twickenham, called on Fallon to commit the UK to help clear 
bomblets caused by cluster munitions from villages in Yemen.
cluster bomb graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/cluster_bombs/giv-3902ZASRdFScC346/>
Julian Lewis, chair of the Commons defence committee, asked Fallon “whether 
the Saudis have explained why they used these British-supplied weapons, 
presumably in the knowledge it would cause considerable embarrassment to the 
British government”.

Although there are no UK forces engaged in combat in Yemen, Britain is helping 
to train Saudi-led forces with targeting and continues to sell arms to the Gulf 
state despite international concerns about the coalition’s compliance with 
humanitarian law.


Britain had previously accepted Saudi claims that there was no use of UK 
cluster munitions, although the government promised to seek fresh assurances 
last May when Amnesty International published evidence from the ground. Since 
then, ITV News and Sky have released further reports showing UK-made cluster 
bombs in Yemen.

The prime minister of Yemen’s rebel Houthi government has also accused the UK 
of “war crimes” for supplying arms to the Saudi-led coalition, which is 
conducting military operations to restore the previous regime overthrown in 
2015.

Fallon mounted a defence of the UK’s backing for Saudi Arabia and claimed the 
Gulf nation was now considering signing up to the convention on cluster 
munitions. “The Saudis believe that in this particular instance they did 
respect international humanitarian law,” he said.

Fallon repeated Saudi Arabia’s claims that the bombs were used in a border 
area and against “legitimate targets” but was unable to say what would happen 
to the remaining stocks, how many cluster bombs had been used or how many were 
left.

The shadow international development secretary, Kate Osamor, said she hoped 
the Saudi Arabia admission would be “used as part of a war crimes case”, while 
Wayne David, the shadow defence minister, said the weapons had a “toxic legacy 
– lying on battlefields and threatening civilians, especially children, long 
after a conflict has ended”.

David asked the government to commit to carrying out an examination into 
whether current policies needed to be changed and said an independent United 
Nations-led investigation on possible breaches of humanitarian and 
international law in Yemen was needed.

Labour MP Stephen Doughty questioned why the UK should in future trust 
anything Saudi Arabia had been saying; it previously denied that UK-made 
cluster bombs and suggested pictures were the product of manipulation.

Tom Brake, the Liberal Democrat foreign affairs spokesman, said it was a “
shocking admission that takes the UK’s complicity in the bombing of innocent 
civilians in Yemen to a whole new level”.
He added: “It’s about time the government ended its involvement in this 
murderous campaign. Ministers must immediately halt sales of arms to Saudi 
Arabia and any other regimes that breach international humanitarian law.”

Charities and international bodies said the admission increased the case for 
the UK to withdraw support for Saudi Arabia’s role in the war by selling arms 
and providing military training.

The disclosure by Fallon is likely to increase calls for MPs to preserve the 
parliamentary watchdog that scrutinises arms exports controls, which is made up 
of members of four other committees and is under threat of being disbanded.

Ann Clwyd, a Labour member of the watchdog, revealed the foreign affairs 
committee has withdrawn its membership from the body over a row about a leak 
relating a report on Saudi Arabia and Yemen.

The MP for Cynon Valley said: “I’m a member of the foreign affairs select 
committee. That committee, as I understand it, and the chairman is over there, 
has withdrawn from the arms export committee.

“There was considerable pressure, with visits from Saudi Arabian ministers, 
when we were deciding our report on the Yemen. I think it’s right the House 
should know that. There are pressures going on here. In the past, the arms 
export committee was quite strong, it revoked 50 licences in the last 
parliament. It’s regrouping was delayed by six months in this parliament, and 
that I think speaks for itself.”

Kate Allen, the director of Amnesty International UK, said Fallon’s statement 
was not good enough.

“We need to see a total suspension of all weapons sales to Saudi Arabia that 
risk fuelling further atrocities in Yemen,” she said. “This is a very simple 
issue. If the Saudi-led coalition can use British-made cluster munitions 
against Yemeni villages, then we shouldn’t be surprised that it can also bomb 
homes, hospitals, schools and factories in Yemen.

“It’s long overdue for the UK to start honouring its international obligation 
to halt weapons sales where there’s a clear risk that those weapons could be 
used to carry out serious breaches of international humanitarian law.”

Mark Goldring, the chief executive of Oxfam GB, said the promise not to use 
UK-made cluster bombs was a small step but there was a long way to go.

“The government’s international credibility is being mangled under the weight 
of evidence of international humanitarian law violations in Yemen,” he said. 
“It cannot possibly expect to be taken seriously while it continues to ignore 
the breaches of the rules of war and sell arms that fuel this brutal conflict.

“The mounting civilian casualties in Yemen, the millions forced to flee their 
homes, the collapse of health care and the economy, all point to the same 
simple conclusion; it is imperative to end arms sales and military support to 
Saudi Arabia now and bring the warring parties to the negotiating table.”

The UK’s relationship with Saudi Arabia has come under the spotlight in recent 
weeks after Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, made critical remarks 
suggesting the state was engaged in proxy wars against Iran in the Middle East. 
His position was immediately disowned by No 10, which regards Saudi Arabia as 
an essential ally.

Fallon was chosen to given the statement despite the fact that arms exports 
are the policy responsibility of Johnson in the Foreign Office.

The UK and US are supporting the Saudis against the Houthi militia, which is 
aligned with Iran. The Saudi-led air campaign has devastated huge swaths of 
rebel-controlled areas, with high civilian casualties. Last week, the US 
suspended arms sales planned for Saudi Arabia but the UK has refused to follow 
suit.

The UK government has been prevaricating for months on the issue of arms sales 
to Saudi Arabia, its biggest market for weapons sales. It also has a military 
team in place at Saudi headquarters giving advice on the air campaign but the 
Ministry of Defence insisted they did not help with targeting but simply 
advised on whether targets were not in breach of international law.

The cluster bombs, the use of which was first raised by Amnesty International, 
had been dropped between December 2015 and January 2016 near al-Khadra in Yemen.

While the UK had stopped manufacturing cluster bombs in 1989 and signed up to 
a convention in 2008 not to use them, neither Saudi Arabia nor the US has 
signed the convention. Since the UK is an ally of both, and the convention says 
signatories should not aid or abet countries using them, the legal position is 
unclear.

Andrew Smith, a spokesman for the Campaign Against Arms Trade 
<https://www.caat.org.uk/>, said: “The use of UK cluster bombs by Saudi Arabia 
is characteristic of a brutal war and a brutal regime. If Saudi forces are 
prepared to use cluster bombs, then why is the UK continuing to arm and support 
the regime?

“Once a weapon has left these shores, there’s little if any control over where 
and when it will be used and who it will be used against. The UK must act now 
to stop the arms sales and to end its complicity in the humanitarian 
catastrophe that has been unleashed on the Yemeni people.”
 