
A contact lens that magnifies objects at the wink of an eye has been created 
by scientists to help people with impaired vision.


The lens contains an extremely thin telescope that is switched on when the 
wearer winks their right eye and returns to normal when they wink their left 
eye.

Eric Tremblay, a researcher at Switzerland’s École Polytechnique Fédérale de 
Lausanne (EPFL), said the lens could help people with age-related macular 
degeneration (AMD), which leaves them with a blind spot in the centre of their 
vision.

The contact lens magnifies objects by 2.8 times, making road signs, facial 
features and other objects large enough for people with AMD to recognise with 
their peripheral vision.


The device was funded by Darpa, the Pentagon’s research agency, as a means of 
giving soldiers a form of bionic vision.

“They were really interested in supervision, but the reality is more tame than 
that,” said Tremblay at the American Association for the Advancement of 
Science. So far, only five people have tested the latest version.

The device is larger and slightly thicker than a normal contact lens. It 
allows the wearer to see normally by correcting for short or long sight. But 
around the central region is a thin, ring-shaped reflective telescope, which 
expands the perceived size of objects like weak binoculars.

To swap between normal and magnified vision, the wearer dons a pair of liquid 
crystal glasses. By winking, they can switch the glasses electronically to 
polarise light in different planes. The contact lens is designed so that one 
type of polarised light goes through the normal, central part of the lens, 
while the other goes through the magnifying region.

More work is needed before the contact lenses are ready for patients to wear 
regularly. The latest lenses can only be worn for about half an hour, because 
they do not allow enough oxygen to pass through them and into the eye. Tremblay 
said he expected a working version of the contact lenses to be available in two 
years or so.

 