
I'm aware that if you're Scottish this is the last thing you need – someone 
who no longer lives there sticking their oar in. Wouldn't a London-focused 
(I'll be amazed if they leave that bit in) newspaper have at least one other 
number to call? If you're used to the UK media, the referendum may simply seem 
disorientating: a possible redefinition of national identity as something 
inclusive and outgoing, extensive coverage suggesting that somewhere 
regional/foreign has significance – like the US. Or Chipping Norton. And if 
you're a progressive based in England – or as the elegant wit of current 
British political debate would put it, a "leftard Guardianista moron" – you 
don't want to be reminded that a yes vote will cast England into the thirteenth 
circle of hell, ruled over by the zombie corpse of Pinochet.

But, let's talk about the real world. The world where massive paradigm shifts 
can happen without establishment consent and the removal of roughly 10% of an 
electorate wouldn't necessarily plunge the remainder into the End of Days. Why 
would I be voting yes if I could and why would I recommend it to those who can?

Very simply, yes is the progressive vote. It continues the vast expression of 
disillusion that produced a landslide protest vote for Scotland's only 
non-Westminster party. Since then, a novel political situation has seen voters 
go feral – abandoning party rhetoric, holding meetings, researching, expecting 
a democratic vote to effect genuine change. For yes, the referendum continues a 
process of holding Scotland's averagely shoddy politicians to account and hopes 
to build new models of financial practice and social cohesion.

For yes voters – and many no voters – Scotland's public sector isn't bloated: 
it provides incomes that are spent on goods and services, restrains private 
looting and preserves social cohesion. For yes, devolution's ability to 
slightly defendScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> against 
austerity's blood sacrifices suggests more could be achieved. Scotland's 
priorities (more than 300 libraries closed in England and Wales, for example; 
none removed in Scotland) could be defended and enjoyed. It's a vote that 
expresses hope in Scottish voters' ability to produce a country they deserve.

No wonder this has moved David Cameron to tearful dismay. Having your world 
view fundamentally questioned, your sense of self, your financial security – 
it's a shock. In the current UK, it's the kind of shock that's meant to happen 
to the poor, to people with disabilities, to Other People. The yes vote is 
about Other People crying as little as possible. Life will still happen, 
politicians will still be politicians and there's a huge amount of work ahead – 
with land ownership reform and environmental protection high on the list – but 
yes is about possibility, about a positivity with which Scots are not usually 
associated, a moral outrage with which they often are.

Disillusion is often a negative word, but in this case it's literal and 
liberating. The illusions have gone. Establishment representatives approached a 
savvy, philosophical electorate with threats, insults and bungs. They implied 
yes voters don't love their children and suggested Scots working-class women 
have the intellectual capacity of herring. The UK media have often been either 
complicit, or out of touch.

The financial world, so fond of representing its own interests as 
manifestations of natural law, has muddled its narrative, faked figures, played 
the usual shell game. The pillars of establishment control – politics, media, 
finance – and the Omniterror that gives them carte blanche have been examined 
and found unconvincing. In other words, the paradigm has shifted. This could 
and should be good news. Not Paradise Now, but certainly Progress.
 