
Sean Maitland believes Scotland are starting to hit all the right notes 
because they now have the X factor. The wing says the likes of Finn Russell, 
Stuart Hogg and the new centre Huw Jones have the talent to unlock any defence 
after a narrow19-16 win against Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/scotland-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
on Saturday.

Jones in particular has quickly proven himself to be a game‑changer in his 
first two Test starts. He scored a braceagainst Australia last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/scotland-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 and followed up with a sublime assist for Maitland’s try on Saturday.

Scotland steal victory over Argentina thanks to Greig Laidlaw’s late penalty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/scotland-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
Vern Cotter’s men have one final autumn international against Georgia next 
Saturday before they turn their attentions to the RBS Six Nations but Maitland 
is already excited about what lies ahead.

“X‑factor players you would probably call them,” the Saracens back said when 
asked about the likes of Russell, Hogg and Jones. “I think our backline, the 
cohesion and the synergy, is getting top class. Hopefully we’ll have Duncy 
[Duncan Taylor] coming back from injury soon so there is going to be a lot of 
competition in our midfield and our back three as well so it’s only going to be 
healthy for Scottish rugby.

“I’m sure Vern will have some difficult decisions coming up for the Six 
Nations.”

Scotland looked to be in trouble against the Pumas after allowing Matias 
Orlando to score the opening try 10 minutes into the second half.

But Jones produced a stunning off-load to put Maitland in for a touchdown in 
the corner as Scotland hit back immediately.

With the scores locked at 16-16, their captain Greig Laidlaw thought he had 
allowed a crucial win to slip through his grasp when he smashed a penalty 
against the post two minutes from time. But he was given another chance deep 
into stoppage time and made it count as he knocked over the winning kick.

Vern Cotter hails Scotland’s ‘complete performance’ despite late defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/vern-cotter-huw-jones-scotland-australia-autumn-internationals>
Maitland, though, paid tribute to Jones for providing the spark Scotland 
needed. He said: “Our outside backs didn’t really see too much ball. It’s was 
just one of those games where you only get a few chances and Huw made something 
out of nothing. He had the vision to see me on the outside and get me in for a 
little lollipop try so it’s always good to get over the line and score.

“The conditions were really difficult. We always knew it was going to be one 
of those tight games but we hung in there.

“In the first half we lost a lot of ball to the conditions. But we played 
better in the second half.”

The win now moves Cotter’s men above Argentina in the world rankings and up to 
eighth. That could yet prove crucial to Scotland’s 2019 World Cup hopes but it 
also restored belief after they lost to a similarly late kick against the 
Wallabies the week before.

“We’ve talked about the Australia game all week and how we respond to 
setbacks,” said Maitland. “The big thing was not to panic when Argentina 
scored. There was plenty of time on the clock and we were only a converted try 
behind.

“The main thing was that Greig got the boys around him and made sure we just 
started again. “We composed ourselves really well. There are always momentum 
shifts throughout a game and after the try it came back to us.

“We started hammering their line and it’s good to finally come out on the 
other side of a tight game.”

Cotter will likely give some of his fringe men the chance to impress against 
the Georgians at Kilmarnock’s Rugby Park next Saturday. After that, the New 
Zealander will have five games left to shape his Scotland legacy before handing 
over the reins to Gregor Townsend.

And Maitland admits his players are determined to give him a positive 
send-off. “Everyone is a bit gutted that Vern’s leaving but that’s footy,” he 
said.

“It’s a business at the end of the day and we want to leave him on a high. 
We’ve developed our own brand under Vern of how we want to play the game and 
we’re improving game by game.”
 