
One should never treat other people’s tragedy as a lesson, but with so many 
countries at war, I am frequently reminded of how lucky I am, simply because I 
don’t have to bring my family up under fear of attack.

Cities that have been destroyed could one day be rebuilt, but the lives that 
have been lost – and the impact of that loss on the people whose families now 
have gaping holes – cannot be so easily replaced or repaired. And so I say it 
again. I say to myself, despite all my travails, perceived or real: “How lucky 
I am.” And sometimes I make my children say it when we’re driving in the car, 
and they are demanding a burger or a new toy or a trip to a theme park. I say 
the words my mother said to me, when I saw images on the news or in the paper 
of children dying of disease and starvation in Ethiopia: “We have to remember 
how lucky we are.”

The BBC’s excellent reporter Lyse Doucet made an astonishing television 
programme recently about the lives of a few Syrian children and their families 
on both sides of the civil war, and how it has affected them. They gave their 
first-hand accounts of how it feels to lose not just their homes and their 
schools, but members of their family, their community – in fact, all life as 
they once knew it.

Inevitably their stories are bleak. Two girls visited their mother’s grave 
with their father and tidied up the debris left after the site had come under 
further attack from the enemy, making it clear that even the dead cannot rest 
peacefully.

But there was hope, and one thing fascinated me as I watched them attempting 
to live in devastation: the rituals. For most of the children, whether from 
families that supported the Syrian regime or those trying to flee it, their 
daily rituals were the activities that seemed to bring a very abnormal way of 
life back to something more familiar. One girl gave a brief tour of her local 
area to Lyse, and smiled when she mentioned the certain day of every week that 
she was allowed to play with her siblings on a particular patch near her home; 
the marking of a birthday with a homemade cake was something to celebrate, and 
the daily customs associated with their meals and preparing food was 
significant.

Mealtimes, whether they were held in the metal containers provided to Syrian 
refugees as accommodation on the Turkish border, or in a single room used as a 
temporary home for a family of six (where sleeping, eating and playing all take 
place), mealtimes, with whatever food was available, were times to savour. Of 
course, meals don’t always happen, when the simple rituals that once kept 
things going can’t be performed because the food runs out. I don’t want to 
become a parody of a middle class parent by telling my children how their 
leftovers could be eaten by the starving children of some famine-stricken 
region – when I have tried this line, they have offered to send the food there 
themselves. But watching how families continue to eke out an existence in the 
least promising surroundings is a reminder of how resilient human beings are. 
And again, how lucky we are not to have to practice this resilience on a 
day-to-day basis. In a way, the issues that befall us in a safe developed-world 
democracy seem trivial compared to the upheaval that the millions of refugees 
around the world endure. But during any sort of trauma, the rebuilding of a 
life in the aftermath of devastation often relies heavily on ritual. The 
rituals that keep things moving, that keep communities thriving, that keep the 
human heart beating because it still has something to beat for.

Rituals don’t protect you from bombs or disease or poverty. But watching those 
people whose lives have become unbearable and unmanageable through no fault of 
their own perform the simple things that I am lucky enough to take for granted, 
simple things that I often forget to see as rituals at all, makes me feel 
extremely fortunate.

So when I eat around a table, when I read my children their bedtime stories in 
peace, when I take a walk around the block without listening for an air raid 
siren, when I get dressed in the morning in clothes of my own choice, I remind 
myself that these are both rituals and privileges. Not grand ones, or ones that 
often get mentioned. But rituals all the same.
 