
The British houseparty is an institution. How better to mark a special 
occasion, celebrate with the family or, once in a blue moon, gather old friends 
and catch up? If you don't happen to have a grand pile of your own, numerous 
companies will rent you one. Just remember one crucial rule of engagement - the 
organiser bags the best bedroom.

To this end, I am arriving early at Chaffeymoor Grange, near Bourton, (with 
Tim and a bootfull of farm produce for dinner). Unusually, this house is 
bookable for short breaks in high summer. The gardens and a south-facing 
terrace hold the promise of long evenings, lazy chatter and the clink of ice in 
glasses. Unfortunately the weather has other plans.

First things first. We race each other upstairs to inspect all 10 bedrooms 
before the hoi polloi arrives. Instead of one five-star room among several 
also-rans, we find a choice of grand doubles - with garden and countryside 
views, en suites or separate bathrooms across the landing - and attic-y 
bedrooms with roll-top baths up narrow staircases at the rear (the house must 
have been extended over the centuries). What a quandary. We like them all.

The consensus, when everyone arrives (by car, except one, who gets a train 
from London to Gillingham), is that there aren't any duff ones. "They're 
missing a trick by not showing all these lovely rooms on the website," remarks 
someone.

"Anyone for bubbly?" another pipes up, fetching more glasses from the utility 
room, adding, "Imagine all the empties lined up in there after a hen party."

We won't need to imagine it, if those black clouds don't clear. Fat chance of 
tennis or croquet outside, let alone sunbathing.

Ooh, this is a nice kitchen to cook in, I think, basting a couple of chickens. 
"Good music system," says one of the chaps, laying the table. We're foregoing 
the dining room along the hall to sit at rustic benches in a cottagey eating 
area with an open fire, two steps up from the vast kitchen.

The youngest member of the party is tucked up in the cot provided and we don't 
hear a squeak till breakfast (possibly because the house is so big). Tim and I 
manage an early morning, though brief, garden exploration, before raindrops 
become a torrent.

Pity - we're only getting half the deal here, as summer blooms are flattened 
in the downpour. The lawns are slippery and it's pointless crossing a wooden 
bridge over an ornamental lake to a gazebo.

After a laughter-filled pub lunch in deepest Dorset, we are forced to ditch a 
proposed visit to Stourhead and return to Chaffey (as we are affectionately 
calling the house), to read or play board games. Someone even strikes up on the 
piano in the hall. "At least this is a nice house for staying indoors," comes 
one observation.

I'd like a bit more ornament or a few rugs downstairs, but one chap hates 
having to look at other people's knick-knacks. "It just needs more people," he 
says, reminding us that Chaffey can accommodate more than double our number.

It's no hardship to pass another evening indoors, with plentiful food, wine 
and banter. "This is like Christmas in the middle of summer," says one. "Oh 
well," adds another, as the drawing room fire is lit. "If it was boiling hot, 
we'd only have said: 'Wouldn't it be nice to stay here in the winter?'"

After supper, the women settle by the blaze to play cards, as rain lashes 
against mullioned windows. The men push off into the games room to play pool. 
It's like being in Peter's Friends (without the weird stuff). We might even 
book a re-run at Chaffey next year.

· Sleeps up to 24 in 10 bedrooms. Three-night weekend from £3,950-£4,500, two 
nights midweek £2,800, six nights (Friday-Thursday) £5,600-£6,300. Book through
thebigdomain.com <http://www.thebigdomain.com> which specialises in properties 
sleeping 12 or more

Prices were updated on 31 August 2012

sally.shalam@theguardian.com <mailto:sally.shalam@theguardian.com>
 