
The Serious Fraud Office <https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office>
 has closed its criminal investigation into the sale of Autonomy to 
Hewlett-Packard, but the Department of Justice in the US will continue its 
scrutiny of the deal.

The move comes almost a year after British prosecutors opened their 
investigation into the controversial 2011 deal, after receiving a complaint 
from HP. The £7bn transaction has been the subject of lawsuits and 
investigations ever since HP issued a shock $8.8bn (£5.8bn) profits warning in 
November 2012, in large part blaming “serious accounting improprieties, 
disclosure failures and outright misrepresentations at Autonomy”.

The US group has accused “some former members of Autonomy’s management team 
used accounting improprieties, misrepresentations and disclosure failures” to 
inflate the value of the company by more than $5bn.

In a statement on Monday, the SFO said that it had reviewed evidence and 
concluded: “In respect of some aspects of the allegations ... there is 
insufficient evidence for a realistic prosecution.”

But the agency added: “In respect of other aspects ... jurisdiction over the 
investigation has been ceded to the US authorities whose investigation is 
ongoing.” The department of justice and theSecurities and Exchange Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/securities-and-exchange-commission> are 
both pursuing parallel probes in the US.

Lynch, an Irish-born mathematician who founded Autonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation> and led the business 
when it was sold, on Monday welcomed the move by the SFO to, in effect, reject 
some of the allegations made by HP.

“As we have always said, HP’s allegations are false and we are glad that after 
a two year review of the material presented by HP, the SFO has concluded that 
there is not a case to pursue,” he said. “Let’s remember, HP made allegations 
of a $5bn dollar fraud, and presented the case in public as a slam dunk. HP now 
faces serious questions of its own about its conduct in this case and the false 
statements it has made.”

The former Autonomy chief executive did not comment on the SFO’s decision to 
make clear not all allegations had been exhausted.

In cases of alleged fraud involving more than one jurisdiction, prosecutors 
around the world often reach a collective decision on which agency should take 
the lead, and which should provide a supportive role. Some UK-based individuals 
facing fraud allegations have fought hard to have their case dealt with in 
British courts, where sentencing and conviction rates can be lower.

No prosecuting agency has brought charges against Lynch or anyone else in 
relation to the HP allegations.

HP is standing by its complaints to criminal prosecution agencies and on 
Monday night reiterated its determination to pursue the matter through the 
civil courts. “As the SFO made clear, the US authorities are continuing their 
investigation and we continue to cooperate with that investigation,” a 
spokesperson said. “HP remains committed to holding the architects of the 
[alleged] Autonomy fraud accountable.”

A cluster of civil complaints have been building up in the US courts. These 
claims have stalled as a California judge considers settlement proposals HP 
wishes to reach with its shareholders, joining forces to pursue fomer Autonomy 
executives. Civil claims have alleged that Autonomy’s accounts were deeply 
flawed, with sales growth, certain revenues and operating margins all allegedly 
lower than was reported in the books.

Lynch and other former Autonomy executives have consistently denied that 
anything was kept from HP.

HP hopes to settle complaints that include allegations that former executives 
had ignored red flags before signing the ill-fated acquisition of Autonomy. 
Among the warning signs, the claims allege, were concerns about the UK group’s 
finances raised by hedge funds, media and analysts; the large amounts of 
goodwill HP was forced to book on the deal; alleged opposition to the 
transaction from HP’s finance director Catherine Lesjak; and warnings about 
Autonomy’s overvaluation from Oracle chief executive Larry Ellison.
 