
Maura Flores Choque pulls the bundle in her arms closer. A mop of black hair 
is all that is visible of the baby beneath a sling of bright cloth. "Children 
are suffering from intense sun in the day and freezing cold at night," says 
Flores Choque as she suckles her baby. "I am worried about my family and our 
future. Our animals are dying. There's not going to be enough food for the 
whole year."

In the Sangarará district of Peru's Cusco region, the challenges of existing 
3,700 metres above sea level have always been part of daily life. But over the 
past three years extreme weather has made that existence far tougher. Experts 
echo what is being experienced on the ground, with the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC) rating Peru as the country third most vulnerable to 
climate change.

The key reason for this critical status is glacial retreat caused by global 
warming. Seventy-one per cent of the world's tropical glaciers are found in 
Peru, but according to Lonnie Thompson, a glaciologist from Ohio State 
University, they are melting at an alarming rate and have lost 22% of their 
mass in the last 35 years.

Thompson predicts all glaciers above 5,500 metres – almost all those in Peru – 
will be gone by 2015. Speaking at a 2009 climate change forum he explained the 
significance of this, stating: "Glaciers, especially tropical glaciers, are the 
canaries in the coal mine for our global climate system." Children in the 
poorest communities will be the ones most affected by the deteriorating 
situation. According to a 2008 Unicef UK climate change report, they face 
increased risk of malnutrition, disease, poverty, inequality and conflict.

For the indigenous Quechua people like Flores Choque, who have farmed Peru's 
highlands since the 15th century, the warning signs are already very real. 
Their farming calendar, dictated by the weather, has traditionally given their 
lives a steady rhythm. But in the last few years uncharacteristic and 
unpredictable weather – flooding, frosts, hail, intense heat and drought – has 
bombarded it. Crops have continually failed and Save the Children research 
reports production in some areas has fallen as much as 44% since 2007, with 
animal mortality rising from 20% to 48%. Water supply has diminished and the 
health and livelihoods of thousands been jeopardised.

Sangarará obstetrician and health centre manager, Sonia Apaza Maita, witnesses 
daily how living in an already harsh environment on a tightrope of poverty has 
been compounded by the changing weather. Families, she says, are being forced 
to make choices for survival and "often animals and land take priority over 
children."

"The people are becoming poorer and malnutrition is increasing," Apaza Maita 
stresses. "Children don't have defences and their health is suffering. They've 
always had respiratory problems but now they're much worse. For the first time 
we have cases of bronchitis."

Children's education is also being significantly affected. "Children are sick 
or stay home to help their parents," says teacher Stana Flores Huillca, who 
works at José Carlos Mariátegui school, in Marcaconga. "During the winters, 
attendance has dropped 30%." Flores Huillca looks around the classroom, which 
is decorated with posters in the Quechua language. "We're trying to teach 
respect for the environment. Nature, community and mutual help (a concept known 
asayni) are essential in the Quechua culture. It's important for the children 
to identify with that."

Local NGO Kallpa, Save the Children's partner in Peru, has responded by 
setting up programmes that aim to make people proud of their heritage and build 
children's immunity. One project designed to fight child malnutrition supports 
women in raisingcuyes, a type of guinea pig whose meat is high in vitamins 
essential in early childhood and which is traditionally eaten by the Quechua,

Kallpa is also encouraging farmers to use natural fertilisers rather than 
chemicals. Hardy native potatoes are being planted again instead of the white 
potatoes previously grown for export, as well as crops such astarwi, a bean 
that, though tasteless, bursts with nutrition.

According to Ignacia Yépes Ayma, president of women's organisation, Adimsa: 
"Quechua traditions have been diluted over time because of outside influences. 
Over the years we've been made to feel ashamed of our traditions. But now the 
weather is crazy and we see they're essential to our survival."

Last July, temperatures plummeted uncharacteristically to –24C (–11F). The 
World Meteorological Organization (WMO) attributes this to the phenomenon of La 
Niña – extensive cooling of the central and eastern Pacific, which WMO also 
believes were the main cause of the Pakistan floods and China landslide that 
occurred in July 2010. The government of Peru called a state of emergency in 16 
out of 25 regions indicating funds would be available for aid. In the same 
month it announced that flourishing foreign investments have boosted Peru's 
economy by 6% .

However, for the children of the highlands there has been little evidence of 
aid or an economic boost. Miguel Paz, a risk management consultant, thinks lack 
of human resources is an issue. "Our government is desperately cutting costs. 
Consequently there aren't enough staff to monitor and implement policies 
concerning rural communities."

For the rural Quechua of Peru who, according to UN Refugee Agency (UNHCR) 
figures, account for one-third of the country's 29.5 million population, 
cultural marginalisation has long been a part of their history. Most of them 
live in poverty while an elite minority of Spanish descent control political 
power and wealth. Yet at a time when Quechua resilience is being severely 
tested by the environment, looking to their culture is the only thing they can 
do.

The Cusco regional government's health director , Oscar Niño de Guzman, also 
thinks that the relationship between regional and national government is 
flawed. "There's a delay in financial help," he insists. "It [the national 
government] is very slow to co-ordinate assistance."

But in Lima, vice-minister for children, women and social development, Norma 
Añaños Castilla is adamant funds for aid have been provided. However, she says 
"regional governments are not obligated to put these funds aside for 
emergencies."

Añaños Castilla's team is working on Peru's National Plan for 2011–2020. She 
says climate change policies will be included and adds, "local traditions in 
this context are important, but it's regional governments that hold the 
responsibility to respect indigenous traditions."

Back in Sangarará, Flores Chogue finishes feeding her baby and tightens the 
brightly coloured sling around her waist. She knows her community must rely on 
each other and NGOs to rise above discrimination, take action and adapt to the 
changes it is facing. "In the bible it says we must accept change," she 
declares as she begins to walk away. Then she adds: "But I think it's also 
important to plant more trees."

Life after the floods

Grimanesa bounds into the classroom, her face beaming. At 11, she is happy to 
be at school among her friends. But on 25 January 2010, Grimanesa's life as she 
knew it was swept away.

That night severe floods destroyed many villages in the Cusco region of Peru 
including Huacarpay, Grimanesa's village. The schoolgirl's smiles quickly 
dissolve to tears with traumatic memories of the flood. "The water came up 
around me and took my blanket," she says, her voice shaking. "The house fell 
down beside us. The water took everything."

Cusco's regional president, Hugo González Sayán estimates 80,000 people were 
affected by the flood, most of whom lost everything. Many are still living in 
tents with no confirmation of when they will be re-housed. They do not have 
land to fall back on for their livelihoods and their future looks bleak.

Since the floods, which are one of the effects of global warming that 
glaciologist Lonnie Thompson predicted, Grimanesa and her family of eight have 
lived in a small tent with no electricity. It has been hard for the family to 
keep warm in the winter's freezing temperatures and respiratory diseases have 
haunted them.

For the children, the psychological trauma of the flood is still apparent in 
every aspect of school life according to Grimanesa's teacher, Yanet Honor 
Casaperalta, who says: "Concentration levels have gone down significantly, so 
we have changed how we teach and now use more interactive and dynamic methods."

Fears for the future

Nicanor Cuadros seems a quiet man. But as community leader in Sangarará 
district he holds a role regarded with great respect, and climate change is an 
issue he takes very seriously.

"The sun is so intense and lack of water is becoming a problem," says Cuadros. 
"It's all connected with the weather and melting glaciers. Four years ago a 
small river near here ran at eight litres per second. This year it's four 
litres per second. Now there isn't enough water for the community."

Cuadros explains that Quechua people are reintroducing "water-eyes", an 
indigenous method of conserving water that involves building a well to capture 
water flowing from the glaciers.

Despite the action they are taking, the future – especially for the children 
of his community – is playing on Cuadros's mind. Looking out across the arid 
mountains he says in his quiet manner, "We're fearful for our community and 
what will happen next."

Teresa Carpio, director of Save the Children in Peru, is also concerned. She 
says: "Ministry of Health figures show that more than 530 children are known to 
have died from respiratory diseases in the last year." Her worry is that 
figures are much higher and rising because child mortalities in isolated 
highland areas where disease is most widespread are unlikely to have been 
recorded. Carpio feels indigenous children are not getting enough governmental 
attention. "The children," she says, "are last in the queue."

Maeve McClenaghan's assignment in Tanzania was hosted by CBM UK
 