
Work placements and internships

If your degree has included an industry placement, make sure you mention it 
prominently on your CV, treating it as you would any paid experience. This 
means detailing the skills you developed as well as your achievements and the 
impact they had on the organisation. Even if the placement isn't relevant to 
your current career goals, the skills are likely to be transferable. A short 
testimonial from your supervisor or line manager (taken from a reference, for 
example) also serves to emphasise your skills or qualities.

Internships <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/internships> can prove that 
you've been proactive in searching out career opportunities. Treat these as you 
would paid employment: mention what you were hired to do, giving brief details 
about the role, then concentrate on the impact you had with examples of your 
achievements and results.

A section on your CV immediately under your profile or before your education 
section titled something like, "Work placements and internships", helps make 
the most of your experience and shows a potential employer that you bring more 
to the table than just a degree.

Gap year

A gap year can be a great way to build your "soft" skills, as well as to 
develop the type of personality traits that employers like, such as resilience, 
flexibility, or the ability to get on and work with a culturally diverse range 
of people. You have a choice of places to put it on your CV, depending in part 
on what other experience you have. For example, it can go in a "voluntary work" 
section (to replace, or as part of your work history section), or you can list 
it under education (while expanding on the skills you developed in a key skills 
section).

When you write about your gap year, make sure you fully describe the skills 
you developed and aim to make these as relevant as possible to the role you're 
applying for. If you were involved in a group project, quantify the outcome 
(and why it was important to your host community).

Summer "filler" jobs or part-time work

If a gap year isn't for you, taking on a summer job (or part-time work) is 
arguably as useful. You'll be building work experience and demonstrating basic 
work skills, showing that you can hold down a job, arrive on time, be managed, 
etc. Don't underestimate these qualities – they can easily give you the edge 
over candidates without any experience but with an equally good degree.

Don't discount any jobs where you've worked for family members. These are 
still as relevant and interesting to a potential employer and there's no reason 
to specify your family connections on your CV.

Whatever the role, find areas in which you excelled. Were you consistently 
highly rated for customer service or for meeting other performance targets and 
standards? Were you called on to give training or to perform particularly 
tricky tasks? For each role you undertook, try to find at least one achievement 
that will set you apart from others. You should also stress anything that will 
make you stand out from others doing the same job, such as being rehired, 
promoted, or trusted with extra responsibilities.

Don't label these types of jobs as "summer" or "filler" jobs. Instead, include 
them in your work history section, which can go either before or after your 
education – depending on the focus in the job advert itself.

Voluntary work

For some sectors or positions, voluntary work is highly desirable. 
Additionally, if you're trying to fill a gap or get essential experience in the 
sector before making a career move, voluntary work can be a useful stepping 
stone. In these situations, it's worth making your voluntary work section more 
prominent. Otherwise, you can slot it into your work history section – or even 
in your extra-curricular activity section if you volunteered while studying.

Extra-curricular activities

These have the advantage of showing an employer that you're well-rounded and 
that you made the most of your time at university. It's especially useful to 
show examples of leadership or team work, or where you developed organisational 
and communication skills. You can do this through including examples of 
captaincy of sports teams, and committee work in student societies. Even 
saying, "active participation in (student club) membership", along with 
examples of events or initiatives you were involved in, can be useful.

Extra-curricular activities can be placed as a sub-section within your 
education.

Academic achievements and coursework

Don't be shy about mentioning awards or high grades in your profile section. 
"Prize-winning history graduate" or "BA Hons (2:1) in history" sets the scene 
for your CV, and you can then go on to give further details in your education 
section. Consider creating a sub-section titled: "Academic highlights". Adding 
detail (what prize you won, particular mention for coursework) helps to cement 
your status as a high-achieving individual.

Make the most of your coursework too. Rather than just mentioning the main 
areas of your study in your education section, you can create a skills section 
from coursework modules and place it just under your profile, as shown in this
graduate CV 
<http://www.careerdirectors.com/members/tori_winners/2012/Brenda_Bernstein_Grad3rd.pdf>
.

In this example, the "Specialised knowledge" section (which you could also 
call "Trained in") includes various coursework modules, such as "financial 
analysis" or "business strategy". This technique works well if you're applying 
to job boards or CV databases where recruiters search using a keyword filter.

Online or continuous learning post-graduation

If you're currently unemployed, creating a section for ongoing training can 
help you not just to fill gaps but also to reassure employers that you're 
proactive about continuous learning. However, make sure that what you include 
is relevant and useful in some way to your career objectives.

You can also include personal projects in this section, especially those that 
are equipping you with the skills and knowledge to do the job you're applying 
for.

Consider including this information before your work history section or as 
part of your education section.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly update and careers ebook. 
<https://register.theguardian.com/careers/?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 