
My father was a charcutier; my grandfather and great-grandfather too. But when 
I left school in France at 14 my destination was the priesthood. Then I had an 
unfortunate encounter with a smelly old priest. So I gave up my training and I 
went off church for many years, but never off God. God had nothing to do with 
that priest. To blame God would be like blaming food rather than a bad chef or 
waiter.

Since 15, I've always seen food as my life – I've never questioned the fact, 
never wanted to change profession, even on the hardest days. I started in 
pastry as an apprentice because I had a godfather who worked as a chef for 
Wallis, Duchess of Windsor, and advised me "Before you learn to cook, learn 
pastry". But I did not enjoyso much pastry and one Christmas, when I again took 
him a box of chocolates, my godfather said there was a job in England with 
[Viscountess] Nancy Astor. On the work visa it said "scullery boy". The first 
thing I had to learn, my very first task – because I arrived at Cliveden [the 
Astor family mansion] in the bloody shooting season – was to pluck pigeons, 
woodcocks and pheasants without upsetting their skin. By the hundreds. You can 
learn fast.

It's pertinent to ask what I wish I'd known at 18, but the truth is that 
everything has been by mistake, or trial and error – in fact that's my motto. 
That's the way I've taught chefs too – to see the mistake, what the source was, 
what the consequences are, thedetails. But the problem with age is that you can 
lose the sense of wanting to just try. I'm not saying I never try, but you can 
become less adventurous. You're more careful. You can think too much before 
doing something.

When I first came to this country in 1953, it was drastic here. There was 
still rationing, which had ended in France in 1946. Britain was a total 
gastronomic desert. Just Joe Lyon's and a biscuit or swiss roll wrapped up in 
beautiful paper. Nowadays the taxi driver discusses lobster, but back then the 
prerogative of eating well was for the very few.

Seven ages of a chef - all the interviews
Georgina Dent, 20: 'Don't be lazy. Be prepared to give up your life' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/may/18/seven-ages-chef-georgina-dent>
James Lowe, 34: 'I love cooking, but I love restaurants more' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/may/18/seven-ages-chef-james-lowe>
Anna Hansen, 44: 'Happiness is getting out by midnight' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/may/18/seven-ages-chef-anna-hansen>
Giorgio Locatelli, 51: 'Someone can come pissed off and leave happy' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/may/18/seven-ages-chef-giorgio-locatelli>
Rick Stein, 67: 'I did have a determined idea of making money' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/may/18/seven-ages-chef-rick-stein>
Albert Roux, 78: 'I've always seen food as my life' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/may/18/seven-ages-chef-albert-roux>
Joyce Molyneux, 83: 'I would recommend it for women' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/may/18/seven-ages-chef-joyce-molyneux>

I cooked in several households, I worked very hard, testing, testing and 
watching chefs intensely, which you must do especially if he's not talkative, 
like the amazing chef I worked for at the French embassy. He was a genius. To 
test the food of a great chef is work of pleasure. When I became private chef 
to [retail and property magnate] Charles Clore, it was a shock, as I'd 
previously worked for rich people with lots of manners, but there was a lack 
there, especially as it was during the time of his divorce. One learns to 
adjust. And next I was called back to France for national service.

I was next on British "territory" working in the kitchen at the British 
embassy in Paris. The ambassador would call me "The English Boy" because he 
knew I'd worked in England. One day I was called upstairs to meet an elegant 
lady who was looking for a young chef for a British gentleman and I became 
private chef to Major Peter Cazalet [trainer of the Queen Mother's racehorses] 
for eight years.

I think the reason for my success, apart from the food, is that I'm amiable, I 
like to think. I'm doing a deal at the moment in Stratford-upon-Avon with a top 
gentleman – millionaire, classy – and he said: "With all my friends, whenever I 
mention you, they're all full of praise. I've never seen anything like that 
before."

When I opened my first restaurant with [my brother] Michel in 1967 there were 
people I had worked for who had invited marquesses, Douglas Fairbanks Jr, all 
these people, and there was all this publicity and Le Gavroche was crowded 
every night. After three years I bought the investors' shares back from them 
for three times their investment and then, the week after, I sold the stake for 
30 times the amount.

You have to move with the times and with what the people want; you have to 
study what they want and where the market is. As far as the food is concerned 
it's always a moving market and unfortunately it's become fashion. But food is 
not fashion. It's all to do with cooking in the bag. Which I started in my 
country incidentally and unfortunately, losing a couple of million quid. Bags 
of kippers. It's a very useful concept, but it has been abused. You get some 
chefs who cook scallops in a bag – it's mad. You don't cook a scallop in a bag. 
On the other hand if you want to make a stew, if you have a piece of meat you 
want to tenderise, cook it gently at 65-70° and re-warm it in a pan, and it 
relaxes and opens up. That's food.

Now, this is important to say, important to my life – I fell in love with this 
country. And recently I applied for a British passport and just yesterday, in 
fact, I became British.

If I had to redo my life I would try to keep away more from women. It's a fact 
– I was born a womaniser and I adore the company of a woman, and not 
particularly for sex. I'd rather have dinner with a charming lady than a 
charming man. But sometimes it can be taken wrongly. I'm at the moment in an 
ugly situation of divorce which is very unpleasant, which I didn't want it to 
be. But there you are.

The restaurants meant the family and children suffered in my first marriage. 
When Sunday came they had to be quiet while I slept the day. Workwise nowadays, 
I can't stop. It's my character. I'm not saying every day is rosy – no. But I 
try to find a solution to make it rosy.

I wish I'd learned accountancy more, but I sent my son off to a top 
accountancy firm for six months in his early days and I recommend it. And I 
love teaching. To me that's my greatest pleasure. I love to make a donkey into 
a racehorse. I trained Gordon Ramsay, Marco Pierre White, Pierre Koffmann and 
Marcus Wareing. I get a lot of reward from seeing people blooming. I have a 
27-year-old in Scotland who I started off as an apprentice chef and I'm full of 
admiration for his skills and his desire to ask questions.

I spend a lot of time behind a desk in Wandsworth. I'm awake at 4am and up at 
5am – shower, coffee then emails, papers, also I like to read 10 to 20 pages of 
a history book, then I'm here early, working on projects, running restaurants 
around the world. Today there's Le Gavroche's chairman's lunch. After that I'm 
looking for a flat for myself. And later I'm out for a meal in the charming 
company of a 6ft 3in young woman who takes her dogs out in the morning and is a 
lovely young woman, very nice, very good conversation.
 