
Aim

"An act to make new provision about sexual offences 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/Acts/acts2003/ukpga_20030042_en_1#Legislation-Preamble>
, their prevention and the protection of children from harm from other sexual 
acts."

Main provisions

• Clearly defines "consent" as a person consents if she/he agrees by choice 
and has the freedom and capacity to make that choice. Sets out evidential and 
conclusive presumptions about consent.
• Reclassifies rape as the penetration by the penis of somebody's vagina, anus 
or mouth, without consent.
• Creates a new offence of assault by penetration, the insertion of a body 
part or foreign object, such as a bottle, into the anus or vagina without 
consent.
• Redefines sexual assault as an intentional sexual touching without consent. 
It can include touching any part of the body, clothed or unclothed, by either a 
body part or an object.
• Sets the age of a "child" at 18, amending the Protection of Children Act 
1978, and provides a defence for all sexual offences when the child is 16 or 
over and the relationship is consensual.
• Classifies any sexual intercourse with a child aged 12 or younger as rape.
• Establishes a raft of new criminal offences including crimes involving 
familial sexual abuse, offences involving adult relatives and offences designed 
to give protection to persons with a mental disorder.
• Re-enacts the offences of abuse of a position of trust towards a child. This 
prohibits sexual contact between adults and children under 18 in schools, 
colleges and residential care.
• Creates a number of offences related to "intent" including a new offence 
targeting drinks spiking.
• Makes it an offence to give someone a substance without their consent and 
with the intention of stupefying or overpowering them so that any kind of 
sexual activity can take place. Two other "intent" offences cover situations 
where a person commits any offence with the intention of committing a sexual 
offence or where a person is a trespasser, he intends to commit a sexual 
offence on the premises and he knows that he is a trespasser,
• Creates several new initiatives to protect children and the general public 
from sex offenders. The act allows dual criminality, meaning notification 
orders can be extended to those convicted abroad, and creates a civil order, 
the sexual offences prevention order, which combines sex offender orders (Crime 
and Disorder Act 1998 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/jan/13/crime-disorder-act>
) and restraining orders (Sex Offenders Act 1997).
• Requires convicted sex offenders to register with their local police every 
year instead of every five years.
• Introduces risk of sexual harm orders, specifically designed to protect 
children, and also creates foreign travel orders, which can be used to prevent 
an offender with a conviction for a sex offence against a child from travelling 
to countries where he is at risk of abusing children.
• A new offence of voyeurism relating to those who observe others doing 
private acts without their knowledge for sexual gratification.
• Decriminalises a series of sexual acts including the offences of gross 
indecency, buggery and soliciting by men (cruising).
• Makes necrophilia and bestiality crimes.

Background

This substantial reform of the law on sex offences was designed to reflect 
changes in social attitudes. The government expressed the belief that existing 
laws, including rape laws, were out of date and the act was designed to reform 
rape laws, and to offer greater protection to children and vulnerable adults.

Describing the act, the home secretary, David Blunkett, said 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/1460768/Britain-casts-off-Victorian-era-sex-laws.html>
: "Until now our sex offences laws were based on the Victorian era – their 
values and the world they lived in. Change was needed to reflect the values of 
today's society and offer protection against crimes which did not exist 
generations ago."

Two review teams, who were directed by the government to examine possible 
reforms, published their recommendations in two documents:Review of Part 1 
<http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/documents/part-1-sex-offenders-act-191001?view=Binary 
(2001> of the Sex Offenders Act 1997 and Setting the Boundaries 
<http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/documents/vol1main.pdf?view=Binary>[pdf]. 
Following a public consultation, the government released a white paper,
Protecting the Public 
<http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/documents/protecting-the-public.pdf>[pdf], which 
detailed the government's proposed reforms.

The new act makes consent paramount when sexual acts occur between adults. It 
enshrines in law a clear definition of consent as well as new responsibilities 
– defendants must show they had reasonable grounds to believe that their sexual 
partner consented.

This reverses previous legal guidelines, which only required a defendant to 
prove they honestly believed consent had been given – however unreasonable 
their belief was – to ensure an acquittal. The new law was intended to ensure 
that "if someone is threatened with immediate violence, was drugged by their 
attacker so as to be incapable of making a decision about consent, or was 
unconscious or asleep, it is extremely unlikely that they have the freedom to 
consent... the act clearly sets down circumstances like these where the courts 
will start from the presumption that the victim did not consent."

The act, which was drawn up amid public outrage over the Sarah Payne case – a 
convicted paedophile was convicted for kidnapping and murdering the 
eight-year-old – also introduces tougher sentences for child sex offenders. It 
seeks to ensure harsher sentences on repeat offenders and to tighten the 
supervision of convicted sex offenders living in the community. And it tackles 
new threats, like sex trafficking and paedophiles grooming children on the 
internet, by introducing civil and criminal measures.

Criticism

Amid claims the act could outlaw teenagers snogging, the government argued 
that it set the age of consent at 16 to recognise that children can and do 
abuse and exploit other children. They argued the accompanyingguidance notes 
<http://www.cps.gov.uk/legal/s_to_u/sexual_offences_act> make clear that it is 
highly unlikely young people would be prosecuted for consensual acts. The 
guidance to prosecutors issued by Crown Prosecution Service sets out the 
criteria they should consider when deciding whether or not it is in the public 
interest to bring a prosecution.

Children's campaigners argue that there is no recognition of the concept of 
actual consent, so the act could criminalise consensual sexual activity between 
children. The act deems that a child under the age of 13 is incapable of giving 
legal consent to any form of sexual activity. Liberty argued the act has the 
potential to "criminalises the widely occurring and harmless sexual activity" 
among 13 – 16 year olds.

Professor Nicola Lacey of the London School of Economics suggested the Home 
Office used the act for symbolic impact, "to say that it's not a good thing  
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/magazine/3672591.stm>for kids to be having sex."

Terri Dowty, from Action on Rights for Children <http://www.archrights.org.uk>
, argued that: "Laws should mean what they say. It's astonishing that the 
government could consider legislation with the prior intent of issuing guidance 
to countermand it. I worry about the message it sends to young people – it 
seems to say that sometimes the law means what it says and sometimes it 
doesn't."
 