
Shelter's trustees may not publicly admit that 2002 has been an annus 
horribilis but they would certainly agree that it has been an eventful year.

Here are some of the highs and lows of the year so far

Lows

February
 After eight months of detailed merger negotiations with the rough sleepers 
charity Crisis the talks collapse. Shelter barely conceals its annoyance with 
Crisis' board, which pulls out of the talks at the last minute. Shelter's 
chairman Peter Robson expresses his "disappointment" and says Shelter "still 
believes in the vision of a single national homelessness charity".

May
 Shelter announces the "retirement" of Chris Holmes, its director of the past 
seven years.

July
 Chris Holmes breaks his confidentiality agreement about the nature of his 
departure by revealing all the acrimonious details to the Guardian. He says he 
was forced to resign over allegations of alcohol abuse and also alleges that 
Shelter breached its own disciplinary rules in the way in which it handled his 
dismissal.

September
 Shelter's founder Des Wilson says the charity has lost its edge and calls for 
a "New Shelter" because he says the old one is no longer doing what is required.

Highs

March
 After meeting the government's target of reducing the number of rough 
sleepers by two-thirds the homelessness tsar and former Shelter deputy director 
Louise Casey announces a new strategy to prevent homelessness. The strategy 
includes a target for abolishing the use of bed and breakfast hotels for 
families following successful lobbying by Shelter and others.

June
 The Homelessness <https://www.theguardian.com/society/homelessness> Act 2002 
comes into force restoring the duty on councils to provide settled 
accommodation for homeless people. Much of the detail of the act, which also 
included a duty for councils to prevent homelessness, was drafted by Shelter's 
legal team.

July
 The government reveals it is considering changes to the right-to-buy rules to 
protect the dwindling supply of affordable homes. Earlier in the month Shelter 
had warned a committee of MPs that councils' homes were being lost to the right 
to buy at almost three times the rate that new ones were being built.

October
 Shelter appoints Adam Sampson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/adamsampson> as its new director.
 