
Recently, in honour of this week's release of the Straw Dogs remake, an 
interviewer from Film 2011 listened to me indulgently while I rambled on the 
subject of 1971 And All That.

1971 was the year of highly controversial and violent movies like Sam 
Peckinpah's originalStraw Dogs 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/83410/straw-dogs> and Kubrick's A 
Clockwork Orange <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/75644/clockwork.orange>. 
It was also the year ofDirty Harry 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/97011/dirty-harry>, and I have myself 
blogged about William Friedkin's 1971 filmThe French Connection 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2011/jul/14/french-connection>, a 
pretty brutal film positively drenched in 1971-ness. What was it that made the 
year 1971 the annus mirabilis (or horribilis) of shock cinema in Britain? It 
could have been something to do with the fact that this was the year of John 
Trevelyan's retirement as a markedly liberal director of the then British Board 
of Film Censors. Trevelyan had been encouraging boundary-pushing for 13 years, 
and these shocking films were, just possibly, the latest to come through a 
pipeline he had helped to create. Or it could be that 1971 saw the fruits of 
film-makers being inspired, or challenged, by radical developments in the 
theatre: by, say, Edward Bond's shocking 1965 play Saved, at the Royal Court. 
Or it could simply be that the 60s spirit of freedom was acquiring a sour, 
confrontational tinge.

I found myself this weekend watching a very "1971" film which is hardly ever 
mentioned in this context, though perhaps it should be: 10 Rillington Place, 
the true story of the West London serial killer John Reginald Christie, a 
mousy, bald, middle-aged man who convinced women he had medical expertise and 
murdered them with a gas kit which he told them was an inhaler. Richard 
Attenborough gives a superb performance as Christie and John Hurt is equally 
outstanding as his upstairs neighbour Timothy Evans – resembling, as Evans's 
poor young wife ventures to remark, a young Gregory Peck. The director was the 
American Richard Fleischer, who had made two other films about serial killers, 
Compulsion (1959) and The Boston Strangler (1968).

But this is not supposed to be a pulp shocker. One of Christie's crimes was 
famously blamed on Evans who in 1950 was hanged in the miscarriage of justice 
which inspired, very materially, the abolition of the death penalty in this 
country. 10 Rillington Place was presented to the public in a very serious and 
high-minded context: it was based on the authoritative book by the 
anti-capital-punishment campaigner Ludovic Kennedy, who served as an adviser on 
the film. Cinemagoers were certainly not invited to think of the film as 
anything like the brilliantly sinister rococo fantasy Peeping Tom, which 10 
years earlier had destroyed the career of Michael Powell.

So this was a film based on a real case, and screenwriter Clive Exton had 
exerted himself to base his dialogue, as far as possible, on what had been 
established in court. Yet watched 40 years on, it is striking how little the 
film concerns itself with legal technicalities or the moral and political 
debate. Another sort of film might have devoted fully 50% of its running time 
to the aftermath of the Evans case, to campaigns, to the arguments, to the 
achievement of some sort of closure.

But actually, Fleischer's film simply takes the audiences through the horribly 
sordid, and skin-crawlingly real home life of Reginald Christie, up to the 
moment of his final arrest. Its lack of sensationalism is, of course, to 
counter any claims of crassness, and to give it a quasi-documentary 
seriousness, and yet it is its very quietness which makes it shocking. If it 
were not so ostensibly serious, you might well mistake this film for an 
inspired, deadpan psycho-exploitation picture. Peeping Tom is sometimes called 
the "very British Psycho" – but 10 Rillington Place, in all its shabby reality, 
is a rival contender.

It is still intensely nasty in its intimately English way, perhaps because it 
is quite explicit and coolly sordid and because we still can't quite believe 
that nice Richard Attenborough is going to appear in so chilling a guise, 
despite the fact that this is one of his most famous acting roles.

This is perhaps Britain's last real kitchen-sink movie, conjuring a world of 
people making each other nice cups of tea in rundown kitchens in rundown bits 
of town, whispering about pregnancies and what to do about them, where kids 
played noisily out in the street and where curtain-twitching folk were 
intensely aware of other curtain-twitchers' disapproval. The film achieves a 
kind of petit-bourgeois nightmare when Fleischer cuts from Evans's muddled and 
panicky confession, straight to a scene showing three or four policemen hauling 
up the manhole outside No 10 Rillington Place where the body is supposed to be 
hidden – with Christie peering from the window and the inevitable crowd of kids 
gawping.

Christie's connection with Evans arises when Evans's wife Beryl (played by 
Judy Geeson) confides to this nauseating, ingratiating man that she is pregnant 
again and hardly knows what to do. Christie claims to have medical knowledge 
arising (somehow) from his war service as a special constable and says that he 
can perform a "termination". Having warned Evans of a "1 in 10" danger of 
death, Christie persuades Beryl that they can go ahead while Evans is out at 
work; it is, of course, merely a twisted pretext for murder.

When Evans comes home, a solemn Christie tells the poor, muddled man that the 
worst has happened, and that now they will have to bury the body secretly, and 
then Evans must leave London. But what of their baby, little Geraldine? 
Christie assures him that he can take her to be looked after by a kindly 
childless couple of his acquaintance in Acton – East Acton, actually, he 
corrects himself with fastidious exactitude.

A quite extraordinary amount of this film takes place in dank, crepuscular 
darkness, the nasty, manky darkness of an unlit London house. When the scene 
changes to a bright, sunlit street outside (there are very few outdoor 
locations) there is something unreal about it. I was reminded of the "outdoor" 
scenes in Alexander Mackendrick's 1955 Ealing comedy The Ladykillers: the 
criminals, like vampires, are not at home in sunlight, happier in some gloomy 
rooming house.

Again, what is so striking is the film's unconcern with the legal or technical 
debate concerning the death penalty itself, the issue which guarantees the 
film's immunity from moralistic objection. It actually looks more modern than 
that: a chillingly affectless series of days in the life of a psychopathic 
serial killer, whose crimes are portrayed without any great melodrama.

It could be said to be an influence on Mike Newell's Dance With a Stranger 
(1985) and it is striking that the pub singalong scene is an important, ambient 
moment, as in the movies of Terence Davies, although it can hardly be said to 
be an influence. The film looks a little like Mike Leigh's Vera Drake, with its 
nasty little homemade "kit" including a length of rubber gas-pipe.

Either way, 10 Rillington Place deserves its place in the shock-horror history 
of 1971: but I hope there is no plan to remake it.
 