
Q Following my daughter's recent marriage and our decision to move house, I am 
struggling to meet my monthly interest payments on a personal loan. I have read 
about the recent bonus cuts at insurance companies and I was wondering whether 
it would be worth cashing in my with-profits endowment and using the money to 
pay off my debts. The endowment policy is about ten years old, and the cash I 
could raise would just about pay for all my outstanding debts.
SP

A There are a couple of issues you need to sort out before you make any 
decisions. First of all, could you have been miss-sold this endowment policy? 
Have a look at the information on the Financial Services Authoritywebsite 
<http://www.fsa.gov.uk> and check whether you are in line for possible 
compensation. You may be owed some money from the company that sold you the 
policy. It is better to seek compensation while you are still holding the 
policy.

Financial advisers are divided on the subject of the future prospects for 
with-profits funds. Although most believe that the stock market will recover in 
time, some warn that it will take years for the with-profits funds to build up 
enough reserves to start paying out decent bonuses again.

Nevertheless, while endowments have not necessarily performed well in recent 
years, you may have paid a lot of the management fees in the early years. These 
up-front charges may actually reduce during the life of the policy. It would be 
a good idea to check, as you may have already taken much of the pain if your 
policy has been in existence for a number of years.

Bonus cuts have certainly been in the news recently with some of the major 
companies like Standard Life and Royal & SunAlliance reducing the maturity 
payments for some of their funds.

A number of financial advisers have been suggesting that investors move their 
funds to provider offering a better deal. Whether or not you decide to do this 
depends on which company your endowment is with. If you are unhappy with the 
performance of your with-profits fund you may be better advised to transfer 
your money to a different insurance company, rather than cashing in your policy.

You would probably benefit from some sound independent financial advice. As a 
general rule, it is not a good idea to cash in a long-term investment. In the 
early years the effects of up-front charges mean you may not even get back what 
you put in. Also, insurance companies are imposing exit penalties at the moment 
to discourage people from cashing in, so it is not the ideal time to leave.

The best option is to talk to the adviser who sold you the policy, find out 
the transfer and surrender value, and then make your decision from there. If 
you don't have any luck with this approach, then seek specific individual 
advice relating to your policy from an independent financial adviser.
 