
Q My husband has just lost his job and although he will get some redundancy 
money he does not have any alternatives on the horizon and it is a bad time of 
year to be looking for new work. I am torn between using some of the money to 
have a good Christmas to cheer him up and worrying about how to pay the 
mortgage. I have a part-time job but the rest of the week I look after our two 
children. Any advice would be gratefully received.

SS 

A When someone is made redundant unexpectedly it can be a terrible shock. It 
could take a while for your husband to come to terms with the way he lost his 
job. It is important that you both confront your financial worries and take 
steps to organise your money before you get into debt.

Do not fall into the trap of spending in order to cheer your husband up - you 
will both sleep better at night if you have organised your finances. First set 
out your priorities - ie the bills you must pay like the mortgage, council tax 
and utility bills. Will your part-time job cover them, and if not, how much of 
your husband's redundancy money will be required?

Thinking about how long he is likely to be out of a job will help you plan for 
the future. If he will be back at work in a couple of months you need a 
short-term budget to tide you over. If, however, you think it could be six 
months or more before he finds a job, you will need to economise and budget 
more strictly. Cut down on eating out, drinks down the pub and take-away meals. 
Speak to your mortgage company or bank if you are getting into difficulties. Be 
very careful not to start using your credit cards to buy essentials like food, 
as this will lead to a spiral of debt.

Check whether you qualify for any state help or benefits and don't fall for 
advertisements offering expensive loans. If you find you are still struggling, 
contact your local Citizens Advice Bureau and make an appointment to see a 
money advice specialist, who will help you draw up a budget and answer all of 
your debt questions.
 