
Q I am 42 years old and in 1991 I bought an £80,000 house with an endowment 
mortgage of £33,000 over 25 years and a £40,000 equity share from my local 
government employer.

I have only recently been able to make significant repayments of the debt and 
have reduced the mortgage debt to £23,000. The debt could possibly be repaid 
completely in two or three years time. I have an income of £27,000, we receive 
two child benefit payments and my wife gets Disability Living Allowance, which 
adds up to a total of about £500 month.

The equity share can be bought in chunks of 5%. I pay rent of £130 a month for 
the equity share. The share is now double what it would have been when provided 
for me.

Our three-bed terraced home is probably now valued at £160,000. Ideally we 
would move to a larger home but the mortgage of up to £120,000+ looks 
unsustainable.

My strategy is to carry on repaying the mortgage first and then to save to 
repay the equity share element. If house prices fall then it will be much 
easier for me to buy out the equity share, the fact that they have risen so 
much has got me in a trap as the scheme is tied to my employment (fortunately I 
am quite happy where I work but it would always be nice to have the option of 
working elsewhere).

I would be grateful for any financial or other advice that you would be able 
to give me.TH

A It sounds as though you are part of a Share Ownership scheme, where you buy 
a proportion of a property with an ordinary mortgage and pay a subsidised rent 
on the remainder. As the value of the property grows, so too does the 
proportion which you need to buy back in order to own your home outright.

Your situation poses a number of questions. Firstly, how is your endowment 
mortgage performing? You may have received a letter from your provider giving 
an indication of whether it is on target to pay back the loan in full. Since 
you bought the house in 1991 the endowment plan probably has more than ten 
years still to run, so you won't be able to use the maturing plan yet to pay 
off the mortgage element in full.

Secondly, does your local government employer manage the scheme, or is it run 
by a housing association? If it is connected to your work, you may be able to 
obtain specialist advice from your union representative on the best way 
forward. Alternatively, your union may be able to recommend financial advisers 
who are skilled in dealing with Shared Ownership schemes.

You are quite right that house prices have risen very sharply and many 
economists believe that they are unlikely to continue to do so and may start to 
fall this year. You would be well advised to take some specialist advice on the 
scheme that you belong to and the performance of your endowment mortgage before 
you decide to move.

Unison local government union <http://www.unison.org.uk/localgov/index.asp>:

UNISON direct: 0845 355 0845 

Freephone textphone: 0800 0 967 968 

Lines are open 6am-midnight Monday-Friday and 9am-4pm Saturdays 
 