
Q I am 30 years old and live with my girlfriend and son in a rented council 
house. The property is in her name along with all domestic utilities as she 
lived here two years before I moved in.

Over the past 12 months I have fallen behind on all payments to all of my 
creditors. When I do pay it barely covers the minimum necessary and I get 
charge late payment fees. I still have outstanding debts of around £19,000 and 
these are growing due to charges. I have no assets and I recently had to leave 
work, which means that my only income is £53.95 a week.

I am now wondering whether my only option is to declare myself bankrupt as 
even when I was working and receiving an annual income of £14,000 I struggled 
to keep up with my payments.

I did contact my creditors and make arrangements but have been unable to stick 
to them. My partner has tried to help me out but she has her own bills to pay 
and has recently fallen behind on rent and council tax payments in trying to 
help me.

My main worry is that I have a television and cooker on hire purchase. Would I 
lose these if I went bankrupt or could these be signed over to my partner?

I have recently cancelled my Sky, AOL internet access and BT phoneline 
agreements and I am also in the process of returning my car to the finance 
company as I have been unable to pay for it for the last 4 months.

My other debts are two bank loans, three credit cards and a store card which 
have all been returned to the creditors. A total of £5,000 of the £19,000 I owe 
should be cancelled once I have returned the car as I have had it for over half 
of the HP agreement.

I would be grateful for some advice.

Mark

A It may be that bankruptcy is your best option as you don't own a house and 
you have no assets. However, it is a drastic option and will affect your credit 
rating and possibly your ability to get a mortgage for many years to come. 
Therefore, it is important for you to get individual advice before you make 
such a key decision.

It sounds as though your partner is also struggling with her own debts because 
she is trying to help you. Although you have done your best to sort matters out 
by cancelling your satellite television subscription and telephone, and 
contacting your credit card companies, you are still unable to keep up with 
your repayments.

This suggests that what you really need advice on is working out a realistic 
budget and repayment schedule that you will be able to keep to in the future.

There are a number of organisations that can help you. You can organise an 
appointment with your local Citizens Advice Bureau money expert who will help 
you draw up a list of your priority bills and commitments and help you write to 
your loan and credit card companies to organise a freeze on interest repayments.

A good option is to use Payplan, a free debt counselling service set up by the 
National Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux. Payplan is paid for by the 
credit industry and there are no fees to pay, so 100% of your repayments go 
towards reducing your debts (unlike some consolidation loan plans).

You'll need to make a list of all your creditors and any maintenance payments 
you receive, then an adviser will help you work out how much you can afford to 
pay each month. Once this is in place, you make a monthly payment to Payplan, 
and they forward the money onto the relevant creditors.

You can also talk to the advisers at National Debtline who will negotiate with 
your creditors on your behalf in order to sort out your debts for you. Both 
organisations will give free advice, and don't charge a fee for sorting out 
your budgets.

Don't be tempted to borrow any more money to get out of difficulties, or to go 
for a consolidation loan. Your priority is to work out how much you can afford 
each month, and stick to it. Only then will you be able to start making 
headway. If you do decide bankruptcy is the option, then the organisations 
below will help you weigh up the pros and cons.

· National Debtline: 0808 808 4000

· Citizens Advice Bureaux: www.nacab.org.uk <http://www.nacab.org.uk/>

· For more information, email Payplan at help@payplan.com 
<mailto:help@payplan.com> or call on 0800 085 4298 (freephone).
 