
Q I hope you can help with this dilemma. My husband lost his job last week and 
now wants me to cash in my long-term savings plan to pay off all credit card 
debts and refinance our car.

He wants to go to tech school and charge the fees for school. I want him to 
get his degree but am not ready to pay off credit card debt and charge it back 
up again. I think this is a bad move. Your advice would be appreciated!

BN

A It does sound like a bad move, and there are a couple of things you and your 
husband need to establish first before you make any hasty financial decisions.

Has your husband got any form of monetary pay-off or redundancy as a result of 
him losing his job? If so, he could use that lump sum to pay off any 
outstanding credit card debt.

Secondly, although he is thinking of going back to school to get a degree, it 
doesn't sound as though he has sat down and budgeted for it properly. How many 
years will he be studying, and how soon after he graduates will he be able to 
get a new job? Making a career change is often a very positive step, but he may 
not need to retrain.

David Thomas, chief executive of CRAC, the Careers Research and Advisory 
Centre has this advice: "Once you've decided on a career change, don't rush 
into retraining - you may not need it. When people think about retraining, they 
often think about very specific and narrow skills, whereas your own personal 
skill set is much more important.

"First do your preparation and work out your motivations and values, and the 
set of skills which you have personally developed and which you will take from 
job to job. Where might you need to develop these? Think carefully about the 
type of retraining you might do - try to choose an industry where the skills 
will be in demand long-term. The more specific the training, the greater the 
danger that it will become quickly outdated."

Your husband may be better taking a part-time job or looking for a new 
full-time post and then studying in the evenings.

Thirdly, are you able to manage without your car? If so, you could sell it, 
which would immediately reduce your monthly outgoings. If you are on a 
hire-purchase agreement, check whether you will have to pay a penalty to pay it 
off early.

It would be very unwise to raid your long-term savings account to pay off 
short-term debts like credit card bills or finance retraining. If you are 
having problems meeting your monthly payments, then write to the card companies 
explaining what has happened, and asking them to give you more time to pay back 
your debts. Your priority is to ensure that you don't lose your home.

Your husband is probably feeling confused and concerned right now, after 
losing his job. You can help him by persuading him to think carefully about 
what he really wants from the future, and not to rush into retraining or 
spending your retirement money without thinking things through properly.
 