
The field is planted with shoulder-high rows of corn and is so close to Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> that the tall concrete boundary wall 
is well within sight, along with the Israeli military jeeps on their regular 
patrols into northern Gaza.

For Abid Razzaq Ouda, 40, who farms this land, this brings its own 
complications. His field is sometimes used by Palestinian militants to fire 
rockets or mortars into southern Israel and the Israeli military mounts so many 
operations here that the farmers dare not risk going out at night for fear of 
being hit.

Last month, after militants used the field for a rocket attack, the Israeli 
military sent in armoured bulldozers which carved sweeping paths through his 
corn, tearing down the crops and wrecking the extensive plastic irrigation 
pipes. Then a bulldozer demolished the cement hut housing the water pump in the 
corner of the field. Ouda, still heavily in debt from the shortfall in his 
earlier strawberry crop, has no money to repair the pump and so this season's 
half-matured corn is already lost.

He is critical of the Israelis and of the militants too, an indication that 
there is considerable, and perhaps growing, frustration acrossGaza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gaza> with the armed groups who continue 
their attacks on Israel. "The fighters are very bad for us," Ouda said. "Many 
times we have tried to talk to them but they just threaten us."

Once Ouda and his neighbouring farmers tried to stop a militant who stood in 
their field to film a nearby attack. They seized his camera and drove him away. 
Minutes later a large group of gunmen returned, took back the camera and warned 
the farmers not to interfere again. "It was a very bad day for us," said Ouda. 
"Unfortunately the fighters do understand the effect they are having on us, but 
they ignore it. They are very young, the ones who come to fight, but they get 
paid for it."

Even without the militants and the Israeli raids, it is a very bad time to be 
a farmer in Gaza. The agricultural industry is a pillar of the Gazan economy 
but one that was reliant on exports and on the import of seeds, fertilizers, 
pesticides and packaging materials. However, Israel has mounted an 
ever-tightening economic blockade of Gaza, the land it calls a "hostile 
territory". All exports have been halted and imports are restricted to a 
limited supply of humanitarian goods.

The World Bank estimates that, as a direct result of the closures, Gaza's two 
biggest farming export industries - carnations and strawberries - saw heavy 
losses last year of more than $6m (£3m) each. Now a fuel shortage means many 
agricultural pumps and wells are no longer working, leaving crops to wither and 
forcing up the price of food (the price of tomatoes in Gaza City has risen 
six-fold).

Last September, Ouda planted his fields with strawberries, taking a chance 
that the crossings might re-open and allow his crop to earn a handsome return. 
It was a costly gamble: the crossings remained shut and when they were briefly 
opened for a special strawberry export to Europe there were such delays that 
the crop wilted and he made a loss on the sale. On the local market, 
strawberries sell for just a tenth of their export price, with the result that 
Ouda still owes $30,000 from his strawberry season.

As he speaks, a buyer arrives with a horse and cart to negotiate a price to 
cut down what is left of the corn crop to use as animal fodder. After several 
minutes of protracted argument, Ouda sells the crop for 400 shekels (£60), a 
crop that he calculates cost him more than 3,000 shekels to plant and maintain.

"I'm not happy about that but I want to be done with it," he said. It is the 
first time in a lifetime of farming that he has ever sold a crop for fodder. 
Now he must rely on the small savings he has to feed his wife and six children, 
the youngest of whom is just three weeks old, until the autumn farming season 
comes round.

Ouda works the land but could not possibly afford to buy it - a dunam of land, 
1,000 square metres, sells for at least £12,000. He was born here in Beit 
Lahiya, in northern Gaza, and took a correspondence course in geography at an 
Egyptian university hoping to become a teacher. But that was at a time when 
Israel still had a complete military and administrative occupation of Gaza with 
thousands of settlers and soldiers deployed across the strip - anyone working 
for the state risked being branded a collaborator. So instead he worked in 
Israel as an agricultural labourer, where he earned a reasonable wage. This 
ended in 1994, when the rules on Palestinian labour permits changed and Ouda 
was regarded as too young to enter Israel. Since then he has farmed the fields 
of others in northern Gaza.

For a while in the late 1990s, Gaza's farmers prospered, until 2000 and the 
start of the second intifada, the Palestinian uprising, which brought more 
conflict and more restrictions. Ouda is not a Hamas supporter - he voted for 
the rival Fatah movement in elections two years ago. He cites Hamas' failings 
but is also critical of the way the factions have been locked in draining 
internal conflict.

"Hamas has control and imposed security but on the other hand the siege really 
squeezed us and they couldn't deal with it," he said. "We just want to 
concentrate on our lives. Everyone in Gaza wants the crossings to open and to 
breathe freely."
 