
It had seemed an appropriate memorial. In August, Russia's president, Dmitry 
Medvedev decided to name a street in Moscow after Alexander Solzhenitsyn, 
shortly after the writer's death aged 89.

But the residents of Alexander Solzhenitsyn Street - as it is now known - 
appear to have other ideas. Together with Russia's communists, locals have 
waged a furious campaign against the change of name - and have demanded that 
the street get its old name of Big Communist Street back

Communist activists have complained that Medvedev's decision to rename the 
street after Solzhenitsyn - Russia's greatest literary chronicler of communist 
repression - is, in fact, illegal. Under Russian law, the authorities are 
supposed to wait ten years before they can name a street after a dead person.

Locals, meanwhile, have gone one step further. Last Sunday residents tore down 
the street sign, leaving a gaping space above house number 12.

The authorities have now put the Solzhenitsyn sign up again. Another plaque 
bearing the writer's name hangs at the end of the avenue next to branch of 
McDonald's, an outlet the Nobel-prize winning author - no fan of western 
capitalism - was unlikely to have eaten in.

Changing the name of the street was "not only a gross breach of existing 
legislation but also a challenge to all people with communist views because 
Solzhenitsyn always fought with the communists," Sergei Udaltsov, the leader of 
the communist Left Front youth organisation, told the Moscow Times.

Most residents were against the change, he added, because they have been 
forced to alter their documents, including passports. "My wife and I haven't 
received our pension," Vladimir Gusarov, a pensioner living at number 24, 
complained.

Around 1,000 people have signed a petition against the change of name, while 
the Left Front has initiated a legal action in Moscow's city court to have it 
overturned.

Officials, however, insist the decision is constitutional, and point out that 
there are precedents. The Urals city of Yekaterinburg, where Boris Yeltsin grew 
up, already boasts a President Boris Yeltsin street, following the former 
Russian president's death last year.

Street names remain a source of bitter controversy in Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and a proxy battleground for rival 
ideologies - hardly surprising in a country with a history so tumultuous and 
unresolved and which includes communists, nationalists, and even monarchists.

After the collapse of the Soviet Union, several Russian towns and cities 
reverted to their pre-revolutionary names. Others, however, have kept their 
communist associations. Every major town in Russia has at least one Lenin 
Street, not to mention a statue of the man who brought about Bolshevism.

(Before the 1917 communist revolution, Moscow's Big Communist Street - or 
Bolshaya Kommunistecheskaya Ulitsa to give it its name in Russian - was called 
Alexseyevska, after a local church.)

During his long literary career, Solzhenitsyn was consistently anti-Soviet. 
His 1961 novella, One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich, exposed the brutal 
reality of Stalin's hidden gulag and labour camp system.

The book brought him worldwide fame and led to his expulsion from the Soviet 
Union in 1974. He returned to post-communist Russia after two decades in exile, 
mainly in the US, but became swiftly disillusioned with the godless, capitalist 
society that replaced Soviet rule.

In his last years, Solzhenitsyn reacted approvingly to Vladimir Putin's 
restoration of authoritarian government. Russia's revival under Putin was 
apparently in accord with the writer's own orthodox and national conservative 
views. Putin even had tea with Solzhenitsyn last year at his Moscow dacha and 
gave him a literary prize.
 