
Consider that most slippery and elusive of media concepts: “the public 
interest”, as invoked a few days ago by a battling Frances Crook, chief 
executive of the Howard League for Penal Reform. “The public interest is not 
served by the prurient media disclosure of the identity of a child who has 
committed a crime, no matter how trivial nor how serious,”she wrote in the 
Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/03/ann-maguire-killer-named-court-media-child-victim>
. “Any judge who claims that it is in the public interest to identify a 
16-year-old boy convicted of murder… risks giving in to the voracious media and 
to public voyeurism.”

Clearly, then, this have-you-stopped-beating-your-wife version of the public 
interest expounded by Crook draws red lines way short of the prurient 
disclosure and voyeurism dished up by voracious websites, TV stations and 
newspapers (including theGuardian, which plonked a big picture of Will Cornick 
on its front page, having previously helped lead court arguments that the 
killer ofAnn Maguire <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire> must be 
named). It’s a construct tailored to fit the case she seeks to argue.

Conversely, those who wanted Cornick named adopted a different definition. 
“This is an exceptional case,” said the judge in the case, Mr Justice Coulson. 
“Public interest has been huge. There are wider issues at stake such as the 
safety of children, the possibility of American-style security measures in 
schools and the dangers of ‘internet loners’ concocting violent fantasies. I 
consider that the debate on those issues will be informed by the identification 
of William Cornick as the killer”. And aGuardian editorial weighed in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/04/guardian-view-on-naming-ann-maguire-murderer>
: “The media case was that in the very particular circumstances, where the 
crime was so serious and the interest of open justice so important, anonymity 
should be forgone.” Note the two words at the heart of that decision: open 
justice.

In the real world, newspapers need paying customers. Websites need clicks. 
Broadcasters, public and private, chase approval ratings. Take all that away 
and there would be precious little information (aka the foundation of openness) 
left. So there’s no evident sense in blankly damning media coverage you don’t 
approve of because supposedly driven by a need to make money. That’s just an 
excuse for not digging deeper.

We’ve lived – as a nation of media consumers – through the horrors of child 
abuse, finally brought into the open. We’ve grown sick of the scandals in care 
homes, in NHS trusts, in the police as they, too, have seeped into sight. We 
don’t trust our banks and we don’t trust our politicians. And we want, when 
asked, open discussion, open inquiries, open justice. That, for good or ill, is 
the Fiona Woolf story.

Newspapers and broadcasters aren’t always best placed to heed these open 
calls. Hacking was a bad deed in the dark. The BBC hasn’t covered itself in 
Savile glory. All this has to change. But so does any automatic assumption in 
genteel society that silence is continuing virtue.

William Cornick, at 16, would have been eligible to vote on a nation’s future 
if he’d lived in Scotland. He could enlist in the regular army. His identity 
would, in any case, have been revealed two years later. He is obviously damaged 
goods, a subject of sadness and distress. But the judge is equally obviously 
right: he stands at the heart of a debate. But to debate properly, you have to 
be engaged. To be engaged, you have to believe. To believe, you have to 
understand. To understand, you have to be informed. And to be generally 
informed, you also need to be entertained. That’s why the “public interest”, 
drawn too tightly and narrowly, can blight understanding.

Mr Justice Coulson wasn’t narrow. The public interest that was “huge” in his 
eyes is general, not specific. It includes other crimes – say the alleged 
dismemberment of Indonesian prostitutes by British hedge fund managers. It 
probably includes Benedict Cumberbatch’s fiancee, Claudia Winkleman’s badly 
burnt child, George Clooney’s wedding. You may call that prurient and 
voyeuristic if you must. But it helps the information world go round. It 
underpins debates. And, in the changing, open spirit of the times, the true 
public interest is not trying to define what can or can’t be published too 
prescriptively: an interest in disclosure.

■ I helped judge the international reporting entries for the British 
Journalism Awards the other day, and something about them brought me up with a 
jolt. Syria, Iraq, Ukraine, Libya, Afghanistan, the Philippines, Africa at war, 
disease, the collapse of Europe’s economy… It’s been a hell of a year, and I 
can’t remember so much brilliant coverage by so many brilliant reporters rising 
to meet that challenge. Any one entry among a dozen or more could have won in a 
quieter time. Here be passion, courage and empathy mixed into a compelling 
cocktail.

I can’t wait to see what fine German, French and Scandinavian reporters have 
to add now the European Press Prize for 2014 is open for entries. But I do know 
one easy excuse for indifference or ignorance won’t run: “No one told me… !” On 
the contrary, you were told in the starkest, most gut-wrenching terms. Devoted 
correspondents put their own lives at risk to tell you. But did you take any 
notice?
 