
Sir Trevor McDonald has warned the media to be vigilant against the risk of an 
"apartheid" system that does not properly represent the UK's ethnically diverse 
population

However, the former News at Ten anchor said UK broadcasting had "improved a 
lot" since he became ITN's first black reporter in the 1970s.

He was speaking after comedian Lenny Henry called for money to be ringfenced 
to boost the "appalling" representation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/mar/18/lenny-henry-black-asian-television>
 of black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) people in the broadcasting industry.

McDonald told the Ad Week Europe conference in London on Monday: "I think 
[BAME representation] has improved a lot. I'm sure there are many more black 
and ethnic people on television, especially in the news field.

"I am not sure how long a television station, a profession, can go on if it 
does not constantly represent the mix of the community. I don't see how you can 
have a kind of almost apartheid sort of division if people who represent the 
bulk of the population are not represented in the media."

McDonald said he knew "very little" about the acting world, one part of the 
industry-wide issue addressed by Henry when he gave the annual Bafta lecture 
earlier this month.

Henry said funds should be set aside to boost the numbers of BAME people in 
the creative industries, but McDonald said he did not think quotas were the 
answer.

"I remember when we started positive diversity classes at ITN with one of my 
colleagues. If you really wanted to know what happens in these communities, how 
are you going to do it by just standing outside and not having people who were 
actually there?

"How are you going to represent people nationally if the people who do your 
work are not exactly representative of the national picture? I think it's 
improved an enormous amount. I was the only black face on national television 
for a very long time. That's not the case anymore."

In a wide-ranging interview looking back on his career, McDonald described 
himself as a "card-carrying coward" when he was a reporter working in warzones, 
and how he had taken "downers" before interviewing Saddam Hussein.

McDonald, who has presented documentaries about prison and people on death row 
for ITV and has another project in the pipeline for the broadcaster, said he 
did not want to return to the topic after the inmates started to "get into my 
head" and "warp" his life.

"I lived with them for too long," he said. "I had a long corridor to walk to 
my hotel room and I started double-locking my door and behaving oddly. I 
thought, these guys were getting into my head. It's very odd.

"I dropped my guard with one guy ... and I said to the guard, 'what did he 
do?' 'He's a contract killer.' My nice friend is a guy who spent his life 
killing people he didn't know. It worried me I was so stupidly fallible to fall 
for the charms of a contract killer."
 