
Valentine's Day <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/132112/valentine-s-day>
 – the romantic 2010 portmanteau movie that starred every-one from Queen 
Latifah toAshton Kutcher <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ashton-kutcher> – 
may have been universally derided on its release, but it also made$216m (£138m) 
at the worldwide box office 
<http://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=valentinesday.htm>. This sum is more than 
enough to justify a sequel – the imminentNew Year's Eve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/144990/new-year-s-eve>, starring 
everyone from Michelle Pfeiffer to Ashton Kutcher. Clearly, there are more down 
the line. It's a winning, horrible formula that can't help but rake in money. 
How can you cash in on this goldmine? Here's a six-part guide to creating a 
little multi-stranded holiday movie of your own.

1. Pick a memorable date.

Remember, both Valentine's Day and New Year's Eve have already been taken. So 
what else is there? Easter Sunday? Bank Holiday Monday? Pancake Day? 
International Talk Like a Pirate Day? Yes, that's a good one. Let's make a film 
set on International Talk Like a Pirate Day.

2. Think up hundreds of storylines, and include them all. 

It doesn't matter how saccharine or flimsy or illogical they are. You want an 
extended encounter in a broken lift? You want a mother to reconnect with her 
daughter in the broadest terms possible? You want a drawn-out 
will-they-won't-they romance? You want six drawn-out will-they-won't-they 
romances? You want Jon Bon Jovi to get slapped in the face for no reason other 
than the fact that he's Jon Bon Jovi? Go for it. This is a portmanteau movie. 
Why worry about traditional narrative cohesion when a handful of barely-there 
sketches will do?

3. Hire the biggest star you can afford. 

So you're making International Talk Like a Pirate Day. You've got a script 
overflowing with offensively dim sketches about every aspect of talking like a 
pirate. But you need a star. True, you've got actors, but they're mainly 
B-listers, TV stars and musicians looking for a bigger break. You should 
stretch the budget to breaking point and acquire a genuine banner name. 
Valentine's Day had Julia Roberts and New Year's Eve has Robert De Niro, so 
there's no reason why International Talk Like a Pirate Day can't use someone 
like, say, Sean Connery or Meryl Streep. And it doesn't matter about their 
role, because they'll only be on screen for about three seconds. That's still 
enough to put their face all over your posters, though.

4. Also hire Ashton Kutcher <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ashton-kutcher>. 

Look, you've just blown all your money on Sean Connery's ridiculous cameo. 
You've got nothing left. Kutcher's cheap, and some people seem to like him, and 
there seems to be some weird unwritten rule that he has to be in all of these 
date-specific portmanteau romcoms. Give him the story about the man who gets 
locked in a cupboard with a woman from NCIS with whom he falls in love while 
learning about the importance of friendship. Even he can't mess that one up.

5. Bring everything together neatly at the end. 

Like all good films, International Talk Like a Pirate Day needs a climax, 
where everyone comes together as one, having fallen in love and learned about 
the importance of friendship. That way the film can end on lots of hugging and 
inspirational music, and the audience can walk out happily in the mistaken 
belief that any of it was actually worth watching. Why not gather all the 
characters together at the UN's annual International Talk Like a Pirate Day 
summit? What? Because there isn't one? An open-air International Talk Like a 
Pirate Day concert? They don't exist either? Look, I'm sure we'll think of 
something.

6. Move on to the next film

Great news! International Talk Like a Pirate Day has been an enormous success. 
This can only mean one thing: you need to get started on the script for 
Movember: The Musical. I'll give Ashton Kutcher a bell.
 