
Sky News <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-news> took the top prize at 
the 2008 AOP awards last night, winning the best consumer website of the year 
award. It was a good night for publisher BSkyB, which also scooped best 
consumer publisher.

Judges making the consumer award praised Sky News's ability to maximise its 
on-site features, singling out its use of video across its news pages as a key 
element in its success.

BSkyB was described by judges as a "powerhouse publisher" and praised for its 
interactive vision as it collected the online consumer publisher award.

Guardian News and Media was praised by judges for the depth and breadth it 
brought to a single subject, as it collected the award for best launch for 
theguardian.com's Katine project. The three-year development scheme is 
following the African Medical and Research Foundation and aims to improve the 
lives of the 25,000 people in a Ugandan village.

Business publisher Reed Business Information was the night's biggest winner as 
it collected four awards, including online business publisher of the year.

Its Farmers Weekly Interactive project was named online community of the year, 
with judges praising its lighthearted approach for pushing business media 
boundaries.

RBI's e-Newsletters claimed the online business ad sales team prize, while 
XpertHR.co.uk won the coveted business website award.

IPC Media claimed three prizes, with NME.com winning the consumer editorial 
team award, the WKD Nuts Football Awards claiming the cross-media project 2008 
prize and its Women's Space project claiming the research and insights project 
award.

The innovation gong went to the Financial Times for Mockingbird, its access to 
online content model that allowed users to view up to 30 free stories each 
month. FT.com also won the use of video prize.

News Group Newspapers' Sun mobile service won the prize for the best mobile 
site, with judges praising its ease of navigation and its consumer offering.

Other awards went to Incisive Media's Accountancy Age, which claimed the 
business editorial team award after impressing judges with its innovative use 
of technology to address niche areas.

The online consumer advertising sales team prize was won by Future Publishing 
for its digital agency team.

Channel 4 New Media's Ford Bite project won the commercial partnership prize.

· To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 