
When job hunting moved online and electronic CVs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/cv> took over, those who didn’t adapt were 
left behind. Today we are still seeing big changes in technology that are 
disrupting the jobs market and forcing candidates to rethink their approach.

If you want to get the most out of your job search, make sure you have a solid 
understanding of the digital changes becoming commonplace in modern 
applications.

Skype interviews

With hiring managers often being hard to pin down, Skype calling has become a 
popular way for companies to conduct face-to-face interviews at short notice. 
This is good news for job hunters, too, because it allows you to interview 
anywhere in the world without the need to travel.

How to succeed in a Skype and video interview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/skype-job-interview> 
When attending Skype interviews there are a few things to be aware of. First, 
the internet connection and audio quality will not always be perfect, so make 
sure you speak slowly and clearly at all times – you won’t build a rapport with 
the interviewer if they are struggling to understand you. Second, remember that 
you can be seen in a Skype interview, so dress exactly as you would for a 
physical encounter and remove any mess or inappropriate objects from your 
background.

Social proof

Social media is no longer optional for jobseekers, it is essential. Not only 
does it increase your chances of finding jobs, but it provides employers with 
social proof of your credentials. Social proof is the validation we seek from 
others around us before making a decision. For example, before making a 
purchase from a company online you will usually check for reviews that previous 
customers have left. Employers want to make the same checks on candidates 
before they commit to hiring them – they want to know who you’ve worked with 
and if anybody is willing to recommend you publicly.

LinkedIn is the perfect platform to provide this to potential employers, so 
once you’ve built your profile, connect with all of your colleagues and ask for 
as many recommendations from managers and clients as you can.

Your activity on Twitter and Facebook can also be taken into account by 
recruiters, so make sure that your profile is sending the right signals by 
sharing informative content that is relevant to your industry and removing any 
posts that might be deemed inappropriate. A sound online presence will greatly 
boost your credibility and your chances of being called in for interviews.

Group telephone interviews

Companies are keen to save time when it comes to hiring staff, so group 
telephone interviews have become popular. They are essentially conference-call 
style interviews that allow companies to interview a candidate with several 
members of their firm at the same time. On the one hand, these interviews are a 
great opportunity to speed up the application process, but they can also be a 
bit daunting. To increase your chances of success, find out exactly who will be 
on the call and what roles they play in the company.

During the call it will sometimes be difficult to know exactly which person is 
speaking, so try to address the group rather than individuals and don’t address 
somebody by name unless you are certain it is them – getting a person’s name 
wrong will not go down well in any interview.

Personal websites

With the ever-increasing need to stand out in today’s overcrowded job market, 
many tech-savvy job hunters have been creating their own websites. This 
approach has proved powerful in the creative industries, especially among 
younger jobseekers who can’t rely on their experience to secure interviews.

Websites allow jobseekers freedom to express their talents without being 
restricted by a traditional CV format. As long as you keep it professional and 
tailored towards your industry’s expectations then you have total control over 
your site’s content.

For example, a graphic designer could include work from their portfolio or a 
writer could showcase samples of their articles. You don’t need to be an expert 
in code either, with do-it-yourself website services you can have a website up 
and running in no time for just a few pounds a month.

The future of job hunting

If you’ve been struggling to get the attention of a certain employer then 
maybe you could try a video CV – many candidates have been able to create 
professional videos using just a mobile phone camera and free online editing 
software.

Video CVs are growing in popularity as they provide a great way to set you 
apart from other candidates. The platform allows you to showcase your 
personality, humour, pitch delivery and creativity.


Andrew Fennell is an experienced recruiter and founder of CV writing company 
StandOut CV 
<http://standout-cv.com/?utm_source=Guardian&utm_medium=Cpage&utm_campaign=posts>

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 