
Residents in Adamsdown <https://www.theguardian.com/cardiff/adamsdown> have 
said they are 'ecstatic' by the decision to overturn a nearby planning 
application for an 'Everest' of flats.

Councillors on the planning committee today voted to defer the application for 
refusal following impassioned pleas from residents and local ward members who 
voiced concerns of the impact the 500-student development would have on their 
lives.See our earlier report and video on the plans here.  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/cardiff/2010/aug/03/adamsdown-residentss-student-flats-fire-station>

Fiona Lewis, 40, who lives on Tharsis Close behind where the development was 
planned, was visibly moved by the majority decision. She had presented a 
petition of 168 signatures to the committee and spoke of the disturbance she 
said the flats would cause to the "quality of life" for the "small community" 
in Adamscroft estate which consists of mainly elderly residents and young 
families. Speaking after the decision, she said:

"I'm ecstatic and so pleased. All I can say is thank you, thank you, thank 
you."

Adamsdown councillor Nigel Howells said:

"This is great news for residents of this part of Adamsdown. We'd like to 
thank local residents for their support in getting this proposal thrown out. It 
was a wonderful example of the community coming together."

The proposed student flats on Adam Street would have housed 540 student beds 
on the site of the old Cardiff fire headquarters – a portion of which is still 
used by the Cardiff Central fleet. The application included provision for a new 
wing for the service still operating from the site.Download the plans here. 
<http://www.cardiff.gov.uk/content.asp?nav=2872%2C3250%2C4875&id=&parent_directory_id=2865&textonly=&language=&$state=calendarmeeting&$committeeID=1423&$meetingdate=12/01/2011>

Committee member Jacqui Parry said she grew up near to the site, and claimed 
the new building would be like an 'Everest' for residents. She said:

"I know this area better than anyone in this room. This is a gross 
overdevelopment and I would not like to be the people that live in this small 
community.

"It's a huge development for students and nine stories would seem like Everest 
compared to those small houses.

"I feel quite shocked at this."

Residents and councillors object to plans

Local members for the ward speaking at the meeting said a lack of parking 
provision on site would have a huge impact on residents.

Councillor Nigel Howells said there was an overwhelming feeling of opposition 
from local residents. Addressing the committee he said:

"In all my many years as a councillor this has generated the greatest levels 
of opposition.

"We believe that the scale and massing of the site is a massive 
overdevelopment."

Councillor John Dixon echoed the concerns raised by Howells and in particular 
emphasised the issue with parking and the policy to have an agreement in 
student accommodation that students will not bring cars. "Let's have a pause 
now and find out how well our policy is working," he said.
 Adamsdown councillors Nigel Howells and John Dixon surveying the flats plans 
at the old fire station headquarters 
Local AM Jenny Randerson also objected to the proposals alongside MP Jenny 
Willott. Along with the petition there were 52 letters of objection including 
one from Cardiff community housing association. Along with objections to the 
scale residents and members queried the affect on light to their properties, 
the density of students on site, noise issues and increased traffic.

Speaking on behalf of the applicant, planning consultant Powys Jones said the 
application was an improvement on the original. He said:

"We admit the original scheme may well have got it wrong. We had a major 
rethink and redesigned the buildings. The height of the buildings was reduced.

"This council has always recognised the good sense of putting students up in 
good design.

"The fire station is old and dilapidated and cannot afford replacement. This 
partnership scheme is the only way which could feasibly fund replacement."

Download the report on the plans here 
<http://www.cardiff.gov.uk/objview.asp?object_id=18897>.

Committee speak of parking problems from students across Cardiff

Members on the planning committee spoke of known problems with students 
ignoring parking restrictions in wards across the city.

Grangetown ward councillor Asghar Ali, said: 

"At least 30% of students have cars in my ward. It's impossible to enforce. 
Some students don't even know they can't have a car there because it's 
somewhere in a 16-page agreement. I will rigorously oppose this application."

With the site allowing for eight disabled spaces and 18 spaces for the fire 
station, the committee also felt the parking impact on local residents would be 
immense.

Councillor Adrian Robson said: 

"You would come to the end of term and it's going to be absolute chaos. Even 
if students don't bring their cars they will need to be picked up.

"I believe the lack of parking is a reason for refusal."

Councillors Hooper and Pearcy also said they had problems with student parking 
in their ward.

The application will now go to Welsh Assembly planning inspectors to be 
assessed.
 