
While commonly associated with jobs like car maintenance or plumbing, in fact, 
apprenticeships are now available in a dizzying range of industries, says 
Spencer Mehlman, managing director of notgoingtouni.co.uk, a service that 
advertises apprenticeship vacancies to employers and is currently promoting 
apprenticeship roles in a range of sectors, including social media, PR, IT – 
and even how to become a jockey.

He says: "It's no longer the case that you've got to be a plumber or 
hairdresser. For example, one of the biggest estate-agents in the country is 
taking on young people to become negotiators and there are lots of new sectors 
starting to open up."

But while many big companies are now investing in apprenticeships, small and 
medium enterprises (SMEs) generally need more persuading. Following the 
government'sHolt Review of apprenticeships 
<http://www.bis.gov.uk/policies/further-education-skills/apprenticeships>, 
published earlier this year, which found that just 10% of SMEs employed 
apprentices, the National Apprenticeship Service's (NAS) dedicated advisory 
team is working closely with small businesses. This team aims to provide a more 
responsive service, and extend Group Training Agencies – groups of employers 
who share training processes and costs. 

There are also plans to increase the number of Apprenticeship Training 
Agencies (ATA), organisations that place apprentices with an employer. The ATA 
pays the apprentice's wages, while the business pays the ATA a fee for the 
apprentice's services, which can be an ideal arrangement for small firms, says 
David Way, chief executive of NAS. "Some smaller businesses can be deterred 
from taking on apprentices because they are not confident that they will have 
enough work or resources to support the apprentice for the whole of their 
apprenticeship."

Changes to the Apprenticeship Grant for Employers (AGE) – which gives 
financial help to SMEs taking on an apprentice for the first time – should also 
help encourage more SMEs to take the plunge. The grant, introduced in February, 
and available until March 2013, will now offer small businesses with fewer than 
1,000 employees (previously they had to have 250 or fewer employees) a sum of 
£1,500 if they take on an apprentice between the age of 16 and 24. 

Way is confident that the changes, along with the introduction of more higher 
level apprenticeships, offering people the opportunity to train for 
degree-level qualifications, will bring "a whole raft of other employers who 
only employ people with high-level skills into apprenticeships for the first 
time". 

But more still needs to be done to inform young people of the opportunities 
available to them. Under new legislation, introduced last September, schools 
are now legally responsible for providing career advice and guidance to young 
people – but this support needs to come early on in their school career, says 
Mehlman. "Reaching out to young people is the most important thing. They have 
to have this explained to them at the right ages and not leave it to a 
last-minute panic once they've made some choices and decisions that are 
steering them along a particular path."

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional> in association with the 
National Apprenticeship Service <http://www.apprenticeships.org.uk>. To get 
more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly 
Careers update 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 