
Q We live in a leasehold flat converted from a Victorian house. Our downstairs 
neighbours are heavy smokers, and the smell seeps up through the floorboards 
into our flat. I find the smell unbearable - but worse, we have a baby on the 
way. Can we block the smoke? We have got carpets down, but I don't know what 
the state of the floorboards is underneath.
Fiona

A The first thing might be to lift the floorboards and fit an impermeable 
membrane - however, this could cause a build-up of moisture which would in turn 
start to rot the joists. The end result being that a lot more than smoke could 
be going through the floorboards (such as your feet). I advise you to cover 
over your floorboards with a layer of hardboard or 3mm plywood. This will 
create an initial barrier. You could then use a latex-backed natural-fibre 
carpet and rubber underlay which would provide two further barriers to the 
smoke - and for your neighbours, a barrier to a screaming baby.

Q Two years ago on the net I found the most beautiful chinoiserie wallpaper 
for my three-storey hallway, and went on a pilgrimage to New York to see the 
real product, where I was blown away by its beauty (and its price). Since then 
I've been hoping the recent trend for big wallpaper would bring something 
similar, but more affordable, on to the market, but I can't find anything I 
like.
Anna Dale 

A The stone you have yet to unturn is that of technology. New printing 
processes mean that from even a small scrap of paper or photograph you can 
magically recreate an out-of-date wallpaper design, or pattern - and have it 
all to yourself. Conceptcoverings.co.uk will take your image and scan it into 
their computers. They then work out the pattern repeat and step it up to create 
a wallpaper roll length. A proof is sent for you to comment on, following which 
they will print as little or as many rolls as you wish. It's printed up on a 
heavyweight 400g paper, which is light-fast for 100 years (but you'll want to 
redecorate before then). The whole process can be done in seven days, but it 
costs £120 per roll.

· If you have a question, email ask.oliver@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
 