
In the vacant parking lot of an estate agency in downtown Austin, Texas, a 
British man in a white flannel shirt is setting out a row of paper plates along 
the top of a brick wall. Each plate is piled high with Korean-Mexican fusion 
food that he has bought fromChi'Lantro <http://www.chilantrobbq.com>, one of 
hundreds of food trucks that dot the city's side streets and laybys.

As the heat of the Texan evening subsides from unbearable to merely stifling, 
a young woman in towering heels strolls past with a piglet on a leash. Nobody 
bats an eyelid. After all, she's adhering to the instruction plastered on 
bumper stickers everywhere to "Keep Austin Weird".

"Right, tuck in," the British man tells the small group of people with him. He 
takes a forkful of kimchi fries: a plate of chips slathered in grilled onions,
Monterey Jack cheese <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monterey_Jack>, Korean 
barbecue meat,Sriracha <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sriracha_sauce> dressing, 
a secret "magic sauce", sesame seeds and caramelised kimchi (fermented cabbage).

"You don't get it at first," he says, "but then the heat builds on you. These 
are really good." "It's a moreish combination," his friend adds. "It ticks all 
the boxes in terms of flavour." They move down the wall, repeating the ritual 
with the Seoul burrito, the Korean burger and the bulgogi taco.

These are not hungry tourists exploring Austin's culinary underbelly. The Brit 
in the flannel shirt is Steve Rowe, the man who runs Marks & Spencer's food 
division; he is more or less the man who decides what middle England eats. Rowe 
and his three colleagues – a chef, a buyer and the chain's director of product 
direction and innovation – are on a trend-hunting trip to find products that 
they can adapt and sell, and they've invited me to join them. The retailer's 
food may end up in the fridges of Tunbridge Wells, but its journey starts in 
places such as this, the car park of Metro Realty. Austin is home to 1,000 food 
trucks.

"Our role is to pick up on the food trends that people see subliminally," Rowe 
explains in his London accent. "The British public travels more than ever. What 
we want to be is one step ahead of them."

Rowe should know what customers want: he has worked at M&S for 25 years, and 
his father, Joe, also ran the chain's food division, making them the only 
father-son team outside of the founding families to have held the same board 
position; his mother, aunt, maternal grandmother and wife also worked there. 
Between them, the extended Rowes have clocked up more than 100 years' service.

Young Rowe was surrounded by M&S food at home. He recalls eating "steak after 
steak after steak" when his father was experimenting with new packaging 
techniques in the 1980s. No family restaurant meal could start before a 
"forensic discussion about the cut of meat" had taken place. His father, now 
67, still offers advice. When Rowe told him he'd got the food job in 2012, his 
dad congratulated him before telling him the store was cutting its calves' 
livers wrong.

While eating from roadside shacks might strike some people as an extreme form 
of market research for one of Britain's more buttoned-up institutions, M&S is 
playing into a growing trend. "Food today is all about exploration and 
innovation," says Martin Raymond, co-founder of research bodyThe Future 
Laboratory <http://thefuturelaboratory.com/uk/>. With household budgets under 
pressure, Brits are spending more on eating in and less on going out. In other 
words, if a supermarket can sate the public's desire for exotic food they can 
eat at home, it has cracked a lucrative nut. M&S has some form here: it was the 
first retailer to sell grapefruits to UK households in the 1930s, and 
introduced the chicken kiev to the UK in 1979; more recently, a trip to Chicago 
a few years ago resulted in the "posh dog", a smoky, hot dog-style sausage. 
Nearly a million units were sold last year.
 Kimchi fries: 'You don’t get it at first, but then the heat builds on you. 
These are really good.' Photograph: Sandy Carson for the Guardian 
Outside a Cajun food truck on the University of Texas campus half an hour 
later, Rowe is perusing the menu. "Can I taste your gumbo?" he asks the shack 
owner. "I want to try the alligator, but we might have a sourcing issue." Would 
M&S shoppers really throw crawfish boil into their basket along with their 
bread, milk and bananas? Absolutely, he claims. About 20% of the store's 
6,000-plus products are new every year. This summer, for example, it is selling 
everything from chocolate-covered wasabi peas to chicken wings coated in 
tequila and sansho pepper. "We should sell something for everyone," he says. 
"Too many people in the UK are blinkered about food. There is always something 
new you can learn."

According to Damian Dixon, the buyer on the trip, the retailer has already 
taken inspiration from Austin. It is testing a fleet of 14 branded food trucks 
in the Milton Keynes area, selling lunchtime sandwiches to workers in business 
parks away from the high street.

But how do you take a product from obscurity into the mainstream? A few years 
ago, kale, quinoa and rice cakes could be found only in healthfood stores; now 
you can buy them in some petrol stations. According to food experts, turning an 
obscure foodstuff into a pantry staple requires – above all else – a total 
conviction that the product will be a hit with customers, even if those 
customers don't know it yet. 

Julian Metcalfe <http://www.julianmetcalfe.com>, co-founder of Pret a Manger 
and founder of the Asian-inspired Itsu chain, says you have to be brave. "It's 
a question of having the guts to bring the product over. To import it, to pack 
it and to push it, rather than play safe. Take rice cakes with chocolate on 
them – we now sell 55,000 a week. No one had ever heard of them a few years 
ago."

So where does the inspiration come from? "A love and respect of food, and 
quite a lot of travelling," Metcalfe says. "Look at coconut water. I sat with 
people in Brazil day after day at lunch and all they drank was coconut water, 
whereas in Thailand I believe they used to throw it away. I'd never seen it 
before. That was eight years ago."

Henry Dimbleby <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/henry-dimbleby>, 
co-founder ofthe Leon chain of "healthy fast food" 
<http://leonrestaurants.co.uk> outlets, agrees that conviction is required to 
back an obscure foodstuff. A process of gradual osmosis can then turn it from 
tryout to trend. "The way these things happen is that an individual or company 
believes that something's absolutely delicious and they put it in a context 
where people in the mainstream begin to understand it and get over their fears. 
Then other people do it, the papers write about it and it becomes a thing."

Dimbleby says foodies such as himself are permanent magpies who are 
"constantly travelling, eating, finding kernels of ideas and morphing them".

Dimbleby cites Leon's quinoa-heavy superfood salad as a dish that came from 
somewhere niche: "When I was growing up, my mum [food writer Josceline 
Dimbleby] used to make salads that were quite substantial. They had vegetables 
in them, and were often dressed with bits of flavour running through them. Mum 
used to call them sumptuous salads. John [Vincent, Leon co-founder] came up 
with the name superfood salad in 2004, we Googled it and it didn't exist. We 
played with recipes. Our version had peas and greens and broccoli and sprouts, 
and it was delicious. The whole package added up to something that people 
understood. And it took off." Google "superfood salad" today and you'll get 
more than two million results.

This is how all big consumer trends start, be they about music, books, fashion 
or food. Someone with foresight, money and enthusiasm co-opts something obscure 
and makes it part of life's fabric. It's why in hipster-land you can't move for 
kale. It's why Nick Clegg owns a onesie. According to Metcalfe, there is one 
golden rule worth remembering when trend-hunting: strange is a relative term. 
"The thing is not weird in the place where you find it," he says. "What's weird 
here is not weird there."
 ‘We have to look at the practicality of eat. It may taste and look good – but 
if people have ties on, is it practical?’ Photograph: Sandy Carson for the 
Guardian 
For M&S, the trick when introducing a new foodstuff is not to scare its 
customers. Rowe says the retailer's role is not to try to educate them, either. 
Rather, it must gently encourage them to try new things. When M&S started 
selling sushi in the 1980s, it bombed. Customers weren't ready for another 20 
years. Rowe's key lieutenant on this trip is Cathy Chapman, who is in charge of 
innovation. Softly-spoken Chapman, an M&S old-timer, is a reluctant legend in 
food circles. It was she who ushered in Britain's ready-meal revolution in the 
1970s, as an M&S technologist. She also oversaw the introduction of 
mass-produced chicken kievs.

Awaiting a plate of fried lobster at a pavement table as the first tendrils of 
a summer tornado whip the street – a tornado that just one hour later will 
prise roofs from buildings – Chapman explains how she persuades their customers 
to try something new. "It can take quite a long time to take off because you've 
got to almost take the customer away from what she's been buying for a few 
years, like Indian or Chinese," she says. "People might want tikka masala on a 
Friday night. You won't get them off that because it's been their ritual for 
several years. We can introduce them to smaller pieces [of new food] and 
sharing plate sizes. It's not such a risk and they can buy them on top of what 
they love, and gradually you can take them with you."

Dishes from this trip will be presented and rigorously debated back at the 
London HQ. James Newton-Brown, the brand's chef and a veteran of most of 
London's high-end hotel kitchens, will work out if the flavours and cooking 
processes can be replicated, whether it's possible to make them at a good 
price, and also consider what he calls "the practicality of eat". "It may taste 
and look good, but if people work in the City and have ties on, is it 
practical?" he says of the sauce-heavy kimchi fries. Test versions will be made 
and products could hit the shelves by next summer. 

Whatever street food comes from this trip, it could be subject to certain 
limitations, commentators say. Due to the scale of what they do, big chains can 
struggle to recreate the intricacies of a dish.Kevin Gould <http://dishy.net>, 
Guardian food and travel writer <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kevingould>
 and now a branding expert, says food that is "shot through with nuance and wit 
and subtlety" cannot easily translate into "mass-manufactured, factory-made 
food". There is a profit motive to some of these trends. The nation's obsession 
with trendy kale is a godsend for chains such as M&S, Gould says. "Kale is 
cheap – it's basically slutty cabbage – so it's the best thing that could ever 
happen to them," he says. "Stick a bit of kale in a juice, and you can sell it 
for £2.50 as opposed to £1.99."

The last food trucks of the tour provide the lightbulb moments for the 
trend-hunters. AtTurf N' Surf Po'Boy 
<http://www.tripadvisor.co.uk/Restaurant_Review-g30196-d2266552-Reviews-Turf_N_Surf_Po_Boy-Austin_Texas.html>
 – an operation run by the bear-like Ralph Gilmore – a taco containing pulled 
pork and "mango tango" dressing proves a hit.

Gilmore, who started opening trucks because they were cheaper than opening 
restaurants in "fancy buildings", is a leading light on the Austin food scene, 
with a weekly turnover of more than $50,000 (£29,000). But it is a plate of his 
avocado deep-fried in sesame seeds, almonds, chilli flakes and cornflakes from 
a van called The Mighty Cone that gets the team most excited.

"Oh my God, it's fantastic," Chapman says. "It's one of those things you'll 
remember all your life." Rowe takes a bite and almost leaps from the rickety 
picnic table with excitement: "That is on my list of the best. To do that in 
the UK would be an absolute game-changer."

There follows a detailed discussion about how they could get unfrozen avocado 
through the flash-frying process needed to create such a dish without damaging 
the produce. "You have to apply technical cooking abilities that would stretch 
everyone," Rowe says. They all nod eagerly. They may be 5,000 miles from 
Tunbridge Wells, but here under the Texan sun they think they've struck gold.

From avocado to kimchi: a short history of fashionable food
 Avocados were introduced to UK shoppers by M&S in the 60s – will the 
deep-fried version prove as popular? Photograph: Getty Images 
Avocado 
When small green fruits called avocado pears first appeared on supermarket 
shelves in the 1960s, no one quite knew what to do with them – in Manchester 
one woman stewed them and served them with custard. Her letter of complaint to 
M&S saw the retailer rebrand them and start selling them with an explanatory 
leaflet. Fast-forward 40 years and you can't move for guacamole and avocado 
smoothies.

Sushi 
M&S's attempts to sell it in the 1980s fell flat as consumers balked at the 
idea of eating raw fish. It took off in the 1990s thanks to the expansion of the
Yo! Sushi chain <http://www.yosushi.com> and the opening of Nobu in London 
<http://www.noburestaurants.com/london/experience/>. Brits now spend about £40m 
on the stuff every year.

Popcorn 
Available in Britain for almost 100 years, but recently given a makeover. No 
hip party is now complete without a stall festooned with bunting and 
faux-Victorian signage offering popcorn in flavours such as cheese and tomato, 
wasabi, sea salt and olive oil, and even gin and tonic. Gourmet popcorn is so 
hot right now that the fact that many of these products taste like a wedge of 
cardboard that has absorbed the moisture at the bottom of the fridge is moot.

Coconut water 
No longer the bit you throw away. This milky-coloured drink is high in 
potassium and is a big hit with gym bunnies and models, but it has now reached 
corner stores and kids' lunchboxes: 39 varieties are now sold in the UK, and 
sales are predicted to rise to £250m by 2017.

Kale 
Kale – chewy and bland, but high in fibre and iron – is nothing new: it 
featured prominently inthe Dig For Victory campaign 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/dna/place-lancashire/plain/A2263529> during the second 
world war, but fell from favour soon after. Partly thanks to Oberon Sinclair, a 
canny British PR working for theAmerican Kale Association 
<http://americankaleassociation.net>, it has become the modern superfood of 
choice. Peak kale arrived whenBeyoncé put a picture of herself on Tumblr 
wearing a "Kale" sweatshirt 
<http://fashionbombdaily.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/beyonce-tumblr-kale-sweatshirt.jpg>
 with 'Kale' written on it.

Kimchi 
This Korean fermented cabbage is part of the vogue for "partially decayed" 
foods that includes pickles and kombucha, a slightly fizzy fermented tea drink 
that is never far from Gwyneth Paltrow's fridge.
 