
There was a point last night when the European Cup winners and self-styled 
biggest club in the world were in serious danger of being embarrassed by a 
group of players who could be seen, an hour or so before kick-off, taking 
pictures of one another in the centre circle. Wayne Rooney's second-half 
equaliser spared Sir Alex Ferguson's team an ignominious defeat but it is fair 
to say they reached the end of the Champions League's group phase in the manner 
of a marathon runner with a pebble in his shoe.

The damage, in the end, was largely superficial. United finished top of Group 
E courtesy of Villarreal's defeat at Celtic and will gratefully accept the 
benefits when the draw is made for the first knockout round. It has not escaped 
Ferguson's notice that that could mean a needle match with Real Madrid - "that 
would be a nice party," joked the United manager, "I'll look forward to tea and 
biscuits with Ramón Calderón" - or a reunion with Jose Mourinho at 
Internazionale. It does, however, mean United will avoid, among others, 
Juventus, Barcelona and Bayern Munich and Ferguson will like to think his team 
cannot be so disjointed again.

There were mitigating circumstances, with the likes of Cristiano Ronaldo, 
Dimitar Berbatov and Edwin van der Sar all left out, but it was still a strange 
evening from United's perspective. Their frustrations were summed up by the 
various off-the-ball clashes involving Rooney and an unimpressed Ferguson 
admitted it had been "quite a shock" before criticising the team's finishing. 
"If we don't start taking our chances we are going to get embarrassed. It 
didn't matter tonight, but it could have been a different night. If we'd needed 
a win, we would have been embarrassed."

His irritation was understandable. Aalborg have spent most of this season in 
the lower reaches of Denmark's Superliga, and it says it all that Aalborg's 
sporting director, Lynge Jakobsen, had promised to "fly home naked" if the 
Danish champions avoided a defeat.

Certainly when Carlos Tevez opened the scoring only three minutes into the 
match the crowd probably thought that Aalborg would suffer heavily. If Tevez 
had made it 2-0 just a couple of minutes later maybe they would have done. 
Instead, he misplaced his left-foot shot when it seemed easier to score and 
what happened next took everyone by surprise.

Perhaps it was complacency. Or maybe Ferguson's team selection underestimated 
Aalborg's desire. Either way, it was stunning to see how they recovered from 
such an early setback to score with two headers before half-time.

It started just after the half-hour mark when Michael Jakobsen got a slight 
yet decisive touch to Anders Due's free-kick to flick the ball past Tomas 
Kuszczak.

Perhaps the most startling thing was the effect the goal had on the home side. 
Aalborg started to knock the ball around confidently and there was another 
collective gasp of disbelief in first-half stoppage-time when Due crossed from 
the left and Jeppe Curth beat Kuszczak again.

When the half-time whistle went a few seconds later the mood inside Old 
Trafford was bewilderment. Ferguson's team were aiming to make it 19 European 
games unbeaten, equalling theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> record set by Ajax in 
1996 and Bayern Munich in 2002, and Aalborg's boisterous fans must have feared 
the worst when Ryan Giggs sent Tevez running clear to open the scoring.

It is never an encouraging sight for United when Rooney has worked himself 
into a temper and for the rest of the match he seemed to be picking fights with 
his opponents. Nobody could accuse him, however, of distracting himself from 
the match. He was United's best player and, six minutes into the second half, 
lifted the sense of shock that was enveloping the stadium. Anderson's 
through-ball was beautifully weighted, bisecting the Aalborg defence with one 
elegant swish of his left boot. Rooney had the time to compose himself before 
finishing the move with a precise shot from just inside the penalty area. The 
relief was palpable.

After that, United had enough chances to win, but Tevez flashed a header wide 
as well as hitting the side netting with one shot and the best other 
opportunity fell to Gary Neville, who blazed over.

"We're missing far too many chances," said Ferguson. "It's difficult to say 
why. It could be concentration, it could be carelessness, it could be anything. 
But we're missing too many."
 