
The phrase of the tour was “It is not ideal”. Alastair Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> used it when talking about 
his preparation for the first Test of this expedition in Chittagong, just after 
his return to Bangladesh having briefly welcomed the arrival of his second 
child back in England. It was then used when the likes of Jos Buttler, Gareth 
Batty, Jake Ball, Haseeb Hameed and Jimmy Anderson were tossed into the Test 
team in India with scarcely any meaningful practice; the same applied to the 
debuts of Keaton Jennings and Liam Dawson, though the late arrivals did rather 
well – at least they were fresh.

England report card: five areas to focus on before the Ashes series next 
winter | Rob Smyth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/20/england-india-test-series-alastair-cook>
Usually the phrase was uttered stoically rather than as an excuse and it could 
have been used even more frequently. The itinerary was not ideal with seven 
consecutive Tests, which meant that in India the Lucans – Gary Ballance and 
Steven Finn – were never sighted outside of a net or dutifully running around 
under the guidance of a fitness trainer during lunch intervals.

The selection of the tour party was not ideal; the quality of the spin bowling 
was not ideal and we could go on. But let’s finish with the observation that a 
1-1 draw in Bangladesh and a 4-0 defeat to India was not ideal.

In the colder light of an abbreviated day the reviews of the tour and the 
planning for the future will soon commence back in England and they should go 
beyond the clear conclusion that India have been much the better side. It 
should be helpful to look back in the hope that mistakes will not be repeated. 
Here the issues revolve around the itinerary and selection.

Who signed off the notion of seven Tests in a row in the subcontinent and was 
that a good idea? The presumption is thatAndrew Strauss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-strauss>, England’s cricket director, 
inherited the itinerary but was the last man to put his pen to it (though it is 
often a murky business to pin down responsibility at the England and Wales 
Cricket Board). It was not a good idea. By Chennai the most conscientious of 
England’s cricketers were running out of steam, a situation inevitably 
exacerbated by three consecutive defeats.

The selection issue has two strands. Specifically there were many reservations 
about the original tour party and not all of them have been expressed with the 
benefit of hindsight. More generally the selection process seems flawed. Two 
selectors are cricket directors at counties, which results in a conflicts of 
interest as well as an obvious restriction in where they can go.

Meanwhile Trevor Bayliss <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/trevor-bayliss>, a 
selector and in an ideal world the one who should be most influential, is in 
fact hamstrung by a lack of knowledge about the candidates available. Perhaps 
his work pattern should be re-examined; in England there may be days when it 
would be far more useful for him to watch cricketers and make contacts around 
the counties rather than overseeing yet another England practice.

High time England utilised judgment of the highly paid Trevor Bayliss | Vic 
Marks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/england-trevor-bayliss-india-alastair-cook-selection-county-cricket>
Perhaps Strauss himself should have a greater input in selection; certainly he 
will have to review the process.

Looking ahead, England’s spin‑bowling resources when playing in Asia remain 
inadequate. Adil Rashid has made some progress this winter though probably not 
quite as much as his bag of 23 wickets against India suggests. By Chennai, 
Rashid and Moeen Ali were spent forces; meanwhile Dawson at least demonstrated 
an ability to land the ball on a length more frequently than any other English 
spinner in either Bangladesh or India, quite a condemnation of the others.

On the final day of the series the name of Somerset’s Jack Leach cropped up 
again because it was reported that there areconcerns about the validity of his 
action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/jack-leach-england-spinner-somerset-cricket>
. Having watched him more often than any of the selectors or anyone in the 
England camp, this was a stunning development. It has never occurred to me that 
there is any problem with his action. No human eye has been bothered but 
obviously the camera has.

It is worth remembering that this would not have been an issue when the 
original tour party was selected in the middle of September since Leach did not 
undergo the routine tests at Loughborough until after the season was over. 
However, the surprising results from those tests must have had an impact on the 
decision tocall up Dawson rather than Leach as a replacement for Zafar Ansari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/30/england-call-up-keaton-jennings-liam-dawson-india-tests-cricket>
 just over a fortnight ago.

At that point the ECB might have clarified the situation or it should have 
determined to keep its mouth shut. Instead there has been some mumbling about 
“issues” with Leach and finally in the wake of increased criticisms of its 
selections and on the day when England conceded the highest total ever, out it 
came. This may be regarded as a trivial matter. Perhaps it is – unless you 
happen to be Jack Leach. If this was an attempt by the England camp to defend 
themselves from further criticism, it failed. As for Leach’s pathway, to use 
the favoured ECB term, it has just acquired a few more obstacles.

Hopefully the captaincy issue will be handled better. We know that Cook and 
Strauss will talk early in January. Cook may want to resign but if he says he 
would like to continue then that is not the end of the matter. In that case it 
is a decision for Strauss and there should be significant input from the coach, 
although there is no suggestion from Bayliss that he is keen to be involved in 
the process, which is both curious and unsatisfactory.

The likeliest outcome – and the best one – is that Cook returns to Lord’s next 
July as England’s opening batsman but not their captain. No England captain has 
had to endure so much abuse (mind you, his predecessors did not have to operate 
under the severe and often anonymous scrutiny of today’s social media). Cook 
has never been the most intuitive of captains but he has been an honest one, 
who has won more Tests (24) than anyone except Michael Vaughan and – before the 
Furies interject – who has lost more than anyone (22). He has, of course, 
captained more than anyone as well (59).

My impression is that Cook himself has started to question whether he is the 
man to lead the next generation of England cricketers. He has looked weary at 
times on this trip and his batting has started to suffer. He has to relinquish 
the captaincy before the next Test in July or after the Ashes. The former seems 
like the best option. He has done his time. He would go with the universal 
respect of his peers, which counts for rather more than the opinions of those 
who have pursued him relentlessly sincethe ostracism of Kevin Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/06/kevin-pietersen-england-bullying-culture>
.
 