
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn <https://www.theguardian.com/books/solzhenitsyn> was a 
humane and tolerant family man a long way from the angry dissident he is often 
remembered as, according to his son.

"There is this notion that Solzhenitsyn was so intolerant, that everything was 
black and white for him and, well — bollocks," said Ignat Solzhenitsyn, whose 
father made public the grim reality of Stalin's labour camps in his Nobel 
prize-winning writing. "He rejected flatly those who sought to reduce his art 
or everything that he was to a political equation."

In an interview with the Times 
<http://entertainment.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_entertainment/books/article6975777.ece>
 in New York to mark publication of the first complete English version

of his father's In the First Circle, Ignat – a pianist and conductor – spoke 
of a man who encouraged his sons to learn English as they grew up in America, 
sent them to local schools and encouraged them to pursue their own interests 
regardless of his own beliefs. "If this seems at odds with the image in the 
west then I'm here to testify that that image is largely inaccurate. There is a 
confusion between my father taking his work seriously and taking himself 
seriously. He was a man of great humility," he said.

He believes it was partly his father's own fault that he was seen as an 
"embittered, angry prophet" – in 1978 he attacked the west in a speech at 
Harvard – because his "strident political tone was not compatible with typical 
western discourse". "Then people saw the beard and, well, two plus two equals 
Old Testament prophet. But that was a result of the urgency of the times he was 
living in. People did not understand the world he had come from," he said.

The reason his father hid himself away from the world was a literary one, as 
he threw himself into writing his epic work The Red Wheel. "He wanted to go 
someplace quiet where he could work without distractions. He said that he 
wished that he could have had the luxury to spend more time collecting 
impressions, mingling with Americans and travelling. But he knew that The Red 
Wheel would take every ounce of his time and energy and so he made his choice," 
he told the Times. "The seclusion wasn't a question of 'I don't want to be 
seen'. I say this with certainty."

Solzhenitsyn died in August 2008 aged 89. He first came to the world's 
attention with the publication of One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich in 
1962; In the First Circle, written between 1955 and 1958, was cut substantially 
to pass through Soviet censors before it was published in a hastily translated 
edition in 1968. Opening in Moscow on Christmas Eve in 1949, the novel follows 
the story of a mathematician in a Moscow prison asked to choose between helping 
the Soviet state or being transferred to the Siberian Gulag.
 