
Alexander Solzhenitsyn, the Soviet dissident writer and Nobel prize winner who 
revealed the horror of Stalin's brutal labour camps to the world, has died at 
the age of 89, his son said last night. Stepan Solzhenitsyn said his father had 
died of heart failure at his home, but declined further comment.

The author whose books chronicled the horrors of the Soviet gulag system was 
lauded as a moral and spiritual leader as well as one of the greatest writers 
of his time. His unflinching accounts of torment and survival in the Soviet 
Union's slave labour camps riveted his compatriots, whose secret history he 
exposed. His writings earned him 20 years of exile and international renown, 
making him one of the most prominent dissidents of the Soviet era and a symbol 
of intellectual resistance to communist rule.

His monumental work the Gulag Archipelago, written in secrecy in the Soviet 
Union and published in Paris in three volumes between 1973 and 1978, is the 
definitive work on Stalin's camps, where tens of millions perished.

Last year he was awarded one of Russia's highest honours, the state prize. In 
announcing the award Yury Osipov, president of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 
called Solzhenitsyn "the author of works without which the history of the 20th 
century is unthinkable".

His experience in the labour camps was described in his short novel One Day in 
the Life of Ivan Denisovich. His major works, including The First Circle and 
Cancer Ward, brought him global admiration and the 1970 Nobel prize for 
literature.

Stripped of his citizenship and sent into exile in 1974 after the publication 
of the Gulag Archipelago the writer settled in the United States.

But in 1989 Mikhail Gorbachev, allowed the publication of Solzhenitsyn's works 
as part of his perestroika reforms and restored his Soviet citizenship, 
enabling Solzhenitsyn to return as a hero in 1994.

He was born on December 11 1918, in Kislovodsk, southern Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, and grew up a loyal communist and 
staunch supporter of the Soviet regime. Solzhenitsyn studied physics and 
mathematics at Rostov University before becoming a Soviet army officer after 
Hitler's invasion in 1941. As a student he edited the Komsomol newspaper and 
was awarded one of only seven Stalin scholarships for outstanding social and 
scholastic achievement.

It was while at university that he began to write short stories, and drafted 
the plan for an immense Tolstoyan novel intended to celebrate the October 
revolution. But his devotion to socialist principles and indiscreet hostility 
to Stalin's autocratic rule led to his undoing.

Shortly before the war's end, Solzhenitsyn was arrested and sentenced to eight 
years in the labour camps.

For many years he had little expectation that his writings would see the light 
of day but the daring One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich caused a 
sensation. Its revelations about Stalin's policies and the evils of the labour 
camps were described as "a literary miracle". Within weeks his name was known 
all over the world.

Last night the Russian government expressed its condolences over his death. 
"President Dmitry Medvedev expressed his condolences to Solzhenitsyn's family," 
a Kremlin spokesman said.
 