
The Somali militant group al-Shabaab has formally joined al-Qaida, according 
to a video translation of a message from al-Qaida's leader.

Ayman al-Zawahiri <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayman-al-zawahiri> gave 
"glad tidings" that al-Shabaab had joined al-Qaida, according to the 
translation of the 15-minute video by the Site Intelligence group on Thursday.

"Today, I have glad tidings for the Muslim Ummah that will please the 
believers and disturb the disbelievers, which is the joining of the Shabaab 
al-Mujahideen Movement inSomalia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia> to 
Qaidat al-Jihad, to support the jihadi unity against the Zio-Crusader campaign 
and their assistants amongst the treacherous agent rulers," he said.

Al-Shabaab <https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-shabaab> leaders have pledged 
allegiance to al-Qaida in the past, releasing a video in 2009 called "At Your 
Service Osama", the same year that Osama bin Laden released a video in which he 
made encouraging comments about the Somali insurgency.

But the new al-Zawahiri video – which was posted on an Islamic Internet forum 
on Thursday – is the first formal welcoming of al-Shabaab by the new al-Qaida 
leader. The new video also featured the al-Shabaab chairman, Mukhtar Abu 
Zubeyr, also known as Godane, pledging allegiance to al-Zawahiri.

Somalia's al-Shabaab militia is a mix of conscripts, paid fighters, clan 
militias, and ideologues. It counts a few hundred foreign fighters among its 
ranks. Most are drawn from other east African nations but a few have travelled 
from as far afield as Pakistan and Chechnya.

The foreigners brought cash and tactical and bomb-making knowledge to 
al-Shabaab, but the extent of the organisation's formal links to al-Qaida have 
often been unclear. Clan allegiances are still an important part of the 
21-year-old Somali civil war, which currently pits al-Shabaab against the weak 
UN-backed government. The government is supported by some 10,000 African Union 
troops and allied militias.

Last November al-Zawahiri released a video about his memories of Bin Laden. 
The longtime Bin Laden deputy became al-Qaida's head after US Navy Seals killed 
Bin Laden in May. Information in his compound at the time of his death 
suggested that Bin Laden was "giving strategic direction" to al-Qaida 
affiliates in Somalia and Yemen.

Western intelligence officials say that al-Qaida officials have found 
sanctuary with al-Shabaab for years. Last month, a US drone strike killed Bilal 
al-Berjawi, a close associate of late al-Qaida operative Fazul Abdullah 
Mohammed, who directed the 1998 bombings of the US embassies in Kenya and 
Tanzania that killed more than 200 people. Fazul was killed in Somalia last 
year.
 