
Restoring a marble fireplace

I am fortunate to live in an A-listed mid-19th century house in Glasgow. It 
has an original big marble fireplace in a dark purplish aubergine colour with 
white veins. But the underside of the mantel top and the surface facing the 
grate are darkened almost to black by years of smoke. The rest of the marble 
surface, though in good condition, is dull. How can I safely remove the 
darkened grime without damaging the marble? Gentle detergent mixed with warm 
water is having no effect. Any suggestions?
Evelyn Silber, Glasgow

Marble is a beautiful but porous stone, and in this age of low-maintenance 
surfaces, it's labour intensive - a pain if you hate housework as much as me. 
To restore stained marble you may be best to use a deep-pore cleaner, which 
will really lift out the ingrained dirt particles. This will etch the surface 
of the marble (dulling its shine), so be sure to cover over any surfaces you 
wish to protect. Once cleaned you should regularly maintain the surface using a 
marble dressing -www.marblemasteruk.com <http://www.marblemasteruk.com> sell 
both.

Rug for a rugrat

I'm looking for a decent, tasteful but cheerful large wool rug for my 
two-year-old son's room, measuring at least a 170cm x 240cm. I would like an 
ethically produced rug (not made in China or by children). It needs to go with 
ebony-stained wooden floorboards, soft taupe walls, plain mushroom mock-suede 
curtains and white furniture. I'm not keen on character rugs. Our budget is 
£250 max.
Anna Walker, Norwich

I have three options. First get a piece of wool carpet cut to size and have it 
'whip-stitched' round the edge by your carpet retailer - you will have a vast 
colour selection and the size will be to your dimensions. Secondly check out 
the range of natural carpets with custom edge trims from
www.alternativeflooring.com <http://www.alternativeflooring.com> - I love the 
cord olive wool carpet. Alternatively blow the budget and let your creative 
skills run riot (or use your kid's drawings) by designing your own hand-tufted 
wool rug with Gaff Rugs, who charge £120 per square metre (www.gaffrugs.co.uk 
<http://www.gaffrugs.co.uk>). Choose from 120 colours in any size - what fun!

· If you have a decorating question for Oliver, email ask.oliver@observer.co.uk
 <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
 