
Just occasionally someone writes a book you've waited your life to read. Alex 
Ross's enthralling history of 20th-century music is, for me, one of those 
books. A subject that has always seemed tantalisingly fragmented and elusive is 
beautifully explained, crystallised and illuminated. Nothing from that century 
will ever sound quite the same again.

The book, The Rest Is Noise, seems to have had the same effect on many people. 
In the few months since it was published in the US, it has been reprinted seven 
times - about 70,000 copies in hardback. Classical musicians and academics have 
garlanded it in praise. Björk loves it. So, it is said, do Sting and assorted 
members of the Pet Shop Boys, Duran Duran and Radiohead. Which is not bad for a 
musicological treatise of 620-odd pages.

There are, indeed, sections on pop, rock and jazz - but you have to first 
thread your way through a good two inches of how music moved from the lush 
tonalities of Mahler to, well, the lush tonalties of John Adams via Schoenberg, 
Shostakovich, Stravinsky, Bartók, Elliott Carter, Messiaen and the other 
dominant figures of the century.

Ross is the music critic of the New Yorker, an august post previously held by 
such distinguished writers as Paul Griffiths and Andrew Porter. He is also a 
blogger. On his site,www.therestisnoise.com <http://www.therestisnoise.com>, he 
has broken new ground in thinking aloud about music on a virtually daily basis. 
Better than that, he's done what precious few other music critics have yet done 
in terms of harnessing the potential of the web. His blog is rich in sound 
files that illustrate the music he's describing or debating. He takes his own 
pictures and is generous in linking to other classical music blogs.

As importantly, he uses the web to ferret out interesting composers who have 
yet to surface through an increasingly hobbled recording and publishing 
industry. Within a short period of time, he has placed himself at the centre of 
musical debate in America. "Each generation produces one outstanding classical 
music critic," says the veteran editor of the New York Review of Books, Bob 
Silvers. "For this generation,Alex Ross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alex-ross> is it."

And here he is in person, beaming shyly and a bit nerdily in the glass and 
marble lobby of the Condé Nast building just off Times Square in New York. To 
the power dressers in the lift - off to their power lunches - he barely 
registers. And there is, indeed, something deeply unassuming about him, until 
we are settled at the New Yorker board table and he starts opening up about 
music.

As he talks, confidently and fluently, the book starts falling into place. 
Ross, now 40, is the son of two music-loving minerologists from Washington DC. 
He was a keen teenage musician and composer but read English and history at 
Harvard. While at college, he immersed himself in the local radio station, 
WHRB, presenting regular musical "orgies", where the entire canon of a 
particular composer's work would be performed and discussed over days. They did 
Beethoven over five days; but Ross was already obsessed with the music of his 
century and hosted orgies devoted to Shostakovich, Ligeti and Nielsen. Soon 
after leaving Harvard, he was writing musical criticism regularly. By 1996, he 
was the music critic of the New Yorker. "I've been happy ever after," he beams 
mildly through rimless glasses.

The book is as much a work of psychology or history as it is of criticism. It 
starts by challenging the common assertion that music is the purest of art 
forms - the one least explicitly rooted in politics, war, conflict, economics 
or events. Ross sets out to prove that the history and politics of the century 
are crucial to an understanding of the music. He wants us to hear the 
turbulence of our time in the music of our time. He wants us to sit up and make 
the link.

"People do seem to have been pulled in by this narrative, which to me is an 
exceedingly dramatic one - of the artists finding themselves out in the wild 
landscape of 20th-century history and surviving or thriving or being 
destroyed," he says. "The book is about composers colliding with the century 
itself and this sense that, through music, you can get a visceral sense of what 
it was like to be alive at these extraordinary moments in 20th-century music 
history. "

He concedes that it may be "vulgar" to go too far in relating music to events 
- "you know, because the Red Army was marching in a north-west direction, this 
is why Shostakovich wrote in A minor" - but insists that, nonetheless, it is 
valuable to give people information "which they can hold in mind as they listen 
to these pieces". He goes on: "When Stockhausen was a teenager, what did he 
experience? Awful scenes of accompanying soldiers in their dying moments and 
trying to feed them water through faces that had melted away. Carrying bodies, 
piling them up in a church serving as a morgue. We then look at what these 
composers wrote, and you can understand why they couldn't maintain a continuity 
with the music of the late 19th and early 20th centuries."

But surely the break with tonality came earlier - more as an intellectual 
reaction against what appeared to be the exhaustion of tonality in the early 
years of the century?

Ross disagrees - and, indeed, the book contains a vivid passage arguing that 
Schoenberg's musical transformation was provoked by a crisis in his own life: 
the discovery that his wife, Mathilde, had been having an affair with 
expressionist painter Richard Gerstl, who duly hanged himself naked in front of 
a full-length mirror.

"So, I think atonality sprang from visceral, emotional sources, which 
Schoenberg later intellectualised and rationalised," says Ross. "In a way, when 
I look at that period I think the ideology which seems to support it is more 
problematic than the music itself."

Ross believes he is of a generation when, in any event, the ideological 
arguments that divided and obsessed musicians for much of the past century now 
seem irrelevant. Just as he debunks the grand intellectual edifice erected 
around the second Viennese school (Schoenberg and his associates), so Ross has 
little time for those who believe that atonality was some sort of historic 
wrong turning.

"I'm fascinated by this whole question of why people are so ready to embrace 
abstraction in painting and yet still reject it in music. Jackson Pollock, John 
Cage and Morton Feldman used to hang out together in the Cedar Tavern on East 
Eighth Street. Now Pollock is this massive iconic figure, while Cage and 
Feldman remain quite obscure - even though the same principle was at work: of 
allowing a certain element of chance to enter the creative process."

The music he writes about today as a critic is, he thinks, a much more 
eclectic mix. "Every strand of 20th-century music is alive and well - the more 
populist tradition of Copland or Britten; the modernist; the avant garde; 
minimalism; folkloric; music influenced by pop or jazz." The difference today 
is that listeners are able to move among these traditions much more freely.

Ross was a latecomer to pop. He considered his brother's Beatles records 
"shrieking nonsense" while a teenager and thinks his then-sneering disdain for 
the genre is all too common in classical music circles. "It was only when I got 
to college that I realised how narrow I was. I was listening to Xenakis, 
Ligeti, Penderecki and other avant garde composers. It was pointed out to me 
how similar their music was to things going on in free jazz or Cecil Taylor or 
Sonic Youth."

It was a journey of discovery that has led via Oasis to Radiohead and Björk; 
to the electronic musician Mason Bates; and to downtown New York dives to 
listen to live "atonal noise" creators such as the Brooklyn band Mouthus. When 
he hears this music, he says he feels increasing confusion about what a 
composer is - and shies away from any attempt to predict which forms of music 
his successors will consider worth writing about in 100 years' time. "It may be 
that they will find huge significance in something created before an audience 
of 20 or 30 people in an obscure loft space. I do try to keep up with this 
underground music-making and find extraordinary things going on - as well, of 
course, as tedium."

All of which leads back to the web - and the avenues through which Ross stays 
in touch with contemporary musical developments. "The internet makes you very 
aware of how many composers there are out there," he says. "Before, there had 
been this situation where what we were hearing in terms of new music was 
heavily filtered by publishers, CD labels and concert presenters. Now, it seems 
very de-centred. There's a small number of composers who are commissioned and 
internationally performed, but there are so many other avenues for any listener 
to become aware of what composers in different camps and styles are doing.

"There's a real community of blogs. It has been really mind-opening for me, as 
a critic, to have so much information at my fingertips, to be able to find a 
completely unknown composer, to hear some of their music."

So, while many music critics concentrate solely on concert hall performances 
in traditional venues, Ross spends part of every day surrounded by teetering 
piles of CDs in his little New Yorker office, following web links on his Apple 
MacBook Air.

"It's the pure serendipity I love," he says. "Every composer will have links 
to 10 or 12 of his or her friends, colleagues, associates. Very often, I start 
with a composer who is known to me and branch out from there. Internationally, 
there are music information centres with individual pages for 100 or more 
composers with sound samples, so I'll dip into those. I sort of go along for a 
bit until I find two or three voices new to me, who grab my attention.

"I'm not trying to find the four or five composers 'who really matter' or who 
will endure. I have absolutely no idea. It's not our responsibility to work out 
what the repertoire will be in 2108. It's about responding to the voices who 
mean something to us in this particular instant. When I'm writing a blog, I'm 
writing from that point of view. I'm not trying to manufacture a canon. I'm 
just offering a lot of possibilities and openings. It's the whole mechanism of 
the link: it is endless."

He cites, as an example of someone he has discovered through this web of 
links, a young British-born composer, Anna Clyne, who has been living in 
Brooklyn (www.myspace.com/annaclyne <http://www.myspace.com/annaclyne>). "I was 
browsing around on the internet and I saw her name and I was intrigued. 
Coincidentally, someone sent me some CDs, and then I heard her music live and 
it all clicked. She at once became one of the younger New York-based composers 
I feel most strongly about. She has a fascinating blend of instrumental sound 
and electronic processes with a dark, wild tinge to it which I find very 
appealing."

Ross's own website uses numerous sound files. So if you feel intimidated or 
baffled to read that the opening notes of Strauss's Salome consist of a 
clarinet playing a scale that begins in C sharp major and ends in G major, you 
can click on a link that will play you the passage. I read The Rest Is Noise on 
an Amazon Kindle reader and half-hoped the links would be embedded in the text 
of the electronic book. Ross agrees this is the next logical step in writing 
about music. "When I put up sound samples to go with my book, I went through a 
pretty elaborate process with the publishers and orchestras. But it's changing."

Indeed it is, with Ross playing no small part in driving the change. "The 
great joy of music today is that you don't have to feel guilty about liking any 
of it," he says. "It's fantastically diverse - everything from purest tonality 
to ungodly noise and every imaginable gradation in between."

· To order The Rest Is Noise, published by Fourth Estate, for £18 with free UK 
p&p call Guardian book service on0870 836 0875 or go to theguardian.com/bookshop
 <https://www.theguardian.com/bookshop>
 