
You're reading these words because light waves are bouncing off the letters on 
the page and into your eyes. The sounds of the rustling paper or beeps of your 
computer reach your ear via compression waves travelling through the air. Waves 
race across the surface of our seas and oceans and earthquakes send waves 
coursing through the fabric of the Earth.

As different as they all seem, all of these waves have something in common – 
they are all oscillations that carry energy from one place to another. The 
physical manifestation of a wave is familiar – a material (water, metal, air 
etc) deforms back and forth around a fixed point.

Think of the ripples on the surface of a pond when you throw in a stone. 
Looking from above, circular waves radiate out from the point where the stone 
hits the water, as the energy of the collision makes water molecules around it 
move up and down in unison. The resulting wave is called "transverse" because 
it travels out from the point the stone sank, while the molecules themselves 
move in the perpendicular direction. A vertical cross-section of the wave would 
look like a familiar sine curve.

Sound waves are known as "longitudinal" because the medium in which they 
travel – air, water or whatever else – vibrates in the same direction as the 
wave itself. Loudspeakers, for example, move air molecules back and forth in 
the same direction as the vibration of the speaker cone.

In both cases, the water or air molecules remain, largely, in the same place 
as they started, as the wave travels through the material. They are not 
shifted, en masse, in the direction of the wave.

The one-dimensional wave equation (pictured) describes how much any material 
is displaced, over time, as the wave proceeds. The curly "d" symbols scattered 
through the equation are mathematical functions known as partial differentials, 
a way to measure the rate of change of a specific property of the system with 
respect to another.

On the left is the expression for how fast the material is deforming (y) in 
space (x) at any given instant; on the right is a description for how fast the 
material is changing in time (t) at that same instant. Also on the right is the 
velocity of the wave (v). For a wave moving across the surface of a sea, the 
equation relates how fast a tiny piece of water is physically deforming, at any 
particular instant, in space (on the left) and time (on the right).

The wave equation had a long genesis, with scientists from many fields 
circling around its mathematics across the centuries. Among many others, Daniel 
Bernoulli, Jean le Rond d'Alembert, Leonhard Euler, and Joseph-Louis Lagrange 
realised that there was a similarity in the maths of how to describe waves in 
strings, across surfaces and through solids and fluids.

Bernoulli, a Swiss mathematician, began by trying to understand how a violin 
string made sound. In the 1720s, he worked out the maths of a string as it 
vibrated by imagining the string was composed of a huge number of tiny masses, 
all connected with springs. Applying Isaac Newton's laws of motion for the 
individual masses showed him that the simplest shape for vibrating violin 
string, fixed at each end, would be the gentle arc of a single sine curve. A 
violin string (or a string on any instrument, for that matter) vibrates in 
transverse waves along its length, which creates longitudinal waves in the 
surrounding air, which our ears interpret as sound.

Some decades later, mathematician Jean Le Rond d'Alembert generalised the 
string problem to write down the wave equation, in which he found that the 
acceleration of any segment of the string was proportional to the tension 
acting on it. The waves created by different tensions of the string produce 
different notes – think of how the sound from a plucked string can be changed 
as it is tightened or loosened.

The wave equation started off describing movement of physical stuff but it is 
much more powerful than that. Mathematically, it can also describe, for 
example, the movement of heat or electrical potential, by changing "y" from 
describing the deformation of a substance to the change in the energy of a 
system.

Not all waves need to travel through a material. By 1864, the physicist James 
Clerk Maxwell had derived his four famous equations for the interactions of the 
electric and magnetic fields in a vacuum around charged particles. He noticed 
that the expressions could be combined to form wave equations featuring the 
strength of the electric or magnetic fields in the place of "y". And the speed 
of these waves (the "v" term in the equation) was equal to the speed of light.

This simple mathematical re-arrangement was one of the most significant 
discoveries in the history of physics, showing that light must be an 
electromagnetic wave that travelled in the vacuum.

Electromagnetic waves, then, are transverse oscillations of the electric and 
magnetic fields. Discovering their wave-like nature led to the prediction that 
there must be light of different wavelengths, the distance between successive 
peaks and troughs of the sine curve. It was soon discovered that wavelengths 
longer than visible light include microwaves, infrared and radio waves; shorter 
wavelengths include ultraviolet light, X-rays and gamma rays.

The wave equation has also proved useful in understanding one of the 
strangest, but most important, physical ideas in the past century: quantum 
mechanics. In this description of the world at the level of atoms and smaller, 
particles of matter can be described as waves using Erwin Schrödinger's 
eponymous equation.

His adaptation of the wave equation describes electrons, for example, not as a 
well-defined object in space but as quantum waves for which it is only possible 
to describe probabilities for position, momentum or other basic properties. 
Using the Schrödinger wave equation, interactions between fundamental particles 
can be modelled as if they were waves that interfere with each other, instead 
of the classical description of fundamental particles, which has them hitting 
each other like billiard balls.

Everything that happens in our world, happens because energy moves from one 
place to another. The wave equation is a mathematical way to describe how that 
energy flows.
 