
The South Carolina <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/south-carolina> senate 
gave its final approval on Tuesday to removing the Confederate flag from the 
capitol grounds, but across the hall in the house of representatives, 
Republicans quietly sought a way to make a last stand to preserve some kind of 
symbol honoring their southern ancestors at the state house.

The House was scheduled to begin debate on Wednesday on the bill to take down 
the flag and its pole and send the banner to the state’s Confederate relic 
room. Governor Nikki Haley and business leaders support the proposal.

Alabama city votes to pull Confederate flag as Florida town flies it again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/07/alabama-florida-confederate-flag>
To stress the chamber’s unity after Tuesday’s 36-3 vote, senators invited the 
widow of their slain colleague Clementa Pinckney to the floor. She stood just 
inside the door in a black dress, only a few feet from her husband’s desk, 
which was draped in black cloth with a single white rose on top. Every member 
stood as she entered and later walked up to her, offering condolences.

After the flag was pulled off the state house dome 15 years ago, it was called 
a settled issue. The banner was instead moved to a monument honoring 
Confederate soldiers elsewhere on the capitol grounds.

But the flag debate swiftly gained urgency last month after Pinckney and eight 
other black people were fatally shot at a historic African American church in 
Charleston. A white gunman who police said was motivated by racial hatred is 
charged in the attack.

Dylann Roof was indicted on Tuesday on nine counts of murder, three counts of 
attempted murder and a weapons charge.

Haley and other conservatives have said they called for the flag to come down 
in part because of photos showing Roof posing with the Confederate symbol.

If the house goes along with the senate’s bill, the flag could be removed by 
the end of the week. But if the house changes the bill, either the senate would 
have to agree with the changes or lawmakers would have to reconcile their 
differences in a conference committee, possibly delaying action for weeks. 
Several senators said the lopsided vote shows they do not want their bill to 
change.

Many Republicans in the house insist the flag will come down because of its 
association with racist groups. But they think lawmakers should at least 
discuss replacing it with a different flag that flew over Confederate troops.

Representative Mike Pitts plans to propose several possible flags for the pole 
and believes he has a majority to pass them. Completely removing the flagpole, 
he said, would scrub history, which includes family members from his Laurens 
county home and from the mountains of North Carolina and Virginia.

“I guess my plan for tomorrow is to be a lot like my ancestors were at the 
Bloody Angle,” Pitts said, referring to part of a Virginia battlefield where 
fighting raged for nearly 24 hours in 1864, leaving Confederate dead stacked 
four deep behind their fortifications. “And fight until I have nothing left to 
fight with.”

Pitts’ favorite amendment would place on the pole the flag of the 1st South 
Carolina volunteers regiment, which is a blue flag similar to the state flag 
with its Palmetto tree and crescent moon but with a wreath around the tree. 
Similar art is etched on a wall inside the state house, Pitts said.

Any change to the senate bill is unacceptable to the 46 Democrats in the 
124-member house – a critical number because some Democrats will have to 
support any bill to take down the flag to reach the two-thirds threshold 
required by law, the minority leader, Todd Rutherford, said.

“It will become the new symbol,” Rutherford said of any flag that goes up 
beside the monument to Confederate soldiers. “It will be the new vestige of 
racism.”

Asked if the GOP was using the idea of an alternative flag simply to avoid 
bringing down the existing banner, Democratic representative Joe Neal, elected 
in 1992, said he thinks most Republicans are willing to remove the flag and 
pole entirely.

“I think a majority wants to do this. There is a minority that is dead set 
against it,” Neal said. “We’ll see, when that vote comes up, who they are.”

Tuesday’s senate vote lacked drama, nearly matching the vote from the day 
before. But minutes after, the chamber hushed and all 45 senators stood up as 
Jennifer Pinckney entered.

On 17 June, she locked herself in an office with one of the slain senator’s 
two daughters as the gunman fired dozens of shots in her husband’s Emanuel 
African Methodist church. Since then, her only appearances have been at her 
husband’s viewing and funeral.

She did not speak publicly at the capitol. Instead, family attorney and 
Clementa Pinckney’s fellow senator Gerald Malloy spoke on her behalf. Malloy 
said he was proud that the senate followed the example of the Emanuel AME 
families who offered forgiveness to the gunman. He cited lawmakers’ willingness 
to accept that the Confederate flag is a painful symbol to many South 
Carolinians who are not in their party nor of their race.

“She wanted to show her gratitude,” Malloy said of Pinckney’s widow. “As you 
can see, Clementa shined on her as well. His grace is contagious. It is 
contagious throughout this state.”
 