
Prosecutors have ordered Pravin Gordhan, the South African finance minister, 
to appear in court over allegations he broke public finance rules by granting a 
colleague early retirement – news that sent the rand and share prices reeling.

The currency dropped as much as 3.4% against the dollar after the announcement 
of the latest legal problems for the finance minister, who says he has been the 
victim of a politically motivated campaign in the past few months.

South Africa’s chief prosecutor, Shaun Abrahams, said Gordhan, in his previous 
role as head of the South African Revenue Service, had cost the tax agency 
around 1.1m rand (£62,000) by approving early retirement for the tax agency’s 
deputy commissioner, Ivan Pillay, and rehiring him as a consultant.

Gordhan is still being investigated for his role a decade ago in setting up a 
surveillance unit at the tax department which is suspected of spying on 
politicians including the president,Jacob Zuma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zuma>. Gordhan has since described the 
investigation as “political mischief”.

An elite police unit known as the Hawks first questioned Gordhan about the 
allegation in February, in an investigation that some analysts have said was 
the result of political pressure from a faction allied to Zuma. The president 
has denied the claims.

Abrahams said: “I can assure you there has been no political interference in 
this matter. There has been no political interference in the decision made.”


Gordhan confirmed that prosecution officials had delivered the summons to 
appear in court to his house on Tuesday morning.

“It looks like we are in for a bit of excitement going forward,” he said at a 
business seminar in Johannesburg. “My lawyers will issue a proper statement in 
a short while.”

David Maynier, the shadow minister of finance for the main opposition 
Democratic Alliance party, said prosecuting Gordhan would be “a disaster for 
the economy” and would make a credit ratings downgrade more likely.

“We must now trust the courts to determine whether there is any merit to these 
charges,” he said.

In August, Gordhan declined to obey a police summons in connection with the 
inquiry into whether he had used the tax service unit to spy on politicians, 
saying he had done nothing wrong.

The governing ANC party urged Gordhan to cooperate with the latest summons and 
said the lingering investigation was having a detrimental effect on the economy.

The party said it hoped the latest legal step would move the country “a step 
closer to uncovering the truth from facts”.

Analysts said the Gordhan summons increased the political risk of doing 
business in the country. “This will further erode confidence in the political 
and economic management ofSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>,” said Daniel Silke, director 
of the Political Futures consultancy. “It will potentially affect our chances 
of sustaining the current rating agency levels.”

President Zuma hires South Africa's third finance chief in a week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/13/president-zuma-hires-south-africas-third-finance-chief-in-a-week>
In line with the weaker rand, South African bank stocks fell nearly 5% to a 
four-week low.

Government and dollar bonds also fell sharply, while the cost of insuring 
exposure to South African debt leapt to three-month highs.

Investors and rating agencies back Gordhan’s plans to rein in government 
spending in an economy that has been forecast by the central bank to grow at 
just above 0% this year.

A cut to “junk” status in ratings reviews due later this year would push up 
Pretoria’s borrowing costs, making it harder to plug the budget deficit.

• This article was amended on 14 October 2016. An earlier version said 
“described the unit” where “described the investigation” was meant.
 