
South Africa’s controversial president, Jacob Zuma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zuma>, is well known for his antipathy 
towards urban black intellectuals, whom he labels “the clever blacks”.

In 2014, when he was asked about public concerns that he had used state funds 
to build himself a £13m palace in his home village in rural KwaZulu Natal, he 
replied that only “very clever and bright people” cared about the issue. In a 
speech in November 2012, Zuma slammed urban blacks “who become too clever”, 
saying: “They become the most eloquent in criticising themselves about their 
own traditions and everything.”

Last week, the “clever blacks” had their revenge on Zuma, delivering the 
heaviest electoral loss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/04/south-africans-deliver-stinging-rebuke-to-anc>
to Nelson Mandela’s African National Congress since democracy dawned in 1994 
while setting up a mighty contest for national elections in 2019.

Although the ANC retained massive support in rural South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>, its losses in urban areas were 
shocking and comprehensive. In Nelson Mandela Bay, the coastal city renamed in 
honour of South Africa’s most famous son, voters rejected the ANC and gave 
their votes to the opposition Democratic Alliance. Just 10 years ago, the ANC 
got 66% of the vote in the city famous for its struggle against apartheid. It 
polled a disappointing 40% last week.

Yesterday, Pretoria (in the process of being renamed Tshwane), the executive 
capital of the country, was set to be run by an opposition coalition after the 
ANC came in at a paltry 41% of the vote behind the DA. The parliamentary 
capital, Cape Town, has been in opposition hands for more than a decade. The 
African continent’s economic powerhouse, Johannesburg, saw the ANC lose its 
majority as opposition parties started coalition talks there too.

The national story tells a similarly depressing story for the ANC. In local 
elections in 2006, the party got 66.3% votes nationwide. The DA took 14.8%. 
Last week, the ANC reached just under 54% 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-36997461> and the main opposition DA 
stood at 27%.

Wednesday’s election was a major turning point for the ANC and for South 
Africa. Last October, ANC general secretary, Gwede Mantashe, warned a party 
policy conference that were its support to plunge below 60% this year it would 
mark a “psychological and political turning point”.

That moment has now arrived as the party that led the international liberation 
struggle against apartheid failed to convince its core urban constituency to 
vote for it in significant numbers. In urban townships such as Soweto, an ANC 
stronghold, voter turnout was as low as 46%, while those who did turn up 
increasingly voted for the opposition DA and the radical three-year-old 
Economic Freedom Fighters formed by expelled former ANC Youth League firebrand 
Julius Malema.

This is a watershed moment because it means South Africa is no longer a 
country dominated by one party of liberation. For long, we were slowly inching 
towards being a proper, lively, multi-party system that holds power to account. 
We are now hurtling that way. It’s exhilarating.

Former ANC treasurer-general Mathews Phosa, a businessman and former Zuma 
ally, summed up the ANC’s losses thus: “We need to accept the reality that 
there are many young people who voted for the DA. Where do these people come 
from? They left the ANC and why did they leave the ANC? The clever blacks have 
spoken… The masses are punishing us with the weapon we won for them. The vote.”

It’s been a long time coming. Since Zuma came to power in 2007, the ANC has 
been racked by corruption scandals, infighting and splits. Economic 
mismanagement has plagued the Zuma administration, with unemployment rising 
from 21% to just over 26% since 2008. The economy has taken a beating, with 
projections by the Reserve Bank saying that there will be zero growth this 
year, while ratings agencies have threatened a credit rating downgrade.

To mask these failings, the ANC ran a negative and racist campaign that aimed 
to paint the opposition DA as the party of apartheid. Campaigning in Nelson 
Mandela Bay, Zuma called the DA “snakes, the children of the National party” 
and repeatedly referred to its young black leader as a puppet of whites.

Urban South Africans did not buy this scaremongering. As the memories of the 
Mandela years and the liberation struggle have faded, and the ANC’s internal 
troubles have spilled out into the open, so too has unquestioning faith in the 
country’s liberation party and its veterans such as Zuma. The legitimacy 
conferred upon them by the struggle is no longer a mask for their failings in a 
country that is now scarred by stories of rampant political corruption, crime 
and poverty.

The country now enters a new era of competitive politics in a terrain where 
once the ANC’s struggle credentials ensured it unparalleled success. Malema, 
the energetic young founder of the EFF, has won 8% of the national vote and is 
a kingmaker in Johannesburg and Tshwane. Malema says he predicts the ANC will 
not be governing South Africa when the country takes to the polls in the 2019 
national government elections.

It is a claim that would have once been dismissed as a pipe dream. No longer. 
Even in its rural strongholds such as Limpopo, where Malema comes from, the ANC 
has slunk in way below its previous support levels. In Zuma’s rural home 
municipality, the ANC claimed 44.25% while the Inkatha Freedom party won with 
54%.

What does it mean? The post-colonial African story is replete with tales of 
liberation movements that have stayed in power with one leader and one party 
despite losing the support of the people. Zimbabwe, just to the north of us, is 
a painful example of such a country; Mugabe and Zanu-PF have been in power for 
36 years.

South Africa has broken with that narrative. First, Zuma is the fourth 
president of the country since 1994. Mandela broke with the “strong man” 
tradition by stepping down after one term. Now, with these results, a future 
where South Africa could be run by an opposition party is beginning to emerge. 
We could see this in the next national election in 2019 or in 2024.

It may be disconcerting for those of us who grew up with the ANC as the very 
heart of the South African political landscape, but it is not necessarily a bad 
thing. It heralds the maturation of our politics and the steady, welcome move 
towards a lively, competitive, responsive multi-party democracy. South Africans 
are using the ballot box to speak to their leaders and that can only be a good 
thing.

Justice Malala is a political commentator and author of We Have Now Begun Our 
Descent: How to Stop South Africa Losing its Way
 