
The following correction was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and 
clarifications column, Wednesday 30 September 2009

In the article below about the efforts by Tate Britain and the Museums 
Association to forestall Southampton's plan to sell works from the city's art 
collection, we reported the argument that display space is limited at the 
present city gallery, and stated that two Rodin pieces are in storage. In fact, 
both are on show.



A council's plan to sell off the "family artwork" to help fund a new museum 
and gallery may be stalled at the last minute, after intervention by Tate 
Britain and the Museums Association.

Southampton <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/southampton> has been told to 
reconsider the proposed auction of a Rodin sculpture and a horse-racing oil by 
Sir Alfred Munnings to meet a third of the cost of a £15m Titanic exhibition 
and civic art gallery.

As well as creating a climb-on replica of part of the liner, which left 
Southampton in 1912, the building would allow the council to show an estimated 
100 works of art which are in store.

The plan would make only a relatively small hole in the city's collection, 
which includes work by Turner, Monet and Picasso among 3,500 pieces worth an 
estimated £180m.

The Tate, which advises on the bequest from a local councillor, Robert 
Chipperfield, which provided the Southampton art gallery in 1911, said that the 
planned disposal appeared to breach its intentions. It said: "We believe the 
sale of works acquired through the Chipperfield bequest to raise funds towards 
a capital project is not advisable and, indeed, not in the spirit of the 
bequest."

The Museums Association, which is meeting councillors in October, said the 
city riskedbreaching policy guidelines <http://www.museumsassociation.org/36433>
. Caitlin Griffiths, the association's head of professional issues, said: "The 
key requirement that they have not met at this time is that all other funding 
sources should be explored and any sale should be a last resort."

Southampton turned to the sale plan after an initial funding package, based on 
selling unwanted land and buildings, fell £5m short. John Hannides, a council 
cabinet member for leisure, culture and heritage, said that every alternative 
had been explored. The new gallery would significantly improve public access to 
the civic art collection, he said, which has only 200 pieces on show at any one 
time.

These include the Munnings painting, which is valued at up to £4m, but neither 
of two Rodins, one of which would be the second lot. Both the Rodins are in 
store. They are a life-size casting of Eve, worth between £1m and £1.5m, and 
Crouching Woman, a 31cm-high piece, worth an estimated £400,000.

The ethics committee of the Museums Association is expected to ask the city to 
spend a further year looking for other funding, or await a revival of property 
prices. The sale cannot go ahead without permission from the attorney general, 
Baroness Scotland, and the Museums, Libraries and Archives Council.

Mary Lloyd, spokeswoman for the Save Our Collection campaign, said: "Our 
stance has been vindicated. We are not alone in thinking the city council's 
proposals are unethical, undemocratic and ill-thought through."
 