
Cardiff Blues <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cardiffblues> achieved only 
their second competitive victory in England since their formation four years 
ago, but it was not enough to take them into the semi-finals. At least they had 
the distinction of inflicting Bath's first defeat at the Rec for more than a 
year, with the home side strangely insipid on a wet and dreary evening.

Bath's head coach Steve Meehan was as unhappy as the players afterwards. "They 
realise as a group that they let themselves down and we are very disappointed 
to give up our home record in such a manner."

It was not a night for try bonus points. Four hours of incessant rain made 
handling hazardous, even if the pitch remained firm. The opening half yielded 
just four shared penalties, and each side also had a try disallowed by the 
video referee who deemed that neither Joe Maddock nor Jason Spice had had full 
control when claiming to have touched down.

Maddock's effort followed a neat chip by the Springbok Butch James in the 17th 
minute, the first timeBath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> had been on 
the attack. The winger beat Spice to the touchdown, but Maddock had knocked on 
before falling on the ball.

Cardiff dominated the opening half but only managed to get in behind the Bath 
defence once, seven minutes before the break, when Spice dummied at a ruck five 
yards from the line and strolled over. But instead of diving to the ground, he 
tried to place the ball with his right hand and it slipped from his grasp.

The Blues twice took the lead in the opening half through David Flanagan 
penalties, but on each occasion Olly Barkley was not long in equalising. Spice 
partially made up for his gaffe with 13 minutes to go when the scrum-half was 
hauled down in the Bath 25. The Blues were awarded a penalty after Peter Short 
had been spotted shirt-pulling and the second-row was sent to the sin-bin.

Flanagan landed the kick to put the Blues three points ahead. Barkley missed 
the chance to equalise five minutes later and it proved Bath's last chance as 
Cardiff snapped up a breakway try. The prop Paulica Ion rashly tried a pass in 
the Blues' 25, the ball fell loose and Jamie Roberts launched a counterattack 
by freeing Tom James. The wing was hauled down a yard short but Robin 
Sowden-Taylor was on hand to seal the victory.

Bath Abendanon; Maddock, Barkley, Stephenson; James, Claasens; Ovens, Dixon, 
Ward, Borthwick (capt), Short, Faamatuainu, Lipman, Browne.

Replacements Goodman for Browne, 44; Ion for Ovens, 46; Mears for Dixon, 51; 
Berne for Cheeseman, 74; Scaysbrook for Lipman, 74; Purdy for Short, 79; Walshe 
for Claasens, 80.

Pens Barkley 2. Sin-bin Short

Cardiff Blues Roberts; Selley, G Thomas (Williams 71min), Hewitt, James; 
Flanagan, Spice; Yapp, R Thomas, Powell, Jones, Tito, Molitika, Sowden-Taylor, 
Rush (capt).

Try Sowden-Taylor. Pens Flanagan 3.

Referee N Owens (Ponyberem) Attendance 9,510

Replacements: Jenkins for Yapp, 58; Powell for Molitika, 58; Williams for R 
Thomas, 75; Morgan for Tito, 79.
 