
A senior US scientist has expressed concern that the intelligence services are 
funding climate change research to learn if new technologies could be used as 
potential weapons.

Alan Robock, a climate scientist at Rutgers University in New Jersey, has 
called on secretive government agencies to be open about their interest in 
radical work that explores how to alter the world’s climate.

Robock, who has contributed to reports for the intergovernmental panel on 
climate change (IPCC), uses computer models to study how stratospheric aerosols 
could cool the planet in the way massive volcanic eruptions do.

But he was worried about who would control such climate-altering technologies 
should they prove effective, he told the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science in San Jose.



Last week, the National Academy of Sciences published a two-volume report 
<http://nas-sites.org/americasclimatechoices/public-release-event-climate-intervention-reports/>
 on different approaches to tackling climate change. One focused on means to 
remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, the other on ways to change clouds 
or the Earth’s surface to make them reflect more sunlight out to space.

Is geoengineering a bad idea? | Karl Mathiesen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/11/is-geoengineering-a-bad-idea-climate-change>
The report concluded that while small-scale research projects were needed, the 
technologies were so far from being ready that reducing carbon emissions 
remained the most viable approach to curbing the worst extremes of climate 
change. Areport by the Royal Society in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2009/sep/01/geo-technology-testing> 
made similar recommendations.

The $600,000 report was part-funded by the US intelligence services, but 
Robock said the CIA and other agencies had not fully explained their interest 
in the work.

“The CIA was a major funder of the National Academies report so that makes me 
really worried who is going to be in control,” he said. Other funders included 
Nasa, the US Department of Energy, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration.

The CIA established the Center on Climate Change and National Security 
<https://www.cia.gov/news-information/press-releases-statements/center-on-climate-change-and-national-security.html>
 in 2009, a decision that drew fierce criticism from some Republicans who 
viewed it as a distraction from more pressing terrorist concerns. The centre 
was closed down in 2012, but the agency said it would continue to monitor the 
humanitarian consequences of climate change and the impact on US economic 
security, albeit not from a dedicated office.

Robock said he became suspicious about the intelligence agencies’ involvement 
in climate change science after receiving a call from two men who claimed to be 
CIA consultants three years ago. “They said: ‘We are working for the CIA and 
we’d like to know if some other country was controlling our climate, would we 
be able to detect it?’ I think they were also thinking in the back of their 
minds: ‘If we wanted to control somebody else’s climate could they detect it?’”

He replied that if a country wanted to create a stratospheric cloud large 
enough to change the climate, it would be visible with satellites and 
ground-based instruments. The use of the weather as a weapon was banned in 1978 
under theEnvironmental Modification Convention (Enmod) 
<https://www.icrc.org/ihl/INTRO/460>.

Asked how he felt about the call, Robock said he was scared. “I’d learned of 
lots of other things the CIA had done that didn’t follow the rules. I thought 
that wasn’t how my tax money was spent,” he said. The CIA did not respond to 
requests for comment over the weekend.

The US dabbled in weather modification before Enmod was introduced. In the 
early 1960s, researchers on Project Storm Fury seeded thunderstorms with 
various particles in the hope of diminishing their destructive power. A similar 
process was adopted during the Vietnam war, with clouds seeded over the Ho Chi 
Minh trail in a bid to make the major supply route for North Vietnamese foot 
soldiers too muddy to pass.

 “I think this research should be out in the open and it has to be 
international so there won’t be any question that this technology will used for 
hostile purposes,” Robock said.
 