
No NFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> team wants to see the face of 
their franchise rolling around on the ground grabbing his knee. When you are the
Pittsburgh Steelers and Ben Roethlisberger has already led you to two Super 
Bowl titles, and remains your best hope for another, it’s an especially 
disconcerting feeling.

There was Roethlisberger in the second half of the Steelers’ 12-6 victory at 
St Louis on Sunday, riding off the cart with his left knee stretched in an 
awkward position. After the game, team officials said they were sure their 
quarterback had not broken his leg, and might have also escaped serious damage.

Later on Sunday, media reported that Roethlisberger has an MCL sprain and a 
bone bruise, per a source informed of the injury. The Steelers’ quarterback is 
expected to be out four to six weeks, but it seems Roethlisberger did not 
suffer any damage to his ACL – which would’ve theoretically ended his season.

“He is being evaluated,” Pittsburgh coach Mike Tomlin said after the game. “I 
gave you all the information I have. I will give you some more when I get it.”

Nobody in Pittsburgh wanted to see the start of the Michael Vick era. The 
former Falcons and Eagles quarterback was decent on Sunday, completing five of 
six passes for 38 yards, but the Steelers need Roethlisberger to return if they 
expect to make a postseason run.

But it was a strange day all around in St Louis. Two hours before 
Roethlisberger went down, a pre-game fireworks display went haywire and embers 
fell on the turf, setting it ablaze. Stadium workers quickly doused the fire 
and had to vacuum the ashes and fire retardant before the game could begin.

Forget the scorched turf in St Louis, the Patriots once again seem to be on a 
scorched earth mission. They trampled theJacksonville Jaguars 51-17. They are 
3-0 in this year in which they were supposed to start the season withoutTom 
Brady <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tom-brady> and have been dealing with 
constant allegations of cheating. So far they have outscored opponents 199-70, 
and Brady today threw his 400th touchdown pass against the beleaguered Jaguars. 
The last time they played with such anger, blasting every team they played was 
2007 – the year they were caught videotaping Jets team signals in what became 
called “Spygate.” That season they went 16-0, scoring less than 27 points only 
twice.

The Cowboys are looking at about a month without their franchise quarterback 
Tony Romo. For a half on Sunday they looked just fine with Brandon Weeden as 
his replacement, especially with Joseph Randle tearing through the Falcons 
early on. But it doesn’t matter who is playing quarterback for Dallas if the 
Cowboys can’t stop their opponents. Atlanta receiver Julio Jones scored two 
second half touchdowns as theFalcons scored all 22 second half points in a 
39-28 road win.

The feelgood story of the day was supposed to be the matchup of the McCown 
brothers, Luke and Josh. Luke was replacing the injured Drew Brees inNew Orleans
 and Josh had regained his starting job inCleveland.

But it was not a happy ending for either brother. Josh played well enough, 
throwing for 341 yards and two touchdowns, but he was outplayed by the Raiders’ 
second-year quarterback Derek Carr, who is quickly becoming a star. Carr threw 
for 314 yards and two touchdowns and, running back Latavius Murray ran for 139 
and a touchdown inOakland’s 27-20 victory. The surprising Raiders are now 2-1.

Luke McCown’s day wasn’t as productive as his brother’s. He had 310 passing 
yards and no touchdowns, but he still managed to push the Saints to within five 
points of beating Carolina for what would have been his first game-winning 
drive since 2007. It fell short and thePanthers won 27-22.

This spells trouble for New Orleans, who are 0-3 and in serious danger of 
seeing their season collapse. Given the salary cap troubles that forced them to 
jettison talented players before the year, the Saints’ record is 
understandable, but few teams have ever come from such a bleak start to make 
the playoffs.

This is the position in which Baltimore finds themselves after losing 28-24 to 
Cincinnati.

Less dire is the situation of the Indianapolis Colts, who played for the AFC 
Championship last year and were expected to be Super Bowl contenders again. 
Despite early struggles in their first two games and a defense that allowed 
Marcus Mariota to throw for 367 yards, Indianapolis managed to win their first 
game, 35-33 against theTitans, although quarterback Andrew Luck was not sharp 
in throwing two interceptions and losing a fumble.

The besieged Eagles also won their first game, beating the Jets 24-17. 
 