
Steve Smith is something of an outlier. The average career life expectancy for 
a university vice-chancellor is under five years. Smith has now racked up 11 
years at theUniversity of Exeter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofexeter> and has just agreed 
to stay on for another five which will take him up to his retirement.

You might think, then, that Smith has the job pretty much nailed. Since he 
took on the post in 2002, Exeter has risen from 34th in the university rankings 
to about 10th –12th in the Guardian listings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/table/2013/jun/03/university-league-table-2014>
 (whoops) and seventh in the Sunday Times, has joined theRussell Group 
<http://www.russellgroup.ac.uk/> and expanded its student intake and campus 
facilities.

"Life is fairly sweet", Smith concedes with a smile – it would be hard for it 
not to be on a hot summer's day in the west country when most of the staff and 
students have already gone off on holiday – "but it can also be fairly tough. 
In fact, I'd say the job is actually harder now than it was when I started. 
Getting Exeter into a position where it could be a sustainable university was 
never easy, but, in many ways, the most difficult part has been to keep it 
there. The competition – especially from overseas – to recruit the best 
students and the best staff is getting tougher and tougher. We've already lost 
a number of high profile academics to better funded Australian universities who 
can afford to pay significantly higher salaries."

The sweet spot

Exeter is in a better position than most universities. Its profile and, yes, 
its location (never underestimate the value of a well-maintained campus in an 
attractive part of the country) give it a head start over many other UK higher 
education institutions and over the past year it has been appointing a new 
member of academic staff every two days on average. "The quality of applicant 
has been frighteningly high," Smith insists. "If I were up against some of them 
I don't think I'd stand a chance."

Even so, Smith doesn't feel he can relax because the battle to maintain the 
new status quo has to be fought on every front.

"The imposition of £9,000 tuition fees did affect the number of applicants 
last year," he says, "though that was in line with what we expected as many 
students who might have deferred their places during the previous year sensibly 
chose not to, UCAS applications have been back up again this year. Not to their 
peak, but to where they were in 2009. But we can't ignore the fact that the 
demographics are changing – the potential student pool has fallen by 60,000 
this year or that student expectations have risen."

The new fee structure may have put more cash directly into the coffers – 
universities are about £1,000-£1,500 better off on every arts and social 
studies student (though down a bit for those doing heavy science courses) – but 
the gain has come with its own price tag. "Students are now asking themselves 
if what they are being presented with is a value for money £9,000 offer," says 
Smith. "And it's one they are fully entitled to make."

But it does present its own problems. Does anyone really know what a £9,000 
university course should like? How do you value higher education? By the 
quality of its teaching staff? By its facilities? By the number of student 
bars? By the quality of the student accommodation? By the job prospects of its 
graduates?

That last one is a particular minefield in a recession. Smith has got most of 
the obvious bases covered. All staff are required to teach at least one first 
or second year course, thereby ensuring every student has the opportunity to be 
taught by a department's 'big name' academic. There are no 'third-year only' 
sinecures for Exeter's superstars.

He has also adopted a transparency policy. "There is a budget scrutiny group, 
to which student representatives are invited, for all the university's income 
and expenditure," Smith says. "Every penny we spend is accounted for. 
Similarly, students are also invited to have their say in what they think their 
money should be spent on. They have the chance to tell us what contact hours 
they would like, who they want to teach them and what facilities they want. 
Last year, their main demand was for the sporting facilities to be upgraded. So 
that's what we are now doing."

A new democracy?

In its way, this could be a healthy sign of a new democratisation of higher 
education, one where those who are paying get to call the shots. But it does 
raise a few rather uncomfortable questions. Are the students necessarily the 
right people to be determining policy? Are new sports facilities – Exeter's 
could hardly ever have been described as bog-standard in the first place – the 
university's priority?

Giving the students what they want also pushes academics into a hard place, 
because what most students want is a first-class degree. Something all 
universities – not just Exeter – are increasingly willing to give. Standards 
may or may not be higher, but when competition for the best students is fierce, 
an institution with a reputation for being stingy with its top-class degrees is 
going to find itself at a disadvantage.

"The balance has unquestionably moved to give students much more of an equal 
voice," Smith says. "But it hasn't shifted to one where the academic staff have 
been marginalised. Look, I'm sure if you were to wander round the campus you 
would find a few grumpy academics who think everything has changed for the 
worst. You will find the same thing at every university. But we do try to 
consult and involve our staff in all decisions. We invite them to think about 
what kind of department they would like to work in and how we could make it 
happen. The £9,000 tuition fees have brought just as much demand for better 
standards from our academics as it has the students. They say, "You want me to 
deliver a £9,000 course, then give me £9,000 facilities". It cuts both ways.

Leaving Smith as the man in the middle. Exeter may have a reputation for being 
one of the more comfortably middle-class and well-heeled of the UK's 
universities, but by inclination he is politically to the left – New Labour in 
the days when the term wasn't a veiled insult.

He believes passionately in equality of opportunity and the value of 
education. "I was the first member of my family to go to university," he says, 
"and I nearly didn't make it. My teacher said I shouldn't bother applying and 
that I should go staright off to work in the shoe factory. My father never 
forgot that. When he was dying a couple of years ago, one of the last things he 
said to me was "make sure I'm not buried next to that bastard who didn't want 
you to go to university."

Compromise

So how does he square away his own liberalism with Exeter's widely-held image 
of privilege? With pragmatism. Whatever Smith may or may not personally think 
of the increasing marketisation of higher education and the knock-on selection 
implications for the most socio-economically disadvantaged students at the top 
universities, he tries to deal with the matter in hand. He can't reverse 
government policy; all he can do is work with it to make sure Exeter is in the 
best place possible to ensure its survival. If he can keep it in 10th place 
then the students and research funding should follow.

But it is still a question of compromise. Things have to change. Research is 
more likely to receive a high number of citations if it is co-authored with an 
academic from an overseas institution. So all departments are now being 
encouraged to collaborate internationally. Exeter's physics department can't 
compete on its own with Tsinghua in China; but it might be able if it grouped 
with other UK universities. Which is why Exeter, Bristol, Bath and Cardiff have 
joined forces under the GW4 banner to co-ordinate research investment.

Likewise unpopular courses have to go. There haven't been any major closures 
at Exeter since chemistry in 2004, but smaller ones come and go. "We have 
ring-fenced some subjects, such as Farsi," says Smith. "But we have to let 
others go. We always encourage academics whose subjects are affected to be 
creative in finding new ways of making their subjects attractive. For instance 
by combining archaelogy with anthropology or introducing liberal studies."

An ability to finesse also applies to its student selection. Exeter is one of 
only a handful of top universities whose website specifically states it will 
consider applicants from disadvantaged backgrounds with lower grades at 
A-level, but its hands are somewhat tied, both by legislation, which now only 
allows the university to admit 551 students with grades less than ABB, and by a 
desire not to deter the highest performing applicants from more well-off 
backgrounds.

Inevitably, perhaps, the 551 discretionary places are generally used to fill 
the least popular courses. "It is a problem," Smith concedes. "But it is also 
unreasonable to expect universities to put right all of education's wrongs. 
Inequality of educational opportunity starts much earlier, with both postcode 
lotteries for state school places and independent schooling. I get it in the 
neck from both sides. Some people accuse me of social engineering by 
discriminating against some better off applicants; others say I'm not doing 
enough. It's not ideal but as long as I'm being shouted at by both sides I've 
probably got it just about right.'

About Steve

Age: 61

Position: vice-chancellor of the University of Exeter 
<http://www.exeter.ac.uk/>

Before that: a lecturer in international relations at Huddersfield 
Polytechnic; professor at University of East Anglia; head of department and 
pro-vice-chancellor (academic affairs) at the University of Wales, Aberystwyth

Likes: Norwich City FC; US indy music

Dislikes: inequality

Last gig: Midlake

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member of theHigher Education Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/>.
 