
To nobody's surprise, the government last night rejected arguments on behalf 
of mesothelioma sufferers and overturned a Lords amendment that would have 
exempted them from the effects of Part 2 of the legal aid bill (known as the 
Jackson reforms).

The justice minister Jonathan Djanogly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jonathan-djanogly> argued that asbestos 
cases are not sufficiently different from other types of personal injury to 
justify allowing lawyers to undertake them on a 'no win, no fee' basis, to 
recover from the defendant their success fee and any legal expenses insurance 
premium.

He said that the conditional fee system has "frequently ended up as something 
of a racket allowing risk-free litigation for claimants, inflated profits for 
legal firms, and punitive additional costs for defendants". Djanogly firmly put 
the onus on clients to negotiate the level of success fee, and on the lawyers 
to decide whether to charge one at all. This bid to use competition to force 
down legal costs ignores the original policy behind success fees, which was to 
compensate lawyers for the cases that lose and for which they don't get a penny.

Lawyers are now resigned to the measures going through, so the focus has moved 
to implementation next April. The Jackson reforms are far broader than just 
these headline changes, and a lot of activity has been going on in the 
background, with rules of court already drafted, working parties formed – the 
most recent this week to advise on the introduction of contingency fees – and 
stakeholder meetings held.

Much of it is relatively uncontroversial, but some significant rows are in the 
offing, particularly around the banning of referral fees in personal injury 
(PI) cases. Related to this is the extension of the electronic portal used for 
low-value road traffic claims to bigger cases and other types of PI (this is 
technically not part of the Jackson reforms, but is a key part of the picture).

Although the company behind the portal has told the government that from a 
technical point of view it is not possible to extend it beyond next April, the 
argument over how much lawyers should get paid under the portal is revving up 
following a recentstakeholder meeting 
<http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/latest-news/rta-portal-extension-cannot-be-done-by-april-2013-government-told>
 chaired by Djanogly.

For a standard road traffic accident worth less than £10,000, lawyers receive 
a basic fixed fee of £1,200; however, insurers say that much of this goes on 
the referral fee paid to secure the case in the first place, and that with such 
fees banned, the figure should fall to £300-400. Djanogly has been clear that 
he expects a reduction and so the fight is over how much. Lawyers counter that 
referral fees are just a form of marketing – and a significant minority of 
firms refuse to pay them anyway – meaning they will have to invest in other 
ways to attract work. A figure of around £800 could be where we end up.

The referral fee ban will make life difficult for claims management companies, 
but does not directly address the problem of nuisance texts and automated phone 
calls asking whether you have had an accident in the last three years. That is 
subject to separate work at the Ministry of Justice, although to judge by the 
calls I have received in recent weeks, it's not having much of an effect yet.

It was years of unseemly scrapping between insurers and lawyers over legal 
fees in PI work that led to the Jackson reforms in the first place – while the 
system has got out of kilter, lawyers are entitled to make a living out of what 
they do and many thousands of people every year benefit from it with legitimate 
compensation for negligently inflicted injuries.

The reality is that access to justice relies to some extent on having lawyers 
who consider it financially viable to do the work; at the same time, in my 
experience lawyers usually find a way of working with changes that they 
previously predicted would lead to the end of the world.

However, the winds of change are blowing strongly, and with their business 
models set to change, some law firms are undoubtedly in a precarious position – 
well-known Manchester PI firm Donnswent into administration 
<http://www.irwinmitchell.com/servicesforyou/personal-injury-claims/donns-LLP/Pages/default.aspx?ref=GooglePPC&gclid=CK6LhpeQvq8CFc4LtAod6RL4yg>
 just last month. Consolidation is afoot and it is no coincidence that thefirst 
wave of major announcements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/feb/03/slater-gordon-russell-jones-walker-abs?INTCMP=SRCH>
 about alternative business structures in the law have come in the PI sector. 
As we head towards April 2013, they will not be the last.

Neil Rose is the editor of www.legalfutures.co.uk 
<http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/>
 