
Twice in recent years, the makers of Who Do You Think You Are? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/sep/24/richard-madeley-grace-dent-tvod>
 have approached me to see if my ancestry might be sufficiently interesting for 
their programme. Both times, they thought it wasn't: a decision vindicated by 
the first 100 pages of this book.

I was born in 1947 and, as with most children of my generation, my parents 
made formal arrangements to see me five times a year. This might strike some 
readers as rather old-fashioned, but I believe children are now far too 
indulged by their parents, which is why so many go on to take drugs, become 
homosexualists and vote Labour.

At my school, I was distressed to find that mass was conducted in Latin. For 
classicists like myself, this was not a problem, but I strongly felt that 
ordinary people were being prevented from having the Mysteries of God revealed 
to them. Thus I wrote to the Pope and was extremely pleased that, in 1962 at the
Second Vatican Council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/andrewbrown/2012/oct/11/second-vatical-council-50-years-catholicism>
, it was announced that my recommendations had been adopted in full.

Having taken a first degree at Birmingham, I reapplied to Oxford, as I was 
certain it would be ideally suited to an ambition that exceeded my talent. My 
judgment was correct, for I emerged three years later having been unsuccessful 
in my attempts to become president of the Union. Though, for the record, many 
believed I was the victim of a scandalous miscarriage of justice within the 
electoral procedure, an outrage I have now entirely forgotten.

I do not propose to indulge people's gutter instincts for salacious gossip by 
revealing whether or not I held hands with my only boyfriend, Colin Maltby. Nor 
will I comment on him having been later heard to say: "I dodged a bullet 
there." Suffice to say that I am extremely happy to have remained single ever 
since, as it has allowed me to fully devote myself to serving God, the 
Conservative party and my cats.

It was incumbent on me to find work and for some years I toiled unhappily for 
Unilever, where I'm told my leaving speech is still regarded as one of the 
finest ever, before embarking on my political career. Having failed to 
ingratiate myself with the constituents of Burnley and Devonport – some people 
refuse to be helped, no matter what you do for them - I was eventually elected 
member for the safe seat of Maidstone.

I did not make an immediate impact at Westminster, as senior politicians were 
suspicious of talented newcomers who knew a great deal more than they did about 
everything and were not afraid to say so. Eventually my preferment could not be 
delayed, and I was happy to have a distinguished career as a junior minister at 
the Home Office during which I achieved very little. Losing the general 
election was a blow, but the real tragedy for the Conservative party came in 
2001 when it emerged I had absolutely no support for my futile leadership bid. 
Many people – well, me – have since said I would have been a brilliant leader, 
but it is not for me to comment.

I have never been afraid to speak with the courage of my convictions, which is 
why, after the Church of England voted to allow women priests, I converted to 
Catholicism. Although I have always been very pro-women's rights – even for 
those with lesbian instincts, of which I am not one – it is a sin to go against 
the will of God. On a lighter note, I was later very fortunate to meet the 
Pope, who told me he had never previously met a person with such inner holiness.

After leaving parliament, many people thought I should have been elevated to 
the House of Lords, but for reasons best known to Mr Cameron that was not to 
be, and, as I am not one to hold a grudge, I have happily moved on. However, Mr 
Cameron did ask me to be his envoy to the Vatican, though this appointment 
clashed with Strictly Come Dancing. Faced with such a tough choice, I asked God 
to give me a sign. He did: he gave me a detached retina. Truly, He and I move 
in mysterious ways.

Digested read, digested: Strictly Self-Advancing.
 