
The art of cookery and the art of love are, say some, inextricably linked. But 
not, perhaps, when it comes to the kind of grub knocked up in your average 
student digs.

However, celebrity chef Ainsley Harriott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/ainsleyharriott>, who reviewed five 
student cookbooks for The Observer (just in time for anyone off to university 
next month) is hopeful.

'Think about your first kiss - if you did it and it was bloody awful, you 
might not do it again,' says the Ready Steady Cook presenter. 'It's the same 
with cooking - you start off gradually, you get your confidence, and you build 
on that. Don't be too adventurous to start with - learn how to cook one dish 
well.' Although he didn't go to university himself, having started his cookery 
career aged just 16, Harriott often crashed at his mates' student flats.

Harriott's favourite book on this test, Fiona Beckett's Beyond Baked Beans 
Budget, was especially good because of advice on what to do with leftover food. 
'There's always the druggy bloke who comes in at 1am with the munchies - so 
it's always good to have leftovers,' he says.

Aren't these books a bit condescending, though? 'Every cookbook can be a bit 
patronising. But all of these books are designed to get you into the kitchen 
and make your life more fulfilling.' His own book, the Feel-Good Cookbook, is 
published next month by BBC Books. With more adventurous dishes - including 
smoked mackerel pilaf - it shows that there is, eventually, more to life than 
spag bol.

Books supplied and prices quoted from www.amazon.co.uk 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk>

· Cheap as chips, better than toast: Easy recipes for students by Miranda 
Shearer
(Cassell Illustrated), £3.99

They say...

The author, who knows how to coax a novice, wrote this for her boyfriend who 
was going to university and wanted to learn how to cook. Recipes include basics 
such as lasagne and vegetable soup, plus extravagances such as potted crab.

...And Ainsley says

The fact that it's written by a student shows they've been through it. There 
are lots of familiar recipes, but not a lot of alfresco food. It's for the 
bloke who wants to impress the ladies - or impress the lads that he's a ladies' 
man.

· Beyond baked beans budget by Fiona Beckett
 (Absolute Press), £4.79

They say...

This shows students how to stretch their food without laying out a fortune. 
Recipes are split into 'Survive' (cooking for yourself), 'Share' (big meals for 
students living together) and 'Spoil Yourself' (something a little more swish). 
Full of tips on how to shop cheaply, bulk out meals and kitchen basics.

...And Ainsley says

There are some wonderful tips on what to do with leftovers. And it has a 
healthy section too: it's not all fry-ups. The photography wasn't very 
inspiring but for those really on a budget this is the best thought-out 
cookbook on test.

· The essential student cookbook by Cas Clarke
 (Headline), £5.59

They say...

A combination of two student cookbooks, this provides everything for the 
aspiring student cook. It gives guidance on essential equipment, the store 
cupboard and vagaries of cooking in halls. Recipes (half vegetarian) are 
straightforward and assume no prior knowledge - or big bank balance.

...And Ainsley says

Delivers what it says on the back cover and is great value. It has a section 
on slimming, which is good, but it's a bit too big, rather like reading a 
novel. I wonder whether you'd have time to look at it all.

· Student grub by Alastair Williams
(Summersdale), £4.79

They say...

This updated edition of a bestseller was written by a former starving student. 
Featuring witty, user-friendly instructions, it includes main meals for one, or 
entire households. There are sections on vegetarian, dairy- and gluten-free 
diets, cheap and healthy eating, dinner parties and booze-ups.

...And Ainsley says

It's very basic but also quite international, with food from around the world 
to inspire. There's nothing too challenging and it's fine for parents to buy 
for their kids; its sense of humour definitely helps.

· Hard up and hungry: Hassle Free Recipes for Students, by Betsy Bell 
(Ebury Press), £7.19

They say...

The author wrote this for her children when they were going to university. 
They knew little or nothing about culinary survival, but their tastes went 
beyond beans on toast. Recipes include spaghetti with fennel and smoked bacon, 
cod with olives and sweet peppers and treats like vodka jelly. There is also 
advice on how to store and shop for food inexpensively.

...And Ainsley says

It's easy to flick through, though there aren't any colour pictures and it's a 
bit more expensive than the others. One of the recipes included saffron, which 
only posh students would be able to afford. Some recipes are helpful, but this 
is more suited to young professionals.

Student eating tips

· Avoid convenience food. Well, not all of it - no one expects you to make 
your own mayonnaise. But you'll pay a real premium on things like pre-packed 
chopped veg and ready-grated cheese.

· Save on fuel. It's cheaper to cook on the top of the stove than it is in the 
oven. If you do use the main oven try to cook more than one thing - for example 
a tray of roast peppers (for sandwiches or salads) when you're cooking a roast.

· Be adventurous! The more types of food you're prepared to eat, the cheaper 
your shopping bill will be. Give cheap, nutritious foods like liver and 
sardines a try (but not at the same time, obviously...)

· Make everything you buy earn its keep. Plan when shopping, don't duplicate 
ingredients you already have - but also be flexible so you can snap up bargains.

· Shop twice a week - if you plan too far ahead, food may go off and be wasted.

· Buy things as you need them. Don't splash out on stuff you may not use: many 
ingredients can be substituted - if you wanted to make a dish hotter, for 
example, paprika, chilli powder, or chilli sauce would all do.

· Learn what's in season. If you insist on buying strawberries in January or 
leeks in June, you'll pay for them.

· Don't scoff the leftovers. OK, I know we all fridge-raid in the early hours, 
but if you really want to save money you can't afford to eat the next day's 
food.

· From Beyond Baked Beans Budget
by Fiona Beckett
 