
There's a growing consensus that cloud computing is going to become more 
prevalent in the public sector, with the first round of G-Cloud procurements 
providing a boost for its take-up. But it has been gathering some momentum in 
recent months without the formal procurement channel, and it is likely that 
more ad hoc deals will account for a big share of the business as the market 
grows.

Suffolk county council is providing an example with its adoption of a 
cloud-based project management system. It may be a relatively small deal on a 
national scale, but according to the council's project manager Duncan Farley it 
is beginning to show the financial and operational advantages of using a 
specialist application in a cloud environment.

Suffolk began to look for a new system to support collaborative working in 
2010, prompted by a feeling in the council that it could improve the way its 
employees were working together and that a cloud application could provide the 
most effective tool to do so.

The decision to opt for a cloud tool was partly due to the expected economic 
benefits, but also the fact that it would be easier to make available for any 
staff needing to use it. Such flexibility is one of demands of online project 
management – systems need to be able to be aligned to the team's way of working 
and be inclusive of all staff involved, rather than in the hands of a few 
specialists.

Suffolk opted to use the Smartsheet system provided by the US-based company of 
the same name.

The application has been built on an out of the box package, and while there 
was some tailoring to meet the council's requirements, Farley says this was 
kept to a minimum.

"We had a project management team that identified what needed to be done with 
the software, demonstrations and licensing," he says. "We got a few people to 
play around it with to investigate and provide feedback to the developers.

"One of the outcomes of this was to incorporate a preference for red, amber 
and green indicators on when to take a piece of work forward, and a function to 
drop a message into officials' email in-boxes when they were due to take a new 
step in a project."

The application includes features that are designed to support matrix working 
– in which people in an organisation carry out specialist functions for a 
variety of managers – such as automated updates and alerts and the capacity to 
hold a range of documents in familiar formats such as Excel, MS Project, PDF 
and Google Docs. This enables the council to share relevant information such as 
work plans and packages, risks, milestones and stakeholder engagement plans.

Suffolk ran a number of trials, collected feedback and, after implementing the 
system early last year, has gradually extended its use through a number of 
projects, including planning for the future developments of the country parks 
in the county, and the procurement of contracts for its highways maintenance.

Mark Adams-Wright, Suffolk's chief information officer, says the application 
has proved particularly useful for the latter project as it enabled information 
sharing with officials from neighbouring Norfolk, ensuring the two councils 
co-ordinate their work on major roads.

"To successfully operate within a matrix working environment it is imperative 
that everyone remains on the same page," he says. "Having one live version of 
every worksheet enables us to achieve results quickly, reduce duplication and 
monitor progress in real time."

Suffolk has begun to pay an annual subscription to use the system, rather than 
commit to a three or four year contract. And while there is a fee per working 
sheet on top of this, Farley says the cost has become nominal now that it has 
about 400 in use.

It's a reflection of one of the big selling points of cloud computing - that 
it lays the ground for the wider use of IT on a 'pay as you go' basis, ensuring 
that the client organisation does not pay for capacity that it never gets to 
use.

Farley says the benefits in cost savings are now feeding through, but that the 
operational factors are likely to be just as important.

"Using localised desktop-based solutions is not always the most effective way 
of working and has some pretty big limitations," he says. "This new tool has 
allowed me to implement an end to end project management workspace which has 
saved both time and money."

He also says that the council is planning to use the application in many of 
its major projects in the future.

"When we go on to do other projects this will be a key tool, and we'll be able 
to manage everything from one place," he says.

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For updates on public 
sector IT, join the Government Computing Network here. 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing/start.php>
 