
You would have got very long odds against Rupert Soames becoming chief 
executive of Serco. He has been boss ofAggreko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aggreko> for 11 years; in that time the 
market capitalisation of the supplier of temporary power generators has risen 
almost tenfold to £4.5bn, bringing FTSE 100 status and a sense of permanence at 
the top. He is 54. It seemed possible he would stay in post for another decade.

Why does he want to leave? We should probably accept his explanation: chief 
executives have a half-life and can become toxic if they hang around too long. 
Fair point. But whySerco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/sercogroup>, a 
company whose market value is only half Aggreko's these days?

That's harder to fathom but, from Serco's point of view, Soames is an 
excellent pick. For a start, he's a plain speaker who should make a clean break 
with the infuriating Christopher Hyman era in which Serco boasted about its 
superior "values" and its "unique culture" even while the scandals piled up. 
Soames tends to prefer self-deprecation – much smarter, especially when things 
go wrong.

Yet the real question about Serco is whether the company is simply too big and 
too diverse for anybody to manage effectively. Serco may be half Aggreko's size 
in terms of stockmarket value but it is a vastly more complicated business. 
Serco has 120,000 employees and operates 700 contracts. The suspicion is that 
so many contracts went sour in quick succession (electronic tagging, prisoner 
escorting, GPs in Cornwall, etc) because it became impossible for senior 
management to know what was happening at the sharp end of operations.

By contrast, Aggreko has only 6,000 staff and has succeeded in part by 
shifting its fleet of generators around the world with military precision. 
Homogeneity, in kit, contracts and processes, has tended to be the Aggreko way.

Note, too, that Soames said in a 2010 interview with Management Today that he 
thought Aggreko could go to "25,000-30,000 people without losing our culture, 
provided that we are really determined to work at it". At Serco, he will be 
boss of four to five times that number and is inheriting somebody else's 
handiwork. It won't be a breeze.

Still, he grew up at Arnold Weinstock's GEC, which employed 100,000 in the 
good old days. And at Serco, there is always the option of divestment if 
over-complexity is deemed a problem. An early judgment on Serco's size should 
be Soames' priority. Serco chairman Alastair Lyons deserves credit. Soames' 
appointment holds promise, as the 12% bounce in the share price suggests.

• Pearson always looked to be facing a tricky 2014 but two profit warnings 
before the end of February make the point starkly. Okay, it's not strictly two 
warnings – call it one-and-a-half, with the main one relating to 2013 – but 
who's counting when the share price has fallen by a quarter since the start of 
the year? "We are in the middle of what we believe will be a short, but 
difficult, transition," said chief executiveJohn Fallon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/john-fallon>.

It's certainly difficult. Pearson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pearson> is in restructuring overdrive as 
it tries to keep pace with the print-to-digital revolution in school textbooks 
and college material, especially in the US, and books (where these days it owns 
47% of Penguin Random House). At the same time, it is stepping up investment to 
meet curriculum changes.

Meanwhile, trading conditions the North American market itself are described 
as the worst in a decade. In the counter-cyclical world of textbooks and 
educational software, a recovery in the US jobs market is unhelpful because 
more people choose to work than take a vocational course.

How about a "short" transition? The theory sounds reasonable. After the 
two-year blitz to close excess warehouse space and accelerate the digital 
programme, restructuring charges should fall away again. Without them, Pearson 
would have reported record earnings last year, instead of a 2% fall in pre-tax 
profits to £382m.

The worry, of course, is that the digital revolution turns out in practice to 
be never-ending. Pure print will soon be 40% of Pearson's business. Depending 
on your point of view, that's evidence of how much digitisation has been 
achieved, or how much is still left to go. Fallon is sufficiently confident to 
predict a return to growth in 2015 and is inviting believers to enjoy a 7% hike 
in the dividend to 48p. That's bold when set against the official forecast that 
earnings per share will fall to just 62p-67p this year. That dividend cover is 
thin. Fallon had better be correct that the storm will pass by the end of the 
year.

• Who pays £19m to raise £60m? AO World, that's who. London's new poster-child 
for the online retailing mania – a shifter of fridges, freezes and microwaves – 
will soon be sent a bill by its financial advisers and underwriters that 
equates to more than twice its pre-tax profits last year of £8.7m.

AO's float prospectus shows how the City's money tree is once again in 
splendid bloom. The gross proceeds for AO from issuing 21m new shares at 285p 
were £60m. Net proceeds will be £40.9m. The difference is "commissions, fees 
and expenses of the offer."

The bankers' bonanza doesn't stop there. Selling shareholders, led by AO 
founder John Roberts, are not allowed to escape with a commission rate of, say, 
0.5%, which an online stockbroker might charge. No, nothing less than 4% will 
do when you're listing on theLondon Stock Exchange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/londonstockexchangegroup> with the help 
of Rothschild, JP Morgan Cazenove, Jefferies and Numis Securities. The sellers 
will hand over £14.5m in commissions from their proceeds of £363m.

Add a few more million quid in discretionary fees and commissions on so-called 
"over-allotment" shares (those that can be sold if demand is strong) and the 
City firms should collect a grand total of about £35m from AO's listing. That 
will fill a few bonus stockings next Christmas.

Naturally, the sums will be paid happily. AO, bafflingly, was priced at £1.2bn 
at float and the bankers were overwhelmed with orders. Roberts probably won't 
resent his advisers' and promoters' cut of £3.4m from his sale of £86m-worth of 
shares. After all, he's now worth £500m-ish when one includes the shares he's 
kept.

Investment fads come and go, and AO's pricing at 150-times earnings surely 
screams dotcom silliness once more. Nothing, though, is as permanent as 
investments bankers' princely fees. AO's fridges were full of champagne.

All credit to RBS for ending teaser rates

"I know I am not the only banker using this sort of language," said Ross 
McEwan, new boss of Royal Bank of Scotland this week. "But I assure you I am 
serious about making this language meaningful and delivering real change."

He has to say that, of course, especially when he has just sent weariness with 
RBS to new depths by announcing an £8bn loss for 2013. But let's give the Kiwi 
some credit for putting a few specific reforms on the table, such as an end to 
0% "teaser" rates to capture credit card customers.

"Others can continue with this, but we will not be in the business of trapping 
people in debts they cannot afford," said McEwan.

It's hard to know whether this policy will be good for RBS's profits in the 
short term. Never mind. McEwan's analysis of teaser rates is correct – and his 
rivals will have to follow or explain why they won't.

Good move.
 