
A teenage boy and a man have been formally refused bail after being charged 
with foreign fighter offences relating to Syria and Iraq following police raids 
inSydney <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney>.

Police have alleged Mehmet Biber, 25, from Merrylands, breached Australia’s 
foreign incursions laws when he travelled to Syria in July 2013 to join Jabhat 
Al-Nusra, before returning to Australia in February 2014.

Biber did not apply for release and it was formally refused during a brief 
appearance at Parramatta local court on Thursday afternoon, following his 
dramatic arrest nearby earlier in the day.

His case will return to court on 15 December, where he is expected to appear 
via videolink.

The 17-year-old boy, who cannot be named, was charged with preparing to engage 
in a foreign incursion, and promoting or encouraging an incursions. The boy was 
stopped at Sydney airport and prevented from leaving.

The teenager did not appear at Parramatta children’s court on Thursday and was 
formally refused bail. His lawyers did not apply for bail.

The two cases do not have a direct connection, but police claim they were 
linked through other associations.

At a press briefing following the arrests, NSW deputy commissioner and 
Australian Federal Police commissioner Neil Gaughan said the lengthy period of 
time it took to charge the 25-year-old man was due to difficulties in gathering 
evidence.

“This has been a protracted investigation and a very difficult one,” Gaughan 
said. He added that because there was no competent law enforcement authority in 
Syria it was difficult to gather information.

“It’s been a complex investigation also based on the amount of electronic 
information we have received, but we have arrested these gentlemen as quickly 
as we could.”

Gaughan also suggested that telecommunications evidence had been gathered from 
US-based social media providers through mutual assistance agreements.

Burn said: “Even if it might have taken two or three years to put someone 
before the court, the safety of our community is always our priority.”

The prime minister Malcolm Turnbull commented on the case a short time later 
and said: “We have to keep on adapting and modernising our tactics, our 
legislation to deal with these evolving threats. We must not underestimate our 
enemies. They are agile. They are tech savvy. And we have to move as quickly as 
them.”

A series of search warrants were executed in Sydney at Merrylands, Bass Hill, 
Horningsea Park and Miller.
 