
Never ignore eurozone leaders’ capacity to conjure a fudged deal at the 11th 
hour. For all that, the astonishing yield of 25% on three-year Greek government 
debt is sending a clear message. The home straight has arrived and the choice 
for Athens and the governingSyriza <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syriza> 
party is becoming simple: capitulate to the rest of the eurozone’s demands for 
economic reforms, or leave the euro.

“Nobody expects that there will be a solution,” said Germany’s finance 
minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, on Wednesday, referring to next week’s meetings in 
Riga, billed as a make-or-break moment for agreement on releasing bailout cash 
to Athens. Ten days ahead of talks, the remark amounted to yet another reminder 
from Schäuble that Germany thinks the eurozone could cope with the fallout from 
a Greek exit.

As it happens, Berlin’s judgment looks far too breezy. A Greek default can 
only damage the eurozone. Two bailout agreements and four years of diplomatic 
shuffling would have failed, with unknown long-term consequences for the 
survival of the single currency. But Germany seems to have made its choice: it 
will accept the risks.

Over in Washington, the International Monetary Fund’s Christine Lagarde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christine-lagarde> avoided downbeat remarks 
about Riga, but said nothing remotely cheerful for Athens. “We have never had 
an advanced economy asking for repayment delay,” she said. In other words, the 
IMF’s hands are tied, and Athens should not ask for a delay in repayments. One 
of those payments, totalling €747m (£540m), falls next month. Time is running 
short.

Of course, it should not have come to this. Greece’s debt burden is 
unsustainable, and it was madness for lenders to impose bailout demands that 
shrank the Greek economy by 20%. But the reality for Syriza is that it faces an 
“impossible trinity”, as Morgan Stanley’s analysts call it. How do you stay in 
the euro, remain in power and undo the bailout programme? It can’t be done. 
Something has to give.

The Greek prime minister, Alexis Tspiras, doing his best to offset Schäuble’s 
remarks, said he is “firmly optimistic” that a deal can be reached in Riga. 
Good luck to him, but it is now very hard to see how any deal could be remotely 
consistent with Syriza’s electoral mandate to end austerity.

In that case, there would be three possible next chapters. In order of 
likelihood, they are: capitulation; a Greek referendum on staying in the euro; 
a rapid exit without a referendum.

Silent on Alliance

Another day, another voice calling for new directors at Alliance Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alliancetrust>. This time it’s US outfit 
ISS that says Dundee’s ancient investment house would benefit from some 
backside-kicking by outsiders, as proposed by 12% shareholder Elliott Advisors, 
an off-shoot of a US hedge fund.

The view here is the same as a fortnight ago. Many of the grumbles about 
Alliance – the high pay of the chief executive, Katherine Garrett-Cox, the 
middling investment performance, the “jam tomorrow” promises about two 
subsidiaries – are legitimate, but shareholders need to hear from the three men 
Elliott wants on the board.

Anthony Brooke, Peter Chambers and Rory Macnamara may be fine City chaps, but 
their silence is inexcusable. Why do they want to join Alliance? What 
assurances can they offer that they would be properly independent and wouldn’t 
act as Elliott’s placemen? Do they think Alliance requires a full strategic 
review? These are not hard questions to answer and this is an election. The 
candidates should speak.

The vote is on 29 April, which leaves little time for the grandees to 
introduce themselves belatedly. If they won’t, shareholders should hold their 
noses and back the current board.

Whisky sour

It’s still tough out there, said Diageo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/diageo> boss Ivan Menezes as the spirits 
and beer group unveiled a 0.7% fall in organic sales for the quarter.

Actually, life’s not so bad, said Unilever. “We are now starting to see more 
tailwinds than headwinds in our markets,” said chief executive Paul Polman. 
Underlying sales were up 2.8%.

A boss can only speak about his own company, but the difference in tunes is 
striking. For Diageo investors, the biggest worry is not emerging markets 
(always volatile), but the US, where the group still longs for the day 
consumers recycle their savings on petrol into purchases of whisky, vodka and 
rum. If the punters are instead preferring more Unilever deodorants and ice 
cream, something very odd is happening.
 