
Syrian activists have rejected a message from the new al-Qaida leader, Ayman 
al-Zawahiri <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayman-al-zawahiri>, praising 
their efforts to topple Bashar al-Assad as an Islamic battle against US and 
Israeli interests.

"I don't think a single Syrian would welcome this statement," said Razan 
Zeitouneh, a lawyer and rights activist in Damascus who has been monitoring the 
uprising. "Al-Qaida is trying to use our revolution to get back into the light 
after the peaceful Arab uprisings took attention away."

In a video message 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2011/jul/28/al-qaida-message-syria> 
posted on extremist websites Zawahiri, who became al-Qaida leader in June 
following the death of Osama bin Laden, denounced Assad as "the leader of the 
criminal gang" and "biggest of those who spread corruption" – largely in tune 
with protesters' views.

But by calling the protesters "the front for jihad and martyrdom" he also 
sought to cast the uprising as sharing al-Qaida's aims – a far cry from 
protesters who have called for greater freedom, rather than the Islamist rule 
al-Qaida advocates.

Another activist who asked for anonymity dismissed the comments as irrelevant: 
"Al-Qaida has long been of no interest to Syrians and the statement comes too 
late in the day even if it had any weight," he said.

But activists said the regime, which made no comment, may try and use the 
statement to portray the protesters as armed Islamists and the uprising as a 
foreign conspiracy.

Mohammad Al-Abdallah, the spokesman of local co-ordination committees in 
Syria, said: "Zawahiri is trying to convince the world that he has supporters in
Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, which will provoke the 
international public opinion against us and give the regime the right to commit 
crimes against our people.

"We condemn such statements that are irrelevant to the revolution, Syrians 
chose the non-violent way for their revolution and they won't change it, they 
refuse any practices or speeches containing sectarian or violent properties."

Protests in Syria have come out of mosques because they are the only place 
where people are able to gather. There is a trend towards growing religiosity 
across the Arab world, but Syrians on the street appear to have little appetite 
for political Islam and have been calling for democratic reforms.

"Anyone observing the Syrian protesters for the last four and a half months 
can see they are peaceful, independent and keen for freedom," said Zeitouneh.

The activists' comments were echoed by the Foreign Office which accused 
Zawahri of "clutching at straws".

A spokesman for the Foreign Office told the Guardian: "We have seen al-Qaida 
struggle to show that its message of violent jihad is relevant to the Arab 
spring where people have found a different voice and a different way to bring 
about change they desire."

Zawahri claimed that Washington wanted to replace Assad with "a new ruler who 
follows America, protects Israel's interests and grants the [Muslim] nation a 
few freedoms".

The US administration has toughened its rhetoric toward Assad's regime, but no 
country has yet called on Assad to step down, causing frustration on the street.

"It's ironic that while the whole international community is silent about the 
regime's crimes against the Syrian people, a terrorist like Zawahiri says what 
he said," said Zeitouneh.

Nour Ali is a pseudonym for a journalist in Damascus
 