
Death and disability can be averted by quickly taking aspirin after a minor 
stroke, a study has found.

The blood-thinning drug is already given to people who have suffered a 
transient ischaemic attack (TIA), or “mini-stroke”, after they have been 
assessed in hospital.

But more urgent treatment greatly reduces the risk of a subsequent fatal or 
disabling stroke, research shows. Taking aspirin as soon as possible after 
experiencing “warning symptoms” increased the level of risk reduction from 15% 
to 70%-80%.

Prof Peter Rothwell, from Oxford University, said: “Our findings confirm the 
effectiveness of urgent treatment after TIA and minor stroke and show that 
aspirin is the most important component.

“Immediate treatment with aspirin can substantially reduce the risk and 
severity of early recurrent stroke. This finding has implications for doctors, 
who should give aspirin immediately if a TIA or minor stroke is suspected, 
rather than waiting for specialist assessment and investigations.”

The researchers analysed data from 15 aspirin trials involving about 56,000 
stroke patients. They found that almost all of the benefit from aspirin was 
experienced in the first few weeks after an initial minor stroke.

Rothwell added: “Public information campaigns have worked in getting more 
people to seek help sooner after a major stroke, but have been less effective 
in people who have had minor strokes or TIAs.

“Many patients don’t seek medical attention at all and many delay for a few 
days. Half of recurrent strokes in people who have a TIA happen before they 
seek medical attention for the TIA.

“Encouraging people to take aspirin if they think they may have had a TIA or 
minor stroke – experiencing sudden onset unfamiliar neurological symptoms – 
could help to address this situation, particularly if urgent medical help is 
unavailable.”

The research is published in The Lancet medical journal. 

Dr Dale Webb, from the Stroke Association, said: “A TIA is a medical emergency 
and urgent neurological assessment must always be sought. We welcome this 
research, which shows that taking aspirin after TIA can dramatically reduce the 
risk and severity of further stroke.

“The findings suggest that anyone who has stroke symptoms which are improving 
while they are awaiting urgent medical attention can, if they are able, take 
one dose of 300mg aspirin.”
 