
Political correspondent Tania Branigan is trekking to the Arctic with a team 
of MPsRead all entries 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/news/archives/arctic_challenge/> / More on the 
Arctic challenge <https://www.theguardian.com/arcticchallenge> 

Some of the team's huskies. Photo: Tania Branigan
Day Two, Muonio, Sweden: They're snarling and bickering with each other, 
baring their teeth and taking passing swipes. It could be just another prime 
minister's questions. But this time the MPs aren't to blame; it's the huskies 
who are scrapping. As departure approaches, their howls escalate into a 
migraine-inducing cacophony.

I think back to Philip the guide's reassuring words: "The dogs? They're 
gentle, they're a bit shy, they don't bite." Hmmm.

But as soon as the sleds are off, the only sound is the scrape of runners 
against icy snow. Much like Bruce Springsteen, huskies were born to run. They 
can work in temperatures as low as -60 or -70C, with only the occasional bite 
of snow to slake their thirst. It takes up to 10,000 calories a day to keep 
them going and - as a result - they have the disconcerting, if efficient, habit 
of relieving themselves frequently as they run.

Each four-or five-dog team is led by a pair; apparently, they work better that 
way than on their own (there may be a moral about cooperation in there for 
politicians).

Several of the MPs take dives into snowdrifts. So do I, when I realise that 
the tight schedule and the waist-deep snow on either side of the trail mean the 
only way to get pictures of the team is to shoot on the move. It's just about 
doable, until we swoosh round a corner unexpectedly. As I go flying I'm torn 
between catching my team or saving my camera - thankfully someone grabs the 
reins for me as the huskies tear down the track.

The camera works fine and the shots are even in focus (apart from the

last, rather random picture of a tree trunk from a peculiar angle. It

was supposed to be Tory MP Ed Vaizey ...)

But I have no doubts about climbing back on; I'm already in love with 
sledding. It's a thrilling yet eerie, even disturbing, experience as we fly 
through the serene pine forests and along the course of frozen rivers: the 
silence, the vast expanse of whiteness, the sun sitting so low in the sky that 
there seems to be no day, only dawn and sunset.

It's impossible to tell how far we've gone or how long we've taken (in the 
end, we notch up 60km or so in around eight hours). Spirits are high until 
around five, when we lose the last of the sun and the chill really sets in. The 
last 10km seem endless.

The thermometer is falling fast, we can't see each other properly and the dogs 
are as weary as we are. Several are working to rule while others get tangled in 
the traces of other teams or veer off the trail willfully.

The line begins to disintegrate and so does our patience and concentration. 
Even with expert guides on hand, the cold and dark make us feel remarkably 
vulnerable. Thankfully cross-party cooperation is fully in evidence, allowing 
Labour MP Emily Thornberry (who has little night vision) and Ed Vaizey (whose 
dogs have given up for the day) to catch up with the rest of the group.

Needless to say, our guides lead us safely back to base - and dinner. But we 
vow to keep lunch as short as possible in future to minimise night-time travel.
 