
Michael Foster <https://www.theguardian.com/media/michael-foster>, who acts as 
an agent for DJ Chris Evans and TV style gurus Trinny Woodall and Susannah 
Constantine, has parted company with All3Media, two years after selling his 
talent business to the independent production company.

Foster will hang on to his own client list, which also includes the actresses 
Julie Christie and Billie Piper, after agreeing to buy out his share of the 
Artist Rights Group.

His new venture has secured independent financial backing and will be called 
MF Management.

Sue Latimer, who co-founded the Artist Rights Group with Foster in 2001, will 
stay atAll3Media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media> as ARG's 
managing director.

Steve Morrison, the former Granada boss who is All3Media's chief executive, 
said he wished Foster's new venture well.

"Michael has felt for some time that he needed to take his part of the ARG 
business in a different direction and so we have reached agreement with him to 
buy out his part of the business," Morrison said.

Foster and Latimer sold ARG to All3Media in March 2006, promising to take 
their business "to the next level".

This was All3Media's first venture into the talent management and rights 
business, after establishing itself as one of the UK's leading independent 
production companies.

All3Media was created in 2003 through the acquisition of Chrysalis TV, home to 
producer Cactus, the makers of Richard & Judy.

Founded by Morrison and former Granada colleagues David Liddiment and Jules 
Burns, All3Media has grown through further deals such as the acquisitions of 
Brookside producer Mersey TV, Castaway producer Lion Television and Company 
Pictures, which makes Shameless.

In 2006, the All3Media founders took part in a £320m management buyout funded 
by private equity group Permira.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 