
Ann Maguire <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire>, the teacher who 
was stabbed in her classroom, died from "shock and haemorrhage" after receiving 
an injury to her neck that severed her jugular vein, an inquest has been told.

The 61-year-old was attacked during a Spanish lesson at Corpus Christi 
Catholic college in Leeds on 28 April.

At the opening of the inquest, DCI Nick Wallen of West Yorkshire police said 
the teacher suffered a number of stab wounds, but one to her neck, which 
severed her major vein, was the fatal injury Wallen gave the only evidence at 
the seven-minute hearing at Leeds coroners court.

He told the coroner David Hinchliff that emergency services were called to 
Corpus Christi at 11.49am on 28 April.

"They were directed to the top floor modern languages department where 
paramedics initially attended to Mrs Ann Maguire, a teacher at the school, who 
was very seriously injured, having been stabbed," the officer said.

"Mrs Maguire was taken by ambulance to Leeds General Infirmary for emergency 
treatment. Sadly, she did not survive her injuries and her death was pronounced 
at 1.10pm."

He told the court that the Home Office pathologist Brian Roger conducted a 
forensic postmortem examination on the same day at Pinderfields hospital in 
Wakefield.

"Dr Rogers established Mrs Maguire's cause of death as shock and haemorrhage," 
Wallen said. "Although there were a number of stab wounds, a stab wound to her 
neck had severed her jugular vein and was the fatal injury."

He said a second postmortem examination came to the same conclusion.

Hinchliff heard that Maguire's body was identified by her husband, Don.

The coroner issued a burial order and released the teacher's body so her 
funeral could be held. He asked a police family liaison officer present in 
court to pass his condolences on to Maguire's family.

Hinchliff adjourned the inquest to a date to be fixed. None of Maguire's 
family were in court.

Maguire worked at Corpus Christi, in the Halton Moor area of Leeds, for more 
than 40 years.

She was due to retire in September and, last year, the school celebrated her 
four decades of service. The headteacher, Steve Mort, has said she was the 
"mother of the school".

Tributes to the teacher have been made from around the world and a 100-metre 
collection of flowers, messages, photographs and other mementos stretched from 
the gates of Corpus Christi to the church next door.

Maguire lived in the Moortown area of Leeds with her husband, who is a 
landscape gardener and former teacher. She had two adult daughters and two 
nephews whom she brought up as her own sons after the death of her sister 
nearly 30 years ago.

A 15-year-old boy has appeared in court accused of murdering Maguire. He is 
remanded in custody and is due to go on trial later this year.
 