
Blinkx, the video search and ad group spun out of Autonomy, has disappointed 
its investors for the second time in three months.

Following a profit warning in July, the company now says that the fall in 
revenues seen in the first quarter has continued into the second. It has been 
making a push into the mobile market, which is expected to contribute $20m of 
the expected first half revenues of $102m to $104m. But this figure is below 
analysts' forecasts, as is its new prediction it will only break even for the 
six month period.

In July it warned first half earnings would be around $5m below its 
expectations, a few months after a blog from Harvard Business School questioned 
aspects of its business model, claims the company rejected.

Following this latest disappointment, analysts at the company's broker Numis 
summed up the situation:
 Blinkx has released a trading update for the 6m to September. It indicates 
that revenues will be $102-4m, which compares with our estimate of $117m and at 
the mid-point represents a 8% year on year fall. The group expects EBITDA to be 
approximately breakeven, compared with our expectation for a $6m profit.

The group guides to a net cash balance of $115m, equal to 17p per share. The 
group believes that it has reached an inflexion point and has seen sequential 
month-on-month growth since July, with mobile now accounting for 20% of 
revenues. The group will provide greater detail at its interims on 11 November 
and we put our forecast, recommendation and target price under review until 
then. 
David Johnson at Northland Capital said:
 A disappointing update with first half revenue expected to contract around 7% 
over the same period last year. Given that management was reporting around 5% 
growth in first quarter revenue in the July update, this suggests that the 
second quarter has been very weak.

The sector continues to evolve rapidly and companies need to be very nimble to 
avoid being left behind. Meanwhile the likes of Google and Facebook continue to 
grow their advertising operations. Current price is partially underpinned by 
cash but there was a $12m outflow in the first half (including the acquisition 
of Lyfe Mobile). 
Meanwhile Alex DeGroote at Peel Hunt said the best option now was for someone 
to buy Blinkx:
 Blinkx has delivered another highly material profit warning. The saving grace 
is net cash of around $115m. Cash burn is now a real prospect. Hence the 
company must seek a corporate buyer, in our view.

Investors will recall a fund-raising (for a deal) took place only months ago. 
With the company now on the cusp of losing money, the concern is thus cash 
burn. Other things being equal, there is around 18p per share of cash 
'backstop' value.

Blinkx comments that in fact July marked an inflection point on sequential 
revenue trends. This remains to be seen, in terms of continuity. Likewise, 
developments on mobile are said to be gaining traction (now around 20% of 
group, albeit at much lower gross margin).

We have no formal house view on Blinx. Historical EBITDA multiples look 
attractive but (downward) profit momentum is alarming. That being said, 
investors will be aware of the cash in the business, together with 
still-impressive revenue scale. Common sense dictates to us that Blinkx must 
have some attraction to a corporate buyer.

Blinkx shares have fallen 4.5p to 30.75p, well off the 52 week high of 234p.

Mike Lynch, who sold Autonomy to Hewlett-Packard in 2011 prompting much 
subsequent acrimony, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/05/hp-court-filing-autonomy-email-finance-director-hewlett-packard>
 is still listed as owning 17.9m shares in Blinkx, or 4.47%, although he had 
been gradually selling down the stake.

Meanwhile HP sold its remaining shareholding 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/06/25/us-autonomy-blinkx-idUSBRE95O19520130625>
 at 120p a share in June last year.
 