
Kids are using more media than ever, across an increasingly wide range of 
platforms and technologies. These rapid changes have created exciting new 
opportunities and pitfalls, and present a host of new challenges for parents 
and kids alike.

The culture around new technology promotes behaviour that can be 
self-revealing before self-reflecting, and creates a host of new privacy and 
safety issues that can have long lasting and serious consequences for our kids.

The media children consume can have a profound affect on their learning, 
social development and behaviour, and the only way to maximise the positive 
impact – and minimise the negative – is to have an accurate understanding of 
the role it plays in their lives.

Seventy-two percent of children under eight have used a mobile device, and 38% 
of children under two have used one, according to Common Sense Media's study,
Zero to Eight: Children's Media Use in America 2013 
<https://www.commonsensemedia.org/research/zero-to-eight-childrens-media-use-in-america-2013>
. It's a dramatic increase since we first measured a significant surge in kids' 
mobile use in our 2011 Zero to Eight study.

Meanwhile, daily reading rates and reading for fun has dropped hugely in 
recent years among adolescents. The proportion of children who are daily 
readers drops markedly from childhood to the pre-teen and teenage years. One 
study shows a drop from 53% of 9-year-olds to 19% of 17-year-olds. A third 
(33%) of 13-year-olds and 45% of 17-year-olds say they read for pleasure no 
more than one to two times a year, if that often.

This is the Twitter generation of 140 characters and that is having an impact 
on the amount of time kids are reading books that teach them to formulate ideas 
and write.

This new world takes increased parental vigilance – both for our children's 
education and for their safety. Understanding what kids are using, how they're 
using it, and how much time they spend on it can help lead to better products, 
better parenting, and better public policies.

These new forms of media and communication have incredible benefits. But there 
are pitfalls, too, including major privacy and safety issues. Companies like 
Facebook, Google and others are gathering reams of data about our kids. 
Meanwhile, kids are subject to new forms of harassment and bullying that have 
had tragic consequences. And with the prevalence of anonymous apps today, 
there's even more of a concern that the anonymity can lead to irresponsible 
behavior or bullying.

As parents and educators, it's important to be involved so that that we don't 
let social media set the rules for how our kids grow and develop. Many of the 
old rules that have been created over the past decades to protect our children 
do not apply to new forms of media.

That's why we are constantly pushing for updates in public policy to try to 
keep pace with this quickly evolving media world.

For example, 33% of young kids' TV viewing is timeshifted (pre-recorded, 
streamed or on demand) – not live. But unlike broadcast TV, there are no 
consumer protections in place when it comes to advertising online. The old 
system of protections is often inadequate in this quickly changing world.

Industry rating systems for television, movies and video games are too blunt, 
too misleading, and too confusing to be relied upon. They place too much 
emphasis on types of content out of context, and don't provide parents with 
truly helpful tools that accurately assess the depth and breadth of any media 
product.

Regardless of the type of media your child is consuming, the core old rule 
still applies – the best way for a parent to protect their child is to be 
informed and involved.

Whether your kid is two or 12, taking a proactive role in her complex online 
life is key. It's not just about turning off devices or encouraging responsible 
use. It's about creating a culture of empathy, starting at home. It's about 
knowing what to say and do when your kid is at risk, monitoring (without 
spying), and knowing the difference between bullying and just "kids being kids."

We need to have an ongoing dialogue with our children, asking them what's 
popular and what they're interested in, and share our opinions, so kids – and 
parents – develop the ability to view media critically and make smart choices.

Jim Steyer is Founder and chief executive of Common Sense Media 
<https://www.commonsensemedia.org/> 

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 