
A few days ago, I stumbled across a documentary on TV called Teens. The series 
of programmes followed a group of English teenagers (who were all from the same 
school), around their daily lives. One of the girls said something that really 
shocked me to the core, and it kept coming back into my mind every day. It went 
along the lines of this:

I’m really worried about my friend, she is really thin. I mean she is really, 
really thin. When she is hungry, she takes nurofen to take away any hunger 
pains.

I was absolutely astounded, and quite frankly shocked, that situations like 
this can still be happening in the modern society we live in. When I heard 
this, alarm bells started ringing in my head; surely teenagers and young people 
can’t be feeling so pressurised that they would have to risk their health, and 
potentially their own life?

Over one­ half of teenage girls 
<http://www.anad.org/get-information/about-eating-disorders/eating-disorders-statistics/>
 and nearly one­ third of teenage boys use unhealthy weight control behaviours. 
Why, you ask, why would they do that? Do you know who I blame? The media. Young 
people can be so easily taken in by images of an unrealistic yet apparently 
perfect body. They pick so many obscure faults with their own bodies, because 
they can only see the perfection in the pages of a magazine, a photo on 
Twitter, or a TV advert. Deep at the heart of the media, then, is just false 
advertising. There are so many examples of magazine companies using Photoshop 
to try to make their models look their best for a mass audience. But these 
advertisements just potentially lead to young adolescents skipping their meals, 
aspiring to a body that isn’t real.

Body expectations for young people can easily end up spiralling out of 
control, for both genders (this is by no means a problem limited only to 
girls). One young adult book that really stuck with me concerning this idea, is 
Only Ever Yours <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/only-ever-yours.html> by 
Louise O’Neill. She describes the struggle of teenage girls “going to bed 
starving every night” because they have to reach a target weight – just so they 
can become the “perfect” wife. What surprised me when I thought about it in 
light of the TV series is just how scarily close to real life this actually 
was. When I read the book it really did put things in perspective for me about 
how teenagers, indeed our whole society, could become obsessed with a life all 
about unhealthy weight loss.


Another less well-known YA book called Skinny 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/skinny.html> by Donna Cooner tells the story 
of Ever, who loses weight through gastric band surgery and then instantly 
ditches her old self, creating a new (more confident) personality. Ever 
immediately starts to flirt with a boy who never used to notice her before and 
starts to make friends with the popular crew. But Conner also includes the 
trials and tribulations of the surgery: Ever still has a niggling voice in her 
head, telling her she is still “ugly” and “fat”. Teenage readers such as myself 
can really empathise with her journey, and see that healthy is the new happy, 
not stick thin.True Face 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/273361/> by Siobhan 
Curham another book attempting to challenge our obsession with body image. It’s 
a guide to taking off your fake face; stripping down to your true self, making 
you see how unique and special you are­ as a human being.

I think these examples prove that YA books can really help teenage readers to 
understand that they don’t have to be defined by their weight. Being abnormally 
skinny, aspiring to fake, photo-shopped role models,­ can make you far more 
unhappy than just being healthy.

What role do you think YA has to play in changing teenage attitudes to body 
perception issues? Email us at childrens.books@theguardian.com or let us know 
on Twitter, @GdnChildrensBks.
 