
It was only afterwards that things livened up here on Saturday evening. A 
glance at the scoreline will reveal everything required to know about the 
match. The weather, with driving rain throughout, might have been awful but the 
quality of play was much worse.

But after the match the Wasps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> 
director of rugby, Ian McGeechan, claimed his side had been robbed of victory 
by an erroneous decision from the television match official, Tony Rowlands. It 
concerned a "try" by Danny Cipriani on 51 minutes. Chasing his hack ahead, 
Cipriani jostled with Dragons' wing Gareth Wyatt before touching down in the 
only true try-scoring opportunity of the evening. But the referee, Dean 
Richards, took his decision upstairs and Rowlands decreed that Cipriani had 
illegally hindered Wyatt.

Not only did McGeechan disagree with that - "it was only jockeying for 
position between the two" - but he also argued that any shoving had taken place 
before the players crossed the try-line and so was out of the TMO's remit. "It 
was in the field of play," said McGeechan, "and the TMO is not allowed to rule 
in the field of play on anything." It was a marginal call. Cipriani put his arm 
on Wyatt's shoulder but whether the definitive shove which sent Wyatt flying 
was over the line or not was difficult to judge. You can be sure it will not 
suffer from the same minute analysis that another disallowed try did a week 
before.

Both teams would do well to consign this video to the waste bin. That there 
were 51 scrums - 19 of which had to be re-set - tells the tale of a pitiful 
plethora of errors. Memorable moments probably take in just two; one a 
stupendous hit from the young Dragons flanker Tom Lydiate on James Haskell and 
the other a delicious flick pass from the returning Tom Rees.

The rest, contrary to all the platitudinous claptrap about the physicality of 
the encounter, was rubbish - an indictment of this half-baked competition and 
of the players' skill levels in adverse conditions.

So it was prudent of the Dragons to send out their wise-crack merchant Ceri 
Sweeney afterwards. He arrived shaking his head and laughing at the absurdity 
of the old-time scoreline. "Please be nice to us," he pleaded. "What with the 
conditions and with both teams blitzing in defence there was no time to play. 
For want of a better word it turned into a 'shit-fight'. In fact I think I've 
got cauliflower-boot I kicked so much." Now that is an injury not even Jonny 
Wilkinson has had.

Newport-Gwent Dragons: M Thomas; Wyatt, Davies (Thomas, 80), Smith (Emerick, 
50), Mustoe; Sweeney, Evans (Williams, 63); Black, Jones (Daly, 72), R Thomas, 
Charteris, Owen (Hall, 72), Lydiate (Ringer, 75), Parks, Charvis (capt).

Pen: Sweeney Sin bin: Charvis 30

Wasps: Van Gisbergen; Hoadley, Waters, Cipriani, Voyce; Flutey, Reddan (capt); 
Payne (Holford, 63), Ward (Webber, 67), Adams, Skivington, Birkett, Hart (Leo 
24- 45), Rees (Ellis, 76), Haskell (Leo 71).Pen: Cipriani

Sin bin: Leo 35

Referee: D Richards (Berkshire)

Attendance: 5,664.
 