
Q We are designing and building a new house. The concept is modern with lots 
of light and space. We can't decide what to do about heating. I'd like 
underfloor heating, mainly for aesthetic reasons, but is it a good option? We 
live in the north of Spain where the climate is similar to the UK.
Hilary Robertson

A Water-fed underfloor heating systems are the architects' choice every time 
as they cut radiator clutter and produce a more even spread of heat to your 
home, allowing heat to rise from the floor as opposed to circulating it across 
the ceiling and then down to the floor as it cools. Combined with a solid 
concrete floor (and tiles) it will be the perfect solution for a modernist 
home, acting as solar thermal mass in the winter (storing heat from winter 
sunlight) and as a heat sink in the summer, keeping your house cool. In 
addition, underfloor heating uses only low-temperature warm water for a super 
efficient yet tactile heating system, so it could run off a heat exchanger from 
a ground source heat pump or solar panels (underfloorheatingsystems.co.uk 
<http://www.underfloorheatingsystems.co.uk> and est.org.uk 
<http://www.est.org.uk>).

Q We have open-plan stairs in the hall. We can't box them in because the hall 
would then be too narrow, and the stairs overhang a doorway. We took the worn 
carpet off the treads but now we don't know whether to go for a heavy-duty 
paint or varnish, or re-carpet. We would prefer a green solution. The house has 
a cottagey feel and was built in 1981. Any ideas?
Carol, London

A Stairs take such heavy wear that any covering must be hard wearing, which 
really reduces your options. However you can go in two ways if you want a green 
solution. First, you can sand down the treads and apply a hard solids floor oil 
(which contains none of the contaminating VOC toxins of conventional paints), 
and its silk finish will bring up the natural wood grain (earthbornpaints.co.uk 
<http://www.earthbornpaints.co.uk>). Or, for a quieter, carpeted tread, try 
either a 100 per cent pure wool (easier to clean) or natural fibre sisal boucle 
carpet (alternativeflooring.co.uk <http://www.alternativeflooring.co.uk>).

· If you have a decorating/design question for Oliver, email 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
 