
Political correspondent Tania Branigan trekked to the Arctic with a team of 
MPs.Arctic challenge slideshow 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/slideshow/page/0,,2014778,00.html> / More on the trek
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/arcticchallenge> 

Day seven, Kiruna, Sweden: We have just under 30km to cover today - taking a 
swift turn through Norway at the tri-nation border with Finland and Sweden - to 
complete our trek. Unfortunately, Nick Clegg's dogs are striking. "I've tried 
everything - I've shouted, I've cajoled, I've given them psychotherapy..." he 
complains.

"Lib Dems - can't make the final push," Tobias Ellwood observes helpfully. 
"They don't know which way they're going," adds Ed Vaizey. "They need the firm 
smack of Conservative government."

Nick (whom I have maligned - he was third not fourth in the poll of fanciable 
MPs ) is unfazed. "Number nine, Vaizey. Number nine."

There have been plenty of jibes on the trip, but by and large the MPs have 
steered clear of political discussions, bar a brief Lib Dem/Labour spat over 
law and order and Labour/Tory row over bus regulation. And yet...as we hand 
back our huskies and head back to civilisation, I overhear Tobias Ellwood and 
Jenny Willott engaged in lengthy discussion on the future of primary care 
trusts.

BlackBerries are being turned on. Researchers are receiving instructions for 
the first time in several days. It's almost as if we were never away.

But not quite. Emily Thornberry and Tobias have established an unexpected 
amity. Everyone is awed by the courage of Jenny, who came to the Arctic Circle 
despite suffering Raynaud's Syndrome - which means blood stops circulating to 
her hands and feet in cold weather - and has not whimpered once. And Nick has 
relished the thinking time afforded by sledding.

"It's a real luxury to get away from all the day to day things that take up 
your time in Westminster and actually have a chance to look at the long term 
perspective, thinking about what will be coming up in 12 or 18 months," he 
says. If the Lib Dems come up with a particularly striking new home affairs 
policy in the next year, you'll know why.

We say goodbye to our huskies and after a chilly reception at the stunning Ice 
Hotel (sorry - you can blame our guide Phil Kool for that one) round off 
celebrations with dinner and superb vodka thoughtfully sent by the Lithuanian 
ambassador, one of the trip's wellwishers.

"I'm not sure I could find four colleagues to do what you did," says one of 
the Swedish MPs who has joined us for dinner. "But they do talk about mad dogs 
and Englishmen..."

The MPs are already planning this weekend's R&R. "I'm going to stay in bed all 
Saturday morning. It may not sound much, but for someone with three kids it's a 
big thing," says Emily dreamily.

Ed can't get enough of Scandinavia. He's dying to see his baby son but also 
plans to fit in a trip to Ikea.

And Tobias? He's heading off for a two-day army training course for former 
personnel. Some people never learn...
 