
Heads of state and government leaders who publicly scorn journalists violate 
the principle of press freedom, argues the Paris-based organisation Reporters 
Without Borders (RWB).

The press freedom watchdog denounces the “little presidents” who publicly 
attack journalists and media outlets 
<http://en.rsf.org/leaders-who-publicly-threaten-17-07-2015,48116.html>, 
arguing that journalists treated in a contemptuous, insulting, defamatory or 
racist manner are put under “terrible pressure... just for doing their job.”

RWB’s secretary-general, Christophe Deloire, says: “A threshold is crossed 
when a head of state lets loose a stream of verbal abuse against media 
personnel...

“How can journalists function normally if the state that is supposed to 
guarantee their safety is headed by a person who holds them up to contempt, 
bullies them and threatens them, opening the way to abuses against the media 
that go unpunished?”

A global survey by RWB of instances of presidential attacks on journalists 
reveals that some political leaders do not tolerate disagreement or debate. 
Others identify expressions of doubt as forms of sedition or as foreign 
interference.

Some, regarded as repeat offenders, wage campaigns of harassment against the 
media outlets or journalists they dislike and seek to hold them to account.

Then there are those who need to say nothing because they already preside over 
effective systems of censorship.

From veiled allusions to open death threats, says the survey, the style varies 
from country to country but the goal remains the same – to gag information.

Here are the bones of the RWB survey...

Latin America

Many Latin American presidents do not hesitate to berate the news media and 
vilify journalism. Some incite hatred and even violence.

Rather than respond to media articles, some presidents prefer to accuse 
journalists of being biased or of plotting against the government. Any 
criticism of government policy is liable to be branded as an attack on the 
country.

According to the Declaration on principles of freedom of expression by the 
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) 
<https://www.cidh.oas.org/Basicos/French/s.expression.htm>, presidents are 
supposed to guarantee the safety of their fellow citizens.

Instead, verbal abuse of the media by presidents such as Nicolás Maduro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nicolas-maduro> (Venezuela), Rafael Correa 
(Ecuador) and Juan Orlando Hernández (Honduras) foster a dangerous climate of 
censorship, self-censorship and impunity for violence against journalists.

Eastern Europe and central Asia

Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan>, smears media critics 
as “agents of subversion,” “foreign spies” or “terrorists.” These verbal 
attacks are symptomatic of his authoritarian tendencies.

Chechen’s president, Ramzan Kadyrov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ramzan-kadyrov>, uses crude language and 
inappropriate comments in order to help sustain a climate of arbitrary rule and 
fear that dominates his republic. He posts both praise and blistering attacks 
on Instagram.

Central Asia’s “eternal despots” - the Turkmen, Uzbek and Kazakh leaders - 
have suppressed pluralism so effectively that virtually no critical journalists 
are left.

European Union and Balkans

Milorad Dodik, president of the Republika Srpska, the Serbian part of Bosnia 
and Herzegovina, reacts with hostility to difficult questions from journalists, 
especially if they are female.

He ordered all government departments to cancel subscriptions to the 
independent daily newspaper Oslobodenje after one of its reporters, a woman, 
asked him about a relative who had been given a prison sentence and was on the 
run.

When a woman TV journalist asked him a question, he replied: “You work for 60 
Minutes? It’s a really lousy programme, it’s complete crap... I see that you at 
least are presentable. But you’re not pretty.”

Elsewhere in Europe, more and more senior politicians are being aggressive 
towards journalists. Last year, Hungary’s deputy prime minister, Zsolt Semjén, 
described investigative journalists as “traitors” and said they were working 
for a “foreign power.”

In France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, the leaders of the 
National Front routinely insult and intimidate journalists, treating them with 
a hostility that is increasingly seen across the entire French political 
spectrum.

Africa

Africa’s presidents often proclaim their undying attachment to media freedom 
and democracy, but they treat journalists as spies, terrorists or traitors.

Reporters are subjected to threats and physical attacks (that are rarely 
punished) and to judicial harassment designed to discourage them from reporting 
potentially embarrassing stories. Investigative journalism is too often 
characterised as being a form of opposition politics.

In 2011, Gambia’s president, Yayah Jammeh, said: “Journalists are less than 1% 
of the population, and if anybody expects me to allow less than 1% of the 
population to destroy 99% of the population, you are in the wrong place.”

Displaying complete contempt for journalists and their “idiotic” questions is 
Zimbabwe’s president Robert Mugabe’s way of dealing with the media.


Mugabe brushed aside a journalist’s questions in April 2014 by saying: “I 
don’t want to see a white face.” In February 2015, his security detail forced 
several journalists to delete photos they had taken of the 91-year-old 
president falling down as he left Harare airport.

Asia

Thailand’s prime minister, Prayut Chan-o-cha, was asked at a news conference 
in March 2015 how the government would deal with journalists who fail to stick 
to the official line. “We’ll probably just execute them,” he replied.

Since imposing martial law in May 2014, Prayut has gagged reporters, bloggers 
and news outlets regarded as overly critical of himself or his military 
government.

He doesn’t think it is the job of reporters to question the government. He 
said in March that journalists should “play a major role in supporting the 
government’s affairs, practically creating the understanding of government’s 
policies to the public.”

Vietnamese prime minister Nguyen Tan Dung’s policy towards journalists is to 
brand them as malevolent enemies and to dismiss revelations about communist 
party corruption as “despicable stratagems by hostile forces.”

When Dung threatens outspoken bloggers with “severe punishments,” the 
deterrent effect is guaranteed because no fewer than 27 citizen-journalists and 
bloggers are currently detained inVietnam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vietnam>.

In 2012 alone, the Vietnamese authorities prosecuted no fewer than 48 bloggers 
and human rights defenders, sentencing them to a total of 166 years in prison 
and 63 years of probation.

China’s president, Xi Jinping <https://www.theguardian.com/world/xi-jinping>, 
rarely mentions media freedom. He doesn’t need to because the ruling communist 
party has ways of exercising control over journalists.

According to a survey by the Foreign Correspondents’ Club of China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, nearly one China-based foreign 
correspondent in 10 has been threatened with the non-renewal of their visa 
because of what they have written.

The New York Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times> has not 
been able to appoint new China correspondents because the government 
systematically refuses to give them visas.

Burma’s president, Thein Sein <https://www.theguardian.com/world/thein-sein>, 
said in July 2014 that “if media freedom threatens national security instead of 
helping the nation, I want to warn all that we will take effective action under 
existing laws.”

That warning was taken seriously because seven journalists have been jailed in 
Burma since the start of 2014.

Malaysia’s prime minister Najib Razak also views journalism through the prism 
of “national security.” He often uses the Sedition Act to order prosecutions of 
journalists, bloggers and other critics, including the cartoonist Zunar.

Najib says he is ready to listen to “constructive criticism” from journalists, 
but when they reveal abusive government practices, he orders police raids 
designed to censor and deter media.

Middle East and north Africa

Middle Eastern leaders usually resort to illegal arrests, arbitrary prison 
sentences, torture and enforced disappearances when expressing their contempt 
for the media.

Many journalists have been convicted on such charges as “disseminating false 
information endangering state security,” “supporting or condoning terrorism” or 
“disturbing public order.”

Most of the region’s leaders give few interviews and carefully vet the media 
that are granted access. One obvious example is Syria’s president,Bashar 
al-Assad <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad>, who has been very 
inaccessible since the start of the crisis in his country, which is the world’s 
deadliest country for journalists.

It is also the case with Algeria’s president, Abdelaziz Bouteflika, who has 
rarely been exposed to the media since his health deteriorated.

Iran’s supreme leader, Ali Khamenei, has never given an interview or news 
conference since assuming power in 1989.

In 2000, he described the pro-reform press as “a base of operations by foreign 
enemies inside our country.” Raids on journalists and media outlets followed.

At least 300 media outlets have been closed, thousands of news websites have 
been censored and more than 500 journalists, bloggers and other online 
information activists have been arbitrarily arrested, tortured and given long 
jail terms. Many others have fled abroad.

In Egypt, President Abdel Fatah al-Sisi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-fatah-al-sisi> accuses journalists who 
do not toe the government line of being “terrorists.”

And the Gulf monarchies? Their leaders rarely address the national media and 
do not insult journalists publicly because they are concerned about their 
international image.

But independent and critical media are rarely tolerated in these countries, 
where censorship and self-censorship prevail. The only space that may still be 
found for freedom of expression and information is online.

Source: Reporters without Borders 
<http://en.rsf.org/leaders-who-publicly-threaten-17-07-2015,48116.html>
 