
On April 30, 1945, the day of Hitler's suicide, "zero hour" in modern German 
history, the 103rd Infantry and Tenth Armored divisions of the U.S. Army took 
possession of the Alpine resort of Garmisch-Partenkirchen, which the war had 
hardly touched. Two hundred Allied bombers had been poised to lay waste to the 
town and its environs, but the strike was called off at the behest of a 
surrendering German officer.

Early in the morning a security detachment turned in to the driveway of a 
Garmisch villa, intending to use it as a command post. When the senior officer, 
Lieutenant Milton Weiss, went inside the house, an old man came downstairs to 
meet him. "I am Richard Strauss," he said, "the composer of Rosenkavalier and 
Salome." Strauss studied the soldier's face for signs of sympathy. Weiss, who 
had played piano at Jewish resorts in the Catskills, recognized the name and 
nodded his head. Strauss went on to recount his experiences in the war, 
pointedly mentioning the tribulations of his Jewish relatives. Weiss chose to 
install his post elsewhere.

At 11:00 a.m. on the same day, a squad of jeeps came up the drive, these led 
by Major John Kramers, of the 103rd Infantry Division's military-government 
branch. Kramers told the family that they had fifteen minutes to evacuate. 
Strauss walked out to the major's jeep, holding documents that declared him to 
be an honorary citizen of Morgantown, West Virginia, together with part of the 
manuscript of Rosenkavalier. "I am Richard Strauss, the composer," he said. 
Kramers's face lit up; he was a Strauss fan. An "Off Limits" sign was placed on 
the lawn.

In the days that followed, Strauss posed for photographs, played the 
Rosenkavalier waltzes on the piano, and smiled bemusedly as soldiers inspected 
his statue of Beethoven and asked who it was. "If they ask one more time," he 
muttered, "I'm telling them it's Hitler's father."

All over Europe, young veterans were emerging from the rubble of the war into 
adulthood. Among them were several future leaders of the postwar musical scene, 
and they would be indelibly marked by what they had experienced in adolescence. 
Karlheinz Stockhausen was the son of a spiritually tortured Nazi Party member 
who went to the eastern front and never returned. His mother was confined for 
many years to a sanatorium, then killed in the Nazi euthanasia program. By the 
age of sixteen, Stockhausen was working in a mobile hospital behind the western 
front, where he tried to revive soldiers who had fallen victim to Allied 
incendiary bombs. "I would try to find an opening in the mouth area for a 
straw," he recalled, "in order to pour some liquid into these men, whose bodies 
were still moving, but there was only a yellow ball-like mass where the face 
should have been." On a given day Stockhausen and his comrades would haul 
thirty or forty corpses into churches that had been converted into morgues.

Hans Werner Henze trained as a radio operator for Panzer battalions and spent 
the first part of 1945 riding aimlessly around the ruined landscape. Bernd 
Alois Zimmermann fought on the front lines of Hitler's ill-fated invasion of 
the Soviet Union. Luciano Berio was conscripted into the army of Mussolini's 
Republic of Salò and nearly blew off his right hand with a gun that he did not 
know how to use. Iannis Xenakis joined the Greek Communist resistance, fighting 
not only the Germans but also the British, who, in an early demonstration of 
Cold War Realpolitik, made common cause with local Fascists when they occupied 
the country. At the end of 1944 a British shell landed on a building where 
Xenakis was hiding; after watching a comrade's brains splatter against a wall, 
he passed out and awoke to find that his left eye and part of his face were 
gone.

In July 1945, the young English composer Benjamin Britten, who had just scored 
a triumph in London with his opera Peter Grimes, accompanied the violinist 
Yehudi Menuhin on a brief tour of defeated Germany. The two men visited the 
concentration camp at Bergen- Belsen and performed for a crowd of former 
inmates. Stupefied by what he saw, Britten decided to write a cycle of songs on 
the Holy Sonnets of John Donne, the most spiritually scouring poetry he could 
find. On August 6 he set to music Sonnet 14, which begins, "Batter my heart, 
three person'd God." Earlier the same day, the first operational atomic bomb 
fell on Hiroshima. There is an eerie coincidence here, for J. Robert 
Oppenheimer, the head of the American nuclear program, cherished the same Donne 
poem, and evidently had it in mind when he gave the site of the first atomic 
test the name Trinity.

On August 19, Britten finished his cycle by setting Donne's sonnet "Death be 
not proud." The singer declaims the words "And death shall be no more" on a 
rising scale; fixates for nine long beats on the word "Death"; and finally, 
over a clanging dominant-tonic cadence, thunders, "Thou shalt die."

· Extract from The Rest is Noise by Alex Ross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alex-ross>, published by Fourth Estate.
 