
Even before I started to read this slim little book, I noticed what a piece of 
art it was. The pages have an ancient parchment feel to them and the 
illustrations look chalky with earthy pigments and an almost magical quality to 
them. The story itself is about Antigone, the daughter of Oedipus and Jocasta 
(both dead), and was originally written as a play by the Ancient Greek 
playwright Sophocles. However, you don’t need to be a Classics scholar to enjoy 
and understand this book and that it is genius.

A brilliant part of this book is that rather than the author or any other 
human, the tale is told by a cynical, aggressive and sarcastic crow, who 
observes everything that is going on whilst on the lookout for food, usually of 
the dead variety. At the end of the book, the same crow interviews the author 
Ali Smith, Jeremy Paxman-style, about why she wrote this story and this is 
another clever idea as it reminds us how the Ancient Greeks loved a full on 
discussion to get to the truth!


It is the crow who first spots the young girl Antigone, who despite warnings 
from her sister Ismene, decides to break the law of the land. It all starts 
after a battle which left both Antigone’s brothers dead – one of them, 
Polynices, has been classed as a traitor. The king of Thebes, Creon, decides 
that his nephew Polynices doesn’t deserve a burial but Antigone can’t bear the 
thought of her brother’s body being left out in the open to be eaten by 
animals. Antigone knows that to disobey Creon’s orders will result in her own 
death penalty but still she goes out of the city to find her brother’s body and 
then buries it. She is discovered and Creon has to decide whether this young 
girl, who just happens to be his son Haemon’s fiancée, should live or die.... 
As it is a Greek tragedy, pride comes before a fall (hubris) and let’s just say 
that the crows aren’t going to be hungry any time soon.


Antigone’s love for her brother, her sense of right and wrong and her bravery 
makes her admirable. Sophocles has also been bold in basing his entire play 
around this strong female at a time when women were considered inferior to men. 
I would say that I wasn’t very keen on the chorus of Greek elders in the story 
who kept bursting into verse, explaining things which seemed obvious to me. 
Also, if they are going to speak in verse, it shouldn’t be written down like 
prose as this reduces the enjoyment even more. However, I understand why they 
were in the story as Sophocles himself used such characters to put both sides 
of the argument to the audience.


Stories like Antigone are so important. They still seem fresh and modern and 
tackle concerns we still have about power struggles, laws of our society and 
how we treat outsiders and insiders. With all that has gone on this past two 
weeks in British politics, this tale continues to be really relevant.


 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/story-of-antigone.html>
 