
Political correspondent Tania Branigan is trekking to the Arctic with a team 
of MPsRead all entries 
<http://blogs.guardian.co.uk/news/archives/arctic_challenge/> / More on the 
Arctic challenge <http://www.guardian.co.uk/arcticchallenge> 

Day four, Jarama Sami camp, Sweden: I can't help thinking minimalist white 
interiors are a little bit 90s. And it's not often you wake up and realise you 
are inhaling ice. But we survived the night.

"It was actually quite cosy," claims Jenny Willott as she emerges to the 
disbelief of her companions. Nick Clegg says he hasn't slept a wink (though 
others in his igloo claimed to have heard him snoring) and Emily Thornberry has 
a simple take: "Done sleeping in an igloo. Don't need to do it again."

It isn't the ideal start to a day's sledding, especially since temperatures 
have tumbled again overnight and many of the dogs are in a querulous mood.

Hugo, our taciturn husky master, keeps stopping to curse the dogs and switch 
them between teams in an attempt to keep the line together. It's extraordinary 
what a difference their position makes (stick them straight behind Hugo at the 
front and they'll accelerate, no doubt worried about another earful.)

It's just the same when it comes to the make up of each team; like humans, 
they appear to take instinctive likes and dislikes to their colleagues.

A husky will gallop if paired with one dog but dig in its heels and be dragged 
along if given a new running mate. That said one disaster was entirely 
predictable - when a male was paired with a bitch on heat.

We're heading north across the tundra; the huge, barren swathe of land with 
spare trees thrusting through the snow. A sudden scatter of ptarmigans remind 
us how little wildlife survives the winter here. The only other signs we've 
spotted are the reindeer tracks traced through the snow.

We're staying in reindeer herders' huts tonight, but arehoping to avoid the 
herds themselves so we don't disturb them.

It is easy to see why the Scandinavian stereotype is gloomy. It isn't just the 
long hours of darkness; driving for hours on end across the whiteness, with no 
idea how far one has come or is going, induces an introspective, almost 
fatalistic mood. A week on a sled is probably enough to induce an existential 
crisis - never mind a lifetime.

Then again, this group may be going the other way; demonstrating increasing 
silliness, by way of release from the day's efforts.

"We're in Sweden and we haven't had an Abba sing along," complains Ed Vaizey. 
The rest of the team make half-hearted efforts to oblige, but the night in an 
igloo has taken its toll. Things tail off after a brief Lib Dem/Tory split over 
the tune Fernando. There go those dreams of coalition.
 