
What is it with female celebrities lately? While good girl/bad girl categories 
have long structured women's representation in popular culture (silent cinema 
was populated by sinister vamps such asTheda Bara 
<http://film.theguardian.com/features/featurepages/0,,2238272,00.html> and 
gamine girls next door like Mary Pickford) there are many reasons to think that 
these categories are intensifying in our own cultural moment. The current 
celebrity landscape is peopled by a starkly divided set of female characters: 
remote cinema goddesses on the one hand (Angelina Jolie, Cate Blanchett, 
Gwyneth Paltrow) and overexposed tabloid "trash" on the other (Britney Spears, 
Kerry Katona, Paris Hilton).

Recent saturation coverage of female stars in crisis 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/comment/story/0,,1874085,00.html> contrasts 
dramatically with the journalistic restraint often exhibited in relation to 
male stars. Current media invite us to root against such toxic celebrities as 
Jade Goody and Amy Winehouse, but it is taken for granted that we root for 
their troubled male counterparts. Last year, media outlets largely maintained a 
respectful distance when a depressed Owen Wilson attempted suicide, more 
recently celebrating his recovery as it manifested itself in the resumption of 
his romantic life. Part of the hype of summer blockbuster Iron Man has involved 
celebrating the career longevity and personal recovery of former drug addict 
Robert Downey Jr. WhenHeath Ledger <http://film.theguardian.com/heathledger> 
died earlier this year, shocked early responses on the internet not 
infrequently expressed surprise that it was Ledger who had died rather than one 
of the many headline-making female celebrities who normally dominate coverage. 
"Heath before Britney?" wrote one. "Something is seriously wrong with the 
world."

Of course, Wilson, Downey and Ledger all became stars through their cinema 
roles while Goody and Winehouse have had very different fame trajectories. 
Partly what's at issue here is a rather stubborn set of status distinctions 
between cinema and TV (although I am not sure we should accept at face value 
that Zoolander necessarily has more cultural worth than doesBig Brother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/jul/03/bigbrother.television?gusrc=rss&feed=media>
). But it seems apparent that the feminisation of crisis celebrity is a larger, 
more durable and more significant phenomenon that can easily be summed up in 
just a few examples.

Thinking about all this in terms of a media conspiracy doesn't seem helpful. 
If there weren't commercial incentives for these kinds of stories we wouldn't 
see such a glut of them. At the same time, the tired old argument that rapt 
audience interest can be explained by the fact that women just love to see 
other women fail doesn't get the job done either, although certainly that kind 
of argument enjoys a renewed respectability in our current post-feminist 
climate. So what's really at stake in the production of celebrity women we love 
to hate?

I'd like to suggest five reasons why these kinds of stories generate so many 
column inches, so much broadcast time and bandwith, and so much public interest.

First, they appeal to a set of common sense ideas about women's lives in the 
early 21st century. The aspiration toward having it all has become the premiere 
female taboo. "Unlearning" feminism has become a standard ingredient of forms 
like the romantic comedy, which now habitually concludes with a woman 
repudiating and/or abandoning her working life. Meanwhile, the stay-at-home mum 
is a glorified and exalted figure. The failures and struggles of the trainwreck 
female celebrity operate as proof that for women the work/life balance really 
is impossible.

Second, many trainwreck female celebrities (especially in Britain) achieved 
fame in reality television, a form that produces distaste, distrust and rank 
antagonism alongside high viewer ratings. This is the kind of TV we love to 
hate, and the emotional ambivalence it stirs up seems to stick to the women 
whose celebrity it generates.

Third, the crisis celebrity emerges at a time when we mourn the passing of a 
probably imaginary era in which the relationship between talent and fame seemed 
stable and reliable. In our current moment, many feel that we've become overrun 
by a set of illegitimate female celebrities who are famous for nothing. This 
sense of unearned celebrity also applies to a high-profile set of women who've 
entered public consciousness on the coattails of their husband's, boyfriend's 
or partner's fame. Britain really does specialise in making such women visible 
and using them as yardsticks for measuring style, glamour, taste and etiquette 
and testing public beliefs about morality, intimacy, parenthood and wealth. 
Does any other country have as distinct a designation as theWag 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WAGs>? Does any other invest as much effort in 
whipping up public hatred for women like Heather Mills who are reviled as 
fraudulent, manipulative hysterics?

This leads to my fourth point, which is the relationship between the crisis 
celebrity and the maintenance of that cherished set of cultural ideals/myths 
known as family values. It's clear that female celebrities are used to prop up 
ideas about which kinds of women's lives are valuable and which aren't. 
Particularly at risk for censure are female celebrities whose sexual, 
relationship and domestic circumstances can't be understood within a family 
values framework. Even seemingly sympathetic coverage works from this mindset – 
hence Jennifer Aniston, Renee Zellweger and recently Kylie Minogue are painted 
as sad singletons, looking for love and fundamentally unfulfilled.

Another explanation is old-fashioned class politics. Many of the celebrities 
who are most severely and regularly judged are those with working class 
backgrounds. These backgrounds are invoked to explain the celebrity's 
misbehaviour (ie Long Island Lolita Lindsay Lohan, southern "white trash"
Britney Spears <https://www.theguardian.com/music/britneyspears>, north London 
Amy Winehouse). Media coverage frequently presents these women as 
over-reachers, reverting to their original class characteristics.

This seems to be an era of strong cultural consensus about out of bounds 
behavior for women and equally strong pleasure to be taken in identifying and 
judging it. Men, meanwhile, largely enjoy a set of laddish prerogatives that 
exempt them from similar scrutiny – the playboy bachelor, the corporate 
titan/patriarch of reality TV competition shows and the slacker hero of recent 
cinema all manifest a sense of entitlement that stands in contrast to the 
beleaguered women whose knicker-less nights out, parenting infractions and 
style meltdowns unify us in condemnation.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> are the test subjects for 
referenda on popular morality, not men.

A stark age gap (again, not a new phenomenon but a revitalised one) also 
structures the gender economy of fame. A prurient interest in the teen nymphet 
– in the US right nowMiley Cyrus 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/art/2008/04/miley_cyrus.html> who was preceded by 
Lindsay Lohan and in the UK by Charlotte Church – stands in contrast to the 
emergence of the sexed-up and/or swashbuckling senior citizen (Harrison Ford, 
Mick Jagger, Hugh Hefner). This contrast reminds us that fame is still 
understood to use up women while it energises men.

The story of the unruly, unhealthy, wayward female celebrity has become so 
common it feels ambient. It's part of the backdrop against which we frame 
any/all newsworthy women now, particularly women with political roles. 
Politicians and politician spouses fromHilary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/jul/08/hillaryclinton.usa> to 
Cecilia Sarkozy, from Cherie Blair toMichelle Obama 
<http://michelleobamawatch.com/> have all faced similar public scepticism about 
their ambition, their motives, their integrity, and their supportiveness, their 
ability to manage the work/life balance. The crisis female celebrity 
preoccupies us because she helps to shape and define a bigger set of dilemmas 
about women's roles in public life.
 