
Three decades before he lost most of his hair, shaved the remaining stubble, 
and began buying an array of flat caps to cover his chrome dome, Bruce Arians 
was a hot young college football head coach, entering his fifth season before 
his 35th birthday.


He had curly blond hair, gumption and a tinge of a Southern accent that made 
him sound a lot more like a college football coach – even though he’d grown up 
in York, Pennsylvania, where they make barbells and Harley-Davidsons.

 His first head coaching job was at Temple University, in North Philadelphia. 
I caught up to Arians on an August afternoon in 1987 at a set of bleachers in 
the middle of a 156,000-square-foot patch of unforgiving AstroTurf behind 
McGonigle Hall, which was then the Owls’ basketball arena. No one was looking 
on except the forlorn, battered rowhouses on the other side of Norris Street. 
It was 87F, with about 87 million percent humidity.

Arizona Cardinals, not Carolina Panthers, looking like the NFC's team to beat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/dec/28/arizona-cardinals-not-carolina-panthers-looking-like-the-nfcs-team-to-beat>
“You’ll get sunburn on the bottom of your ears,” Arians said, smiling.

I was there as a young Philadelphia Inquirer reporter to chronicle the first 
week of summer camp for a prospect from Philadelphia named Rich Drayton. A wide 
receiver, Drayton ended up having a fine career at Temple and is now the head 
coach at his old high school. Drayton was nice, earnest and talented, but 
Arians made animpression. He’d come to Temple from Alabama, where he’d been the 
running backs coach under none other than Bear Bryant, and he did a pretty good 
job succeeding the legendary Wayne Hardin at Temple

Arians, now the coach of the Arizona Cardinals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arizona-cardinals>, who will play the 
Carolina Panthers on Sunday in the NFC Championship game, has grown a white 
goatee and wears horn-rimmed eyeglasses that, with the flat cap, make him look 
more like a Beat poet than a football coach.

He always has been avant-garde, which in the NFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> means honest. For example, he was asked 
Wednesday at a news conference if the Cardinals quarterback Carson Palmer got 
some butterflies out of the way by beating the Green Bay Packers in overtime 
last weekend.

“I think everybody got it out of the way,” Arians replied, “and with it 
especially being such a tight game, it was very beneficial to us. I think this 
preparation already, you can see a different football team. It looks like a lot 
of energy, a lot of focus – maybe not as much apprehension.”

Arians has earned a reputation as an innovative offensive coach, but he is 
demanding, flamboyant in a way most NFL coaches never are, and, at the same 
time, compassionate. His players love him.

Arians was an assistant coach for two Pittsburgh Steelers teams that won Super 
Bowls, but he really does sound like a coach who has learned some things the 
hard way. Between his first full head-coaching job and his second, he held nine 
jobs over 25 years.

In 1986, Temple had finished 6-5, propelled by a running back named Paul 
Palmer, the runner-up for the Heisman Trophy behind Miami quarterback Vinny 
Testaverde. Two years later, Temple forfeited all six victories because Palmer 
had taken a loan from an agent.

The 1987 training camp began without Palmer, but Arians seemed to have his 
program headed in the right direction, because he could spot and develop 
talent. Arians was mentioned as a candidate for the open head-coaching position 
at his alma mater, Virginia Tech. Another alum got the job: Frank Beamer.

One of his first top players at Temple was a savvy defensive back from New 
Jersey named Todd Bowles, who stuck as an undrafted free agent with Washington 
for eight years and is now the New York Jets head coach.

“They have to know how serious this level is,” Arians said in 1987. “They know 
you can’t come here to get a free education through football. The football is 
too tough. If you don’t love it, you won’t make it. The education is too tough, 
too.”

The Owls won three of their first four games in 1987. But they lost their last 
seven games, went 4-7 in 1988 against a brutal schedule, and Arians was fired. 
The Temple football program slid into an abyss, where it stayed for most of the 
next 30 years.

From Temple, Arians became the running backs coach of the Kansas City Chiefs, 
where he befriended the ferocious young defensive coordinator, Bill Cowher. 
Arians held six jobs before Cowher hired him as the Steelers’ wide receivers 
coach in 2004.

By that point, Arians appeared destined to be a capable career assistant – and 
he was the Steelers’ offensive coordinator for five years under Mike Tomlin, 
who is 20 years younger than Arians. But then Tomlin forced him out, and 
Arians, then 59, was ready to retire.

Then Chuck Pagano, the Colts’ first-year coach, called Arians and asked him to 
be his offensive coordinator. Arians said yes, little knowing that Pagano would 
miss 12 games to undergo treatment for leukaemia. The Colts won nine of those 
12 games, and Arians was named as the NFL coach of the year. The Cardinals 
hired him in January 2013.

But Temple still is a fond memory. Before Arizona routed the Philadelphia 
Eagles in December, he opened a conference call with reporters by exclaiming, 
“How about those Temple Owls, baby! What a year.”

Before that game was moved to Sunday night, Arians had even planned to have 
the Cardinals practice on the Temple campus. The Owls don’t practice on that 
patch of baked AstroTurf behind McGonigle Hall; they have a new practice 
facility six blocks away.

Arians is now one victory from the Super Bowl, but he won’t forget his first 
head-coaching experience that launched him – well, pointed him – to the choice 
spot he is in today.
 