
Prophets, it is said, are without honour in their homeland. Yet Moscow has 
just witnessed the extraordinary sight ofAleksandr Solzhenitsyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/aug/04/nobelprize.russia> – the 
dissident and once-exiled author of the Gulag Archipelago and One Day in the 
Life of Ivan Denisovich – receiving what amounts to a state funeral, with prime 
minister Vladimir Putin acting as chief mourner.

So, even in death, Solzhenitsyn will, it seems, remain a force to be reckoned 
with. But will he be a force in keeping with the liberating vistas of his 
greatest works?

Sadly, art in Russia is always used to reinforce the narcissism of power. 
Solzhenitsyn was used in this way twice. The paradox is that, in the Soviet 
era, his art was used, briefly, as a force for liberation, becauseNikita 
Khrushchev <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nikita_Khrushchev> allowed the 
publication of One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich in order to buttress his 
anti-Stalin thaw. In today's supposedly free and democratic Russia, however, 
Solzhenitsyn is idealised for his nationalism and Orthodox messianism, his 
contempt for the west's supposed decadence – all messages that Putin's regime 
proclaims loudly and daily.

The old Soviet iconography has broken down completely; despite heroic efforts, 
not even Putin could restore Lenin, Stalin, and the old Soviet pantheon. Yet 
the Kremlin understands that something is needed to replace them asRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> adapts to its new oil-fuelled 
autocracy. Solzhenitsyn, one of the most famous and heroic dissidents of the 
Soviet era, now seems certain to become a towering figure in the iconography of 
Putinism.

Throughout his presidency, Putin repeatedly invoked Russia as an ancient, 
powerful, and divinely ordained state going back a thousand years, a 
civilisation separate from the west, neither Communist nor a western liberal 
democracy. That message echoes Solzhenitsyn's famous commencement address at 
Harvard in 1978: "Any ancient deeply-rooted autonomous culture, especially if 
it is spread on a wide part of the earth's surface, constitutes an autonomous 
world, full of riddles and surprises to western thinking. For 1,000 years, 
Russia has belonged to such a category."

For Solzhenitsyn, a survivor of the gulag system enforced by the KGB, the 
desire to see Russia as a great nation, its eternal spirit superior to the 
west's vulgar materialism, found him in old age supporting ex-KGB man Putin, 
who once said that there is no such thing as an ex-KGB man and who sees the 
Soviet Union's collapse as the greatest geo-political catastrophe of modern 
times. Despite this, Solzhenitsyn seemed to accept Putin as a "good dictator", 
whose silencing of his critics enhances Russia's soul.

It is a sad testament to Russia's current mindset that it is Solzhenitsyn the 
anti-modernist crank who is being remembered, not Solzhenitsyn the towering foe 
of Soviet barbarism and mendacity. Today, his writing is seen as buttressing 
the state, not individual freedom. Works such as The Red Wheel series of 
novels, a tedious account of the end of Imperial Russia and the creation of the 
USSR, or his last book, written in 2001, entitled Two Hundred Years Together on 
the history of Russian-Jewish coexistence, seem backward, preachy, 
conservative, unenlightened, at times even antisemitic, and smack of 
Solzhenitsyn's own grim authoritarianism.

Both Putin and Khrushchev sought to use Solzhenitsyn for their own purposes. 
Putin vowed to revive the moral fibre of the Russians, their glory and 
international respect. To achieve this goal he sought to restore high culture 
to a position of primacy in Russian life, and to put mass media in its 
(politically) subservient place. Putin held up Solzhenitsyn as a model for 
those who stand for the ideal of Great Russia – "an example of genuine devotion 
and selfless serving of the people, fatherland, and the ideals of freedom, 
justice, and humanism".

Under Khrushchev, however, Solzhenitsyn's work was used to liberate the 
country from the grip of Stalinism. In choosing to allow One Day in the Life of 
Ivan Denisovich to be published, Khrushchev knew that he was undermining the 
entire Soviet era up to that point. But, with Khrushchev's overthrow in 1964, 
Leonid Brezhnev lost no time in restoring orthodoxy and purging books that 
threatened the party's reputation. Solzhenitsyn was banned, driven first 
underground and then into exile.

Yet Khrushchev, isolated and in disgrace, continued to see a bond between 
himself and the great author. Solzhenitsyn wrote in his memoir, The Oak and the 
Calf : "As late as 1966, he [Khrushchev] sent me New Year's greetings – which 
astonished me because I was on the brink of arrest. Perhaps (in his disgrace) 
he did not know."

One lesson of the 1989 revolution in Eastern Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> is the value of having truly 
democratic-minded figures lead the escape from communism. Poland had Lech 
Walesa; Czechoslovakia Václav Havel. Both kept their countries calm during 
wrenching transitions.

Russia, sadly, had no one with the moral authority to soothe people's 
passions. Only Solzhenitsyn andAndrei Sakharov 
<http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/peace/laureates/1975/sakharov-autobio.html> 
came near to Walesa and Havel in terms of moral authority, but Sakharov was 
dead by the time communism collapsed, and Solzhenitsyn's ideas were too 
conservative, too tied to Russian nationalism, for him to become a symbol of 
democracy in a multi-national Soviet Union.

The tragedy of Solzhenitsyn is that, although he played a mighty role in 
liberating Russia from totalitarianism, he had nothing to say to ordinary 
Russians after their liberation, except to chastise them. Yet perhaps one day 
we Russians will escape our false dreams, and when that day comes, the heroic 
Solzhenitsyn, the Solzhenitsyn who could never surrender or be corrupted, will 
be restored to us. But it is now that we need that Solzhenitsyn most. For to 
paraphrase Milton's Paradise Lost on the illumination of Hell, "Solzhenitsyn's 
is no light, but rather darkness visible."


 Copyright: Project Syndicate <>, 2008.
 