
Last week, I spoke to one of the largest providers of specialist legal 
services in this country. But you would not know their name. The services they 
offer are usually badged and marketed by larger, better-known brands, 
particularly banks. And within a relatively short time, they have captured over 
10% of their particular legal market.

And despite the fact that central to their offer was the delivery of services 
which are formally classified as "reserved", things which a only qualified 
lawyer can do, they are not lawyers and their firm is, they claim, subject to 
no regulation at all. There are no formal standards to which they have to 
adhere, no professional body of which they have to be a member, no redress 
scheme to which they have to sign up. Regulation has yet to catch up with them 
and their customers have no protection should they make a mistake.

The legal profession feels threatened by firms like these, and with good 
cause. Publicly, there is fierce optimism about the future of high street law 
firms; privately, legal insiders are predicting widespread closures as incomes 
drop and competition increases. Traditional structures are changing too, with 
the old boundaries between solicitors and barristers being eroded as both 
search for new roles and new markets. And consumer behaviour is changing. No 
longer content to rely on traditional methods of delivery, we are demanding 
immediate access to fixed price services.

Some of those changes are the direct result of government policy. It's clear 
thatlegal aid <https://www.theguardian.com/law/legal-aid> cuts are hitting 
earnings in areas like crime and family law. The licencing of the first
alternative business structures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/alternative-business-structures>- "Tesco law" 
- will allow non-lawyers to own law firms: a deliberate attempt to open the 
legal services market to new providers. From that point, in theory, estate 
agents could be able to offer conveyancing alongside house sales or the Co-op 
to provide probate alongside funerals.

But, in truth, these are likely to be a sideshow. In this era of small 
government, it is the market, not the state, which drives change. Two things 
have put the lawyer's traditional monopoly of legal wisdom in jeopardy.

Technological advances mean that legal knowledge can now be separated from the 
lawyer and systematised via modern software. Why go to a solicitor for a will 
when you can generate your own will by filling in an online form based on 
sophisticated legal algorithms? If more and more law can be packaged and sold 
online, what is the future of expensive and forbidding high street law firms?

The second pressure comes from the market itself. Ten years ago, the 
boundaries between the professions were clear. Bankers banked, insurers 
insured, lawyers did law. Now those boundaries are much less distinct. Go onto 
the website of any major bank or insurance company and you will find them 
offering legal services alongside their core activities. We have grown used to 
the RAC offering to sort out the legal as well as the insurance aspects of the 
aftermath of our car accidents. RAC legal services offering crime, matrimonial 
and immigration law to customers of Barclays bank is a more novel departure.

All these developments are not just a challenge for lawyers. There is a danger 
that we – the customers – may lose out. On the plus side, law is likely to 
become cheaper and more accessible now that 800 years of self-regulation has 
come to an end. But there are risks. We go to lawyers at some of the most 
critical times of their lives: when someone has died, when they are getting 
divorced, when they are buying a house, the largest financial transaction of 
their lives. If the legal service we rely on to help us is inadequate, the 
consequences are devastating. That is why professional standards and access to 
redress are so vital. And with the reputation of bankers and journalists 
shredded by apparent failures in regulation, we cannot afford to take similar 
risks with the reputation of lawyers.

Adam Sampson is the legal ombudsman, who published his first report 
<http://www.legalombudsman.org.uk/> this week
 