
As the news of this week's intelligence sting against al-Qaida in the Arabian 
Peninsula 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/may/09/underwear-bomber-working-for-cia>
 became public, there was a seemingly odd contradiction. On the one hand, the 
president, speaking from Afghanistan, had just announced that, thanks to US 
military action, al-Qaida was "on the path to defeat". In the words of John 
Brennan, "In short, al-Qaida is losing badly." On the other hand, there wasnews 
of a new and potentially lethal plot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/may/09/fbi-surveillance-measures-al-qaida>
 – a perhaps undetectable bomb aimed at blowing up an airplane.

At first blush, these two facts seem incongruous. As a result, much of the 
editorial comment on the bomb plot has focused on the need for increased 
vigilance when it comes to al-Qaida. But there's a more important lesson to 
take away from this disrupted plot.

Since 9/11, the United States has responded with a full arsenal of national 
security tools. All too many of these were merely shots in the dark; many were 
misplaced attempts to find information, with few leads and even less 
understanding of al-Qaida. Whether it was enhanced interrogation techniques, or
FBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> stings that focused on 
individuals with few or no real ties to al-Qaida, or the useless expenditure of 
funds on fruitless and unfocused data collection, law enforcement and national 
security officials spent a decade struggling with, rather than mastering, the 
ways to detect and counter al-Qaida.

Throughout, there was a determination to find a way to place sources inside 
the inner chambers of al-Qaida – but until this case, the payoff seemed 
elusive. When US intelligence services did get close to infiltrating al-Qaida, 
the result was disastrous – witness the trust the US placed in thetriple agent 
who blew up the CIA team of seven operatives in Khost 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/05/world/asia/05cia.html>.

The success of this latest tactic – successful infiltration based on wise 
intelligence and careful espionage work – carries an important message. It did 
not involve secret prisons or torture. It was not a made-up plot designed to 
lure individuals to the cause of jihad. It was not a case of surveilling or 
rounding up whole groups of people to try and find one who might pose a danger 
to the United States. Accordingly, it signifies the new era in 
counterterrorism, one in which the threat is understood and is therefore 
manageable; a threat for which the lawful, legitimate and professional skills 
of the national security apparatus take center stage.

The Yemeni underwear plot is not the only recent sign of the way in which law 
enforcement and intelligence have reached a new plateau.Last week, a verdict 
was returned in the federal courthouse in Brooklyn in a case where three men 
were accused 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/05/02/nyregion/terror-defendant-convicted-in-plot-to-bomb-new-york-subways.html>
 of plotting to blow up the New York city subways. This was a case where the 
accused, two of whom have pled guilty and the third of whom was convicted by 
the jury, were apprehended in the midst of a plot in which training in 
Waziristan, the purchase of explosives, and the plot to bomb the subways was 
well underway by the time law enforcement became involved. It was, one could 
argue, the most serious homegrown terrorist threat to the United States since 
9/11. And it was one in which law enforcement intercepted the crime through 
tactical surveillance.

Both of these cases, sobering as they may be in their potential for harm, 
signal that rather than flailing about to find those bent on destruction, the 
United States has reached a new level of confidence and competence in 
addressing the threat of al-Qaida. This is a welcome turn of events, one that 
suggests that counterterrorism has come to rely on knowledge, on on-the-ground 
information, on patience, and on strategic methods of investigation and 
pursuit. 

The president was right. The age of al-Qaida, as we once knew and feared it, 
is dwindling. With the deaths of Osama bin Laden andAnwar al-Awlaki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-al-awlaki>, BinLadenism has 
essentially disappeared. What remains seems to be a less centralized enemy, one 
that we are now able to declare can be handled by methods of intelligence that 
have been used against far more recognizable – and far more lethal – enemies. 
Of equal importance, though, was the manner in which the discovery and 
disruption of the plot came about: techniques that were essentially by the 
book, without either illegal methods or overblown claims of danger.

The sobering significance of the Yemeni underwear bomb was less the plot 
itself than what it indicates about the way forward. In the future, a frantic 
reliance on torture, entrapment, and over-inclusive surveillance can give way 
to the more reliable methods based on knowledge of the enemy, on-the-ground 
intelligence, global cooperation, and strategic planning to make us safe.

If only our efforts at apprehending terrorists had trusted these tried and 
true methods early on in the "war on terror". Perhaps, then, we could have 
avoided the lapses of law and morality that have marked the era.
 