
Antwerp is hardly the first place that springs to mind for a city break; 
indeed, nowhere in Belgium figures in most people's list of hip destinations. 
But reconsider on both counts, because Antwerp is currently one of the most 
fashionable cities in Europe.

Previously known as the home of the Flemish master Rubens and the world's 
leading diamond trading centre, this prosperous city has in the past two 
decades produced more internationally acclaimed fashion designers than any 
other.

From the renowned Antwerp Royal Academy of Fashion emerged the notorious 
"Belgian 6" (including Dries Van Noten, Ann Demeulemeester, and Walter Van 
Beirendonck) in the 1980s, and since then have come legions of cutting-edge 
names, including Veronique Branquinho, Raf Simons, and Dirk Schonberger.

For a compact city of 400,000 people, Antwerp is incredibly rich in fashion 
and interiors stores, antique dealers and art galleries. Many international 
fashion houses have stores in Paris, London, Milan, and... Antwerp. Trendy bods 
arrive from Germany, the Netherlands, Paris, and even Japan for shopping sprees 
- Belgian labels are considerably cheaper here, and most have flagship stores.

It wasn't always like this. Antwerp was once the world's busiest port (it's 
still the second largest in Europe), a working, no-nonsense town. So how did it 
become such a mecca for fashion designers and artists?

Much of the credit goes to the Fashion Academy. At a time when "proper" 
fashion looked to Paris, and street fashion to London or New York, designers 
such as Dirk Bikkembergs and Van Noten had the confidence to bring a Belgian 
sensibility (intellectual, thoughtful, eclectic) to their work, and remain in 
Antwerp. Van Noten, the most commercially successful designer, Demeulemeester, 
and Van Beirendonck are still to be seen striding round the city's streets, 
providing inspiration for its growing army of designers.

Antwerp can be "done" in a weekend, but to become its friend takes longer, 
because it is a reserved city. There are few big clubs, parties are rarely 
advertised and the hippest bars (there are hundreds to choose from) can look 
like ordinary cafes from the outside.

To understand Antwerp's appeal, you have to consider its history. At various 
times, it's been under the control of the Netherlands, Germany, Austria and 
France. This, along with its international port status, means it's accustomed 
to outsiders, and this is reflected in its small, well-defined ethnic quarters. 
Architecturally, one street in Antwerp can contain buildings from several 
different centuries and styles - none of the grandiose uniformity of Paris. 
Belgian architects, like Belgian designers, are all about individuality.

Today, the working docks are far to the north, near the Dutch border, to 
accommodate huge container ships, but as in so many cities, this has provided 
an opportunity for a renewal of urban living. Walking along the Scheldt towards 
the docks is like emerging from the old world and in to a new one: from 
dreaming spires, through the now redundant old docks, you see the giant 
petrochemical plant and modern docks to the north, like a futuristic techno 
city.

Alternatively, you can look to the past. You can visit Rubens's restored 
house,or one of the city's numerous museums, churches, and monuments. The most 
authentic is the Plantin-Moretus museum (Vrijdagmarkt 22), the palatial home of 
a rich businessman, that has remained unchanged since the 17th century.

 Bars and restaurants


 CRAK Resto, Volkst 58 (+3 216 9643). Modern European food in well designed 
surroundings.

Brasserie National, Nationalestraat 32 (+3 227 5656). Brasserie attached to 
the new Antwerp museum of fashion. Good for posing.

 No Problem, Ernest Van Dijckkaai 26. Jamaican restaurant by the river. 
Authentic food combined with friendly service.

Patine, Leopold de Waelstraat. Good for breakfast. 

Cappuccino Club, Sint Laureiskaai. Trendy bar near Dries Van Noten's HQ in the 
docks area. Laid back, good music.


 Pottenbrug, Minderbroedersrui 38 (+3 231 5147). Traditional high-class 
Belgian bistro.

 Kei Kei, Minderbroedersrui 34 (+3 213 2226). Trendy oriental canteen. 

 Hecker, Kloosterstraat. Solid Belgian food served in the daytime. 

 La Luna, Italielei 177 (+3 232 1632). Fusion food. 


 Clubs


 Cafe D'Anvers, Verversrui 15. Techno/dance club in red-light district. 

 Red & Blue, Schipperskapelstraat. Straight crowd Friday, gay Saturday. 

 Clun Geluk, Liukstraat 5. Cool dance club. 


 Where to shop


 Ann Demeulemeester , Verlatstraat 38 (+3 216 0133). Beautiful flagship store 
for Belgium's princess of fashion.

 Louis, Lambardenvest 2 (+3 232 9872). The original Antwerp multi-brand 
fashion store selling all the cool names.

 Walter, St Antoniusstraat 12 (03 213 2644). Incredible store/art gallery 
selling Walter Van Beirendonck's clothes alongside Dirk Van Saene, Wim Neels, 
and others.

 Francis, Steenhouwervest 14 (+3 288 9433). Great store selling second-hand 
designer fashion and modern, antique furniture.

 Interdesign, Lombardenvest 40 (+3 233 1698). Modern furniture. 

 Fiftie Fiftie, Kloosterstraat 187. Stand-out store on street of antiques and 
interiors outlets.

 Dries Van Noten, Nationalestraat 16 (+3 470 2510). Belgian designer's 
beautiful flagship store.


 Where to stay


 T'Sandt, Het Zand 17 (+3 232 9390). Beautiful hotel in riverside location, 
handy for tunnel across river. From €124.

 De Witte Lelie, Keizerstraat 16 (+3 226 1966). Classy hotel in historic 
neighbourhood. From €162.

 Hotel Prinse, Keizerstraat 63 (+3 226 4050). Medium-range hotel in old 
neighbourhood. From €102.

 Bazar Bizar Breakfast, Steenhouwervest 18 (+3 232 9744). Decent bed and 
breakfast. From €86.


Designer briefs

Dries Van Noten's city: 'Antwerp is a comfortable city, very relaxed, unlike 
many big cities which take too much effort. I love London and Paris, but 
couldn't live there. When you consider the size of Antwerp, there's so much 
happening: theatre, ballet, modern dance. I'm inspired by these things.'

Van Noten recommends the  Koninklijk Museum voor Schone Kunsten, which opened 
in 1890 and contains work by Rubens, Van Dyck, and Jordaens; and De Singel, a 
theatre for music and dance.

He prefers 'the traditional cafes' to clubs. 'I like a healthy mix of people, 
and you get this in Antwerp cafes. It's not like in London, where those from 
certain professions or neighbourhoods all gather in the same cafe - in Antwerp 
it's more open.' Van Noten's favourite cafe is called Kat . 

On fashion, he says: 'Boutiques in Antwerp buy the collections in a very 
specific way, so you see pieces here that you don't in other cities. Belgian 
customers are more adventurous than those in Milan or Paris - there are more 
possibilities here.'

 Raf Simons's city:  Simons is the 'bad boy' of Belgian fashion, and the only 
major name not to attend the Royal Academy of Fashion. His Antwerp is as 
visionary and idiosyncratic as his clothing.

Simons's favourite place, typically, has nothing to do with historic, 
bourgeois aspect of the city. The Metropolis multiplex cinema, just north of 
the centre, is the largest in the world. 'Sometimes, I watch four films in one 
day, and then we just sit around in the pizza places and hang out. It's great.'

His choice of restaurant is equally idiosyncratic.  The Bistro (Wapper 1A) is 
set in the heart of the commercial shopping district, and is filled with 
gossiping housewives, thirtysomethings, and couples out on shopping sprees. 
Simons eats here virtually every day, and the food is basic Belgian fare, and 
delicious.

On the other side of the river is  Linker Oever, another of his favourite 
places, along withSaint Anneke beach, which consists of a small, sandy bank on 
the River Scheldt. It's a bizarre spot, with one typical Belgian moules and 
frîtes restaurant, and a stunning view across the river to old Antwerp. Look up 
the river and you see the old docks, and further away, the huge petrochemical 
plants. 'The beach is weird, but we like it because it's off-scene.'

Particularly worth seeing, according to Simons, is the MUHKA (Leuvenstraat 
32), the modern art museum featuring work from the 1970s to the present day, 
and set in a renovated grain silo. Across the square is the main concentration 
of commercial art galleries, including many of the designer's favourites, such 
as Galerie Micheline Szwajcer, with painting, installation, and photographic 
work centred around Verlatstraat and Hoogstraat. Many of the coolest bars, 
restaurants, and stores are in this southern district, Het Zuid, around the 
square near Vlaamse Kaai.

Way to go

 Getting there:  Rail Europe (08705 848848, Rail Europe 
<http://www.raileurope.co.uk>) offers London-Antwerp from £85 return. 

 Further information:  Belgian National Tourist Office (0906 3020245, Trabel 
<http://www.trabel.com>). Antwerp Tourist Office: Grote Markt 15 (+03 232 
0103). Country code: 0032. Rail time London-Antwerp via Brussels: 3hrs . Time 
difference: +1hr. £1 = 1.51 euros.

 