
Real Madrid v Barcelona

Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> are currently on 
course for a treble of league, cup and Champions League, but after Tuesday's 
stutter in Camp Nou against Chelsea doubts may slowly be creeping in. They hold 
a four-point lead at the top of the Primera Division with five games to play, 
but this weekend sees them travel to the Bernabeu for El Clásico - and some 
have questioned whether Barça are running out of juice at the wrong time.

They've got injury problems: Pep Guardiola brought in Rafael Marquez to shore 
up the defence but his knee injury means the out-of-form Carles Puyol is back 
in the centre. Meanwhile Thierry Henry is likely to miss out with a sore neck, 
and with Real hoping for the return of Arjen Robben, and Chelsea looming next 
week, the pressure's being turned up. "We don't know what all this stuff about 
being scared stiff is about," insists Gerard Pique. "It motivates us more every 
time we hear it." Yep, they're feeling the heat alright.

Crystal Palace v Sheffield United & Reading v Birmingham

With recent top-flight stalwarts Southampton and Charlton already down, and 
Norwich teetering on the precipice, this season'sChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> has all been about watching 
the mighty fall, a nine-month schadenfreude-fest of epic proportions. A slight 
shame, then, that these particularly hapless shenanigans have denied attention 
to a similarly farcical state of affairs at the top of the table.

Reading <https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> started off this season 
like a train, then forgot how to score. Birmingham looked like benefitting, at 
one stage even leading eventual champions Wolves, but they too have fallen to 
small pieces; a liberal sprinkling of draws has seen a once almost guaranteed 
automatic promotion berth look anything but.

It's all now up in the air - and with Birmingham due to travel to Reading, 
only a win will guarantee Blues automatic promotion. Reading can go up 
automatically too, but Sheffield United - who have come up on the rail and have 
a chance of finishing second themselves - will have to fail to win at Crystal 
Palace. Who are, of course, managed by former Sheffield United manager and
Sheffield United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> 
supporter Neil Warnock. It should be, for once, a Super Sunday that lives up to 
expectation. Especially as the cost of the prize has been estimated at £60m by 
Deloitte & Touche (who keep banging on about stuff like this, so they probably 
know).

Arminia Bielefeld v Stuttgart

The eyes of the world will be on Jupp Heynckes and Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> this weekend, in the wake 
of Jurgen Klinsmann's sacking, as the preposterously close Bundesliga title 
race continues apace. They should win easily at home against relegation-haunted 
Borussia Monchengladbach - that this classic 1970s rivalry should have become 
this lopsided farce - while leaders Wolfsburg will surely bounce back from last 
weekend's defeat at Cottbus at home to shambolic winter champions Hoffenheim.

Quietly entering the fray, however, are Markus Babbel's Stuttgart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stuttgart>. They were 10th at the winter 
break, but after a five-game winning run suddenly find themselves in fourth 
place, only three points off the leaders. "One should not get carried away by 
our recent success," warns sports director Horst Heldt, pointing to the 
terrible recent form of one-time championship hopefuls Hoffenheim and Bayer 
Leverkusen. "They showed how quickly you can crash."

But Babbel's team should prevail at Bielefeld, who have the worst home record 
in the division. If they do, and the leaders continue to falter, Stuttgart 
could be on course to repeat their 2007 title-winning success - another year 
which saw them spring from the pack to surprise everyone.
 