
Fifty years ago, Scottsdale, Arizona, was the place to be. Fresh from her 
starring role in Rebel Without a Cause, 19-year-old Natalie Wood fled to the 
small desert town to escape the paparazzi for her marriage to Robert Wagner. 
Back in Hollywood, the event was billed the 'most glittering union of the 
century' and brought a host of stars in its wake. Soon Marilyn Monroe, Humphrey 
Bogart, James Cagney and Ingrid Bergman were enjoying the town's clear skies 
and dry desert air, and the swish resorts boasting the novelty of 
air-conditioning.

But times changed, the thrillingly futuristic architecture - which seemed to 
merge traditional south-western styles with The Jetsons - dated fast, and by 
the Seventies many of the hippest joints had become down-at-heel motels. Nearby 
Phoenix grew at lightning speed and swallowed up Scottsdale, which became known 
as a sort of US Eastbourne, a suburb full of retirement villages and affluent 
OAPs playing golf in immaculately-ironed shorts.

Today, arriving in Phoenix feels like reaching the very heart of America. In 
our Dodge Charger, my girlfriend and I drive down the dead straight, wide 
roads, thrown like a grid over 515 square miles of what a century ago was 
nothing but sand, rock and cactus. Behind the white concrete pavements, 
sprinklers are working overtime to create vivid green lawns dotted with palm 
trees, behind which stand immaculate low-rise houses, flat-roofed and 
stone-clad, in the Frank Lloyd Wright style. There is virtually no city centre, 
just endless palm-lined boulevards and low-density sprawl. Such is the spread 
of the Phoenix grid that today big, dusty ochre desert mountains lie marooned 
in the middle of suburbia.

Our first stop is the downtown Hotel Valley Ho. Back in the day, this was the 
very hub of the scene. The Wagners' reception took place here, and legend has 
it that Cary Grant, Tony Curtis and Bing Crosby could often be seen wandering 
in the garden smoking, while Zsa Zsa Gabor rode horses round the property.

When the area fell out of fashion, the hotel became an unloved Ramada Inn, but 
at the start of last year it reopened after a £40m renovation. Now there are 
all the imperatives of a modern hip hotel - plasma TVs, free-standing baths in 
the bedrooms, organic smellies and WiFi on tap. But the designers have played 
up rather than papered over the building's history, creating a gloriously 
kitschy retro atmosphere.

While smart hotels in most of the US try to ape Europe's Hotel Magnificos, 
this is a riotous celebration of Americana. Pulling up outside feels like 
stepping into an Edward Hopper painting; walking through to the restaurant - 
done out like a Fifties diner - is like entering an episode of Happy Days. The 
shag pile carpet is a deep chocolate; the fire in the lobby is circular and 
steel; the funky armchairs are multi-coloured and extravagantly curved. There 
are places where it all gets a bit Austin Powers, but this just adds to a party 
vibe and, as we're shown round the rooms, the pretty young crowd is starting 
the day with morning margaritas around the circular pool.

Crucially, the revamp has also brought the celebrities back - Jamie Foxx 
stayed here soon after it reopened, as have Denise Richards, the Pet Shop Boys, 
Ice Cube and many more. But the Valley Ho isn't pulling off Scottsdale's 
resurrection single-handed. The town is also now home to some of the world's 
best spas, retreats, and even rehab centres - Robbie Williams, Kate Moss and 
Tara P-T all came to dry out in the desert.

The Mondrian is enjoying rave reviews, and a cool new W Hotel is opening next 
spring, but pick of the bunch at the moment is the Sanctuary on Camelback 
Mountain, a luxurious 53-acre enclave high on the flank of a dramatic desert 
peak and hidden from outsiders by lush gardens. It feels very different from 
the good-time Valley Ho, but their stories are surprisingly similar. It started 
life as a tennis club for celebrities in the Fifties and Sixties. Dean Martin 
and Liza Minnelli used to turn out to charity tournaments, and the bungalows 
dotted around the club (billed, more enticingly, as 'casitas') were rented out 
to the likes of Elton John, Bill Cosby and Johnny Carson. It, too, fell out of 
fashion and lost its stars, but was later given a big-bucks revamp and reopened 
as an American take on the Asian super-spas.

Tiny hummingbirds drink from the exotic flowers as we walk through cactus 
gardens to our secluded casita. Inside, there's a hi-tech kitchen, a vast 
living room opening to a terrace with stunning views, and the softest bed, 
secretly infused with lavender every night at turndown. It is quite simply the 
nicest place I've ever stayed in the US.

Today, the stars can't get enough of the place - everyone from Jennifer 
Anniston and Britney Spears to Bruce Springsteen and U2 have been. But this 
brings me to the really good bit - the cost. Americans wouldn't dream of 
heading to Arizona in the summer, so in July, August and September, prices are 
slashed. Couple this with the best exchange rate in 26 years, and the fact that 
British Airways currently has a sale on its direct flights to Phoenix, and you 
have a recipe for epic, rock-star luxury at a rock-bottom price.The Valley Ho 
has double rooms, with wall-to-ceiling windows, large terraces and king-size 
beds, from £63 a night. At the Sanctuary, you can get a mountain casita for 
£90, and the 'mountain vista suite' swank-fest that we had, for £139.

Stand with a sundowner on the terrace of your casita, watching the dark bulk 
of the desert peaks rising like shark fins from the sea of the city's twinkling 
lights, and it feels like Scottsdale is the place to be once more.

Essentials

BA (0870 850 9850; www.ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) has a sale on - returns to 
Phoenix start at £357 if booked by 31 July. The Sanctuary (00 1 800 245 2051;
www.sanctuaryaz.com <http://www.sanctuaryaz.com>) has 'casitas' for two from 
£90. Doubles at the Valley Ho (00 1 866 882 4484;www.hotelvalleyho.com 
<http://www.hotelvalleyho.com>) cost from £63. Car hire with Dollar (0808 234 
7524;www.dollar.co.uk <http://www.dollar.co.uk>) from £115 a week. More details 
from the Arizona Office of Tourism (020 8741 7256;www.arizonaguide.com 
<http://www.arizonaguide.com>).
 