
The China-US joint climate change agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/nov/12/china-and-us-make-carbon-pledge>
 is a full pendulum swing back from the failures of five years ago. It was only 
in 2009 at the Copenhagen climate change summit that, despite global pressure 
for action and the highest political attention, an agreement that would have 
addressed temperature increases and reduced emissions fell flat. China and the 
United States — among others — accused each other of sinking the agreement.


Now the two countries have announced unilateral measures to reduce their 
greenhouse gas emissions by 2030. Significantly,China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> agreed to slow and then stop its 
emissions by 2030 while the United States agreed to reduce emissions by up to 
28% by 2025. Both sides also spoke about jointly pushing negotiations at a 
climate change conference in Paris next year, and to cooperate on clean energy 
and environmental protection.

What changed? Five years ago the core reality for China and other developing 
nations was that the burden of reducing emissions would handicap their economic 
growth. Since carbon emissions were largely a product of already developed 
nations they had more to benefit from an agreement than developing, future 
emitters.

That simplistic reality has disappeared. Now there is new energy for change. 
In China, citizens are angry. Air quality is so far below World Health 
Organisation standards that a blue sky appears only after it rains, or when the 
government closes steel mills around Beijing and bans drivers from highways for 
major summits, like Apec.

Some Chinese netizens, of which there are 632 million, are so frustrated they 
have named it “Apec blue” — a feeling of false, temporary hope. Locals don’t 
want to show off Beijing for a few days, they want blue skies to be the new 
normal. They have global aspirations for themselves and for China.

It’s not just the people who want a cleaner country; China’s leaders too have 
a vision for national rejuvenation — the “China dream”. Irreversible climate 
change could throttle China’s rise as a great power, as environmental damage, 
emissions and temperature increases derail China’s path to modernity. President 
Xi Jinping told his Apec guests he hoped that “every day we will see a blue 
sky, green mountains and clear rivers, not just in Beijing, but all across 
China so that our children will live in an enjoyable environment”.

There is a growing desire for national rejuvenation and an increased 
consciousness about the effects of China’s rapid development. We are “breathing 
the same air, sharing the same fate” said one online viral message. If China’s 
leadership can reduce emissions and clean up the environment, they will gain 
further support from the emerging middle class. Party legitimacy will be 
maintained, and that support will be necessary as China overcomes other 
domestic challenges.

Greenhouse gas emissions and other environmental challenges in China have 
already been mitigated by solid policy approaches. Local officials are under 
enormous pressure from the central leadership to reduce emissions. China is 
moving more quickly towards a cap-and-trade system. Renewable energy is a fast 
growing industry and traditional heavy industry is being closely regulated and 
consolidated to deliver more efficiently.

There is also another climate to consider, the regional strategic environment. 
In the face of ongoing strategic competition in the Asia Pacific, it’s more 
important than ever for the two most consequential powers, the US and China, to 
find common ground on global issues.Climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> is one of those issues 
where shared interests and pragmatic action can build trust.

US-China relations have been defined in different ways. China’s leaders have 
promoted what they call “a new model of great power relations”. That framework 
was introduced at the Obama-Xi meeting at Sunnylands, and has at its core the 
need for mutual respect and win-win cooperation. China hopes that global 
leaders can by-and-large, put aside differences, recognise the problem, and 
work pragmatically to solve it. China sees itself as an equal player to the US, 
and a regionally predominant one. It wants more of a say without causing 
concern. In this way, acting on climate change offers clear strategic advantage.

That China and the US have decided to address climate change has broader 
implications for the future of theAsia Pacific 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/asia-pacific>. So far it’s a positive sign. 
Deep dialogue has trumped stonewalling and China is showing itself a capable 
regional player. Last week, leading up to Apec, China and Japan agreed on a 
four-point agreement to manage tensions over the Diaoyu/Senkaku islands. Today, 
the world’s largest emitters are tackling global emissions. This type of 
complementary action will reduce the strategic trust deficit between the US and 
China.

China’s leaders have taken a pragmatic approach to cap emissions and bring 
China to the table as a modern, clean nation. In any case, China’s leadership 
cannot afford to walk away from change on climate change anyway; doing so would 
diminish the China Dream.
 