
1) Brazil v Argentina

Arguably the daddy, the big one, one of the longest-standing rivalries in the 
world between two of the biggest and most successful teams. Quite apart from 
the brilliant football on display, there have been plenty of lively old 
encounters down the years, from the 1937 Copa America game that the Brazilians 
team departed before the final whistle, apparently fearing for their safety 
amid much barracking from the crowd, to the 1946 game which descended into a 
mass brawl involving players and spectators, after Argentina’s captain José 
Salomon’s leg was broken in two places, to the 1982 World Cup game in which
Diego Maradona was sent off for booting João Batista up in the air 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LP3u2nDEcPA>. Perhaps the most notorious 
encounter was at the ‘Holy Water’ game at the 1990 World Cup, where the drinks 
of the Brazilian players were apparently spiked with a little something to 
hamper their performance, something confirmed by Maradona but denied by 
Argentina coach Carlos Bilardo.NM

2) Germany v Holland

As with many sporting rivalries, there is more than a touch of politics and 
history to this one, even ignoring the many big encounters between the two 
sides down the years. Will van Hanegem, a midfielder who played for the Dutch 
in the 1960s and 70s, said after the 1974 World Cup final between the two 
sides: “I didn’t give a damn about the score. 1-0 was enough, as long as we 
could humiliate them. I don’t like them. It’s because of World War II.” West 
Germany would of course win that final despite Holland going ahead with an 
early penalty, a tournament in which the German newspaper Bild ran a story 
about a ‘naked pool party’, with accounts differing as to whether it really was 
an episode of bacchanalian excess by Johan Cruyff and chums, or whether it was 
a sting/honey-trap from the ever-willing newspaper. Of course the rivalry 
manifested itself in a rather revolting manner during the 1990 World Cup, when 
Frank Rijkaard enthusiastically spat into Rudi Völler’s mullet,as covered in 
some depth by Barry Glendenning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/may/22/25-stunning-world-cup-moments->
.NM

3) Egypt v Algeria

If anyone wondered about the extent of the rivalry between these two, who are 
separated geographically by Libya, they were given a gentle reminder in 2009, 
when the pair found themselves neck and neck for World Cup 2010 qualification. 
Algeria had won their home game, that June, 3-1 in relative calm but the stakes 
were somewhat higher by November. When they met in Cairo, Egypt had to win by 
three goals to overhaul the Fennec Foxes, or by two to force a play-off between 
the two. When the Algerian side arrived, two days prior to the game, their bus 
was stoned by hooligans to such an extent that three players and an official 
were injured; explanations in the Egyptian media that the visitors had smashed 
the windows from the inside in a bid to see the game moved to a neutral venue 
held little water. In the end, despite suggestions from within the Algerian 
camp that they were mentally unfit to play,the match was played in an 
atmosphere of staggering intensity <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UOuRWMCIO_E>
 and ended in typically high-octane fashion when, 30 seconds from the end of 
injury time, Emad Moteab’s goal gave the Egyptians the 2-0 win they needed.

So they met again, in a winner-takes-all shootout staged in the calmer climes 
of Omdurman, in Sudan. It did not stop 15,000 police being deployed to keep 
order, and nor did it prevent all manner of claim, counter-claim and posturing 
about dastardly needs perpetrated by either side.Algeria won 1-0 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tpfq7E63jrk> and proceeded to send everyone to 
sleep in South Africa.

But the mould for these tensions was firmly set in 1989, as Brian Oliver 
recounted in these parts five years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2009/oct/10/egypt-algeria-repeat-hate-match>
, when a crowd including Mido was present for an edition of the ‘hate match’ 
that ended in criminal proceedings from Interpol. It was far from the first 
time that there had been trouble between the two; this one is as hot as it 
gets, on and off the pitch.NA

4) England v Scotland

That this is the oldest international fixture of all used to be imprinted into 
the minds of schoolchildren on both sides of the border, and there is no doubt 
that the clash of the ‘Auld Enemy’ has seen heady enough times. Played every 
year of peacetime between 1872 and 1989, usually as part of the long-gone 
British Home Championship or – latterly – the Rous Cup, its clockwork 
regularity became for many years a genuine case of familiarity breeding 
contempt. While never the incendiary fare seen elsewhere on this list, each 
meeting was loaded with centuries-old cross-border antagonism and as such was 
one of the most important fixtures on the football calendar.

Highlights have generally been more football-based than off-field – Scotland’s 
‘Wembley Wizards’ won 5-1 in London back in 1928 andEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> had to wait until 1961, when 
they won 9-3, to inflict something even more miserable. The next two stand-out 
meetings both ended in Scottish victories on English soil, a 3-2 win in 1967 
leading to plenty of crowing about being ‘unofficial world champions’ and a 2-1 
success a decade later resulting in such unbridled joy among the visiting 
faithful that they took to yanking the goalposts down after the game.

England prevailed in rather more meaningful affairs in 1996 and 1999, in 
European Championship group stage and play-off ties respectively, but the 
fixture then died a 14-year death until being revived at Wembley last year. The 
decline of the Scottish side and a growing apathy towards international 
football among England followers meant that, to all bar the old-timers, it was 
not missed as much as it should have been.

“For me what mattered was that we had lost to the Jocks and I have never gone 
home from Wembley in such a bad mood. I was furious,” quoth Stuart Pearce of 
the second leg of that 1999 tie, which England lost 1-0 but still went through 
2-1 on aggregate. It is tempting, from that alone, to make conclusions about 
the difference 15 years makes.NA

5) Japan v South Korea

A good case could be made for the North Koreans’ rivalry with the Japanese 
too, but it is the South who really go way back against a country with which 
they have grappled for regional supremacy – and so much more – since 1954.

Back then, wounds were still especially raw from Japan’s 35-year occupation of 
Korea, which had come to an end in 1945. Korea had subsequently been divided 
into north and south. In 1954South Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southkorea> were paired with their former 
colonial masters in a World Cup play-off to decide who represented Asia in 
Switzerland. Both games had to be played in Tokyo after Syngman Rhee, the South 
Korean president, refused to allow the Japanese to enter his country. It 
mattered little: an inspired, whirlwind performance from the visitors saw Japan 
blown away 5-1 on home soil in the first leg, a 1-1 draw doing nothing to alter 
things at the second time of asking.

If that could be viewed as spectacular payback on the Koreans’ part, things 
have continued to bubble along in the years since. Cardiff was the venue for 
one flashpoint in 2012, when the pair’s Under-23 sides met in the2012 Olympic 
bronze medal match <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F8-4XKtoYB8> and South 
Korea’s Park Jong-woo, whose team had just won, held up a banner proclaiming 
“Dodko is our territory’, referring to a group of islands claimed by both 
nations. And they don’t even have to be playing against each other for 
sensitivities to be piqued: in 1993, a late goal for Iraq against Japan sent 
the Koreans through to the USA World Cup at their bitter rivals’ expense. That 
match is known in Seoul as the “Miracle of Doha” and in Tokyo as, yes, the 
“Agony of Doha”.NA

6) England v Germany

Like a bigger, more intelligent and better-looking older brother, England have 
generally been in Germany’s footballing shadow over the years. Other than in 
1966 and the clownish encounter at Euro 2000 when Kevin Keegan’s men just about 
succeeded in being slightly less terrible, the Germans have held sway over the 
English, winning in heart-breaking circumstances in 1970, 1990 and 1996, and of 
course the embarrassing shellacking in 2010. As if this ritual humiliation 
wasn’t enough,Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany> were also 
the last team to beat England at the old Wembley, and the first to beat them at 
the new version, asserting their superiority at just about every turn. The 
imbalance extends to women’s football as well, with the Germans taking 17 of 
their 19 encounters, with the other two being draws.

Of course, it’s something of a one-sided rivalry that tends to bring the worst 
out of the more bombastic sections of the media and indeed population, with a 
crass reference to either world war just round the corner whenever the two 
sides face each other. Indeed, Germans tend not to bother particularly with 
England, preferring to focus their ire on Holland, their true rivals, asMarina 
Hyde wrote back in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2010/jun/24/england-germany-rivalry-world-cup-2010>
, before Mesut Özil and chums delivered their first-order paddling in 
Bloemfontein: ‘From the minute England’s round of 16 destiny was clear, you 
will have heard much about this sainted antagonism with Germany. Yet the 
so-called rivalry is quite obviously an illusion, existing only in the minds of 
those wishful to the point of insanity – which is to say, the English. We are 
rivals with Germany in the same way Christine Bleakley is rivals with Oprah.’NM

7) Serbia v Croatia

That there is no love lost between Serbia and Croatia was underlined on 22 
March 2013, when the Croatians beat their rivals 2-0 in a World Cup qualifier 
amid a tempestuous atmosphere in the Maksimir Stadium in Zagreb. It was a 
rivalry whose tale was well told in the match-up between the teams’ 
then-managers,as Jonathan Wilson recounted at the time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/mar/21/sinisa-mihajlovic-serbia-croatia>
, and one that exploded from intra-Yugoslavian enmity (fans of leading clubs 
such as Dinamo Zagreb and Crvena Zvezda had famously fought before, notably in 
a shocking riot at the Maksimir in 1990 in the run-up to Croatian independence) 
to a full-blown international conflict following the terrible war that followed 
the old nation’s break-up. The rematch in Belgrade six months later saw honours 
finish even at 1-1, but it is unlikely that much bread was broken afterwards. 
Not only did the result rule Serbia out of any remaining interest they had in a 
trip to Brazil, but Croatia’s well-known shrinking violet Josip Simunic cleaned 
out Miralem Sulejmaniwith one of the most cynical challenges imaginable 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lBDl_Kw380o>. Predictably, the bad blood now 
extends into many other sports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2013/mar/22/croatia-serbia-sporting-rivalry>
 and, even though last year’s two meetings were their first as independent 
countries on the football field, its early incarnations suggest that this one 
is going to run and run for many a year.NA

8) USA v Mexico

A rivalry spiced up by geography and a healthy dose of Mexican immigration to 
the States, this wasn’t much of a rivalry for some years, with Mexico losing 
just one game between 1937-1990. However, the Americans have improved since 
then, and the rivalry has gained some of the petty bickering that make feuds 
like this so entertaining. In 2004 before an Olympic qualifying game in 
Guadalajara, Landon Donovan allegedly relieved himself on the training pitch, 
causing a minor international incident in the Mexican media, until it was 
revealed that Landycakes actually did his wee in a bush outside. In the game 
two days later, the Mexican crowd, perhaps irked by this flagrant display of 
urination, responded by chanting ‘Osama! Osama! Osama!’ at the Americans. 
Charming. When they faced each other again three years later,Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mexico> keeper Oswaldo Sanchez rather 
cheekily attempted to trip US striker Eddie Johnson up, which might not seem 
that unusual, apart from the fact he did so after Johnson had scored, and was 
wheeling away to celebrate.NM

9) Serbia v Albania

As we have seen very recently, things are liable to go south in a hurry when 
these two face each other. The history between Serbia and Albania is long and 
complex, but Uefa didn’t deem the rivalry to be dangerous enough to keep the 
two apart as they had for Spain v Gibraltar and other potentially explosive 
encounters. As you’ll recall, the match between the two sides in October 
descended into chaos after a drone carrying the flag of ‘Greater Albania’ was 
flown into the Partizan Stadium in Belgrade, an incidentcovered by the 
Guardian’s Nick Ames 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/15/serbia-albania-provocation-violence-lessons-not-learned>
 at the time:

“The vision – as surreal as anything you might be confronted by at an 
international football match – had a dreamlike quality at first but, once the 
Serbian defender Stefan Mitrovic had leapt to receive the flag and was rounded 
upon by Albanian players hotly seeking to retrieve their national symbol, 
reality quickly bit. By any standards, the violence that followed was shocking. 
The number of marks overstepped during the next two and a half minutes may keep 
Uefa busy for weeks: it will want to consider the fan who attacked Bekim Balaj 
with a chair as he carried the flag towards the away dugout, the supporter who 
attempted to kick oneAlbania <https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania> 
player in the head as the team fled down the tunnel never to return, even the 
intensity of Lorik Cana’s retaliation on Balaj’s assailant – and these are just 
for starters.” NM

10) Denmark v Norway

Not the first pair of countries that springs to mind when thinking about big 
international rivalries, but things can get pretty spicy between these two 
Scandinavian nations, and when things get spicy, the insults get personal and 
childish. Before the teams faced off in a Euro 2004 qualifier back in 2003, the 
Danish press referred to their rivals as ‘mountain apes’, apparently quite 
cross about a late John Carew equaliser in their previous encounter,as the 
Guardian reported at the time: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2003/jun/07/newsstory.sport2>

“This week the feud has left the pitch and strayed down a much more 
nationalistic path. The Danish newspaper BT started the unpleasantries with a 
piece headlined “Why we can’t lose”. Its reason was thatNorway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/norway> was “a nation full of losers” and 
“blue-eyed Arabs” and it also complained about their attitude to sex - 
Norwegians are over-horny, apparently.” NM
 