
Deidre Sanders, the Sun's long-serving agony aunt, has given a rare glimpse 
into her 35-year career, describing the debt she owes Kelvin MacKenzie, the 
worst letter she has ever received and how she remains as relevant as ever in 
the internet age.

Sanders started at the Sun in 1980, "about six months" before the 1981 
appointment as editor of Mackenzie, whom she credits with shaping the style of 
the agony aunt across the industry.

"I learnt so much from him," she said, speaking at the Ad Week Europe 
conference in London on Tuesday. "All agony aunts got transformed by Kelvin's 
influence on me, really. He wanted a story, a drama, what was the personal 
feeling rather than [just] justifying a problem – you know, 'I had depression'. 
[Mackenzie wanted to know] how is this played out in real life."

Sanders started her agony aunt career proper in the late 1970s when the 
freshly launched Daily Star hired her to do a "mixed agony/consumer column".

She said of that experience that of the 10 issues she submitted each week, the 
"five sex ones would get chosen… and ones about people's gas cookers got 
dropped".

Sanders said that often her job is not considered real journalism, but she 
counters that it can be "haunting", citing the worst of the tens of thousands 
of letters she has come across in her career.

"The worst letter … it is the letter that stays in my mind really … was back 
in a previous recession from a chap who lost his job, had been ruined 
financially – he lost his home, his marriage.

"He split up with his wife and on the first weekend he had his children come 
to stay he smothered them both to death. He then tape-recorded his message to 
me and posted it – this is back in the days of tape recorders – and then went 
home and shot himself.

"Listening to that message, the voice of someone about to kill themselves, has 
haunted me – and those working with me still on my team – forever. So there is 
a real heavyweight job to being an agony aunt."

Sanders said that she was always "mad keen" to be a journalist – starting with 
"making newspapers for cats at home when I was eight years old" – and that the 
internet age has invigorated her.

"The whole electronic age has been brilliant for me," she said. "I get 
hundreds of emails every week, instead of letters, and I can get [out] a reply 
very quickly."

She cites the example of "Turnaround Tuesday" where anyone who sends an email 
in by noon gets a guaranteed personal reply by 6pm the same day.

Still, old habits die hard and Sanders admitted she still carried reams of 
paper around with her.

"I carry around a vast bag full of email printouts," she said. "[I have to 
have a] trolley bag with me or I will break my back. I feel a massive 
responsibility with it."

Sanders said that while the internet has opened up a world of answers, people 
still like the human touch of the lady who solves the nation's problems.

"People can Google but often people want a human voice," she said. "They like 
to think that I might have better judgment. I'm no better placed than anyone 
else… but I have had a lot of training, my team have had a lot of training. I 
hope to give a bit of insight".

• This article was amended on 3 April 2014 to make clear that the Sun 
columnist's name is Deidre Sanders, not Deidre Saunders

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 