
Festival no.6 2013 
<http://www.muzu.tv/festival/playlists/festival-no6-2013/1118560/> on MUZU.TV 
<http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
Reading on mobile? Click here to view video 
<http://www.muzu.tv/festival/playlists/festival-no6-2013/1118560/>

Patrick McGoohan, as suave secret agent Number Six, spent the duration of cult 
60s TV seriesThe Prisoner <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Prisoner> trying to 
escape the village ofPortmeirion <http://www.portmeirion-village.com/>. 
Conversely, many of the people who visited the same location last September for 
the inaugural Festival No 6 said they'd be happy to never leave. In the 
fairytale setting on the North Wales coast, artists from New Order to Jessie 
Ware provided a magical soundtrack, as writers such as John Niven and Caitlin 
Moran held talks on the village green. Sequences from the TV show were 
recreated shot-for-shot: men in black blazers with white piping rode around on 
penny farthings past a game of human chess. As night fell, the local 
Brythoniaid Male Voice Choir performed Blue Monday as a procession of masked 
festival-goers wound their way tipsily through the village, flaming torches 
aloft.

No 6 was the surprise hit of last year's festival season. It won Best Small 
Festival at the NME Awards and Best New Festival at the UK Festival Awards, 
while the Guardian's review reckoned it "could rival Montreux as the most 
sophisticated in Europe". For co-founder Gareth Cooper, the man behind annual 
Alpine wingdingSnowbombing <http://www.snowbombing.com/>, the plaudits came as 
a big relief – launching a new festival at a time when existing events were 
downsizing or closing altogether represented a considerable risk. "It was total 
madness!" he laughs. "We knew that. But once we visited Portmeirion and saw its 
amazing potential as a site, how it could be completely different to any other 
festival, we just had to do it. We werecompelled to do it. We never would have 
considered launching another festival in a green field, but Portmeirion was a 
once-in-a-lifetime opportunity that we couldn't turn down."

Like all good ideas, it's a wonder no one considered Portmeirion as a festival 
location before. Built by eccentric architect Sir Clough Williams-Ellis between 
1925 and 1976, it was known at the time as "a home for fallen buildings". 
Portmeirion's fantastical Italianate architecture incorporates fragments of 
buildings that Williams-Ellis saved from destruction and then pieced back 
together in this remote corner of Gwynedd. Local opposition to putting on a 
rock festival was no issue: operating as a hotel and holiday camp, there are no 
residents as such for miles around, and the Williams-Ellis estate jumped at the 
opportunity. "This is a place where people would want to enjoy the 
environment," Clough's grandson Robert Llewellyn told the BBC. "And Clough was 
keen that this place should not be a museum; he wanted it to be alive."

This new chapter in Portmeirion's life is mindful of respecting all aspects of 
its history. Welsh culture is represented at No 6, but the festival also worked 
hard to acknowledge the legacy of its most famous export, from the name 
downwards. "The Prisoner is a cult classic," reiterates festival director 
Bradley Thompson. "We wanted to make references, but we also had to make sure 
that those references worked if you'd never seen the series."

Over the last few years, there have been rather too many promoters erecting 
speakers and bunting on the nearest available green space and calling it a 
festival. Not surprisingly, plenty have foundered. The No 6 gang themselves had 
grown frustrated at what was on offer: pushing 40 but not out of the game, 
their aim was to throw the kind of party they would want to attend. "It's 
incredible to have a canvas like Portmeirion to work with," says the festival's 
head of arts and culture (and Guardian/Observer contributor) Luke Bainbridge. 
"But the key thing is to make the village come alive. We try wherever possible 
to get artists to do something completely different – like Andrew Weatherall in 
conversation on the piazza, or Tim Burgess performing with a string quartet in 
the town hall. When we approached Jan Morris, whose relationship with 
Portmeirion goes back decades, she was horrified that a 'rock festival' was 
coming to her beloved village. But she agreed to perform, loved it, and even 
wrote a piece for the Financial Times declaring it her 'best discovery of 
2012.'"

This year, alongside Chic, James Blake, AlunaGeorge, Laura Mvula and many more 
yet to be announced, No 6 have scored a coup by tempting theManic Street 
Preachers <https://www.theguardian.com/music/manic-street-preachers> out of 
their hiatus. The rock veterans had sworn to take two years off and reinvent 
themselves. Although they've played a handful of foreign gigs in the meantime, 
their No 6 show will be their only UK festival appearance of the year. "We're 
coming back three months early because we were offered the opportunity to do 
Festival No 6," says Nicky Wire. "I don't think we would have done it for 
anything else." The band have form with Portmeirion, having shot the cover for 
This Is My Truth Tell Me Yours on the resort's beach. "It just seemed pretty 
magical last year, from following everyone online. It's hard to establish a 
festival that feels fresh and new, but they seemed to do it on all fronts."

Admittedly, No 6's mix of music and literature (rock'n'read?) owes a certain 
debt toLatitude <http://www.latitudefestival.com/>. But far from taking 
umbrage, Latitude boss Melvin Benn has joined the chorus of approval. "I went 
up to Festival No 6 last year," he reveals. "I thought it was a terrific little 
festival, but it's not going to have the diversity of Latitude." Perhaps the 
reason Benn doesn't view No 6 as competition is because the organisers have 
promised not to make the festival any bigger. Inevitably, small festivals risk 
losing their charm when word gets out. But because No 6 is set within the 
confines of Portmeirion village, it doesn't have the option of expanding. This 
is a double-edged sword for punters: while the cap on numbers will help 
preserve No 6's intimate magic, it means that the organisers have had to raise 
the ticket price considerably this year, from £129 to £175, after overreaching 
themselves last time out. "It's a unique site, but one that also poses unique 
logistical challenges," explains Cooper. "The festival cost us a lot more to 
put on than we envisaged, so a small price increase was necessary to ensure the 
longevity of the festival." He is convinced, however, that No 6's offering 
remains compelling enough to avoid any potential backlash. "It's still great 
value. Ask anyone who came last year – you won't be disappointed."
 