
I was 13 when I first saw Angela Lansbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angela-lansbury> as Mama Rose in Gypsy
, the musical based on the life of striptease artist Gypsy Rose Lee, and it 
changed my life. It captured the possibility of the theatre and what it could 
do.

I've always revered Lansbury's performance - I can't imagine anyone doing it 
better.Gypsy is the ultimate stage-mother story: Mama Rose is the one who 
should have been a star; she's the one with the talent. But she chose to have 
kids and put her dreams into them. The musical shows the power of showbiz and 
how much it can mean to someone.

Mama Rose has this famous song at the end of Act 1 called "Everything's Coming 
Up Roses". It can be sung in an upbeat way but it's actually quite dark, 
because at this point one of her children has eloped with a chorus boy. In the 
song she turns to the daughter she's always ignored and says she'll make her 
into a star.

Lansbury did it in a frightening way, showing you that this was a demented 
woman living her dreams through her children. What her character does with her 
kids, it's almost child abuse. It takes a really great performer to bring that 
out. Lansbury played the strength within Mama Rose without trying to dominate 
the piece, as a more glamorous actress might have done.

Her performance showed me that you could marry the lighter side of musical 
theatre with darker themes. That's something I've tried to do ever since – 
taking subject matter that seems light, likeCinderella, which I'm doing at the 
moment, and giving it a deeper and darker edge. InGypsy there's a big song at 
the end called "Rose's Turn". It starts off as a burlesque number then becomes 
an inner monologue. Lansbury tore the place down. I remember feeling numb at 
the end of it.

I wasn't expecting the performance that I saw. I wanted to be a part of it, 
not just an observer. I actually wrote to the theatre and asked if I could 
audition for a part. I just wanted to be in that world, and I've never really 
lost that.



Matthew Bourne's Cinderella 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/show/Matthew-Bourne-Cinderella/extras/pre-show-restaurant-menu>
 runs at Sadler's Wells, London EC1, until 23 Jan
 