
American Psycho is a novel that aspires to the condition of cinema. It has 
fade-ins and fade-outs, an obsessive visual detailing of what characters wear 
and what rooms look like, cinematic violence - and most of all it has a 
soundtrack. Mary Harron's film of the book is its inevitable consummation. In 
the very first paragraph, a character aware that riding in the back of a taxi 
through Manhattan venting spleen at the traffic may be a bit Marty-like, 
introduces another Scorsese allusion when he "tells the driver he will give him 
$5 to turn up the radio, Be My Baby on WYNN..."

The Ronettes' Be My Baby is the song on the opening credits to Martin 
Scorsese's Mean Streets, from 1973. American Psycho's narrator, Patrick 
Bateman, is a Scorsese psycho transplanted from the mean streets to Wall 
Street, living in a fantasy world structured by the soundtrack in his head. He 
interrupts his tale of killings with essays on the music that means most to 
him: he loves Genesis, but only since their 1980 album Duke - when Phil Collins 
emerged as leader. He loves Whitney Houston. He adores Huey Lewis and the News.

There is a history to this way of thinking about pop music. Cinema as we 
experience it began in the 70s with the new wave of US film-makers for whom the 
sound of pop and rock was integral to the way they saw the world. The pop 
soundtrack defines contemporary cinema and, ever since Taxi Driver and 
Apocalypse Now, the sound of pop has accompanied images of violence, murder and 
brutality.

In 1975's Taxi Driver, Travis Bickle was a character so out of sync with his 
times that he didn't know who Kris Kristofferson was, and watched blankly as 
people danced to a soul show on television. But Bateman, like all of us now, 
lives life to a soundtrack; pop has become a structuring presence in our lives, 
something that counterpoints every great event from falling in love to killing 
someone.

This is a habit of thought we got from the movies and most of all from the 
films of the 70s. "Do you enjoy K Billy's Sounds of the 70s? It's my personal 
favourite," says Mr Blonde as he prepares to torture a young cop to a radio 
show inReservoir Dogs <https://www.theguardian.com/film/reservoir-dogs> - when 
pop's history became long and gory enough for it to be quoted, discussed and 
analysed as part of the fabric of films. The generation of directors who 
transformed cinema in the 70s grew up in the 60s to a soundtrack of Motown, the 
Stones and psychedelia; they grew up in the counterculture; they were the first 
generation of film-makers for whom pop was something with deep emotional 
meaning.

But why is that meaning so blood-spattered? Why has pop music become so 
indelibly associated in films with brutality, mayhem and psychosis? It was one 
thing for Francis Coppola to suggest in The Godfather that Frank Sinatra - one 
of whose early hits the Godfather's protégé sings at his daughter's wedding 
before having the family advance his career with the help of a horse's head - 
provided the soundtrack to mob violence. It is another to take the hippy 
escapism of Mike Oldfield's Tubular Bells, as William Friedkin did in The 
Exorcist, and reveal this jingle-jangle music as the sound of Satan.

Pop became the soundtrack to violence in films when it became the soundtrack 
to violence in reality. The secret source for every ironic counterpoising of 
rock and slaughter may be the Maysles brothers' 1970 documentary of the Stones' 
Altamont concert, Gimme Shelter, which shows murder right in front of the stage 
as they play. But then rock 'n' roll began as music of rebellion, menace and 
outsiderdom, and Kenneth Anger's 1963 underground classic Scorpio Rising - 
perhaps the very first film to use a sampled rock soundtrack - dredges darkness 
from the heart of pop in juxtaposing the sweet ballad Blue Velvet with a biker 
gang's vicious rituals.

Through all the classic juxtapositions of sweet sounds and casual violence, 
interpretations of our music and our culture are being advanced. Is our culture 
banal and anaesthetised to violence? For Stanley Kubrick inA Clockwork Orange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-clockwork-orange>, pop is the soundtrack of 
psychosis; the synthesised Beethoven and musical numbers that Alex enjoys are 
the music of cultural death. In the record shop where he hangs out, pop culture 
is cruelly caricatured as teenagers buy records by The Heaven Seventeen, Black 
Christmas by Cyclops and The Sparks. Some of these groups later became real. In 
Scorsese's films, pop is not something to satirise but the core of his 
sensibility; he has remembered how when he grew up in Manhattan's Lower East 
Side there would always be music playing and before he directed anything he 
edited the film of Woodstock.

In Scorsese's films, music is full of meaning and passion and hints of 
redemption; the music that plays when violence is being done hints at another 
world in which this could not happen. In his most violent film - emotionally if 
not physically - The King of Comedy, the streets are full of music (with cameos 
by the Clash) that Robert De Niro's fascistic TV wannabe doesn't hear. If he 
did, he would be a different person. Patrick Bateman would be a different 
person if he could understand why Phil Collins' sversion of You Can't Hurry 
Love is not, as he claims, a huge improvement on the 60s original. "How can we 
stand the violence?" asks Van Morrison over the end credits of The King of 
Comedy, and that's the question all these films ask.

 Mean Streets 
(Martin Scorsese , 1973) 
Please Mr Postman, The Marvelettes, 1961

Charlie (Harvey Keitel), Johnny Boy (Robert De Niro) and their crew visit a 
pool hall on New York's Lower East Side to collect a debt. Everything is going 
fine, and they are about to shake on the deal to the sound of Motown from a 
jukebox, until Johnny Boy launches into a stream of unprovoked insults at the 
pool hall, its clients and its proprietor.

"That's it, we're not paying," says the guy. "We're not paying because he's a 
mook." "A mook, what's a mook?" They fight, in a sequence edited to the rhythms 
of Please Mr Postman. As the Marvelettes sing of love and longing - all they 
want is a love letter - Johnny Boy bestrides a pool table beating away three 
men with a broken-off cue. As the film progresses, the choreography of music 
and violence becomes ever darker until Johnny Boy is shot to an Eric Clapton 
guitar solo.

More about Mean Streets <http://guardian.imdb.com/Title?0070379>

 A Clockwork Orange 
(Stanley Kubrick, 1971)
Singin' in the Rain, Gene Kelly, 1929/1952


In Anthony Burgess's novel Alex has a passion for Beethoven, which means he 
has a soul. Kubrick is more sceptical about the value of art, and in the film, 
when Alex is made to watch Nazi atrocities to Beethoven (as part of the 
Lodovico Method of behavioural therapy) the music seems to go all too well with 
the horrors on screen. Alex's most memorable musical moment is when he performs 
Singin' in the Rain as he cuts off Adrienne Corri's clothes before raping her.

Singin' in the Rain was a hit in 1929 before being used in the Gene Kelly 
musical, where it's a celebration of rebirth after a silent star's career is 
ended by the arrival of soundtracks. After seeing atrocities to a Beethoven 
soundtrack, Alex can no longer listen to the composer; after seeing A Clockwork 
Orange, you can never hear Singin' in the Rain in the same way.

More about A Clockwork Orange <http://guardian.imdb.com/Title?0066921>

 Performance 
 (Donald Cammell and Nicolas Roeg, 1970)
Uncredited blues guitar solo

Gangster Chas (James Fox) wants to put the frighteners on a lawyer so he and 
his lads barge into the mews garage where the lawyer keeps his Rolls-Royce. 
They beat up a chauffeur, tie him to the radiator and shave his head. Then Chas 
starts to pour acid on the car - it bubbles and hisses, burning and scarring 
the smooth paint. We are terrified he is about to start on the chauffeur. A 
gangster turns on the car radio and we hear sleazy Keith Richards-style guitar.

Doing it to music seems to suggest that there's a vicious art to Chas's 
violence, his "performance": his grotesque ritual of torture is choreographed. 
It rocks. The camera dwells on the patterns his acid makes on the car body and 
it looks like abstract art. The blues guitar - later to return when Mick Jagger 
performs Memo From Turner - implies that violence is beauty, beauty violence.

More about Performance <http://guardian.imdb.com/Title?0066214>

Scarface <https://www.theguardian.com/film/scarface> 
 (Brian De Palma, 1983) 
Shake It Up, Elizabeth Daily, 1983

Cuban gangster Tony Montana (Al Pacino) and colleague try to do a drug deal in 
a Miami hotel room while the rest of the gang wait outside in the car. A row 
with the dealers results in Tony and his brother-in-law being tied up in the 
bathroom as the head drug dealer produces a chainsaw.

As he prepares to cut Tony's brother-in-law to pieces, the camera sidles out 
of the bathroom, through a window, across the street to where the back-up are 
listening to Shake It Up - a piece of nondescript MOR rock by soundtrack 
composer Giorgio Moroder - on the car radio. Then we pan back, to the growl of 
the chainsaw... De Palma often uses this kind of music (bad rock, bad synth) in 
a way that is oddly affecting because it reflects the desperate lives of his 
characters. Tony Montana's life and death are played out to disco kitsch.

More about Scarface <http://guardian.imdb.com/Title?0086250>

 Apocalypse Now 
 (Francis Ford Coppola , 1979) 
The End, The Doors, 1972

"Everyone wanted me to do it, even he wanted me to do it," says Martin Sheen 
in voiceover as he prepares to slaughter Marlon Brando's Major Kurtz. Coppola 
intercuts the killing with the sacrificial slaughter of a beast by Kurtz's 
crazed followers, and on the soundtrack come the dung-dung-dung opening notes 
of The Doors' attempt to translate Greek tragedy into psychedelic pop in The 
End.

Apocalypse Now puts the counterculture that imagined itself in opposition to 
Vietnam on the frontline of the war itself. The use of The Doors is 
particularly apt as Jim Morrison's father was a US admiral, and Jim's psychotic 
confession in The End ("Father, I want to kill you") was clearly genuine. Here, 
metaphorically, his wish comes true.

More about Apocalypse Now <http://guardian.imdb.com/Title?0078788>

 GoodFellas 
 (Martin Scorsese, 1990) 
Atlantis, Donovan, 1968

Mobsters Jimmy (Robert De Niro), Tommy (Joe Pesci) and narrator Henry Hill 
(Ray Liotta) are drinking in a bar owned by Henry while Billy Batts, a senior 
gangster just out of jail, has a sparsely attended coming-out party at the 
other end of the bar.

Batts taunts Tommy by reminding everyone how he used to shine shoes as a boy. 
They make up and everything seems settled. "Now go and get your fucking 
shine-box," says Batts. After being pulled off him, Tommy returns at closing 
time and, as Henry locks the door, he and Jimmy kick and stamp Batts to death 
(so they think - actually he has to be finished later). Over the entire kicking 
sequence we hear the incongruous sound of Donovan's 1968 psychedelic idyll 
Atlantis, which he wrote after visiting the Maharishi with the Beatles. Like a 
lot of the music in GoodFellas, this is the sound of another reality that the 
gangsters, with their Sinatra style, don't know exists.

More about Goodfellas <http://guardian.imdb.com/Title?0099685>

 Blue Velvet 
 (David Lynch, 1986) 
In Dreams, Roy Orbison, 1963

Frank (Dennis Hopper), the underworld weirdo, gets innocent do-gooder Kyle 
MacLachlan alone in his car in the woods at night. On the car radio is Frank's 
favourite song, In Dreams. Hopper kisses his victim on the mouth. They are both 
covered in Isabella Rossellini's lipstick. He speaks the song's lyrics, out of 
sync with Orbison, his face contorted in pain: "In dreams... I walk with you." 
Then he begins to punch MacLachlan in the face. Blue Velvet reads astonishing 
depths of menace in Orbison's 1963 hit, which is played again and again in ever 
weirder ways. It's the most disturbing use ever made of pop in that it 
convincingly makes early 60s music sound like a source of unnameable horrors.

More about Blue Velvet <http://guardian.imdb.com/Title?0090756>

 Reservoir Dogs 
 (Quentin Tarantino, 1991) 
Stuck in the Middle with You, Stealer's Wheel, 1973

As Mr Blonde (Michael Madsen) begins to torture an undercover policeman (Tim 
Roth) in a warehouse, this song comes on the car radio. This is, in a sense, a 
pastiche of all the scenes listed on this page; it marks the moment when we 
become so aware of pop's - and film's - quotability that the moment Mr Blonde 
puts on the radio, you know this is going to be really horrible.

Stuck In The Middle With You is a song whose meaning is elusive and 
uncomfortable ("I've a feeling that something ain't right") and somehow 
vacuous; the horror lies in the lack of meaning implied by Mr Blonde's liking 
it. He does his torture as a dance to the music. It's only when the spell of 
the music is over that we are freed, and the cop shoots him.

More about Reservoir Dogs <http://guardian.imdb.com/Title?0105236>

Dr Strangelove <https://www.theguardian.com/film/dr-strangelove> 
 (Stanley Kubrick, 1964) 
We'll Meet Again, Vera Lynn, 1939

As the first bomb is dropped, Peter Sellers' Dr Strangelove wrestles with his 
artificial arm and explains how it would be possible for the world's elite to 
live underground for 100 years to escape nuclear death. Then we cut to real 
films of nuclear tests to the sound of Vera Lynn.

"We'll meet again," promises that brassy 40s voice, as mushroom clouds and 
lateral flashes of light illuminate the sky. The song comes from a time when 
war could be contemplated as a necessary, noble cause; but now war is this 
post-human spectacle of beautiful mushroom clouds, each one signalling hundreds 
of thousands of deaths. We'll Meet Again - it's a promise, too. We will meet 
this scene again, says Kubrick, and this time we won't be watching from above. 
Or perhaps, as Dr Strangelove expounds his eugenic plans, we'll meet the Nazis 
again.

More about Dr Strangelove <http://guardian.imdb.com/Title?0057012>

 Superfly 
 (Gordon Parks Jnr, 1972) 
Think, Curtis Mayfield, 1972

A black drug dealer is driven off by white cops - who are in reality working 
for the city's police commissioner and top gangster - to the sound of a soulful 
instrumental by Mayfield, whose soundtrack to this blaxploitation thriller is a 
brilliant commentary on the film and its violent world. As the music goes on, 
the car pulls up in the shadow of the elevated railroad, and a cop takes out a 
syringe. As the victim pleads for his life, he is injected with a lethal dose 
of heroin and left to die. We see his face one last time through the window, to 
the sweet melancholy music.

Mayfield appears in the film singing Pusherman, an ironic counterpoise to the 
story of how a pusher gets out of the business. Mayfield's darkest song and the 
biggest hit on the soundtrack album, Freddie's Dead, is not in the film, but 
even so, his bouncy yet sad music gives Superfly a poetic quality that lingers.

More about Superfly <http://guardian.imdb.com/Title?0069332>
 