
A year is a long time in the movies. Fifteen months ago, I met the Canadian 
film-makerAtom Egoyan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/atom-egoyan> as he 
brought his low-key indie Adoration to the London film festival. The venue was 
an anonymous hotel cafe. At the festival's next edition, Egoyan returns with a 
new film, Chloe; this one stars Julianne Moore, Liam Neeson and Amanda 
Seyfried, and Egoyan is holding forth in a suite at Claridge's in central 
London. Things have clearly gone well for him.

At our first enconter, in the cafe, Egoyan was nursing a hangover that made 
him pleasantly effusive. He wasn't what I expected. Even his actors can be 
confused; before starting work on Adoration, one of its leads, Scott Speedman, 
said he thought Egoyan would be "an auteur in a black suit, not communicating 
very much". Instead, Egoyan joked about failing to meet Penelope Cruz at a 
party the previous night. "I thought there would be a red carpet, people would 
part and I would be able to glide directly to her." He smiled. "I gather she 
was there, but I never saw her." A stern auteur he was not – though he was 
wearing a black suit and a pair of fiercely designed glasses.

Egoyan made his first film, Next of Kin, in 1984, when he was 24 – "I was very 
driven" – which roughly puts him in the same generation as Jim Jarmusch, Todd 
Haynes and the Coens. "At that point independent film-making wasn't considered 
the cool, hip thing to do," he says. Since then he has directed 12 features – 
Exotica, from 1994, was the biggest commercially, and 1997's The Sweet 
Hereafter the most critically acclaimed, winning two Oscar nominations. In 
1987, he got a splashy career launch at a film festival in Montreal when Wim 
Wenders publicly handed over a $5,000 prize he had won for Wings of Desire to 
the young director. (The gesture backfired somewhat when Egoyan tried paying 
the cheque in, only for the cashier in his local bank to ask him if he was Wim 
Wenders. "I was totally crushed. It was worthless.") As well as films, he has 
directed theatre, opera, television and made art installations. Penelope Cruz 
aside, it is serious stuff. "Atom has no lowbrow side," a friend of his 
recently told the New York Times. "He doesn't even have a middlebrow side.''

Watch one Egoyan film and you'll soon be able to spot another. They feel like 
they've been traumatised, back-ended by a car; the chronology has been knocked 
out of sequence, characters behave like they're in shock. Recurring themes are 
loss, missing bits of history and voyeurism. They can leave you deeply uneasy. 
In one scene in 1991's The Adjuster, the colleague of a female film censor 
(played by Arsinée Khanjian, Egoyan's wife), sidles up to her pervily in a dark 
screening room. She responds by pushing his hand up her skirt and laughing 
manically. I vividly remember watching it in a London cinema years ago. When 
the lights went up at the end the audience squirmed out like we'd been caught 
watching something seedy in a Soho backstreet.

He says he changed his formula dramatically after The Sweet Hereafter – "I 
felt I'd gone as far as I could go" – though Felicia's Journey, a 
Birmingham-set thriller with Bob Hoskins and the Armenian-inflected Ararat 
don't seem allthat different. Much more of a departure was Where the Truth 
Lies, a critically derided take on LA noir, with Colin Firth and Kevin Bacon as 
a pair of sleazy 50s rat-packers. It cost $25m but recouped just $3.5m. "If 
you're going to do a ­neo-noir it has to be an LA Confidential," Egoyan said. 
He had clearly thought about it a lot. "It has to be exceptional." Adoration, 
which finally goes on limited release next week was a return to his signature 
personal storytelling, he told me. He called it "a coming of age story in the 
time of the internet".

That might be a little pithy for this puzzle about memory, extremism and 
technology. It's very loosely based on an incident involving a Jordanian, Nezar 
Hindawi, who in 1986 hid a bomb in his pregnant Irish girlfriend's handbag on a 
flight from Heathrow to Israel. The bomb was intercepted and he is still in 
prison in the UK. In the film, a newspaper article with a similar story is read 
out to a class of Canadian teenagers to translate into French. One boy, Simon 
(Devon Bostick) writes it up in the first person, imagining himself as the 
terrorist's child. Encouraged by his teacher (Khanjian again) he carries on the 
pretence to his classmates. Rather sweetly, Egoyan said one of his reasons for 
making the film was to get to grips with his teenage son. When he was that age 
he was reading Beckett and Pinter, throwing himself into local theatre. "But 
what if I was that child now? Putting on plays for friends, parents and 
teachers wouldn't be enough, right? You would want to find the largest audience 
possible."

Egoyan was born in Cairo to Armenian-Egyptian parents, who moved to Canada 
when he was two. Growing up in Victoria, British Columbia, all he wanted was to 
fit in. "It was the quest for assimilation, always aware of being outside. The 
usual." He wouldn't speak Armenian at home, and it was only at university that 
he became interested in his heritage, relearning the language and culture, and 
researching the 1915 genocide – in which up to 1.5 million of Turkey's Armenian 
population were killed. His family had never openly discussed it at home: "I 
suppose it's why it became so powerful, and why my films seem to contain a 
history which is suppressed and held."

One sensed a bit of frustration in Egoyan. He admitted there was a limited 
audience for the arthouse films he makes. "The reality is the world for that 
film is becoming more and more marginal." Directors such as Gus van Sant and 
Steven Soderbergh dart between commercial and personal film-making; Jarmusch 
has maintained his beat-cool and found a younger generation of filmgoers. 
Egoyan would like to be seen by a wider audience and over the years has been 
caught up in negotiations with the studios as a gun-a-for-hire. "I've come 
close a couple of times," he said. Both projects snagged on his casting 
choices. He can't talk about the second project, but the first was a thriller 
with Susan Sarandon. This was before Dead Man Walking and the suits decided she 
couldn't open a picture. "As lucrative as it is, I'm not sure how satisfying it 
could be to do one of these films, because it's not really my vision," he 
concluded.

Fast forward to a year later, and Egoyan is at the London film festival with 
his new film. In the fancy suite at Claridges a makeup artist is on her mobile 
tracking down the correct shade of lipstick for Julianne Moore. Egoyan's film, 
Chloe, is an erotic thriller, that second gun-for-hire project, the one he 
couldn't talk about the previous year. It's a remarkably quick turnabout, by 
anyone's standards. "It's the nature of financing now," Egoyan says. He seems 
to be on good form. "It's so difficult, that if something comes together it 
either takes a very long time or it happens very quickly."

Moore plays a Toronto gynaecologist who becomes convinced her lecturer husband 
(Liam Neeson) is sleeping around, and hires a classy escort (Amanda Seyfried) 
to seduce him. It was during shooting in March last year that Neeson's wife, 
the actress Natasha Richardson, died after a skiing accident in Canada. So, for 
all the PR bustle you expect with a junket like this, the air is a little 
heavy. Egoyan, who has worked with Neeson before, on a Beckett play in 2008, 
describes Neeson's enforced departure as the most traumatic professional 
experience of his career. They were close to wrapping when Neeson had to leave. 
"We didn't know when he would be back." In fact Neeson returned within days, 
"heroically" and in a state of shock, says Egoyan, to complete two days of 
filming. "It was really harrowing. Also because of the subject matter of the 
film was dealing with …" He pauses for the first time in either interview, to 
formulate his words. "It's so clear how precious marriage is, relationships 
are. How you have to seize every moment."

Chloe might put him in the big league, but you wonder if Egoyan will want to 
stay there. Talking about auditioning Seyfried ("She was clearly astonishing"), 
he mentions that she was picked before the success of Mamma Mia! made her a big 
name. Any other director would be blessing the heavens, but this one says 
dolefully: "I don't know if I would have had quite the same response after 
seeing the film." Which leaves you wondering: how on earth will the director 
who doesn't do lowbrow cope with Hollywood?

Adoration is released on 29 January, and Chloe on 5 March
 