
You say (Editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/04/guardian-view-on-naming-ann-maguire-murderer>
, 5 November) that the decision of Mr Justice Coulson to allow the murderer of 
Ann Maguire to be named – in response to a request from the Guardian and other 
news organisations – is “contentious”. Your editorial goes on to explain and 
justify your action because of the “very particular circumstances” of the case. 
One could equally argue that, in the case of such particular circumstances, the 
law should be at its most robust in protecting the rights of those who are 
legally considered children, as well as the rights of victims and their 
families.

There is a real fear that the media will use the precedent of this case to 
press for other breaches of anonymity where offences by children are involved, 
citing the oft-uttered rationale of “in the public interest”. Such fears would 
be allayed if the much-vaunted new press regulator, Ipso, was to make a clear 
statement that it expects its members, who have already signed up to the 
code, to respect the law in letter and in spirit as far as anonymity for 
children is concerned. Those who have not signed up to Ipso should be asked to 
make similar declarations.

Without some sense of responsibility and self-discipline being exercised by 
the media itself, anonymity for children in our criminal justice system is only 
safe until the next time.
Tom McNally
Chairman of the Youth Justice Board for England and Wales

• I was appalled to discover the Guardian was one of those seeking to name 
Will Cornick. There is not an atom of public benefit in doing so and the 
consequences for the child and his family are irremediable. Your editorial 
seems to be verging on the side of embarrassment for what you have done, and so 
it should. Compassion far outweighs narrow media obsessions.
Michael Dempsey
London

• As a retired teacher of children who had emotional and behavioural problems, 
I feel very strongly about the details which emerged at the trial. I have grave 
concerns about some of the pupils with whom I have had dealings, as have my 
colleagues, but there is no one to whom a teacher or a pupil can turn, within 
the present framework, to express these concerns in order to ensure that the 
dreadful action which took place in April will not be repeated. I have been 
threatened sufficiently to be told not to go into our local town on my own in 
case I was attacked, I have received threats to gouge out my eyes, I have had 
threats to burn my home down, but it would appear no one can take any 
pre-emptive action. I am only one teacher and I am still alive.

I wonder if there were warning signs which were picked up about this boy 
but which were unable to be acted on.
Name and address supplied

• Following the judicial judgment over the killing of Ann Maguire, many 
newspapers might well rush to total excoriation and condemnation of her then 
15-year-old killer. I regret even having to declare that I do not excuse this 
catastrophic act. But let’s try to bear the unbearable thought of just how 
awful it is for everyone involved.Ann Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire> herself, warm and loving, is 
honoured at her memorial service because she believed in the “innate goodness 
of children and young people”. That this young person did a terrible thing and 
showed no emotion is perhaps a clue to the depth and degree of his own 
confusion, anger, pain and distress that led to his distorted thinking and 
acting.

We need to move far more “upstream” to try to connect with the confused, angry 
and disaffected who are isolated and – as we learn in this case – self-harming 
in the recent past. Or we can simply blame a bad/evil adolescent, bang him away 
for good and carry on – until the next catastrophe. That is the socially easier 
route, in the company of the tabloid press. The harder route is to keep on 
thinking about what drives our young to such extremes.

Maybe Will Cornick is unsafe at any time. I do know we can be of little help 
when it might count for the Wills past, present and to come if we don’t act 
earlier and keep on thinking while mourning such a terrible loss and losses.
Richard Rollinson
Witney, Oxfordshire

• Congratulations to Deborah Orr on an intelligent and objective article (
The 20-year sentence for Will Cornick defies logic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/04/will-cornick-sentence-defies-logic>
, 5 November). There are at least two implications here. The first is for the 
justice system, which needs to address the philosophical perspective of the 
nature of, and need for, punishment. The second is for the education system, 
which should address the potential impacts of high achievement on a child’s 
psychological wellbeing and self-esteem. Academic success is not always an 
indication that everything is going well.
Tricia Ayrton
Rochdale, Lancashire

• Deborah Orr questions Mr Justice Coulson’s integrity but in so doing reveals 
her lack of knowledge and understanding as to what has taken place. Will 
Cornick has pleaded guilty to murder. He must then be sentenced to life 
imprisonment. The judge must then set a tariff as to minimum length to be 
served in custody. Mr Justice Coulson has quite properly determined a minimum 
length of 20 years, but is entitled to proffer his opinion that Will Cornick 
may never be released.

A life sentence is exactly that. After the tariff has been served, it will be 
the job of the parole board (or its successor) to determine when it is safe and 
proper to release Cornick, and under what licence conditions. If Cornick is 
released then he will remain under state control for the rest of his days. Ann 
Maguire would want Cornick to grow, develop and show remorse. She would want us 
all to show understanding. This must include children and others sharing with 
teachers and parents if any child is vocalising violent ideation against others 
or themselves.
Mick Gough
Stoke on Trent, Staffordshire

• The wellbeing and mental health of our young people are increasingly seen as 
major causes of concern – theChildline report on teenage suicides last week 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/more-children-feeling-suicidal-then-ever-before-childline-figures-show-9831031.html>
 and the brutal murder of Ann Maguire. We need to ask what’s being done to help 
schools identify all young people who are in distress and possibly 
self-harming, as well as those causing distress and actual harm to others. 
Adults with chronic mental, social and emotional problems are often resistant 
to intervention, so we need to take these conditions seriously in childhood 
when we see evidence of them in individuals.

There is an awareness issue, a staff training issue, a tracking and monitoring 
issue and a resources issue. We need secretaries of state for education who 
devote as much time and attention to mental health and wellbeing as they do to 
raising scores in tests and exams. Quality work in personal, social, health and 
economic education should also be essential in every school – for the benefit 
of all students and their teachers.
Gary Foskett and Clare Blackhall
London
 