
I am reactionary on freedom of speech. I am for it. I have no time for the 
weasel words of pseudo-liberalism, that freedom must sometimes be curbed to 
advance freedom. It is like the tyrant's censor who declares he approves of all 
criticism provided it is fair, constructive, offends no one and is not 
conducive to violence. That is free speech a la Putin. It is the more dangerous 
as it often has the best tunes.

The British government cannot tolerate a French comedian, Dieudonné M'bala 
M'bala, setting foot on its soil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/03/dieudonne-banned-uk-nicolas-anelka-quenelle>
. For reasons of "public policy and public security", the Home Office has 
alerted airports, motorways and docks to watch out for him. The white cliffs of 
Dover are being combed, trawlers searched, binoculars trained from Martello 
towers. Defences long in place to repel the dreaded French are at last being 
used for their original purpose.

According to a leaked declaration, a fine of "up to £10,000" is to be imposed 
on anyone, airline, train, coach or ferry, that results in Dieudonné "being 
carried to the UK". The same people who spent 10 years and £1.7m protecting 
London from the Muslim preacherAbu Qatada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-qatada> have a new quarry.

There are no plans for Dieudonné to give a performance. So from what is 
sensitive Britain being shielded? The man appears to make a living being funny, 
though by all accounts he goes far beyond humour. He has incurred the wrath of
France's interior minister, Manuel Valls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/09/france-court-upholds-ban-antisemitic-dieudonne-show>
, who says his views on Jews and the Holocaust are the "mechanics of hate". 
Valls says Dieudonné has been found guilty "by the highest jurisdiction in our 
country" of "antisemitism, historical revisionism and racism". His shows have 
been banned in France. Though the comedian says he is merely 
"anti-establishment", he has allegedly "failed to distance himself" from 
pseudo-Nazi salutes.

One such salute, repeated on a British football pitch by a friend of 
Dieudonné, the West Bromwich Albion striker Nicolas Anelka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/29/nicolas-anelka-10-match-ban-quenelle-gesture>
, has had the footballer charged by the Football Association. It is a proposed 
visit by the comedian to support his friend that has led to the home 
secretary's exclusion order.

The greatest test for those who claim to champion liberty lies in their 
attitude to its opposite. How far will they tolerate the intolerable? Do they 
line up with Gandhi's followers and invite the soldiers literally to hit them 
over the head? Do they see the Pussy Riot performers as prisoners of conscience 
or as hooligans causing deep offence to Russia's state religion? The answer in 
such cases is never simple, but one principle is clear: the more confident a 
society is in its values, the greater can it tolerate intolerance. A robust 
community can handle the stresses of pluralism. It can take on board, challenge 
and defeat odious opinions without having to take refuge in law or state 
authority.

Two recent assaults on unpalatable speech concerned the radical imams Abu 
Hamza and Abu Qatada,deported in 2012 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/terrorism-in-the-uk/9591274/Abu-Hamza-extradited-to-US-under-cover-of-night.html>
 and 2013 respectively. Abu Hamza was a full-blooded terrorist agitator, 
legitimately wanted in America on serious criminal charges. Deportation was 
just – and given Washington's paranoid mood, may have saved Finsbury Park from 
a drone attack. Qatada was more a typical London fugitive from alien justice. 
His past activities and his views on Islamist militancy possibly merit 
Whitehall's favourite word: "unacceptable." He might even have "allegedly 
inspired" the failed shoe-bomber,Richard Reid 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Reid>. But there has to be a difference 
between holding racist or belligerent opinions and plotting or inciting others 
to kill. It seems sad that the ideal of asylum for dissent, which has long made 
London the home of political and intellectual tolerance, could no longer handle 
this man.

Much as many may now deplore the exaggerations and scares of the "war on 
terror", its backwash continues to serve Osama bin Laden's game. It is shifting 
the west ever closer towards censorship and antipathy to opinions it cannot 
accommodate. After 9/11, Tony Blair's 2006 Terrorism Act sought not just 
internment without trail but thejailing of anyone who "glorifies, exalts or 
celebrates" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2005/sep/16/terrorism.immigrationpolicy> 
any terrorist act committed over the previous 20 years.

The then home secretary, Charles Clarke, even prepared a list of earlier 
"historical terrorist acts" which, if glorified, meant "a criminal offence 
being committed". The 1916 Irish Easter Rising was exempted, but there was no 
exemption for the Indian Mutiny, the Boston Tea Party or the Peasants' Revolt. 
As yet, no regius professors of history are banged up in the Scrubs, but 
Blair's lurch into Stalinism must still fester in a Home Office attic.

The biggest challenge now comes from the antisemitic strand in militant Islam. 
No sooner were the UK's illiberal blasphemy laws being abolished (eventually in 
2008) than a move arose to revive and reinforce them. The terrorism expert, 
Anatol Lieven, argued for "the revival and implementation of blasphemy laws 
acrossEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and their explicit 
extension to cover not just Christianity but all the major religions". The 
occasion was the Dutch publication of cartoons depicting the prophet. To 
Lieven, "if they were to prove the last straw that leads only a few more 
European Muslims to join terrorist groups and carry out successful terrorist 
attacks, then not just the terrorists, but the fools who started this scandal 
will have blood on their hands."

That could be said of all who tolerate intolerance. Freedom often has blood on 
its hands. I can excoriate, deplore and refuse all dealings with odious speech 
or publication. Most decent-minded people do likewise. That is a world away 
from declaring such opinions criminal. "Causing offence" is so easily elided 
into inciting hatred, then inciting violence, then to being the cause of actual 
violence. The quick remedy, as the 2006 act showed, is to ban the offence. This 
is not advanced political ethics. Liberty often demands we risk causing offence 
and even seeing heads bloodied in its cause. The idea of generalisations that 
"giving offence" to specific groups, ethnic, religious or, nowadays, 
"self-defining", may be deeply uncomfortable, but it is the gateway drug of 
censorship.

Voltaire's demand, that we endure those with disagreeable views, is becoming 
ever harder for a modern state to endure. Governments are under perpetual 
pressure to curb such licence. They purport to protect "the right not to be 
offended", but usually they are just avoiding the bother of umpiring 
factionalism and dissent. In banning Dieudonné, the home secretary may have 
kept a nasty piece of work offshore. What she has really shown is that Britain 
is too feeble a country to tolerate his presence.
 