
Just like any other aspect of the modern world, urban wildlife is subject to 
change. Species come and go, as their populations rise and fall. There are new 
arrivals, sometimes by natural means, others through human intervention. And 
from time to time a once thriving species will simply disappear.

I was born in 1960 and grew up in the west London suburbs, described by 
naturalist Kenneth Allsop as "that messy limbo which is neither town nor 
country".

Allsop was writing just after the end of the second world war, and his subject 
was a small wading bird called a little ringed plover. These birds had just 
begun to colonise Britain. They were taking advantage of an unlikely new 
habitat: the gravel pits and reservoirs appearing in a ring around the western 
edge of the capital, where the M25 now runs.

The little ringed plover wasn't the only bird using an unexpected new 
opportunity. Black redstarts, another new colonist from mainland Europe, found 
the ideal equivalent of their typical rocky habitat in the bomb sites that were 
dotted around London, and which remained undeveloped well into the 1950s. Once 
these had been built on, black redstarts turned to brownfield sites. They 
remain one of London's star birds to this day.

My teenage years also saw the arrival of the most colourful newcomer to our 
city birdlife, the ring-necked parakeet. These comical birds have now become so 
numerous they have attained pest status; yet many Londoners have a great 
affection for them.

Other major UK cities have also seen big changes to their wildlife. The Tyne, 
once one of Britain's most polluted rivers, is now home to salmon and otters, 
while the clean-up of the Mersey, Clyde and Tees has benefited nature in 
Liverpool, Glasgow and Middlesbrough respectively. Foxes have moved into many 
city centres to forage in our dustbins, while badgers retain a foothold in the 
wooded suburbs of Bristol and Brighton.

One of the most notable success stories is that of the peregrine. This avian 
equivalent of a Formula One racing car can now be seen in virtually every major 
British city.

It hasn't all been good news. Once widespread birds such as the song thrush 
have suffered major falls in numbers, due partly to the increased use of slug 
pellets by gardeners. I can recall walking home from school on spring evenings 
during the 1970s and hearing singing thrushes on every other rooftop. Yet when 
I returned to live in the same area 30 years later, there were none to be found.

But the most dramatic decline of all, without doubt, has been that of the 
humble house sparrow, which has virtually disappeared from the centre of most 
British cities. Now that we are beginning to understand the complex reasons 
behind the decline, we may be just in time to save this iconic bird.

On balance, though, the future of our city creatures looks positive. During my 
lifetime I have seen a huge rise in appreciation of our natural heritage in 
general, and urban wildlife in particular. Many challenges remain – not least a 
growing population and the threat of climate change – but the good news is that 
we now care more about our natural neighbours than at any other time in our 
history.
 