
Alf Ramsey <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alf-ramsey> taught England 
the art of the possible. Before his side so memorably defeated West Germany 4-2 
at Wembley in 1966 the World Cup was merely a quadrennial reminder of the 
shortcomings of the national team but ever since then the idea that another 
England side might win it has never quite gone away.

The abundant optimism, albeit unfulfilled, which accompanied Glenn Hoddle's 
team to France last summer owed much to what Ramsey had achieved eight 
tournaments before. Yet it was against France in Paris that Alf's career as 
England manager began so inauspiciously with a 5-2 defeat in a European Nations 
Cup qualifier early in 1963.

From that low point Ramsey, the one-time studious right-back with Tottenham 
Hotspur and England, moulded the side which was to win the World Cup. He did it 
through tactical innovation, through individual experimentation, through trial 
and error.

More than anything he did it because he won the trust and affection of his 
players. The special strength of his bond with Bobby Moore was crucial, as was 
his passionate desire for English success - particularly when playing against 
Scotland.

No England manager or coach has had such a deep understanding of the inner 
workings of the professional footballer. That is why his players loved him. 
Ramsey had an instinctive sense of players' moods. He sensed what a player had 
to give.

From his early days as secretary-manager with Ipswich Town he was seeing the 
game through a new pair of eyes. When Ipswich won the league championship in 
1962, a year after winning promotion, Jimmy Leadbetter, a spindly Scottish 
left-winger from Brighton and Hove Albion, was fundamental to their success. 
Ramsey moved Leadbetter to a position just behind the forwards, where he could 
use his accuracy with the chip and the lob to set up chances for Ray Crawford 
and Ted Phillips.

Yet, when Ramsey used Bobby Charlton in a similar role for a friendly against 
Spain in Madrid in 1965, he was derided by the media, who christened his 
England team "wingless wonders". This did not help Ramsey's often uneasy 
relationship with the press, although he always had time for those who 
understood what he was about.

England were not favourites to win the World Cup in 1966. Most experts thought 
they would get no further than the quarter-finals.

In the event they beat the highly rated Argentina to reach the last four. But 
Ramsey's description of Juan Carlos Lorenzo's players as "animals" after Geoff 
Hurst's goal had beaten them at Wembley following the controversial dismissal 
of Antonio Rattin, the Argentine captain, returned to haunt England in Mexico 
20 years later (Hand of God) and again in France last summer (Hell of Hod).

German revenge 

In 1970 Mexico witnessed the pivotal moment of Ramsey's 12-year reign as 
England manager. A combination of circumstances - Gordon Banks's food 
poisoning, Peter Bonetti's error, Franz Beckenbauer's goal, the withdrawal of 
Bobby Charlton, the fresh legs of Jurgen Grabowski, Gerd Muller's winner - had 
enabled West Germany to avenge their defeat of 1966 by recovering from going 
two goals down to England in Leon in the quarter-finals to win 3-2. Ramsey 
never really appreciated the use of substitutes.

Three years later England failed to qualify for the 1974 World Cup in West 
Germany because, needing to beat Poland at Wembley, they were held 1-1. 
Uncharacteristic errors by Moore had already led to an English defeat by the 
Poles in Chorzow. "If Bobby Moore had wept then," said Ramsey two days later, 
"we would all have wept with him."

England's failure in the 1972 European Nations Cup left him vulnerable to 
criticism from within the Football Association. In the summer of 1974 Ramsey, 
surprised and hurt, was dismissed and it was left to another former Ipswich 
manager, Bobby Robson, to take the team within sight of another World Cup 
triumph when England reached the 1990 semi-finals in Italy, only to fall to 
Beckenbauer's Germany, this time on penalties.

Hoddle had much of the Ramsey in him. Like Alf, he had played for Tottenham, 
he also had the courage of his convictions and did not suffer idle criticism 
gladly. Hoddle, too, adhered to a way of playing in the face of criticism off 
stage. Unlike Ramsey, fatefully as it turned out, he believed in reincarnation.

In some ways Kevin Keegan is everything Ramsey was not - media-friendly, a 
professional optimist, a press conference waiting to happen. But when, in 1966, 
Ramsey said quite simply that England would win the World Cup, he was not 
thinking in headlines, he was stating a simple conviction. And he was right.
 