
Some readers were surprised that the Guardian not only took part in a joint 
application to the court to seek to name Will Cornick, the 16-year-old killer 
of teacher Ann Maguire, but led it. “I was horrified to read today the 
self-satisfied tone in which the Guardian claimed credit for leading media 
calls for the killer ofAnn Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire> to be publicly named,” wrote 
one. “However horrific the crime, Cornick was legally a child when it was 
committed.

“Cornick has been told … that he will ‘probably die in prison’. Given the boy 
is considered a suicide risk, it seems a fair bet. And yet the Guardian still 
considered it to be in the public interest that Cornick should be publicly 
named. Really? Whose interest can it possibly serve that Cornick’s family will 
now be vilified? Is this what passes for crusading Guardian journalism 
nowadays?”

The surprise of that reader and a few others that it should be the Guardian 
that took the lead reflects the idea that a newspaper regarded as progressive 
and liberal should not do anything that may be seen as being against the best 
interests of a child, brutal killer or no.

It is no cop-out to suggest that the arguments on both sides in such cases are 
finely balanced, as a reading ofMr Justice Coulson’s reasons for granting the 
application to name Cornick 
<http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWHC/QB/2014/3623.html> shows.

First, I don’t think it matters whether we “led” or not, as it is more a 
matter of coordinating a joint effort. However, what does matter is why the 
Guardian decided the application was the right thing to do, an issue that has 
also caused a debate within the Guardian. I have contacted the editors and 
reporter involved, and looked at the legal submission to the court. It is 
important to note that the Guardian is committed to open justice and regularly 
challenges reporting restrictions. Other killers who are children have been 
named in the past following their appearance in an adult court.

On this occasion the newspaper joined with other news organisations to resist 
an application by the defence to extend an order undersection 39 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/Geo5/23-24/12/section/39> of the Children 
and Young Persons Act. The order for anonymity for Cornick and other witnesses 
had been made on 29 April.

The newspaper made the decision primarily on the basis of open justice, 
freedom of speech and the fact that his name was widely known in his community 
and on the internet. In addition, a news editor also believed that the order 
would lapse in any case when he was 18. Once that decision was made, the 
support of other news organisations was sought.

An editor said: “We argue for open justice in a whole range of cases and at 
times ask for support from other media organisations. In this case the Guardian 
was one of seven. Open justice means that uncomfortable truths, such as the 
facts of a murder, enter the public domain, but the principle needs to be 
defended. It is important as we debate this issue that we also consider whether 
Cornick’s sentence at 20 years is appropriate, and whether in the light of cuts 
he will receive appropriate custodial care, ie rehabilitation.”

That last is what he won’t receive as a result of the naming of him, argues 
Penelope Gibbs, chair of the Standing Committee for Youth Justice, an alliance 
of 30 organisations that aims to improve the youth justice system in England 
and Wales and which believes no child under 18 should be named in court 
whatever the crime.

Gibbs said: “We think it was wrong to seek to name him for two reasons: 1) The 
media storm has made a monster of him and because of this, rehabilitating him 
will be much more difficult. 2) Because of the issue of his safety, crucially, 
using his picture is as important as his name and we believe this will have put 
his life in danger.”

Whatever the legal arguments, the Guardian has to be sure that its decision to 
go to court to have the boy named is consistent with the values it espouses and 
for which it is often criticised, not least when it puts its faith in the 
capacity for rehabilitation. The next time we are faced with a choice, I hope 
we take a longer, harder look at the options.
 