
Your nose is more congested than the M25 on Friday night. Your partner has 
kicked you out of bed for snoring. Running for the bus feels like an Everest 
ascent with a backpack. Your favourite pasta tastes like boiled cardboard. 
Innocent signs? Or is something more sinister creeping up, about to take over 
your life?

You are an adult in your prime but that's just when it strikes. You have ASRD. 
No you don't catch it from toilet seats; it stands for aspirin-sensitive 
respiratory disease, one of the most aggressive forms of asthma known. It can 
kill you within the hour if you swallow something as seemingly harmless as 
aspirin.

First you get a cold that never goes away then, before you know it, you are 
more breathless than Paula Radcliffe on the last lap - except all the time.

But, it doesn't stop there. The disease destroys the lining of your nose and 
sinuses, filling them with fat slug-like polyps. Bugs cheerfully move into your 
blocked sinuses and breed away, causing pain, headaches and frequent trips to 
the doctor for antibiotics and painkillers. Except that you can no longer take 
painkillers.

Most of us swallow a couple of aspirin for a headache without giving it a 
second thought. The most widely consumed drug in the world, we use aspirin to 
prevent heart disease, eradicate hangovers, relieve colds and reduce deep vein 
thrombosis risk whilst flying. Now, if you take aspirin or ibuprofen, your 
chest shuts up tighter than a squeezed out dishcloth.

Next thing you know, it's an ambulance, blue lights and a stay in your local 
intensive care unit. After a week of steroids, oxygen and bedpans, you decide 
that the description "aspirin-sensitive" is a tribute to English 
understatement: it's a death trap.

As ASRD progresses, so does reliance on nasal sprays, inhalers and tablets. 
You are left puffing away, pockets more full of medicines than the average 
chemist, permanently having lost all sense of smell and taste. You are sent to 
the surgeon to clear out your nose: he snaps on his gloves and digs out 
multiple gelatinous polyps.

Afterwards in an Alan Titchmarsh moment, he tells you polyps are like "garden 
weeds" - easy to pull out but quick to grow back - sometimes within weeks. You 
both know that even the best "weed killers", namely the medication prescribed, 
just does not work that well. A season ticket to the theatre (operating) has 
your name written on it.

Having made light of ASRD, as do some of my patients who use humour to bravely 
battle on against this disease - the grim reality is, ASRD is a life sentence. 
As a specialist, I do not exaggerate. Once diagnosed, you require lifelong 
medication but, despite this, will never have another symptom-free day.

With over half a million fellow sufferers, you are not alone, about 10% of the 
5.2 million asthmatics in the UK have ASRD. I want to find new, effective 
treatments for these patients, and urgently. But how can we safely research 
this debilitating condition? Giving aspirin-sensitive subjects, aspirin to 
investigate its effects, is both unethical and dangerous.

In the last year, I have developed a test-tube (in vitro) model of ASRD. This 
is exciting because it allows me, at no risk to aspirin-sensitive patients, to 
recreate the inflammation found in their airways. I can conduct detailed 
experiments and try to understand why aspirin makes these individuals so ill. 
This model therefore unlocks the door to the mechanisms driving this condition, 
thereby opening the gateway to new treatments.

In our airways, an enzyme called COX-1 manufactures chemicals called 
prostaglandins.Aspirin <https://www.theguardian.com/science/aspirin> blocks 
COX-1 and inhibits prostaglandin synthesis. Some prostaglandins exacerbate 
asthma, but one called prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) has protective effects. It even 
protects ASRD patients, from the life-threatening respiratory crisis taking 
aspirin provokes.

PGE2 acts on four receptors called EP1-4 and levels of the EP2 receptor are 
far lower in the airways of aspirin-sensitive compared to aspirin-tolerant 
individuals. I believe it likely that aspirin-sensitive asthmatics make 
insufficient PGE2 and, after taking aspirin, their PGE2 levels drop 
precipitously lower. This would explain why their disease is worse in general 
and becomes far worse if exposed to aspirin.

Another possibility is PGE2 cannot protect these patients due to low EP2 
receptor expression, even if adequate levels are produced. This newly developed 
model will allow me to determine if this is the case.

As well as sorting out these mysteries, I hope my work will translate into 
future benefits for aspirin-sensitive individuals because potential medicines 
which stimulate the EP2 receptor have already been identified. New treatments 
will reduce the significant financial cost this condition places on the NHS 
but, most importantly, will free patients from the life sentence that is ASRD.
 