
Where the Truth Lies

(108 mins, 18)
Directed by Atom Egoyan; starring Kevin Bacon, Colin Firth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/colin-firth>, Alison Lohman

Lower City

(97 mins, 18)
 Directed by Sergio Machado; starring Lazaro Ramos, Wagner Moura, Alice Braga

Keeping Mum
(103 mins, 15)
 Directed by Niall Johnson; starring Rowan Atkinson, Kristin Scott Thomas, 
Maggie Smith, Patrick Swayze

Steamboy
(106 mins, PG) 
Directed by Katsuhiro Otomo; featuring the voices of Anna Paquin, Alfred 
Molina, Patrick Stewart

The Hidden Blade
(131 mins, 15)
 Directed by Yoji Yamada; starring Masatoshi Nagase, Takako Matsu

2 Young
(107 mins, 12A) 
Directed by Tung-Shing Yee; starring Jaycee Fong, Fiona Sit

Doom
(105 mins, 15)
 Directed by Andrzej Bartkowiak; starring The Rock, Karl Urban, Rosamund Pike

Both of Canada's major directors, David Cronenberg and Atom Egoyan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/atom-egoyan>, have this year set aside some 
of their personal quirkiness and headed south of the 49th parallel to make 
highly enjoyable, rather conventional thrillers in the States. The former's A 
History of Violence is the more successful of the two. Egoyan's Where the Truth 
Lies is a rich brew that draws on Citizen Kane and Rashomon in telling the 
story of an ambitious journalist, Karen O'Connor (Alison Lohman), who sets out 
in 1972 to re-examine the circumstances that led to the break-up 15 years 
earlier of one of the most successful double acts in American show business. 
The duo are the poised, sharp-tongued British straight man Vince Collins (Colin 
Firth) and the wild, zany Jewish New Yorker Lanny Morris (Kevin Bacon).

Firth and Bacon make a plausible pair, vaguely reminiscent of Dean Martin and 
Jerry Lewis in character and size of popularity, but not so much that they 
invite direct comparison. They also have the right dated quality, as we first 
see them in black and white hosting a three-day 1957 telethon for a polio 
charity, in which their theme tune is - persuasively, if slightly 
anachronistically - Jule Styne and Stephen Sondheim's 'Together Wherever We Go' 
from Gypsy

This TV show in Miami was their last joint appearance, because on the 
following night, in a New Jersey hotel owned by a mobster who regards them as 
his personal possessions, the dead body of a beautiful young girl is found in 
their suite. Fifteen years later the death is shrouded in mystery as is the 
cause of the break-up, and the chaps have gone their separate ways as single 
acts.

As with Kane, there is a manuscript for the reporter to read under special 
conditions, and a suspicious valet (David Hayman) who knows more - or possibly 
less - than he lets on. As with Rashomon, the testimony of various parties is 
in sharp conflict. Unlike either, however, Karen the journalist is deeply 
compromised. She came into contact with the duo as a child, and during her 
investigations becomes sexually involved to near catastrophic effect with both 
men.

The movie is full of ambiguity as it goes in search of, as proclaimed by the 
title, where the truth lies. It's generally convincing on the Fifties and the 
Seventies, and the differences between the two in styles and attitudes. Whether 
various cliches are of a part with the pastiche music and fashions one cannot 
be sure. But the movie, with its endless flashbacks and switches of time, holds 
the attention and makes us want to know the outcome.

Directed by Sérgio Machado, a documentarian and former assistant to Walter 
Salles, Lower City (Cidade Baixa) is an accomplished slice of Brazilian 
working-class life set in the northern coastal state of Bahia. The fetching 
22-year-old Alice Braga, niece of the celebrated Sonia Braga, plays Karinna, a 
stripper and prostitute of highly independent mien who becomes involved with 
two sailors, the very dark Deco, and the relatively pale Naldinho.

They eke out a living carrying small cargoes between the state capital 
Salvador and nearby ports and doing the occasional dodgy job on the side. At 
first their relationship works as a ménage à trois, before both men become 
jealous and possessive, especially after she becomes pregnant. It's a violent, 
passionate, erotic film with a steamy atmosphere that hits you in the face like 
an unwashed bar-cloth from a backstreet dive. The film ends as abruptly as it 
begins.

Unlike Lower City, Keeping Mum has no sense of life, ongoing or otherwise. 
It's a 'school of Richard Curtis' black comedy, with Rowan Atkinson reprising 
his bumbling vicar from Four Weddings. As his unfaithful wife, Kristin Scott 
Thomas swears like a trooper in a Dibley-like village, where their son is 
bullied and their 17-year-old daughter romps promiscuously. Into this troubled 
family comes housekeeper Grace, a Nanny McPhee figure with missionary intent 
(Maggie Smith).

Recently released after serving 43 years for carving up her husband and his 
mistress, she transforms their lives, but leaves a trail of bodies in her 
psychopathic wake. The movie is laboured and staggeringly unfunny. Most of the 
cast founder, desperately trying to keep their heads above water. But Patrick 
Swayze, as a lecherous, voyeuristic golf pro, is a goner from his first 
appearance in an ill-written, under-directed role. He cannot look back on this 
sojourn on the Isle of Man with much pleasure.

A rather more interesting image of England, initially at least, is to be found 
in the Japanese animated movie Steamboy. It begins attractively with a mid 
19th-century Manchester family of ingenious engineers leading the way in the 
industrial revolution. It's very funny, even touching, as James Ray Steam, the 
intrepid young son, tries to protect their latest invention, the 'steam ball', 
from nefarious foreigners. There's a fantastic railway chase in which Ray meets 
Robert Stephenson, son of George of Rocket and £5-note fame. Sadly the movie 
turns into an over-extended take on Armageddon in London around the Great 
Exhibition that anticipates the horrors of 20th-century warfare, as rival arms 
manufacturers slug it out.

Also from Japan but less unexpected, Yoji Yamada's The Hidden Blade is close 
to his Twilight Samurai, but not as successful. A proud samurai, Katagiri, 
attempts to live an honourable life among dishonourable people as the sword 
gives way to the repeating rifle in the 1860s. At the same time he saves a 
beautiful servant girl from being abused in an unhappy marriage but, bound by 
tradition, cannot bring himself to marry her. The pace is stately, the 
compositions carefully contrived, and such action as there is comes late in the 
day.

The poorest Hong Kong import for years, 2 Young is a lacklustre modern Romeo 
and Juliet starring Jaycee Fong (son of Jackie Chan) as a bus driver's son who 
courts and makes pregnant a rich international lawyer's 16-year-old daughter 
(pop star Fiona Sit). Instead of a tragic ending there is sentimental 
moralising about the need for sympathy and generational understanding.

Based on a best-selling computer game, Doom is a dim reworking of Aliens 
starring the handsome former professional wrestler Dwayne Johnson, who performs 
under the nom de guerre the Rock. Here he leads an RRTS (rapid response 
tactical squad) of intrepid US marines sent to block a portal on Mars that is 
releasing monsters into a research station. The chief interest resides in 
guessing who'll be killed and in what order.
 