
In March, the property world will gather in France to discuss billion-pound 
development deals at the the annual Mipim conference.

The UK government’s focus has been on infrastructure spending and policies 
that favour development – the housing and planning bill now going through 
parliament includes several measures aimed to ease development.

But many people, including chair of the London Assembly planning committee 
Nicky Gavron, want to put an end to “dodgy development deals” where 
consultation with communities is “tokenism”. Is there still room for local 
objections? We’ve talked to four campaigners, armed with little more than an 
iPad and a Twitter handle, who have either seriously delayed or halted entirely 
projects worth more than £2.2bn.

Local writer v Shell

George Turner is an unlikely anti-hero. Graced with a beard that would look 
more at home in Shoreditch than the Royal Courts of Justice, his rise to 
prominence in London’s property world came in 2012 when he single-handedly took 
the decision of then communities secretary Eric Pickles to approve the £1.2bn 
Shell Centre all the way to the high court.

Revealed: how developers exploit flawed planning system to minimise affordable 
housing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/25/london-developers-viability-planning-affordable-social-housing-regeneration-oliver-wainwright>
The proposal was for eight buildings, up to 37 stories high, to be built next 
to the London Eye. Turner, a South Bank resident and writer, objected to the 
design and the damage the buildings could do to important heritage sites.

Taking a campaign to court can come with serious costs, but Turner was 
protected by a 2012 law that states that access to environmental justice should 
not be prohibitively expensive.

“Going to the high court was surreal,” says Turner. “On one side, we had me 
and my mate, Dave, helping me shuffle papers, on the other there were four QCs. 
Me, on my own, with this one piece of paper, had caused this immense amount of 
panic in all these institutions.”

It eventually failed 
<http://www.bdonline.co.uk/george-turner-on-his-shell-centre-defeat-i-did-what-i-could/5075916.article>
, but the case caused ripples across the property world, with one developer 
describing Turner’s campaign as “a siege” against Braeburn Estates, the firm 
behind the scheme. It is a claim Turner dismisses: “One reason we are seeing 
more campaigns such as mine is that you don’t have the public interest being 
served by councils or government; instead, they act as an arbitrator between 
communities and business. The people whose job it is to work in the public 
interest don’t see that as their job anymore”

Turner says many developers are successfully lobbying government to tie the 
hands of campaigners like him – hence the measures in the housing bill.

Pharmacy lecturer v Aberdeen city council

But around the country, individuals have taken up arms against what they see 
as poor or wasteful developments. Aberdeen’s controversial Marischal Square 
development has been opposed strongly by a campaign led by former pharmacy 
lecturer Lorna McHattie. She is particularly critical ofAberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/aberdeen> city council’s planning process and 
dealings with Muse, the developers of the hotel, office, and restaurant complex.

She began her campaign almost by chance when, after taking an interest in the 
proposals, she found it almost impossible to access documents regarding the 
£107m scheme in the city.

“To understand what was going on with the scheme I had to visit the council 
offices,” explains McHattie. “I couldn’t see the plans online. When I turned up 
I was put in a room and shown the plans, which were dragged up from a box in 
the archives. I was told I could not take photographs but I have no 
architecture expertise so I didn’t understand what I was looking at. How could 
people of the city understand what was going on if they all had to visit this 
room to get information?”

The development was questioned in the Scottish parliament 
<https://www.pressandjournal.co.uk/fp/news/aberdeen/771156/scottish-parliament-debate-to-be-held-over-marischal-square-development/>
 because of McHattie’s campaign, and although the scaffolding is already going 
up, she doesn’t believe it’s the end. “The development can still be stopped all 
the way until they hand over the keys,” she says.

Resident v Hammerson and Ballymore

McHattie’s struggle for transparency is echoed by David Donoghue, who leads a 
campaign in Shoreditch <http://www.morelightmorepower.co.uk/> to halt the £900m 
Bishopsgate Goodsyard development. Donoghue and a small team of voluntary 
campaigners have had to wade through hundreds of pages of documents to 
scrutinise the scheme – a series of 800ft high skyscrapers they claim will 
destroy the vibrant heart of Shoreditch, and cast shadows over much of east 
London.

“It’s in a developer’s interest to make the documents as difficult to 
comprehend as possible,” says Donoghue, who adds that it is “ridiculous” that 
the Goodsyard documents have more pages than the complete works of Shakespeare 
or the bible.

Donaghue has managed to run his campaign largely online, where more than 
10,800 people have signed his petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/local-councils-and-the-gla-reject-the-bishopsgate-goodsyard-development-proposals>
 against developers Hammerson and Ballymore. “Social media means the campaign 
can be run on an iPad. It costs my time, but means it’s possible to spread 
information for next to nothing,” he says.

Plans for £80m London mega-mansion rejected after six-year battle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jun/08/london-mega-mansion-80m-super-rich>
Local author v multibillionaire Kuwaiti family

Groups that oppose development are often tarred as nimbys – 
not-in-my-back-yards – but it’s a label with which Michael Hammerson takes 
issue. He successfully led the Highgate Society’s battle tohalt the demolition 
of the 1871 Athlone House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jun/08/london-mega-mansion-80m-super-rich>
, which overlooks Hampstead Heath, to make way for construction of a £80m 
mega-mansion for a Kuwaiti family that that campaigners said would blight views 
of the park. “Groups like ours do not oppose development per se,” says 
Hammerson, a local researcher and author. “We oppose bad development, and 
unfortunately we get too much of that.”

He says more developers now use the planning system as a “second throw of the 
dice” to overrule refusals made under local policies.

Many campaigns are run on a shoestring, and Hammerson says his was helped by 
the high proportion of expert witness submissions that were given pro bono, and 
the many days of preparatory work by the campaign’s barrister, David Altaras.

Sign up for your free Guardian Housing network 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/housing-network> newsletter with news and analysis 
sent direct to you every Friday. Follow us: @GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 