
The first thing that happens, you tell me, is that school stops.

We are meeting in a room in a London university so that you can tell me, in 
anodyne safe surroundings, a bit about your life so far; I say so far because 
you aren’t old, you are maybe 30.

We meet at the front door and follow the man who’s showing us to the room. We 
go through several doors and down then up some stairs. We go through a lot of 
corridors, then some more corridors, then down more stairs and along more 
identical corridors, then further down again and along a corridor with lagged 
pipes in the ceiling above our heads. We go through some swing doors, round 
some corners to some dead ends. We double back on ourselves. The man, who’s not 
sure where the room is, has to keep pressing codes into doors on our way in and 
then on our way back out again because we’ve come the wrong way or taken a 
wrong turning.

Eventually we find the room we’re being lent for the two hours. It’s a room 
with some tables pushed together and two or three chairs in it. There’s a 
window with a view on to bricks and the side of a building. You put your bags 
down one on each side of you and we sit down at the pushed-together tables.

You begin to speak. You speak as if picking your way over broken glass. You 
are graceful in the speaking. You are a small man, dainty even, and gentle. 
You’re so small that the two quite small rucksacks you’ve got with you seem 
large beside you.

The Journey: A refugee's odyssey from Syria to Sweden
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/jun/09/a-migrants-journey-from-syria-to-sweden-interactive>
Later, when we leave this room and go back up through the maze of university 
corridors, you and your rucksacks keep getting caught in the swing doors 
because you aren’t strong enough to hold them open; the door hinges are 
stronger than you.

Here’s what you tell me. It’s all in the present tense, I realise afterwards, 
because it is all still happening.

* * *

So: the first thing you remember knowing is that there isn’t any more school. 
Your mother dies when you are three, you don’t remember. You never see your 
father, so you can’t remember him. You know, from being told, that your 
father’s family fought with your mother’s family; his were Hausa, hers were 
Christian. So you get given by your father’s family to a man in the village and 
for a short while there’s school under the great big tree, where you sit in the 
shade on the ground and the teacher sits on a seat and you get taught letters 
and reading.

Then the school has to have money so the man you’ve been given to takes you to 
the farm.

You are six years old.

There is definitely no school on the farm.

There is cocoa, there are bananas and plantain, and the harvests run from 
January to December. The older kids, seven or eight and upwards, drag and carry 
the sacks. The younger ones, like you when you arrive, do the bagging and 
drying. Cocoa, you explain to me, has to be dried twice. You have to climb the 
tree, cut the pods, break the shell with the seeds inside then pour them into 
the baskets, then there’s the spreading them out to dry on the leaves or on the 
tables. The sacks of seeds are as big as you are. You drag these sacks back in 
the heat. The only clothes you’ve got are made from the sacks you drag, shorts 
sewn from sack. It’s hot there. Not like here. You look out the window at the 
bricks. Not like when it’s hot here either; there on the farm it’s the hottest 
that hot can mean.

The Guardian view on the Calais migrants: Europe’s shared challenge | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/24/the-guardian-view-on-the-calais-migrants-europes-shared-challenge>
You arrive at the farm when you’re six and you run away when you are 21. 
That’s not the first time you’ve run away. The first time you’re 15. Hunger. 
Beatings. Headaches. You have a headache, you have it quite often, and you have 
to have the right medicine or leaves for it or you hit the earth.

One day when you’re 15 and the boss isn’t there, you just go. You get out. 
There’s a road. You follow it. It isn’t a tarmacked road like here, you tell 
me. It’s kind of a dirt or dust, an earth road. Anyway the boss catches you on 
that earth road. There are beatings for a week, and every day between the 
beatings you’re out to work again carrying the firewood on your head, sometimes 
five miles, sometimes eight, and at the end of the day the boss coming in to 
the room with the sleeping mats in it saying how you’re not making him enough 
money and beating you again.

There’re always beatings.

A man sometimes comes to the farm, he’s in the removing business, he comes to 
remove the stored beans. He sees the wounds on you when you are 20, 21. He says 
to you on the quiet, beaten again? You need to get out of here, he says, or 
you’ll die.

You think about the boy called Nana, who was beaten so much that he hit the 
ground. He didn’t wake up. He didn’t respond. He just lay there. You went to 
work, you came back, he wasn’t in the house any more. Some days later you were 
told he was dead and that’s when they started to lock you all up at night.

You put your head in your hands, here in the nondescript university room, all 
the years later, in London.

A very difficult time, you say. A very very difficult time.

I’ve been working here for a long time and I know what I’m talking about, the 
man says. You’ve got to get out of here.

He says he is going to help you out.

I watch you remember, now, without knowing it’s what you’re doing, the wounds 
you had then. Your left hand goes to your right forearm, then to your right 
leg. I notice there’s a scar on your forehead, too, the size of a walnut shell, 
like someone’s at some point scooped a handful-sized piece out of you.

The man tells you to go when everyone else is busy eating to the latrine, and 
when no one can see to go through the hedges at a certain place. He tells you 
where the footpath is. He tells you to follow the footpath all the way.

It’s eight hours to the village. It’s a day when the boss and his wife aren’t 
at the farm. You go to the latrine, you push through the hedges. You find that 
path. You walk till it’s dark. You meet nobody. You walk till you get to a 
village. A woman is cooking under a shade. She sees you. She asks you where you 
are going. You tell her the man’s name and she takes you to a house.

You sit in this house and you hope you won’t be killed.

You wait there for four hours. The man comes. He says that because they’re 
already looking for you he has to move you tonight.

You walk almost the whole night to get to a town. You are there in a room for 
a week. Then the man comes back and another man with him. The other man takes 
your photograph. We are going to take you somewhere, he says, where you are 
going to be safe. This is where the white people are, do you want to go there?

You are in the town where the lorry station is for a month until the man comes 
back with a car. He tells you not to worry. He tells you this all the way 
through the local villages, all the way to the proper road. You never see that 
brown earth road again. From now on, instead, you see a lot of lights. Then 
there’s no lights, then lights again. Then you’re standing at the counter in 
the airport at the man’s side and there’s a girl, and another boy, and the man.


Say nothing, he says. If they ask you who I am to you, say I am your uncle.

When you get to the other airport, though, it isn’t London. You don’t find out 
for quite some time. It’s just a shut room that you’re in, and a warehouse. 
Much later you get to know that it’s called Luton. The shut room is all 
mattresses on the floor and there are six others and you in the room. There are 
girls in the room above, men in the room below. That night they give you all 
chicken and chips and tell you the work will start early so you’d better be 
ready.

A van comes at four am. Someone opens the front door. The back of the van, 
with its door open, is right up against the front door. You and the others get 
in one by one. The van door closes. It’s dark in the van. You get to the 
warehouse. You hear the warehouse door go up. The van goes in. The warehouse 
door comes down again.

Costa novel award 2014: How to Be Both by Ali Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/06/costa-novel-award-2014-how-to-be-both-ali-smith>
Room, van, warehouse. Warehouse, van, room. Four in the morning. Nine at 
night. Packing shoes. Ladies bags. Sorting dresses. Cleaning microwaves. They 
give you a cloth for this. Cleaning TVs. Cleaning fridges. They give you a roll 
of white rubber to wrap the electric things. They give you a winter jacket, one 
jeans and a towel. They give you two shoes. They tell you it’s cost them a 
great deal of money to bring you here. They say you’ll be working till you’ve 
paid it all back. There aren’t beatings but there’s shouting. There is a lot of 
shouting.

Room, van, warehouse. Warehouse, van, room. Five years. Most weeks all week, 
eighteen hours a day. You sit in silence, now, with me. You hold your head in 
your hands.

You meet a guy, you tell me. He’s the driver. He takes a liking to you. He 
says he can get you out of there and find you a cleaning job in London. You 
trust him.

You say the word trust and it is as if your whole body fills with pain. You 
sit silent again for a moment.

Then London. One place to the next, one place to the next. But you go to a 
church. You make some friends at the church. You tell them about your life. 
They tell you there are things that can be done to make this better. You can 
write to the Home Office, they tell you, and explain to them what’s happened to 
you, and the Home Office will help you sort this out.

You do it. You write to the Home Office.

They come. They arrest you.

They put you in prison for six months because the passport you’ve got is the 
wrong kind.

They tell you to write to the Home Office and they will help you. You write. 
They come. They arrest you

First it’s prison, then detention. That takes two years. Then they release you 
for six months. Then they arrest you again. Back to detention, another six 
months. Then they release you. Any moment now they can arrest you again. They 
say we have accepted you are a victim of human trafficking. But to go back to 
Ghana? You have nobody there to go to. Indefinite leave to remain. That means 
they’ll arrest you again. They can, any time. We accept you are a victim of 
human trafficking. But we need to reconsider the case.

Most of all, you tell me, you want to go to school. Right now you are in a 
house belonging to a man from your church, and the man who has the house lets 
you live there. You do cleaning, do errands, you help look after the baby. It 
is kind of him to let you stay. There isn’t any money. You sleep in the lounge 
when they’ve gone to bed. There is a chair you can sit in. You just stay at the 
house, that’s what you do all day, except for the days you have to report. 
There isn’t any money for rail or bus tickets. This is sometimes a problem. 
Central London to East Croydon is a long walk.

You want most to go to college, you tell me in that university, in the room 
borrowed for two hours. But colleges need ID. The piece of ID you have, the 
colleges tell you, isn’t enough for colleges.

You don’t tell me about what detention is like until we walk back up to street 
level through the interminable swing-doored corridors, up staircases that lead 
to other corridors.

You stop in the middle of a corridor. You look at me and you say: you would 
ask God not to send your enemies to detention, where fellow human beings treat 
you not like human beings.

And being out of detention, and knowing they can put you back in detention? It 
is all like still being in detention. Detention is never not there.

You have seen things, you tell me, with your own naked eyes. The room there in 
detention has a window, sure. But a window without any air. The only place air 
comes in is the gap under the door. And the door in detention is an iron door, 
and when they come to lock it they bang it. They do it on purpose, to make the 
great noise that it makes. And there’s no privacy in detention. There’s no 
religious privacy. This is a terrible thing, you say. And there’s no medication 
guaranteed in detention. Not even for epilepsy, your headaches. Prison is 
better. At least in prison there is something to do. But not at the removal 
centre. They call it the removal centre, you know?

You raise your eyebrows at me.

Removal, you say. When you arrive they remove you from a life. Then they 
remove your phone from you. They make sure it isn’t the kind with cameras. They 
take it away for several days, and they put it “through security”.

But still, I’m thinking to myself as you speak. It can’t be that bad. It can’t 
be as bad as prison. And surely there’s a reason to take a phone away to check 
it. It’s for security, isn’t it? It doesn’t sound so bad. It doesn’t sound so 
rough, not really, and there’s a window. Albeit a window that doesn’t open. A 
window, all the same.

I am an idiot. But I’m learning. A mere hour or two with you in a university 
room and I’m about to find out that what I’ve been taught is something 
world-sized.

 * * *

Later this same day I will go and visit, for another couple of hours, what it 
is to be a detainee, in this day and age, in our country. No, not even that: 
what I’ll go and visit is only what it’s like to visit a detainee.

I’ll take the train to the removal centre you told me about, the very place 
that you’ve been detained then detained again, then any minute now might be 
detained again.

It’s a place so close to a runway that the sound of the planes taking off and 
landing is its only birdsong. There’s a jolly painted sign above the visitor 
centre reception desk. PROPERTY CHECK-IN, it says with a big painted tick, for 
correct, next to it. It’s the first thing I see. Is it a joke? Is it supposed 
to put people at ease? It’s an obscene irony, and, as I’ll find, maybe the most 
human thing in the process it takes to visit someone here. There are creatures 
painted, too, on the back wall of this check-in building, and some toys on the 
floor beneath them for visiting kids. The painted creatures are meant to be 
Disney jungle creatures but one looks anguished, as if in pain, and one has 
huge ferocious teeth.

Everywhere else there are bright information posters proclaiming in words and 
symbols how people of all origins, ethnicities, religions and sexual 
orientations will be treated equally here.

I will have to fill in two forms. I will get given a bright red wristband. 
VISITOR, it says on it. (Anna, my companion for the afternoon, is a regular 
visitor of the detainees held in the centre, and will warn me with some urgency 
not to lose this wristband.) I will have to empty my pockets into a locker, all 
the pennies and the five pence pieces, all the bits of tissue, crushed 
receipts, even the little balls of fluff in the linings of the pockets. I will 
lock the locker door on my own ID, on everything that proves I’m me, and will 
get given a number instead and a lanyard. Visitor Lanyard 336.

I throw away lanyards from literature festivals without thinking. This one 
will render all others nothing but a frippery

I quite often get given lanyards in my job. At literature festivals they’re 
used as passes into all the events or the hospitality and the green rooms. I 
throw away several lanyards a year without thinking. This one, the one I’ll be 
given this afternoon, will render every other lanyard I’ve ever been given and 
ever will be given from now on nothing but a frippery. The little plastic 
wallet it’s in will be bent as if it’s been twisted over and over in someone’s 
hands, chewed by a hundred nervous people or their children – a beaten-up 
lanyard, a lanyard with a history.

I will have to go through a guarded door and then through an airport scanner – 
no, something much more downmarket, scale down your vision, more like a body 
scanner would have been if this was back when I was in my 20s, 30 years ago, 
and was ill and was claiming invalidity benefit at the DSS and part of that 
process of signing on had ever involved being body scanned. Before this, a man 
will write down my number. He will check that I’m me from a photograph that’s 
already been taken, a minute ago, front of house, by a security camera. After 
it, a woman will come out of his glass-barrier office. She will make me take my 
boots off. She will thump them, shake them upside down. She will go through all 
the pockets of the coat she’s made me take off with more thoroughness than I’ve 
ever had at any airport. She will find a pencil sharpener and a spare coat 
button in a little button envelope in my inside pocket. She will hold them both 
up.

Were you going to use this sharpener to sharpen a pencil and write on this 
envelope? she will say. No, I’ll say. I didn’t even know that envelope was in 
there.

As I say it I will feel guilty, though I’m telling nothing but the truth.

She will put the things on a table by the scanner machine.

They may or may not be there when you come out, she’ll say. We take no 
responsibility for what’s left here.

Then, after she’s searched me from head to feet, the woman will unlock a door 
and we’ll go into a waiting space and the woman will open another locked door 
on the other side of the room which will open into a yard with a razor-wire 
fence so high and encircling such a tiny yard space that it would pass as a 
literal example of surreality.

Then she’ll unlock another door and we’ll pass into the Visitor Centre H-Block.

There will be placards everywhere. Inside the H-Block the placards will all be 
inspirational messages about how good the teamwork and the care are here.

Up some stairs there’ll be another security check. Altogether there are four 
security checks, before you can visit someone here. Then a man will unlock a 
door into a big square room, somehow both bright and dim, with blue carpet 
tiles, blue chairs. We will be shown to a seat. The form we will have signed 
says we have to take the seat we are shown to, and no other seat. We will do as 
we’re told. Someone will unlock a different door behind us. The man we’ve come 
to visit will be shown through this different door.

No, not a man, something closer to a boy – a sweet tired boy, not much past 
adolescence. He is Vietnamese. He will find his painstaking way in English for 
just over an hour, telling me he is embarrassed not to be better at speaking 
it. I will tell him not to worry, that my Vietnamese isn’t up to much. He will 
laugh at this. The laugh, like a clear little torch-beam, will light up the 
true and profound state of this young man’s dejection. Anna will tell me later 
he spoke no English when he arrived here, and the epic nature of the story he 
tells me in hard-won broken phrases, of the one and a half months hidden in the 
back of a lorry it took to get him here, will be pretty clear even though all 
the time I’m trying to listen to him all I’ll be able to hear are the guards of 
this place, three or sometimes four of them, rattling their keys and their 
keychains incessantly up and down the length of the room, though there’ll be no 
one here to guard but us and one other family on the cheap blue seats.

Airless, the room, and its windows barred and Perspexed – and suddenly I’ll 
understand what you were telling me this morning, about how a window, when no 
air can come through it, isn’t the same thing as a window. You didn’t even 
mention the bars.

I will ask the boy I’m talking to if the windows in this room are the same as 
the window in his room. Yes, he’ll say. Do they have those bars on them? I’ll 
say. He will nod gently. I will ask him what the food is like here. The guards, 
male and female alike, will walk up and down, shaking their keys. It’s okay, 
he’ll say.

Baileys prize winner Ali Smith: ‘We’ve always been up against the canon and 
the canon is traditionally male. That is what this book is about’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/05/baileys-prize-winner-ali-smith-interview>
He’ll have his dictionary in his hand, a Pocket Vietnamese-English paperback. 
Its spine will be several times broken. The guards will jaunt up and down the 
room joking with each other over and above our conversation and the whole time 
I’m there I will feel the paper edge of my VISITOR band round my wrist rough 
under my sleeve – I say paper, but I suppose I mean plasticised paper, because 
later when I try and rip it off I can’t, it won’t tear, and I’ll have to remove 
it with scissors – I will feel it keenly, the whole time, the reminder that I 
can leave. I will long to leave. Meanwhile the young man will be looking 
overjoyed at the slip of paper Anna has given him, which means he can receive a 
little blank notebook she’s brought for him, though he won’t see it for several 
days because it’s got to go “through security”, though already we will have 
spent quite a long time, when we arrived in “check-in”, filling in forms about 
the notebook and having the notebook weighed and processed. He will say, 
several times, how delighted and grateful he is to have had visitors. Two 
visitors! Anna came! And another person! Like he can’t quite believe his luck. 
Again this moment of brightness will mean I catch the real low ebb of his 
spirit.

He will tell us in broken English that his mother, at home, is ill right now, 
how she doesn’t have a phone, and how someone from home has phoned him and told 
him. He will tell us he told his friend to tell her how he is fed and has a bed 
to sleep in. He doesn’t want her to worry, he will say. He will rub his 
forehead with his thumb between his eyes above his nose, trying to get to the 
right words. He will struggle, again, for polite enough good enough words of 
apology about his English not being better.

Then it’s back to the H-Block reception and back through the barbed wire 
coiled yard. The man unlocking the doors will small-talk Anna and me about the 
weather. It’ll be a grey, grey English day, the day I go to the detention 
centre.My pencil sharpener and button will still be on the table and as we go 
out Anna will tell me she is surprised I managed to get through and keep both 
my pairs of glasses since a couple of weeks before she’d been disallowed a pair 
of clip-on shades she sometimes wears over hers and they’d sent her back to 
“check-in”, made her check in all over again.

We’ll go out to the car park in the regular noise of the planes, another 
taking off, another one landing, as we drive along the barbed wire airport 
fences through the new no man’s land.

After I get home, because I’ll finally have sensed the real depth of 
depression in the young man I’ve just met, I’ll do a bit of digging around in 
what information there is, to see if there’s such a thing as therapeutic help 
for people in detention.

There isn’t.

Even if you’re traumatised? Even if, when you arrive there, you’ve seen 
deaths, been tortured? It isn’t provided. Even if you’ve got a mental illness? 
Like schizophrenia? Surely the place is full of people with post traumatic 
stress disorder? Since nobody leaves home for no reason. Nobody crosses the 
world crushed in a crate in a lorry, drinking his own urine for one-and-half 
months, nobody gets flung on a plane from one trafficking destination to 
another, without terrible mental consequence.

For terrible mental consequence what there is isolation, where the light is on 
24 hours a day, where there’s no sheet on the bed and nothing else in the room, 
and where security check on you every 15 minutes.

When I find this out, I’ll think of you and the epilepsy, and the beatings, 
and something you said in passing about how difficult, in detention, it is to 
get the simplest medication.

Anyway, I’ll be out of there, and on my own safe way home. Anna will drive me 
to the station. When we get there, she’ll lean over, open the door for me and 
thank me for making the journey today.

Me? I’ll say. Making a journey? Today?

I’ll think of the young man in the lorry. I’ll think of you on all your roads, 
the road between the gone school and the farm, the first dirt road the time the 
boss caught you, the ground coming up to meet you when you fell with the 
headaches, the footpath to the village, the brown earth road you didn’t see 
again when the road to the airport took you to another country.

I’ll think of me asking you if you ever had visitors in your own time at the 
removal centre, and of how your face softens when I do for the only time in our 
talk.

Yes, you say. Mary.

Then you don’t say anything else.

* * *

This morning, in the university room, just before we attempt to find our way 
again around that building, I ask you if you’ll mind showing me the piece of 
paper that they give you as the proof of who you are – the proof that’s not 
enough, when it comes to ID, for colleges.

I watch you go through your bags. I realise, by the length of time it takes 
you to find it, that it is a very painful thing I’ve asked you to do. The 
longer it takes, the more terrible I feel for having asked you to find it and 
show me.

What kind of a life are we living when a piece of paper can mean and say more 
about your life than your life does?

But there it is at last. You unfold it there between us. It’s an A4 piece of 
paper, a photocopy whose ink is creased and flaking, beginning to disintegrate 
in the folds.

I pick it up. I hold it in my hand.

What kind of a life are we living on this earth when a photocopied piece of 
paper can mean and say more about your life than your life does?

On the train home this evening, I’ll think of the moment you say to me, as 
we’re saying goodbye: people don’t know about what it’s like to be a detainee. 
They think it’s like what the government tells them. They don’t know. You have 
to tell them.

On that train home, and all these weeks and months later, I’ll still be 
thinking of the only flash of anger in the whole of your telling me a little of 
what’s happened to you in this life so far.

It was a moment of anger only. It surfaced and disappeared in less than a 
breath. Except for this one moment you’re calm, accepting, even forgiving – but 
for these six syllables, six words, that carry the weight of a planet, weight 
of the earth – yes, earth, like those roads there under all our feet, whatever 
surfaces we cover them with, under all our journeys, the roads you walked 
between one place and another in the mix of fear and hope and the dark falling.

But when I came to this place, when I came to your country, you say.

I sit forward. I’m listening.

You shake your head.

I thought you would help me, you say.
 