
Thank you for highlighting the plight of regional art galleries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/23/art-galleries-closure-perfect-storm-stupidity-walsall-edinburgh>
 (News), in particular the possibleclosure of Walsall’s New Art Gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/24/walsall-council-seeks-residents-views-library-closures-new-art-gallery>
, which houses the world-class Garman-Ryan collection.

A 60% cut in its budget since 2010 means that Walsall council faces the 
prospect of being unable to fund not only the gallery but our leather museum, 
arts centre and all branch libraries across the borough, together with service 
cuts right across the board. Like countless other local authorities, we are 
desperately seeking to square the financial circle so as to prevent a total 
breakdown in services.

Twenty years ago, as then mayor of Walsall, I was delighted to receive a 
£16.5m cheque from the national lottery. That, at long last, enabled the 
construction of a fitting home for the collection bequeathed to us by Jacob 
Epstein’s widow, Kathleen Garman, and I hope against hope that the gallery can 
be saved. But how?

You quote artist Patrick Brill as saying of the threat of closure: “It’s just 
nuts. It’s a perfect storm of stupidity and a lack of balls.”

Words easily said, but were it simply “a lack of balls” on the part of 
councillors, I would rapidly don an extra pair, if in so doing I could save the 
gallery. This is desperation, not stupidity, Mr Brill: perhaps you’d like to 
give the soundbites a rest and put a shift in instead? Please give us the 
benefit of your wisdom and work with us to help save our gallery.

The harsh reality, which many voted for at the last general election, was the 
continuation of “austerity”, so that taxpayers’ money (our money!) previously 
returned to local authorities to provide adequate local services and facilities 
continues to be massively withheld by the government, so that we all end up 
paying more for much less service and sometimes none at all.

The moral is this: you get what you vote for.
Councillor Richard Worrall
Walsall

While one can expect politicians and polemicists to keep rerunning the 
arguments of the referendum campaign, rather than deal with the realities we 
now face, it’s a pity to see analysts and commentators doing the same.

I’ve long admired and respected William Keegan’s ability to analyse and 
present economic issues in an accessible way, but now he seems tobe falling 
into the same trap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/30/theresa-may-brexit-parliamentary-vote>
 (“Brexit is a case our conflicted PM shouldn’t have taken on”, Business). He 
may wish, quite reasonably, that the referendum result had gone the other way, 
or that it had never been held, but to write that “we know that 6% of those who 
voted leave now regret their decision”, and thereby imply that the result could 
be ignored, is disingenuous.

I can’t believe that Mr Keegan doesn’t know enough behavioural economics to be 
unaware of “buyer’s remorse” or, in this case, “winner’s regret”. I would have 
been amazed if there hadn’t been some reported regret, whatever the outcome. 
And, of course, strictly, we don’t “know” this at all – only that the “6%” was 
the result of aBritish Election Study panel survey 
<http://www.britishelectionstudy.com/bes-resources/brexit-britain-british-election-study-insights-from-the-post-eu-referendum-wave-of-the-bes-internet-panel/#.WByKiDaLSrM>
, which, commenting on the figure, states “the level of regret is consistent 
with what we saw at the general election”.

Given where we are now, one shudders to think what the social and political 
consequences would be if Mrs May were to adopt Mr Keegan’s apparent advice and 
ignore the referendum result. His time would be better spent looking at the 
real options now available, rather than some steampunk version of what might 
have been.
John Old
Nuneaton
 