
The incomparable Andrew Breitbart is gone, at the age of 43 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/01/andrew-breitbart-dies-at-43> – 
killed, in part, by his intense love of liberty, his non-stop concern for 
America – leaving behind a wonderful wife and four children. Andrew could have 
been just another comfortable Brentwood professional, anonymous in a shallow, 
liberal-minded materialism.

Adopted and raised in relative opulence in west Los Angeles, Andrew graduated 
from Tulane University in 1991 with a degree in American studies, which he said 
wasn't very American, nor involved much in the way of studies. He learned the 
foundations of moral relativism and was steeped in cultural Marxism, 
graduating, as he said, "with few skills and less motivation to work" than he 
had when he finished high school.

Degree in hand, Andrew returned to California only to have his 
conservative-minded father cut him off for his aimlessness. He found himself 
waiting tables, serving his rapidly advancing school friends. Half a year after 
Andrew's graduation,Clarence Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/clarence-thomas>, nominated to the US 
supreme court, faced a difficult series of confirmation hearings on Capitol 
Hill. Andrew, ever the angry liberal then, looked forward to seeing Thomas get 
"taken down". Instead, he saw a series of white elite senators – Teddy Kennedy, 
Howard Metzenbaum and Joe Biden – fail to deliver the goods against Thomas.

Equipped in college with a highly-honed sense of political correctness, Andrew 
engaged the leftist deconstruction he'd learned – to come to a troubling 
conclusion about the nature of the American left. A year later, he saw the same 
privileged elite who'd pilloried Justice Thomas anoint Bill Clinton president 
and realized something was horribly wrong.

In the space of 18 months, Andrew was jolted off his liberal slacker path, 
becoming deeply skeptical of the "Democrat-media complex", which he described 
as the "the natural way in which the Democrat[ic] party, the liberal interest 
groups, the mainstream media and Hollywood coalesce to represent 'The Man'".

It was this understanding of the nature of American modern media that made 
Andrew Breitbart <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrew-breitbart> himself 
the indispensable man. Naturally full of energy, brilliant and always 
multitasking, he found the internet's rapid emergence in the 1990s perfectly 
timed for his talents, as he played a role in the rise of both the Drudge 
Report and the Huffington Post. He went on to create his own online 
conservative media family with Breitbart.com, Breitbart.tv, BigHollywood.com, 
BigGovernment.com, BigJournalism.com and BigPeace.com.

In 2009, as Andrew was rising to prominence, I strongly urged him to set some 
time aside to study America's founding principles through the Claremont 
Institute's Lincoln fellowship program. Initially, he was reluctant to take 
eight days out to study and reflect on the philosophy that undergirds America's 
ideals, but he agreed and dove in. As fate would have it, the fellowship 
coincided with the explosion of the undercover James O'Keefe-Hanna Giles Acorn 
videos that resulted in the union group's federal defunding.

Because he understood the American left and their methods so thoroughly, 
Andrew Breitbart was our time's most important conservative never to hold 
office.

His drive, his creativity, and his wry self-confidence – in the face of the 
endless attacks on his character – stand as an example to all who would 
challenge America's dominant cultural elite.
 