
The path is well-trodden: from a tough housing estate in a western city, 
through a scruffy, colourful, traffic-choked capital 3,500 miles away, on to 
one of the country’s religious schools, and eventually into a violent extremist 
organisation.

The journey has been made by thousands of young western Muslim men over the 
two decades or more that contemporary Islamic militancy has posed a deadly 
international threat. Many are converts, including some of the most wanted 
militants today. Some are followers, rather than leaders. Some are already 
committed to an extremist agenda, even if they have yet to act. Many return 
with a dogmatic, sometimes hate-filled, world view, but remain non-violent. 
Others return with the skills and contacts necessary to implement their, or 
their new leaders’, ambitions to kill and maim.

This weekend at least one new name, probably two, have been added to the list: 
Chérif and Saïd Kouachi, the brothers who killed 12 people in the Paris offices 
of satirical magazineCharlie Hebdo last week. Details of the Kouachis’ travels 
are still unclear but it appears both spent time inYemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> over the past five years.

Speaking to French TV channel BFM on Friday afternoon, as police commandoes 
prepared for the final assault, Chérif, 32, said he had travelled to Yemen in 
2011. His expenses were paid by the American-Yemeni extremist preacherAnwar 
al-Awlaki <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-al-awlaki>, who was 
influential within al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula (Aqap) and one of the most 
popular radical propagandists in the world. “It was a while ago, before 
al-Awlaki was killed,” he told BFM. Al-Awlaki died in a suspected US drone 
strike in September 2011.

Saïd, 34, had also travelled to Yemen, attending the Iman University, which is 
headed by fundamentalist preacher Abdel Majeed al-Zindani, whose name figures 
on a US terror blacklist, according to a former Yemeni classmate interviewed by 
AFP. The classmate said he had lost track of Saïd between 2010 and 2013, when 
local rebel Houthi militiamen, who are from the Shia minority strand of Islam, 
overran a religious school in the small town of Dammaj, to the north of the 
capital Sa’ana, run by conservatives from the Sunni majority. The school, well- 
known in jihadi circles and to security agencies, was a destination for 
hundreds of foreigners, former students have said.

John Walker Lindh, the “American Taliban” captured in Afghanistan in December 
2001, may have spent time there during his radicalisation.Morten Storm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/02/agent-storm-al-qaeda-morten-storm-review>
, a Danish convert deeply involved in Aqap before becoming a spy for western 
intelligence services, described finding 300 young men “with the ardent 
expression of those who had found righteousness” when he studied at the school. 
In 2008 French intelligence told theObserver the school was a favourite 
destination for 200 or 300 young hardline Muslims from France who travelled for 
religious instruction each year.Two men from west London were killed 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/terrorism-in-the-uk/9356915/British-Muslims-killed-fighting-in-Dammaj-Yemen.html>
 fighting in sectarian clashes close to the school in 2012.

US officials believe Chérif, a former pizza deliverer, also received training 
in small arms and basic tactics from Aqap at this time. But the brothers differ 
from men such as Lindh or Storm in that they had previous deep links with 
extremists. Chérif was jailed for his role in a network funnelling volunteer 
fighters to Iraq between 2003 and 2005, and both brothers were investigated for 
another plot in 2010, around the time they were travelling to the Yemen.

Aqap, formed from the merger of groups in Yemen and neighbouring Saudi Arabia, 
is the al-Qaida affiliate with the most established track record of efforts to 
strike the west, though so far these have targeted aeroplanes. The group’s most 
senior bomb-maker is one of the most wanted militants active today.

Chérif told BFM he had been sent back to France by Aqap to execute attacks, 
and the organisation on Friday claimed responsibility for “directing 
operations” against a target “chosen carefully as revenge for the honour of the 
prophet”.

However the degree to which the Yemen-based group might have controlled the 
brothers on their return is unclear. Amedy Coulibaly, suspect in the Parish 
Jewish supermarket siege, told BFM in a separate interview on Friday afternoon 
that he had coordinated with the Kouachis only “at the beginning”, and said he 
had been sent by Islamic State, the militant organisation which has seized 
tracts of Syria and Iraq and is now the focus of a multinational US-led 
military campaign.

The Paris attack was far less ambitious than the mass-casualty bombings that 
were once al-Qaida’s hallmark and are known still to be its aim. But the 
emerging links to Yemen indicate the continuing threat posed by a combination 
that is unique to the past decade. There are the lawless zones of conflict in 
the Islamic world where extremist groups committed to violence against the west 
and against other Muslims have survived, as in Yemen, and thrived, as in Syria. 
There are the marginalised second- or third-generation youth in European 
countries at a time of social and economic stress who have access, via the 
internet, to extremist propaganda and to extremists themselves. There is cheap 
air travel. And, finally, there is a violent extremist ideology which has 
proved tenacious and deeply rooted.
 