


1. Wilton House, Wiltshire <http://www.wiltonhouse.com>

The elderly Inigo Jones, the first architect to bring Italianate Renaissance 
architecture to Britain, is reckoned to have had a hand in this country house, 
particularly the dignified south facade, with its central Venetian window and 
pedimented corner towers (a trick Jones had borrowed from the Venetian 
architect Andrea Palladio, and others borrowed from Jones). Behind that central 
window is a grand state room of solid Renaissance proportions – it is called 
the double cube room – but dripping with proto-baroque ornament, all gold leaf, 
carved foliage, painted ceilings and Van Dyck portraits. The window 
is off-centre, which Jones would surely never have allowed.



2. Hampton Court Palace, Surrey <http://www.hrp.org.uk/hamptoncourtpalace>

Before Henry VIII altered and expanded it to match his girth, the original 
Hampton Court marked the first shift away from the gothic and towards the 
fashionable Renaissance style – even if no one in Italy would have recognised 
it as such.

Cardinal Wolsey imported Italian sculptors to add some Florentine flourishes 
to the original palace, and probably laid out the sprawling complex according 
to genuine Renaissance principles of geometry and symmetry.

0844-482 7777



3. Banqueting House, Whitehall, London <http://www.hrp.org.uk/banquetinghouse>

With Inigo Jones, Britain at last at last gets to grips more than a century 
late with the principles of Italian Renaissance architecture, rather than just 
copying the decoration.

This is the first properly classical building in England, and its rigorously 
ordered facades must have made the sprawling Tudor palace of Whitehall around 
it (which burned down in 1698) look like a botch-job. Those once-radical 
patterns of pedimented windows divided by columns and pilasters are still 
synonymous with sophistication today – testimony to the building's influence. 
The interior is less restrained, with the Rubens ceilings the climax.

0203-166 6154/5



4. Blickling Hall, Norfolk <http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/blickling>

The telltale signs of the Jacobean (1603-1625) can be seen creeping in here: 
the curvy Dutch gables suggest the new Flemish influence, and the facades are 
generally busier than in Elizabethan (1558-1603) times, mixing brick and stone 
and incorporating classical elements such as Doric columns. It's no less fancy 
inside, with an ornately carved wooden staircase and plasterwork ceilings. 
Designed by Robert Lyminge, this was the home of the Boleyn family – Anne's 
headless ghost supposedly still haunts it.

01263 738030



5. Queen's House, Greenwich, London <http://www.nmm.ac.uk>

Jones transplants an Italian villa to Greenwich, and plants the seed of 
Palladianism in the process. This plain, regular, white-painted block, indebted 
to, but not directly imitating Palladio, must have looked terribly 
unfashionable in frilly Jacobean times. Instead, its prestige was expressed in 
proportion and restraint – new benchmarks of taste for Britain. The exterior 
relates to the interior, for example – something of a novelty in British 
architecture up to this point – and the rooms are classically pure: the 
fabulous double-height central hall is a 12m cube.

020-8858 4422



6. Burghley House, Lincolnshire <http://www.burghley.co.uk>

This lavish affair is proof of both Elizabethan England's more international 
outlook and its growing number of architectural dilettantes. Lord Burghley, 
Queen Elizabeth's well-read chief adviser, doubtless had a personal hand in the 
design, which nonchalantly mixes a host of styles. The tower in the centre of 
the courtyard, for example, looks like a French triumphal arch, but with a very 
English bay window stuck on to it, all capped by a Flemish-looking obelisk and 
adorned with the three main classical orders on different storeys. A monument 
to Burghley's knowledge, if not his restraint.

01780 752451



7. St Paul's church, Covent Garden, London <http://www.actorschurch.org>

Originally the centrepiece of the fourth Earl of Bedford's ambitious property 
development – hence its cost-cutting modesty. "I would have it not much better 
than a barn," Bedford told Inigo Jones, who modelled it on the no-nonsense 
Tuscan order. Jones planned the whole area along Italian lines, in fact, with a 
large, public piazza in front of the church, lined on two sides by arcaded 
houses. Today only the church remains.

020-7836 5221



8. Little Moreton Hall, Cheshire
 <http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/littlemoretonhall>

The classic, half-timbered style that launched a thousand 20th-century 
"Tudorbethan" eyesores rarely reached Moreton's levels of artistry back in the 
day, but this fairy-tale edifice testifies to the continuous prosperity and 
experimentation of the era. Construction of the moated manor house was begun in 
1450, to a familiar medieval technique – an oak timber frame resting on stone 
footings, filled in with wattle and daub.

But that technique was tested to its limits by extensions and additions over 
the entire Renaissance period, to the extent that the weight of the upper 
storey and roof caused the lower floors to sag. The gradual growth also 
explains the irregular plan and clashing patterns of the framework, and the 
Renaissance touches that appear here and there, in the carvings and the 
fireplaces.

01260 272018




9. Hardwick Hall, Derbyshire 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/main/w-hardwickhall>

"Hardwick Hall, more glass than wall", as the saying used to go, and for a 
nation more used to wattle-and-daub huts, the huge windows of Hardwick must 
have seemed like an exotic fantasy.

The Italian influence is most obvious in the classical-looking loggia – a 
roofed, open gallery – over the front entrance. But mason, surveyor and 
"architector" Robert Smythson's complicated layout includes a central, 
two-storey great hall at its heart and separate floors for public and private 
uses. The "ES" initials of Smythson's powerful patron, Bess of Hardwick, are 
set into the stonework of the towers like a precursory corporate logo.

01246 850430




10. Bolsover Castle, Derbyshire <http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/daysout>

Owner Charles Cavendish was clearly not to be outdone by his mum, Bess of 
Hardwick (see Hardwick Hall). This unashamedly romantic edifice began the 
British tradition of "sham" castles, built for picturesque rather than 
defensive purposes, and over the top inside and out. Cavendish even employed 
John Smythson, son of his mother's architect Robert.

You'll need a black belt in jargon to describe some of these features – is 
that a mix of banded and vermiculated rustication on those corbelled columnar 
shafts?

01246 856456

Architect of the age: Inigo Jones

Nine years younger than Shakespeare, Jones is often described as the first 
English classical architect. The reality is slightly more complicated, 
as Elizabethan architects before him were influenced by classical architecture. 
But there is no doubt that Jones was decisively different. He went to Italy and 
studied the work of Andrea Palladio at first hand, and his detail and 
proportion followed classical precedents far more closely than any that had 
gone before. His surviving works are relatively few. He designed the Queen's 
House in Greenwich, straddling the muddy road where Sir Walter Raleigh did his 
thing with the cloak. He laid out Covent Garden Piazza, the first formal square 
of its kind in Britain, and designed the church of St Paul there, the "finest 
barn in Europe" with its sturdy Tuscan portico. He created the Banqueting House 
in Whitehall, as a celebration of the Stuart monarchy, from whose balcony 
Charles I would exit to his execution.

Jones also designed stage sets for masques and plays, by Ben Jonson among 
others, many staged at Banqueting House. As it was for many Italian architects, 
this was an essential part of his work. Without them his surviving oeuvre, 
while elegant and strong, is less lively than he intended.
 