
While Southern Europe is unlikely ever to lose its holiday appeal, a 
sophisticated crowd are increasingly heading north, attracted by good design, 
jaw-dropping scenery, a friendly atmosphere and a distinctly positive attitude 
to partying.

Reykjavik has won a well-deserved reputation for its funky bars, clubs and 
other-worldly feel. Yet it is only one of a number of cities booming with 
new-found confidence. There, exuberant, well- educated and youthful populations 
enjoy life amid excellent design and architecture and, during the summer, 
almost endless sunny days. Here is our list of the five brightest northern 
stars.

St Petersburg

 After the 1917 revolution, Peter the Great's baroque capital was relegated to 
a provincial city, but with the collapse of the Soviet Union, it began to claw 
back its status and now easily rivals Moscow in terms of cultural appeal. 
There's a great summer performing arts festival - the Harms Festival - as well 
as Russia's wildest and most innovative live music/club scene.

 What to see:  The Hermitage, housed in the sumptuous Winter Palace, is one of 
the world's great art collections and must not be missed. You should also take 
a boat cruise down the Neva.

 Where to eat:  The popular Durak - the Idiot - provides authentic gloomy 
19th- century Russian decor that conjures up Dostoevsky's time and serves 
excellent borscht, rustic rye bread and chilled vodka. Kavkaz offers Georgian 
cuisine.

 Nightlife:  Many of the more interesting nightspots spring up and then close 
rapidly. Look in Friday's English- language St Petersburg Times for up-to-date 
listings. Long-standing favourites include Griboedov, housed in a bomb shelter 
and one of the coolest places around, and Manhattan for smooth, intellectual 
jazz.

 Where to stay:  In order to get a visa, you must have a hotel booking. 
All-inclusive package deals offer the best value - try Russia House on 020-7407 
3558. Otherwise try the luxurious Hotel Astoria (+7 312 2105757) in the city 
centre. £150+.

Helsinki

 In summer, the city is a joyful mix of parks, open-air bars/ cafés, public 
art, great architecture and almost endless sunshine. And, at any time of year, 
you'll be greeted by one of the hardest drinking and partying cities in Europe,.

The Russian influence still looms large, particularly in the area around the 
cathedral at Senate Square, a pretty neoclassical quarter modelled on St 
Petersburg. However, most of Helsinki's architecture is thoroughly modern. The 
Finns have a real appreciation of design and form, which has led to some of the 
north's sleekest new buildings from Alvar Aalto's sweeping curves of Finlandia 
Hall and the post-modern Kiasma.

 What to see:  The exhibitions at the Museum of Contemporary Art at Kiamsa are 
a bit hit-and-miss, but the building is fantastic. Also take a day-trip to 
Suomenlinna, an odd inhabited island fortress.

 Where to eat:  Try fantastic - and expensive - Russian cuisine at Bellevue, 
behind the Orthodox Uspenski Cathedral. The Lapp restaurant serves sautéed 
reindeer.

 Nightlife:  Moskva bar has great retro-Soviet chic, Saunabar mixes essential 
sounds with steamy saunas, and Tori spins chilled-out jazz-funk and serves 
great food. For serious drinking, head to Corona or, for legendary tango 
dancing, Vahna Maestro.

 Where to stay:  The new swish Scandic Hotel Simonkentta (+385 9 68380) is 
perfectly positioned, and some rooms even have their own sauna. £60-£200.

Aarhus 

 The Danish second city has a massive student population giving the place a 
zesty and friendly atmosphere along with the country's most vibrant live-music 
scene - many of Denmark's top acts originate here.

The compact city centre has recently undergone massive renovation, and the 
bustling waterfront area, Vadestedet, is full of bars, restaurants and cafés 
spilling out into the long summer nights. The Latin Quarter has a string of 
designer outlets, including Munthe + Simonsen - Helena Christensen's favourite 
- and one of Denmark's few boutique hotels. And, if you just want to get some 
fresh air, nearby blue-flag beaches, parks and woodlands provide a great 
counterpoint.

 What to see:  The Art Museum houses a fine collection of Danish art, 
including Asger Jorn's dramatic abstracts. Den Gamle By is a collection of 
medieval housing from around the country turned into a living museum.

 Where to eat :  Emmerys provides great organic cakes, coffee etc in a simple 
Scandinavian atmosphere. Poeme offers excellent fusion food.

 Nightlife:  Voxhall hosts the underground live acts, while Casablanca is for 
a more refined and chilled crowd. Head for Vadestedet for bar crawling.

 Where to stay:  Guldsmeden (+45 8613 4550) is a friendly boutique hotel right 
in the city centre. The rooms are simple and elegant. Some have four-poster 
beds. £60plus.

Oslo 

 For hundreds of years, Oslo - or Christiania as it used to be known - was a 
far-flung outpost of the Swedish and Danish empires. Since independence at the 
start of the 20th century, it has struggled to shake off its provincial chains 
and finally become the sophisticated capital of one of the world's richest and 
best-educated countries.

Like most northern cities, Oslo comes alive during the summer months. A stroll 
down the main thoroughfare, Karl Johans Gate, reveals a bustling city filled 
with cafés and street performers while statues of figures such as Ibsen remind 
you of the depth of Norwegian culture. Drifting past the twin modernist brick 
towers of the R dhus - city hall - leads to Aker Brygge, a collection of 
excellent waterfront bars, restaurants and cafés. Nearby, you can take a ferry 
to the numerous wooded islands scattered around Oslofjord.

Oslo's nightlife doesn't really get going until about 11pm, but when it does 
it's a serious party town with many bars staying open till 4am. The Norwegians 
are a hospitable bunch who generally speak perfect English, and with virtually 
no crime this has to be one of Europe's most user-friendly capitals.

 What to see:  The open-air sculpture park devoted to the work of Gustav 
Vigeland and the Munch Museum are must-sees, while the ski jump/ museum and 
surrounding woodlands of Holmenkollen make for a good day-trip.

 Where to eat: Det Norske Hus serves excellent reindeer and salted cod, while 
the groovier Sjakk Matt offers inexpensive Mediterranean-inspired grub.

 Nightlife:  Jazid focuses on bigbeat, jungle and underground techno, while 
Head On serves up smoother soul and hip-hop. For a beery night in fashionable 
surroundings, try Barbeint or the Beer Palace.

 Where to stay:  Noble House Hotel (+47 23 10 72 00), cool modernist decor and 
a fantastic central position. £80+.

Riga

 With a population approaching one million, the Latvian capital is the 
Baltic's biggest and most cosmopolitan city. Celebrating its 800th birthday 
this year, it was a wealthy trading post between the West and Russia before 
being occupied by the Nazis and then the Soviet Union. It regained its 
independence in 1991 and is once again rebuilding ties with the West.

The nightlife provides plenty of options from the coolest clubs to the 
downright sleazy. If you just want a romantic evening stroll, head for 
Bastejkalns park and the surrounding boulevards. Just outside the western 
fringes of the city, there's a string of beach resorts backed by pine forests. 
There, you'll also find some hedonistic nightclubs, outdoor bars and more 
examples of well-preserved early modern architecture.

 What to see:  Just behind the bus station, the covered market housed in five 
old Zeppelin hangars is a phenomenal sight. The 12th-century cathedral is worth 
a visit and also houses a history museum.

 Where to eat:  Staburags provides a feast of Latvian cuisine in a labyrinth 
of oak-furnished rooms. Nostalgija serves Russian food amid pure retro-Soviet 
chic.

 Nightlife:  DECO has great furniture and cocktails, Aligators trades on tacky 
Americana and rock'n'roll while Groks Stacija plies techno in a strange 
underground station set.

 Where to stay:  Konventa Seta (+371/7087501) is set in a complex of nine 
medieval buildings equipped with all mod cons. £45.

Tomorrow's world

Walking on sunshine 
<http://travel.guardianunlimited.co.uk/countries/story/0,7451,479478,00.html>
 Author Chris Stewart kicks off our Tomorrow's World special with a hike 
through some of Europe's most spectacular country - in southern Spain

Basque it 
<http://travel.guardianunlimited.co.uk/countries/story/0,7451,479548,00.html>
 The glitterati head for nearby Biarritz. But the homeliness of St Jean de Luz 
is where Alex Ninian's heart is

Curtain raiser 
<http://travel.guardianunlimited.co.uk/countries/story/0,7451,479515,00.html> 
 It's not an obvious choice for a weekend away, but the capital of Lithuania 
is a treasure waiting to be discovered

Foreign fields 
<http://travel.guardianunlimited.co.uk/weekenders/story/0,7454,479488,00.html>
 If your boots were made for walking on something other than paving stones, 
Simon Birch suggests five real hikes for the weekend

Is this the new Caribbean? 
<http://travel.guardianunlimited.co.uk/countries/story/0,7451,479556,00.html>
 People still live in caves and travel by camel on this island in the Arabian 
Sea. But plans are afoot to turn it into a holiday paradise over the next 10 
years. Erland Clouston takes a look

Viewing recommended 
<http://travel.guardianunlimited.co.uk/countries/story/0,7451,479499,00.html>
 Alf Alderson on how to enjoy Montana - a piece of splendid isolation in the 
wilderness
 