
Some four years ago, the Guardian and the NGO Marie Stopes International (MSI) 
hatched a plan. MSI had already sponsored a couple of supplements with the 
Guardian, and both organisations were thinking about grander co-operative  
projects.

The Guardian has always been committed to global journalism, and MSI's 
reasoning was also clear: "The world very quickly learns of the disasters and 
despair taking place in developing countries – the floods, earthquakes, war and 
famine. It can sometimes seem like a lost cause to the average newspaper reader 
or broadcast watcher," says Peggy Walters, head of communications at MSI. "This 
competition provides the opportunity for the world to experience the positive 
work that is changing lives in many countries around the world."

A competition like this is inevitably expensive to run, and the search was 
immediately on for significant sponsors. The main one was the UK Department for 
International Development, which sponsored the competition until earlier this 
year. The pharmaceuticals organisation GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) also came on board 
quickly. Andy Wright, from GSK, believes that "the International Development 
Journalism Competition is a great way of highlighting the issues faced by 
people in the developing world, to bring them to the attention of the public 
and governments."

The Guardian first ran the competition in 2008 and some 18 other NGOs (eight 
per year, including MSI) have supported the project since that time. They have 
hosted trips to projects in countries ranging from Kenya to Bangladesh, Jamaica 
to Kyrgyzstan.

In March, a call went up on the Guardian website, and in the newspaper, for 
entrants – either amateurs or professional journalists – to write a feature on 
an aspect of international development. NGOs proposed themes on subjects 
ranging from disability and development, to the impact of hygiene on education.

More than 400 people entered and a panel of distinguished judges – Behrouz 
Afagh, head of Asia Pacific Region, BBC World Service; Elizabeth Ford, editor 
of the Guardian's Katine website; Channel 5 newsreader Natasha Kaplinsky; 
award-winning Ugandan journalist Richard Kavuma; Elisabeth Ribbans, managing 
editor, the Guardian; and ITN's Jon Snow – chose their 16 favourites.

These 16 finalists – eight amateur, eight professional – were sent to a 
country in the developing world to write a feature on a theme suggested by the 
NGO that hosted their trip. Each of them found it rewarding, some mentioning to 
me that they had found the experience amazing, even life-changing, regardless 
of whether the judges considered their entry the best.

Nash Colundalur was the amateur winner in last year's competition, with a 
feature about the drought in northern Kenya. He found the competition helpful, 
even if it has not immediately resulted in a glittering career in journalism. 
"The competition opened doors for me and led to several paths – the career path 
not being the only one. Winning the competition has encouraged me to become 
actively involved in international development projects and write about them 
too."

The focus of international development journalism is primarily, however, on 
those written about. "It amplifies the voices of the most disadvantaged," 
says Colundalur.

This year's features, which are published in this supplement, and in its 
professional counterpart on Monday, are moving, shocking, infuriating and 
enlightening, and show the human spirit at its best.
 