
In her memoir Wishful Drinking 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781847397836>
, Carrie Fisher discusses her 12-year, on/off relationship with Paul Simon. Her 
friend said they were like "two flowers, no gardener. No one was minding the 
relationship." The marriage died, and their subsequent reunion did too, despite 
all their good intentions and effort. It's hard to tell whether a gardener 
could have saved them.

My garden is like a jungle at war. Ivy is strangling the daffodils, and shrubs 
that were once neat and colourful have grown branches that stick out 
like broken limbs. R is fixing our eldest son's bike on the lawn, despite 
nothing really being wrong with it.

"I'm going to have a crack at weeding today," I say, handing R a coffee.

I tell him how well he looks, his skin glistening in the sun, the dark circles 
under his eyes faded, his arm muscles flexing as he turns the bike upside down 
to check the wheels. We are both aware that the bike is fine, but I don't want 
to reveal to R that I asked him over simply because I wanted to see him.

If I were more honest, less reticent about being truthful outside the confines 
of our therapy sessions, then I might say: "I really miss being with you."

"We could tidy this up a bit now," R says, casting a hopeful eye over 
the shabby lawn; I am surprised at his spontaneity because he is usually all 
for doing things tomorrow or next week when it comes to anything remotely 
domestic.

Despite his enthusiasm, I'm a little frightened for the plants' welfare. 
We are both complete amateurs at gardening: I once dug up a whole bed of 
well-established flowers, and saved the neighbouring weeds from a similar death 
thinking that one was the other. R likes the monkey work – the sawing, axing 
and heavy digging – but can't bear the more intricate stuff.

Seizing the moment, I gather rusty tools from the cupboard under the stairs 
and put them outside. I move swiftly to the kitchen and start to wipe the 
surfaces to busy myself: I want to dodge gardening duty now that R shows 
willing.

"I'm going to start with that," he says, pointing to a spiky bush that looks 
unwell; it casts a shadow over a quarter of our small lawn and I keep praying 
for high winds to carry it away, Wizard of Oz-style.

For 10 minutes, R goes at it with gusto, hacking off all the branches 
with shears until there is nothing but a stump. Then he digs down into the soil 
with a fork and uproots the rest.

"Drastic, but it was ugly," he says, smiling triumphantly.

I fetch a sack and gather the debris. The sun warms my skin and for no other 
reason than because I want to, I move over to kiss R. After a few moments we 
stop and I look over to the house to check that the children are not in sight, 
before we continue.

It's been a while. On Christmas Eve, like some sort of lusty present to one 
another, we had sex. But then I found out that R had been casually seeing 
someone else. I felt cheated and hurt. I vowed not to touch him again, until 
such time that we could make a clear decision about whether to stay separated 
or reconcile.

Now though, I desperately want to dive into bed with him, but with children 
inside the house it's just not possible. "Later. We'll save it for later," he 
says, almost reading my mind. Thoughts of having him back in the home, and us 
living together once more, are all I can focus on.

I could blame the sun: heat makes me think of holidays and siestas and lying 
down and being lazy, and, well … sex. "The sun always makes me want to drink," 
says R, and I'm sad that he is thinking about the one thing he just can't do if 
he wants to remain sober. I don't offer any words of consolation, such as "One 
day you can do it again", because even if he does, it will never be how it used 
to be.

"Drink and sex. It's linked to all the headiest memories of being a young 
adult – being allowed, all of a sudden, to enjoy all of the grownup fun," I 
say, not denying him the pleasure it once brought me, him and most other people 
we know.

And then I think of gardening and how it is a very sensible, sober, grownup 
thing to be doing with R, because, however ridiculous it might seem at my age, 
I often feel too immature to be a married mother of three. But as we do 
something that will improve our surroundings, I feel hopeful that we could – if 
we get back together – be pretty happy.
 