
The Rams, Falcons, Eagles, Cowboys and Vikings are lumped together in the NFC 
standings through the first four weeks of theNFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> season. Not at all surprising. 
Meanwhile, the Panthers and Cardinals have begun to separate themselves from 
the pack. Another nailed prediction. The NFC is going just as we all thought it 
might – outside of the fact that almost every team is performing exactly 
opposite of what was expected.

Vikings shut down Odell Beckham and Giants to stay perfect at 4-0
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/04/minnesota-vikings-shut-down-new-york-giants-nfl>
While the AFC is playing out so far much like it did in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/20/2016-nfl-season-last-year> with 
the Broncos, Patriots, Steelers and Texans all on pace for the postseason, the 
NFC standings look like something generated by a video game simulation using 
outdated rosters. If the playoffs started today – and wouldn’t that be strange 
to start the playoffs on a Tuesday in early October – four of the six 
participants in the NFC would be teams that missed out in 2015. And missed out 
by a lot, too. The Eagles, Falcons, Rams and Cowboys were a combined 26-38 a 
season ago. So far this year they’re 12-3 and trailing only the 4-0 Vikings, a 
presumed Super Bowl contender in the pre-season … before they lost their 
starting quarterback and superstar running back to injury, and before Vikings 
fans felt that familiar sense of hopelessness consume them. Assuming most 
didn’t expect the Sam Bradford-Jerick McKinnon Vikings to be 4-0, only the 3-1 
Seahawks are playing somewhat in line with how we thought they would. (Thanks, 
fellas!)

Perhaps the biggest surprise of all is the sense that this all isn’t some 
aberration, an early-season blip that we’ll laugh about in a month – “Hey, 
remember when the Eagles were undefeated? What was that?” – but the rise of 
some new and legitimate contenders. That is definitely the case with the 
Vikings, who have used a dominating defense and simple offense that limits 
mistakes to knock off quality opponents in the Packers, Panthers and Giants 
already this season. (Yes, that’s the same formula Denver used to win the Super 
Bowl last year, and is still employing with any and everyone who happens to get 
under center again this season. Who’s ready for a Trevor Siemian-Sam Bradford 
Super Bowl?) In the last two weeks alone, Minnesota’s pass defense has held 
Kelvin Benjamin and Odell Beckham, Jr, to a combined 23 receiving yards. So if 
you have DeAndre Hopkins in fantasy football, you may want to bench him in week 
five because he has to play the Vikings. If Minnesota beats Houston on Sunday, 
they’ll enter their bye week at 5-0 with a match-up against the Eagles on tap 
in week seven. Who knew back in the pre-season when Bradford and Carson Wentz 
were on the same practice field that they’d battle it out for conference 
supremacy two months later? Absolutely no one. But, hey, maybe some struggling 
team should consider trading for Chase Daniel now while the Eagles QB depth 
chart is hot.

While Wentz has been impressive in his first three NFL games and has improved 
each week, it’s the Eagles defense that has led the way. They’re giving up a 
league-best 9.0 points per game, highlighted by a complete domination of the 
Steelers a week ago. Jim Schwartz’s unit held Pittsburgh to just three points 
on a measly second quarter field goal. Three points to a team that has scored 
105 against its other three opponents so far this season including 43 on Sunday 
night against former Eagles coach Andy Reid. Philadelphia’s schedule is brutal 
from here on out: four of their next five game are on the road, and they still 
have to play the Cowboys twice, the Packers, Seahawks, Falcons, Bengals and 
Vikings. But their defense should keep them competitive every week even if 
Wentz’s Hall of Fame induction gets delayed by a rough patch.

Defense and an offense that limits turnovers has worked in Los Angeles, too. 
And Dallas. (Hey, I’m noticing a pattern!) The Eagles and Vikings have the top 
two scoring defenses in the NFL, but the Rams and Cowboys are ninth and 10th 
respectively. Rams quarterback Case Keenum has thrown just three interceptions 
in four games and allowed Aaron Donald and the defense to do the heavy lifting, 
exactly what a veteran quarterback needs to do to keep a No1 overall pick on 
the bench. Meanwhile, Cowboys’ fourth-round pick Dak Prescott has set an NFL 
record for the most pass attempts by a rookie quarterback without an 
interception to begin his career. It’s not flashy, but it’s effective. And, 
really, in Dallas just not getting injured as a quarterback can excite the 
masses.

The Rams already have wins over the Seahawks and Cardinals in the bag, and 
welcome Rex Ryan and the Bills to LA on Sunday with a chance to get to 4-1. The 
game is a toss up, especially with Buffalo riding high off of their shutout of 
the Patriots, but it’s guaranteed there will be some head coach fist-pumping.

Jason Garrett won’t be (awkwardly) celebrating <https://vine.co/v/565nz3WVlMr> 
his team’s upcoming schedule. Dallas plays the Bengals, Packers, Eagles and 
Steelers in their next five games. That stretch will determine their playoff 
hopes, and probably also whether Prescott cedes the job back to Tony Romo for 
however long the veteran’s body can keep it.

The Falcons have no such uncertainty at quarterback with Matt Ryan having a 
career-year in year nine of his career. While the other surprise NFC teams are 
winning with defense, Atlanta is playing like there is no defense on the field. 
Ryan is on pace for 44 TDs and nearly 6,000 yards of passing. In Sunday’s 48-33 
destruction of the Panthers, Julio Jones had 300 receiving yards. Prescott, 
Keenum and Bradford haven’t even thrown for 300 yards in a game yet this season.

The Falcons have taken every other winning NFC team’s gameplan and turned it 
completely upside-down, just like how the whole conference has been flipped so 
far this season. For Atlanta to get past the Vikings and Seahawks and other top 
teams in the NFC, conventional wisdom says they’ll need to improve their 
defense. But then conventional wisdom has been wrong all season. Do whatever 
you want, Falcons.
 