
And so, after 26 years and 1,359 issues, the Independent on Sunday is laid to 
rest. Its black front page, a photograph of Shanghai in darkness as part ofthe 
Earth Hour event 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/environment/climate-change/earth-hour-2016-lights-go-out-worldwide-in-demonstration-against-increasing-climate-change-a6941511.html>
, marked the death of a newspaper dream.

Call it the Independent on Sunday: The Journalists’ Edition, because it 
overflowed with reminiscences by staff past and present, hymning the 
contribution their beloved newspaper has made to Britain and to journalism.

Amid the paper’s routine news and features, which included an interview with 
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> and a voter’s 
guide to the EU referendum, several columnists bade their sad newsprint 
farewells.

Steve Connor, science editor throughout the Sindy’s life, reminded readers of 
his topic’s central place in the paper’s agenda. Cole Moreton raged against the 
political iniquities he has witnessed, registering his pride in the paper’s 
opposition to the “misguided war” on Iraq. Dom Joly said it had been a 
privilege to write his column for 15 years.

Other regulars, aware of their possible appearance in the online Independent, 
perhaps, or because they saw no point to it, wrote without mentioning the 
Sindy’s demise.

Robert Fisk, in a clever nod to journalism’s longevity as distinct from that 
of its “platform”, chose to interview the oldest living war correspondent, 
Clare Hollingworth, now aged 104. Famous for witnessing Germany’s invasion of 
Poland in 1939, she claimed a genuine world exclusive: the outbreak of the 
second world war.

 The New Review - which a former Independent owner, Tony O’Reilly believed to 
be the ne plus ultra of Sunday newspaper magazines - was devoted entirely to 
the Independent on Sunday’s story, republishing articles that were a testament 
to its journalistic verities.

Some of the staff who were there at the beginning, on 28 January 1990, 
recounted their experiences. On Saturdays, recalled subeditor Barbara Gunnell, 
“a trolley of champagne and sandwiches would be wheeled into the editor’s 
office.”

The editor, Lisa Markwell, recalled the eight who sat in their chair before 
her, from launch editor Stephen Glover, on through Ian Jack, Peter Wilby, Rosie 
Boycott, Kim Fletcher,Janet Street-Porter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/janet-street-porter>, Tristan Davies and 
John Mullin.


All exerted their very different personalities on to a paper that tried so 
very hard to forge a niche somewhere between the Sunday Times andThe Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/theobserver>.

It did well, very well indeed for quite a while, and can point to a having 
acted as the springboard for writers who went on to become famous, such as
Sebastian Faulks <https://www.theguardian.com/books/sebastianfaulks>, Zoe 
Heller and Blake Morrison.

It played host to fine journalists: interviewers, columnists, cartoonists page 
designers and photographers. It was inventive, distinctive and sometimes 
unconventional. It was brave at times and also honest. In 1997, it launched a 
campaign to decriminalise cannabis; in 2007, it apologised for having done so.

The Sindy campaigned relentlessly for climate change to be taken seriously by 
politicians, winning many deserved awards for such work down the years. It is 
fair to say that the paper was a journalistic ornament.

But the fragility of that ornament was evident from its first appearance on 
the newsstands amid an economic recession. It then developed cracks during 
Fleet Street’s unsentimental war for readers - and, most importantly, 
advertisers - as rival publishers sought to regain the initiative in the 
mid-1990s.

Early in this century, despite a generous and loving owner in O’Reilly and, 
later, an optimistic Evgeny Lebedev, those cracks widened and deepened. The
Independent on Sunday <https://www.theguardian.com/media/independent-on-sunday>
, in company with its flagship, The Independent, were the weakest national 
papers in terms of sales and could not resist the inexorable advance of the 
digital revolution.

So the ornament has finally shattered. Many of the journalists who have graced 
its pages, such as Fisk, Patrick Cockburn, Rupert Cornwell and Hamish McRae, 
will continue writing online. They have recorded profound political and 
economic changes across the globe for a quarter of a century, and surely accept 
that they must accommodate technological change themselves.

But, like all veterans of newsprint, they regret the passing of a newspaper in 
the inky format that sustained for centuries.The Independent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/theindependent> on Sunday, the title known 
affectionately as the Sindy, is no more. And even the most fervent digital 
missionary cannot fail to be moved by its passing.
 