
Mistaken identity can be highly damaging to charities and social enterprises 
fighting to solve social and environmental problems. A4e has been, up to now (
A4e's 'social purpose' company tag banned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/aug/22/a4e-banned-social-purpose-company>, 
22 August), able to parade itself as a "social purpose" company, a term that 
arguably overshadows its primary objective – profit maximisation for private 
gain. Now, the term "social enterprise" is being hijacked by other big 
businesses too. Salesforce, a US megacorp providing software, has tried to 
trademark "social enterprise" and is claiming that if companies use its product 
they will become "social enterprises". The likes of Richard Branson and Angela 
Ahrendts of Burberry have already signed up, and more are set to follow.

The move is wholly misleading and threatens the real social enterprise 
sector's future – a global movement of businesses that exist to tackle social 
problems. Two decades of hard work have gone into building the movement; it has 
heavy political and economic investment here in the UK, including the launch of 
Big Society Capital earlier this year, and has global recognition, cited by the 
EU and the UN. Its achievements and work cannot be lost to the latest corporate 
marketing quest for private profit and greed. Social enterprise must be 
protected.
Peter Holbrook
Chief executive, Social Enterprise UK <http://www.socialenterprise.org.uk/>

• In 1908 Philip Snowden, future chancellor, stood on the steps of 
Huddersfield station before a huge crowd, demanding nationalisation of the 
railways (Comment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/aug/28/rail-branson-firstgroup-public-ownership>
, 29 August). All of his arguments – profiteering, fragmentation, poor service 
and high fares – are just as relevant now, with the added point that the 
taxpayer is paying vast sums to support this "insane" system, as Richard 
Branson describes it. Snowden had a vision of our railways being run by what we 
would now call a "social enterprise" which has a wider social remit than 
shareholder profit. We need a single, socially owned InterCity network 
dovetailing with regional not-for-profit train and bus operators.
Prof Paul Salveson
Hannah Mitchell Foundation
 