
For the past four months, Turkey’s leader has subjected his country to 
sweeping political purges – but there are few signs of an end soon. The new 
announcement that 6,000 teachers will be reinstated in their jobs after having 
been suspended is a welcome gesture but does little to reduce the level of 
tension.

Since the mid-July failed coup attempt against Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s regime, 
the president has orchestrated what amounts to a counter-coup. What Mr Erdoğan 
sees as a clean-up of the Turkish body politic looks like the biggest purge in 
Turkey’s modern history. More than 125,000 people have been dismissed or 
suspended and around 40,000 others arrested.Amnesty says there are “credible 
reports” of detainees being subjected to “beatings and torture, including rape” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-38123926>. Judges, military personnel 
and professors have lost their jobs.

While democracy should not have been usurped by the military, there are 
justifiable concerns about where Mr Erdoğan is going. A state of emergency 
allows him to rule by decree. Those affected are opponents of the ruling AK 
party. Kurdish activist groups and people suspected of links to the Fetullah 
Gülen network find themselves bracketed with Isis militants. Media freedom has 
been dramatically crushed. On 12 November the executive director of the 
pro-democracy newspaper Cumhuriyet was detained. Nine of its journalists had 
already been arrested.

Turkey’s western allies are alarmed, but against a complex geopolitical 
backdrop, they have chosen discretion rather than valour. After the EU 
parliament last week voted tofreeze EU accession talks with Turkey, Mr Erdoğan 
lashed out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/eu-parliament-votes-freeze-membership-talks-turkey>
 by threatening to open the country’s borders to migrants heading to Europe. 
This is tantamount to blackmail. If the president made good it would collapse 
the EU-Turkey deal negotiated by Angela Merkel which saw Ankara agree to take 
back refugees in exchange for billions in aid, ease travel restrictions for 
Turks and refresh EU membership talks. The hope in European capitals is that Mr 
Erdoğan will not want to destroy the agreement: visa-free travel to Europe 
remains a popular prospect for Turks.

By fanning nationalist sentiment, Mr Erdoğan wants to reach his long-held goal 
of changing the Turkish constitution in a way that would enlarge and 
concentrate powers in the presidency.One proposal would see Mr Erdogan in 
office until 2029 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/22/turkey-erdogan-presidency-referendum-akp-nationalist>
. But both the EU and Turkey’s strongman appear to suffer from a bout of 
magical thinking. There is currently no consensus in Europe for further 
rapprochement with a regime whose authoritarianism is blatantly on the rise. 
Nor is Mr Erdoğan ready to abandon the leverage he publicly claims to have with 
European governments. The lifting of visas hinges on Turkey rescinding the 
anti-terrorism legislation, which Mr Erdoğan uses to repress dissent – and he 
shows no appetite of giving up. An October deadline came and went, with no 
progress whatsoever.

No one, whether in Brussels or Ankara, is ready to cut off talks. The 
stalemate plays to both sides’ interests. This might change if Mr Erdoğan 
reintroduces the death penalty, as he has threatened to:the EU has said this 
would end accession talks 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/23/world/europe/turkey-eu-membership-talks.html?_r=0>
. Meanwhile, the grinding machine of political repression continues in Turkey, 
whose rapprochement with Vladimir Putin’s Russia has become a stark new feature 
of its foreign policy – with western allies left to contemplate their lack of 
sway.
 