
The UCAS figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2012/feb/07/analysis-of-ucas-application-figures>
 surprised many people. Only a slight reduction in HE participation among young 
people from the most disadvantaged areas, and apparently a smaller reduction 
than in more advantaged areas. A possible explanation for these results is that 
learners from disadvantaged backgrounds applying in 2011-12 have received years 
of support in terms of additional information, advice and guidance via the 
widening-access work of schools, colleges and universities working particularly 
(although by no means solely) through the AimHigher programme.

Even though AimHigher finished in July last year 
<http://www.hefce.ac.uk/widen/aimhigh/> and many university widening-access 
departments have been in flux in 2011-12 ahead of the new access agreements, 
young people from disadvantaged backgrounds had already developed the skills to 
navigate the new financial system and a belief in the value of HE that means 
they are still prepared to take on the risk of higher debts. But will their 
cohorts reaching the point of entry feel so confident in subsequent years? 
Decision making regarding higher education is a process. Young people do not 
suddenly wake up at 17 and think "I'll go to uni".

Research shows clearly that from primary age children are starting to think 
about their future and that includes higher education. By 14, many have pretty 
firm ideas and are starting to follow qualification paths that can dictate 
their futures. By 17, most have made their minds up. The worst possible 
conclusion to draw from these figures is that the widening-access challenge is 
licked. The real crunch will come when we see the impact of how today's 14 or 
15-year-olds are thinking. It is essential they receive the kind of support 
that their predecessors received. This can only be done effectively with 
institutions collaborating with one another.

Collaboration in widening-access work will have to be different in the 2010s 
to what it was in the 2000s. The removal of top-down state funding implies a 
bottom-up, flexible, entrepreneurial approach. Previous boundaries set byHEFCE 
<http://www.hefce.ac.uk/> to shape regional partnership no longer exist. At the 
regional level new organisations are emerging that are forming their own 
borders and focusing on enabling collaboration in quite contrasting ways. 
Overall, however, commitment of HEIs to supporting regional vehicles is best 
described as guarded. At present, there is no accurate picture of how things 
differ across England, and no mechanism to communicate examples of how 
collaboration is being made to work in the access agreement era. This gap has 
to be addressed. Many institutions are guarded because they do not have 
evidence of how regional collaboration could happen and what they need to know.

But regional collaboration will not be enough. An unintended consequence of 
the partnership strategy pursued in the 2000s was the growth of regional 
collaboration vehicles that became too often almost hermetically sealed from 
each other. Supporting learners from disadvantaged backgrounds to enter HE when 
fees average more than £7,000 will take creativity, innovation and above all 
coherence across the whole widening-access community. Launched in January 2012, 
theNational Education Opportunities Network 
<http://www.educationopportunities.co.uk/> is an attempt to foster this 
coherence and create the space for the exchange of ideas and practice that 
spans regional boundaries. As the new national professional organisation for 
the widening-access community, NEON will focus on developing accreditation 
frameworks for those involved in widening access and quality standards for 
institutions across sectors delivering access activity.

The cross-sector nature of what an organisation such as NEON needs to do is 
vital. HE providers may be the place where we want students to reach but they 
don't define the journey. The widening-access community also includes schools, 
colleges, a growing and vibrant third-sector presence, student unions and a 
range of employers and employer organisations with commitments to social 
mobility. NEON needs to be shaped by all of this community – not one part of it 
and not by the state. Don't let the recent UCAS figures fool us – the 
widening-access challenge is going to get tougher in the 2010s. It will take 
new thinking and new partnerships. Most importantly, it will need a 
widening-access community prepared to do this for itself.

Dr Graeme Atherton is head of AccessHE <http://www2.accesshe.ac.uk/> - a 
London-based organisation that supports under-represented groups into higher 
education.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network <https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network>.
 