
Three years ago, Roddy Doyle had come to the Guardian book club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/aug/29/paddy-clarke-ha-roddy-doyle> to 
talk about his novelPaddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha, and had reflected on how his story 
of shabby 1960s Dublin was being read in the new economic age of the "Celtic 
tiger". It seems a long time ago. When Anne Enright came to the Guardian book 
club to talk aboutThe Forgotten Waltz, her tale of ordinary adultery in modern 
Ireland, she was asked a good deal about her depiction of Dublin's smart, 
affluent professionals. The economic crash comes two-thirds of the way through 
the novel, puncturing the self-assurance of the leading characters and 
explaining much of the narrator's self-mockery. Was satire one of her main 
purposes?

Enright's characters work in IT or management consultancy and think a good 
deal about property prices. One reader noted the care with which the novel 
described the insides of people's houses. ("I describe interiors partly for 
social reasons," Enright replied, "but also because they are ourselves.") 
Another remarked on the attention given to clothes: Gina tells us all about her 
lover's shirts and suits. The characters inThe Forgotten Waltz have all the 
21-century trappings of affluence. For British readers of Irish fiction, it was 
evidently something of a novelty not to associate Irishness with repression or 
poverty. "Irish writers write many different kinds of books, but the most 
successful ones," Enright thought, "are set in the past." She was consciously 
trying to write against this expectation.

As the author agreed, Gina keeps her illusions about love, despite the 
indirect evidence of her lover's philandering ways. (He has had affairs before; 
he seems to have made a pass at Gina's sister, Fiona.) But her illusions about 
the ease with which prosperity comes are dispelled. Members of the audience 
clearly read the novel, in part, as mocking a kind of national hubris. "I have 
been wondering how this book was received in Ireland, given that it is so 
honest, so in your face" – or perhaps, the questioner thought, "so in their 
face". Irish critics, Enright told us, were preoccupied with the "Irishness" of 
what they read and discuss, but the large reading public in Ireland was 
different and much less worried about how a book depicted their country.

As Enright ruefully noted, British reviewers who had praised the novel had 
come to utterly incompatible judgments about its narrator, Gina. Some had 
commended the author's creation of a wildly untrustworthy protagonist, who was 
completely blind to her own deceitfulness. Others had discovered a narrator who 
was, as one account had it, "pathologically honest" when speaking to the 
reader. Readers who came to the book club also talked a good deal about what 
they thought of Gina, though appeared less polarised. There was agreement about 
her humour and her evasiveness, but uncertainty about how much sympathy a 
reader might have for her.

One reader observed that the novelist seemed to be avoiding the question, 
asked in different ways by more than one member of the audience, as to whether 
she expected to win sympathy for Gina. "It seemed to me that you don't 
necessarily want sympathy – you want someone who is rounded and complex and 
doesn't necessarily do what we like." Perhaps, she added, we generally want to 
be sympathetic to a leading character, especially one narrated in the 
first-person. Enright wanted to know why the reader might want to feel 
sympathy. Because it is our recognition that the character is human, suggested 
one reader. "I found the scene with Gina's mother dying very touching, and it's 
the only time I felt any sympathy for Gina," observed another. Was that the 
purpose of the episode: to win a degree of fellow feeling with the narrator 
that she had not been able to gain in any other way? The author acknowledged 
that there were points in Gina's narration when the reader has to "reel back", 
but in this scene she can no longer "gossip up" what has been happening.

How much did readers flinch from her selfishness or callousness? As the 
question was debated, something odd happened. The polite questions to the 
novelist turned into a discussion among half a dozen readers. What did they 
think of this character? Could it be that her most dislikeable qualities were 
also what made her most engaging? The author and her interlocutor were 
forgotten as the readers debated their responses to this humorous, nettling 
narrator. She had acquired a kind of life of her own.
 