
The World Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> final 
is one of the rare events that pits ITV and BBC head to head in a battle for 
viewers. But if previous tournaments are anything to go by, the result will be 
a rating mismatch almost as one-sided as Germany's humbling of Brazil in last 
week's semi-final.

The advertising-free football coverage of the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> has always proved more popular with 
armchair fans, and ITV's simulcast of the final is likely to be outscored by 
about 5 to 1 on audience levels.

More than 18 million viewers watched live coverage of the 2010 World Cup final 
between Spain and Holland, with 15.1 million opting for BBC1 and 3.3 million 
for ITV.

Yet for ITV it is a beating worth taking as the only place advertisers can 
turn to hit World Cup fans, so ad revenues will be up by well over 20% year on 
year across the tournament.

Few programmes can draw mass-viewing levels like the 20 million peak that 
watched England's defeat by Uruguay on ITV – the largest audience for any UK 
programme since the London 2012 Olympics closing ceremony.

The BBC's lineup for the final will be fronted by Gary Lineker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gary-lineker> alongside Alan Hansen, 
making his last appearance as a pundit after 22 years on the sofa.

Alan Shearer and Rio Ferdinand will also appear, and there will be 
contributions from Clarence Seedorf and Jason Mohammad live from the Maracanã 
stadium, with match commentary from Guy Mowbray and Mark Lawrenson.

ITV will be led by Adrian Chiles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/adrian-chiles>, the Marmite of frontmen, 
with a deep bench of pundits in Martin O'Neill, Fabio Cannavaro, Ian Wright, 
Glenn Hoddle and Lee Dixon. Clive Tyldesley and Andy Townsend will commentate.

The deep-pocketed BBC machine prides itself on being able to outclass rivals 
with its coverage of big events, but the feeling is that this World Cup has 
perhaps not been vintage BBC.

Jonathan Pearce's struggle to get to grips with goal-line technology 
progressed to the disaster that was the choice to use Phil Neville as a 
commentator, with one social media barb referring to his monotone delivery as a 
"satnav to Dignitas".

Thierry Henry's cardies have gone down better than his analysis, but newbies 
Danny Murphy and Ferdinand have showed promise, although Gabby Logan was 
underutilised.
 Gary Lineker and the the rest of the BBC's World Cup broadcast team. 
Photograph: Andrew Hayes-Watkins/Matthew Burlem/BBC 
Many had written off ITV's chances after Roy Keane's decision to pull out of 
its lineup days before the tournament kicked off. Instead the broadcaster 
embraced its underdog status, countering the more serious BBC approach with a 
casual, beachfront appeal.

This has paid dividends, despite Hoddle's extremely tight shorts for the 
opening game, which produced the infamous "camel foot" picture that stormed 
Twitter, and his reference to Algeria as al-Jazeera.

There have been plaudits for Dixon, O'Neill, Patrick Vieira and Gordon 
Strachan.

"The BBC are the Germans of this tournament, slick and reliable, and ITV are 
the plucky Costa Ricans who gave us some great moments even if they don't get 
to lift the trophy," said Ben Preston, editor of Radio Times.

The question of how the broadcasters have fared on TV ratings is an equally 
tricky assessment, and England's swiftest exit from a World Cup in 56 years 
certainly hasn't helped.

Viewing of England's group matches was down about 16% on 2010, although the 
kick-off times were more conducive to TV viewers.

The most recent figures for BBC1's total audience in June were down 5% 
compared with the same month in 2010, while ITV is down about 2%.

However, viewing of World Cup games is thought to be up on 2010, and viewing 
across the entire tournament is tentatively expected to be up by 5%-7%, due to 
the high quality and big audiences attracted to non-England matches.

For example, Brazil's opening match with Croatia drew more than 8 million 
viewers, while South Africa managed fewer than 6 million in the 2010 opener 
against Mexico.

ITV beat the BBC in attracting the biggest audience for a World Cup match. 
England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> versus Uruguay drew an 
average of 18.2 million viewers, and a peak of more than 20 million.

"I think ITV has won. They had the balls to sit all the pundits on the beach 
in shorts, T-shirts and flip-flops," said writer and broadcaster Sam Delaney.

"The BBC would never do that. I think ITV win in the studio, but the BBC win 
in the commentary box."

For ITV the World Cup is an advertising bonanza: a 30-second ad in an England 
match cost as much as £300,000, and the prestige of appearing in the World Cup 
final means premium pricing.

"ITV may get spanked in the final on viewing, but what they are doing is 
buying the whole World Cup package," says Andy Barnes, the former head of 
Channel 4's sales operation and a director at advertising auditing firm Concise 
Media.

"They can command prices two or three times a regular slot – even though they 
lose the ratings battle, advertisers get to appear in a hugely desirable 
environment." 
 