
Beautella, who by this time had forgotten she was ever called anything else, 
applied to be one of the professionals and won against heavy competition but 
the first series of Lively Toes saw her eliminated in the first round. There 
was nothing wrong with her partner's dancing but he chose that week to make the 
headlines over an extra marital affair and was punished by an audience which 
thought his pretty, tiny, timid-seeming wife a woman wronged.

"They don't have to listen to her nagging all day long," was his bitter 
farewell to Beautella.

In the second series she was partnered by a gentle, charming celebrity 
hairdresser with two left feet. Early elimination was inevitable but she was so 
engaged with his disappointment that she felt little on her own account until 
the producer casually remarked "You have been unlucky, haven't you?"

Programme makers wanted lucky people and Beautella knew her contract was in 
danger. When the same producer said "better luck this time" as the third series 
began it was not hard to imagine the unspoken addition of "three strikes and 
you're out."

And they had given her every chance, partnering her with a popular politician 
from a minority party whose good looks made him a media favourite. Never likely 
to see power and live with the fruits of his procurements, he said only what he 
believed tuned with the prevailing mood and was hailed as a model of common 
sense and compassion. At 65 he was the oldest celebrity but looked 50 and knew 
it.

He could certainly dance, thought Beautella gratefully, until it became 
obvious that he was interested only in excelling and performing feats which 
could have been beyond the abilities of most professionals and that she, as the 
one who was thrown in the air, spun until she was giddy and caught again at the 
last millisecond, bore all the risk while Grainger basked in the glory. When 
she found that his dancing was exceeded only by his arrogance and undisguised 
disdain for lesser performers, she hated him and, but for the imperative to 
win, would have walked off the set.

It was a driving imperative. Studio LaReine was struggling as people in turn 
struggled to economise. The roof over their heads was essential while dance 
classes were not. If she could claim to have trained the winner or the 
runner-up of Lively Toes she might just save her livelihood and, anyway, the 
programme paid well.

Beautella sighed and fell into a sleep which was haunted by a now recurring 
nightmare in which she was dropped by Cobb Grainger and paralysed for life. 
When she woke to find herself in a soft bed instead of immobile on a wooden 
floor the relief drenched her in sweat and she, who once began each day with an 
almost childish delight, began this one in tears.
 