
Here we are in Cannes, the day before the official opening: the Tuesday Lull. 
It's the calm before the storm, which, traditionally, is not all that calm. The 
red carpet is still being hammered into place and the Grand Palais prepared by 
grey-suited officials bustling about everywhere. Last year, my friend Nigel 
Andrews of the Financial Times told me he saw a Cannes local walk down the 
Croisette, survey the scene and loudly sigh: "Les conneries commencent …" ("The 
bullshit begins …"). For journalists covering the festival, this is a time for 
savouring all the possibilities of movie experience that must surely be 
available in the next 10 days, before you're suddenly plunged straight into it, 
and there never seems to be enough time, and always seems to be one other great 
new film that you somehow can't get to see.

I blogged last year on the idea that Cannes's love of Hollywood stars has a 
kind of pre-history in its pre-war love of English milords 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2009/may/11/cannes-film-festival-books>
. Any psychogeographers in town might care to use this downtime to wander over 
to the Palais building, and ponder the fact that this stands on the site of the 
old Cannes casino, where in the 1930s those young English aristocratic 
revellers Winston Churchill and Anthony Eden won a huge amount of money by 
betting on the number 17 at roulette. According to Churchill's biographer Sir 
Max Hastings, the number became an optimistic talisman for them in the dark 
days of 1940. "About time number 17 turned up, isn't it?" Churchill said to 
Eden, after digesting the news of the BEF's defeat in France.

For me, there is one sound that powerfully conjures up the Cannes film 
festival: the sound of the guy who sells Libération outside the Palais every 
morning in what is usually the burning sun, crying: "Libé! Libé! Libé! Demandez 
le monde!" Like the first cuckoo in spring, his voice signals the start of 
Cannes.

But today is always a bit of a lull. So to fill it, I have decided to create 
my own imaginary, non-existent film festival, taking place only in my head, 
which I have tentatively called No Cannes Do, consisting of those films which, 
over the decade I've been reporting from Cannes, have been a huge deal here at
le festival, but were somehow not released theatrically in the UK. The British 
filmgoer is perpetually bombarded with dreary mediocre fare, or out-and-out 
dross – and yet, mysteriously, some really fascinating Cannes films, genuinely 
brilliant or bizarre, never make it over the Channel. So here is my official 
competition list for the inaugural 2010 No Cannes Do festival.

La Soledad (or Solitary Fragments, directed by Jaime Rosales)

Rosales's creepy serial-killer drama The Hours of the Day was a big Cannes hit 
in 2003, and this followup, in Un Certain Regard in 2007, was passionately 
admired. It picks apart the fragmented lives of women devastated by the Madrid 
terrorist bomb, and the intricacy and intelligence of Rosales's directing is a 
marvel. Why, oh why, did no one want to distribute it in the UK?

En Jouant "Dans la Compagnie des Hommes" (or Playing "In the Company of Men", 
Arnaud Desplechin)

Deplechin's Christmas Tale and his Kings and Queen got a UK release, but not 
this, in Un Certain Regard in 2003, despite the British connection. It is a 
loose, experimental version of Edward Bond's 1996 play In the Company of Men 
(nothing to do with the Neil LaBute movie), about an arms manufacturer, set in 
a dystopian future. The movie is bizarre, fragmented, challenging – not a 
masterpiece, but glinting with life and ideas.

And Now … Ladies and Gentlemen (Claude Lelouch)

This thoroughly silly and bizarre romantic dramedy-thriller-farce by Lelouch 
closed the 2002 festival and was simply never heard of again – although 
Jonathan Romney of the Independent On Sunday mischievously suggested he might 
try to get it into the French section of the London film festival. It stars 
Jeremy Irons, but even hardcore Jeremy Irons fans have mostly never heard of 
it. Irons plays a jaded criminal mastermind and jewel thief who sets out on a 
solo round-the-world sailing trip to forget his ennui, and finds love in 
Morocco. It has a so-bad-it's-good reputation with the few who have seen it, 
but I remember this film with affection, chiefly for the gobsmacking moment 
when Irons's character – that master of disguise – appears in drag as an old 
lady.

La Moustache (Emmanuel Carrère) 

Vincent Lindon and Emmanuelle Devos star in this elegant, witty squib about 
marriage, relationships and intimacy; it was in Directors' Fortnight in 2005. 
Lindon plays a married man who, on a whim, one day shaves off his moustache. 
Not only does his wife not notice, but insists he didn't have a moustache, and 
an increasingly frantic Lindon can't find any photos to prove that he did. When 
we spend so much time with someone, do they become invisible to us? How well do 
we know our spouses, or ourselves?

Milyang (or Secret Sunshine, Lee Chang-dong)

Lee's new film Poetry is in competition this year – but here is a fascinating 
and rather shocking film, in the 2007 competition, which never got a British 
release. A woman goes through unthinkable agony when her child is abducted and 
killed; her profound Christian faith compels her to visit the convicted killer 
in prison in order to forgive him and find peace. A highly-strung, 
highly-charged film.

'R Xmas (Abel Ferrara)

Abel Ferrara, that crazed auteur, gets mixed reviews for his work these days, 
despite a revival of interest following the Herzog remake of his Bad 
Lieutenant. But Cannes has always stayed loyal to Ferrara, and doggedly finds 
room for his films. Here is a representative example – it was in Un Certain 
Regard in 2001 and from there pretty much vanished. Yet, like so many of 
Ferrara's films, it had a kind of radioactive grittiness and quotidian horror. 
A criminal couple achieve an upper-middle-class level of wealth through drug 
dealing – but when the husband is kidnapped, his wife must scrape the cash 
together for the ransom and wonders about the life they have chosen.

Kinatay (or Butchery, Brillante Mendoza)

At Cannes last year, all the talk was of Lars von Trier's Antichrist, and how 
shocking it was. Yet this, from the same lineup,was more shocking 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2009/may/21/cannes-film-previews>. There is no 
prospect of it getting a UK release – although it was shown at the London film 
festival later in the year – and part of me is profoundly relieved. It really 
is horrifying. And yet the horror is not gratuitous, and there is a point to 
it. A young police recruit in Manila is getting married, and needs money. An 
older colleague tells him about an off-the-record "job": a group of cops are 
going to rob and savagely murder a prostitute who has been failing to pay them 
their "cut" – partly to terrify the other prostitutes, but partly, Mendoza 
implies, out of sheer uniformed misogyny and male hate. And why do they need so 
many guys? To spread the guilt, to implicate as many officers as possible, to 
bond, and to assist in the closing of ranks, if there is ever any sort of 
inquiry. A truly horrible film in many ways, and yet seriously intentioned and 
powerfully made.

Ce Jour-Là (or That Day, Raoul Ruiz) 

Ruiz is one of the world's most distinctive, perhaps eccentric film-makers – 
certainly prolific, and most admired for his version of the last volume of 
Proust's In Search of Lost Time: Time Regained. Here is a real oddity from 
Cannes 2003, about a beautiful heiress, played by Elsa Zylberstein, whose 
family attempt to kill her for her money, a plot they intend to carry out by 
letting loose a psychopathic killer in her house, and encouraging him to 
believe God wants Zylberstein dead. A bizarre, elegant black comedy which 
British audiences never saw. Pity.

The Brown Bunny (Vincent Gallo)

Here is the movie which got Vincent Gallo virtually jeered off the Croisette 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2003/may/24/cannes2003.cannesfilmfestival>: a 
crazily self-indulgent and self-important movie selected for the Cannes 
competition in 2003, in which Gallo stars, writes, directs, produces – 
everything. A road movie of sorts, it features Gallo as Bud, a motorcycle racer 
heading to California to compete once more, and tortured by his past. It was 
much mocked at the time, and became legendary as the Cannes turkey to end all 
Cannes turkeys. I have to admit I joined in the derision, but in retrospect, 
The Brown Bunny had a certain something. If it failed in a big way, that's 
because it aimed for something big. Maybe now is the time to revive The Brown 
Bunny and give it another chance.

Enter the Void (Gaspar Noé) 

I simply can't believe that this film, one of the most visually stunning at 
Cannes 2009, still hasn't got a UK release. What's the matter with everyone? 
Like Kubrick's 2001, which it very candidly admires, thisoutrageous head-trip 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/130014/enter-the-void> has to be 
experienced at least once on the big screen, and the Cannes Grand Palais 
supplied the biggest. It is a movie shot entirely from the POV of a dead 
drug-dealer as his soul floats above Tokyo – where the cops have shot him dead 
– and watches over his sister. Surely it will get a UK release any day now?

Of course, most of these are available on DVD – except for the Noé, the 
Deplechin and the Mendoza. But in each case it's strange to think that a full 
UK release never happened.
 