
Writers have a weird life. Ninety per cent of the time we are alone, in our 
attics, loafing around in our dressing gowns and trying not to punch our 
computers. And the rest of the time we are doing the exact opposite of this. 
You know, getting washed and going out into the world and performing in front 
of and then meeting fellow members of our species.

It is all very strange. I mean, the reason we write is because we were the shy 
kids and yet now we are expected to get out there and put on a show, as if we 
were Lady Gaga. I, for one, am terrible at performing live. To choose to see me 
live is like choosing to have root canal work while watching an awkward silence 
competition. (I jest. I'm amazing live. That's what my mum says.) Some writers 
though, such as those below, are as brilliant off the page as they are on.

1. Sebastian Barry
I had the experience of seeing Barry reading from his Costa-winning novel The 
Secret Scripture last year at aWorld Book Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/world-book-night> event on the Southbank. I 
had never seen a reading like it. Seriously, it was a tour-de-force 
performance. His whole body shakes as he reads and he is certainly is unafraid 
to "do the voices".

2. Neil Gaiman
Probably the closest thing the world of books has to a bona fide megastar. 
Wherever they are, Gaiman's events attract sell-out crowds and he somehow 
manages to create the kind of electric pre-appearance atmosphere more commonly 
found in rock venues and Roman ampitheatres. He could probably fill the O2.

3. Caitlin Moran
Not every author who writes with energy and fizz and wit, can speak with 
exactly that same energy and fizz and wit in real actual human time. Moran is a 
prime example of this rare and exotic species.

4. Chuck Palahniuk
To go to a Chuck Palahniuk reading is like visiting an extreme amusement park. 
You go as a kind of test of nerve. To date, 75 people are said to have fainted 
at Palahniuk events, usually while he is reading the grotesque short storyGuts 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XU_Bj9LVbOc>, which also demands readers to 
hold their breath for the duration of the tale.

5. Ruth Ozeki
I was lucky enough to do an event with the Booker-shortlisted author of A Tale 
for the Time Being last year in London. It was one of the most enjoyable I've 
done, and Ruth oozes warm wisdom and Zen-like charm.

6. David Levithan <http://www.davidlevithan.com/>
Confession. I haven't actually seen him live. But when I said aloud on Twitter 
that I was writing this piece, about 100 (OK, six) people I trust said I must 
include him. So he is duly included. And next time I get the chance, I'll see 
him and tell you if he is worthy of his spot.

7. Jeanette Winterson
She is amazing live, and one of the few writers to read from her work exactly 
as you hear it in your head. She walks on with such confidence, never has any 
barrier between herself and the audience, and is the person I try to think of 
five seconds before I do any event.

8. AL Kennedy
Kennedy is very funny live: so funny you can see why she decided to cross over 
into full-blown stand-up comedy. But her humour is, as you'd expect, the brainy 
and passionate kind.

9. Laura Dockrill <http://www.lauradockrill.co.uk/>
Got to have a childen's witer/illustrator on the list – there are many 
brilliant ones to see live out there (Sarah McIntyre, Andy Stanton, Anthony 
McGowan, Philip Ardagh, Guy Parker-Rees) – but Dockrill is a must for sheer 
energy and colour. She is like Victoria Wood on Red Bull.

10. Jon McGregor <http://www.jonmcgregor.com/>
Not one of the showiest or most showboating of authors to see live, but 
McGregor reads very well, and he also has a lot of interesting and important 
stuff to say about writing. Oh, and he's drily funny too. And I've just 
realised I haven't enough room for Nikesh Shukla, Val McDermid and Ian Rankin, 
who should also be on this list...
 