
My problems with anorexia <https://www.theguardian.com/society/anorexia> began 
not long before my mother was diagnosed with cancer. When she became unwell, my 
issues with food just got worse.

In 2010, while she was ill, I was admitted to the child and adolescent mental 
health services (Camhs) outpatient unit at the Royal Free hospital in north 
London.

In March of that year, during my treatment, my mother died. In April, as a 
result of being estranged from my father, I was taken into foster care. At the 
end of 2010, at the age of 14, I was discharged from Camhs. But, sadly, my 
difficulties with eating didn’t end there.

Two years later, I was admitted to the eating disorders unit at the Royal 
Free, where I stayed for six months, followed by a further seven months at the
Ellern Mede Ridgeway <https://ellernmede.org/> clinic, which provides 
specialist treatment for children and adolescents with eating disorders.


Early into my stay at the Royal Free, my foster placement broke down. For six 
weeks, until my new foster mum, Nina, and her son, Isaac, entered my life, I 
had no parental figure to look after me. During those six weeks, the love and 
care of the nurses and support workers helped save my life.

Although I don’t remember the dosage of medication that gave me such severe 
side-effects I couldn’t go to the Paralympics, I do remember the nurse who had 
offered to take me there with her spare ticket. I remember the nurses stepping 
in to offer to do my laundry because I had no family to do it for me.

I remember how they made sure to facilitate my brother Andrei’s visits. We had 
been living apart, ever since I went into care. Those visits meant we’ve kept a 
strong relationship to this day.

I recall how the receptionist at the outpatient unit, who had remembered me 
from my time there a couple of years earlier, would come upstairs to the ward 
to see me. Then there were the support workers who would sit by my bed and read 
magazines when I had no one to visit me.

One nurse at Ellern Mede came into work on her day off to take me on a day 
out. And when it came to meeting my new foster mum for the first time, they 
made sure I was there with my chosen member of staff.

One nurse came into work on her day off to take me on a day out

I am still struggling with mental health problems, but I have recovered from 
my anorexia. My “lightbulb” moment came on my first holiday with my new foster 
family, at a Buddhist retreat in France. I was sitting on a bench with my 
foster mum and started eating independently. From there, my recovery really 
started. I was eventually discharged from Ellern Mede in August 2013.

Many important factors played a part in my recovery from anorexia, such as my 
friends, my social worker, my brother and my foster family. But without the NHS 
I probably wouldn’t be here. It is such a vital service.

I worry when I think about all the cuts and the already extremely stretched 
mental health services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/12/mental-health-budget-cuts-putting-services-under-huge-pressure>
 and wonder what would have happened if it had all happened now. Would I even 
have been admitted? Or would the budget cuts mean I would have slipped through 
the cracks and been even sicker before I qualified for help? The NHS saves 
lives daily; we need to save it to save ourselves, our families, our friends, 
our neighbours and the most vulnerable in society.

I am forever in debt to the employees of the NHS who not only saved my life 
physically but made me feel like I was worth something when I was adamant that 
I was not. Thank you.

 