
All is not well with the Work Programme, the government's flagship 
back-to-work scheme.

Last week Channel 4 news 
<http://www.channel4.com/news/exclusive-a4e-finds-jobs-for-3-5-per-cent-of-job-seekers>
 released the first piece of real evidence we've seen on how the scheme is 
going. It doesn't make for happy reading. Out of 115,000 jobseekers referred to 
provider A4E in the first year of the scheme, just 4,000 of them – 3.5% – have 
found sustained jobs.

Since last year's launch of the Work Programme, hailed by ministers as a 
revolution in back-to-work support, the omens haven't been good. But the 
Department for Work and Pensions' baffling strategy to ban any public sharing 
of the scheme's performance data has made it impossible to properly assess how 
it's going – until now.

A4E's 3.5% rate is lower than the rock-bottom minimum of 5.5% expected by the 
DWP. In the context of recent, unflattering media coverage surrounding the 
provider, people will no doubt want to kickA4e 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/a4e> for these atrocious figures. It may be 
that the organisation isn't making a good fist of the new programme. But A4e's 
past performance suggests that the problem isn't unique to it. It's likely that 
lots of Work Programme chiefs are staring at a similarly dire set of figures. 
The problems run deeper.

The uncomfortable truth is that the Work Programme design is flawed. DWP's 
minimum performance targets are based on its best guess of how many people 
would have got a job without any help. These, in turn, are based on the Office 
for Budget Responsibility's projections for growth from November 2010, when it 
predicted the economy would grow by 2.1% last year and 2.6% this year. But the 
economy has flatlined since then, and employment prospects have been similarly 
poor.

Worse, the scheme's design cuts frontline services at the very point when 
unemployment is mounting. During economic stagnation, when job outcome payments 
slow to a trickle, the only response for a firm or charity that doesn't want to 
go bust is to cut services – just when people need them most.

At the root of these problems is the fact that providers are on the hook for 
something they can't control – the labour market. A scheme that was supposed to 
hold providers accountable for their performance has ended up holding them 
accountable – and penalising their customers – for the performance of the 
economy. The programme was designed in a boom. Is it any wonder that it can't 
cope with economic stagnation on a scale not seen for 80 years?

With little prospect of imminent economic recovery, we need to start a 
conversation now about how to make the scheme work for the people who need it 
more than ever. Without changes, we risk a rerun of the human, social and 
economic unemployment tragedy of the 1980s and 90s.

Many of the principles behind the Work Programme are sound. Paying for 
sustained employment success, holding poor providers to account and encouraging 
innovation are welcome parts of the government's policy. But these features can 
be retained in a Work Programme reformed to cope with recession. So what should 
the strategy be?

First, the government could tone down the proportion of payments made for 
achieving job outcomes. In the depths of recession, the priority must be to 
make sure jobseekers get the help they need. For that they need the money to 
provide it.

Second, it should reassess its expectations of what's achievable in a 
recession, and formally link minimum performance levels to the latest OBR 
forecast.

Finally, the government should look at re-engineering the Work Programme so 
that a large proportion of the payment to providers is based on their 
performance compared with those of other providers, rather than judging them on 
inflexible targets and crucifying them when the economy falters.

Only then will the funding for this vital employment scheme not collapse when 
the economy tanks. And only then will the policy adequately support the people 
it was designed to help.
 