
If there's a mathematical idea that applies itself to almost everything in 
everyday life but is almost unknown outside the scientific world, the Fourier 
transform has to be the most unsung contender. It pops up wherever scientists 
need to study complex things that fluctuate in the real world – sound, heat, 
light, stock prices – and has been used to separate the signal from the noise 
in data collected for astronomy, medicine, genetics and chemistry. It is also 
the main equation used in the compression of digital images and sound on the 
web.

The noted physicist Lord Kelvin wasn't exaggerating when he wrote, in 1867: 
"Fourier's theorem is not only one of the most beautiful results of modern 
analysis, but it may be said to furnish an indispensable instrument in the 
treatment of nearly every recondite question in modern physics."

The equation was developed by the mathematician Baron Jean-Baptiste-Joseph 
Fourier and appeared in its final form in his 1822 book,The Analytical Theory 
of Heat. As the title suggests, Fourier was interested mainly in how heat 
flowed around materials but his mathematical tool turned out to be more 
fundamental than perhaps he realised.

In essence, it says that any complex wave-like signal you care to measure, 
that fluctuates over time or space, can be broken down into a sum of the 
familiar, regular, sine waves – the type that roll across the tops of oceans or 
vibrate along strings. Think of your complex signal as a cake. It contains 
flour, sugar, eggs and butter but you don't taste any of these things 
individually when you take a bite of the finished product. If the cake is the 
waveform, the recipe is the Fourier transform, a list of ingredients and how to 
combine them. If you want to adapt the final waveform (cake) somehow, it is 
much easier to do it by isolating the ingredients first.

Fourier's insight was to isolate the regularity contained in what looks, in 
the real world, a tangled mess of complexity. The term F(s) is called the 
transform and gives you the properties of the specific sine-wave component of 
your signal at the frequency "s". Specifically, it gives the amplitude (the 
maximum height of the wave above and below zero) and phase (how much of a 
wave's cycle has been completed relative to a fixed point).

On the right of the equation, f(x) represents how your signal fluctuates over 
space (x is the co-ordinate of location). This is multiplied by e (a widely 
used constant in maths, equal to 2.718) raised to the power of x multiplied by 
s, i (the square root of -1) and pi. This gives the properties of the sine wave 
at frequency s but, since we want the sum of all the frequencies, the 
expression on the right is added up across all space for steadily increasing 
values of s (the adding up is represented by the integration sign, by the 
elongated "S" on the left and the "dx" on the right).

To get a good visual of the Fourier transform, look at a graphical equaliser 
on an old hi-fi system. The bouncing lines give you the strengths of individual 
frequencies in the music at any point in time, as a spectrum. That spectrum is 
the real-time (albeit crude) Fourier transform of the sound coming out of the 
speakers.

Indeed, your ear performs Fourier transforms all the time (not mathematically, 
but you know what I mean). A sound wave is, physically, a collection of 
pressure waves moving through the air, but it isn't the vibrations they create 
in your eardrum that you "hear". Instead the components of the inner ear 
perform a sort of Fourier transform to untangle the composite pressure wave, 
teasing out each specific frequency and their associated amplitudes in order to 
covert them into a spectrum of electrical signals which is sent to the brain. 
Your brain interprets this changing spectrum as sound.

The Fourier transform represents the same information as the original signal, 
but in a way that makes it simpler for engineers and physicists to work with.

Say you want to compress music or speech files. While vinyl records store 
analogue sound in surface pits and grooves that mimic the waveform, an MP3 
lists frequencies and amplitudes – the Fourier transform – present in every 
moment in the track. This makes it easy to filter and compress the file – you 
can delete the information about frequencies outside the range of human 
hearing. This method is also useful if you want to clean up a recording – if 
there is a background hum, the Fourier transform information allows you to 
isolate and delete the main frequencies of that hum and preserve the rest.

The transform can also be applied to clean up pictures which are, in essence, 
just two-dimensional signals where colour and brightness fluctuate over space. 
A photograph taken in dim light, for example, might have lots of noise in the 
form of random spots of light – take the Fourier transform of the image and you 
can filter them out. This is especially useful in cleaning up astronomical 
images from space probes, sharpening the focus onto an area of interest.

Some of the most important uses of the Fourier transform have been made in 
understanding the precise arrangement of atoms in molecules. The science of 
crystallography works by shining X-rays at a crystal of the substance you want 
to examine (salt, say, or DNA or a protein). The X-rays come in from one side, 
are scattered by the molecules within and produce a pattern of spots on the 
other side. The intensity and position of each spot gives the amplitude and 
frequency information for the Fourier transform of the crystal's molecular 
structure. In essence, the scattering of X-rays by the crystal give the Fourier 
transform of the molecule within. Working the transform backwards, scientists 
can use the scattering pattern to infer the original 3D molecular structure. 
This method was used to work out the structure of DNA in the 1950s and has now 
advanced to giving us insights into the structures of complex proteins and even 
viruses.

Fourier transforms are also used to process information in medical imaging, 
including MRI and CAT scans, and to stop buildings falling down in earthquakes. 
When the ground shakes, a Fourier transform can show you which frequencies of 
vibration impart the most energy to their surroundings. A building will also 
have its own natural modes of vibration (a complex version of how a string 
vibrates at preferred frequencies) and, if the building's natural frequency 
matches that of an earthquake, it will shake harder and is more likely to fall 
down. Architects and building engineers can work out their proposed design's 
preferred vibrational frequency using computer models and, using information 
from the Fourier transform of local earthquakes, tune the building's preferred 
frequency so that it has the best possible chance of remaining standing, should 
disaster strike.

For more on the wonders of the Fourier transform check out Professor Stephen 
Curry's lecture at the Royal Institution: http://bit.ly/ri-fed
 