
Jimmy Carr or Gary Barlow, fill your boots with this one. It's got income tax 
relief, CGT relief, IHT relief, loss relief, luvvie relief (well, OK, not that 
one, but you get the picture). It is, to use the formula favoured by newspaper 
lawyers, "entirely legal and legitimate" tax avoidance. But what sets this 
particular scheme apart from the others is that it is also entirely moral and 
ethical.

Moral and ethical tax avoidance? Yes, it does exist, and Guardian Money even 
promoted it to readers last July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2011/jul/29/sands-films-studio-investors>. 
And as a result, a remarkable business is now prospering, jobs are protected 
and an historic archive is saved.

It is what tax breaks were meant for, before grubby financial advisers sliced, 
diced and packaged them up for the wealthy to renege on their responsibility to 
society.

It's the story of Sands Film Studios, which started life in a derelict 
Docklands wharf in the mid 70s and has become the leading film costume making 
and design centre in Britain, used extensively by Hollywood. Just recently it 
has fitted Daniel Day-Lewis for Lincoln and Sacha Baron Cohen for Les 
Misérables. Sands now has an unparalleled collection of costumes used in films 
such as Little Dorrit, A Passage to India, Pride and Prejudice and The Young 
Victoria.

Yet last year it was threatened with closure – the building was slated for 
redevelopment, maybe into yet more luxury riverside flats. But it has now been 
saved, and it is thanks in large part to Guardian Money readers, and a tax 
avoidance scheme called the Enterprise Investment Scheme.

The idea behind an EIS is that investors receive tax breaks if they put their 
money into helping risky businesses grow. Unfortunately, these types of schemes 
– from the Business Expansion Scheme onwards – tend to attract tax lawyers, who 
cynically manipulate the reliefs for "investors" who end up taking little risk 
and are rewarded with huge tax breaks.

Sands is different. The boss, Olivier Stockman, initially had discussions with 
tax specialists. They told him it would cost a minimum of £35,000, plus a 
percentage of the money raised, to launch an EIS. They advised him to set the 
minimum investment at £10,000 or more to attract the right sort of investor. 
They promised to produce the usual flashy corporate prospectus.

Nonsense, thought Stockman. Boldly, he decided to do it himself and cut out 
the financiers. If you are raising money to save a business, why hand a huge 
chunk of it to the middlemen? He approached HM Revenue & Customs, who he says 
were fantastically helpful. He set the minimum investment at just £500 as he 
wanted to engage with real people, not just rich tax avoiders.

The DIY approach worked. Most investors have indeed put up just £500. Many are 
people who work in the film and theatre business or in the local area. So Sands 
now has a hugely engaged bunch of "shareholders" inspired to help the business 
develop and grow (and, as the ever-entrepreneurial Stockman says, he's still 
open to further EIS investment).

The lesson? One of the oldest in the book: cut out the middleman. Guardian 
Money recently featuredcommunity/co-operative share offers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/jun/22/community-investment-schemes?newsfeed=true>
, where the cut paid to the financiers has, pleasingly, been close to zero. 
Finance is not rocket science, and whether you are borrowing or saving, the 
fewer mouths you feed in the finance industry, the better off you will be.
 