
Three things, only one week later, need saying about the Independent’s change 
of life. Let’s politely call them three dodgy propositions, and avoid mixing 
too much snake oil with the hogwash.

Thus far, the simple assumption of Indy transition has been eagerly grasped by 
a doleful chorus of pundits. Well, it’s obvious isn’t it? Goodbye news in 
print, ageing info pounded by heavy metal presses and carried in lorry-load 
bundles around the land; hello news on the screen in your back pocket. No 
diesel fumes or sweaty labour. Let the death rattles sound.

Evgeny Lebedev almost set this thesis to music 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/media/press/the-independent-becomes-the-first-national-newspaper-to-embrace-a-global-digital-only-future-a6869736.html>
. “The newspaper industry is changing, and that change is being driven by 
readers. They’re showing us that the future is digital… My family bought and 
invested heavily in theIndependent because we believe in world-class quality 
journalism, and this move secures the future of these vitally important 
editorial values.”

But it wasn’t digital that killed Indy ambitions through the 90s and 00s when 
David Montgomery and Tony O’Reilly picked up the tab. It was lack of a stable 
ownership with stable resources. It was grinding losses that refused to come 
down. And now, with those losses finally edging closer to break even, with the 
long struggle at last availing, what do the Lebedevs (and their shrewd, newish 
chief executive, Steve Auckland) do?

They sell the print i that helped turn things around – especially once the 
cover price was jacked up to 40p. They proclaim a global digital future, with 
more reporters to be appointed all over the world, but they pick up the £24m 
Johnston Press paid them and aim to spend it giving away the printEvening 
Standard (not turning it into a digital miracle) and making their London TV 
franchise less of a black hole. Global vision, in short, stops short at the 
M25. Transition doesn’t make it across Kensington High Street. Feet stay firmly 
on the ground.

The Indy and Sindy depended on the i for salvation. When Lebedev reached for 
his scissors, that all fell apart. Of course you can’t blame the Lebedevs for 
cutting and selling. They don’t own Chelsea FC; they’re good Samaritans who 
need hard cash. But the choices they’re making are basic terrestrial stuff, not 
some genius jump into a rose-tinted future.

And let’s – dodgy proposition two – dissect that future. We know what the BBC 
World Service is made of: more than 30 different language sections. We know 
what BBC Worldwide or CNN provide: discrete programmes and news bulletins for 
different parts of the world. That’s because, as a generalisation, “all news is 
local” (the Johnston Press motto, ironically enough).

Not always quite true, perhaps. Some news has a world dimension: a Syrian 
ceasefire, the death of David Bowie, a baby for Kim Kardashian, another bad day 
for Louis van Gaal. Big wars, big celebs and big football have international 
currency. But the detail of country coverage is local coverage: the election 
campaign on your patch, the council debates, the corrupt deals, the doctors on 
strike – news that won’t make it across national borders, but matters hugely 
inside them.

That’s why the New York Times, for all its pomp and circumstance, is starting 
editions for Latin America as well as Europe, and hiring reporters in places 
like Detroit and Atlanta so it can give home and front pages a local twist. 
That’s why Mail Online has added scores of reporters in America and Australia – 
because faraway places need stories about themselves above and beyond pictures 
of bikini models. That’s why theGuardian has complete coverage teams in New 
York and Sydney. “International” operation doesn’t mean a correspondent or two 
and a few cheap freelances: it means spending money you’ll find hard to get 
back.

“The unique editorial proposition of the Independent is perfectly suited to 
the global digital landscape,” says chief executive Auckland. “Following our 
decisive move to digital, we will be as focused and uncompromised as any 
startup, but with all the authority and trust of an established news brand – a 
truly unique proposition.” Sorry, Steve, but the hogwash won’t go away.

A print newspaper (say the Indy) has a familiar structure: news home and away, 
opinion, cartoons, pictures, puzzles, the arts, business and sport. It’s a 
complete, familiar package. It aims to offer a bit or a lot of everything, at a 
price. But sample the sport in Vice, BuzzFeed or the Huffington Post. It’s 
vestigial – or pathetically worse. The dominant news sites that don’t stem from 
newsprint pick, choose and leave masses out. If you want proper sports 
coverage, try a newspaper website instead.

Online selects and neglects. Online doesn’t do whole packages. Online, in 
truth, doesn’t need them – because the missing coverage you seek is only a 
click away. Online is endemically promiscuous. If print newspapers didn’t 
exist, you sometimes think, no one would think of inventing them digitally.

What evolves next may be change beyond banal assumption: an explosion of 
discrete, often paid-for, news brands you can blend to your taste: a truly 
unique proposition. Which is why magazines are doing so well. But theIndy, 
voyaging out alone with a bit of everything? Good luck and good fortune: but 
don’t think that this – or BBC3’s parallel transition online – is a bold, 
decisive step. On the contrary, it’s dodgy proposition three: making the best 
cover story of a bad job.
 