
It was rather hard to report on the forum about user-generated content at the 
Association of Online Publishers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aop> on 
Friday given that I was chairing the thing. But first off, I asked if anyone 
could come up with something better than the vomitous "user-generated content".

The alternatives include participatory media, visitor-generated content, 
prosumer content, homemade content and porous media, which is the other term 
the AOP picked out for the session.

What is user-generated content?

So what is it? The simplest definition I could muster was "material 
contributed to a service by the public", which is about as broad as a broad 
thing on Broadway but hey. I pointed out that evenletters to the editor 
<http://blogs.guardian.co.uk/organgrinder/2007/02/citizen_journalism_bullsht.html#more>
 have been described as UGC before, but that that isn't quite what we're 
talking about here. The focus is the vast ocean of video, photos and text 
content enabled by a new generation of websites like YouTube, Flickr, MySpace, 
Facebook, Twitter et al.

A show of hands confirmed the popularity of these sites as a consumer tool, 
but note that all these sites originated independently of mainstream media and 
professional content. It sometimes seems that the guys making all the big money 
online, for the most part, are the guys who invent extremely sophisticated 
content management systems and then sit back while everyone else fills them up. 
Not so easy for mainstream media, whose professional content requires skills 
and a great deal of money to produce. Can the mainstream media really invite 
and manage UGC as anything other than a bolt-on to their core business?

As we reported last week, around 90% of UK teenagers 
<http://media.guardian.co.uk/newmedia/story/0,,2081126,00.html> have at last 
one social networking account. In ten years' time, those teenagers won't be 
teenagers any more but adult consumers, so what implications are does that have 
for mainstream publishers?

The good and the bad sides

The challenges: time, for one thing - teenagers spend an average 40 minutes on 
Bebo every session.

Should publishers pay for contributions? Video sharing site Revver 
<http://www.revver.com> is one of a few exceptions, but generally UGC sites 
don't pay. Users want to share content for their own convenience and to get 
some profile. Publishers, on the other hand, have a legacy of paying for good 
content, so is it ethical to solicit material from the public and make money 
from ads alongside it if the contributors aren't paid?

And there are also huge legal issues about publishing and managing UGC, not 
least because actively moderating it, rather than just allowing people to post 
freely, can increase your liability.

On the plus side, anything that encourages people to think and engage and 
create, whether that's in apolitical debate on a web forum or in one of the art 
clubs that meets on Flickr, then great. I'd much rather people were doing that 
than watching Big Brother. (Sorry colleagues...)

Also on the positive side, this is an opportunity for traditional brands to 
reach new audiences and to act, as we keep hearing, as editors and guides 
through these mountains of new material.

The editor of the MIT Review described this role 
<http://blogs.guardian.co.uk/organgrinder/2007/02/more_wemedia_miami.html> 
recently as that of a bartender: you chose a particular pub in a particular 
street because you like the way it looks and feels, and because you like the 
people. The bartender finds out your tatste and recommends something that 
suits, and that's a helpful way to think about the increasingly important role 
of the conventional editor. There had to be at pub analogy in there somewhere.)

As often in web world, there are few definite rights and wrongs and no single 
perfect publishing model that incorporates UGC with professional content. But 
the way forward begins with flexibility and a willingness to experiment and 
respond to whatever comes next.

The BBC and UGC

Paul Brannan, deputy editor of BBC News Interactive <http://news.bbc.co.uk>, 
is a true evangelist for the value of user content and what it adds to 
professional news. Arguably the BBC is perhaps better resourced and better 
ideologically placed to deal with user content than any other news 
organisation: paying for contributions will never happen, said Brannan, mostly 
because the public feel their contribution is for the social good. One 
contributor had great pictures of a breaking news event and gave them to the 
BBC under the implicit understanding that they would not find their way into 
the hands of Rupert Murdoch. Suffice it to say that the BBC published the 
pictures and lo, screen grabs appeared in the papers the next day.

Brannan calls UGC "collaborative journalism" instead, underlining how the BBC 
views these contributions. We've read plenty about the July 7th and Buncefield 
examples, which are regularly wheeled out to illustrate the value of user 
contributions, but Brannan also showed a video report I hadn't seen before that 
incorporated mobile phone footage of people trapped on a tube near Edgware Road 
with the sound of injured people crying for help in the next carriage. There's 
no denying the power and editorial value of this material that just isn't 
matched by the professional footage of the outside of the tube station, no 
matter how much better quality and less wobbly it is.

Everyone's agreed on that, but how does the BBC handle this material in 
practice? There are six people working full-time on the news "UGC hub" who 
solicit and then distribute this information through the BBC. That process 
involves verifying material by contacting the contributor and checking the 
background, although only a tiny minority contribute hoax or reappropriated 
material.

The same tiny minority is illustrated in Have Your Say 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/talking_point/default.stm>, the BBC's rather 
complex comment and discussion platform. Yesterday's debate on a big brother 
society, for example, had 1827 comments, only 27 of which were rejected. The 
remaining 465, we assume, the hub just didn't get through. You might see that 
as illustrative of the demand for this kind of service compared to the 
resources it demands of the site.

Brannan said the introduction of UGC to the BBC on this scale has 
fundamentally changed the corporation's news processes. Its stories are no 
longer the end of the process but the beginning of it, soliciting comments, 
updates and new leads from readers that contribute because they "like the 
ethos" of the organisation. On 7th July, those pictures "pushed the development 
of the story and our understanding of what was going on". Would that 
willingness to contribute be quite as strong outside a public service 
organisation?

And is it right for journalists to plunder the social net profiles of people 
caught up in news events? Brannan said no, because although that information is 
technically public people are incredibly sensitive about the network and 
environment that they create. A stranger plundering a victim's MySpace page for 
personal information - as happened after Virgin Tech - is no more welcome than 
a doorstepper.

Brannan also showed examples of questions from users that were put to Colonel 
Gaddafi <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/help/3681938.stm>, the Libyan leader, when 
he took part in a debate organised by the BBC at Oxford University. Questions 
from the public were far more direct than those typically put forward by 
journalists.

One BBC viewer asked Gaddafi: "You're the leader of Libya. Why haven't you 
given yourself a promotion?"
 