
In his preface to The Rest Is Noise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/mar/14/rest-is-noise-alex-ross>, Alex 
Ross writes: "In the classical field it has long been fashionable to fence 
music off from society, to declare it a self-sufficient language." He goes on 
to contend that while in the "hyper-political 20th century, that barrier 
crumbles again and again", the "vague, mutable and deeply personal nature of 
musical meaning" makes the establishment of clear connections – let alone 
correspondences – between music and the outer world "devilishly difficult".

This is in fact a special form of pleading that rests on artificial 
parameters: implicit inThe Rest Is Noise, for all its formal disavowals, there 
remains an assumed sharp dichotomy between high and low art, and a privileging 
of the discourse of the former. While this may be a legitimate by-product of 
Ross's central purpose (after all, he is writing the history of 20th-century 
classical music), it leads him into reformulating the very aesthetic position 
he seems to renounce, without being able to adequately account for the way the 
rest of the 20th century's noise – its telephone tintinnabulation and 
ticker-tape timpani, its 4/4 stroke internal combustion engines and Wurlitzer 
steam ones – vitally impacted on the sound worlds of the great composers, even 
as they appeared to be turning their backs on it.

This is not to claim that Ross pays no attention to the impact of 
technological modernity on 20th-century classical music – he most certainly 
does. He notes the influence of recorded sound on the practice of composers as 
various asPercy Grainger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/nov/10/percy-grainger> and Béla Bartók 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/nov/28/bluebeards-castle-bela-bartok>; 
he identifies the gramophone – and latterly the radio – as totalising forces 
that erased deep cultural differences by spreading the "lingua franca" of 
American-style pop music. And he locates inStravinsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/igor-stravinsky>'s work in particular a 
creative response to new technology that resulted not only in a "steel-tipped" 
sound to his neo-baroque compositions of the interwar years, but a powerfully 
constructive creative relationship with it as "a new kind of folklore, another 
infusion of the real".

The fact of Hitler's undoubted musicality torments Ross, and runs through The 
Rest Is Noise like a haunting threnody – from the 17-year-old's claimed 
attendance of the 1906 premiere ofStrauss's Salome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jan/18/salome-strauss-an-unnverving-heroine>
 in Graz, to the Nazi leader's ecstatic absorption into theWagner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/richard-wagner> cult at Bayreuth, to the 
gramophone parties at Berchtesgaden, in the German Bavarian Alps, where he 
lectured his inner circle on this or that piece while it was playing. Ross 
describes Richard Strauss's equivocations with the Nazi regime and Hitler (who 
shamelessly flattered the composer only so far as he compromised himself 
artistically as well as morally) in a highly equivocal way: he wants to save 
Strauss, the man, from the fascist taint, just as he wants to save Wagner's 
sublime coloratura from the livid streak of antisemitism that tainted its 
creator. But really there's no need for these complex dissections to separate 
head from heart, or morality from art. To adopt the contemporary idiom, Hitler 
was indeed a great music lover – get over it! He could be one, and still 
prosecute the deaths of untold millions by word and deed.

Hitler loved music because many humans – including evil ones – love music. He 
loved Wagner's music both despite and because Wagner was an antisemite – it all 
just fed into the semiotic mix. Hitler also adoredFranz Lehár 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/apr/28/classicalmusicandopera.livereviews1>
's light operettas because he was a petit-bourgeois Austrian from the sticks, 
and that's what people like him, from there, at that time, loved. It's no more 
bizarre than Charles Manson loving the Beatles'"Helter Skelter" 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QWuXmfgXVxY>, and considerably less strange 
than American shock-rocker Marilyn Manson's choice of a stage name. The real 
shocker, though, is that classical music aficionados – including Alex Ross – 
still believe there can be something intrinsically morally ennobling about 
music.

In The Rest Is Noise, Ross reminds us of the invention, in 1906, of 
"a 200‑tonne instrument called the Teleharmonium, which, by way of an ingenious 
if unwieldy array of alternators, broadcast arrangements of Bach, Chopin and 
Grieg to audiences in Teleharmonic Hall opposite the Met". Ross's implication 
is that this was technology at its most premature; because he goes on to say 
that the Teleharmonium interfered with calls of local phone-subscribers – that 
"rushing, singing sound" again – and the hall shut after only two seasons. 
In fact, during the late 19th century, telephonic broadcasting systems operated 
in most of the major cities (the first was in Budapest). In London, the 
Electrophone Company was established in 1894, allowing subscribers to "sit 
comfortably at home in all weathers and listen to the latest comedy, opera, or 
tragedy, as the case may be, by the payment of a nominal rental". (This 
description comes from Stephen Inwood's excellentCity of Cities: The Birth of 
Modern London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/dec/31/featuresreviews.guardianreview8>
.) Subscribers to Electrophone received four headsets, so that the family could 
listen together.

True, there were only 600 paid-up subscribers, but the system was extended 
free to London hospitals, where it remained in use during the first world war. 
There was also an Electrophone Salon in Gerrard Street, where le bon ton, in 
full evening dress, listened to West End performances; and several London 
restaurants – including the Cafe Royale – had tabletop electrophones that 
allowed diners to hear the latest popular tunes by putting sixpence in a slot 
and cranking the handle of the apparatus. This early jukebox should remind 
us that all eras are steampunk in the sense that they contain within 
them, simultaneously, nascent and obsolescent forms of technology. The 
Teleharmonium and the Electrophone foreshadowed the broadcast of music by radio 
waves, but they also explode the notion that the telephone itself was ever a 
device that facilitated intimacy.

Stalin was a phoner quite as much as a phoney; the dictator enjoyed a 
particularly sinister form of chitchat: the late-night call placed to this or 
that artist would provide him with the opportunity to grant an imperial boon – 
inDimitri Shostakovich <https://www.theguardian.com/music/dmitri-shostakovich>
's case, a life-saving sinecure that kept the composer afloat in Stalin's 
bloody flux. But just as frequently, an artist would be told to expect a call 
that never came, and would either moulder away his days in petrified tension, 
or else have this fermata terminated by the heavy largo of the NKVD's 
approaching jackboots. Stalin, Ross writes, had narrow but by no means vulgar 
musical tastes. A frequent attendee at the Bolshoi, he also listened to 
classical music on the radio, sang folksongs with a fine tenor voice and 
audited every single recording made in the Soviet Union, writing judgements on 
the sleeves. What a curious contrast with the musical engagement of our own 
monarchical family, the members of which are seldom – if ever – to be seen in 
the Covent Garden opera house dedicated to them.

Ross's doom-laden narrative of Shostakovich and his music under Stalin's 
regime is, perhaps, the most dramatic portion ofThe Rest Is Noise. His careful 
readings of Shostakovich's Fourth and Fifth symphonies represent the clearest 
possible refutation of the idea that music is a non-representational art form. 
Indeed, when Ross writes of the response to the finale of the Fifth, with its 
listeners – many of whom were numb with grief from the loss of family members 
and friends to the Terror – jerked to their feet, while its conductor, 
Mravinsky, then held the score above his head throughout the long ovation, it's 
hard not to wish – albeit perversely – for a society and a culture in which 
music truly mattered this much. Ross writes of the sarcasm and even the irony 
detectable in many of the pieces Shostakovich composed during this period, but 
also hedges his non-representational bets by reiterating that since it's 
difficult to know what any given piece of music means, it remains still more 
problematic to claim that music can be mouthing one thing, while saying its 
diametric opposite.

And yet The Rest Is Noise paints with exemplary clarity the moral vacillations 
of Shostakovich and Strauss, and how those vacillations were depicted by their 
compositions during the late 1930s and into the second world war. When we reach 
the redemptive tale of Shostakovich's "Leningrad" Symphony No 7 – the 
microfilmed score flown out of the USSR to Tehran then around the war-torn 
world to be conducted by Toscanini in New York – we can only append to the 
author's aperçu "The composer became a propaganda symbol for the allied cause," 
the further observation that the piece itself also portrayed this cause. 
Leningraders heard Shostakovich's Seventh for the first time under absurdly apt 
conditions, given – as Ross writes – that the composer intended to "record in 
almost stenographic fashion the emotions of battle". The depleted Leningrad 
Radio Orchestra had to be bolstered by soldier-players conscripted from the 
frontline (three of whom died during rehearsals), and in spite of the attempts 
of a German general to disrupt the performance, the defenders took the 
initiative with a heavy bombardment of the enemy positions, followed by the 
symphony, which howled out into the eerie quiet of no man's land through 
loudspeakers.

Ross says of this bizarre irruption of the classical verities into the 
most extreme of contemporary contingencies: "the symphony became a tactical 
strike against German morale." And what could possibly be more representational 
than that? No, the problem for classical music in the age of the dictators 
remains the same one that classical music retains to this day: it remains, by 
virtue of the accumulated cultural sediment implicit in its very ascription – 
classical – an art form forever hand-cranking itself into contemporary 
relevance, and always tainted by association with vertiginous social 
hierarchies. We can see this more clearly if we examine those dystopian novels 
that famously either anticipated the emergent form of 20th-century 
totalitarianism, or responded to its actual shape – for in three, prime, 
examples, the significance of music is primary.

Yevgeny Zamyatin's We 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/jun/08/george-orwell-1984-zamyatin-we>
 was completed in 1921, published in English in 1924, but had to wait another 
64 years to appear in his native Russia. This is for obvious reasons: although 
the dystopia is called "One State", and the ideological overlord is glossed as 
Taylor (the American guru of the "Efficiency Movement" and father of the time 
and motion study), there can be no mistakingWe as anything but a monitory 
portrait of what Russia was likely to become under the soulless inspiration of 
dialectical materialism. InOne State, there are no names, only numbers, 
and mechanised music plays the role of emotional governor: "As always the big 
Musical Tower was playing the March of the United State with all its pipes … 
the Numbers were walking slowly, four abreast, exaltedly keeping step." The 
protagonist, D-503, goes to a talk given by a "phono-lecturer" on the 
"musicometer", a machine whereby "merely rotating this handle anyone can 
produce about three sonatas an hour. What difficulties our predecessors had in 
making music! They were able to compose only by bringing themselves to attacks 
of inspiration, an extinct form of epilepsy."

Zamyatin was describing music as yet to be created – although it sounds 
uncannily likePhilip Glass <https://www.theguardian.com/music/philip-glass>'s 
to me. In Aldous Huxley <https://www.theguardian.com/books/aldoushuxley>'s 
Brave New World music is also machine-made and ubiquitous, "warbling" from 
"synthetic music machines". The genetically engineered humans of the future are 
also – like the numbers of One State – corralled through the choral, but in 
their case, rather than marching songs, they participate in Solidarity Services 
and Mass Community Sings, both being drug-fuelled and orgiastic. When Huxley's 
characters are exposed to primitive music in Mexico they experience it 
as terrifying – as does Zamyatin's D-503 when he is exposed to aScriabin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jul/22/scriabin-piano-sonatas-1-10-anatol-ugorski>
 piano piece.

In Orwell <https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeorwell>'s 1984 the 
distinction is also drawn between the machine-made music created by 
"Versificators" that propagandises from the telescreens – and which is produced 
in bulk, along with all culture by departments of Winston Smith's Ministry of 
Truth – and the rendition of these ditties by the authentic voices of the 
proles. Still more revelatory is the song of a thrush heard by Winston and his 
lover Julia during one of their clandestine trysts: "The music went on and on, 
minute after minute, with astonishing variations, never once repeating itself, 
almost as though the bird were deliberately showing off its virtuosity." In 
stark contrast is the theme song of Hate Week, concocted – rather than composed 
– to orchestrate the sublimation of the individual into mass violence: "It had 
a savage, barking rhythm which could not exactly be called music, but resembled 
the beating of a drum. Roared out by hundreds of voices to the tramp of 
marching feet, it was terrifying." Like so much of1984 this is clearly Orwell's 
recasting of his own distempered 1948 into a dystopian future. And like all 
the best futurology it succeeds by pinpointing those discontinuous advances in 
technology that – while still only emergent – will come to dominate the 
societies to come.

The Rest Is Noise offers us a fascinating narrative of classical music under 
the mid-20th-century tyrannies of Hitler and Stalin, but what it cannot 
adequately convey is the extent to which developments in compositional theory 
were quite irrelevant to what music was saying, or being made to say. For 
insight into this we must have recourse to the hoary old McLuhan adage: "the 
medium is the message"; and the new media that came increasingly to dominate 
the making and receiving of music in the 1920s, 30s and 40s were the telephone, 
the radio and the television.

• Will Self's lecture on "Dictatorship, Machines and 20th Century Classical 
Music" will be delivered today in the Art of Fear series as part of The Rest Is 
Noise festival at the Southbank, London SE1.southbankcentre.co.uk 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/festivals-series/the-art-of-fear>
 