
 Can art change lives? The argument has raged since Plato's time and the only 
convincing answer anyone has come up with so far is "maybe".

Ministers are as uncertain as the rest of us, although some have come to the 
rather vague conclusion that listening to music, going to plays and looking at 
pictures may be good for us. But rarely do they marvel publicly at a late 
Beethoven quartet or a Shakespeare sonnet, fearing that too public a belief in 
high art (for high art's sake) might be both elitist and politically unwise.

It is much easier to lend support to the creative industries (advertising, 
design, publishing, internet, performing arts), not least because they create 
jobs (1.3m people work in the sector) and generate revenue (£112bn a year). 
Tony Blair is a big fan.

When it comes to culture, ministers are happy to see readily measurable social 
benefits, which is why two of the 10 goals that the Department for Culture, 
Media and Sport has set itself relate to increasing access to the arts and 
improving social inclusion.

These outcomes can be more easily measured than spiritual enlightenment and so 
last year the department published a report showing how the arts and sport 
could help beat crime and long-term unemployment, boost health and improve 
qualifications. With responsibility for a £1bn budget, the department is 
understandably happier to report that it has helped a voter get a job than to 
say it has improved her mind.

To be fair, it puts its money where its mouth is. It has found the cash (at 
last) to help end admission charges at national museums: adults have had free 
entrance to publicly funded museums since December 1.

Arts minister Tessa Blackstone says she believes in "minimum bureaucracy, 
maximum money", one of the reasons she has supported the controversial reform 
of the Arts Council.

Arts education, she believes, is key to what the DCMS should be doing. "I'm 
particularly happy that we've given £30m to the National Foundation for Youth 
Music which promotes music-making in young people." There is also Creative 
Partnerships, the DCMS's flagship initiative, which, from 2002, will give pilot 
schools the money to "explore their creativity by working with creative 
professionals".

Blackstone has also moved the access debate on a little by suggesting that it 
might be an even better idea if more "ordinary people" became involved in doing 
art rather than just looking at it. Again, it could be argued that this is more 
a way of reducing demands on social and healthcare budgets than spreading 
enlightenment.

One of the problems with access is that a concern for head counting can become 
more important than the quality of art produced: do we rejoice more over 2,500 
people packing a hall to hear Charlotte Church than over 120 crammed into 
Stratford's Other Place to see Sam West's magnificent Richard II? Blackstone 
argues that: "There is an acceptance that we do have to fund things that are 
excellent, but they've got to be presented in ways which would bring people in."

The West Yorkshire Playhouse in Leeds has managed to maintain this critical 
balance. Its productions have won praise while its innovatory - and 
passionately believed-in - work in the community has set new standards for 
cultural institutions.

Two years ago, the former culture secretary Chris Smith challenged the arts 
world to increase participation from half to two-thirds of the population. 
Earlier this year, the Policy Studies Institute reported that attendance at 
arts and cultural events had fallen by an average of 8%. Tessa Blackstone is 
sceptical about these figures. Still, she admits: "I accept there is more work 
to be done." We will have to wait and see whether gloomy statistics will defeat 
official cultural good intentions.
 