
Nine will open wide in America on Christmas Day, and it is certain to be a 
major contender in the Oscar race. It is the movie version of the musical (book 
by Arthur Kopit, music by Maury Yeston) that opened on Broadway in 1982, with 
Raul Julia in the lead role of Guido Contini. In a New York revival, Antonio 
Banderas played Guido, and when it was given in a concert performance in London 
Jonathan Pryce played the lead. This is the movie, from the Weinstein Company, 
and everything has been upscaled. Beyond the astonishing female cast (more 
anon), it has Daniel Day-Lewis as Guido. There is a hint that in this version, 
Guido has been upgraded just a little, from romantic manipulator to tragic 
figure. And that's the proper place to add that Nine is probably the last 
script written byAnthony Minghella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthonyminghella> (so suddenly wiped away in 
March 2008 – but still working, or so it seems, still creative, still obsessed 
and anxious over the role of the show's director).

In a way, I've omitted the most important point: that Nine was a re-working of 
Federico Fellini's film from 1963, 8½. It won the Oscar for best foreign 
language picture, and it won Fellini a nomination as best director – he lost to 
Tony Richardson for Tom Jones (a lesson in making sure your ironic smile stays 
in place). 8½ is much admired. In 2002, when Sight & Sound last polled writers 
and film-makers on the best pictures ever made, 8½ was No 9 in the top 10. And 
10 years earlier – in a marked split – when the film failed to make the 
critics' top 10, it was No 2 (second only to Kane) in the directors' poll.

That's not surprising, for 8½ is Fellini's movie about the dilemma of a 
celebrated director (like himself) who has all the opportunity to make a new 
film, but can't quite work out what it should be. In 8½, Guido was played by 
Marcello Mastroianni. That Guido was a man surrounded by women (as well as his 
director's entourage), all of whom represented a facet of the man and the 
artist. But Nine (or this movie version) goes rather further: the director's 
difficulty in finding a subject or a story is personified by his helpless 
infidelity. To be precise, in the movie – there are four female figures (his 
wife, his mistress, his muse or regular actress, and a novice) with whom he is 
or has been in love. These female figures are played by Marion Cotillard, 
Penélope Cruz, Nicole Kidman and Kate Hudson – and if you want a little more 
firepower, there are two older women, his mother, Sophia Loren, and his regular 
costume designer, Judi Dench.

But I think the first thing to say is that this extra stress on love, fidelity 
and endless seduction seems to me to come from Anthony Minghella – from "Ant", 
the name of endearment by which so many knew him, the apparent opposite of the 
"Maestro" by which Guido is known.

Very few artists know what their last work is – fate determines that. But you 
will remember that Minghella died suddenly (he was only 54) from complications 
after what had seemed like an ordinary operation. I'm sure the public in 
Britain especially felt the loss, the more so in that Minghella had 
stretched his busy life into being a very active chairman of the British Film 
Institute. And in his small development company, Mirage (in partnership with 
Sydney Pollack, who also died, two months after Ant), he had been active 
in writing, producing and generally assisting a range of interesting and 
unusual projects including The Reader and Kenneth Lonergan's Margaret.

When a busy film-maker dies, he does not simply stop. There are many projects 
to which his work and his name are attached, and more of them will stay active 
if enough people think they show promise. One of them is Nine, co-written by 
Ant and Michael Tolkin (writer of Altman's The Player). In other words, 
Minghella never knew that Nine would become so significant. Equally, it may 
have been a picture that he wrote so that he could direct it. Minghella was 
of Italian descent (you know the history of ice-cream makers in Ryde on the 
Isle of Wight). The last time I was in the Mirage offices in London, he showed 
me some colour drawings he had just received – drawings done by Fellini himself.

I am one of heaven knows how many people who live with a hole in our lives 
since Ant's death. It was not just that he was merry, warm, kind and smart. It 
was that he could always find time to share those things with you. He was a 
connecting force (that's why the BFI hired him) likely to be of value and 
assistance to projects that passed by in one long, rapt telephone conversation, 
but which he would not explore further himself. We all of us miss him and his 
talk and his friendship, and I daresay that many will fall upon Nine with all 
the more interest in that it may be his last word.

Which is why I want to say that this is a very poignant, fragile movie about a 
man, Guido, who becomes a nearly Dracula-like womaniser in Day-Lewis's great 
performance. Guido ends the film about to begin a new movie, but haunted by the 
fact that he uses his performers in ways that may make stars of them, but which 
also pain them and leave them damaged.

Ant made love stories (of one kind or the other), and I think that he had once 
been a shy, squat, rather dry fellow who led a provincial life and then found 
that the making of plays and films was a way of meeting women, and of doing 
great work with them. And so Nine on the screen is a film rather like Jean 
Renoir's great picture French Cancan. Made in 1955, it has Jean Gabin as a 
showman and impresario, Danglard, who introduces the can-can to Paris. But he 
is a demon, too, a man who regularly falls in love with his actresses – and he 
ensures that they do greater work because of that. But of course, such a man 
cannot help but notice new girls as they come along. And so in French Cancan, 
Danglard has a mistress, the dancer played by María Félix. Then he discovers 
and falls for a young laundress (Françoise Arnoul), who will lead the can-can 
line. But just as she is readying the big night of that dance, she realises 
that Danglard has found a new flame, a singer.

The women are taken up, raised to a higher level and abandoned. Such things 
happen. Damage is done sometimes. And the men are likely to solve the problem 
by crying, "The show must go on." We are inclined to say the same thing – after 
all, we are the audience, and we love the parade of beauty and its melodrama 
just like a Guido.

But French Cancan is one of those few films that, even in passing, admits to 
the damage and the danger. People kill themselves sometimes. Shining careers go 
dead from depression or dismay. And no one with normal human kindness can fail 
to notice that.

I found Nine a very moving film. I'm not sure if the public will take it to 
their hearts. Oh, the women are dazzling and then tragic. There are brilliant 
musical numbers. Director Rob Marshall has served the project admirably. This 
is not an attempt to assign credit. Tolkin did the first script, then Ant did a 
revision – handed in shortly before he died. The film belongs to all three men, 
and to Day-Lewis, who has a mixture of charm and the sinister that is unique. 
Still, this is a film about the soul-searching of a privileged, spoiled man – 
it is hardly a dilemma that is widely shared.

Anthony Minghella has been dead getting on for two years – the anniversary 
will be close to Oscar time. Ant may win another award. Plenty of you will 
find great pathos and energy in Nine – as well as astringent humour. It is a 
film for showbusiness people, I suppose, and I only wish that Ant could still 
be reached by phone and told that the message came through, truly, madly, 
deeply – if you recall, his first film was the story of a couple separated by 
death, but defiant.
 