
On the last day of my holiday at my parent’s house, a text arrives from Emily, 
who I met last year when R and her husband Jim were in rehab. Jim’s funeral is 
in a few days. The news of his death is sad, if not surprising news. Both R and 
Jim relapsed a few months after leaving rehab but, unlike my husband, hers had 
liver disease.

After many failed detoxes at other hospitals, this was Jim’s last stab at 
sobriety. Despite the warnings, despite Emily, the doctors and all his friends 
saying “If you pick up the bottle again you will die!” after a hopeful dry 
phase, and in a little more than a year, Jim drank himself to death.

I forward the details of the funeral to R, but remember he hasn’t replied to a 
couple of my texts from the day before. I listen to a voicemail from a 
neighbour, a close friend. She tells me that R lost his keys and came around to 
collect the spare set from her after lunch. “He said he’s fallen off the 
wagon,” she says. “He’s gone home to bed, but asked me to tell you not to 
worry. He seems OK.”

When I call R’s phone it goes straight to voicemail. I speak to my neighbour 
and ask her to check on him in the morning if the curtains are still closed.

We came here to help. That’s what we all said – me, Emily, all the other 
husband, wives, lovers, children, parents and friends of the addicts – gathered 
in the family therapy room of the rehabilitation centre where our loved ones 
were receiving treatment. Help for them first, and us second, if at all. Not 
many of us really understood then that we needed to concentrate on getting 
better ourselves, regardless of what the addict was doing.

There is no one cure for addiction, no magic bullet, no panacea that will lead 
to a sober life. Relapses are common, a reminder that recovery is hard. (How 
many times have I heard the cliché “I wish I could just wave a magic wand and 
make everything better!”)

If only it were that easy. Jim’s imminent funeral confirms my belief that one 
cannot save the life of an addict unless the addict wants to be saved.

Jim was somebody who had endless support from his family, and although he 
briefly grabbed on to a healthier life, he didn’t choose to hold on. And R has 
taken to bed in the afternoon because he would rather drink than face the 
outside world, and that makes me sad too. But not as sad as it used to, and 
almost certainly not as sad as it makes him.

To question that my help and support is not important to R would be 
pessimistic thinking indeed. But I am aware that no amount of expensive rehab, 
medication or wise words from expert doctors or well-meaning friends will save 
him from drink. In the end, compulsion, desire and whatever-the-fuck-else it is 
that makes human beings do things to excess – things that are harmful and can 
turn the fun into un-fun in no time at all – are stronger than I can fathom. 
Human behaviour is sometimes beyond science.

In my mind – and despite some recovering alcoholics insisting that their 
sobriety came as a result of a spiritual awakening – people often give up doing 
the things that harm them because they are too exhausted to continue. The 
fatigue – rather than the biblical thunderbolt-from-the-sky moment – can be the 
thing that eventually makes them stop. But who knows? And who really knows if 
the decision to stop drinking for ever can ever really mean for ever?

As I sit here thinking about Jim’s too short life – a life that at one point 
looked as if it could have been turned around – I realise that one can never be 
too complacent about recovery. R seems to be more cheerful, less anxious, 
despite his occasional hide-away-from-the-world days; I am not yet too tired to 
carry on in our relationship and he is not yet too tired to give up on his 
dreams of a sober life. But as for tomorrow, I know he could get better or he 
could get worse. Or in years to come, he could end up as the sober one, and I 
the insufferable drunk.

However much I have learnt to practise tough love, however much I have begun 
to focus on my own happiness rather than his, I will never be able to stop 
loving my husband simply because he drinks. I remember Emily once saying: 
“Drink kills every bit of Jim that is good. I love him, but I can’t fucking 
stand him.”
 