
What does Nitin Sawhney's orchestral commission for the Britten Sinfonia have 
in common with Jamaican comedies at the Hackney Empire and a training scheme 
for black and Asian museum curators in Birmingham? Well, quite obvious really: 
they are examples of the new cultural diversity in Britain which is set to 
change our view of the artistic landscape. To quote a recent Arts Council 
paper: "Britain's culture has been transformed. . .with new forms, energies and 
cultural perspectives. This process has generated a quality of heat and 
excitement that has not been lost on countries outside Britain."

Seeking cultural diversity is surely a laudable aim: to reflect the 
diversified communities in terms of cultural management and artistic 
production. Yet some naysayers still mutter about the perils of "political 
correctness" and cultural relativism. Indeed the issue of the right to cultural 
diversity caused such discord in Australia that the brilliant artistic director 
Peter Sellars was compelled to resign from the Adelaide Festival for wanting 
more than a tokenistic presence of Australian ethnic minority culture. More 
relevantly for the UK, many arts institutions seem to place more resources into 
presenting a shiny smiley package of equal opportunity proposals and monitoring 
forms than they do in actually implementing radical new practices.

If we take arts for all as a serious objective, it must mean that in an 
increasingly multiracial, multicultural society, we reflect these communities 
in the arts at all levels. Belatedly the arts establishment, from the Museum 
Libraries and Archives service to the Film Council, has been forced to 
recognise that much needs to be done.

The current thinking is that equal access can be achieved by the proper 
implementation of equal opportunities for those of African, Caribbean, Asian 
and Chinese origin; ethnic minorities make up about 30% of Londoners - 7% of 
the UK population. Moreover, the Arts Council's paper argues that the leaders 
of these arts organisations will need to start promoting black and Asian work 
and recognise the dynamic force that our various communities represent.

What this means in practice can vary widely. There are the exciting attempts 
to cross-fertilise ideas and themes between different cultures realised by 
musicians such as Belize-born composer, Errolyn Wallen, flitting from jazz to 
Shostakovich-influenced compositions. Her band, Ensemble X's motto is "We don't 
break down barriers in music. . .we don't see any." Or Nitin Sawhney's musical 
hybridity, which deconstructs barriers by drawing on traditional Asian and 
contemporary sounds, flamenco guitar and Latin rhythms, drum'n'bass and 
electronic music.

Then there are one-off festivals such as the extraordinary Push Festival last 
summer that showcased black visual arts, comedy, opera and even circus. And 
Birmingham's The Drum, the only arts centre in Europe committed to promoting 
work from the ethnic communities.

How institutions respond depends on their building a dialogue with the 
communities involved. The Museums, Archives and Libraries service has set up 
groups to advise and share good practice on how local communities can see 
themselves in their collections. This has led to new initiatives such as 
recording memories from the Afro-Caribbean communities in Gloucester Folk 
Museum for an audiovisual exhibit, to a new touring exhibition on Egyptology 
that will, for the first time, see these relics of antiquity through the prism 
of black African art.

The Film Council is in the middle of an extensive process of consultation, 
listening to the constituencies' demands before it declares more detailed 
measures on how best to proceed. Patience will be needed: they are playing a 
long game, but the transformative effect of diverse filmmaking in the 
mainstream could profoundly change the film culture.

There are new spaces for creativity and grounds for inquiry here. Only time 
will tell whether this is mere window dressing or the sign of a new political 
will to blast us into the future.
 