
Many Afghans are scratching their heads trying to make sense of what has just 
happened in their country. What, some ask, was the point of the all-absorbing, 
expensive and divisive electoral exercise that has dominated the past six 
months?

On Sunday the Afghan independent election commission declared Ashraf Ghani, 
former finance minister, the winner of the presidential elections. On the same 
dayan agreement was signed between him and his rival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/21/afghanistan-power-sharing-deal-abdullah-ashraf-ghani-ahmadzai>
, Abdullah Abdullah, former foreign minister, to establish a government of 
national unity.

The agreement promises to reduce the political uncertainty that has recently 
plaguedAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>. And the 
country can claim to have undergone its first peaceful democratic transition of 
power – a major achievement.

The deal has been hailed by the US, the Europeans and neighbouring countries 
as a breakthrough, an essential step towards stability. Unsurprisingly, it has 
been denounced by the Taliban who view the elections as a sham and describe 
Ghani as “the new handpicked US employee in Kabul”.

The focus will now be on whether the deal will hold, how senior posts will be 
allocated, and how the new government will work to deliver on promises made 
during the campaign.

But the sense of relief, and the buzz around what the new president will do, 
is tinged by perplexity about what has happened, the implications for the 
future, and the relevance of elections.

The second round in June gave Ghani 56.4% of the votes. This prompted 
accusations of massive fraud from the opposing camp. It was swiftly followed by 
what was effectively an exercise in conflict prevention: an audit of all 8m 
votes.

The audit was described by the UN as “unprecedented in international electoral 
practice” and unique in terms of its scale and depth. Its results have not been 
officially released. This was at the insistence of the Abdullah camp on the 
grounds that it would trigger violence, presumably as it shows that he lost by 
a substantial margin – as much as 45% to 55%. The agreement pre-empts the 
audit. The text reflects Ghani’s insistence upon constitutional rectitude while 
accommodating conflicting interests.

It includes the creation by presidential decree of a post of chief executive 
officer, which Abdullah can fill, answerable to the president but with specific 
executive responsibilities; aloya jirga 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-25024163> or assembly to consider the 
creation of a prime ministerial post; a constitutional review; electoral reform 
including issuance of electronic national ID cards to Afghan citizens; future 
elections including at the district level; and an understanding as to how 
senior officials will be chosen.

For the US and its allies, the deal provides a basis for continued support to 
Afghanistan, not least to preserve the economic and security gains made at 
enormous expense, both human and financial, over the past decade. From Obama 
downwards, the US has invested significant political capital in making it 
happen.

The dividend could be substantial. Both candidates have agreed to sign a 
bilateral security agreement with the US, required for Nato to honour financial 
commitments to 2017, which may be more significant than the security support 
that accompanies it. The new government needs help to face a series of 
interlocking crises, the most pressing of which is financial.

Political uncertainty has badly dented business confidence and activity. 
Domestic revenues are dropping as economic growth and customs revenues have 
contracted. Major drains include capital flight, illicit economic activity, 
corruption and assets stolen as a result of theKabul Bank fraud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/16/kabul-bank-afghanistan-financial-scandal>
. As the prospect of civil servants going unpaid looms, the government is 
seeking $537m (£330m) in emergency funding from donors.

Overhanging everything are mounting levels of violence as the Taliban encroach 
upon a number of provincial capitals and penetrate Kabul. The six months since 
the first round have seen mounting civilian and security force casualties.

The prospect of a political process involving the Taliban is very uncertain. 
Ghani says his government believes in reconciliation as the only path to peace. 
Given Obama’s plan toremove all US combat troops from Afghanistan by the end of 
2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/28/afghanistan-president-welcomes-us-plan-withdraw-troops>
, Taliban hardliners will argue that time is on their side. The Iraq experience 
may increase pressure on him at home to pursue a conditions-based rather than 
calendar-based withdrawal.

Sunday’s agreement and the formation of a national unity government mark the 
end of the Karzai era. They should allow the incoming president to set a new 
agenda – to tackle the financial, economic and security crises, and to take 
steps that meet popular expectations including on the rule of law and 
corruption. It can be the occasion to reboot international partnerships, 
whether with the US or with regional actors such as China, India, Iran and 
Pakistan.

But this opportunity has been gained at a high price: the reputation of 
elections. The first round was celebrated as a powerful expression of popular 
will and national sovereignty. The second round and its audit were used to 
achieve what many thought elections were supposed to displace – closed-door 
deal-making by the political elite.

Hence the disappointment. It may take a long time to repair the damage.
 