
Taking the heat

Rajendra Pachauri

The head of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has been under fire 
ever since it was revealed that a glacier that was supposed to be a waning 
trickle of despair by 2035 is actually going to take a few years longer than 
that to disappear. Though disappear, still, it most assuredly will.

Nevertheless, this somehow apparently means that Pachauri should resign, all 
science is wrong, all sceptics are right, global warming is a lie and we can 
all live forever. What a relief. Let's throw another panda on the fire.

Papal protest

Pope Benedict

A familiar weariness steals over us as we report that the pope has inveighed 
against a proposed tweaking of the equalities bill which, as he – albeit 
wrongly – understood it, threatened to impose greater responsibilities on 
church leaders not to discriminate against homosexuals.

Pope Benedict, just ahead of his visit to Britain, argued that the bill ran 
contrary to "natural law". Honestly, popes. You can't take them anywhere.

The proposed amendment was actually merely to strengthen the distinction 
between religious and non-religious jobs but the House of Lords deemed it 
otiose. So everything is as it was and nobody's aged homophobia glands needed 
to have started pumping after all. Pace yourself, Joseph. There's bound to be 
plenty of genuine potential progress that needs retarding before you're done.

Money can't buy love 

Katie Price and Alex Reid

From the supposed ashes of Brangelina's relationship rises a phoenix at least 
0.0001% as beautiful as that which has gone before. Former glamour model and 
barracuda-womanKatie Price <https://www.theguardian.com/media/katieprice> has 
married cage fighter Alex Reid (pictured), the copper-coloured derbrain who won 
Celebrity Big Brother, in a doubtless beautiful ceremony in Las Vegas.

It is, to all those who demand a percentage of the magazine sales, a match 
made in heaven. It promises to be the start of a beautiful, or at least 
beautifully lucrative, story for everyone. Of course, if the unromantics among 
you would rather shoot yourselves in the head than plough through another 
Price-based media storm, now would be the time to do it.

What they said

"Somebody asked me what it's like to be a duchess. Well … I've been one for so 
long now, I can't remember what it was like before."Dowager Duchess of 
Devonshire, 90 next month. They don't make 'em like they used to.

"It just wasn't my night." Software analyst Kajen Thuraaisingham, who scored a 
total of five points on Mastermind, the lowest score ever.

"I love all the old classic music. Bands like Take That, that my mum used to 
listen to."Pixie Lott

What we've learned

Kyrgyzstan is to issue passports for its mountain sheep

4,500 children were penalised for trying to cheat on exams last year

Trevor Eve is the BBC's best-paid actor

Britons have a collective personal debt of £1.5 trillion

The capital budget for the NHS will fall by 22% this year

and what we haven't

What we're going to do when we fall ill
 