
They say Americans don't walk. Well, they do in the Navajo Nation - because 
even if northern Arizona has gigabytes of photogenic vistas, getting out of the 
car is the only way to get your boots covered in desert dust and soak up the 
silence. I'd already taken a short walk on the drive up from Phoenix - in the 
lush woodland of the Coconino national forest - but once you get north of 
Flagstaff, the light and landscape change dramatically. At Monument Valley I 
took a dusk walk across a vast plain of extinct volcanoes and cinder flow, 
surrounded by towering mesas splashed with purples, greens, pinks and reds that 
turned to black as the shadows of the rocky spires and buttes got longer.

Hiking the mesas and canyons also provides a chance to observe at close hand a 
mode of life that predates asphalt and gasoline, to see the sensually shaped 
female hogans (traditional dwellings) still used for rituals and to study the 
petroglyphs and rock art left by generations of Indians. Given the ferocity of 
cowboys and colonial governments, it is incredible that the Navajos and Hopis 
have this land at all. For visitors, the self-governed 27,000-square-mile 
reservation, created in 1923, is an opportunity to re-imagine America in all 
its mysteriousness.

I stopped to eat and sleep at Cameron, site of one of the old trading posts 
where natives and settlers would exchange goods and services and the occasional 
gunshot. Now it was a lonely old motel on the main highway with a homey 
restaurant attached that did a peppery lamb stew. I was in a "dry state" - the 
Navajo autonomous government has banned alcohol since the foundation of the 
Nation - and expected to get fit and lose weight as I weaned myself off booze. 
But the stews were big and came with enormous slabs of fried bread. And it was 
cold. I got fatter with each day.

In the morning I left my room at 6am. I wanted to see the sun rise on the 
eastern tip of the Grand Canyon - on the western border of the Navajo Nation - 
so took the meandering Highway 64 to the lookout at Desert View. The road 
followed the Little Colorado river into more national forest territory, but in 
the dim light I might have come here straight from my dream state of a few 
hours earlier.

It was the pinkish hues of the rocks all over again, but now with a faint mist 
hanging over the gorges. The radio service was limited, and I opted for the 
Navajo/Hopi station FM 88.1 over country and western.

The exotic, unfathomable drone of pow-wow music added to the unearthly quality 
of the dawn here. The canyon proper is hidden from the road and I walked in the 
cold morning air to a spot just beneath an old brick lookout tower. It was 
eerie to see the sun unveil itself with not another human soul in sight. The 
canyon is deeper and more cosmic than any coffee table print could ever 
suggest. Afterwards I drove to one of the main entrances at Grand Canyon 
Village, had a huge breakfast, and then bolted as coaches began to draw up 
packed with noisy sightseers.

After the highlights of Monument Valley and the Grand Canyon, it would be easy 
to become blasé about the Navajo Nation's less famous natural attractions. But 
the 24-mile-long Canyon de Chelly, near the town of Chinle, is beautiful and 
tranquil. Not only is the canyon lined with Anasazi (ancient Puebloan) 
dwellings, but from the top of the canyon I could see that the flat bottom was 
carpeted by soft green pastures.

Peer over the edge and you'd think these grasslands on the valley floor were 
inaccessible, but there is a good self-guided hike from the White House Ruin 
overlook. I walked down, using a trail that squeezes between jutting ledges of 
sandstone, meandering precariously - and steeply - to impressive adobe and 
stone ruins lying at the base of a vast wall of sheer rock. Nearby were the 
homes and farms of working Navajo families. Squash, corn and beans were growing 
nicely around the smallholdings. There were fruit trees and sheep and ponies 
penned in by makeshift wooden fences.

The Chelly links up with the 25-mile-long Canyon del Muerto, and the rims of 
both can be driven in a couple of hours. I met hardly any other drivers along 
the way. Largely forgotten by the hordes that congregate at the Grand Canyon, 
the Chelly and Muerto canyons are impressive in their own way. It's their low 
profile on the national tourist radar that accounts for the fact the Navajo 
have remained here in large numbers, and have been able to preserve their 
traditional way of life as smallholders and artisans.

The Navajo are proud of their un-American way of life, their history and that 
they have, against all odds, survived where other, often more ancient, tribes 
have perished. An artist scratching away on a rock at the edge of the Canyon de 
Chelly told me that it was "the women who were the warriors. My grandma told me 
she knew a woman who took out an officer right there." He pointed across the 
curve of the canyon. "And she hit him right there." He placed his forefinger 
between his eyes. His work echoed the graffiti of the Puebloans who had 
colonised the canyon a millennium ago, with Klee-like antelopes and dancers 
lost in a whirl of abstractions and enigmatic motifs.

That evening, when I visited the powerful permanent exhibition of 19th century 
photographs in the main Navajo Nation museum at Window Rock, I was struck how 
all the captions had emotional and political content. Beside images of hungry, 
enslaved Navajos were comments such as "This boy has seen enough for one life" 
and rhetorical questions: "Can you imagine what this was like?" The victors are 
able to tone down their passions in scholarly tomes and Discovery Channel 
documentaries, but for the Navajo history is alive and affecting.

On my penultimate day in the Navajo Nation, two of my most deep-seated 
prejudices about modern America were quashed. First, at the Hubbell Trading 
Post, instead of the usual tacky souvenirs and fossilised "living museum" 
experience, I came upon a vibrant historic site that manages to combine 
conservation with old-style commerce. Local Navajos and Hopis still come by to 
buy, sell and barter - their large rugs cost more than your average car - and 
the bookshop, jewellery store and arty objects are all of a high quality. There 
is also a grocer's shop on site stocked with the staples of the Navajo diet - 
corn meal, corn oil, corn chips, popcorn, and chillis, pinto beans, mutton and 
wild teas.

Just two hours down the road - a road that crossed the old Route 66, a painted 
desert, a petrified forest and the Santa Fe railroad - an equally negative 
stereotype was exploded.

I'd had my fill of bad pizzas and tacos, and grimy motels en route through the 
Navajo badlands; I'm all for slumming it and acting out scenes from movies, but 
there's a stage in anyone's development when a Quality Inn ceases to be an 
interestingly ironic experience. At La Posada, in Winslow - just outside the 
Navajo Nation proper but located in Navajo County - was a 20-room 
architect-designed urban ranch that immediately became one of my favourite 
hotels on the planet. Was it the gorgeous old rooms, the epic cargo trains that 
passed every few minutes, the lavish restaurant, the antiques and artworks and 
perfect martinis? The bar is a magnet for locals, and after four dry days 
living by the Nation's strict laws, I enjoyed a couple of drinks with a man 
from Phoenix who was in town to build a Taco Bell (but he was quite a nice 
bloke), a Navajo who drank premium lagers and an Apache whose tipple of choice 
was Newcastle Brown. As the ancient Geordie tribal saying goes: you couldn't 
make it up, man.

Way to go

Getting there

British Airways (0870 850 9850, ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) flies 
Heathrow-Phoenix; until August 20 seats for winter travel start at £438.70 rtn 
inc tax

Where to stay

Cameron Trading Post (001 800 338 7385, camerontrading post.com 
<http://www.camerontradingpost.com>) doubles from $69 plus tax. La Posada, 
Winslow (+928 289 4366,laposada.org <http://www.laposada.org>) doubles from $99

Further information

arizonaguide.com <http://www.arizonaguide.com>; navajo.org 
<http://www.navajo.org>
Navajo Nation Museum: +928 871 7941, wnmu.org/mcf/museums/nnm.html 
<http://www.wnmu.org/mcf/museums/nnm.html> Hubbell Trading Post: +928 755 3475, 
nps.gov/hutr <http://www.nps.gov/hutr>

Country code: 001

£1 = 1.91 dollars
 