
I have always believed that the key to reducing crime is to focus on what 
works. It may sound obvious, but politicians can easily end up chasing 
headlines, trying to sound tough but actually making the situation worse. 
Instead of this, we need to focus on firm, practical solutions that address the 
root causes of crime and stop people offending in the first place.

The continuing fall in crime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/jan/24/surprise-8-percent-fall-crime> is 
one of the biggest success stories of this coalition. Many people predicted 
that in tough economic conditions, crime would go up, as it always has done in 
the past. But it hasn't, and we should be proud of that fact. Under this 
government,crime is at its lowest levels since independent records began 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/crime-in-england-and-wales-falls-to-lowest-level-since-1981>
.

Everybody has been shaken by the death of Ann Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire> and the notion that any 
teacher should lose their life in the classroom. It was especially poignant 
because she was clearly such a widely respected and loved teacher. But in the 
aftermath of terrible events such as this we have to be careful that we don't 
simply reach for headline-grabbing solutions that don't necessarily work in 
practice.

That is why the Liberal Democrats have opposed a recent proposal to introduce 
a six-month mandatory minimum sentence for anyone who is convicted of 
possessing a knife for a second time. This is a minimum of six months in prison 
for simply having a knife, potentially even a penknife, in your pocket – not, 
as I've read insome press reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/may/02/lib-dems-tories-leak-knife-crime>
, for a number of offences involving a knife.

I've also read that Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> is 
thinking of playing politics with this issue. If they do, and back this 
proposed law just to appear tough in the eyes of voters and the rightwing 
press, it will be clear that they have learned nothing from their time in 
government, when they let the prison population spiral out of control.

It is important to remember that there still should be consequences for 
carrying a knife. Prison is often going to be the right option, and violent 
offenders who are a danger to the public ought to be behind bars. Too many 
young people wrongly think they need to carry a knife for self-defence. 
Carrying a knife is not cool; it's extremely stupid and dangerous. I'm a parent 
of young children. I can completely understand parents' fears that a misjudged 
word or the wrong kind of eye contact could end up with their child being 
attacked.

When someone is caught carrying a knife, we need to do something about it. But 
six months in prison is not always the right answer. Imagine a vulnerable young 
girl hanging round with members of a gang. She could be forced into carrying a 
knife by another gang member; it happens a lot. When stopped by the police, she 
doesn't mention that she was forced to carry the knife, fearing retribution 
from the gang.

Putting someone like that into prison could push them into the arms of 
hardened criminals, and let the gang leaders off the hook. Instead of prison, 
we need to divert vulnerable people away from gang culture.

We also need to give judges the flexibility to use their expertise and 
judgment, based on the facts of each case. It is often entirely appropriate for 
judges to give a prison sentence for carrying a knife. While minimum sentencing 
might sound attractive in media headlines there is a serious risk it could 
undermine the role of the judges, who are best placed to decide on sentencing.

This is why I believe this proposed law would be a step backwards. It would 
undermine the government's progress in establishing a rehabilitation 
revolution, and reducing crime. We need to treat knife crime very seriously by 
letting judges choose the sentence to fit the crime. Turning the young 
offenders of today into the hardened criminals of tomorrow is not the answer.

 