
The deadly thunderstorm asthma that struck Melbourne was the worst ever 
recorded anywhere in the world, a doctor has said, amid warnings that the 
forecast of more stormy weather meant people had to be vigilant.

As the death toll from last week’s storm rose to eight, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/29/melbourne-thunderstorm-asthma-death-toll-rises-to-eight>
 respiratory physician Michael Sutherland said last week’s event was the most 
severe doctors had ever seen.

“The previous worst episode was in London in 1994 with 640 cases (and) only 
five to ICU (intensive care units),” Dr Sutherland told 3AW radio on Wednesday.

Victoria’s chief health officer has advised people with asthma to remain 
vigilant after thunderstorms were forecast to hit eastern parts ofVictoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> on Wednesday.

Prof Charles Guest advised people with asthma to keep their medication close 
at hand.

“Thunderstorms, combined with pollen in the air, can cause an increase in 
asthma symptoms, hay fever and breathing difficulties,” Guest said.

Thunderstorm asthma: 'You're talking an event equivalent to a terrorist attack'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/27/thunderstorm-asthma-oure-talking-an-event-equivalent-to-a-terrorist-attack>
The warning comes after health authorities said two more people had died, 
while another patient remained in a critical condition and was receiving 
specialist care.

The department said Wednesday’s storms were not expected to be another 
thunderstorm asthma event but it was important for people prone to asthma or 
hay fever to make sure they were prepared.

The state’s ambulance chief has told radio 3AW on Wednesday that many people 
waited too long for paramedics to arrive during the storm – and Victorians may 
be told to drive their critically ill family and friends to hospital rather 
than wait for an ambulance if there is another similar event.


“We routinely don’t recommend (to) people that they take critically ill people 
to hospital themselves (but) this is a different type of emergency,” Ambulance
Victoria <https://www.theguardian.com/weather/victoria> chief executive Tony 
Walker said.

“As part of our review we’re looking at ... giving the community real-time 
information to enable them to make an informed decision about what they do.”

Walker said if Ambulance Victoria couldn’t guarantee they’d be there, people 
should have the information required to make the decision to drive a loved one 
to hospital.

Paramedics saved “countless lives” during the freak storm, but the families of 
the eight people who died deserve to know changes would be made, he said.

Hospitals are continuing to treat seven people for respiratory and related 
conditions after last week’s thunderstorm. The storm’s extreme winds and air 
moisture broke up pollen particles into pieces small enough to enter people’s 
lungs.

Emergency services and hospitals were overwhelmed by calls for help during the 
storm. Paramedics dealt with an unprecedented 1,900 emergency calls in five 
hours that evening as the phenomenon swept the state.

At one point there were 140 code-one cases occurring at the same time. 
Melbourne hospitals treated more than 8,500 patients in two days.

Four of the victims have been named as Noble Park father of two Clarence Leo, 
35-year-old Apollo Papadopoulos, law student Hope Carnevali, 20, and year 12 
student Omar Moujalled.
 