
Since he turned 40 four years ago, Robert Carlyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/robert-carlyle> has been thinking about his 
legacy. He imagined his children looking at his films on the video shelf and 
decided he had to concentrate on decent work. Since then, there have been no 
more Bond villains with bullets in their brains. "I just don't like the whole 
Hollywood thing," he says. "It's fucking tacky. It's not me. It's not my world."

I first met Carlyle in 1995. He was on the brink of mainstream success. The 
role that would define the early part of his career - the psychotic Begbie in 
Trainspotting - was not far away, but first Carlyle was taking a surprising 
sidestep. He was about to star alongside a dog called Wee Jock in the BBC1 
Sunday night drama Hamish Macbeth. It seemed an odd choice, perhaps even to 
Carlyle. He defended the role on the basis that the character had no ambition. 
"It's commercial television," he said, "but it is not - it is fucking not - 
Heartbeat." This ambivalence towards commercial success, and all it entails, 
has been a feature of his subsequent career.

Carlyle's early breakthrough came in 1990 with his turn as a builder in Ken 
Loach's building site drama, Riff Raff. He explored his darker side as a raging 
crusty in Antonia Bird's Safe. In Jimmy McGovern's television series Cracker, 
he played Albie Kinsella, a charismatic psychopath seeking revenge for the 
Hillsborough disaster: the echoes of De Niro as Travis Bickle would have been 
evident even if the costume department hadn't put Albie in combat gear. None of 
it suggested any professional similarity to Nick Berry.

If you take Carlyle at his word - he says you should never imitate other 
actors but be yourself - and you assume that his acting style offers a true 
reflection of the person, he is a conflicted animal. There is a tough guy and 
there is a humane streak. There is Begbie, the Scottish hardman in all his 
repressed, glass-chewing glory, and there is Gaz in The Full Monty, exposing 
himself to preserve his dignity. People tend to focus on the psycho roles, but 
there are just as many thoughtful, socially conscious parts in which a tough 
guy is forced to accept his humanity. Looking back now, though, Carlyle accepts 
that if he is remembered for anything, it is for Trainspotting. It is, he 
thinks, a seminal film, defining a time in people's lives. For Carlyle, it 
seemed to be the bright moment when anything was possible. The middle of the 
video shelf, padded with odd choices such as The 51st State and Plunkett & 
Macleane, offers evidence of a more messy outcome.

In 1995, Carlyle was aware that the story of his journey towards acting had a 
corny tinge. He left school at 16 with no qualifications, and went to work with 
his father as a painter and decorator for five years. From the age of 18, he 
did night classes at Cardonald college, Glasgow. At 21, he spent a birthday 
gift of a book token on Arthur Miller's The Crucible, and was entranced. He 
pursued drama at Glasgow Arts Centre, got into the Royal Scottish Academy of 
Music and Drama (which he hated), and dragged himself towards a career in which 
he could be himself by pretending to be other people. Success was not, of 
course, without its downside. Fame - especially the attention he got when The 
Full Monty became an unlikely blockbuster - meant his background became public 
property. A tabloid tracked down Carlyle's mother, who had walked out when he 
was young. A former girlfriend was uncovered. His wedding plans, to make-up 
artist Anastasia Shirley, were revealed. (The couple now have two children: 
three-year-old Ava and 18-month-old Harvey.) He didn't like any of it.

Occasionally, Carlyle will refer to a period in his teens when he went off the 
rails. I ask him to explain what happened, and he says he prefers to answer in 
general terms. "Nonspecifics, you know? It's best to leave that blank. But in 
terms of what was going on in my head, I was 17 and full of testosterone and 
angst. I saw my life stretching ahead of me as a painter and decorator, which 
my family - my father and uncles - had been. There was a nihilistic quality 
about me then, which said, 'Fuck it, I'm no' caring if I'm destined to do 
that.'"

By the time he finished his apprenticeship as a painter, he was totally 
disaffected. When he was introduced to acting at 20 or 21, it was therapeutic. 
"For the first time I was able to go into a room and shout and scream. I was 
finding these wee plays with people shouting and screaming about things that 
were important to them, and I thought: 'This is interesting. I can shout and 
scream my stuff inside them.'"

That, he says, was the condensed answer. The bigger answer was more personal. 
"I was an only child. My mother had gone - and it's fucking boring and I don't 
want to talk about it - but all of that came to me at that time in my life. The 
injustice of that, suddenly, when you're a teenager."

Accounts of Carlyle's life with his father tend to have an unreal quality. He 
is said to have been raised in hippy communes, travelling around the country. 
"I hate the word 'hippy'. It was a bunch of people who had been hurt by the 
world. My father was one of them. There was a woman there who'd had two 
children, whose husband had left. Her sister also had had two children; her 
husband had left. There was another couple whose child had died. And we all 
lived in a house in Belmont Street [in Glasgow]. Everybody got very close 
through that sense of loss. I never wanted for a mother because I had these 
surrogate mothers. When you start to talk about that, flowery journalism starts 
to build it up into this commune idea. If that's what it was, that's what it 
was, but it's not what people think it was."

So it wasn't, "let's drop out of society and have an alternative lifestyle"?

"No, I don't think they knew what they were doing. Certainly, my father didn't 
drop out of society. This place in Belmont Street was a squat. I was maybe 
seven or eight. But then that house was gone, so what are they going to do now? 
They're all clinging to each other. Nobody wanted to go their separate ways. 
Somebody knew somebody in London, so they all ended up in London. My father was 
painting and decorating to make money. They didn't stop participating in 
society - far from it. People were out doing wee jobs but money was, to a 
certain extent, communal. People didn't starve. One of the women would make a 
big pot of communal soup and everybody would have it.

"From London, somebody knew somebody in Brighton, so we all moved there. The 
whole bunch of us stayed in Brighton for the best part of two years. There was 
a period in that when we did literally sleep beneath the pier on the beach for 
a couple of months." He remembers picnics in the park. "Everyone would go along 
and play guitars and the kids would run about. That was my upbringing."

Even as he talks about it, you can see the appeal of some of his roles. Hamish 
Macbeth was a dope-smoking policeman who did everything he could to avoid 
making an arrest. Begbie, we may assume, is informed by his late teenage years. 
The Begbie-lite Jimmy, in Shane Meadows' comic western, Once Upon A Time In The 
Midlands, was fuelled by a rage about his fragmenting family. There is 
something to be said for the notion that Carlyle's work reflects his 
background. It is clearly informed by the politics of the 1970s. And the 
politics of the 70s were seasoned by the realisation that reality was tougher 
than the idealism of the 60s had suggested.

"There was most definitely a downside to all that for a lot of people," 
Carlyle says. "By about 1972-73, there were more than four - possibly five, 
even six - suicides all round about my father and I. Two of the people I've 
mentioned killed themselves, and there were others on the periphery of the 
group. I've thought about it for years: why did these people kill themselves? I 
think it was a very simple answer: there was nothing for them to go back to. 
Society had no place left for them. Any hiccups that happened in their lives - 
and in a couple of cases a couple of affairs had happened - that was enough to 
tip the balance. They were all deaths by overdoses or pills. All round about 
me. Terrible. This one woman died with her wee boy in the bed. Killed herself. 
I was getting to be 15, 16, and thinking, 'What the fuck was all that about?' 
So my teenage years were a kind of backlash against my 60s childhood."

It was, he says, a strange time. His attitude was: why should I fit in? "I was 
dogging school every day of the week, and I had no fucking idea what I was 
going to do with my life. My dad set me up with a wee bedsit of my own when I 
was 16. He was next door in another flat, but I was autonomous."

Salvation came at the Glasgow Arts Centre. Carlyle was starting to act at a 
time of mass unemployment. "The Thatcher years. I was in the situation where I 
had a job, and you didn't want to lose it. So it's a big decision to let all 
this go and join this arts centre, with hundreds of similar souls." He laughs. 
"All going, 'What the fuck are we going to do with the rest of our lives?'"

In a way, I suggest, it was a creative time. "That's true. Hunger's a great 
spur. Even thinking back to my time at the arts centre, and some of the theatre 
I directed at that time, I see furry images of it in front of my eyes now and 
think, 'Fuck's sake, did I do that?' We're walking up the road, four of us, 
trying to club in for a fish supper, and I was 29 at that point. What the fuck 
happened after that?"

So was there a period in which you had to adjust to the idea that it was OK to 
be an actor, and that it didn't make you a poof?

He laughs. "Jesus, man, it's so true. I was at drama school fighting against 
it. Even at the arts centre before that, which was much more creative, and then 
when I went back into doing my own improvised theatre after drama school, I 
think I was kidding myself on that. I was embracing it. Even at that point in 
Scotland in theatre, in the 1980s, there were important English actors up from 
the National to be in the Citizens Theatre, and I thought they were wankers. I 
didn't want to hear the word 'actor' come out of my mouth. And then there's the 
celebrity world, which I abhor with every fibre of my being ... I don't want to 
be seen as being part of that. What I'd thought it was about was all these guys 
in a room, creating stuff. There was no 'luvvie this' or 'darling that', as far 
as I was concerned. Yet I was in an industry where every journalist would put 
the term 'luvvie' before the word 'actor'." He employs his most exasperated 
voice. "I don't want to be a luvvie actor. It took a long time for me to accept 
I was an actor, a professional actor, and that, actually, I make a living out 
of this."

With Riff Raff, Carlyle found a sympathetic mentor in Loach, who had trawled 
the country for an actor with experience of the building trade. Carlyle was 
perfect. The actor, meanwhile, imagined that Loach's methods were typical. "I 
thought, 'This must be how it is. This is great. Fuck me.' Only one time since 
then, which was Carla's Song [another Loach film], did I experience that again.

"But it's enabled me to work with people like Antonia Bird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/antonia-bird> and Danny Boyle, Peter Cattaneo 
and Michael Winterbottom. People who were disciples of the Loach school. 
They're the people who would go and watch Loach films and say, 'Oh, this 
actor's interesting, I'll work with him'. Without Ken Loach, I don't think I 
would be anywhere at all."

If he had chosen to, Carlyle could have followed his fellow Trainspotting 
alumnus Ewan McGregor to international A-list fame. He dabbled with the 
multiplex, but his time on The World Is Not Enough taught him that big budgets 
mean special effects, and special effects mean six hours in the trailer between 
takes. Derisively, he called the result "instant acting".

His latest film, The Mighty Celt, is a reflection of the mature Carlyle. He 
plays an IRA man returning home and trying to adapt to the peace. "It reminded 
me of the films I grew up with, and the films that inspired me, certainly as a 
young actor: Saturday Night, Sunday Morning, The Loneliness Of The Long 
Distance Runner. Those films were about the people - it was about their lives - 
the wider political world had affected them, and they were zooming in on one 
particular aspect of that." He liked Pearse Elliot's script because of its 
emphasis on reconciliation. "In my 20s, a lot of the parts I was doing were 
about revenge."

The future promises more of the same. He would love to do a Trainspotting 
sequel, but someone - we may guess McGregor - is less keen. The production 
company Carlyle formed with Antonia Bird, critic Mark Cousins and Irvine Welsh, 
is soon to start work on The Meat Trade, starring Carlyle and Colin Firth, with 
a screenplay by Welsh. There is talk of a role in Go Go Tales, with the 
uncompromising director Abel Ferrera, co-starring Carlyle's hero, Harvey 
Keitel. (While his son is named Harvey, Carlyle says, a little defensively, 
"There's a wee nod in Keitel's direction, but he's not named after him.")

The offer of Go Go Tales, Carlyle says, "was a bit of a marker". Keitel, he 
notes, has never stopped searching. "You've always got to look for the 
interesting stuff and try to find a world that you haven't visited before. 
That's the only chance."

· The Mighty Celt is released on August 26.
 