
She's a good shot, likes eating salted herrings and has a new pet: a lion cub 
called Nano. Those were the secrets revealed whenAnna Chapman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-chapman>, the sleeper agent at the 
centre of a Russian spy ring exposed in the US, gave her first television 
interview yesterday.

Chapman, 28, who has done several risqué photo shoots for men's magazines 
since she was deported in July, appeared on one of Russia's most popular chat 
shows, Let Them Speak.

Wearing a tight green dress, she made her entrance to the James Bond theme 
tune as a screen showed pictures of her sashaying through Red Square, and, in a 
different sequence, swinging to point a pistol at the audience. "I'm a very 
good marksman," she told the host Andrei Malakhov. "I have a passion for it."

Chapman, who was praised by Vladimir Putin, the prime minister, and awarded a 
state medal in the Kremlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/oct/19/russian-spies-receive-top-honours>
, is being promoted as a patriotic role model, despite the failure of her 
mission. She and nine other undercover agents had been monitored for years by 
the FBI before they were arrested in June.

Since returning to Russia after being freed in a spy swap, the other agents 
have shunned publicity, but Chapman has cultivated a high-profile image which 
chimes with the macho posturing of Putin, himself a former KGB lieutenant 
colonel. Earlier this monthshe became a leader of Molodaya Gvardiya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/dec/21/anna-chapman-russia>, the youth 
wing of Putin's party.

When the premier met the "illegals" – as the agents are called – in the summer,
he joined them in singing From What the Motherland Begins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/25/vladimir-putin-russian-spy-ring>
, a sentimental song from a Soviet-era spy series. On television this week, a 
Ukrainian crooner led the audience and guests in a rendition of the song, 
although Chapman appeared not to know the words. "I'm a terrible singer," she 
explained.

Chapman refused to confirm she was ever a spy but said her favourite Bond was 
Sean Connery. Asked if she would die for her country, she replied: "The 
incorruptibility of a person is one of the most important qualities. The only 
thing more important than patriotism is to be humane. Love of the motherland is 
vital to be a happy person."

Sources in the SVR, Russia's foreign intelligence service, have admitted that 
a double agent betrayed Chapman and her colleagues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/11/kremlin-assassin-anna-chapman-traitor>
, and fled to the US shortly before they were exposed.

The defection caused deep soul searching in Russia's intelligence community, 
but asked if fate would punish the culprit, Chapman replied: "I wouldn't like 
to wish anyone anything negative. Even a traitor."

The rest of the show was punctuated with clips from family videos which showed 
Chapman attending a ballet class, reading a school poem about friendship, 
overturning a quad bike and visiting a giraffe centre.

An monosyllabic ex-boyfriend appeared to give her a bunch of flowers andher 
former English teacher sent a message from her home town of Volgograd. "It was 
she who really made me want to live in London," said Chapman. "She told me 
about the red telephone boxes, the red buses." She worked in Britain from about 
2001 to 2006, had a flat in Stoke Newington, north London, and was briefly 
married to an Englishman, whose surname she kept.

In-between the clips and visits, Chapman spoke about the need to love each 
other, focus on the positive and do unspecified good things for your 
country.Chapman's grandmother gave some relief from the platitudes. She brought 
her granddaughter her favourite food, "herring in a fur coat" - a traditional 
dish of salted fish covered in beetroot.

She also told how, as a child, Chapman had loved a book called, The Tale of 
the Military Secret. "We used to play out the roles," she said. "I would tie 
Anya up and say, 'Tell me the secret!' But she would always reply, 'No!' very 
severely. And I would shoot her."

At the end of the show, Malakhov, who called Chapman "girl of the year", asked 
if she had a wish. She said: "I've tortured everyone with the idea that I want 
a lion cub." A lion cub was promptly presented. She stroked it and said 
quietly: "Wow! That's something."
 