
Leicester secured a place in the LV Cup semi-finals by beating Newcastle 24-13 
at Welford Road. Toby Flood came through 30 minutes of action from the bench in 
a boost to the England management, as the fly-half returned from a knee injury 
with no ill-effects.

The home side went ahead in the seventh minute, when the No8 Thomas Waldrom 
was barged over the line after a lineout. Jeremy Staunton added the conversion 
and then struck two penalties. Jimmy Gopperth replied with two penalties for
Newcastle <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons>, but two more 
kicks for Staunton gave Leicester a 19-6 half-time lead.

Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> lock George 
Skivington increased their lead when he nipped in for their second try early in 
the second half. Newcastle kept battling, and when Will Chudley whipped the 
ball out to Gopperth at first receiver, the Kiwi utilised superb decoy running 
from Jamie Helleur to scurry between the posts, adding the conversion himself.

Northampton scored eight tries in a 57-10 home victory over Wasps to qualify 
for the semi-finals. The England Under-20 winger Jamie Elliott scored twice as 
the Saints dominated against a hopelessly out-of-formWasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps>.

The Saints went ahead with an early penalty from Stephen Myler, and soon the 
hooker Andy Long plunged over for his first try for the club. James Craig soon 
opened his account and Elliott scored their third try after Myler's deflected 
grubber fell kindly for him.

Will Robinson struck a long-range penalty for Wasps to make the half-time 
score 22-3, but when Simon McIntyre was sin-binned, the home side took 
advantage with a penalty try, a run into the corner for Noah Cato and Elliott's 
second. Joe Simpson scored a consolation for Wasps before Alex Waller and Cato 
completed the scoring.

The England flanker Hendre Fourie scored a try on his home debut to give Sale 
a 19-14 victory butScarlets still progressed to the semi-finals. Scarlets' 
bonus point, coupled with defeats for Gloucester and Newcastle, guaranteed 
their passage into the last four. Fourie's early try was converted by the 
fly-half Nick Macleod, but the visitors were 11-7 ahead by half-time thanks to 
two penalties from Dan Newton and a try from Peter Edwards.

Sale rallied in the second half with three further penalties by Macleod. The 
Scarlets replacement Stephen Jones reduced the deficit with a penalty, but a 
final kick from Macleod ensured victory for Sale.

A masterly kicking display from the London Irish full-back Tom Homer condemned 
the defending championsGloucester to a 23-15 defeat, with both teams already 
out of semi-final contention. The Gloucester winger Ian Clark stole the show 
with two tries, one of them an outstanding solo effort, on his first start for 
the club. Homer kicked six penalties, with the hooker Brian Blaney grabbing a 
try for the Exiles.

Worcester beat Ospreys 24-14 at Sixways in another match where both teams were 
already eliminated. Two tries from Josh Drauniniu and nine points from the boot 
of Andy Goode contributed to Worcester's win, while Matthew Morgan and Hanno 
Dirksen crossed for the Ospreys. 
 