
Eddie Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eddie-jones> knew precisely 
what he was doing when he suggested Argentina could pose England their toughest 
challenge of this autumn series. As well as alerting his own side to the perils 
of complacency it also delivered a jagged little dart to Australian posteriors 
before their Test against Ireland. Even if the Wallabies do not respond in kind 
when they reach London next week, Jones’s calculated jibe will have found its 
fleshy target.

It also had the additional virtue of being potentially true. Argentina did, 
admittedly, end up bottom of the Rugby Championship and lost to Australia at 
Twickenham just a few short weeks ago but if ever there was a team with the 
attacking capacity to spring a spectacular surprise it isLos Pumas. They were 
leading the All Blacks in Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/all-blacks-pound-pumas-in-57-22-rugby-championship-revival>
 in September andwere World Cup semi-finalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/18/ireland-argentina-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
 in October last year.

The only problem for Daniel Hourcade’s side is their unfortunate timing: at 
precisely the moment they are staggering to the end of a marathon, 
globe-trotting season, England are threatening to soar to a whole new level. 
Twelve straight victories, 11 of them under Jones this year, do not unfold by 
accident and two more over the next eight days would equal England’s record 
sequence of 14, achieved under Clive Woodward in 2002-03.

Gus Pichot: ‘The Fiji v England game wasn’t very good for rugby … it’s unfair’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/25/gus-pichot-world-rugby-fiji-england-global-calendar-player-welfare-eligiblity>
For players like Tom Wood, who caught the tail end of the Martin Johnson era 
and lived through last year’s Rugby World Cup disappointment, the upturn is all 
the more enjoyable. Wood, restored to the back row ahead of his club-mate 
Teimana Harrison, noticed a difference as soon as he returned to camp: “There 
was a buzz about the place that suggested we’re a confident team. I noticed it 
in certain individuals that I hadn’t been around for a period of time like the 
Vunipola brothers, Jamie George, Mike Brown, Owen Farrell and George Ford.

“They’ve always been good speakers but they’ve been given the reins within 
this team and they’ve taken ownership and responsibility. The personalities 
within the team are massive. That’s a tangible difference I’ve noticed since 
I’ve come back in.”

Add in the collective desire to improve further plus the self-belief generated 
by a Six Nations grand slam and a 3-0 series win in Australia, and it is 
difficult to recall an England side since 2003 that has felt better about 
itself. “Winning breeds an inner confidence,” said Wood. “If you think you are 
doing good things and you lose games then you start to question it. If you 
think you are on the right track and you start winning a few games your 
confidence grows and grows. You get even more ‘buy-in’ and it becomes a 
self-fulfilling snowball effect.”

Rugby union autumn internationals: 10 things to look forward to this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/25/rugby-union-autumn-internationals-what-to-look-forward-to-this-weekend>
The 30-year-old Wood also credits the no-nonsense impact of Jones, 
specifically his refusal to beat around the bush verbally. “The fact that Eddie 
is so straight-talking allows you to clear away all the mind games and the fog 
and just get on with doing the job.”

England’s players have also latched firmly on to the idea they can blow teams 
away if they can operate consistently at the cracking pace they set in the 
first half-hour against Fiji. “The important thing for us is to start fast, put 
teams under the pump and see if they can live with us for the full 80 minutes,” 
said Wood. “That’s why we train the way we do. The intention is to train almost 
above Test match intensity so the Test match itself comes a little easier to 
you.”

This deliberate increase in tempo, with the deft skills to match, is what sets 
New Zealand apart but Argentina, of late, have ventured too far down the 
continuity road at the expense of forward impact. England see no reason why 
they cannot eventually tick both boxes, particularly when Maro Itoje returns 
from injury. As Wood puts it: “We’re not necessarily the biggest pack in world 
rugby but we’ve got good athletes who can perform multiple roles.”

Perhaps the biggest danger for England this weekend lies in the pocket of the 
French referee Pascal Gaüzère. World Rugby’s determination to punish high 
tackles and stray boots – sanctions for many offences are due to be increased 
in January – is no secret and this weekend could well see an increase in yellow 
and red cards. The Pumas’ desire to enhance their 2019 World Cup draw prospects 
by finishing this calendar year ranked in the top eight should also not be 
underestimated. Their upwardly-mobile hosts, even so, should still have their 
measure.

England

M Brown (Harlequins); J May (Gloucester), J Joseph (Bath), O Farrell 
(Saracens), E Daly (Wasps); G Ford (England), B Youngs (Leicester); M Vunipola 
(Saracens), D Hartley (Northampton, capt), D Cole (Leicester), C Lawes 
(Northampton), G Kruis (Saracens), C Robshaw (Harlequins), T Wood 
(Northampton), B Vunipola (Saracens).Replacements J George (Saracens), J Marler 
(Harlequins), K Sinckler (Harlequins), C Ewels (Bath), T Harrison 
(Northampton), D Care (Harlequins), B Te’o (Worcester), H Slade (Exeter).

Argentina

J Tuculet (Jaguares); M Orlando (Jaguares), M Moroni (Jaguares), S González 
Iglesias (Jaguartes), S Cordero (Jaguares); JM Hernández (Jaguares), T Cubelli 
(Brumbies); L Noguera Paz (Jaguartes), A Creevy (Jaguares, capt), R Herrara 
(Jaguares), G Petti Pagadizaval (Jaguares), M Alemanno (Jaguares), P Matera 
(Jaguares), J Ortega Desio (Jaguares), L Senatore (Jaguares).Replacements J 
Montoya (Jaguares), S García Botta (Jaguares), E Pieretto Heiland (Córdoba), F 
Isa (Jaguares), T Lezana (Jaguares), M Landajo (Jaguares), J de la Fuente 
(Jaguares), JP Estelles (Northampton).
 