
No one can pretend to have mastery over anything other than small parts of our 
legal system. And yet every one of us, under the law, is taken to have 
knowledge of all legal provisions that affect us. Given that most citizens do 
not know most of the law and cannot afford to obtain legal advice, we seem to 
be in a rather parlous state.

The problem comes sharply into focus when people contemplate taking an action 
through the courts. From a lay perspective, as well as appearing to be 
unaffordable, the courts seem to be excessively time-consuming, unjustifiably 
combative, and inexplicably steeped in opaque procedure and language.

Better access to justice should embrace improvements not just to dispute 
resolution, but also to dispute containment, dispute avoidance, and legal 
health promotion.

Often non-lawyers may not know that they are in a situation in which there is 
a legal problem to be resolved, contained, avoided, or that there is some 
benefit to be secured. Paradoxically, it seems you need to be a lawyer to know 
if and when you would benefit from legal help.

I do not believe that conventional lawyers in traditional law firms are always 
the best placed or most affordable sources of guidance for clients. A major and 
urgent social challenge is to find new ways of providing legal help, not least 
to citizens and to small businesses.

An alternative to the provision of legal help by lawyers is for skilled and 
often voluntary non-lawyers to advise people on their problems, rights, and 
responsibilities. In the UK, for instance, the Citizens Advice service does 
precisely this but it too suffers from lack of resources.

Another option is to provide citizens and businesses with online legal 
resources so that they can take care of some of their legal affairs on their 
own; or, when guidance is needed, they can work more efficiently with their 
legal advisers. If we can have in England, NHS Direct, an online service that 
provides medical guidance, why not have something similar for law?

In a recent study <http://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/news/?id=598>, the Oxford Internet 
Institute established that 73% of the British population are online and that 
57% had used a government service in the past year. The remaining 27% are, of 
course, important, but only about one fifth of them "definitely don't know" 
someone who could assist them; a smaller percentage than is often supposed.

IT will continue to assist non-lawyers to recognise that they might benefit 
from some kind of legal input. One approach will be for people to register 
their social and working interests and for legal alerts to be delivered 
automatically to them when there are new laws or changes in old law. Another 
tack will be online triage — when a citizen has a grievance of some sort, a 
simple online diagnostic system could ask a series of questions, require some 
boxes to be ticked, and could then identify if the user has a legal issue, and 
if so, of what sort.

In many dimensions of our social and working lives, legal rules will be 
embedded in our systems and processes. Non-lawyers will no longer have to worry 
about recognizing when legal input is required.

A final use of IT will be through "communities of legal experience", so that 
people will learn of legal issues that affect them, not formally through 
notification by their lawyers, but informally, through social networks.

IT will play a role in helping select lawyers and other sources of guidance. 
There will be online reputation systems, not unlike those services that offer 
collective feedback on hotels and restaurants, to provide insight from others 
into their experiences with law firms and lawyers. There will also be price 
comparison systems, which will allow non-lawyers to assess the respective 
prices of competing legal providers. And there will be auctions for legal 
services—not generally for complex bespoke work but for the routine and 
repetitive work that will be sourced in various ways in the future.

Increasingly people will turn for basic guidance, on procedural and 
substantive issues, not to lawyers but to online legal services. We already use 
so much online information in our daily lives that there is no reason why legal 
help should not be similarly accessed. Equally, users will turn to theInternet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> for the production of 
standard documents, such as basic wills and landlord and tenant agreements and 
to communities.

Another possibility is online dispute resolution — for example, e-mediation 
and e-negotiation — for resolving differences.

Although I speak of many of these systems as belonging to the future, there 
are already innumerable examples of operational online legal services. In the 
words of William Gibson, the science fiction writer, "The future has already 
arrived. It's just not evenly distributed yet."

This is an extract from Richard Susskind's book Tomorrow's Lawyers, published 
by Oxford University Press. To order a copy for £9.99 with free UK p&p go to
theguardian.com/bookshop <https://www.theguardian.com/bookshop> or call 0330 
333 6846
 