
At his 300-hectare luxury County Kildare estate, Sir Tony O'Reilly once feted 
the rich, the famous and the infamous. Guest lists at the restored 18th-century 
mansion included the likes of former US secretary of state Henry Kissinger, a 
host of Irish prime ministers from the 1980s premier Garret FitzGerald onwards, 
business magnates and a succession of editors and chiefs of the global 
publishing industry.

Now the former billionaire is contemplating declaring himself bankrupt and 
putting up for sale his beloved Castlemartin to repay creditors owed a total of 
€195m (£155m).

Only as recently as 2012, O'Reilly was reported to be worth around €1bn, not 
including the multimillion-euro fortune of his second wife, the Greek shipping 
heiress Chryss Goulandris. Now, it is a far smaller sum that has triggered a 
scramble for his assets. At the end of last month a Dublin commercial court 
refused the tycoon's request to delay a court order that he repay a debt of 
€22.5m to Allied Irish Bank.

A man once in the vanguard of the Celtic tiger phenomenon that turned Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> into a galloping modern economy was 
reduced to making a plaintive appeal for more time. Known for his skills as a 
raconteur, his charm and hard work had seen his career span successes from 
international rugby hero to chief executive of one of the biggest names in 
corporate America, to Fleet Street tycoon. Now he was citing those same 
achievements in a plea to keep creditors from his door.

In court affidavits he said: "I have spent my whole life in business. I 
believe that, throughout a range of different commercial interests across a 
host of countries in several continents, I have built a reputation for honest 
dealing and straight talking."

Responding, Mr Justice Peter Kelly was blunt and to the point 
<http://www.rte.ie/news/business/2014/0627/626953-oreilly-case/>. O'Reilly was 
insolvent and the probability was that an asset sale would not cover the debt 
to AIB, Kelly said, according to an RTE report. The 78-year-old had been given 
enough time to pay up, the judge ruled.

O'Reilly's finances had been severely damaged by his investments in crystal 
and porcelain maker Waterford Wedgwood and media group Independent News & 
Media, former owner of the UK's Independent newspaper.

O'Reilly and his brother-in-law Peter Goulandris had invested €400m in 
Waterfood Wedgwood, but in 2009 the banks financing the business pulled the 
plug and called in the receivers. O'Reilly lost control of Independent News & 
Media several years ago but in the course of a doomed power struggle over the 
media group – which pitted him against telecoms tycoon Denis O'Brien –the Irish 
Times claimed he had wasted €350m buying INM shares prior to its restructuring 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/sectors/media-and-marketing/ignominious-end-to-career-of-ireland-s-first-business-superstar-1.1846807>
.

Some of the press commentary in Ireland, including from one member of the 
Independent News & Media stable, has been more generous. The group's 
bestselling Sunday Independent recently lauded O'Reilly after a barrage of 
negative stories about his debts.

As Sir Tony sits in his chateau at Deauville on France's Normandy coast this 
week – also has a hideaway in the Bahamas – pondering the option of declaring 
himself bankrupt, two writers from two different sides of the Irish political 
divide praised Ireland's one-time richest man.

Dublin poet, playwright and biographer Ulick O'Connor extolled him as a 
businessman who "had a vision for a new Ireland". O'Connor also opened up his 
personal archive which contains a long correspondence between himself and 
O'Reilly dating back to the 1960s.

While O'Connor would be regarded as a traditional Irish nationalist, 
O'Reilly's admirers also included one of the country's most trenchant critics 
of republican violence, the TV producer, columnist and former Marxist Eoghan 
Harris.

In the same paper, Harris paid tribute to O'Reilly's contribution to Irish 
public life over five decades. It is all the more surprising given that in the 
1970s, when Harris was the chief strategic thinker for Sinn Féin-The Workers 
party (evolved from the old Official IRA), he wrote a pamphlet, Tony O"Reilly's 
last game, tracing the rise and fall of the tycoon's first business empire in 
the 1970s that portrayed him as the epitome of the new Irish capitalist.

Today, having worked for the Sunday Independent for more than 15 years, Harris 
defended his old boss. Harris singled out O'Reilly's "principled stand against 
Provo propaganda" as one reason he had come to admire the rugby star turned 
business tycoon, whose interests ranged across the planet from newspapers to 
baked beans. Prior to launching a business career, O'Reilly was a former Irish 
rugby International who played for the British Lions in South Africa.

O'Reilly's business record was colossal. As well as owning 200 newspapers 
around the world, he had been the chief executive of the Heinz food corporation 
in the US and invented the Kerrygold butter brand that is still one of 
Ireland's most successful food exports.

But not everyone who works for Independent News & Media will recall O'Reilly's 
time at the helm with as much magnanimity, especially in the latter years, when 
debts mounted and jobs were shed. Although papers such as the Sunday 
Independent are still extremely successful in terms of readership and influence 
in Ireland, some of his other investments proved disastrous.

Insiders say his biggest error and the one that led to mutiny on the board was 
his acquisition of the Independent in London in 1995. One former news 
executive, who asked to remain anonymous, told the Guardian there was "seething 
anger" in Northern Ireland after its then profitable Belfast Telegraph was used 
as a "cash cow" to keep The Independent afloat.

"Millions were diverted from the budget of the Belfast Telegraph every year to 
prop up the Indy and it caused widespread anger among the staff at the paper," 
the former employee said.

According to one estimate, the financial life-support system provided for the 
Indy out of O'Reilly's operations in Ireland, including the Belfast paper, 
amounted to £12m in a single year.

He was eventually supplanted on the board by his rival O'Brien, who now holds 
the majority stake in the group and is the effective head of the media 
corporation. According to the Irish Times, the telecoms multimillionaire cut a 
dividend that was worth €14m annually to O'Reilly and hampered his ability to 
pay debts.

Now, O'Reilly is attempting an orderly disposal of what he has left. O'Reilly 
bought Castlemartin from the Earl of Gowrie in 1972. As well as becoming one of 
the family's grand homes dotted across the globe, part of the property was 
turned into a stud farm.

Selling the 18th-century mansion and estate would be a painful sacrifice for 
O'Reilly who used to host an annual party for his newspaper executives in a 
marquee there as well as inviting politicians, editors and entrepreneurs.

The loans used to try and prop up his shares in Independent News & Media were 
secured on Castlemartin and other family properties including his luxury pile 
at Glandore in County Cork.

However, for O'Reilly Castlemartin is the "jewel in the crown" and will be the 
most wrenching to sell – he has even pledged to sell the church and graveyard 
on the estate, where his parents and two of his grandchildren are buried.

Another grandee of Ireland's emergence as a modern economy, financier Dermot 
Desmond, spoke out over O'Reilly's treatment this week. Citing AIB's own 
bailout at the hands of the taxpayer during the credit crunch, Desmond said: 
"The Irish government showed sensitivity to the bank and the bank should have 
shown the same sensitivity to Tony O'Reilly."

In the wake of the near-collapse of the country's economy, it seems that 
honest dealing and straight talking are not enough.

Profile

Name: Sir Tony O'Reilly

Born: Dublin, 7 May 1936

Education: Belvedere College, Dublin; University College, Dublin; Bradford 
University

Career: 1962-66, chief executive, Irish Dairy Board; 1967, joined Heinz; 1979, 
appointed chief executive; 1987, appointed chairman (departing in 1998); 
1995-2009, chairman, Waterford Wedgwood; 1973-2009, director, Independent News 
& Media including spells as chief executive.

Family: Married, six children

Interests: Rugby (played for Ireland 29 times and British Lions 10 times); 
tennis; art
 