
Tony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> had been in power 
for barely a year when Britain was given a taste of a bitter feud between the 
two neighbours in Downing Street.

On 18 January 1998 Andrew Rawnsley wrote in his Observer column 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/1998/jan/18/labour.comment> that a close 
Blair ally had told him that the then prime minister believed Gordon Brown had 
"psychological flaws".

The devastating description of the then chancellor, which was splashed across 
the front page of the Observer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/1998/jan/18/labour.uk>, had an immediate 
impact on relations between the two men. Brown regarded the remarks as a 
declaration of war by the Blair camp.

Until now, the identity of Rawnsley's source has never been confirmed. In his 
column he wrote that "someone who has an extremely good claim to know the mind 
of the prime minister" had identified Brown's fundamental weakness.

Rawnsley has always been careful to protect the identity of his source. In his 
book on New Labour, The End of the Party, he simply noted that Campbell had 
excised any mention of the episode from the condensed version of his diaries, 
The Blair Years, published in 2007.

Well,  the Guardian publishes extracts 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2011/jan/16/alastair-campbell-diaries-diana-gordon-brown>
 from the full version of the diaries covering 1997-1999, The Alastair Campbell 
Diaries Volume Two: Power and the People, 1997-1999.*

The diaries show why Campbell, a tribal Labour figure whose loyalty to his 
party comes before everything – except maybe Burnley Football Club and his 
family – excised most mentions of Brown from his diaries. These were published 
as Brown became prime minister.

It turns out that Campbell inspired the Rawnsley column.

This is what Campbell wrote in his diary on Friday 16 January 1998. At the 
time he was facing questions about tensions in Downing Street after the then 
chancellor's camp had briefed the political journalist Paul Routledge that 
Blair had reneged on the famous Granita 'pact' in 1994:

I probably went over the top, and said to [Andrew] Rawnsley [Observer] that it 
was all about them thinking GB was robbed of his rightful place as leader, but 
that anyone who seriously thought he would have beaten TB in a contest needed 
their head examined.

I denied we had been behind any of the recent nonsense, and GB had to realise 
the damage he was doing by letting his advisers operate like this, and how he 
would be judged by the party if he didn't stop it.

While I did all the stuff about TB being a strong admirer, and this being a 
strong relationship which benefited the government as a whole, I made clear it 
was not on for them to behave the way they were.

This is what Campbell wrote on the following day, Saturday 17 January:

On the way down to Bristol Rovers vs Burnley I became alarmed to learn the 
Observer were splashing on my briefing to Rawnsley and the idea GB had 
'psychological flaws'.

I called Rawnsley and said when I'd talked about people needing their heads 
examined and exposing flaws I meant people who thought TB would have lost to GB.

Campbell, who later indicated to the House of Commons Public Administration 
Select Committee that he was not Rawnsley's source, makes clear he had inspired 
the Observer column, however unwittingly. This is what he wrote on Sunday 18 
January:

TB called from Chequers...I said even if I had not actually used the 
psychological flaw line, I did say anyone who thought GB would have won was off 
their heads, and this was all about nursing a grievance that was not justified. 
I couldn't deny I'd been pretty heavy.

Campbell makes clear that the Brown camp was enraged as he relates a 
conversation between Anji Hunter, a senior Blair aide, and Sue Nye, a senior 
Brown aide:

Sue said as far as GB was concerned, this was a deliberate AC/Peter M 
operation, authorised by TB and it was therefore 'war'.. Sue said the 
'psychological flaw' headline was like a bullet.

Blair was unhappy with Campbell because he believed that Brown was a difficult 
but brilliant strategist who was crucial to the success of the government. But 
there was another reason for Blair's concern, recorded by Campbell in his diary 
on 21 February 1998:

TB said the problem with 'psychological flaws' was its brutal truth, which is 
why it hurt him so much. Then he said 'But I'm worried, Ali.' He was the one 
person who called me Ali when he was being serious.

Campbell's diaries contain some other intriguing insights into the Blair-Brown 
relationship. He discloses that Margaret Thatcher used her first meeting with 
Blair after he became prime minister to issue a warning about his chancellor. 
Thatcher was concerned about Brown's treatment of Eddie George, the late 
governor of the Bank of England. The new chancellor had granted the Bank 
independence but had stripped it of its powers to regulate the city.

This is what Campbell wrote on 23 May 1997:

TB's main worry when I went to the flat, just before 7, was the Eddie George 
situation. Thatcher had said to TB she thought GB was arrogant and insensitive, 
that you could not treat a Bank Governor with anything but respect and that was 
not coming over.

Campbell blogged 
<http://www.alastaircampbell.org/blog/2011/01/15/iraq-certainly-but-northern-ireland-and-kosovo-big-parts-of-blair-legacy/>
 over the weekend that his partner, Fiona Millar, expressed some frustration 
that the extent of the Blair government's achievements were not reflected after 
the 746 pages of his latest volumes were edited down toa few thousand words by 
the Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2011/jan/14/alastair-campbell-diaries-iraq-serbia?intcmp=239>
.

So let's show what Campbell says in his introduction about how much was 
achieved in the first term:

It is often said that we didn't do enough in the first term, with that huge 
parliamentary majority and the hopes that had created it. Yet there were times 
during the editing process of Power and the People, not least when we were 
writing the little 'running feet' which give a flavour of the content of each 
page, when I felt a sense of genuine astonishment remembering how much happened 
during the two years covered by this volume.

Many of the most significant and enduring parts of the Blair government's 
legacy stem from this period – Bank of England independence, the minimum wage 
after a century of Labour campaigning for it, devolution to Scotland, Wales and 
London, the New Deal jobs programme, Sure Start, the beginnings of the reversal 
in the underinvestment in schools and hospitals, the first steps of welfare 
reform and the anti-government protests to match – the policy programme 
certainly rolls forward.

The introduction also makes clear that Campbell is unlikely to be on Peter 
Mandelson's Christmas card list for much longer. He describes his memoirs, 
published last year, as an:

....insufferably self-indulgent account.

* The Alastair Campbell Diaries Volume Two: Power and the People, 1997-1999 by 
Alastair Campbell, to be published by Hutchinson at £25 on 20 January. To order 
a copy for £20 with free UK p&p go toguardian.co.uk/bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/home.do> or call 0330 333 6846
 