
Tony Abbott <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> appears 
to have backed away from a government-supported inquiry into the iron ore 
market after a backlash from mining giants and some cabinet colleagues.

Last Friday the prime minister said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/15/tony-abbott-backs-inquiry-into-whether-miners-are-driving-down-iron-ore-price>
 “I think we do need an inquiry,” and on Mondayhe said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/18/tony-abbott-says-iron-ore-inquiry-must-not-become-a-witch-hunt>
: “I think it is important to get to the facts and an inquiry may well be a 
very good way of doing that.”

But in the wake of a lobbying effort by BHP Billiton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhpbilliton> and Rio Tinto the prime 
minister said on Tuesday: “We certainly haven’t made any decision to have an 
inquiry … the last thing this government would ever want to do is interfere in 
a free market like the iron ore market.”

Distancing himself from the proposal, Abbott emphasised that the independent 
senatorNick Xenophon <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon> 
was the one who suggested an inquiry.

The government was considering backing an inquiry headed by a government 
member as an alternative to Xenophon’s original proposal, but the idea 
triggered cabinet divisions.

The industry minister, Ian Macfarlane, who opposes the idea, said six times 
during an interview on Tuesday morning that a decision had not been made.

Macfarlane said the government did not want to regulate the iron ore market 
and that it was the job of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission 
to examine claims.

“I’ve spoken pretty regularly with the prime minister in the last two days and 
I can tell you no decision has been made to have an inquiry,” he told the ABC’s 
AM program on Tuesday.

But the environment minister, Greg Hunt, pointed to the collapse in iron ore 
prices and suggested it was worthwhile to examine actions “in the policy space 
to remove regulatory barriers which may be prohibiting or preventing 
efficiencies”.

“A parliamentary inquiry also allows us to look at long-term government policy 
settings,” Hunt told ABC Radio National on Monday.

“Clearly the prime minister has indicated a desire to head down that path, so 
you would presume that’s precisely where we are heading and there’s very broad 
support for that. The details need to be worked through.”

The inquiry push was championed by the chairman of Fortescue Metals Group, 
Andrew Forrest <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-forrest>, who 
has accused Rio Tinto and BHP Billiton of increasing iron ore production to 
reduce prices and damage smaller competitors.

Rio Tinto <https://www.theguardian.com/business/rio-tinto> and BHP have 
rejected this criticism and have been lobbying all parties against backing the 
inquiry, arguing such a review would send a bad signal to Australia’s trading 
partners about potential government intervention in the market.

On Tuesday, Abbott sounded cooler on the idea of an inquiry than he had in 
other media appearances over the past few days. The prime minister said while 
it was important to gather facts, the government would not interfere in the 
market.


“Obviously we believe in the free market,” the prime minister said.

“We certainly haven’t made any decision to have an inquiry. This was something 
that Nick Xenophon was talking about last week.

“The last thing we would want is a one-sided inquiry which degenerates into a 
witch-hunt against some of our best companies ... The last thing this 
government would ever want to do is interfere with a free market like the iron 
ore market.”

Abbott praised BHP, Rio and Fortescue as “terrific Australian businesses” that 
had flourished in a competitive free market “and long may that be the case”.

The opposition leader, Bill Shorten, said the government was “in a world of 
pain on this iron ore inquiry because they’re sending out mixed messages” and 
had “let this debate run on far too long”.

The chief of BHP Billiton, Andrew Mackenzie, said an inquiry “would be an 
amazing gift to our major competitor Brazil”, which was currently hosting a 
visit from the Chinese premier, Li Keqiang. China could be persuaded to 
increase investments in Brazil at the expense of Australia, he said.


“Not all inquiries are bad because they can draw people onto the same page, 
create transparency and trust, but this is a ridiculous waste of taxpayers’ 
money on providing a basic economics course on supply and demand,” Mackenzie 
told RN Breakfast on Tuesday.


“It is something that will be an additional burden on the backs of business, 
distract us from growing profitability and paying more tax. It’s red tape pure 
and simple.


“It comes at a very bad moment, it sends a terrible signal to our customers 
and it flies in the face of the commitments that we have made at the highest 
level in places like China, Japan and Korea that they can count on secure 
supply from us at fair prices.”

In arguing for an inquiry, Forrest said it was no longer a free market but a 
distorted market.

To support his argument that the big miners were flooding the market, Forrest 
pointed to a comment by the BHP Billiton iron ore division chief executive 
Jimmy Wilson in October 2014 that “demand side in this business still remains 
good but what we’re doing is we’re oversupplying at the moment and we’ll 
oversupply in the medium term”.


But Mackenzie said Wilson “was not commenting on us” but was “commenting on 
the whole market” and was repeating a point made about four years ago.

“Since 2006 we have not increased our market share. It still sits globally at 
17%,” Mackenzie said.

“Most of those other small suppliers have substantially increased their market 
share – good on them – because they were able to do that at higher prices but 
they were the sorts of investments that our company and our shareholders would 
never have made because we knew they weren’t sustainable in the long term. 
There was a once-in-a-generation spike in price caused by the massive 
urbanisation of China that was always going to peter out.”

The treasurer, Joe Hockey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/joe-hockey>, who spoke to Xenophon 
last week and persuaded him to delay his attempt to launch an inquiry, said the 
Xenophon-initiated probe “was going to turn into some kind of star chamber by 
[Labor senator] Sam Dastyari”.

“From our perspective, we’ll speak to the relevant parties,” Hockey told ABC 
Radio in Adelaide on Tuesday. “We haven’t made any final decision.”

Asked what would be the point of an inquiry if it did not lead to action at 
the end, Hockey said it was “not an unreasonable point” and the government was 
“consulting with all the parties”.

On Adelaide radio station FiveAA, Hockey said his priority was the budget, 
describing the iron ore issue as “not the main game”.

“I’d love to have iron ore prices higher but the market’s the market,” he 
said, referring to the flow-on impacts of a low price on government revenue.
 