
 The Relapse  Olivier, London SE1 
 My One and Only Chichester Festival Theatre
 Nixon's Nixon  Comedy, London SW1 

There are several good reasons for going to the National Theatre at the 
moment. Most of them are actors. And one of these isAlex Jennings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alex-jennings>. Nearly always a lead, and 
never merely a star, Jennings has often appeared in pinched and pernickety 
roles, parts which didn't merely gain from but demanded the precision of his 
speech. After a time, his gimlet-eyed Angelo in Measure for Measure began to 
seem like typecasting.

Now he's been given his chance in Trevor Nunn's production of  The Relapse to 
take full comic flight. And he's seized it triumphantly. As Lord Foppington, 
the beau who employs a page to carry his hankie, and whimpers 'my epaulette' 
when a duelling sword strikes his shoulder, Jennings is a many-tiered 
confection of plumes and furbelows, teetering on lilac high heels.

He looks like a wedding cake that has sprung into alarming, fruity life. He 
goes all round the character, sometimes striking the note of a latterday 
Malvolio, with his fixed, face-lifted gaiety and his lurking distemper. 
Enormously jealous of any vivacity that isn't his own, he constantly interrupts 
others by echoing their own words. His pursed-up mouth unleashes a range of 
blustering phrases - 'Split me windpipe', 'Stack me vitals' - as if they were 
surprises even to himself.

The trouble is that Foppington is only a frill on the main fabric of 
Vanbrugh's play, which is a dark one. The Relapse was written in 1696, as a 
sequel to, and parody of, Colley Cibber's morally improving Love's Last Shift, 
which gloried in a rake's repentance. In Vanbrugh's play, the rake resumes his 
old habits with relish. Opportunism and materialism reign supreme. It's a 
glittering but never genial drama.

Trevor Nunn turns it into a romp. Both brawling and drawling scenes are 
over-choreographed - they look like set pieces from a costume drama. From the 
opening moments, when beauties in ballgowns swish down the aisles giggling 
behind their fans, to take up residence in boxes at the side of the stage, it's 
the artificial aspect rather than the painful nub of the play that is 
emphasised. Sue Blane's design, which gleams in shades of cinnamon and scarlet 
and has a painted plush curtain at the back of the stage, is a sumptuous 
parody. Brian Blessed supplies his roaring baron act, rolling around bellowing.

Janine Duvitski, as a dimpling, wily Nurse, gives a fine performance; so does 
Maxine Peake as her charge, Hoyden, altogether cheeky and lascivious. And in a 
beguiling sequence which shows Nunn's gift for intricate detail, a chorus of 
women clusters together to sing about love's fickleness; they lose their place, 
simper at their foolishness, but always stick together. But these pleasurable 
moments are incidental embroidery on a bland conception.

 My One and Only is a prime example of the way a song and a dance can make the 
weird look winsome. This version of George and Ira Gershwin's Funny Face may 
not have the threatening surreality of The Wizard of Oz - what was Judy Garland 
up to, stuffing her bosom into a pinny and going off with three disturbed 
strangers? It doesn't, as does Seven Brides for Seven Brothers , contain a 
chorus in praise of the Rape of the Sabine Women. But it does feature some of 
the more harmless deviations of Twenties American culture: synchronised 
swimming; Rudolf Valentino as a sheikh; bathing costumes with short legs. Its 
main romance is between a cross-Channel swimmer and a transatlantic pilot. A 
subsidiary love interest blossoms between a pornographer and an FBI agent 
disguised as a girl mechanic.

 My One and Only was first produced on Broadway in 1983, and was a big hit for 
Twiggy, though it's hard to imagine those little limbs greased up for a Channel 
swim. Loveday Ingram's production, its British premiere, does the show, with 
its irresistible roll of big numbers - 'Strike up the Band', "S Wonderful', 
'Nice Work if You Can Get it' - proud. Lez Brotherston's design rises valiantly 
to the musical's preposterous transport challenges, sending a Western Pacific 
train hissing on to the stage, and following it up with an undersized sailing 
ship and a jolly little scarlet plane. The cast - at one point acting in front 
of a spoof Valentino movie - glide easily from the preposterous to the ironic, 
managing guilelessly to pronounce the play's most striking line: 'We don't get 
many white tap-dancing aviators in here.'

Anna-Jane Casey is appealing; Richard Lloyd King is slinky. And at the centre, 
Janie Dee is both alluring and peculiar. There's something of the 
pre-adolescent about her: she's like a chirpy, gymslipped girl in a school 
story - good at games and innocent to the point of goofiness - who suddenly 
discovers she's a beauty. Her voice, catchy rather than arresting, moves in the 
course of a line from sweet to huskily breathy. She could have been made to 
play Funny Face .

 Nixon's Nixon, a neatly executed two-hander, has come to the Comedy after 
success at the Edinburgh Festival. A dialogue between Nixon and Henry Kissinger 
on the eve of the President's resignation at the time of Watergate, Russell 
Lees's play has the trappings of an insight masquerading as an absurdist 
fantasy. Nixon, hoping to shore up his position, dreams up a variety of 
extravagant situations: a small bombing of some Palestinians is thought likely 
to come in handy; the President's trip down memory lane requires Kissinger to 
take the part of his mightiest antagonists - quacking as Mao, growling as 
Brezhnev and booming as God.

In fact, the evening, with Tim Donoghue as a cross, almost Hispanically 
guttural Kissinger, and Keith Jochim boggle-eyed as Nixon, is a fairly cosy 
one, relying for its laughs not on political acuity but on feats of 
impersonation. Set far away and long ago, it has only one eerie echo of 
present-day British politics. The week afterJeffrey Archer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/archer> was sentenced, there was one stage 
politician proclaiming to another that all the best books were written in jail.
 