
The Exchange, Sturminster Newton

The Exchange is more than just a music venue: it offers a diverse programme of 
music, theatre, cinema and community events. At its heart is a community centre 
but it does rather a fine impression of being a commercial venue. The website 
offers a taste of the programme on offer and the professionalism with which The 
Exchange operates. It has a flourishing programme of events and a growing 
audience keen to catch something different and of good quality.
• Old Market Hill, 01258 475137, stur-exchange.co.uk 
<http://www.stur-exchange.co.uk/>

The Lazy Lizard, Weymouth
 Til there was Uke playing the Lazy Lizard earlier this year. 
Take a surf-orientated style coupled with a mix of music from indie to 
hip-hop, funk, reggae and ska – all the good stuff basically – throw in cool 
live bands and DJs upstairs and down and you have yourself a chilled, enjoyable 
night out at one of Weymouth's best venues. It sits directly opposite the beach 
and during the day the tables out front are the perfect place for 
people-watching while slurping a cappuccino or two. The venue has welcomed 
everything from new bands to established names looking for a more intimate gig, 
and continues to support the local live music scene both within its walls and 
on the beach across the road at larger events.
• 52-53 The Esplanade, 01305 766901, thelazylizard.co.uk 
<http://thelazylizard.co.uk/>

The Three Compasses, Charminster
 Three Compasses 
What it lacks in size this pub more than makes up for in its welcome. The bar 
is an "intimate" space, but they love their live music andnever ask you to turn 
it down. On the outside it's your typical village pub, but inside you will find 
two bars and a skittle alley. Anything from a three-piece outfit upwards manage 
to squeeze into the venue and still play as if it were Wembley. Whether you're 
a local or a new kid in town, you'll get the same warm reception. Among 
musicians in the area, an intimate gig at the Compasses is high on the "things 
to do before I die" list. Local jazz stalwart Rodney Teague hosts the area's 
only jazz jam session here.
• 9 The Square, 01305 263618

The Ropemakers, Bridport
 Ropemakers Bridport 
Bridport has its own annual hat festival, and PJ Harvey also famously hailed 
from here. The Ropemakers stands out as the town's live music pub, offering a 
diverse selection of live acts. A quick glance at the website details what you 
can expect, and reflects the venue's commitment to live music. There's also a 
hearty and well-priced menu on offer in this quirky, friendly and deservedly 
popular venue.
• 36 West Street, 01308 421255, theropemakers.com <http://theropemakers.com>

Finns, Weymouth
 Finns, Weymouth Photograph: Alamy 
Perhaps one of the longest-established live music venues in Weymouth and 
attracting a diverse crowd of all ages, Finns offers a mixed program of regular 
gigs and a crowd that likes to have a good time. You always seem to bump into 
somebody you know from the area within its walls. If you're lucky, you'll get 
to meet landlord Steve Perry (not to be confused with the former Journey 
frontman). I've spent many an enjoyable night in Finns whether on the stage or 
in the crowd and have always left in high spirits. The layout of the venue 
makes it possible to get right up to the band or stand towards the back and 
have a conversation without shouting "yeah!" at each other on a continuous 
loop. Good times!
• 26 Westham Road, 01305 778098, finns-weymouth.co.uk 
<http://finns-weymouth.co.uk/>

The Electric Palace, Bridport
 Posters in the bar at the Electric Palace, Bridport. Photograph: Kai Taylor 
Built as a state-of-the-art cinema in 1926, the New Electric Palace closed its 
doors in 1999 and lay derelict for years before local artist and writer Peter 
Hitchin bought it in 2003 and reopened it as an arts and live music venue. The 
new owner retained many of the building's original art deco features, including 
a portrait of Bob Hope in the circle foyer, and enhanced it with lavish 
features – a five-metre screen for the back of the balcony depicts Alice 
through the Looking Glass, contributed by Ralph Steadman, a patron of the 
Palace. The venue was a finallist inRock The House 
<http://www.rockthehouse2012.com/>'s Best Small Live Venue 2012 award.
• 35 South Street, 01308 428354, electricpalace.org.uk 
<http://electricpalace.org.uk/> 

Sixty Million Postcards, Bournemouth
 Sixty Million Postcards music venue, Bournemouth, Dorset 
This is an indie venue in the truest sense, with a mixed crowd of students and 
older locals drawn by the eclectic range of music that includes live bands, 
DJs, hip-hop, and the legendary Dirty Soul nights. The venue also doubles as a 
gallery for art events and hosts vintage clothing sales. In addition to the 
music, the decor ("chic grunge" with battered sofas and "granny" lampshades) 
and the ambience, they also do a nifty range of food, including 13 different 
burgers (with three veggie options) and drinks, with a good selection of 
mojitos. A guaranteed good – but always different – night out.
• 19 - 21 Exeter Road, 01202 292 697, sixtymillionpostcards.com 
<http://www.sixtymillionpostcards.com/>

Mr Kyps, Poole
 Tribute band Dirty DC at Mr Kyps 
Similar in size and capacity to the Electric Palace, Mr Kyps differs in 
focusing entirely on live music, subsidising the door take from local and 
up-and-coming rock, indie and metal bands with that of the ever-lucrative 
tribute acts. The large stage and spacious green room facilities are more like 
those of more major UK venues, making it a particular favourite of touring 
bands.
• Parr Street, Lower Parkstone, 01202 748 945, mrkyps.net  
<http://www.mrkyps.net>

Quicksilver Mail, Yeovil
 Quicksilver Mail 
As the name suggests, the Quicksilver Mail is a 17th-century coaching inn, 
situated on the southern approach to Yeovil (just over the border in Somerset). 
It has a purpose-built function room where bands of every hue have appeared 
since the 1970s. (It used to be a favourite of London-based jazzers such as 
Dick Morrisey and Jim Mullen.) Landlord Pete Lamden, something of a music 
promoter himself, took over the place in 2002 and has extensively refurbished 
the pub, adding a large restaurant and providing accommodation.
• Hendford Hill, 01935 424721, quicksilvermail.com 
<http://www.quicksilvermail.com>

Royal Portland Arms, Portland
 Guitarist Pete Christie at the Royal Portland Arms. 
This funky little locals' pub has been turned into a live music venue by its 
owners Kim, a touring musician himself, and his wife Jill. Despite its size, 
blues, roots and folk bands from around the world appear here regularly, and 
the walls of the "stage" (more accurately described as "the bit where the bands 
shoehorn themselves in") are decorated with their tour posters. The pub 
provides an extensive range of real ales and ciders, and if you time it right 
you might leave with a bag of freshly caught scallops or mackerel bought from a 
local fisherman who's dropped in for a pint.
• 40 Fortuneswell, 01305 862255
 