
1 Lyme Townhouse, Lyme Regis 

It doesn't have much in the way of sea views (rooms four and five are the ones 
to go for) but this Grade II-listed townhouse is beautifully situated within 
minutes of the beach, Broad Street shops and some of the best of Lyme Bay's 
restaurants (Mark Hix's seafood joint is a few minutes' walk). The rooms and 
suites are pretty cool too (white walls, wrought iron beds, rain showers, 
Georgian fireplaces, retro furniture). You get breakfast in bed delivered to 
the door in hampers – a morning picnic of warm savoury flans, Dorset cereals 
and toasted Townmill breads (if you don't fancy it, you get £10 knocked off the 
room rate). For the best views in town, go for afternoon tea on the garden deck 
at theAlexandra Hotel <http://www.hotelalexandra.co.uk> next door.
• 1 Pound Street, 01297 442499, hotel1lyme.com <http://www.hotel1lyme.com>. 
Doubles from £95

No 27 Bridport 
 No 27 Bridport 
A tall Georgian townhouse, tucked down a side street off Bridport's main drag, 
Juliet Lewis's B&B is more homestay than hotel. Breakfast is served in her 
sunny kitchen conservatory; you can help yourself to tea and coffee, or wander 
into the garden and meet the chickens. The rooms are very Farrow & Ball: 
floors, walls and furniture painted in shades of grey, olive and duck-egg blue. 
The Shaker room – the largest of three – has a king-size bed, views across 
rooftops to the countryside and a high-spec wetroom. The twin-bedded Attic Room 
shares a bathroom with the Green Room (an ideal set-up for families). Wake up 
to homemade bread, fresh eggs and proper orange juice. No television, but lots 
to do in this busy market town: just around the cornerThe Bull Hotel 
<http://www.thebullhotel.co.uk> has two decent restaurants. 
• 27 Barrack Street, 01308 426378, no27bridport.co.uk 
<http://www.no27bridport.co.uk>. B&B from £85 per double (or £75 if you stay 
two nights)

The Abbots House, Charmouth
 The Abbots House, Charmouth 
The raw material is medieval, built by the Abbot of Forde Abbey and, thanks to 
Nick and Sheila Gilbey's diligent restoration, still sporting vintage oak 
panelling, beams and flagstones. The three romantic rooms however have at least 
one foot in the 21st century – all offer grown-up bathrooms with contemporary 
roll-top tubs, walk-in-showers, armchairs and bathtime televisions. The Gilbeys 
used to run a restaurant, and their foodie breakfast menu includes smoked 
haddock and pea fishcakes or warm Dorset apple cake. In the garden, you might 
see Nick's Swiss model railway in action. The house is an easy walk from 
Charmouth's fossil-rich beach and there is a good local restaurant at theWhite 
House Hotel <http://www.whitehousehotel.com> up the road. 
• 01297 560339, abbotshouse.co.uk <http://www.abbotshouse.co.uk>. Doubles from 
£100 a night (minimum two nights)

Roundhouse Hotel, Weymouth
 Roundhouse Hotel, Weymouth 
On the curved end of a classic Georgian terrace set between the harbour and 
the promenade – Eva Buschmann's funky little hotel stands out from Weymouth's 
crowd of standard guesthouses (big on knicker-bocker nets and plastic flowers). 
The decor is, let's say, individual: carved beds, splashy art, lots of bling 
and bare plaster, silver furniture and vivid fabrics; in one room an open-plan 
shower cubicle sits on a corner of what looks like pink Astroturf. Since most 
of the five rooms have a dual aspect, it has some of the best views on the 
seafront – boats on one side, beach on the other – hence the relatively high 
prices. Downstairs, a cosy little bar serves drinks and light suppers.
• 1 The Esplanade, 01305 761010, roundhouse-hotel-weymouth.com 
<http://www.roundhouse-hotel-weymouth.com>. Doubles from £105-£175

Heathcote House, Milborne St Andrew
 Heathcote House, Milborne St Andrew 
Owner Kate Guilor grew up in a guesthouse and she clearly knows her stuff: 
every corner of her Grade II-listed, village B&B is immaculate, sparkling, 
decked with greenery and collections of blue and white china. The rooms are a 
perfection of soothing colours, pretty wallpapers and a touch of the old 
colonial. And breakfast is a treat of local produce and fresh fruit from Kate's 
garden (figs, gooseberries or pears poached in cinnamon). On the through road 
between Dorchester and Blandford Forum (note the traffic can be a little noisy 
during the day) the village is handy for the likes of Maiden Castle, the Cerne 
Abbas giant or, in September, Blandford's mega Dorset Steam Fair.
• 01258 837219, heathcotehouse.co.uk <http://www.heathcotehouse.co.uk>. 
Doubles from £95 per night

Bindon Bottom, Lulworth
 Photograph: Julia Toms 
The place was a nightmare of cranky plumbing and 1970s carpet when Clive and 
Lisa Orchard first took over the former Graybank B&B two years ago. A complete 
revamp has created five light, fresh rooms with small but smart bathrooms and 
views across fields to Hambury Tout – a pudding-basin Purbeck hill which takes 
you up and over to rocky Durdle Door, one of Dorset's natural wonders. You are 
minutes away from Lulworth Cove (and its excellentDandelion Café Bistro 
<http://www.dandelioncafe.co.uk>) but far enough away to avoid looking at the 
crowded car park. Just behind is Bindon Hill – in case you are wondering where 
this large Victorian semi got its peculiar name.
• Main Road, West Lulworth, 01929 400256, bindonbottom.com 
<http://www.bindonbottom.com>. Doubles from £85 per night

Urban Beach, Bournemouth 
 Urban Beach, Bournemouth 
More urban than beach, this well-run boutique hotel is five minutes' walk 
inland from Bournemouth's Boscombe Pier. No sea views then, but lots of brownie 
points for style, substance and great value. Decorated in a neutral palette – 
chocolate, caramel and cream, leather and oak – the rooms come in various sizes 
ranging from a generous single to a wow-factor double deluxe. They all have 
natural-stone bathrooms, downy bedding, Wi-Fi; and there's a bit of a Japanese 
thing going on here and there. A big plus is the friendly Urban Reef bistro-bar 
with its relaxed surfy vibe, outdoor deck and sensibly-priced food. The 
breakfast choice includes smoked herring, Dorset pork and leek sausages and a 
Bloody Mary.
• 23 Argyll Road, 01202 301509, urbanbeach.co.uk <http://www.urbanbeach.co.uk>
. Small doubles from £97, king doubles from £138, singles £72 (but check for 
last-minute offers)

The Old Post Office, Swanage
 The Old Post Office, Swanage 
On the cliffs above Swanage, the Ballard Estate was a first world war barracks 
that has evolved into a small community of hut-like bungalows on a private 
road. In its midst, the Old Post Office is what it says, except it's been 
completely rebuilt by antiquarian bookseller David Bishop and his artist wife 
Rowena. They offer two cosy rooms with mini verandahs and lots of little extras 
(bath robes, wine glasses, hot water bottles, fresh milk). In her homely 
kitchen, Rowena cooks eggs, bacon, and herby potatoes on an Aga the colour of a 
pillar box; there are two giant ginger cats (Ronnie and Reggie) and a brood of 
egg-laying hens in the garden. On sunny days, breakfast is served outdoors. And 
you can wander around the corner to Ballard Cliff, take the coast path to 
beautiful Studland Bay, or the 15-minute seaside walk into Swanage.
• 4 Ballard Estate, 01929 422041, oldpostofficeswanage.co.uk 
<http://www.oldpostofficeswanage.co.uk>. Doubles £75 a night 

Number 5, Shaftesbury
 Photograph: Jonathan Stone 
In one of Dorset's oldest towns (think medieval abbey meets Thomas Hardy), 
Trevor and Kate Toms' 18th-century townhouse B&B is relatively new (they opened 
in Spring 2012). He's a cabinet maker, she's a textile designer, and their eye 
for detail is writ large on the modern-meets-traditional décor: pewter and 
gunmetal paintwork, white walls, wood floors, slipper baths, big sash windows 
overlooking Shaftesbury's Trinity Church. The guest rooms are in the basement – 
but both are light and spacious (one peeks at the walled garden). After a 
farmers' market breakfast in the Georgian dining room explore Blackmore Vale, 
the downs of Cranborne Chase or pop round the corner to Gold Hill – the 
near-vertical cobbled street made famous by a 1970s Hovis advert directed by 
Ridley Scott.
• 5 Bimport, 01747 228490, fivebimport.co.uk <http://www.fivebimport.co.uk>. 
Doubles from £85

Marren, Holworth
 Marren, Holworth 
Outside the seaside towns, Dorset's heritage coast offers very little in the 
way of places to stay with sea views – particularly in lonely spots like this 
one. But Wendy and Peter Cartwright's 1920s house has views to die for. Looking 
out across Portland and Weymouth Bay from a tiny hidden, hamlet between 
Ringstead and Lulworth, it faces south-west – perfect for sunsets. The rooms 
are simple and rustic with a hint of Scandinavia. In one, you can take in the 
view without getting out of bed; the other opens on to its own little seaview 
terrace. The gardens are big and beautiful (Wendy is a garden designer), 
offering a sanctuary of woodland and wildlife, Italian courtyards, green oak, 
pebble paths and Purbeck stone sloping down to the sea.
• Holworth, 01305 851503, marren.info <http://www.marren.info>. Doubles from 
£95-£115 (minimum two nights)
 