
Crab House Café, Wyke Regis

I've known the Crab House since it first opened, serving fresh shucked oysters 
picked from its own oyster beds just outside the restaurant's front door. 
Oysters – in fact seafood of all sorts – is a passion of Nigel Bloxham the 
owner and chef, and the cafe is perfectly situated to buy fish fresh from the 
Portland and Weymouth day boats. On a sunny day there is almost 
Caribbean/Floridian feel to The Crab House. Portland harbour is home of some 
stunning wild shell fish too, and the special, of razor clams with chorizo and 
young sweet broad beans, that I sampled was criminally gorgeous. The posher 
dishes include fillets of brill caught from the Shambles sand bank only a 
couple of miles offshore, served with horseradish and samphire (£19.95), and 
locally dived scallops (£8.95). So much of this fantastic local fish is 
exported to France and Spain – in fact most of the best fish you'll eat in 
France, Spain and Italy comes from the West Country. The crisis with the euro 
means more of it is now available at home – a sweet silver lining to the 
European financial meltdown perhaps.
• Ferrymans Way, Portland Road, 01305 788 867, crabhousecafe.co.uk 
<http://www.crabhousecafe.co.uk/>

Watch House Café, West Bay, Bridport
 Watch House Café, West Bay, Bridport 
Dogs, boats, beach, children, sea, sky and fat, firm flakes of perfectly 
cooked fish flesh, make the Watch House Café a smashing lunchtime venue. New 
little sister to the well-loved and much-praisedHive Beach Café 
<http://www.hivebeachcafe.co.uk/> in Burton Bradstock, the Watch House – 
located in a former 1970s bungalow beach cafe that served scary bacon rolls and 
undrinkable tea – is the owners' new venture in West Bay, the seaside suburb of 
Bridport. Huge bowls of steaming Exe mussels (£9.95), brown-bread doorstep 
fresh Lyme Bay crab sandwiches (£8.15) and one of the best cod, chips and peas 
(£13.45) you could ever wish to wrestle with, are the daily fare; they also do 
good coffee, proper big pots of tea and a range of local beers and ciders. 
Comfortably informal, with a system where you order at the counter, grab a 
table (outside and inside dining is spacious and comfortable – with hooks to 
tie up dogs or children). We often take our four youngsters and dog for a 
bracing cliff walk before tucking into a crab snack or a fish feast followed by 
huge wedges of homemade cakes.
• 01308 459330, watchhousecafe.co.uk <http://watchhousecafe.co.uk/> 

The Olive Tree, Bridport
 Photograph: Pete Millson 
The Olive Tree sits on one of Bridport's two main streets, a mussel-shell lob 
away from the heart of this busy, friendly market town. From the outside this 
high-street bistro doesn't exactly shout "fish", but inside, chef and co-owner 
Stephane Frigon (a keen angler and diver) is easily excited about things that 
come in shells and scales. "The Spectacular" (£17.90) is a sumptuous, 
broth-poached bath tub full of Exe mussels, local clams, Lyme Bay scallops and 
chunks of seasonal white fish (pollack, whiting, gurnard) and salmon, all 
topped with a fillet of local sea bass. I like to share it with my wife – 
there's easily enough for two and we spoon and slurp and dredge with hunks of 
local Leakers' bread. And if I'm feeling greedy we'll top it off with half a 
dozen hand dived scallops (£7.90) served (lightly cooked) in the shell with 
only a tangy creamy sauce to cover their modesty. The menu also features sea 
bass fillets (£14.90) and local crab as staples, and occasionally Stephane gets 
his hands on something sexy like bundles of huge black razor clams, Cornish 
sardines, samphire and local lobsters.
• 59 East Street, 01308 422882, olivetreerestaurant.net 
<http://www.olivetreerestaurant.net/>

Parkstone Bay Café, Poole
 Photograph: Richard Langdon/Ocean Images 
Poole is the Kensington of Dorset. It's full of bright red Ferarris, 
yummy-mummies and cosmetically preserved ladies-who-lunch. For those of us from 
rural west Dorset, where our tractor-rumbling streets have weeds growing up the 
centre, Poole can seem a little, scary, elitist and fund-manager heavy. All the 
same seeing how the other half (of Dorset) lives, is occasionally irresistible. 
As a family we like to visit The Bay Café inParkstone Bay 
<http://www.parkstonebay.com/> on our bikes so we can cycle along millionaire's 
row on Sandbanks after lunch. It is a tiny decked wooden chalet in the heart of 
the yacht-owning, deck-shoe wearing, chino-sporting Poole, and it is an oasis 
of charm. I've eaten cuttlefish and chorizo stew here that was better than any 
I've had in Spain. Belgian chef Stephane makes a great crispy haddock fishcake 
(£7.90), a smoked, peppery mackerel nicoise salad and a casserole of Scottish 
mussels cooked Belgian style. It won't break the bank and the position deep in 
the posh yachty marina is fascinating for anyone with even the slightest 
interest in boats.
• Parkstone Bay Marina, Turks Lane, 01202 724915, parkstonebay.com/cafe 
<http://www.parkstonebay.com/cafe/>

Hive Beach Café, Burton Bradstock
 Photograph: Alamy 
Grilled herrings with garlic butter, salad and granary bread (£10.95) is a 
daily special menu listing that I find hard to resist. Herrings feature so 
rarely on British menus, apart from the suspect Dutch-cured varieties and the 
occasional industrially vinegared roll mop. So I have to applaud any restaurant 
that serves them. The herrings, fried mackerel fillets and Cornish sardines are 
a delight. Also, there's great crabs served whole or picked, and there's fancy 
fillets of turbot and brill to lust after. The Hive is never not busy, even in 
winter, and it can be a bit of a bun fight to get served, but food arrives fast 
and is always reliably delicious. We eat here as a family all year round and it 
never ceases to amaze me how good the fish and the service is. It ain't exactly 
cheap, it can be noisy, but it's worth it. It's dog and child friendly too. Its 
location makes it the perfect place to park and walk Chesil Beach.
• Beach Road, 01308 897 070, hivebeachcafe.co.uk 
<http://www.hivebeachcafe.co.uk/> , 01308 8970

Marlboro Fish & Chips and Weyfish fishmongers, Weymouth
 Photograph: Alamy 
Forget the Olympics and the world heritage Jurassic coastline; the most 
exciting thing about Weymouth is the harbour (pictured). For a fishing boat 
groupie like me, there's nothing more delightful than walking around the town 
harbour, bustling with crabbers, scallop dredgers, sole netters and whelkers 
that nestle cheek by jowl with charter angling boats and tourist dive boats … 
while eating fish. I like to start with a mackerel bap smeared with horseradish 
sauce from the Marlboro fish bar. The mackerel is filleted, lightly battered 
and deep fried. I am a huge fan of deep frying oily fish, something which 
rarely happens in our kitchens.

I like to finish my walk with a bag of Billy Winters (locally caught Weymouth 
Bay prawns), fresh boiled and served in their shells from Weyfish fishmongers 
on the east of the quayside. And maybe I'll spoil myself with a cup of local 
whelks doused in malt vinegar or even a fresh picked Portland crab.Seafood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/seafood> is sometimes better on the 
hoof. Sitting on the town wall, doing battle with prawn-mugging herring gulls 
while sucking salty prawn juice off my fingertips is a joy like no other.
• Marlboro Fish & Chips, 46 St Thomas Street, 01305 785700. Weyfish, 1 Custom 
House Quay, 01305 761 277

By The Bay, Lyme Regis
 By The Bay, Lyme Regis Photograph: PR 
Lyme Regis is toe-curlingly pretty, with its historic Cobb made famous by 
Meryl Streep inThe French Lieutenant's Woman. But the main reason for a day out 
at Lyme is to visit the beach with the children. Eating out with four children 
is never cheap, but our family favourite for affordable fish in Lyme is By The 
Bay, in the perfect spot for beach, Cobb and town fun. Sea bass with 
Mediterranean vegetables and risotto (£15.95), and their reliably delicious cod 
and chips with peas comes in at a reasonable £9.95 – and will fill up even 
hollow-legged teenage boys.
• Marine Parade, 01297442668, bythebay.co.uk <http://www.bythebay.co.uk/>

The Bluefish Café & Restaurant, Chiswell, Portland
 The Bluefish Café & Restaurant, Chiswell, Portland 
How can you not love a small independent restaurant that can present a menu 
offering both braised pig cheeks with beetroot and gherkins as well as poached 
sea bass with local faggots and serrano ham. Not to mention scallops with black 
pudding and orange butter sauce (two courses £22.50, three courses £26.50). The 
children's menu (£9.95 or £12.95) includes home made fish fingers that are so 
good I have to stop myself stealing from other people's distracted toddlers. 
Bluefish is fantastic for so many good reasons: it is small, friendly, run by 
an enthusiastic French chef; it nestles just below the shingle bank at the 
Portland end of Chesil Beach; it offers an unhurried, unharassed dining 
experience and the menu is like a schizophrenic mixture of all the things I 
love to eat, from blue cheese to prunes, from chorizo to homemade chutney and 
confit of duck, to squid ink and ham hock soup – with a duck egg! They also do 
one of the best and biggestmoules frites I've ever had the pleasure to assault. 
A short walk away from Portland harbour and Portland Prison, it's a great place 
to eat before searching for razor clams on the mud flats or visiting your 
bank-robbing uncle. I love it!
• 01305 822991, thebluefishrestaurant.com <http://thebluefishrestaurant.com/>

Half Moon Inn, Melplash, Bridport
 Half Moon Inn, Melplash, Bridport 
Hake is not a fish that is served very often in pubs. Partly because, given 
the chance, the Spanish would buy and eat every hake ever landed, as they regard
merluza as the most perfect of all deep-water white fish. Quite a lot of great 
hake is landed by the (somewhat controversial) beam trawlers of Brixham. And 
some occasionally ends up in Melplash, a tiny village on the road between 
Bridport and Beaminster. This newly revamped, thatched gastro-pub does 
astonishingly good meat (such as 28-day-aged local beef) and a selection of 
very tasty fish. The posh fish pie with salmon and scallop (£12) and the 
natural smoked haddock chowder (£6.50) are alive with tangy flavours and firm 
fish flesh. The Portland crab and Lyme Bay scallops sing siren songs of the 
Chesil shingle, and the bowls of lightly steamed Fowey mussels are an easy 
crowd-pleaser. With a back garden for children to investigate and very 
welcoming service, it's hard to find anything not to be happy about.
• 01308 488321

Shelley's Plaice, Dorchester
 Photograph: Alamy 
Of all the best kept fish-eatery secrets in Dorset, there is none so well kept 
as Shelley's Plaice (until recently called Billy The Fish), secreted down a 
practically invisible dead end in the centre of Dorchester. This tiny 
open-kitchen cafe-restaurant is draped with used nets and pots. Billy used to 
be a fishmonger who occasionally cooked fish for customers. Now, because his 
dad's not well, Shelley who did most of the cooking as the restaurant grew 
larger (but it's still tiny) now runs the kitchen, where everything is cooked 
fresh to order. Cooking fish well is important, but sourcing it is even more 
vital. Billy does all his buying from the boats and market in Brixham, Devon 
(pictured), bringing home skate, megrim, grey mullet, monkfish and gurnard as 
well as great bass and crabs. Shelley smokes her own locally line-caught 
mackerel (main course £8.50). On my last visit, Portland crab and local 
samphire was her best-selling starter (£4.95), while oddities like conger eel 
and huss (a dogfish) regularly appear on the chalkboard. This is fish done with 
simplicity and love.
• Trinity Street, 01305 757428, no website

• The entry on the Hive Beach Café was amended on 31/7/2012 to reflect the 
recent accident at Burton Bradstock
 