
A Conservative government would have to raise the general level of taxation as 
well as cut spending to bring the soaring public deficit under control, the 
economist who will head the Tories' new spending watchdog has insisted.

Sir Alan Budd, who will lead a new office for budget responsibility  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/may/07/george-osborne-demos-conservatives-spending>
if David Cameron wins power, has also cast doubt on Conservative claims that 
they can pull down spending sufficiently merely through "efficiency savings", 
without hitting frontline services.

The remarks, echoed by Lord Turnbull, a former cabinet secretary under Tony 
Blair, are contained inCameron Uncovered, a hard-hitting Channel 4 documentary 
about the Tory leader to be broadcast tomorrow evening. The programme is 
presented by theObserver's chief political commentator Andrew Rawnsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewrawnsley>.

While the Tories have not ruled out tax rises, including an increase in VAT, 
they are trying to reassure voters ahead of a general election by emphasising 
that the bulk of spending cuts can be achieved without the pain of tax rises, 
and through efficiency savings.

But Budd, a chief economic adviser to Tory chancellors between 1991 and 1997 
and one of the original members of the Bank of England's monetary policy 
committee, said the line was hard to defend.

"It is going to be very difficult indeed to achieve the kinds of cut in 
deficit that will be needed without some increases in the general level of 
taxation like that," Budd says. "It just doesn't seem to me possible to do it 
all on the public spending side."

He questions whether necessary spending reductions can be achieved without a 
direct impact on frontline services. "You can't keep the same level of 
services, publicly funded, as are currently running. It's easy to say 'get rid 
of waste'. Everybody will get rid of waste, but in the end people notice that 
there aren't the services they previously had."

Turnbull, who has been helping Cameron and his shadow chancellor, George 
Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>, ensure their 
policy programme will stand up to scrutiny, tells the programme it is not 
"believable" to say all frontline services can be protected. "I don't think 
it's believable. It's clear that frontline services are going to be in for a 
very mean, lean time."

Osborne tells the programme, however, that it is wrong to say frontline 
services will inevitably be hit. "I don't accept that," he says. "The whole 
Conservative argument, the whole modern Conservative argument, is that you need 
structural reform to public services to increase their productivity, so we get 
more for less.

"So I think you can improve the way these services are delivered and live 
within our means as a country. These are not incompatible things," the shadow 
chancellor says.

Earlier this year the shadow business secretary, Ken Clarke, said tax 
increases were something "every Conservative tried to avoid". But he refused to 
rule them out. Asked about the prospect of a rise in VAT from 17.5% to 20%, 
Clarke said: "When you're the most indebted country in the western world ... 
then you cannot start promising you are not ever going to start increasing 
taxation.

"We will try to avoid it, we'll minimise it if we have to, by having proper 
control of public spending, which we haven't had in this country in the last 12 
years."

Setting up the office for budget responsibility will be one of the first acts 
of a Tory government so it can publish forecasts ahead of the emergency budget 
planned within the first 50 days of a Conservative administration.

Osborne has said it will be down to him and the government "to account for 
promises made to the British people". Budd has said the office will "keep the 
chancellor's feet to the fire".

Meanwhile, Cameron pledged yesterday that a Conservative government would 
crack down on waste and excessive bureaucracy from "day one".

In a speech to the Welsh Conservative conference in Llandudno, the Tory leader 
attacked Labour's "spendaholic culture" and repeatedly said he wanted to 
deliver "more for less".

He said reducing demands on the state and reforming public services would have 
"a profound impact" on how much the government spent. "But the truth is, it may 
take years to feel many of the benefits – and we can't afford to wait that 
long," he said.

"We need to start getting more for less from day one. So there is a third 
component to our plans – cutting out waste."
 