
The opening salvo from Adrian Chiles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/adrian-chiles> as he announced ITV's World 
Cup coverage was to challenge his former BBC Sport colleagues to a five-a-side 
match.

A man clearly much happier at the prospect of watching the world's best 
footballers from a Rio beachside studio for a month than he was when chained to 
the Daybreak sofa, Chiles joked that his punditry line-up would easily overcome 
a team headed by Gary Lineker.

"We would hammer them, probably 10-1," Chiles said but when the two 
broadcasters go head to head in broadcasting the final live, it is 
traditionally theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> that dominates its 
commercial rival in ratings' terms.

"It's a healthy degree of competition," Chiles said. "We all know each other. 
Their studio is right next to ours. I wouldn't compare us against them. We've 
got a different offering. I do it differently to Gary and people will decide 
which they like more. You could put anyone, a first-timer, presenting an 
England game and you'd get a 20m audience. I know my place."

It would likely be a close run thing if the punditry teams swapped golf 
jumpers for goalposts, given that ITV on Tuesday unveiled a line-up who include 
Fabio Cannavaro, Roy Keane, Lee Dixon, Gus Poyet, Patrick Vieira, Glenn Hoddle 
and Ian Wright. Andros Townsend, the Tottenham winger who played a key role in 
getting England to the finals but missed out on the final squad through injury, 
described his role in the ITV studio as "the next best thing" to being in 
Brazil.

He will join his namesake Andy, the former Professional Footballers' 
Association chairman Clarke Carlisle and Martin O'Neill in completing the ITV 
team. The early signs were that the expressive and erudite Poyet, fresh from 
delivering Premier League salvation for Sunderland, was a good early bet for 
the best newcomer on the punditry couch.

The BBC last week announced it had added Thierry Henry, Phil Neville and Rio 
Ferdinand to its roster for theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>. Henry is likely to 
slip seamlessly into the role filled by Ruud Gullit and Leonardo while 
Ferdinand will become the latest former player to try to pull off the Gary 
Neville trick of constructively criticising players with whom he was recently 
sharing a dressing room.

A beach pick-up game is more likely than in South Africa in 2010 when the two 
rival free-to-air broadcasters were based hundreds of miles apart, with ITV in 
Johannesburg and the BBC in a purpose-built studio in Cape Town.

This time the two, who will share the 64 matches of the tournament, will be 
based virtually next door to each other in identical Fifa studios on Copacabana 
beach.

In South Africa the BBC came under fire from the usual quarters for taking 295 
staff and building that £1m glass studio with views of Table Mountain. This 
time, it has got its retaliation in first by revealing that its staff across 
TV, radio and online will number 272 and they will produce 50% more content.

ITV, which is taking around 120 staff, will kick off the World Cup with 
coverage of the opening match between Brazil and Croatia from Arena de São 
Paulo, and will show England's second and third group games, against Uruguay 
and Coast Rica.

The BBC will broadcast England's late-night opener against Italy from Manaus, 
which will kick off at 11pm BST, and their second-round match should they 
qualify. ITV's head of sport, Niall Sloane, said he was satisfied with its 
picks: "We have two England games, two Brazil games and two Argentina games in 
that first phase." Clive Tyldesley and Sam Matterface will be the match 
commentators, with Gabriel Clarke as a reporter.

ITV, in addition to hoping that the late push to install broadcasting and IT 
infrastructure in some of the stadiums is completed in time, will be desperate 
to avoid a repeat of its 2010 embarrassment when some viewers missed Steven 
Gerrard's opening goal of the tournament for England against the USA.

With the pay-TV networks BT Sport and Sky Sports dominating domestic football 
coverage, major sporting events such as the World Cup are becoming ever more 
important for the BBC and ITV. Not only do they bring huge audiences to the 
broadcasters, regularly dominating the end-of-year list of most-watched 
programmes, but for ITV they deliver the so called "water-cooler moments" that 
advertisers crave.
 