
Emmanuel Adebayor is again absent for Tottenham’s Europa League travels, but 
the head coachMauricio Pochettino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mauricio-pochettino> denied his 
non-appearance against Asteras Tripolis is symptomatic of a wider problem.

Adebayor has not travelled for a continental match since last year’s trip to 
Sheriff Tiraspol. He was an unused substitute that night in Moldova, perhaps 
after falling out with then head coach Andre Villas-Boas, yet his absence has 
continued despite re-establishing himself under Tim Sherwood and now Pochettino.

The striker started against Asteras at White Hart Lane two weeks ago but has 
not travelled for the reverse fixture in Greece – the sixth successive European 
trip he has not been involved in.

That pattern of absenteeism led to Pochettino being peppered with questions.

“Aaron Lennon is not here, Kyle Naughton is not here, Younès Kaboul is not 
here,” he said when asked specifically about Adebayor. “It is the same 
situation.

“I decide the list for those coming to Greece and the players here are the 
players in the squad that will play.

“Okay, yes, it is a reality that Adebayor has not travelled in three games 
from England, to Limassol, Partizan Belgrade and here.

“For every single mission, for every single trip, we have our organisation and 
selections. We are ready.” Pochettino’s insistence nothing untoward is behind 
it suggests the Togo striker has been rested ready to face Stoke on Sunday. 
That would be a blow to Harry Kane - and many Tottenham fans - given the 
striker’s impact in place of the ineffective Adebayor last weekend, when the 
21-year-old’s introduction helped Spurs to come from behind to win 2-1 at Aston 
Villa.

When that was put to Pochettino, in tetchier mood than usual, he retorted: “I 
want to say that tomorrow we have a very important (match). Our mind is only on 
Asteras.”

The former Argentina international finally broke into a smile when asked 
whether hat-trick hero Kane would go in goal like he had done in the closing 
stages against Asteras a fortnight ago after Hugo Lloris was sent off.

“No, no he will not be in goal,” he said, laughing.

Pochettino is expecting a much tougher ask against Asteras than that 5-1 win 
at White Hart Lane, with the Greek club preparing for one of the biggest 
matches in their history.

“Every game is different, a different moment,” he said. “We know Asteras at 
home is a difficult team, a strong team.

“Their supporters are brave and we expect a very, very difficult game. 
Different, sure, to what we played in London.

“It will be a very important game for Asteras Tripolis, but don’t forget we 
also want the three points.”

Tottenham  Possible 4-2-3-1 Vorm; Dier, Fazio, Vertonghen, Davies; Dembélé, 
Bentaleb; Lennon, Kane, Townsend; Soldado
 