
Eclipse of the tattooed lady

Maybe you caught the National Movie Awards on prime-time ITV last week? Most 
of us in the film world – as opposed to movies, that is – didn't even know it 
was happening and it certainly made Cannes look somewhat snobby. They had a 
starry list of attendees, from Chris Rock to the Harry Potter cast to Tom 
Cruise. My favourite category was the most-awaited movie of the summer award, 
whichThe Twilight Saga: Eclipse won ahead of some other movies which, you know, 
people are really, really looking forward to.

I wonder why, though, they didn't show a clip from The Girl With the Dragon 
Tattoo in the breakthrough category? Is it because they didn't like those ugly 
subtitles getting in the way? The award was won byThe Time Traveler's Wife, 
which isn't very breakthrough at all, unless you go back in time to when Eric 
Bana and Rachel McAdams weren't already hugely famous. Of course, the NMA is a 
big studio love-in, voted for "by the fans" and all that and, sadly, it's 
probably more representative of film culture in the UK than Baftas, Bifas and 
critics' awards, but in the future can we please find a spot in there to show 
that there is life on British screens from outside Hollywood?

From Cannes to Japan

Having won the Palme d'Or last week with Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past 
Lives, Thai director Apichatpong Weerasethakul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/apichatpong-weerasethakul> (below) visited 
London to open his haunting installationPhantoms of Nabua at BFI Gallery on the 
Southbank. Due to the unrest in Thailand, he was finding it hard to get a visa, 
but, he said, that when you win the Palme d'Or, suddenly doors that used to be 
closed seem magically to swing open.

He's off to Japan next, he tells me, to make a documentary portrait of film 
scholar Donald Richie. After visiting with the American task force in 1947, 
Richie settled in Tokyo and became fascinated by Japanese cinema. He met 
Japanese film master Yasujiro Ozu and undertook to promote his films in the 
west. He then did the same for Akira Kurosawa and Kenji Mizoguchi before 
curating film seasons at New York's Moma and writing the definitiveA Hundred 
Years of Japanese Film. "The film will look at how he bridged the two cultures 
and why the east was so fascinating for him," said Apichatpong. "But it won't 
be like a normal documentary. I don't know how to do that."

Coming to a screen near you…

Films from Cannes I hear are definitely getting UK distribution: Le Quattro 
Volte (a dialogue-free Italian film about goats); Cristi Puiu's three-hour 
Aurora and, hooray, Jean-Luc Godard's Film Socialisme and, of course, Uncle 
Boonmee…
 