
Several years ago a few trees in my 15 acres of pine forest in Montana turned 
from green to a rusty brown, killed by swarms of bark beetles. Four years later 
virtually all of my centuries-old forest was dead. It wasn't just the beetles 
that did in my trees, but much warmer winters here in the Rocky mountains that 
no longer killed the bugs, allowing them to expand exponentially.

Since then, as a science journalist for the New York Times, I have written 
many stories about the dying of the trees – and the news is not good. Many 
forests across the length and breadth of the Rockies have died in the last 
decade. Most of the mature forests of British Columbia are gone, from a 
combination of climate and insects.

The bristlecone pines of the US – the most ancient trees in the world, with 
some more than 4,000 years old – will die in the coming years because of a 
combination of bark beetles and a fungal disease, enabled by a warmer climate. 
Tree-ring studies on the bristlecone show that the last 50 years are the 
warmest half century in the last 3,700 years.

All this is to say that the fungus killing ash trees in Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/shortcuts/2012/sep/26/fungus-kill-third-britains-trees>
 is unlikely to be a one-off. Trees across the world are dying. It's not only 
the changes brought by a warmer world. We've treated the world's trees poorly 
for centuries, without regard to ecological principles. We've fragmented 
forests into tiny slivers, and selected out the best genetics again and again 
with no regard to the fitness of those that remain. Air pollution and soil 
abuse has taken a toll. And scientists admit trees and forests are poorly 
studied. "It's embarrassing how little we know," a leading redwood expert told 
me.

Yet the little that is known indicates trees are essential. They are the 
planet's heat shield, cooling temperatures beneath them by 10C and blocking 
cancer-causing ultraviolet rays. They are robust filters of our air and water, 
and soak up climate-warming carbon dioxide. Forests slow the runoff of 
rainfall. Many of the world's damaging floods are really caused by 
deforestation.

These functions are well known. But trees play many other critical roles that 
we know little about. Katsuhiko Matsunaga, a marine chemist at Hokkaido 
University in Japan, discovered that as the leaves from trees decompose, humic 
acid leaches into the ocean and helps fertilise plankton, critical food for 
many other forms of sea life. Japanese fisherman began an award-winning 
campaign called Forests Are the Lovers of the Sea, and planted trees along the 
coasts and rivers that rejuvenated fish and oyster stocks.

Also in Japan, researchers have long studied what they call "forest bathing 
<http://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2008/05/02/news/forest-therapy-taking-root/#.UdmBCL-0ZE4>
". Hiking through the forest has been shown to reduce stress chemicals in the 
body and to increase NK or natural killer cells in the immune system, that 
fight tumours and viruses. Elsewhere researchers have demonstrated that 
anxiety, depression and even crime are lower in neighbourhoods with trees in 
the picture.

Hundreds of different kinds of chemicals are emitted by trees and forests, 
many beneficial. Taxane from the Pacific yew tree is a powerful anti-cancer 
drug. Many other tree compounds are proven to be antibacterial, anti-fungal, 
anti-viral and even to prevent cancer. The active ingredient of aspirin, 
acetylsalicylic acid, for example, comes from willows. Recommended by doctors 
to prevent a range of cancers, as well as heart attack and stroke, some believe 
this chemical in the wild has a medicinal impact on the health of all creatures 
as it is aerosolised into the air and water, and breathed in and drunk. Yet, it 
hasn't been researched.

Trees are greatly underused as an eco-technology – "working trees" – to make 
natural systems, as well as the world's cities and rural areas, more resilient. 
They are used here in the US to prevent soil erosion and shade crops. In a neat 
bit of alchemy, trees can be used to clean up the most toxic of wastes, 
including explosives, solvents and organic wastes, because of a dense community 
of microbes as thick as a finger around the tree's roots, a process known as 
phytoremediation.

The question is what to plant to withstand the challenges of a changing world 
to assure a world with trees. In the UK a group calledFuture Trees Trust 
<http://www.futuretrees.org/> is breeding more resilient trees. And a 
shade-tree farmer from the US named David Milarch, a co-founder of the 
Archangel Ancient Tree Archive, and whom I have written about, is making copies 
of some of the world's oldest and largest trees, from California redwoods to 
the oaks of Ireland – with proven survivor genetics – to be part of a future 
forest mix. "These are the supertrees," he says, "and they have stood the test 
of time."

Before I began this journey I felt planting trees was a feeble response to the 
planet's problems. No longer. As the proverb asks: "When is the best time to 
plant a tree?" Twenty years ago. "The second-best time?" Today.
 