
A landmark civilian trial of Osama bin Laden's son-in-law may be delayed until 
next year due to budget cuts arising from the sequestration, a US court heard 
Monday.

Lawyers for alleged al-Qaida spokesman Suleiman Abu Ghaith said that due to a 
mandatory five-week furlough of all federal defence lawyers inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, the prosecution may have to be 
pushed back from September to January 2013.

US district judge Lewis Kaplan said it was "extremely troublesome" that a 
trial of such importance could be affected by government cuts.

In a further development, defence attorneys suggested that they intend to ask 
for court hearings to be moved away from the federal court in lower Manhattan – 
situated just a few blocks from the site of the September 11 attacks – due to 
the potential of a jury being prejudiced.

Abu Ghaith faces an indictment that includes the charge of conspiring to kill 
US nationals. The 47-year-old Kuwaiti is the alleged spokesman of al-Qaida, and 
the son-in-law of former terror network chiefOsama bin Laden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/osamabinladen>.

Prosecutors say he was summoned on the evening of the September 11 attacks by 
bin Laden and asked to assist in al-Qaida's campaign against the West.

The following morning, Abu Ghaith – along with bin Laden and then al-Qaida 
deputyAyman al-Zawahiri <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayman-al-zawahiri>, 
released a video in which he warned the US that "a great army is gathering 
against you" and calling on "the nation of Islam" to fight "the Jews, the 
Christians and the Americans".

He later gave a speech in which he warned Muslims "not to board any aircraft 
and not to live in high rises".

At Monday's hearing, lawyers for the suspects told the court that they were 
considering filing a motion to change venue.

Outside the courtroom, defence attorney Martin Cohen was asked if he thought 
it possible to find an impartial jury, given the courtroom's proximity to where 
nearly 3,000 people died on September 11, 2001.

"That is a question that we are mulling over," Cohen said. He issued the same 
response when asked where he thought an unbiased jury could be found.

If the case is moved from New York, it will come as a blow to the White House, 
that has long sought to try terrorists – including those connected to the 
September 11 attack – in a civilian courtroom in New York, rather than in 
military hearings atGuantánamo Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/guantanamo-bay>.

After Abu Ghaith's first appearance last month, senator Mitch McConnell 
accused President Barack Obama 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/mar/08/white-house-republican-bin-laden-son-in-law>
 of putting politics above security concerns.

"The decision of the president to import Suleiman Abu Ghaith into the United 
States for civilian prosecution makes little sense and reveals, yet again, a 
stubborn refusal to avoid holding additional terrorists at the secure facility 
at Guantanamo Bay despite the circumstances," McConnell said.

It echoed an earlier clash over attempts by the administration to try alleged 
9/11 mastermind Khalid Sheikh Mohammed in New York. Faced with an outcry and 
warnings that it posed a security risk to the US's most populous city, Obama 
relented and moved the case back to Guantanamo.

Abu Ghaith was arrested on 28 February and was transferred to US soil the 
following day. He was reportedly picked up in Turkey after entering the country 
from Iran. Local authorities passed on information to US authorities and a 
handover of Abu Ghaith reportedly took place in Jordan.

In court Monday, his lawyers indicated they would apply for a motion to strike 
from the record a post-arrest statement from the alleged al-Qaida spokesman.

That motion – along with the one to have the case moved – will be put before 
the court in May.

During a discussion on trial scheduling, Kaplan suggested that jury selection 
could take place either in September or January next year. But defence lawyers 
pointed out that due to the furloughing of federal employees, the earlier date 
could be impossible.

"It would be very hard for us to be ready by September," Cohen told the court.

Kaplan said he was stunned.

"The irony – that is not exactly the right word – is it is extremely 
troublesome to contemplate the possibility of a case of this nature being 
delayed because of sequestration," he said.

Cohen later explained to reporters that lawyers at the Federal Defenders of 
New York have been told they must take 27 days off by the end of September as a 
result of the sequestration.

Throughout Monday's hearing Abu Ghaith remained silent. Dressed in a blue 
prison smock, he was led into the courtroom in handcuffs. He listened to 
proceedings through a translator.
 