
On Wednesday night Amazon's Nasdaq share value closed down slightly, a 
perplexing turn of events that did little to reflect future demand for new 
Kindles signposted by the announcement, on Wednesday morning, of Tulisa 
Contostavlos's debut novel.

In announcing the news 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/tulisa-wants-become-author-after-2097570>
, the Mirror quoted a curiously knowledgable pal saying "it has been a hard few 
months for Tulisa but she can't wait for her book to be released", which is 
perhaps a little optimistic about the critical and commercial fate that awaits 
Tulisa's latest travails. "Tulisa's debut novel is impossible to put down," we 
are told, which sounds rather like a challenge of endurance, "and impossible to 
forget", which simply sounds like a threat.

There is also a subtle hint from Tulisa's pal that Sky – for this is the title 
of the book that will have Tulisa's name on the front – is not the limit. "She 
has been really focused on writing the novels," they noted, "and has been 
spending most of her time on them." That's novels with an "s"! And "them"! So 
there could be more to come. But let's concentrate on the first, the 
publication date of which is listed byTulisasource.com 
<http://tulisasource.com/>, one of Lost in Showbiz's favourite Tulisa fansites, 
as 11 September – make of that what you will.

Until then, the level of public debate we can expect to surround this literary 
release is best summarised byone tweet quoted by gossip website 
Entertainmentwise 
<http://www.entertainmentwise.com/news/122176/Tulisa-Contostavlos-Debut-Novel-Will-Flop-Like-Her-Album-The-Best-Twitter-Reactions>
: "Tulisa is releasing a novel!? MOVE OVER CHARLES DICKINS!"

Still, the promotional blurb for Sky promises some impressive work. The book, 
apparently, tells the story of a London schoolgirl's rise to stardom and – hold 
on. Lost in Showbiz can see what's happening here. This is a companion piece to 
last year's autobiographical tome Honest, which also had Tulisa's name on the 
front. But back to Sky. "In 2005, a south London schoolgirl huddles cold and 
wet on the kerb," trumpets the synopsis. "Her bruised eye swollen shut, her 
schoolbag dirty and torn. Sky Beradino dreams of coming out on top – just for 
once – and vows that no one will keep her down for ever. In 2013, a talented 
young actress takes a deep breath before stepping on stage. Glamorous, 
confident and beautiful, only the very closest to her know the price she has 
paid."

In one sense it's cheering that, despite the lamentable efforts of a certain 
Sunday newspaper to destroy Tulisa as both a celebrity and human being, she is 
storming ahead with her plan for world domination. But that sound you hear is 
not just the doors to the publishing industry being kicked down, or at least 
wedged open with a job lot of unsold perfume bottles, any more than it's the 
distant rumble of JCBs heading to Poundland HQ in a race to construct extra 
warehouse space by 12 September. It is the sound of Tulisa crossing one further 
option off her list.

So far Tulisa has been a member of N-Dubz (and a rather good one, too), an X 
Factor judge, an actor, a solo performer, a perfumer and, of course, an 
autobiographer. Beyond this she is also a celebrity, that supposedly solid 
foundation on which some of those commercial ventures, and most future ones, 
are built. The modern celebrity must be a polymath: so determined to prove 
doubters wrong when they ask "but what do they actuallydo?" that they try to do 
everything but often end up succeeding at very little. They forget that great 
celebrities, like great musicians and actors, are defined more by what they say 
no to than what they say yes to. In the end, the noise they make cancels itself 
out, and as each venture fails, the celebrity moves on to the next career 
lifeline on the list.

But it is a finite list. Obviously, Tulisa can still launch that theme park we 
have all been waiting for – after all, who wouldn't want their picture taken 
with a Rada graduate in an oversized Dappy costume? But as you watch a 
celebrity slowly running out of options while crossing your fingers that their 
next venture is in some way decent, and as you see them meeting, then shedding, 
companions along the way, you feel rather like the Doctor Who fan who eagerly 
awaits his next incarnation, while knowing that with each new face the 
franchise approaches the Doctor's 12-regeneration limit.

How many times can Tulisa regenerate? She is probably now at the Colin Baker 
stage, which might seem perilous but elsewhere this week the celebrity cosmos 
has also shown us Alex Reid offering his Katie Price wedding ring ina 
competition for readers of Now! magazine 
<http://www.nowmagazine.co.uk/celebrity-news/546736/omg-alex-reid-wanted-to-pawn-his-wedding-ring-from-katie-price-but-we-ve-snapped-it-up-for-you>
, which in the Whovian timeline is somewhere near Christopher Eccleston. 
Jedward, meanwhile, have changedtheir Twitter biography 
<https://twitter.com/planetjedward> to a Gmail address at which they hope to 
receive "Business Enquiries". For Jedward, perhaps the four-year spell of 
employment that began when they startled the world by clearly not being able to 
sing on a singing competition represents a decent run of luck; but in 
regeneration terms they have gone beyond the Matt Smith stage and are firmly 
into whoever-comes-after-Matt territory. The BBC is naturally tight-lipped 
about Smith's replacement as the Doctor. Perhaps, if her busy schedule of 
promoting books with her name on the front allows, this role could be Tulisa's 
next move?
 