
In a fairly bubbly market for the second day running, Tullow Oil is on the 
slide.

The oil explorer and producer said it was writing off $415m after 
disappointing results in Mauritania, Ethopia and Norway. It will also incur a 
loss on disposal of $115m related to a project in Uganda. It kept its full year 
production guidance of 79,000 to 85,000 barrels of oil equivalent a day, and 
said 2014 half year profits are expected to be in line with forecasts of $650m. 
Chief executive Aidan Heavey said:
 We are well funded following our second bond issue and we are making steady 
progress with our asset disposal programme.

With potential basin-opening wells across the portfolio coming up in the 
second half of the year and strong revenue and cash flow, Tullow is in a strong 
position for the remainder of this year and into 2015. 
Despite this optimism, the company's shares have slipped 5p to 850p. Oriel 
Securities said:
 Given that the company had its capital markets day recently, there was not 
much new on the operational front. Overall however we see the update slightly 
on the negative side, largely due to production being below the full year 2014 
guidance range, suggesting to us that the full year production is likely to be 
towards the low end of guidance. 
But Liberum and Westhouse Securities both kept their buy ratings on the shares.

Overall the FTSE 100 has added 13.05 points to 6815.97 after a strong 
performance in the US following reasonable manufacturing data from around the 
world. Rebecca O'Keeffe at Interactive Investor said:
 Positive manufacturing data from both China and the US helped propel US 
stocks to new highs yesterday afternoon, with Asian markets following up with 
gains and European markets cautiously rising this morning. In an environment 
where central bank policy is making it incredibly difficult to be short stocks, 
equities continue to float on a sea of confidence and liquidity. As the direct 
beneficiaries of central bank and government employment policy, smaller 
companies lead the way, enjoying increased support and growing confidence. 
Among the risers, BG was 12p better at £12.59 after Canaccord raised its 
target price from £12.50 to £14.50.

A number of companies saw their shares go ex-dividend. These included Royal 
Mail, down 10.8p at 480.4p, Burberry, 29p lower at £14.50, and Babcock 
International, off 17p at £11.47.

Finally, it has been a bad few days for Autonomy and its associates.

The former Cambridge software star was bought by Hewlett-Packard, which 
subsequently faced legal action over the deal. But on Fridayreports suggested 
HP had settled the claims, with the parties set to turn their attention on 
former Autonomy bosses. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/28/hp-settles-investors-lawsuit-autonomy>

Now a spin off from Autonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation>, Blinkx, has issued 
a profit warning and seen its shares tumble 44% or 29p to 36.75p.

The company, an internet video search specialist, said in the last three 
months it had seen lower than forecast demand with a corresponding shortfall in 
revenues and earnings. It said the shortfall was exaggerated towards the end of 
the quarter, adding:
 We attribute this performance to industry-wide issues of efficiency and 
effectiveness, which in our case was compounded by the lingering effects of the 
disparaging blog about the company.

This resulted in a slower than expected return of demand, despite earlier 
signs of normalisation.

The blog post came out in January and the company immediately denied the 
claims and said there was no change in its outlook.
 