
A television ad showing Ainsley Harriott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/ainsleyharriott> kissing a stove top 
could prompt children to copy the celebrity chef and harm themselves, the 
advertising watchdog ruled today.

In the advert for Fairy Power Spray, the Ready Steady Cook host rested his 
face on a stove hob and kissed it, declaring: "It's a love hate relationship. 
Love cooking on it. Hate fighting burnt-on grease off it. Fairy Power Spray. 
Everyday you squirt, wait and wipe. Love it."

The Advertising Standards Authority <https://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> 
ruled that the advert, made by the Grey London agency, breached its regulations 
relating to the harming of children, but conceded that young people were 
unlikely to imitate the chef.

"We considered that, even if unlikely to be directly emulated, the actions 
featured in the advertisement gave the impression that ovens and hobs were 
perfectly safe to touch," the ASA said.

"We were concerned that children could be harmed as a result." 

Following complaints, Procter & Gamble, the manufacturer of the spray and one 
of the largest advertisers in the world, asked that the advert not be shown 
during children's television programmes.

The advertising watchdog also rejected complaints from the Salt Manufacturers' 
Association that a government health campaign linking salt intake to high blood 
pressure, heart disease and strokes was misleading.

The poster and television campaign from the advertising agency HHCL featured 
an animated Sid the Slug character that warned that "too much salt could lead 
to a heart attack".

Salt manufacturers had objected that the Food Standards Agency campaign was 
incorrect and potentially damaging as it was "based on the fact that salt kills 
slugs and the assertion that it will kill also humans".

But the ASA said the food regulator had based its commercials on sound 
scientific information.

· To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 