
South African police said on Wednesday that two people suspected of looting 
shops in South Africa’s capital were shot dead in continued violence triggered 
by the ruling party’s choice of a mayoral candidate for local polls.

Police said they had also arrested 40 of the rioters who were targeting 
foreigners’ shops as public anger mounted over economic hardships in the 
build-up to elections on 3 August that are likely to become a referendum on 
president Jacob Zuma’s leadership.

Residents of Pretoria’s townships started setting cars and buses alight on 
Monday night after the ruling African National Congress (ANC) named a candidate 
in the Tshwane municipality where the capital city is located, overruling the 
choice of regional branches. Burned-out cars blocked roads on Wednesday.

The two killed were shot on Tuesday night, the police spokeswoman for Gauteng 
Province, Colonel Noxolo Kweza, said.

“Two of the suspects were shot and killed following looting at Mamelodi,” 
police said in a statement, adding that those arrested would face charges of 
violence and theft.

“Incidents of protests and looting continued in other areas while situation is 
tense in others.”

Violence continued in parts of the capital on Wednesday. 

Protesters continued to clash with police and “a disproportionate part of the 
looting was taking place at shops owned by foreign nationals,” Tshwane Metro 
police spokesman Console Tleane told eNCA television.

Searching for Soweto: mystery of a man whose image defined apartheid brutality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/16/soweto-uprising-40-year-anniversary-photo-south-africa-apartheid>
“There is calm in some hotspots [but] the navigation of the streets is 
difficult because of the rubble and the debris,” he said.

Foreigners, many of them from other African countries, were attacked in April 
last year by crowds blaming them for taking jobs and business.

Analysts warned of more unrest in the commercial hub of Gauteng province, 
which includes Pretoria and Johannesburg.

“Intra-ANC, election-related, factional violence is being ignored by markets 
trading on external factors, but is worrying,” Peter Attard Montalto, a 
London-based Nomura emerging markets analyst, said.

The mayoral dispute flared at the weekend after an ANC member was shot dead on 
Sunday as party factions met to decide on a candidate for mayor of Pretoria’s 
Tshwane municipality.

South African miners given hope in battle for lung damage payouts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/20/south-africa-miners-silicosis-battle-compensation-lung-damage>
The ANC leadership then named senior party member and former cabinet minister 
Thoko Didiza as its candidate for Tshwane, overriding regional branch members 
and refusing to back down as the violence mounted.

The ANC said it picked the candidate as a compromise between two rival 
factions in Tshwane. But critics say the decision by the party, which has been 
in power since the end of white-minority rule in 1994, showed that it is losing 
its touch in areas where it was once unassailable.

Zuma survived impeachment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/05/firms-cut-ties-jacob-zuma-allies-before-impeachment-vote>
 in April after the constitutional court ruled he had breached the constitution 
by ignoring an order by the anti-graft watchdog to repay some of the $16m 
(£11m) in state funds spent renovating his home.

“Ahead of the August elections, disgruntled ANC supporters in Gauteng will be 
motivated by the Pretoria riots to stage further protests to demonstrate the 
unpopular ANC leadership’s decisions,” Robert Besseling, the head of the EXX
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> business risk intelligence 
group, said.

• This article was amended 23 June 2016. An earlier version said incorrectly 
that South African police said they had shot the two looters.
 