
The house is spattered with blood. It has dried on to pillow-cases, shirts, 
towels and sofa cushions. “Looks like a murder scene,” R says, walking away 
from the laundry pile by the washing machine. I predict a boil wash and a litre 
of Vanish will do the trick but, by God, two open wounds have the power to 
spread a lot of pain.

“Look away,” the nurse tells me, as he injects the anaesthetic into our 
youngest son’s lip to numb the pain of the stitches. I am the wimp here. R is 
fascinated by the nurse’s sewing skills, I’m just trying to stay conscious. Our 
son is the least bothered; his lower lip wobbling only fractionally as his last 
stitch is tied up. He is, we tell him, the bravest boy in the whole world, a 
boy who is due a big red lollipop when we are finished here. “No vigorous 
face-washing or rough play for a few days, but other than that,” the nurse 
says, “he’ll be back to normal in no time.”

The next day, it’s my elder daughter. A surreptitious trip to a cowboy 
body-piercer on our recent holiday has left her with a hole three times as big 
as it should be and an infected ear. Because we were unaware of the piercing 
(long hair, expert “avert-your-eyes-away-from-the-left-side-of-my-face” 
skills), our daughter admits herself to A&E. I am alerted to all of this by one 
of the hospital staff, who calls and asks me to go straight to the hospital. My 
daughter is distressed and has lost a lot of blood.

The cannula in her hand feels horrid, she tells me when I arrive 10 minutes 
later, and I recall the weirdness of that sensation myself. It was not a 
vicious, searing, wicked pain at all: more a dull ache that was uncomfortable 
when the hand moved. I also remember the trickle of cold liquid passing into my 
flesh as the antibiotics were administered.

“I had to have one of those in labour with you,” I say. “It was the bit I 
hated most.” She looks at me and says, “I’m really sorry,” which I’m a little 
baffled by, but pleased about all the same. “I hope she’s learned something 
from this,” R texts, and I tell him to cool it because his behaviour in the 
past has been far from saintly; he texts back and says, “Tell her I love her.”

I spend the night on a ward with my daughter because she needs to be monitored 
and the next morning the doctors do their rounds, inspect her ear and ask me, 
“Where’s the piercing shop? They did a terrible job,” to which my daughter 
answers, “Spain.” Her notes are gathered, drugs prescribed and she is 
discharged. I wonder whether this will turn into Groundhog Day and I’ll be back 
in hospital tomorrow with another injury and another member of the family.

We have returned to normality then – as normal as my family ever gets. Once 
the blood has been Vanished out of the clothes, we can get stuck into autumn 
and all the crisp promise that the new season holds. The epoch-making step into 
recovery – when I started going to regular Al-Anon meetings and sharing how my 
family’s problem with addiction had affected me – was more than a year ago.

Back then, I thought the pain might dissipate if I kept on doing everything 
right. But nobody can do everything right all the time. And, like blood, if 
I’ve seen it somewhere before – on a surface or an item of clothing or a patch 
of floor – I can never quite look at the area or thing again without seeing 
where the blood once existed.

This isn’t as tragic as it sounds. It’s just a realisation that things don’t 
disappear. Blood flows beneath the skin even when we can’t feel or touch it. 
Things may sink but they’re still there. When they surface, at least we can see 
what we’re dealing with.

I’d rather not have to contend with too much pain, because who would choose 
that? However, I feel I’m better equipped to look at things that I was once 
terrified of and face the problems I have no control over – partly because I’m 
in recovery and I’m learning to live fairly contentedly now with R, who is 
sometimes sober and sometimes not.

It’s also because I’ve accepted that I found growing up very hard and certain 
members of my family a little bit nuts. And also, more significantly, because 
pain is an inescapable part of life for everybody.
 