
Houston officials have accused Uber of aggressive behaviour as the car service 
start-up and its rivals attempt to enter the city and shake up the taxi market.

Smartphone app-based companies such as Uber and Lyft have expanded into dozens 
of major cities in recent years, promising more efficient service than 
traditional taxi and limousine firms but prompting local politicians to 
question whether the rides are legal.

Uber is available in 32 countries and close to 40 North American cities but 
has been fiercely opposed by established businesses and banned in places 
including Portland, New Orleans and Miami - much to the frustration ofone of 
its investors, Ashton Kutcher 
<http://miamiherald.typepad.com/nakedpolitics/2014/02/ashton-kutcher-slams-miami-for-keeping-out-uber.html>
.

Houston, the US’s fourth-largest city, is the biggest hold-out remaining in 
North America, and its size and limited public transport make it a prime 
target. The Texas city’s council members are expected to spend up to several 
months considering whether to alter regulations to permit the technology 
businesses to operate, but officials have been unhappy with the tactics of the 
two best-known brands.

Uber and Lyft have started to offer rides in Houston for free on a promotional 
basis, arguing that as long as no money changes hands they are not violating 
city rules. “Uber and Lyft decided to up the pressure by entering the market 
and operating legally because they’re not accepting fares. But they’re trying 
to bully us into acting,” Houston mayor Annise Parker told the Guardian.

Parker, a former gay rights activist, said she would not be browbeaten. “Uber 
cannot threaten me in any way. I had people threatening to shoot me in the 
seventies, there’s not anything that Uber as an entity can do that will 
intimidate me,” she said.

“It just slows down the process because what happens - I know there are 
politicians who will cave under pressure - but often what happens for the 
majority of us when someone starts applying that kind of pressure, you don’t 
want to look like you cave in to pressure so you slow down and get dug in. And 
it’s not I that have to make this decision alone, there are 16 [council 
members]. It has not made it easier.”

Uber claims that more than 10,000 people have signed a petition 
<http://blog.uber.com/HoustonStandUp> supporting it. Houston’s city attorney, 
David Feldman, sent an email to Uber last month formally asking that it “cease 
and desist” from encouraging the public to write to officials demanding the 
introduction of the service. “The excessive number of e-mails has gone 
unabated, to the point that it has become harassing in nature and arguably 
unlawful,” Feldman wrote.

“It’s not that we mind hearing from our citizens, but these internet petitions 
... while I respect that someone who lives in New York City really really likes 
Uber, they’re not my constituents,” Parker said. “And having 300 emails hit my 
inbox from people who don’t live in Houston and then I can’t send or receive 
emails from someone who may really need help is a distraction. But it has 
abated somewhat.”

Nairi Hourdajian, a spokesperson for Uber, said: “We were giving voice to all 
of the people in Houston, more than 10,000, who have been clamouring for more 
and better transportation options... we think it would be a particularly strong 
market.” She added that the company’s research indicated it would be popular 
with many drivers. Lyft did not respond to a request for comment.

Kitessa Turi, of the United Houstonian Taxi Drivers Association, said that 
many cab drivers in the city struggle to make a living. He is unsure if the 
start-ups would help or hurt his group’s members. “I’m not against anybody, I 
support the open market, but we have no idea how [they] want to conduct 
business,” he said.

Founded in 2009, Uber is backed by investors including Goldman Sachs and 
Google Ventures. It offers a range of services. UberX is a ride-sharing system, 
UberBlack provides sedans and UberLux is the company’s high-end offering. The 
app allows users to order a car and watch on a map as it heads to the pick-up 
point. Often more expensive than a standard taxi, “surge pricing” means that 
customers pay more at times of peak demand, such as in bad weather.

Also headquartered in San Francisco, Lyft is a ride-sharing scheme that claims 
to be generally cheaper than taxis. In some cities it charges set amounts for 
journeys and in others its drivers accept “donations”.

New digital companies such as Uber and the accommodations website Airbnb are 
at the forefront of the “sharing economy”, which challenges traditional 
business models by encouraging peer-to-peer marketplaces.

However, innovation and regulation have not always been easily compatible. 
Insurance coverage is a problematic issue for the car start-ups. Regulators in 
US cities have examined whether ride-sharing drivers should each require 
commercial insurance policies.

Uber was sued in January 
<http://articles.chicagotribune.com/2014-01-27/news/sns-rt-us-uber-accident-lawsuit-20140127_1_uber-app-uber-x-uber-driver>
 by the family of a six-year-old girl who was killed in San Francisco by a 
driver linked to the company. “I am a little concerned at the way, the cavalier 
attitude, that - UberBLACK would be the example I use - they contract directly 
with drivers of black town cars. Most of those drivers, virtually all of those 
drivers, do not actually own the vehicles that they drive, at least here in 
Houston,” said Parker, they mayor.

“And so here’s a real-world problem. Uber contracts with the driver, they give 
the driver their smartphone, the driver starts moonlighting in-between regular 
limo runs for their company, that driver has an accident. Whose insurance 
covers that?... It’s not as easy as just saying: ‘we’ll let them come in and 
let the market sort it out’. I’m not worried about the limo company, not 
necessarily worried about the driver, I’m worried about the customer in that 
car and whether they’re safe.”

Uber faces a class-action lawsuit 
<http://www.sfgate.com/business/article/Uber-drivers-suit-over-tips-clears-hurdle-5044858.php>
 from drivers related to its tipping charge. Resistance to its arrival in 
Washington was so virulent that a filmmaker made a documentary calledThe Uber 
Wars 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/dr-gridlock/wp/2013/10/23/new-documentary-chronicles-ubers-d-c-battle/>
. And itupset Salman Rushdie 
<https://twitter.com/SalmanRushdie/status/400630114943135744>. But Uber’s 
financial muscle is allowing it to wage extensive PR campaigns andhire 
influential lobbyists 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2013/09/uber-taxi-lobbying-expansion-97028.html>
. It marketed aggressively and organised a petition with more than 10,000 
signatures in Seattle, where city council members voted last month to limit the 
number of drivers 
<http://www.geekwire.com/2014/city-seattle-contact-uber-illegal-marketing-tactics/>
. Despite its divisive tactics and controversial business model, Uber usually 
gets its way when it tries to expand and it seems likely that Houston will be 
no different in the end. “We have successfully deregulated all sorts of 
industries, and I’m assuming that we will figure out a way to work Uber in down 
here,” said Parker.
 