
The British defence secretary Michael Fallon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michael-fallon> has seen government 
analysis indicating that UK-made cluster munitions were used by the Saudi-led 
coalition in the current conflict in Yemen, sources have told the Guardian.

It is understood the government’s own investigations back up media reports 
that such cluster bombs have been deployed in the war, in which Britain is 
helping to train Saudi forces. A source told the Guardian that Fallon is among 
the ministers to have known about the analysis for about a month.

But it is understood ministers have still not been given definitive 
confirmation one way or the other bySaudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia>, which has publicly denied the 
allegations and claimed that UK-made cluster bombs found are the relics of old 
conflicts.

The revelation is likely to increase calls on the government to reconsider 
exports of arms to Saudi Arabia, which have already grown since theUS suspended 
a planned sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/us-to-halt-planned-arms-sales-to-saudi-arabia-over-yemen-airstrikes>
 of precision-guided munitions last week.
 Some of the UK-manufactured cluster bomblets gathered in northern Yemen. 
Photograph: Amnesty International 
A Saudi-led coalition has been fighting a Houthi rebel uprising against the 
Yemeni government since 2015, with Britain providing some military training 
assistance.

Establishing the truth is important because the UK is a signatory to a 2010 
international treaty banning the use of cluster munitions. The weapons leave 
mini-bomblets that can explode much later, killing civilians. The Cluster 
Munitions Convention commits the UK to disposing of all cluster munitions and 
working to prevent their use by anyone else. Saudi Arabia is not a signatory.

A senior defence source said the issue of UK-made cluster munitions was 
“something that has been raised at the highest possible levels and we have been 
trying to establish definitively for some time”.

The Ministry of Defence <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ministry-of-defence> 
would not reveal the contents of the analysis but a government spokesman said: 
“The government takes such allegations very seriously. We have analysed the 
case carefully using all available information, considering all possibilities, 
and raised the issue with the Saudi-led coalition.”

Reports from ITV, Sky News and Amnesty International have all pointed to bombs 
made in the UK and exported before the ban having been dropped in the ongoing 
war.

Philip Hammond, then the foreign secretary, pledged in May that the Ministry 
of Defence would investigate fully and seek concrete assurances from Saudi 
Arabia that there has been no use in the current conflict of British-made 
cluster munitions.

At that time, ministers said the government does not possess any evidence that 
such weapons have been deployed, and suggested that the bomb found by Amnesty 
International could have been from a previous conflict in the region, adding 
that the last supply of this weapon to the Saudis was in 1989.

Since then, further footage has been published by ITV and Sky, showing the 
leader of the rebel Houthi government, Abdulaziz bin Habtour, accusing Britain 
of war crimes. “They have sold cluster bombs to Saudi Arabia,” he told Sky News 
earlier this month. “They know the Saudis are going to drop them onYemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> ... in Sa’dah and in Sana’a and other 
provinces.I don’t think they are guilty of war crimes, I believe so. They are 
participating in the bombing of Yemen’s people.”

Concerns about the Saudi military using weapons in Yemen that have been 
exported from the UK have been repeatedly raised in prime minister’s questions 
by Angus Robertson, the SNP leader in Westminster.

Robertson said: “I too have heard from informed sources about the Saudis 
dropping UK-made cluster munitions in Yemen. It is totally unacceptable and 
piles pressure on the Ministry of Defence and Foreign Office to come clean. The 
US has now stopped supplying Saudi with guided missiles and it’s high time for 
the UK to adopt an ethical approach.”

When it was raised last week at prime minister’s questions by Robertson, 
Theresa May told the House of Commons that any allegations of breaches of 
international humanitarian law would be “properly investigated”. She also 
defended the UK’s support for Saudi Arabia, saying the intervention in Yemen is 
backed by the United Nations and “the security of the Gulf is important to us”. 
She added “the intelligence we get from Saudi Arabia has saved potentially 
hundreds of lives here in the UK”.

How to contact the Guardian securely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/2016/sep/19/how-to-contact-the-guardian-securely>
Earlier this month, No 10 delivered a rebuke to Boris Johnson, the foreign 
secretary, for critical remarks at a conference saying thatSaudi Arabia was 
engaged in puppeteering and proxy wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/saudi-arabia-row-boris-johnson-yemen-conflict>
 in the Gulf. Downing Street said that was not the official government 
position. The UK is a firm ally of Saudi Arabia in the war in Yemen, with 
British military personnel helping train its troops to how to target bombs. 
Britain has also sold billions of pounds in defence equipment including planes 
to the Saudi military since the start of the war.

Last week, Tobias Ellwood, a Foreign Office minister, revealed he had formally 
urged all six Gulf states to sign up to the international convention banning 
the use of cluster munitions. He said Britain condemned the weapons’ use and 
that he had personally told the six Gulf foreign ministers that they should 
sign up to the treaty. “I absolutely condemn the use of cluster munitions,” he 
said. “They lie around the battlefield until it turns into a civilian arena, 
and that is why they cause damage.”

Ellwood also said he would support an independent inquiry into war crimes by 
both sides in the Yemen civil war if the Saudi’s own inquiry proved 
unsatisfactory.

 