
The decision on whether Abu Hamza’s daughter-in-law is a “serious danger” and 
should be deported from the UK should be taken by British judges, the European 
Union’s most senior court has ruled.

The European court of justice advised that the woman, identified as CS, should 
not be automatically deported from Britain simply because she has a criminal 
record, but also said that it should be left to British judges to decide if her 
deportation can go ahead.

'We don't decide national cases': ECJ veteran swipes away Eurosceptic barbs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/apr/19/we-dont-decide-national-cases-ecj-veteran-swipes-away-eurosceptic-barbs>
The woman’s case was repeatedly cited by Boris Johnson and other Brexiteers 
during the referendum campaign to demonstrate that Britain’s security was being 
put at risk by European courts by hampering the ability to go ahead with 
deportations.

The European court of justice said that the European freedom of movement law 
does not allow the Moroccan-born woman to be automatically deported as a 
convicted criminal because she is the sole carer of her British son, who is a 
citizen of theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. The judges 
said that EU law on freedom of movement and rights of residence applies to 
every person, including children, who are nationals of a member state, 
including CS’s son.

But the ECJ said that it was for the judges in the UK upper immigration and 
asylum tribunal to decide whether her deportation should go ahead anyway and an 
exception made on grounds of “upholding the requirements of public policy and 
safeguarding public security”.

Criminals with UK children cannot be automatically deported, says EU court
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/04/theresa-may-cant-deport-moroccan-mother-with-criminal-record-eu-court>
The European judges said that in the case of CS, “it is for the United Kingdom 
tribunal to assess specifically the extent to which she is a danger by weighing 
up the interests involved (that is to say, the principle of proportionality, 
the child’s best interests and the fundamental rights whose observance the 
court ensures).”

They said that it was for the British tribunal to assess whether CS’s 
“personal conduct constitutes a genuine, present and sufficiently serious 
threat” to public security.

There is an order banning the media from naming CS but she was named “as the 
daughter-in-law of Abu Hamza” in the House of Commons using parliamentary 
privilege on 5 February by the Conservative MP Philip Davies, who said: “This 
is a very serious matter and is something that this country and this house 
should be aware of.”

CS was jailed for attempting to smuggle a banned item, a mobile phone sim 
card, during a prison visit. While serving the sentence she was told that she 
was liable for deportation from the UK.

The ruling by the European court of justice followed a request from British 
judges in the immigration and asylum tribunal for its interpretation of EU law 
in the case.

A Home Office spokesperson said that there should be no doubt that they were 
determined to deport foreign nationals who committed crimes in Britain. “We are 
considering the implications of today’s finding, but it should be emphasised 
this represents guidance on a point of law – it is not a final judgment on this 
deportation case,” they said. “Proceedings are ongoing in the immigration 
court’s upper tribunal. We await its judgment so it would be inappropriate to 
comment further at this stage.”
 