
Failure to meet the UK's pledges to cut carbon emissions would likely result 
in fines for the government, a higher chance of dangerous climate change and 
reduced competitiveness for green British businesses.

Although the UK's contribution to a warming planet is relatively small – 
around 2% of global emissions – it has a large historical responsibility and 
was still the world's 10th biggest emitter in 2009, according to the US Energy 
Information Administration.

Britain is committed to cutting its carbon emissions on three main fronts. The 
first commitment, to cut emissions by 8% on 1990 levels between 2008 and 2012 
under the international Kyoto Protocol, is easy. A move from carbon-intensive 
coal-fired power plants to lower-carbon gas ones and the recent recession mean 
the UK is well on track to meet its obligations to the UN-brokered treaty. 
World leaders have so far failed to agree to a successor to Kyoto.

At home, the UK has led the world by enshrining carbon cuts in law under the 
2008 Climate Change Act. The act calls on the coalition – and successive 
governments – to cut emissions by at least 34% by 2020, and 80% by 2050, 
against 1990 levels. To hit those targets, the government's independent climate 
watchdog, the Committee on Climate Change, has set three "carbon budgets", for 
the periods 2008-2012, 2013-2017 and 2018-2022. Beyond the political 
embarrassment if the budgets were overshot, the government of the day would be 
obliged to tell parliament how it proposes to compensate for those excess 
emissions.

Climate change

David Kennedy, chief executive of the Committee on Climate Change, says: "It 
is vital that we act now to reduce emissions through investing in energy 
efficiency improvement, clean energy and clean transport. This will place us 
well for the deep emissions cuts that are required here over the next decades. 
Together with action in other countries, this will limit risks of dangerous 
climate change, and bring significant economic benefits."

He adds: "The urgent challenge for the government is to put in place new 
policies to drive down emissions and develop new clean technologies. We need to 
move from talking about reducing emissions to doing this in practice."

In addition to these self-imposed targets, the UK has an EU target of cutting 
emissions by 20% by 2020. Those cuts must come partly through the European 
Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS), a carbon-trading scheme designed to curb 
emissions from big polluters in the power and manufacturing sector and – from 
2012 – aviation. While unlikely, a failure to hit the European targets would be 
a blow to the credibility of carbon trading as a mechanism for cutting 
emissions.

Hypothetically, the UK would also face the EC's infringement procedure, which 
could lead to legal action before the European court of justice and, 
ultimately, fines. The UK already faces potential EC fines for London's high 
levels of air pollution.

The competitive power of British industry could be hit if carbon targets are 
not met, say industry figures. Nick Medic, head of communications at trade body 
RenewableUK, says: "We are seeing a very strong pipeline of [renewable energy] 
projects in construction which, added to our current capacity, already take us 
over the halfway mark to 2020. But, we must also be aware that we have now 
reached a critical momentum; any perception that we are slowing down could 
disrupt confidence."

He adds: "Growth in renewable electricity contributions to the grid, a very 
strong growth in employment and a marked pick up in investor interest all rest 
on the assumption that we are on course to reach the targets.."

Connie Hedegaard, the European commissioner for climate action, last year 
warned that the EU needed carbon targets for 2030 and 2050 to ensure Europe 
remains competitive with China on green technology. "We should take care not to 
be too complacent," she told business leaders at the European Policy Centre, 
adding that if Europe wanted to lead on exporting such technology, it must not 
"sit on its hands".

Economists and energy experts also warn of the financial costs if targets are 
not met and temperatures are allowed to rise dangerously high. Each year the 
world delays moving to stop temperatures rising by 2C, it increases the cost of 
investment needed to reach a low-carbon economy by $500bn (£314bn), says the 
International Energy Agency. And as the Gordon Brown-commissioned Stern report 
famously said, acting on emissions now is cheaper than dealing with the impacts 
of climate change.
 