
UK universities must go to India if they are to benefit from a shake up to 
international higher education which will see India enrolling the largest 
number of students into tertiary education in the world by 2020, warns aBritish 
Council report 
<http://www.britishcouncil.org/organisation/press/%E2%80%98-uk-must-go-india%E2%80%99-new-british-council-report-urges>
.

Universities are being urged to move away from focusing on recruiting Indian 
students to forming partnerships in India, creating new opportunities for UK 
students and academics to study and teach there, as well as encouraging 
collaboration through research.

"By 2020, India and China will produce 40% of the world's graduate talent 
pipeline," says Lynne Heslop, British Council's senior education advisor in 
India and author of the report. "We can't sit back and rely on this talent to 
continue coming to the UK.

"Other countries are also looking to capitalise on these new opportunities, 
and the UK will miss out unless our sector can increasingly engage with India, 
in India."

The Indian government's five-year plan to reform higher education aims to 
create 40m new university places and train 500 million people by 2020. Heslop 
says it is the largest transformation in higher education that any country has 
attempted.

But universities need to see this collaboration as mutually beneficial, says 
Sir Steve Smith, vice-chancellor of the University of Exeter, speaking about 
the report at a British Council event.

He says there is a historic relationship with India, and unintentionally, we 
echo that imperial relationship by using language like "send us your best and 
brightest students", suggesting that India can't educate them.

Frankly, he says, "it cannot work unless it's a win-win situation that is 
based on respect".

Yet collaboration in India won't come without its challenges. Currently the UK 
collaborates with just 2.5% of the Indian higher education sector. Although 
India is a fast growing economy, it has few universities in the top 200 world 
university rankings and there is little data available about Indian 
institutions.

"The real issue is quality," says Pramath Raj Sinha, founder and managing 
director of 9.9 Media, and "that's where the UK comes in. There's also a 
central problem with academic staff, in terms of both quality and quantity". 
Between 30% and 40% of departmental positions in Indian universities are vacant.

Although two thirds of Indian students go to private rather than 
government-run universities, the government's lack of trust in private 
providers also makes it a tough place to operate in, says Sinha – "you get 
treated like a crook".

He says the real opportunity for the UK is not building new universities in 
India, but helping Indian institutions with quality and access.

Rod Coombs, professor and deputy vice-chancellor of the University of 
Manchester, says the education opportunities in India should be taken "very 
seriously" by the UK.

"In five year's time, 40% of all university students in the world will either 
be in China or India. So if you are running a global university you absolutely 
have to take that very seriously and work out how to expand your connections 
with the country."

Coombs says he would like to see Manchester University working with India in 
three different ways: collaborating on PhD projects with research-intensive 
organisations in India, finding ways to deliver blended learning products in 
India, and working with corporate partners in their research labs in India.

But one of the big unanswered questions is: who will fund these projects? "If 
you are looking at higher-level partnerships you need to see what frameworks 
are in place and what the limitations are within the policies and laws of the 
Indian government," says Stuart Shorthouse, international recruitment manager 
at Strathclyde University. "And that's not really clear at the moment.

"We've heard that it is open for business but we really need further 
guidelines to say this is exactly what we can do and these are the constraints."

As part of the reforms, the Indian government's plan to hand over money to the 
state also makes the situation complicated, adds Shorthouse. "It will depend on 
what stage of the reform each state is at, otherwise universities might find 
themselves all trying to do deals with the couple of states that are ahead."

The India-UK Advanced Technology Centre <http://www.iu-atc.com/> (IU-ATC) – 
which supports collaborative PhD and research projects in telecoms engineering 
between India and the UK – was one of the first initiatives to be successfully 
established between the two countries in 2006.

But it wasn't easy, says professor Gerard Parr, the academic lead for the 
project. "The UK was not a partner of choice for many academics in India – they 
were eighth or ninth in the pecking order, and this is because there was no 
funding mechanism in place to sustain any collaborations."

He adds that the UK will not be a partner of choice unless it puts money on 
the table.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts.
 