
A Ukip MEP is facing calls to resign after allegedly comparing SNP minister 
Humza Yousaf to convicted terroristAbu Hamza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza>.

Yousaf, the minister for Europe and international development in the Scottish 
government, said he was appalled, disgusted and hurt by the “Islamophobic” 
comment reported in the Scottish Daily Mail.

The MSP for Glasgow has written to the Ukip leader, Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage>, calling for David Coburn 
to be suspended while an investigation takes place.

Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, condemned Coburn’s alleged remark 
as reprehensible, while the Scottish Conservative leader, Ruth Davidson, 
described it as totally unacceptable and Scottish Labour’s deputy leader, Kezia 
Dugdale, said it was a disgusting slur.

The Scottish Liberal Democrats leader, Willie Rennie, called the reported 
comment astonishing and labelled Coburn an offensive fool.

But Ukip’s Scottish chairman, Arthur Misty Thackeray, denied the comparison 
had been made, saying his party colleague made a slip of the tongue and “got a 
name wrong”.

Coburn, who is Ukip’s only elected member in Scotland, is said to have made 
the remark during a conversation with the Scottish Daily Mail regarding his 
appearance on the BBC’s Big Immigration Debate on Tuesday.

He claimed that Yousaf was supposed to appear on the show, before reportedly 
stating: “Humza Yousaf, or as I call him, Abu Hamza, didn’t seem to turn up.”

Coburn, who is standing for Ukip in the Falkirk constituency at the general 
election, is said to have told the paper that the remark was intended to be 
private.

Yousaf said: “I am utterly appalled, disgusted and hurt by the comments 
allegedly made by David Coburn MEP. This is Islamophobia of the worst kind.

“If this was shouted at a Muslim on the street none of us would tolerate it. 
The fact that this abuse has come from an elected member of the European 
parliament is even more shocking and completely unacceptable.

“Nigel Farage has been plagued by accusations of leading a racist party and 
this outburst from David Coburn MEP shows that Ukip is not just a party with a 
few rotten apples but rotten to the core.

“If Nigel Farage is serious about Ukip being a party that will not tolerate 
xenophobia in any form then I expect David Coburn to be expelled from Ukip 
immediately and have written to Nigel Farage in that vein.”

Yousaf added: “David Coburn has been exposed making Islamophobic remarks and 
should do the honourable thing and resign.”

His letter to Mr Farage reads: “I am sure you will wish to distance Ukip from 
such attitudes and I note you have taken disciplinary action against those 
found to make such prejudiced remarks in the past.

“I therefore call on you to immediately suspend David Coburn while you 
investigate this matter and if he is indeed found guilty of making these 
remarks then I expect he will be expelled from Ukip.”

Sturgeon said: “This is an appalling and reprehensible thing to say.

“For David Coburn to effectively compare Humza to a convicted terrorist 
because he is Muslim is disgraceful and he must surely face consequences for 
that.

“This is about the most basic standards of decency in public life – even for a 
party like Ukip – but there seems to be no depths below which Mr Coburn will 
not sink. Nigel Farage should remove him from his party.”

Thackeray said: “This is a non-story. David Coburn did not compare Humza 
Yousaf to convicted terrorist Abu Hamza.

“He simply got a name wrong, which many people do on a daily basis. For 
example, I very often get referred to as Minty, which I believe is a character 
from EastEnders, but I don’t take offence at that and run to the papers about 
Mistyphobia.

“I just accept that sometimes people get a name wrong. It simply was a slip of 
the tongue.”

Abu Hamza, the radical cleric, was sentenced to life in prison for a string of 
terrorism offences by a judge in New York in January.

 