
As markets trod water ahead of the US Federal Reserve's latest announcement, 
water companies sprung a leak.

Both United Utilities, down 34.5p to 692p, and Severn Trent, 69p lower at 
£16.96, saw their shares go ex-dividend. But both were also hit by negative 
comments from RBC Capital Markets.

On United, analyst John Musk issued an underperform rating and cut his target 
price from 680p to 650p, suggesting its dividends were at risk and it was 
facing a harsher regulatory environment. He said:
 In light of an anticipated harsher regulatory settlement, we reiterate our 
call for a dividend cut of 15% in 2016 as we see United's credit metrics and 
dividend payout ratio deteriorating. Despite the recent approach by the 
LongRiver consortium to acquire Severn Trent, we see United as an unlikely M&A 
target at the moment particularly as we advance further into the current price 
review where regulatory risk is relatively high. Furthermore, the scale of 
United and the limited pool of potential remaining deep-pocketed suitors for UK 
water companies limits the likelihood of further M&A.

As for Severn Trent <https://www.theguardian.com/business/severntrent> - where 
RBC's corporate division was an advisor to the failed LongRiver bidding 
consortium - Musk said the two sides should have tried to come to an agreement:
 The recently rejected £22 conditional offer by LongRiver represented a 37% 
premium to Severn's 204 regulatory capital value, or 27% were we not to adjust 
debt to reflect its fair value. Determining whether to adjust for this fair 
value on debt is where we believe the bidders and the board held major 
differences. However, both these premiums are at least consistent with the 27% 
historical average of water deals completed over the past decade and this, in 
our view, should have warranted further discussion given impending regulatory 
risks.

We see United as most exposed to Ofwat's outline proposals but see Severn as 
most overvalued post recent M&A activity. 
So on Severn, he cut his price target from £17 to £15.80.

Overall the FTSE 100 finished 25.39 points lower at 6348.82, as investors 
waited for Fed chairman Ben Bernanke's latest pronouncements, in particular for 
news on the future of its $85bn a month bond buying programme. Central bank 
actions to boost the global economy have been supporting the markets for 
months, but in May Bernanke spooked investors by seemingly suggesting an end 
could be in sight.

Aggreko was the biggest faller in the leading index, down 92p to £16.60 after 
JP Morgan and UBS cut their targets for the temporary power supply business 
following its update on Tuesday. JP Morgan said:
 Although management did not downgrade guidance (as we thought they might), 
our discussions with them did little to allay our concerns over the short-term 
outlook for Aggreko. 
UBS cut its price target from £19.75 to £18.50 and moved from buy to neutral:
 Whilst the longer-term story based on structural growth and sustainable 
returns remains attractive, Aggreko now trades on around 19 times forward PE, 
in line with the three year average, despite a subdued international power 
projects environment and headwinds to 2014 estimates, in our view. 
Vodafone fell 2.9p to 181.45p on concerns it would get into a bidding war with 
Liberty Global for Germany's Kabel Deutschland.Vodafone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/vodafonegroup> was said to be raising its 
proposed offer for Kabel from €82 a share to around €86 after Liberty 
reportedly offered €85 a share. That would value the German company at some 
€7.6bn.

BT closed 5.6p lower at 313.7p after falling as low as 306.5p following news 
that its chief executive Ian Livingston was quitting to join the government at 
minister for trade and investment.

AstraZeneca dripped 9.5p to £32.41 as it suffered another drug trial setback. 
Its diabetes treatment Onglyza, developed with Bristol-Myers Squibb, failed to 
reduce heart risks or strokes in a large scale clinical trial. Despite investor 
hopes, the Savor trial showed the drug was no better than placebo or standard 
treatments.

But BAE Systems climbed 7.6p higher to 403.3p on optimism at the Paris air 
show and despite denials of a renewed tie-up with EADS.

EADS spokesman Rainer Ohler told Reuters:
 Considerations about a deal with BAE are water under the bridge, we have said 
this time and again, the window is closed. 
Last October political opposition, particularly from Germany, scuppered plans 
for the two business to merge, but a recent report suggested EADS had left the 
way open for a new attempt at a deal.

Among the mid-caps, Micro Focus International jumped 62.5p to 709.5p after the 
software group's full year earnings of $188m beat market expectations. Julian 
Yates at Investec said:
 Headline 2013 earnings are 3% ahead of our forecast, with solid progress in 
core COBAL licences and also Main Frame solutions, albeit aided by a large 
first half deal. Test licences continue to decline materially, as already 
factored into our forecasts. Of interest is that .... the company has stated it 
will now return to M&A if returns are superior versus the continued cash return 
strategy of the past couple of years. This could create some debate. We remain 
buyers. 
But JD Sports dipped 7.5p to 882.5p after a mixed trading update. The core JD 
Sports business saw like for like sales rise 7% in the 18 weeks to the start of 
June. But sales at its fashion brands, including Bank and Scotts, fell by 5%. 
Its outdoor brands including Millets have seen positive like for like sales, 
but at the expense of significant falls in margin. It expects a substantial but 
reduced loss from the outdoor business this year.

Ahead of results from Dixons Retail on Thursday, rival electrical retailer 
Darty - a former owner of Comet in the UK - reported a 66% slump in full year 
profits to €26.4m thanks to weak economic conditions in the eurozone and the 
growing shift to online sales. But the figure was slightly ahead of analyst 
forecasts and Darty's shares closed 2p higher at 64.5p.
 