
One of the traits of a frothy market is a spate of bid rumours, and water 
companies were the latest victims.

Despite investors taking some of their cash off the table after recent rises 
in the FTSE 100,United Utilities jumped 15.5p to 703p on talk of a possible £10 
a share bid from sovereign wealth funds from Abu Dhabi or Kuwait.

Severn Trent was also in demand, up 34p to £17.92. Traders said the business 
could be attractive to a predator for its strong cash flow and defensive 
qualities but they also pointed out that Canadian-led consortium LongRiver 
recently gave up on a bid after a board rejection. And the regulatory regime 
surrounding the UK water companies remains unclear.

Overall, the FTSE 100 finished down 52.69 points at 6570.17 on caution ahead 
of Wednesday's decision by the US Federal Reserve on whether to ease its $85bn 
a month bond buying programme, one of the key props of the recent market rally. 
Analysts predict a $10bn cut in the programme, but the outcome is by no means 
clear. Paul Dales at Capital Economics said:
 We expect a small cut in the pace of monthly asset purchases, from $85bn to 
$75bn. We wouldn't be surprised to see the Fed also emphasise that interest 
rates will remain low for a long time, perhaps via the publication of its 
interest rate forecasts for 2016 for the first time.

The day's biggest faller was Aggreko, down 69p at £15.80 after Credit Suisse 
downgraded the temporary power supply business from neutral to underperform and 
cut its target price from £20 to £14. The bank said this reflected more 
challenging conditions in its power projects division:
 We expect that underlying growth in the power projects division will turn 
negative in the second half of 2013 and into 2014. This is due to falling 
demand as end clients struggle with the effects of weaker currency versus the 
dollar; the roll-off of the high margin military and Japanese contracts and the 
on-going effect of a more competitive market place. At 20.2 times 2014 
estimated PE, Aggreko still trades above its average multiple and this does 
not, in our view, reflect slowing growth, falling margins and lower cash flow 
return on investment.

After the government's sale of a 6% stake in Lloyds Banking Group, its shares 
fell 2.71p to 74.65p. Joe Rundle, head of trading at ETX Capital, said:
 Many will see this as a symbol of the UK's financial system returning to 
health as institutional investors snapped up the shares on offer, an indication 
that the market feels far more comfortable with the UK banking sectors' 
prospects given the upswing we are seeing in the UK economy. Lloyds itself is a 
leveraged play on the UK economy for investors – if you believe in the UK 
recovery, Lloyds is the likely long play versus the likes of riskier banks RBS 
and Barclays.

Miners were mixed. Randgold Resources recovered some of its recent losses, 
adding 59p to £45.45, butGlencore Xstrata was down 7.7p to 334.2p after UBS cut 
its recommendation from buy to neutral, citing pressure on copper and coal 
prices. The bank said:
 While we are still attracted to Glencore Xstrata's refreshing strategy and 
improving free cash flow profile, we expect its valuation to cap performance 
until the outlook improves for copper/coal prices.

Among the mid-caps, Debenhams added 1.8p to 105p after a positive trading 
update, saying the warm summer helped sales pick up in the fourth quarter. Full 
year like-for-like sales rose 2%, and the retailer said it expected to meet 
profit forecasts of around £153m for the 12 month period.

Pharmaceutical group BTG dipped 2p to 377p after selling its brachytherapy 
business to Germany's Eckert & Ziegler for an initial $5m plus 30% of revenues 
for the next 12 months. Investec said:
 With the product range already out of action since an FDA warning letter, we 
think management have taken the right action in disposing of the portfolio to 
focus BTG on higher priority growth projects, of which there are many. We 
expect this to have a minimal effect on forecasts and maintain our buy 
recommendation.

Imagination Technologies slipped back on profit taking following its latest 
trading update.

The chip designer, boosted by last week's launch of Apple's iPhone which 
includes its technology, said royalty revenue growth continued to be strong in 
the final quarter. It predicted revenues of £38m to £43m including its recent 
acquisition MIPS.

But its shares, up 40% over the past month, closed 9.4p lower at 334.6p after 
the update.

Transport shares were in focus following an upbeat note on bus and rail 
companies from JP Morgan Cazenove.

It upgraded both Go-Ahead - up 35p to £16.01 - and Stagecoach - 5p higher at 
335.3p - from neutral to overweight, based on their exposure to the deregulated 
UK bus market and the benefits of the country's improving economy. There is 
also sizeable potential in their rail businesses, said the bank.

As for the rest of the sector, it repeated its overweight rating on FirstGroup
, down 1.9p at 121.6p, but cut its target price from 143p to 137p. On Monday, 
FirstGroupwas fined £75,000 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-24107132> after passengers were 
stuck on a train in London for more than three hours.

JP Morgan stayed neutral on National Express, down 0.6p at 274.2p, after the 
company's recent rally.

Asos dropped 482p to £48.80 ahead of a trading update this week, as Morgan 
Stanley moved from equal weight to underweight on the online fashion retailer.
 