
Martin Freedman, head of pay, pensions and conditions, Association of Teachers 
and Lecturers <http://www.atl.org.uk/> (ATL)

The government's policy on raising university tuition fees to a maximum of 
£9,000 began to unravel almost as soon as it was announced by David Willetts, 
secretary of state for universities and science. The cap didn't please free 
marketeers such as Lord Browne, who had argued against a limit on fees, while 
we, and other education unions, warned that the near–trebling of fees would put 
many potential students off higher education altogether. The government 
countered that it could limit the number of universities charging the maximum; 
ATL said it couldn't, and we were proved right. Instead the government 
predicted that the average fee charged would be £7,500; in fact, it was around 
£8,400.

Now we can see the result of that huge hike in fees: a fall of nearly 10% in 
student applications in 2012 in England (where the fees will bite hardest), 
which the government has blamed on everything except the rise in fees. But 
worse, the government has reduced the teaching grant to universities so that 
many courses – particularly in arts and humanities - will be financed entirely 
by student fees. So any fall in student numbers will mean a sharp drop in 
income, and this will put the viability of many vital courses, including 
foreign languages, education and computer studies, at risk, leading to 
potential job losses of more than 10,000 university staff.

For university lecturers, already suffering from pay freezes and pension cuts, 
the threat of redundancy could be the last straw. Why stay in a contracting 
higher education sector in England when the USA, Australia, Switzerland, 
Germany and even Ireland are expanding their universities by up to double the 
rate in the UK, and paying lecturers more, to boot?

Graeme Atherton, head of AccessHE, London Higher 
<http://www.londonhigher.ac.uk/>, the umbrella' body representing over 40 
publicly funded universities and higher education colleges in London

The picture painted by last week's UCAS figures for applications to HEIs is 
one of greatly contrasting trajectories, especially in London. Against an 
average fall in England of 8.3% in applications, London institutions ranged 
from increases of over 200% to falls of more than 40%.

The huge increases, albeit from a relatively small base, are from private 
providers. Cutting out these and other small providers, the spread is -27% to 
+8%. Virtually all experienced a decline, but it was not uniform and not 
universal. There is a big difference between a decline of 25% and a single 
figure increase. These variations do not map onto differences either by 
'mission group' or the type of student they admit. Nor do they correspond with 
overall changes in participation, especially where mature student are concerned.

One large university seriously bucking the trend is University of West London. 
A major recruiter of mature students, its applications are up 8%. Applications 
are not the same as applicants – changes in the former can be heavily 
influenced by changes in the courses a HEI offers. Nevertheless, it appears 
some London HEIs are doing something right. I imagine many others will be keen 
to know what it is.

Julie Ramsay, director of admissions, University of St Andrews 
<http://www.st-andrews.ac.uk/>

At St Andrews our applications are up 17% and of course we're very pleased to 
be one of only a handful of multi-faculty universities to have experienced such 
a significant rise in interest, particularly given the big and obvious 
financial pressures affecting the sector just now.

The Guardian has us at third in its current league table and after much 
consideration we set RUK fees at £9,000 per year in line with our UK 
competitors, but with a comprehensive support and bursary package to make sure 
we can still attract the brightest kids, regardless of circumstance. Our 
English applications are down a little – just 3% - but Scottish applications 
are up 11%, both fluctuations we anticipated given the Scottish Government 
decision that the Scottish sector should charge RUK students, but not Scots. 
Our EU applications are up 35% and overseas up 22%.

The national and international profile of St Andrews for teaching, research 
and student experience is high, which is always welcome, but we wear out a lot 
of shoe leather at home and overseas in school visits and personal marketing 
and this is reflected in the interest in places here. The new UCAS stats mean 
we're looking at an average of 10 applications for every place.

What will be far more important than application figures however are the 
numbers of young people who actually decide to take up the offer of a place at 
university, given the considerable pressures facing families at present. We're 
acutely aware of that and it's going to be a very challenging year for students 
and institutions, no matter what these statistics tell us.

John McCarthy, director of marketing and communications, Keele University 
<http://www.keele.ac.uk/>

While it may seem simple to correlate the drop in university applications to 
the increase in fees, the reality is more complex. At Keele, we have actually 
seen an increase in applications to our core subjects of around 2%. The 
national drop in applications to medicine degrees has skewed the overall 
picture, but when this niche area is removed, things look quite different.

Regular dialogue with prospective students and their parents suggest there has 
been a flight to quality. In a difficult economic climate, the graduate job 
market is a highly competitive arena, so students are not willing to let cost 
become a barrier to the quality of their education. Undergraduates realise this 
is an income related investment rather than a straight-forward loan or debt and 
just as young people taking their first step onto the property ladder are 
pushing their finances to get the best home they can for their money, so 
students are willing to apply to £9,000 a year universities, to get the best 
education they can to further their career prospects.

Subsequently, we don't think that undergraduate applications will be 
significantly affected in the long-term. Just as we saw in 2006, many students 
will have applied last year without taking a gap year to avoid higher fees and 
we also need to remember that the number of school leavers in the population is 
in decline. This is expected to continue to drop until 2017, so it's feasible 
that the population levels are having an impact on the number of university 
applications.

Ross Renton, dean of students, University of Hertfordshire 
<http://www.herts.ac.uk/home-page.cfm>

The headlines state that the number of student applicants from the UK has 
decreased by 8.7%. It has already been said by others that we need to look 
further than the headlines and dig deep into the data. Many institutions, 
including my own, have performed well, attracting similar or increased numbers 
of applicants compared to the bumper year in 2011.

Why have we done better than many of our competitors? I believe it is down to 
three reasons; a strong identity, a fees strategy underpinned by fairness and 
innovative relationships with our partners.

We implement a banded fee system guided by our absolute commitment to 
delivering an exceptional student experience. We understood the need to be fair 
and reasonable during a time of considerable economic uncertainty. Our fees 
ensure financial sustainability, while offering exceptional value for students.

Identity is also key to our success. We don't just talk about being the 
leading business-facing university; we embed it in everything we do. An example 
of this commitment is to encourage students to take part in a placement by not 
charging a tuition fee for the year they are on placement.

The university has been building relationships with feeder schools and 
colleges over many years. These strong and mutually benefited partnerships have 
been baring fruit in recent years. We have been increasing our entry 
requirement in consultation with our school partners and involving them in our 
admissions strategy. Like many universities we offer an impressive range of 
outreach activity; however we have chosen to take these partnerships further. 
This includes innovative trust arrangements, training for heads of sixth form 
and collaborative work with the school improvement teams.

Institutions will need to be agile in the uncertain years ahead, they will 
have to find ways to clearly articulate to students their values and direction.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 