
Data analytics is nothing new. Commercial giants such as Tesco have been 
collecting consumer data since the early 1990s and with advances in technology 
the process has become hugely more sophisticated – the retailer is now able to 
accurately anticipate its customers' preferences. Analysing activity data is 
becoming more commonplace in universities, too, especially when it helps 
influence student engagement and retention.

It shouldn't necessarily be seen as a dark art. Cheaper and more effective 
technology is making it possible to monitor student behaviour and their digital 
footprints to ascertain their chance of success. Data analysis has also created 
more touchpoints where academics can intervene and offer support if they feel a 
student is at risk of dropping out.

Historically, due to the multitude of variables affecting any one student's 
engagement and retention, it has been difficult for universities to anticipate 
or understand why some students drop out. Before fees were introduced, it 
wasn't always obvious that a student had left an institution until they failed 
to turn up to the end of year exams. Now that students pay fees in three annual 
instalments, they are much more likely to come forward sooner if they wish to 
leave to avoid incurring extra charges.

Why are universities so concerned with retention? Well, it goes both ways. 
Besides the obvious financial incentive of not wanting to incur losses when 
students drop out, universities are keen to demonstrate value to their students 
now paying fees of up to £9,000 per year. They want to offer the more 
personalised experience today's students expect.

Gone are the days when the lecture register was the only sign of student 
engagement. Many higher education institutions are now looking at a huge 
variety of data in addition to attendance to determine student engagement and 
anticipate retention. Manchester Metropolitan University has carried out 
analysis that reveals a direct correlation between the two. Engagement 
indicators include how frequently a student swipes into the library, how many 
borrowed books are logged on the system and how often they sign into their 
virtual learning environment – all of this activity leaves a data record that 
can be interpreted.

In an environment in which many students have a low number of contact hours 
and are expected to undertake significant self-directed learning, universities 
must understand student data to enhance the overall experience. There is also a 
greater emphasis on relationship management between institutions and students 
and this begins from the application stage. Digitally savvy applicants are 
doing more desk research before they attend open days. In response, more 
universities are creating videos, podcasts, virtual tours of the campus, as 
well as monitoring opinion on social media sites. The University of the West of 
England employs student ambassadors to monitor Facebook pages linked to the 
institution to help the university gather applicant opinions.

One university that has been particularly effective in harvesting student 
activity data is Leeds Metropolitan. Through its project, Student Tracking and 
Retention Next Generation (orSTAR-Track:NG 
<http://www.activitydata.org/STAR-Trak.html> – acronyms don't have to be 
forgettable) the university combines data in its existing systems with 
demographic information and presents it in a single portal application. The 
purpose: to improve student support services by providing students, tutors and 
support officers with a broader picture of student engagement with the 
university on both an academic and social level.

When you consider that students leave a digital footprint in a variety of 
places, and touch points can include student services, financial aid, billing, 
registration and admission, it can be a daunting prospect to analyse such a 
plethora of data. A key concern for universities is not having the in-house 
expertise to manage the data and also fears that exploiting such activity data 
could cross the data protection line.

Despite these reservations, data analytics in universities is only set to 
develop and mature further. One US university has created a traffic light 
system, which is gaining popularity in the UK, to track student academic 
experience and thus retention. The system compares activity data of previous 
students with behaviour of current students to give a clearer prediction of how 
certain behaviour will impact on their academic success. If a student profile 
is flagging up as amber, the university can quickly engage with that individual 
and offer them personalised support to get them back on track.

Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> are living in a 
world where more and more of their daily interactions are personalised and 
expect the same from their university and overall learning experience. Activity 
data presents unprecedented insight which, if used in an efficient and ethical 
way, can support higher education institutions in proactively managing student 
retention – and expectations. At its best, it can even help universities exceed 
them.

Ruth Drysdale is an eLearning programme manager at Jisc – follow it on Twitter 
@Jisc <https://twitter.com/Jisc> or find out more about these issues at the 
Jisc Digital Festival 2014 
<http://www.jisc.ac.uk/events/jisc-digital-festival-2014-11-mar-2014>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
 