
Many universities work very hard to put in place effective mental health 
support for their students and remove barriers to academic progression. 
However, on-course support in itself does not remove barriers to accessing 
higher education in the first place. Nor does it provide the comprehensive 
pre-entry guidance which is sometimes needed to give a person the best possible 
chance of starting (and staying) the course.

In short, it's not enough to create an accessible environment. If you want 
people to access it, you need to tell them about it. People's perceptions of 
the infrastructure and inflexibility of higher education institutions can make 
university seem a remote possibility for them – or not a possibility at all.

The Well aHead project at Nottingham Trent University 
<http://www.ntu.ac.uk/student_services/health_wellbeing/mental_health/support_before_you_get_here/index.html>
 was established to address these issues and has three main aims: to raise 
awareness among mental health workers in the local community of the level of 
support at university and how to access it, enabling high aspirations for their 
service users; to offer targeted outreach activities for mental health service 
users, both on campus and on more familiar agency turf; and to enable the 
transition to university by offering one-to-one post-application support, 
guidance and campus familiarisation.

Central to this are our termly taster sessions for people engaged with local 
mental health services. The purpose of this targeted outreach is to change 
perceptions through information-sharing and personal experience, and to 
encourage people with mental health difficulties to consider university as a 
realistic option for their future. As one community mental health support 
worker puts it: "The campus visits have really helped to motivate our young 
people and increase their confidence to get educated."

Once the spark of aspiration has been lit, we also support people through the 
application process. One student who already had one false start at university 
several years ago was desperate to start afresh, but lacked confidence in her 
ability to cope. She knew her depression could leave her with little motivation 
or sense of hope, and feared that this – combined with her low self-esteem – 
may prevent her from seeing through her application. Even if she managed to 
submit an application and was offered a place, she couldn't see how the 
pervasive social anxiety she experienced could be compatible with attending 
lectures.

Regular contact from Well aHead helped to keep her on track, and in-depth 
advice about the kinds of support she could be entitled to gave her the 
reassurance that her mental health difficulties did not automatically preclude 
her from attending. She is now half way through her first year, and says, "I 
would not have had the confidence to do it without support and guidance 
throughout."

It is our opinion that being well prepared for university life goes a long way 
to supporting the retention agenda, and this is especially true for people with 
mental health difficulties. There is an abundance of excellent guidance 
available online and from universities about how to prepare for this new 
chapter, but there is also a need for tailored, personalised support in the 
field of mental health. Why?

Firstly, because support needs to be in place from day one to enable students 
to fully participate and start on a positive note. So much of the support on 
offer hinges on the student applying for theDisabled Students' Allowances 
<https://www.gov.uk/disabled-students-allowances-dsas/overview> (DSAs), and 
this process can take weeks, if not months. For people with mental health 
difficulties, the first step is simply understanding that they are entitled to 
apply and there is a lot it could fund that would make it significantly easier 
for them to participate in university life. "I did not fully understand the use 
of DSAs and would not have applied without the advice I was given," one student 
told us.

Personalised support is also essential because there are multiple stressors 
associated with the transition to university, and for someone with mental 
health difficulties it's likely to be an incredibly vulnerable time. We try to 
minimise the number and impact of these stressors by offering ongoing 
familiarisation visits to the campus. These are tailored to the individual's 
course, interests (such as sports facilities), accommodation preferences and 
support needs – identifying swift exit routes from buildings, for example, or 
finding quiet spaces on campus to go for time out.

Even students who are very self-aware about their mental health may have no 
idea about how they will feel in a university context, so it is crucial to 
offer these opportunities at an early stage to identify any potential problems 
and address them before the start of term.

One student with severe OCD relating to hygiene had not considered how he 
would feel using a library full of books which countless other students had 
touched, or writing on an exam paper which had been touched by the invigilator 
handing them out. Not planning for this would have made certain aspects of 
university life impossible, but instead he was able to start term with a stash 
of disposable gloves and a book allowance from the DSAs which helped to reduce 
his reliance on borrowing books through the library.

Another student, when asked what difference the Well aHead project had made to 
them, summed up the impact in this way: "I felt less nervous and part of the 
university community. It allowed me space to explore the university grounds and 
facilities and to know what support I would be receiving. It enabled me to have 
a smooth transition into university life."

Lou Silver is development officer in Student Support Services at Nottingham 
Trent University <http://www.ntu.ac.uk/> – follow it on Twitter @TrentUni 
<https://twitter.com/TrentUni>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member ofthe Higher Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 