
As students prepare to leave school after A-levels, they face one of the most 
important decisions of their lives: what to do next. For some, the decision is 
easy – perhaps they have always wanted to become a doctor, study ancient 
history, or get a plumbing apprenticeship. But for many school leavers, the 
decision can be daunting, and weighing up the pros and cons of the different 
options is a tricky task.

Higher education has continued to be the most popular choice for school 
leavers, withmore than 412,000 university or college places awarded last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/aug/15/record-number-students-university-women-deprived-areas>
. But the number of apprenticeships has grown quickly in recent years, likely 
spurred on by the rise in tuition fees.

Last year 55,000 18-year-olds took up apprenticeship schemes in England; a 
figure thathas risen by nearly 20% since 2010 <>. For slightly older people 
aged 19-24, the total number of apprenticeship places in England peaked at 
159,000 last year.

The skills minister, Nick Boles, told the Guardian: "I want every young person 
leaving school to view university degrees and high-level apprenticeships as 
different but equally valid choices.

"You can gain a degree with an apprenticeship in subjects ranging from 
accountancy to law and engineering," he said. "Apprenticeships allow all school 
leavers the chance to fulfil their potential through taking the next step that 
best suits their skills and ambitions."

But are they really always equally valid? The truth is, for most people it 
just depends what you are looking for. Although many university courses have 
become more vocational recently, the main emphasis for most continues to be on 
education, learning and research. Meanwhile, apprenticeships are primarily 
focused on training for a particular career. So the two are not always directly 
comparable, they are designed for different things.

Tom Laws, an adviser for the National Careers Service 
<https://nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk/Pages/Home.aspx>, says: 
"University is usually very much based around education, rather than aiming for 
a particular career. So it may be that if you get a degree, you are able to 
apply for quite a wide range of different jobs. Whereas, on an apprenticeship, 
the training and the skills you gain are quite specific to that particular 
industry. So if you're confident you want to go into plumbing, for example, an 
apprenticeship will be really well focused for that line of work."

But he adds: "There are some career routes where you definitely have to have a 
degree. For something like becoming a doctor, for example, there aren't any 
apprenticeship opportunities."

Laws points out that apprenticeships come in many different shapes and sizes 
<https://www.gov.uk/apprenticeships-guide/overview>, so it's important to find 
the one that suits you best. Higher-level apprenticeships can even lead to a 
foundation degree, so going to university at a later stage needn't be off the 
cards.

Hattle Wrixon, who runs the website Uni's Not For Me 
<http://www.unisnotforme.com/>, explains that there can be a lot of pressure 
for young people to take the same option as all their friends, or to follow 
family expectations. She says she felt that progressing in academic life at 
university wouldn't be worth it for her, and her website aims to help people in 
similar situations.

"I loved school because I loved my friends, but I also hated it because I 
hated the work," she says. "I wasn't that inspired by any of the subjects I was 
doing, and I was more keen to just go out and work. I think if I'd gone to 
university it would have been a complete waste of time and money."

Wrixon left school to pursue a range of different jobs, as well as an 
apprenticeship scheme, before focusing on her website full-time. For her, the 
hardest part of the decision not to go to university was worrying that she 
would miss out on the social side.

"If you've got friends, or brothers and sisters, who have gone and done the 
uni thing, they never really talk about the work side of things. It's all about 
the whole uni experience and the social life, which was quite appealing. That's 
something that made me quite scared about not going to university, because I 
was suddenly going to be in London by myself, and I didn't really know how to 
meet new people.

"But, I think I've really benefited from it because it forced me to make new 
friends. I don't think I've missed out on anything, because I've worked in 
loads of different types of jobs, so I've always been able to meet new people."

One of the main attractions of apprenticeships for many people is the 
opportunity to earn while you learn. And because the schemes are linked to 
businesses, it also means some apprentices are able to walk into a full-time 
job after they have finished.

But it's important to do your research and find out as much as you can about 
individual employers. A highly paid job is not a guarantee. In the past, 
figures have shown that90% of apprentices taken on in government departments 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/government-apprentices-employment-placement> 
are dropped after their placement ends. And the legal minimum wage for 
apprentices is far lower than for normal workers,starting at just £2.73 an hour 
<https://www.gov.uk/national-minimum-wage-rates>.

However, the public consensus is that apprenticeships may be better for an 
individual's career than university.Research last year 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/newsarchive/higher-apprenticeships-better-jobs-university-degrees-say-public-new-polling-sutton-trustpearson-summit/>
 showed that more than a third of people thought a degree-level apprenticeship 
would best improve someone's career prospects, compared with 21% who thought a 
traditional university degree would be better.

"Anybody who is in the position where they're not sure what to do after school 
should know that they're definitely not alone in this," says Laws. "There are 
literally thousands of people in the exact same position. Maybe they're friends 
have made decisions already, so it can be hard to make up your mind in a 
rational way.

"But there are lots of services available to talk through the options in 
impartial ways. I would definitely recommend speaking to teachers, friends and 
families, and maybe people who are at university at the moment or on 
apprenticeship courses. Our services are geared towards helping people in this 
exact situation, so they can find us online or give our free helpline a ring."

He adds: "There are pros and cons on both sides, but it's just important that 
people have the confidence to make whatever decision is right for them."

This article is funded by Starbucks. All content is editorially independent 
except for pieces labelled "brought to you by". Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 