
Reports earlier this year by Accenture found that 60% of recent graduates in 
work are underemployed 
<https://www.accenture.com/us-en/insight-uk-university-graduation-research.aspx>
, or in a job that doesn’t require a degree. If you’re one of those graduates 
or you’re just unsatisfied in your job, then there are steps you can take to 
change your career.


Identify your ideal job 

The first step is to pinpoint what your perfect job would be. Visualise what 
it looks like and ask yourself why you want a change. Perhaps it’s for a new 
challenge, better environment or to improve your prospects? Don’t let your 
reasons for change be clouded by pay offers if the rest of the job isn’t right.

Second, set yourself a personal mission statement which should be specific to 
your current and future needs. For example: “I want to earn £24,000 a year 
working in software development; with a good training programme, modern working 
environment, a commute of less than 30 minutes and the option of flexible 
working.” The more specific you are, the closer you will be to finding a job 
that ticks most of the boxes.

But be honest and think about your individual qualities, characteristics and 
skills. You may love the idea of working in fashion but if you’re not keen on 
crowded, after work events perhaps a role that takes you behind the scenes of a 
fashion organisation may suit better?

Also, consider what skills could be transferable as this may open your eyes to 
other types of roles which you hadn’t considered. Many roles require similar 
skills, for example – being able to communicate with people at all levels, 
listening or good time management.

Land your perfect career 

Research the companies you want to work for, and find out about their 
environment, goals etcetera, to decide if they match your mission statement.

Online forums are great for gaining insight and feedback from workers already 
in the field. Talking with people face to face is even better.

With your shortlist in hand, register with recruitment agencies and check the 
career websites of your target companies to apply directly. Over half of UK 
companies use social media to screen potential employees so make sure your 
profile is up to date, displays your skills, and if possible advertises that 
you’re open to new jobs. Follow your target list online and, if you really want 
to impress, write a blog connected with your ideal job.

Nine ways to find a job you love in 2015
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/how-to-find-job-you-love> 
Once the vacancies come in, take time with your application. Match your skills 
to what they are looking for and sell your personality so it suits the 
business, both in your cover letter and CV. If you want to stand out from the 
crowd, consider a video CV as it shows how you present yourself and that you 
can use technology creatively and effectively. Charts, graphs and infographics 
in CVs are also a powerful way for the reader to quickly see all your 
accomplishments at a glance – which will be gratefully received by any busy 
employer.

Before you attend an interview, be clear on the job role and research the 
company. Prepare any questions and practise your interview technique; consider 
your voice, tone and pace, and pay attention to body language. Answer interview 
questions in detail but do not ramble, and maintain eye contact throughout to 
show you’re interested and enthusiastic. First impressions count so wear smart 
business dress and arrive five minutes before the interview.

New starter expectations 

Starting a new job is daunting, but there are ways to make a great first 
impression. Arriving 10 minutes early shows that you’re eager and raring to go. 
Likewise, make sure you dress according to the company dress code. Quickly get 
up to speed on the employer’s policies and procedures such as staff conduct and 
attendance and, if possible, avoid taking holidays within the first three 
months on the job.

Take notes during your training and don’t be afraid to ask questions – this is 
a new job and no one will expect you to know everything. Finally, take a 
proactive approach to work. Although it can be nerve-racking, if a phone is 
ringing and everyone is busy, answer it. If you’ve finished the tasks you’ve 
been set, request more or ask team members if you can lend a hand. The most 
important thing is to show that you’re interested, keen to learn and that you 
have the right attitude.

Adopting an optimistic and proactive approach to your career will not only 
help you to find your ideal job but will give you the positive mindset you need 
to excel in your career in the New Year.

Kelly Kendall is managing director of general staffing recruitment company, 
Cordant People <http://www.cordantrecruitment.com/cordant-people> 

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <https://jobs.theguardian.com/> or 
sign up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest vacancies and careers advice
 