
Remember the Hovis ad? The one where a baker's boy in a flat cap pushes his 
bike up an impossibly steep cobbled street whose cottages lean like old people 
in a gale? Well, we're on that street. Gold Hill is its name and it's in Dorset 
- not Yorkshire, as the ad implied.

The booking blurb says we can drive to the door to unload, but must park lower 
down and not on the cobbles. Fair enough. I'm amazed the handbrake works at 
this angle anyway. The blurb also details an intriguing method for getting in. 
Most self-catering places have a coded keybox outside, but at Updown Cottage 
you use your mobile phone (a Nokia at the door). I jab a pre-supplied number 
into my phone keypad, the door clicks and we're in. How neat is that

My bloke disappears through a doorway and next thing a disembodied voice 
floats into the hall, "This is quite a large house."

"Where are you?" I call, wandering into the sitting room, which has a 
woodburner, writing desk and a bird's-eye view of Gold Hill. Off this is a 
music room with a baby grand piano. Shame I brought my bloke and not Jools 
Holland.

Down a flight of stairs I go - here he is, in the basement kitchen making tea 
and prodding about in the basket of goodies - jams, cereal, juice and bread (no 
it isn't Hovis). The kitchen leads to a dining room, housed in an extension. 
It's a narrow slice of a room, with windows and French doors looking out over 
the garden which, not surprisingly, is so steeply terraced we can't actually 
see where it ends.

Back up the stairs to surface in the music room (we're beginning to understand 
why it's called Updown Cottage) we both have a close shave with a shelf which 
juts over the stairwell. Off the main hallway we find a wet room before heading 
up to the first floor. Here's a bathroom with views over the garden and 
rooftops to Blackmore Vale. There are also two very cute single bedrooms and a 
double decorated in soothing shades of pale blue, cream and grey.

By the time we negotiate a third flight of stairs we're wondering about the 
prospects for a stairlift business. Finally we're at the top - an attic room 
with low-slung modern bed and mosaic-tiled shower room.

We don't fancy abseiling to the kitchen for tea in the morning, so plump for 
the soothing double on one. There's no blind at the window, but I'm nit-picking 
- everything has been carefully chosen, from umbrellas and a shopping bag in 
the hall to writing paper and envelopes in the sitting room, from rainy day 
distractions - jigsaws, Nespresso coffee machine, piles of magazines - to 
travel toothbrushes and White Company bathroom toiletries. Maybe it's even a 
bit too perfect - what's needed is a couple of kids to ruffle the place up a 
bit.

"They've thought of everything, right down to birthday cake candles," says my 
bloke, peering into a kitchen drawer as we cook dinner. I say cooking ... a 
lamb tagine has been delivered by a local deli listed in our booking info; all 
we're doing is rice and veg.

The morning's sunny and bright, and we're torn between breakfast in the garden 
or at a cafe at the top of the hill. The cafe wins and we sit at a pavement 
table in the sunshine enjoying what must be one of the best views in the 
country.

· 07710 307202, updowncottage.co.uk <http://www.updowncottage.co.uk>. Sleeps 
six, short breaks (Fri-Mon or Mon-Fri) from £450

Prices updated on 31 August 2012

sally.shalam@theguardian.com <mailto:sally.shalam@theguardian.com>
 