
The US attorney general, Eric Holder, said the decision to kill a US citizen 
living abroad who poses a terrorist threat "is among the gravest that 
government leaders can face", but justified lethal action as legal and 
sometimes necessary in the war on terror.

Holder's comments on Monday broke the administration's silence on the legal 
justification for its decision to kill US-born al-Qaida operativeAnwar al-Awlaki
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-al-awlaki> five months ago in Yemen. 
In a speech at Northwestern University law school in Chicago, he described 
al-Awlaki as concocting plans to kill Americans but he never explicitly 
acknowledged the administration responded by targeting the cleric.

Instead, the attorney general outlined a three-part test for determining when 
a targeted killing against a US citizen is legal. He said the government must 
determine after careful review that the citizen poses an imminent threat of 
violent attack against the US, capture is not feasible and the killing would be 
consistent with laws of war.

The Obama administration has refused to release the justice department legal 
opinion on al-Awlaki's killing under the Freedom of Information Act and is in 
court opposing efforts to have it made public.

Responding to criticism from civil libertarians, Holder flatly rejected the 
suggestion that the constitution's due process protections require the 
president to get permission from a federal court before taking lethal action.

"The unfortunate reality is that our nation will likely continue to face 
terrorist threats that at times originate with our own citizens," Holder told a 
packed Thorne Auditorium. Law students made up the majority of the 700 seats 
and they were joined by Chicago-based federal prosecutors and other observers.

"When such individuals take up arms against this country and join al-Qaida in 
plotting attacks designed to kill their fellow Americans there may be only one 
realistic and appropriate response," the attorney general continued. "We must 
take steps to stop them in full accordance with the constitution. In this hour 
of danger, we simply cannot afford to wait until deadly plans are carried out – 
and we will not."

Al-Awlaki's killing in a joint CIA-US military drone strike on a convoy in 
Yemen sparked a public debate over whether the president should have the 
authority to kill an American citizen without a conviction and despite an 
executive order banning assassinations – which Holder called a "loaded term" 
that doesn't apply in this case. Until now the Obama administration has said 
very little about it publicly as administration officials have debated how much 
to reveal in response to the criticism.

The day that al-Awlaki was killed, President Barack Obama said his death was 
"a major blow to al-Qaida's most active operational affiliate" and "another 
significant milestone in the broader effort to defeat al-Qaida". But he did not 
acknowledge publicly that the US was responsible for the drone attack, which 
was confirmed by counter-terrorism officials.

Al-Awlaki was a cleric born in New Mexico who once preached at an Islamic 
centre in Falls Church, Virginia. His sermons in English are posted on the 
internet and his name has been associated with several attempted terrorist 
attacks. The justice department has said a Nigerian man who tried to blow up an 
international flight on Christmas 2009 told FBI agents his mission was approved 
after a three-day visit with al-Awlaki.

Obama administration officials told the Associated Press that Obama approved 
al-Awlaki's killing in April 2010, when he became the first American placed on 
theCIA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> "kill or capture" list.

"Any decision to use lethal force against a United States citizen – even one 
intent on murdering Americans and who has become an operational leader of 
al-Qaida in a foreign land – is among the gravest that government leaders can 
face," Holder said. "The American people can be – and deserve to be – assured 
that actions taken in their defense are consistent with their values and their 
laws."

Al-Awlaki's father sued to try to stop the government from killing his son, 
arguing he had to be afforded the constitutional right to due process. But US 
district judge John Bates in Washington refused to intervene in al-Awlaki's 
case because he said the courts did not have the authority to review the 
president's military decisions.

Holder pointed out that decision in his speech. "The constitution guarantees 
due process, not judicial process."

At least three recently filed lawsuits have sought to force the Obama 
administration to publicly release its legal justification for the attack, 
contained in a secret justice department memo. The Associated Press also filed 
a FOIA request for the memo, which was denied. The AP has appealed.

Hina Shamsi of the American Civil Liberties Union, one of the groups suing for 
the memo, said if Holder can discuss the targeted killing programme publicly, 
the memo should be released and its position defended in court.

"Few things are as dangerous to American liberty as the proposition that the 
government should be able to kill citizens anywhere in the world on the basis 
of legal standards and evidence that are never submitted to a court, either 
before or after the fact," Shamsi said. "Anyone willing to trust President 
Obama with the power to secretly declare an American citizen an enemy of the 
state and order his extrajudicial killing should ask whether they would be 
willing to trust the next president with that dangerous power."

University of Notre Dame international law expert Mary Ellen O'Connell also 
said the memo should be released to reveal more about the administration's 
position.

"From what we know so far, the memo is highly reminiscent of the torture memos 
written during the Bush administration, in which irrelevant US cases and 
statutes are cited in order to give the CIA a green light," she said. "The 
relevant international law does not permit targeted killing far from battle 
zones."

Holder said it was "not a novel concept" to target enemy leaders, pointing out 
such attacks were made against al-Qaida's chief, Osama bin Laden, and during 
the second world war, including shooting down an aircraft specifically because 
it was carrying Japanese Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto, leader of the attack on 
Pearl Harbor. He said Congress had given the president authorisation to use 
lethal methods under a resolution passed a week after the September 11 
terrorist attacks that authorised the use of all necessary force to prevent any 
future acts of international terrorism against the US. He said that authority 
was not limited to battlefields in Afghanistan, because the nation faced a 
threat of terrorism from "a stateless enemy, prone to shifting operations from 
country to country".

"It is preferable to capture suspected terrorists where feasible – among other 
reasons, so that we can gather valuable intelligence from them," Holder said. 
"But we must also recognise that there are instances where our government has 
the clear authority – and, I would argue, the responsibility – to defend the 
United States through the appropriate and lawful use of lethal force."

Holder said that did not mean the administration could use military force 
whenever it wanted and that it must respect other nations' sovereignty before 
acting alone on their soil. "But the use of force in foreign territory would be 
consistent with these international legal principles if conducted, for example, 
with the consent of the nation involved or after a determination that the 
nation is unable or unwilling to deal effectively with a threat to the United 
States."
 