
A US drone strike targeting an al-Qaida leader in Yemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> has killed five militants in the 
country's south, according to local officials.

The air strike was aimed at Qaid al-Dahab, a local leader of al-Qaida, who was 
travelling in a convoy of three cars near the town of Radda, 100 miles of the 
capital, Sana'a.

Yemeni authorities said four militants were wounded in the attack. The 
officials said al-Dahab's fate was not yet known.

The alleged terrorist's sister was the wife of Anwar al-Awlaki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-al-awlaki>, the US-born radical 
militant cleric killed by a US drone strike last fall.

There was no immediate word from Washington on the latest strike.

On Sunday, defence secretary Leon Panetta defended drone strikes in Yemen as a 
measure "to defend and protect the United States of America".

Al-Qaida's branch in Yemen, known as al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, is one 
of the movement's most dangerous offshoots. The US considers the impoverished 
country as a key battleground in the war against the terror network.

Al-Qaida <https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-qaida> has had a presence in 
Yemen for years, but expanded its influence during last year's political 
upheaval when millions of Yemenis rallied across the country demanding the 
ouster of their long-time ruler, Ali Abdullah Saleh.

The militant group seized control of several towns in the south during the 
turmoil.

Earlier this year, al-Dahab's brother, Tariq, led militants who stormed and 
briefly occupied Radda, They pulled out after authorities released 15 of his 
men from jail. Tariq was later killed in a family feud.

Yemen's army is pushing an offensive to uproot al-Qaida-linked militants from 
their strongholds in the south. The US is aiding the operations. Panetta in an 
interview with ABC's This Week said its activities "don't necessarily involve 
boots on the ground".

In their offensive, Yemeni government troops have retaken most of a southern 
provincial capital from al-Qaida fighters.

Officials said Monday that the army holds 90 percent of Zinjibar, the capital 
of Abyan province, which fell to al-Qaida last year. They say 48 hours of 
fierce fighting left 22 militants and nine soldiers dead.

They said the army was advancing toward Jaar, another town in militant hands 
for over a year, in a three-pronged attack supported by heavy artillery 
shelling and air raids.

The officials spoke on condition of anonymity in line with military 
regulations.
 