
Elliott Advisors has accused Alliance Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alliancetrust> of using scare tactics to 
repel its proposed shake-up of the investment company and has stepped up its 
attack on chief executive Katherine Garrett-Cox.

The activist US hedge fund, which is seeking to woo at least 50,000 retail 
investors to force change at the 127-year-old Alliance Trust, set out its 
criticisms in a 12-page document.

Elliott said Alliance Trust had:

 * persistently performed worse than other investment trusts and indexes

 * maintained high costs despite claiming to be managing those costs

 * relied on “one-off effects and unusual accounting” to support its profits 
and dividend

In a response to Alliance Trust’s earlier rejection of its proposals, Elliott 
said: “The company has put spin before facts and attacks the messenger rather 
than the message in a cynical attempt to avoid an open and honest debate about 
the serious issues facing the company.”


Elliott, which has built up a 12% stake in Alliance Trust since 2010, sought 
to increase the pressure on Garrett-Cox, one of the most high profile women in 
the City who earned £1.34m last year. It said she had received at least half 
her annual bonus in each of the past six years despite failing to match 
performance against other trusts in all but one of those years.

“Since Katherine Garrett-Cox became chief executive of Alliance Trust in 
August 2008, she has presided over persistent underperformance,” Elliott said. 
“Pay for underperformance is a sign of a board which is not demanding enough of 
the executive and which fails to hold it to account.”

Elliott’s attack is the latest instalment in a battle that broke out in 
mid-March when the fund called for Alliance Trust to instal three Elliott 
nominees to the board. Elliott, the trust’s biggest shareholder, said the board 
revamp was needed to correct poor investment performance, high costs and weak 
governance.

Alliance Trust rejected the nominees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/20/alliance-trust-says-hedge-fund-bid-threatens-its-existence-elliott-advisors>
 and said Elliott was acting in its own short-term interest. Last week Alliance 
Trust published a detailed rejection of Elliott’s points in a circular to 
shareholders.

The US fund wants Alliance Trust shareholders to vote ex-investment bankers 
Anthony Brooke and Rory Macnamara and former fund manager Peter Chambers on to 
the board at the Dundee-based trust’s annual general meeting on 29 April.

Elliott’s campaign received support over the weekend from Tim Ingram, a former 
Alliance Trust non-executive director. Ingram said investment performance had 
been “dismal” and urged other shareholders to support Elliott’s board nominees.

Analysts at JP Morgan Cazenove, Alliance Trust’s corporate broker, said: 
“Elliott’s response this morning and the strongly worded attack by a former 
non-executive director of the company both land a few heavy blows. It is hard 
to deny that performance has been lacklustre.” But the analysts added that 
Garrett-Cox and her team could argue that financial performance was improving.

Elliott’s attack is the second time in four years that Alliance Trust has been 
targeted by an activist investor. Another fund, Laxey Partners, tried and 
failed in 2011.

A spokesman for Alliance Trust said: “Alliance Trust has clearly set out its 
reasons for rejecting Elliott’s request in its circular to shareholders last 
week. We encourage all shareholders to read the circular in full.”
 