
The US government must publicly disclose in redacted form secret papers 
describing its legal justification for using drones to kill citizens suspected 
of terrorism overseas, because President Barack Obama and senior government 
officials have commented on the subject, a federal appeals court ruled Monday.


The 2nd US circuit court of appeals in New York ruled in a Freedom of 
Information Act case brought by the American Civil Liberties Union and two 
reporters for the New York Times. In 2011, they sought any documents in which 
Department of Justice lawyers had discussed the highly classified 
"targeted-killing" program.

The requests came after a September 2011 drone strike in Yemen killed Anwar 
al-Awlaki <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-al-awlaki>, an al-Qaida 
leader who had been born in the United States, and another US citizen, Samir 
Khan, and after an October 2011 strike killed Abdulrahman al-Awlaki, Awlaki's 
teenage son and also a US citizen. Some legal scholars and human rights 
activists complained that it was illegal for the US to kill American citizens 
away from the battlefield without a trial.

The Justice Department did not immediately respond to phone and email message 
requests for comment.

In January 2013, US district court judge Colleen McMahon ruled that she had no 
authority to order the documents disclosed, although she chided theObama 
administration <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> for 
refusing to release them.

In an opinion written by 2nd circuit judge Jon Newman, a three-judge panel 
noted that after McMahon ruled, senior government officials spoke about the 
subject. The panel rejected the government's claim that the court could not 
consider official disclosures made after McMahon's ruling, including a 16-page 
Justice Department white paper on the subject and public comments by Obama in 
May in which he acknowledged his role in the Awlaki killing, saying he had 
"authorized the strike that took him out".

Jameel Jaffer, deputy legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union, 
said in an email that "the government can't pretend that everything about its 
targeted killing program is a classified secret while senior officials 
selectively disclose information meant to paint the program in the most 
favorable light."

David E McCraw, vice-president and assistant general counsel of the New York 
Times Co, said in an email that the 2nd Circuit "reaffirmed a bedrock principle 
of democracy: the people do not have to accept blindly the government's 
assurances that it is operating within the bounds of the law. They get to see 
for themselves the legal justification that the government is working from."
 