
Three of the most famous landmarks in the US, which have closed as a result of 
the government shutdown, are expected to reopen after a deal was struck to pay 
for staff.

Under the deal agreed on Friday, state money and other funds will be used to 
reopen the Grand Canyon, Mount Rushmore and the Statue of Liberty to visitors 
as well as some national parks in Colorado and Utah.

The sites have been closed since the partial government shutdown, under which 
up to 800,000 federal employees across the country have been suspended without 
pay for the past two weeks.

Funding will be provided by the states of New York, Arizona and South Dakota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/south-dakota> to reopen the three tourist 
attractions.

The Liberty Island National Park, home to the Statue of Liberty, costs $61,600 
(£38,599) per day to keep open. The governor ofNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, Andrew Cuomo, said the park 
should not remain closed because of the "dysfunction and gridlock of 
Washington".

"Every day that Liberty Island is closed means we are losing visitors who 
would otherwise be spending at our local businesses – not to mention the 
employees who maintain the park and have been forced out of work," he said.

"As the shutdown continues, we cannot afford to lose the thousands of visits 
to the park each day. So while the dysfunction and gridlock in Washington DC 
has failed to keep this important state asset open, New York is stepping up to 
take over this responsibility."

The reopening of the Grand Canyon will cost the state of Arizona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona> $93,000 (£58,274) per day. There 
has been a commitment to keep it open for at least seven days.

"While this deal will buy us some time and bring back lost revenue to the 
state, I would hope our elected officials in Washington move urgently to 
negotiate an immediate end to this government standstill," the state governor, 
Jan Brewer, said.

"Arizona is doing what it can to keep the Grand Canyon up and running, but we 
cannot pay the federal government's tab for long."
 