
The man who wrote a White House legal memo endorsing the execution of 
Americans by drone strike is poised to become a federal judge after Senate 
Democrats used new anti-filibuster rules to quash opposition from civil 
liberties critics.


David Barron, a Harvard law professor who drafted a key memo authorising 
Barack Obama's controversial targeted killing programme while at the Department 
of Justice, on Tuesday saw his lifetime appointment to the appeals court in 
Boston clear the main procedural hurdle in the Senate. The 52-43 vote was split 
along party lines.


Previously, Senate cloture rules meant judicial nominees required 60 votes to 
bring an end to debate and move to a simple majority vote, but this was 
scrapped by Democrats last November after Republicans frustrated a series of 
similar appointments with the threat of filibuster delaying tactics.


As a result, Barron's appointment now looks certain to proceed with Democratic 
support alone and an attempt by Republican critic Rand Paul to stand against 
the nomination was limited to a brief speech.


Paul claims Barron is unfit to serve as a judge because his once-secret White 
House legal advice authorising the use of drone strikes in cases involving US 
citizens breaches the constitution.


“I oppose the nomination of anyone who advocates the executive branch killing 
of American citizens not involved in combat without trial,” Paul said.


“Any nominee who rubber stamps and grants such power to the president is not 
worthy of being placed one step away from the supreme court.”


The White House had previously attempted to placate critics by promising to 
release the Barron memo – first to senators only and then,once it has been 
redacted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/20/drone-memo-disclose-obama-justice-department>
, to the public too.


But this decision failed to satisfy Paul, who said: “It isn't about seeing the 
memos; it's about what they say and about disrespecting the bill of rights.”


Unusually, Paul's argument for civil liberties over national security 
interests brought unanimous support from Republicans including conservative 
senator Chuck Grassley, who criticised the White House for not saying whether 
Barron had drafted similar legal memos.


Opponents of Obama's targeted killing programme, which has been used to 
assassinate at least one American <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anwar_al-Awlaki>
, Anwar Al-Awlaki, alleged to have been working for Al-Qaida in Yemen, argue 
that suspected US terrorists should be tried in absentia if they cannot be 
brought before a US court.


“Critics will argue that these are evil people,” said Paul. “I understand 
that. My first instincts, like many Americans, is to immediately want to punish 
these traitors. The question is how we decide guilt. Aren't we in a way 
betraying our country's principles when we relinquish the right to trial by 
jury?”

 