
The Obama administration is to outline how it says US laws empower the 
government to kill Americans overseas who engage in terrorism against their 
home country, according to a source.

In September a drone strike killed the US-born cleric Anwar al-Awlaki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/blog/2011/sep/30/anwar-al-awlaki-yemen-live?INTCMP=SRCH>
, who was accused of plotting attacks while sheltering in Yemen. Civil 
liberties groups have pressured the administration to justify what has been 
described as a top-secret "targeted kill" programme in which Americans who have 
joined al-Qaida or other militant groups abroad are deemed legitimate targets.

The US attorney general, Eric Holder, plans to address the issue and the 
underpinning legal principles for using lethal force during remarks at 
Northwestern University School of Law on Monday afternoon in Chicago, the 
source said on Sunday, on condition of anonymity.

The Obama administration has increased the use of unmanned aerial drones 
against terrorism suspects. US officials have said little publicly about the 
programme but some officials said in 2011 that Americans such as Awlaki could 
be placed on a kill or capture list by a secretive panel of senior US 
government officials which would then inform the president of its decisions.

Holder will probably link the justification with another argument made by the 
administration: that both civilian and military courts can successfully try 
terrorism suspects.

The speech will be the latest attempt by the administration to address the 
issue, an unusual break with the past when there was virtually no discussion 
about the top-secret programme.

The defence department lawyer Jeh Johnson in February referred to the 
so-called "targeted kill" programme, saying it pursued legitimate military 
targets overseas. He rejected suggestions that the United States was engaged in 
assassination.

"Under well-settled legal principles, lethal force against a valid military 
objective, in an armed conflict, is consistent with the law of war and does 
not, by definition, constitute an assassination," Johnson said at Yale Law 
School.

The American Civil Liberties Union on 1 February sued the Obama administration 
in federal court, demanding that Holder's justice department release any legal 
memoranda justifying targeting Americans overseas using lethal force. The ACLU 
called such power a "breathtaking assertion" and warned it would be available 
to future presidents as well.

"The administration is asserting the unreviewable authority to kill any 
American whom the president declares to be an enemy of the state," said Jameel 
Jaffer, the ACLU's deputy legal director.

US officials have linked Awlaki to several plots against the United States, 
including the 2009 Christmas Day attempt by a Nigerian man to blow up a US 
commercial airliner as it arrived in Detroit from Amsterdam with a bomb hidden 
in his underwear.

When the bomber, Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, was sentenced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/feb/16/underwear-bomber-sentenced-life-prison?INTCMP=SRCH>
 to spend the rest of his life in a US prison, authorities said Awlaki himself 
approved and directed the plot from Yemen.

Civil liberties groups have complained that Awlaki and others like him should 
be captured and prosecuted in a US courtroom where practical. They oppose using 
military courts for terrorism cases.
 