
Once, a charisma-deprived politician named John Major unleashed his secret 
weapon. His plan was to stand on a soapbox during campaigning, in an attempt to 
muster the common touch and gravitas that had hitherto eluded him. It worked, 
and the Tories won the 1992 general election.

Twenty two years later, pint-sized, foul-mouthed, policy vacuum of a maladroit 
MachiavellianSelina Meyer is deploying the same tactic in Veep. Could it help 
propel her to the Oval Office? Could she become the first woman president of 
the United States of America (at least, since Geena Davis in Commander in 
Chief) by standing on a box? Probably not. She's just lost New Hampshire. "I 
came in third, Amy. Okay?" she snaps at an aide who is trying to console her. 
"Even the Nazis came in second."

But the Major connection isn't the only link between Veep and this rain-soaked 
dime of a country. For British viewers, one of the great pleasures of Veep, 
which premiered in 2012 and recently concluded its third series, is looking at 
the end credits and thinking that, just for once, the cultural imperalism is in 
the opposite direction. Limey assholes (no offence)Armando Iannucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/armando-iannucci>, Chris Addison, David 
Quantick  and Ian Martin are responsible for this takedown of American politics 
that is every bit as delightfully vicious as their British shows The Thick of 
It and In the Loop. They all deserve Emmys, but such is the cheerful demolition 
of the deferential, genteel genre of Beltway fables (The West Wing, The 
American President, Dave, Protocol, Commander in Chief ), that they possibly 
also risk being put on rendition flights and sent to third-party countries.

No matter. For those of you who have been suffering withdrawal symptoms since 
Peter Capaldi dropped his final F-bomb as Malcolm Tucker (his Doctor Who 
certainly won't be inviting his next companion into the Tardis with a cheery: 
"Come the fuck in, or fuck the fuck off"), Veep is a happy discovery. It's like 
Tucker on the Potomac.

But here's the twist. Meyer is all woman. When Meyer pleads with Ben to become 
her acting chief of staff, she goes gynaecological: "I'm 10cm dilated. I'm 
fully effaced. I mean, this presidency is crowning. I need you. Ben, I swear to 
sweet Jesus Christ, if you don't do this, I'm gonna bring back prohibition."

Who knew that Julia-Louis Dreyfus, so sweet as Elaine in Seinfeld, had a gob 
on her like Larry David in Curb Your Enthusiasm, and his cynical worldview? You 
might well say that it's difficult to work out how on earth Selina Meyer got to 
be the second most powerful person in the world, given her consummate 
ineptitude. Surely leading US politicians need some aptitude for holding high 
office? And that is a good objection – or it would be had George W Bush not 
served for two terms in the Oval Office.

Meyer has surrounded herself with aides who are even more invertebrate, 
unprincipled and incapable of collective responsibility than her. When Dan asks 
Ben to confirm that a rival presidential candidate whom they are trying to 
smear tortured Iraqis, Ben carpet bombs the dialogue to eliminate risk of 
 personal blowback: "You misheard me, Dan. Torture is a terrible thing. You 
know, I told you when I was telling you that I wasn't telling you what I told 
you. The fuck stops here."

None of these people should be allowed to clean the corridors of power. And, 
as more than one critic has pointed out, the Tea Party could use Veep to 
support its indictment of federal government – if the show were not fictional. 
But British politics managed to survive the Iannucci treatment. Or did it?

Sometimes, the speeches are too showy, the insults too baroque and considered 
for anyone to have ever used them in anger, but  realism is overrated. Forget 
about plausibility, enjoy the ride. For three series now (season four is due 
next year) Meyer has been the answer to a dream. While Aaron Sorkin and Martin 
Sheen gave US liberals the wish-fulfillment of  a good father of a Democrat 
president, surrounded by politically savvy and decorously screwed-up aides, 
Veep gives me what I want: a presidential candidate who can cuss virtuosically, 
verbally eviscerate and stand for nothing in particular - without being Kevin 
Spacey.

So while I await the happy day that John Goodman's Republican congressman in 
Alpha Dog becomes the GOP's presidential candidate  (it'll never happen, but 
let me dream) and Meryl Streep stars as President Hillary Clinton in The Iron 
Lady 2 (that could happen), Veep will do nicely.
 