
Hotels and restaurants generate huge amounts of waste, the majority of which 
has traditionally gone to landfill.

This makes hospitality and leisure the third worst performing sector, behind 
home and transport, and a big contributor to global carbon emissions.

Veolia Environmental Services saw an opportunity to help its long-term 
partner, Whitbread, whose top brands include Premier Inns and Beefeater Grill 
restaurants, tackle these issues and to put itself at the forefront of 
environmental practice in the hospitality sector.

Together they have developed a far-reaching waste, recycling and energy 
strategy to divert waste from landfill, which, in the process, is cutting 
carbon and turning unused food into renewable energy.

Early results have proved impressive with the equivalent of 4,600 tonnes of 
CO2 cut from the company's emissions.

Diverting waste away from landfill – across 590 hotels with 43,000 rooms and 
376 restaurants – rose dramatically from 49% in November 2009 to 66% in January 
2011and the target is to hit 80% by February 2012.

Carbon emissions are being cut in three ways. First, food waste across 60% of 
the Whitbread estate is being recycled, rising to 100% in February 2012. 
Second, non-food recycling has been extended from only card to plastic, paper 
and tin.

Finally, the two groups are diverting residual waste from 30% of the estate to 
energy recovery facilities so that it can be turned into electricity for the 
national grid.

Whitbread and Veolia have worked together for more than 10 years. Both have 
achieved the prestigious Carbon Trust standard and have set similar long-term 
targets to cut carbon. This got the landfill diversion project off to a strong 
start.

It began with an analysis of Whitbread's waste streams which showed that food 
accounted for 18% of total waste, third behind cardboard and glass. Devising a 
strategy for dealing with it, however, involved tackling some tricky issues, 
including creating systems to segregate, collect and dispose of food.

Whitbread and Veolia began a trial at 18 sites to test new food collection 
bins and to develop bespoke training and systems for back-of-house staff. Food 
was collected by Biogen Greenfinch, which worked out what waste could be 
treated in anaerobic digesters and composters.

Enough food waste was recycled in 2010 to provide power for a typical 
Whitbread restaurant for 464 days, and diverting a further 11% from landfill. 
By the end of the year, 359 outlets were involved in the scheme and the aim is 
to have the entire estate covered by February 2012.

Mixed recycling has been introduced at 354 sites, resulting in a further 2% 
diversion from landfill. And residual waste at 164 locations, which cannot be 
recycled, is now being sent to energy from waste sites, boosting diversion by 
another 6%.

A number of factors make this joint scheme groundbreaking within the 
hospitality sector, including the use of Veolia's innovative GHG tracker to 
measure direct and indirect carbon savings, but also that a fully-operational 
food waste diversion scheme has been developed ahead of an expected government 
clampdown on the issue.

Simon Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 