
Wasps and Newcastle have mobilised their World Cup players for tomorrow's 
crucial EDF Energy Cup clash at the Causeway Stadium. The Falcons revealed on 
Wednesday that Jonny Wilkinson and Toby Flood would start the shoot-out for a 
place in the semi-finals and Wasps yesterday confirmed that the England captain,
Phil Vickery <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/phil-vickery>, will also return.

Vickery has not played since England's World Cup final defeat by South Africa 
six weeks ago but has been passed fit after recovering from a neck injury. "We 
have been very careful with Phil's rehab and recovery since he returned from 
the World Cup but we are happy that he is now fully fit and ready to go," said 
Wasps' director of rugby, Ian McGeechan. The England forwards Lawrence 
Dallaglio and Simon Shaw also return to a powerful Wasps pack but the openside 
flanker Tom Rees is out with a hand injury.

Wasps demolished Newcastle <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons>
 35-12 in the Guinness Premiership last Sunday but McGeechan saw enough in that 
fixture to concern him for tomorrow. "Newcastle will be a big challenge for our 
back line again, as we will be up against one of the most positive sides in 
English rugby for the second time in a week," he said. "One of the memorable 
aspects of last week's game was the ability and willingness of both teams to 
play some rugby."

Wilkinson, who has been struggling with an ankle injury, will be playing his 
first match since the World Cup final and slots in at fly-half. Outside him 
will be Flood, who makes his 50th start for Newcastle after recovering from his 
own ankle problem and a torn scrotum suffered during a freak collision with his 
team-mate Mathew Tait.

Saracens hold an advantage going into their match at Llanelli with a place in 
the last four at stake but it is slight. Strictly the Premiership club require 
only two points from the contest to progress,. But, as Saracens' director of 
rugby, Alan Gaffney, said: "This match is effectively winner takes all in terms 
of getting a place in the semi-finals. There are a number of combinations 
involving bonus points that could come into play but we are not thinking like 
that."

In the pick of Sunday's games the Neath- Swansea Ospreys are heavy favourites 
to reach the semi-finals against Harlequins.

Meanwhile the England A prop Nick Wood has signed a two-year contract 
extension with Gloucester that will keep him at Kingsholm until 2010.PA
 