
The Victorian government has come under pressure to introduce voluntary 
euthanasia laws after a cross-party parliamentary committee said to do 
otherwise would be “an inadequate, head-in-the-sad approach to policymaking”.

The legal and social services committee report on end-of-life choices 
<http://www.parliament.vic.gov.au/about/news/3068-reforms-recommended-for-end-of-life-choices>
, released on Thursday, recommended the government allow people at the end of 
their life who are “enduring an unbearable suffering that cannot be relieved in 
a manner which they deem tolerable” to request lethal medication.

The premier, Daniel Andrews <https://www.theguardian.com/world/daniel-andrews>
, a practising Catholic, said he would consider the recommendations, but added 
that this was a field clogged with deeply held personal views.

“Personal views are informed by personal experience, and I know that for me, 
and my family, we’ve been doing a lot of thinking about these issues,” he told 
reporters on Thursday.

Bob Hawke calls for euthanasia to be made legal in Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/12/bob-hawke-calls-for-euthanasia-to-be-made-legal-in-australia>
The report set out a framework for the legislation, which it said would be 
restricted to mentally fit adults who were suffering a serious and incurable 
condition, and would require the approval of two doctors. The person would have 
to make three requests, one written, to end their life, and would then be 
prescribed a drug they would take orally.

It’s similar to the model proposed in Tasmania in 2013, with one key 
exception: while that legislation was open to anyone experiencing unbearable 
and unrelievable suffering, the Victorian model is open only to people who are 
incurably and unrelievably suffering and already dying.

The report followed a 10-month inquiry, which included five MPs travelling to 
Canada, the Netherlands, Switzerland, and the US state of Oregon, all of which 
have some form of voluntary euthanasia legislation.

“We found no evidence of institutional corrosion or the often cited ‘slippery 
slope’,” said the committee chair, Liberal MP Ed O’Donohue. “Indeed, the 
regulatory framework has been unchanged in Oregon, the Netherlands and 
Switzerland for many years.”

As well as introducing voluntary assisted dying laws, the report recommended 
an overhaul of the palliative care sector, which would include providing better 
training and integration with other medical providers; introducing legally 
binding future care agreements; and requiring doctors to discuss end-of-life 
plans with all patients at key points like their over-75 check-up.

It also recommended codifying common law principles that protect doctors for 
practices which can hasten a patient’s life, like the doctrine of double 
effect, which allows a doctor to administer morphine for the primary purpose of 
pain relief even if it has a secondary effect of ending the person’s life.

“Laws regarding providing assistance to die are inconsistent,” O’Donohue said. 
“On one hand, doctors, on a patient’s request, can withdraw life sustaining 
treatment with death the certain outcome, while they can also deliver lethal 
doses of morphine and other drugs, as long as the intent is to relieve pain.

“On the other hand, a loving husband who assists his frail, suffering and 
near-death wife to die could be guilty of murder, while a person near death and 
in unacceptable pain cannot receive help to end their own suffering.”

The result of that inconsistency, he said, was a legal system that, despite 
“significant examples of death taking place in the shadows of the law”, either 
looked the other way or gave penalties so light “as to risk undermining the 
law”.

In 15 years of medicine I've had only one conversation about euthanasia | 
Ranjana Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/09/euthanasia-isnt-a-political-wedge-issue-dying-patients-deserve-better>
Dr Rodney Syme, vice-president of Dying with Dignity Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria>, said he was “delighted” 
by the report, particularly the approach it took to dismissing “fear-based 
arguments” against the law. Syme said he was confident parliament would pass 
the laws if both major parties allowed a conscience vote.

“I’m absolutely convinced, provided there is a free vote on this issue in the 
Victorian parliament, that the laws would pass,” he said. “Why should 
parliamentarians be any different to the rest of the community on this issue?”

The campaign to legalise voluntary euthanasia has gained momentum in the past 
year, with the former prime minister Bob Hawkethe latest figure to add his 
voice to the argument 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/12/bob-hawke-calls-for-euthanasia-to-be-made-legal-in-australia>
.

“I am more than happy for my name to be associated with a clear statement of 
belief that the time has come where we in Australia should have clear 
legislation on our books that makes euthanasia legal,” Hawke said.


 