
For all the chatter about the coming revolution in film distribution, movie 
fans might be forgiven for thinking that there has been a lot of hot air and 
not much actual innovation. If you want to see a new release, your choices 
remain a visit to the cinema or pursuing pirated content. You have to wait four 
months before you can leegally watch a film in the comfort of your own home. 
Sure, there is the odd exception such asThe Decoy Bride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/146084/decoy-bride> – a little-loved 
romantic comedy starring David Tennant and Kelly Macdonald, which last month 
you could find on digital platforms such as FilmFlex, iTunes and Blinkbox, as 
well as simultaneously in four cinemas – but this is hardly reinventing the 
film distribution wheel.

While the music industry has seen revenues eroded by illegal downloading, and 
cinema fans continue to insist they wouldn't engage in piracy if new films were 
available legally on demand, the various parties have been reluctant to embrace 
a fresh model until they're certain the old one is definitively broken. Which 
means that the major expansion of Curzon On Demand, heralded by the release of 
Aki Kaurismäki's Cannes competitorLe Havre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141832/le-havre>, is a significant 
development. Opening in 23 independent cinemas nationwide, the critically 
acclaimed comedy can also be viewed at home on multiple devices for £6, via 
Curzon's new platform. The Independent Cinema Office's Simon Ward, who advises 
regional cinemas on programming, says: "This is uncharted territory. Le Havre 
is the first time a strong arthouse film is going out video-on-demand (VOD) in 
tandem with a theatrical release. Previously none of the films that have been 
simultaneously VOD have worked at the box-office, either because they were weak 
titles that wouldn't have had a theatrical audience anyway, or because they 
were weakened by the presence of VOD. Le Havre will be an interesting one 
to watch."

Curzon chose to launch its new service – and reveal the 14 UK distributors 
that have signed up to it, as well as a new Curzon On Demand application for 
Samsung smart TVs – with a press event at its Mayfair cinema earlier this week. 
It was at this venue, thatThe September Issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/130547/september-issue> achieved a 
remarkable triumph. Despite coming out on DVD just 10 days after its 
mid-September 2009 theatrical bow, the Vogue documentary happily played for 
five weeks at the Curzon Mayfair, grossing a quarter of its £428,000 UK total. 
The result proved that availability of a film for home consumption is not 
necessarily a bar to simultaneous success in cinemas – as long as it's one that 
audiences genuinely want to see.

It's no surprise that the brand that is driving this long-overdue innovation 
is Curzon. The company owns not just some of the key UK independent cinemas but 
also major arthouse distribution company Artificial Eye, so it can credibly 
claim to have a rounded view of all the issues and challenges. In CEO Phillip 
Knatchbull, whose background is in both film and internet businesses, it has an 
evangelist who has long been anticipating the tipping point "where we live in a 
windowless world with regard to how a film is released, where the consumer has 
to be in control". And with his distributor hat on, he can see one definite 
upside to VOD. While cinemas take the lion's share of revenues from ticket 
sales, and the distributor is left with considerably less after VAT is 
deducted, VOD, with its significantly lower running costs, sees the proportions 
flip: it is the content provider that takes a bigger slice of the pie, not the 
retail platform.

Cinemas take a different view. "They're ambivalent at this point," says Ward 
of his clients, which include the Watershed Bristol and Showroom Sheffield. 
"They are certainly not endorsing it as a wonderful thing. The attitude is: 
let's wait and see. It's a thin end of a wedge that's coming over the next few 
years. Is it something that's just going to replace DVD? In which case that's 
fine. Or is it going to take away from a theatrical audience? In which case 
it's going to hit cinemas."

There may be ambivalence, but the independent and arthouse cinemas are 
choosing to roll with the punches, rather than fight a change that everyone 
sees as inevitable. So far, Odeon, Vue, Cineworld and Showcase are not budging 
on the four-month theatrical window, which will create an interesting shift if 
on-demand services take off: distributors will increasingly be willing to 
sacrifice multiplex bookings on even their bigger arthouse movie releases for 
the gain of simultaneous VOD revenue, and the four major circuits will become 
even more dominated by mainstream fare.

If that happens, don't expect any tears from Knatchbull. "From market research 
we know that our audience doesn't really like going to multiplexes to see these 
kind of films. And with the cost of releasing going up, and the amount of film 
rental that as a film distributor we receive, it doesn't really make much 
financial sense to continue with the old model."

Of course, there is nothing stopping the multiplexes compromising the 
theatrical window for, say, films released on fewer than 50 screens – no one is 
expecting them to allow simultaneous VOD for The Dark Knight Rises. But while 
they mull that conundrum, there's a danger that their programming may gradually 
become less diverse.

As for the arthouse cinemas that Ward advises, he remains sanguine about their 
likely fate. "If we are to cast our vision into the future, and assume every 
film does this, which is the ultimate end game of this initiative, then the 
question is: how do people want to experience this content? We think for an 
independent arthouse cinema, the communal experience, the immersive experience, 
people who really care about cinema, that's all still going to exist. We've 
seen the coming of television, the coming of VHS, all these things that were 
going to spell the death-knell of cinema, and we just don't believe that video 
on demand is going to do that either. We think cinema has something special to 
offer."

• Join theguardian.com/film/series/curzon-on-demand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/curzon-on-demand> for a live stream of 
Aki Kaurismäki's Le Havre on Friday 6 April at 6:40pm BST. We'll be watching 
the film, then following a post-screening discussion, live from the Curzon Soho 
in London
 