
The powerful head of Vietnam’s Communist party will travel to the United 
States for the first time next week, and said he expects PresidentBarack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> will visit Vietnam later 
this year.

Party general secretary Nguyen Phu Trong said on Friday he hopes to build 
trust and create more opportunities to improve relations between one-time foes 
as they mark the 20th anniversary of normalized diplomatic ties. They are also 
being brought closer together by shared concerns over China’s territorial 
claims in the SouthChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Sea.

The White House said Trong would arrive on Tuesday, and the leaders would 
discuss trade, human rights and defense cooperation. It did not confirm a visit 
by Obama toVietnam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vietnam>, which would be 
his first if it happens.

Obama is expected to attend the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in 
the neighboring Philippines in November.

Trong, 71, hosted a small group of western journalists on Friday, and his 
staff provided his written answers to questions posed in advance.

“Like in any relations between two countries in the world, Vietnam and the US 
have differences on a number of issues such as perception on democracy, human 
rights and trade,” Trong wrote in his reply to questions.

“To resolve differences, I believe the most effective way would be open and 
constructive dialogues to better understand each other so that differences 
won’t become hurdles to the overall bilateral relations,” he wrote.

Trong is one of the four most powerful figures in Vietnam, along with the 
president, Truong Tan Sang, the prime minister, Nguyen Tan Dung, and the 
national assembly chairman, Nguyen Sinh Hung. In theory, he is first among 
equals in the one-party communist state, but the country is ruled by the 
party’s collective leadership, and most important decisions must be decided by 
a 16-member politburo.

Trong is considered to be in the leadership’s conservative camp, tilting more 
toward strong ties with China.

Both Vietnam and the United States are seeking to strengthen their 
relationship as a way of dealing with strategic and economic challenges.

Beijing’s assertive claims in the South China Sea have put Vietnam on edge, 
and it is interested in having the US as a counterbalance. Washington also 
wants closer ties with Vietnam to help offset China’s growing strength in the 
region.

Both countries also seek stronger economic ties, already healthy enough that 
Vietnam has become southeast Asia’s biggest exporter to the US. They seek to 
benefit from the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a controversial yet-to-be-finalized 
trade agreement.

There are hiccups in the relationship, however.

Critics point to Vietnam’s arrests of dissidents and say until human rights 
are improved, Washington should not grant too many favors, such as Vietnam’s 
request to purchase a range of weapons currently restricted.
 