
Business secretary Vince Cable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/vincentcable> said that the number of 
international students in British universities has fallen sharply because they 
do not feel welcome.

His warning came at a fringe event on 16 September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional/2013/aug/19/liberal-democrat-party-conference-glasgow-monday-16-september>
 to discuss universities and growth at the Liberal Democrats party conference. 
Cable said that a lot of students who would normally come to Britain to study 
have gone to America and Australia where they think they will have a "warmer 
welcome".

The Liberal Democrat cabinet member said, "There are lots of perception issues 
particularly in India where the message has got back that the British do not 
what overseas students. Numbers have fallen sharply and students have gone off 
to the States and Australia."

Cable said that around £17bn is generated each year by universities, £10bn of 
which comes from overseas students through their fees and expenditure. But the 
issue of overseas students was a controversial one, he added, because if 
foreign students stay for more than one year they are classified as immigrants 
and counted under the government's immigration cap.

Cable added that home secretary Theresa May had tightened the regime on 
immigration, but that her decision not to impose a cap on overseas students 
where we had come out was "reasonably sensible". However Cable branded 
restrictions on post-study work, with those earning enough allowed to stay on, 
as "not perfect".

Other speakers at the event, which was sponsored by Bright Britain 
<http://www.qaa.ac.uk/Newsroom/Events/Pages/bright-britain-higher-education.aspx>
 included Shami Chakrabarti, the chancellor of Oxford Brookes university; John 
Longworth, director general at the British Chambers of Commerce; and event 
chair Michael White, assistant editor and former political editor of the 
Guardian.

Longworth agreed that overseas students were valuable to the UK economy 
saying, "We need to attract the brightest from around the world." He also said 
that if our children and grandchildren are to afford a high quality of public 
services like the NHS and welfare we need to build up the economy now.

Young UK businesses are being hoovered up by foreign and multi-national 
companies, said Longworth, before asking, "How are we ever going to have a 
Cisco or an Apple in the UK if the business disappears before the first stage 
of development?"

A large part of the debate centred on whether investment should go to higher 
education or further education. Chakrabarti said that education must be for the 
world of life, not just the world of work. "I am not stuck in the mindset that 
it has to be classical subjects and we cannot be investing in more vocational 
subjects. I think it is good for the economy and the country to have young 
people in full time education for longer."

Chakrabarti expressed shame that "this generation of young did not warm the 
planet, and crunch the credit and start wars, real and metaphysical, and [yet] 
they are going to have to work longer and harder for less remuneration and more 
taxation than my generation of 40-somethings who screwed everything up."

She added that from a democratic perspective, citizens are more challenging, 
active and questioning, and capable of holding the powerful to account when 
they have been to university, saying that hard evidence also shows more 
graduates are good for the economy. "Nine out of 10 graduates still get jobs 
within three years of leaving college. It works politically, constitutionally 
democratically and economically as well," she said.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for thousands of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
 