
While helping my 81-year-old mum clear out unwanted clothes from her wardrobe 
to take to the local Oxfam shop, we came across three half-used bottles of 
perfume stashed in their boxes since the 1980s and 1990s, when she stopped 
using them.

Kept in the dark, the trio were still fresh – it is exposure to sunlight and 
heat that makes perfumes go off. None of the scents was to my taste but, rather 
than throw them out, we wondered if they might be of use to someone else.

An hour or so searching the internet revealed the existence of a healthy 
vintage perfume collectables market where enthusiasts are willing to pay good 
money to get their hands and their noses on old scents that have been 
discontinued or reformulated. It transpired that my mum's three bottles could 
be worth around £80.

To find out more about the market, I contacted self-taught perfumer and 
vintage scent collector Sarah McCartney. Following 14 years as head writer for 
handmade cosmetics retailer Lush, during which time she read 200 books on 
essential oils and herbalism and played with the materials her boss gave her to 
learn what everything smelled like, McCartney gave up her day job to start 
creating fragrances.

"After years writing and learning about scents, I wanted to create those I 
couldn't find in the shops," she says. Two and a half years on, the result is 
her 4160Tuesdays brand, sold mainly through her website4160tuesdays.com 
<http://www.4160tuesdays.com/sarahmccartney.html>, where she also sells vintage 
perfume samples.

For McCartney, collecting vintage perfumes is all about finding out what older 
scents smelled like as an essential part of creating new ones.

The attraction for many collectors is that the formulas for famous perfumes 
change over time, often because perfumers have to remove ingredients used in 
the original formula that have been banned or restricted by theInternational 
Fragrance Association <http://www.ifraorg.org/> (IFRA), the body that regulates 
the guidelines for safe usage of chemicals and oils in perfumes. So vintage 
scents often smell very different to their modern versions.

The use of oakmoss, for example, a species of lichen that grows on oak trees 
and a common ingredient in a lot of classic scents, has been severely 
restricted in recent years. Other natural materials such as certain musks, once 
much used by perfumers, are no longer considered safe and have been banned.

"In shops, perfume retailers will often tell you that the formula in a 
particular scent has been the same for ever, but that is not true," McCartney 
says. "The art of the commercial perfumer is to make scents smell as close as 
possible to the original. Perfumes are also sometimes reformulated to follow 
fashion trends or to reduce costs by using cheaper versions of an expensive 
ingredient. So my interest in smelling vintage and discontinued perfumes is to 
compare the old with the new."

The term vintage is quite loosely defined in the perfume world. If, hidden at 
the back of a cupboard, you have Shocking by Italian fashion designer Elsa 
Schiaparelli, in its original 1930s mannequin-shaped bottle, then 
congratulations – it is worth up to £1,000. Bottles of Chanel No 5 from periods 
such as the 1950s are also highly prized. However, collectors will be 
interested in any pre-2000 recognisable brands because it was around this time 
that a number of EU restrictions came in, causing many perfumes to be 
discontinued or reformulated.

"So if you have some old perfumes from as recent as the 1980s and 1990s, don't 
chuck them out," McCartney says. "If you are not interested in starting a 
collection yourself, you can make money out of them."

There is no price guide telling you what particular vintage perfumes are worth 
in the UK, where most buying and selling is done online via eBay. "Like many 
collectables, they are worth what someone is prepared to pay for them on any 
one day, though looking at 'completed sales' on eBay will give you an idea of 
how much particular scents have sold for recently," she says.

Sought-after scents at the moment include vintage Miss Dior, Diorella and Eau 
Sauvage, all by Christian Dior, 1970s scents by Mary Quant, 1970s hippy-chick 
scent Aqua Manda by Goya and, as always, pre-2000 Chanel No 5.
 Smells good: Jill Papworth's mother's perfumes. Photograph: Guardian 
Appraising my mother's three scents, McCartney tells me all are in good 
condition, definitely pre-2000 and saleable. The half-full atomiser of Eau My 
Sin by Lanvin is a 1970s or 1980s bottle, she reckons, and would fetch around 
£30. The third-full bottle of Lancôme Trésor first came out in 1990 and smells 
similar to the current version, so is not quite as desirable and would probably 
go for £12-£15. Meanwhile, mum's nearly full bottle of Yves Saint Laurent 
Yvresse would sell for £30-£40. Had it been branded with its original name, 
Champagne (changed when France's champagne producers sued), it would be worth 
more.

If you are selling vintage scent on eBay, it is best to restrict your sales to 
UK buyers because international rules agreed by Royal Mail and other bodies 
such as the Civil Aviation Authority forbid the mailing of perfumes overseas. 
Knowing that some individuals and businesses have long flouted this rule, Royal 
Mail tightened up its enforcement procedures in January this year. Now, if you 
send a bottle of perfume by Royal Mail to an overseas buyer, you risk your 
parcel being scanned and the bottle confiscated.

Similar rules banning UK sellers from sending perfume in the domestic mail 
will be relaxed in July, when individuals, like business customers, will be 
allowed to send up to four bottles (maximum 150ml each), subject to strict 
packaging and labelling rules.

There are thought to be several thousand vintage perfume collectors in the UK, 
most of whom make use ofBasenotes.net <http://www.basenotes.net/content/>. The 
website has been described as the biggest online reference guide to the world 
of fragrances, with a searchable database of more than 20,000 new and vintage 
perfumes, consumer reviews and forum discussions. Meanwhile, many scent fans 
will be familiar with the bookPerfumes: The A-Z Guide 
<http://www.perfumestheguide.com/Perfumes_The_A-Z_Guide_-_Luca_Turin_and_Tania_Sanchez/Home.html>
 by Luca Turin and Tania Sanchez.

If you are inspired to start collecting, it is worth scouring car-boot sales, 
junk shops and the dusty back shelves in old chemist shops.

"Last year I found a bottle of Nina Ricci's Deci Dela, which was discontinued 
in the 1990s, in a chemist shop in London," McCartney says. "Unfortunately they 
only had one left."

And don't despair if you come across old perfume bottles whose contents have 
evaporated – there is a separate collectables market for empty perfume bottles 
… but that is another story.
 