
Virgin Galactic crash: co-pilot unlocked braking system too early, inquiry 
finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jul/28/virgin-galactic-spaceshiptwo-crash-cause>
Free-falling miles above the desert, his test spaceship ripped to pieces and 
the frigid air hard to breathe, pilot Peter Siebold struggled through crippling 
injuries to turn on his oxygen and just to stay conscious.

Siebold was aware that Virgin Galactic’s SpaceShipTwo had violently 
disintegrated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jul/28/virgin-galactic-spaceshiptwo-crash-cause>
 but then he blacked out. When he awoke, still far above the California desert, 
he repeatedly tried in vain to activate his backup oxygen.

He next remembered the jolt of his parachute automatically opening and the 
sensation of just having woken up.

The National Transportation Safety Board released Siebold’s description of his 
harrowing plunge during a Tuesday hearing. His account stems from a January 
interview done by accident investigators as part of their inquiry.

Virgin Galactic <https://www.theguardian.com/science/virgin-galactic> chief 
executive George Whitesides described Siebold’s survival at the time as 
miraculous. Though bad, his injuries were not life-threatening — his right leg 
broke in four places, as did his collarbone. He was cut up, extensively bruised 
and had trouble seeing.

Siebold didn’t realise the extent of his injuries until he landed, falling 
forward into a creosote bush.

The pilot told investigators that he considered the test flight high risk 
because SpaceShipTwo was “flying an unproven rocket motor” on an ambitious 
flight plan.

The motor was not a factor in the accident. The safety board concluded the 
breakup was triggered when co-pilot Michael Alsbury prematurely unlocked a 
braking system as the craft hurtled toward space. Alsbury died in the accident.

Siebold is director of flight operations for Scaled Composites, an aerospace 
company that has partnered with Virgin Galactic to develop the spacecraft in 
Mojave, about 80 miles (130km) north of downtown Los Angeles.

The safety board emphasised that Scaled Composites had failed to put in place 
ways that would have prevented the braking system’s early initiation.

Virgin Galactic has said it hopes to resume test flights later this year with 
a new craft. The company’s goal is to fly six passengers more than 60 miles 
above Earth.
 