
Vitamin D pills can halve the risk of serious asthma attacks according to a 
major review of research into the impact the supplements have on the condition.

People with mild or moderate asthma who took the vitamin with their normal 
medicine had fewer attacks that required hospital treatment than those who went 
without, scientists found.


The risk of severe attacks fell from 6% to 3% in patients who had a vitamin D 
boost for six months to a year. The supplements cut the frequency of attacks 
too, with cases needing steroid treatment falling from one per person every two 
or so years, to one every four years.


Half of all asthma patients will at some point have an attack that needs 
treating with oral steroids such asprednisolone 
<https://www.asthma.org.uk/advice/inhalers-medicines-treatments/steroids/>, 
while a quarter will end up in hospital emergency departments. One in eight 
will have such serious attacks that they are admitted to hospital for further 
care.

“There were some pretty striking positive findings,” said Adrian Martineau, a 
professor of respiratory infection who led the review at Queen Mary, University 
of London. “Asthma attacks cause 185 hospital admissions and three deaths each 
day in the UK, so this is a major problem for society.”


More than five million people in the UK, and 334 million globally, are 
affected by asthma which causes wheezing, coughing, tightness in the chest, and 
shortness of breath.


Asthma drug 'gamechanger' could revolutionise treatment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/06/fevipiprant-asthma-drug-trial-treatment>
The review for the Cochrane library <http://www.cochranelibrary.com/> drew on 
results from seven published trials on 435 children, and a further two trials 
on 658 adults. Most of the patients had mild to moderate asthma, meaning they 
had symptoms at least two days a week, but their daily routine was not 
seriously affected. Nearly all kept taking their normal asthma medicine on top 
of the vitamin D supplements.


While the trials found that a daily dose of 25 to 50 micrograms reduced the 
risk of serious attacks, the evidence was largely from adults. “We need more 
trials specifically focusing on children and also specifically focusing on 
adults with severe asthma to see if those patient groups could benefit,” 
Martineau said.


In July, Public Health England recommended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/02/britain-not-sunny-enough-healthy-vitamin-d-levels-supplements>
 that everybody in Britain over the age of one consider taking a 10 microgram 
daily supplement of vitamin D, particularly over the autumn and winter when 
sunlight levels are low. The body makes vitamin D when sunlight falls on the 
skin, but people who cover up outside, and those who are housebound can 
struggle to make enough.


It is not clear how vitamin D helps asthma patients, but supplements may work 
by boosting the immune system’s defences against respiratory infections, such 
as the common cold, which are the main triggers for serious asthma attacks. The 
vitamin also seems to keep inflammation under control.


“You can think of vitamin D almost as a designer drug because it has these two 
actions, the first being to boost immunity to infections and the second to 
dampen down inflammation,” said Martineau.


One question scientists hope to answer in the next few months is whether 
supplements only benefit asthma patients with low levels of vitamin D. “At the 
moment we just don’t have the evidence to say who are those who are going to 
benefit and how low their vitamin D has to be in order to benefit,” Martineau 
said. “We don’t want people to stop taking their asthma medication and start 
taking vitamin D instead,” he added.

The findings come as scientists report impressive trial results for a drug 
that cuts asthma attacks in patients with the most severe form of the disease. 
Two trials in more than 2,500 people showed that a year’s course of 
benralizumab injections reduced asthma attacks by a third to a half, according 
toThe Lancet <http://www.thelancet.com/>.


Samantha Walker at Asthma <https://www.theguardian.com/society/asthma> UK said 
the new drug offered “genuine hope” for people in the UK who had a type of 
asthma that does not respond to standard treatments. “These people struggle to 
breathe every day, restricting their ability to carry out everyday activities 
such as going to work or school and severely affecting their quality of life,” 
she said.
 