
Leading shares have moved higher for the second day running, but Vodafone 
missed out on the rally on concerns about its future growth.

The mobile phone company was the biggest faller in the FTSE 100, losing 2.2p 
to 112.8p and knocking nearly five points off the index. Morgan Stanley cut its 
price target from 175p to 170p and said the forthcoming trading update due next 
week "should provide some bearings for the market, which currently tends to 
fear the worst."

More significantly, Vodafone's own broker UBS issued a trading sell on the 
shares, saying the company was losing market share in three of its four main 
European markets, which it said was unsustainable in the medium term. It said:

"We are downgrading Vodafone, with a reduced target price of 115p from 150p 
previously. We believe deteriorating fundamentals and earnings momentum could 
result inVodafone <https://www.theguardian.com/business/vodafonegroup> being 
the classic value trap. Given our expectations for poor KPIs [key performance 
indicators] and cuts to consensus estimates, we introduce a short-term sell 
rating.

"Stemming [the market share losses] could necessitate price cuts, or increased 
commercial costs, potentially thwarting management attempts to attack the 
overall cost base."

Overall, though, the FTSE 100 closed 35.55 points higher at 4237.68. This is 
the first time for nearly a month that the leading index has been in positive 
territory for two days in a row. And it came despite an uncertain start on Wall 
Street. US investors seemingly decided to take profits after Goldman Sachs 
delivered much better than expected results. Analysts were also concerned that 
US retail sales - although higher overall - had been boosted by rising gasoline 
prices. Angus Campbell, head of sales at Capital Spreads, said:

"The market is still very much in a state of flux at the moment with both 
falls and rallies being short lived. The days of massive trading ranges from a 
year ago are well and truly over as investors attempt to build up some sort of 
base, which for the time being seems to be holding up well."

Financials were lifted by the Goldman figures, with Barclays 3.6p better at 
300p. Miners moved higher in tandem with metal prices. In particular silver 
specialistFresnillo was wanted, up 62.5p to 533p while Lonmin was lifted 92p to 
£10.77.

Aquarius Platinum added 17p to 197p as it received shareholder approval for 
its proposed takeover of Ridge Mining, which is developing projects in South 
Africa.

A new spate of takeover speculation enlivened the oil sector. Heritage Oil was 
50.25p higher at 490.25p, valuing the company at nearly £1.5bn, on talk of 
possible interest fromRoyal Dutch Shell, whose B shares rose 3p to £14.66p. A 
price of 700p a share for Heritage was being mentioned. The wrinkle here is 
that Heritage has already agreed to a merger with Turkey's Genel Energy, so 
Shell would be breaking up that little party if it is really interested. 
Another tale had BP involved in a possible deal, with a suggestion it was 
interested inDana Petroleum. BP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> was 
2.2p better at 473.8p, while Dana - recently said to be in the sights of 
Germany's RWE - climbed 32p to £13.32.

While these have not been confirmed, there have been some concrete 
developments in the sector.Emerald Energy, up 4p to 636p, has admitted to a bid 
approach, while British Gas ownerCentrica, steady at 224.25p, has offered 845p 
a share forVenture Production, down 3p at 825.5p, and China's Sinopec recently 
agreed to buy Swiss group Addax Petroleum.

Elsewhere satellite broadcaster BSkyB was boosted 11.5p to 487.75p after Lorna 
Tilbian at Numis raised her recommendation from add to buy and her target price 
on the company from 518p to 591p ahead of its full-year results due on 30 July, 
where it is expected to report profits of £650m.

Also benefiting from a broker upgrade was electrical retailer DSG. Its shares 
ended 1.25p higher at 21p after Nomura repeated its buy recommendation and 
raised its price target form 26p to 35p.

But PV Crystalox Solar - which supplies silicon wafers to solar cell makers - 
fell 3.5p to 76p after a warning on revenues from German solar specialist 
Q-Cells, in the wake of falling prices and oversupply.

Lower down the market, an upbeat trading statement from Tenon, the business 
advisory group, saw its shares climb 2.25p to 45.25p.

Finally Phorm, the controversial targeted advertising company, was steady at 
210p despite house broker Canaccord Adams downgrading after the recent news 
that BT had decided not to use the company's services. Canaccord has moved from 
buy to speculative buy, and slashed its price target from £19.22 to 563p. The 
broker said:

"Given the statement by BT, we now regard UK deployment of Phorm's technology 
as conditional on successful deployment in other territories, and unlikely 
before the second half of 2010. As a consequence, we have pushed out our UK 
estimates by one year in our model. Should Korea deploy this year, we are 
confident that the company has the cash resources to get to break-even. 
However, given the greater risk attached to deployment, we have raised our 
discount rate from 30% to 36%, which leaves a discounted cash flow valuation of 
£97m, or 563p per share, which we use as our target price (previously 1,922p)."
 