
Alexandra Shulman <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alexandra-shulman>, the 
editor of Vogue, is severing her 10-year connection with the Daily Telegraph 
and jumping ship to the Daily Mail.

Shulman, who has written a weekly style notebook for the Daily Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> since 1996, will join the 
Mail as a star columnist.

The loss of a marquee name will further hurt the Telegraph after its round of 
54 editorial redundancies and intensify rivalry between the two conservative 
newspapers.

Shulman - appointed editor of Vogue in 1992 - is described as one of Britain's 
most quoted authorities on fashion trends.

She started her career in journalism at Tatler in 1982 and spent a year at the 
Sunday Telegraph in 1987. In the 1990s she became editor of GQ.

News of Shulman's defection comes two days after it became known that former 
Daily Telegraph deputy editor Neil Darbyshire was joining the Mail.

Darbyshire - who left the Telegraph in September after losing his deputy 
editorship two months earlier to the deputy editor of the London Evening 
Standard, Ian MacGregor - is to join the Mail as a senior news executive.

Days earlier the the Daily Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> 
lost a senior news executive, Tony Gallagher, to the Daily Telegraph as 
executive head of news.

Tit-for-tat hirings between the Daily Mail and the Daily Telegraph became more 
frequent after Sir David and Sir Frederick Barclay bought the Telegraph papers 
in June 2004 and immediately employed Associated Newspapers' managing director, 
Murdoch MacLennan, as the chief executive of the Telegraph Group.

Former managing editor of the Daily Mail Lawrence Sear retired from the paper 
only to fulfil the same role at the Telegraph after coming out of retirement. 
In January, the Telegraph hired Liz Hunt to be its assistant editor (features). 
She had been assistant features editor on the Mail.

In November, John Bryant arrived from the Mail to be editor-in-chief, 
prompting the resignation of the editor Martin Newland.

Columnist Simon Heffer is another prominent Daily Mail journalist to join the 
Telegraph.

In response, the Mail hired former Sunday Telegraph editor Sarah Sands, and 
columnist Tom Utley. Former Daily Telegraph editors Martin Newland and Max 
Hastings also write regularly for the Mail.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 