
Days after Yahoo's chief executive, Marissa Mayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/marissa-mayer>, demanded Silicon Valley 
home-workers turned up at the office, British bosses are also questioning just 
whom flexible working really benefits.

Writing in Saturday's Guardian, the head of British Vogue, Alexandra Shulman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alexandra-shulman>, admits that her instant 
reaction to employee requests to work from home is "no". She argues: "It's very 
pleasant and often very constructive, but it is not doing the same job as I do 
at work and neither is it for anyone else."

Shulman – like Mayer, a working mother at the top of her profession – said 
that while Yahoo's chief might have disappointed many workers, she agreed with 
her. "We have come to believe that working at home is a completely adequate 
alternative to showing our face in the office. But it's not."

Mayer's diktat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/feb/25/yahoo-chief-bans-working-home>
 states that all 11,500 Yahoo employees now have to go into the office to 
ensure better communication. She said working from home meant that "speed and 
quality are often sacrificed".

The British online business Mind Candy, the firm behind children's Moshi 
Monsters, has also concluded that office space is best, and is moving to a new 
London office to bring all its employees together. Its chief executive, Michael 
Acton Smith, said working remotely was not best for business. He told the 
Evening Standard: "Our preferred setup is everyone being under the same roof."

Signs of a backlash against homeworking were evident last year. Feared 
transport chaos at the London Olympics was averted after tube managers 
persuaded millions to fire up their home computer. But Boris Johnson derided 
what he called "telecottaging" and told business leaders: "I don't want to see 
the Olympics turned into a skivers' paradise. You should expect your staff to 
turn up." Critics of the position held by the London mayor and Mayer believe 
that the tide is with homeworking: a 2011 CBI survey showed 59% of companies 
allowed employees to work from home.

The advertising boss Sir Martin Sorrell positioned himself "somewhere in the 
middle", but said in his industry it was female workers who were best able to 
take advantage of flexibility.

"You want a bit of both. You need to have flexibility," the WPP chief 
executive said in an interview with Reuters. "Women are much better organisers 
of time in our industry than men. I would argue they're even better at doing 
their jobs than men in our industry generally."

Stefan Stern, visiting professor of management practice at Cass Business 
School, London, said: "I find it slightly depressing actually – five decades of 
management thought and research has told us we should be worrying more about 
what people do and how they do it, and not where they do it.

"In this era of knowledge work, brain power, empowering well-educated, 
intelligent people to do interesting things – the idea that you need to 
recreate the classroom ethos, that physically turning up is the answer to 
creativity and better ideas … I don't get it." He added: "Offices can be 
incredibly unproductive places. But managers do like to supervise and they do 
like to see people."
 