
South Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia> 
premier Jay Weatherill has said he is “gutted” after the state parliament’s 
15th attempt to pass a voluntary euthanasia bill was defeated by one vote.

Weatherill told ABC radio on Thursday he respected the decision of MPs in the 
overnight vote but he was personally “incredibly disappointed”.

Opposition leader Steven Marshall, who like Weatherill voted in favour, said 
unless an MP has a change of heart, the issue was unlikely to be reconsidered 
until the makeup of the state’s assembly changed.

After an overnight sitting, the latest bill was defeated in parliament’s lower 
house on Thursday morning on the casting ballot of the speaker, Michael 
Atkinson, after MPs were deadlocked at 23-23 on a conscience vote.

It had earlier passed a second reading vote, the first time such legislation 
had got so far.

Philip Nitschke: how the face of the voluntary euthanasia campaign became its 
outcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/22/philip-nitschke-how-the-face-of-the-voluntary-euthanasia-campaign-became-its-outcast>
Go Gentle Australia, the organisation that had championed the latest attempt 
to approve assisted dying, thanked all those who had supported its cause.

“For the bill to have even reached that stage was an historic moment, for 
which we should all be proud,” it said.

The latest bill was introduced by the Liberal MP Duncan McFetridge last month.

In his speech during the second reading on Wednesday night, McFetridge said 
the person most likely to make use of the provisions would be about 70 years of 
age and suffering from cancer.

“There will be no further treatment and they will usually only have days or 
weeks to live,” he told parliament. “They will be losing dignity, they will be 
in pain, they will have had enough.

“We can be sure their situation is dire because, any health professional will 
tell you, people will do anything to live.”

One of the strongest opponents to the legislation, the Labor backbencher Tom 
Kenyon, who said his stand was influenced by his religious beliefs, said the 
concept of euthanasia was fundamentally flawed.

Kenyon said he was also concerned about the potential breakdown of any 
safeguards put in place.

The original bill required someone to have a terminal illness and to be 
suffering unbearable pain that could not be relieved through other measures 
before they could access assistance in ending their life. They also needed to 
have their decision endorsed by at least two doctors.

A number of amendments were passed to tighten access to the provisions, 
including making a mental health assessment mandatory, but ultimately failed to 
sway enough MPs.

The Australian Christian Lobby welcomed the bill’s defeat and said palliative 
care was a better way of ensuring people had a dignified death.

“As a just and compassionate society we can find better ways to deal with the 
suffering which do not draw us into providing state-sanctioned killing,” the 
ACL managing director, Lyle Shelton, said.
 