
Baku is not the new Prague. It's too weird, too dishevelled, too industrial 
and the electricity and water cut out too often. And yet it's an exciting city 
to explore, easy and fun to negotiate on foot. It is true that reliable city 
maps are thin on the ground. But it's fine, honestly.

And I found that, if in doubt, I could always orient myself by Fountain Square 
(though the fountains rarely work), the central, café-filled hub of town whence 
radiate smart, western-style shopping streets. Or by the windswept sea-front, 
with its wide, olive-and-cypress fringed promenade, shady tea gardens and 
quaint, concrete-bound network of stagnant waterways called, imaginatively, 
Little Venice.

But sometimes it's fun to lose yourself. I did so, comprehensively, in the 
city's labyrinthine old town, which has well-preserved medieval walls. Tucked 
inside is the Shirvanshah's Palace, one of the city's main sights. It's a 
complex of living quarters, mausolea plus a handsome mosque and minaret dating 
from the 15th century. (If you paid attention to The World is Not Enough, James 
Bond's last adventure partly set in Baku, you may have received the impression 
that Azerbaijan is an Orthodox country. Not so - its national religion is a 
relaxed form of Shiite Islam.)

When you wend your way down the hill from the palace towards the Caspian, you 
won't miss the other big landmark: a fairytale, ancient colossus called, with 
utter romance, Maiden's Tower. There's a boring story that suggests its name 
means merely that the tower was virgin, in other words impregnable to attack. 
There are much better versions involving suicidal princesses. Whatever, it has 
great views from the top and really is impressive - its blank, minimal keep and 
slab-like buttress give it an almost modernist look.

Dotted right round the foot of Maiden's Tower are scenes of terrible 
temptation, in the form of carpet shops, all of them delicious caves bright 
with textile treasure. It helps to be a confident bargainer (dollars are 
rug-currency, and my haggling companions seemed to be knocking the traders down 
to about half their asking price).

Best of all in Baku, I liked aimless afternoons in the streets left from its 
last oil-boom - in the late 19th-century, when the city expanded like crazy and 
Nobels and Rothschilds came to make, or increase, their fortunes. These 
entrepreneurs built street after street of mansions. They may be dusty and 
dilapidated now, many having been split into tiny apartments during the Soviet 
era. But they are still elegant, with their frighteningly cantilevered, 
first-floor balconies that look as if they are clinging on to their host 
buildings only through the willpower of the great twisted vines that struggle 
up from the streets below.

Those oil millionaires also built an irrigation system for Baku, which means 
that though the city is slap-bang atop a desert, there are oleanders and olives 
and pleasant parks in the city.

The best sight in Baku, though, is an acreage of spoiled, exhausted oil fields 
on the shore of the Caspian Sea. The deathly anti-forest of lop-sided, angular 
derricks have the look of one of those first world war paintings of exploded 
woods in Paschendaele or Ypres. It's strangely beautiful - even though it's an 
environmental nightmare.

Now there's a new oil boom underway, offshore, and right by this field there's 
a foreign rig being assembled - called Qurtulus, which is Azeri for rebirth. 
And oil may mean rebirth for this country, which still bears so heavily the 
scars of post-Soviet ructions.

After all that, it was good to sit and eat. Azeri food is not a million miles 
from Turkish or Persian - lots of lamb kebabs for my meat-eating friends and 
for me, a lone vegetarian, delicious "aubergine caviar", yoghurt soups, salads 
with tarragon and basil and chives, and tomatoes to make your mouth water. 
There are quantities of real, cheap caviar, too. After dinner, you can sample 
the joys of the Chechen-run nightclub, Mosaic, or toast your friends in Azeri 
brandy and splendid vodka.

Azerbaijan has so much fresh produce because, you see, the country contains 
not just deserts and oil-fields but rolling hills and lush valleys too. I 
marvelled at all this fruitfulness in the city's Taza Bazaar, a cascade of 
higgledy-piggledy stalls selling peppers and paprikas, saffron and walnuts and 
pomegranates. (Plus nails, screws, doorknobs and strip lights. And, at one 
stall, a captive buzzard gave me a gimlet stare.)

There's a beautiful opera house, too. The Kirov and Bolshoi pay the odd visit, 
but you can also see works by Azerbaijan's national composer, Hajibeyov, who 
infused his Romantic pieces with echoes of mugam, the country's traditional 
folk idiom. Charles de Gaulle stopped over for a performance on his roundabout 
way to Moscow to see Stalin in 1944, which must be a recommendation. Since the 
season hadn't started, I opted instead to see a Russian pop star called 
Zemfira, who was playing the Palace of Hand Games. She was terrific.

Back to those lush valleys. I was ferried by tourbus to Quba, a town north of 
Baku. When you get there, you're in verdant orchard lands where the pretty, 
turquoise-painted clapboard houses are surrounded by apple trees and vineyards 
gone to seed, and the roadsides are stacked with buckets of aubergines, 
tomatoes, apples and cucumbers - a shock to the eye after the miles and miles 
and miles of satanic industrial dereliction you pass en route over the flat, 
greyish desert.

For a real adventure, I was able to call on the services of my friend with a 
Neva - a sturdy, uncomplaining, Russian four-wheel drive that seemed able to 
negotiate any obstacle in its path. Which it needs to, for to venture off the 
main roads, which are pitted and pockmarked enough, is a tricky business. Plus 
signposts are as rare as hen's teeth and the maps don't help much. The man with 
the Neva was a demon at the wheel, and took me south of the city, on the road 
to Gobustan, where there are all sorts of wonders.

When you leave the city, out in the desert are twin mountains where the 
Zoroastrians laid out their dead to be picked over by carrion. In the lee of 
these heights we paid our respects at a graveyard for dead Soviet tanks, next 
to a sad old cemetery for orthodox Russians. Farther on you can visit a lunar 
hillside covered with prehistoric cave paintings; and there are mud volcanoes, 
funny old craters that fart natural gas and chuck great globules of mud at you.

Beyond the mud volcanoes, and beyond the main road, lies an isolated 
caravanserai and mosque guarded by a lady with an impressive embonpoint. She 
warned us that the place was only to be visited by those with pure thoughts. 
Putting aside our worries on that point, we investigated this Silk Route 
stop-off, then exchanged pleasantries with two nice blokes who were bleeding 
and skinning a decapitated sheep.

We then spurred the Neva on to tackle a great brown-and-rust-coloured hill, 
following the route of an oil or gas pipeline (everywhere we went seemed to be 
following the route of a pipeline). We scaled the final few hundred yards on 
foot, where we found our very own slurping and burping mud volcanoes.

Feeling on top of the world (indeed, I would have been able to see the 
Caucasus ranges proper had it not been such awful weather), I felt that I loved 
these scarred mountains, these bruised and ugly plains.

 The practicals


 Getting there:  The  Online Travel Company <http://www.otc-uk.com> (0870 
8870100) is offering three-night, room-only stays in the Hyatt Regency Baku, 
including return scheduled flights with BA from London Heathrow, for £719 until 
December 31. Extra nights cost £60pp. Prices are based on two people sharing. 
The Online Travel Company will organise visas at a separate cost.

 What to read: Azerbaijan with Georgia by Mark Elliott (Trailblazer, £12.99) 
is an excellent guidebook with useful maps that make exploring in and around 
Baku possible. It is much more detailed than the new but disappointing Georgia, 
Armenia and Azerbaijan (Lonely Planet, £12.99). Azerbaijan Diary: A Rogue 
Reporter's Adventures in an Oil-rich, War-torn, Post-Soviet Republic, by Thomas 
Goltz (ME Sharpe, £22.50) is a gripping, first-hand account of the country post 
independence.

 More information:  The Azerbaijan International magazine <http://www.azer.com>
 produces informative themed issues on cultural matters.

Places to see, things to eat and drink

 Museums

State Art Gallery 
Opposite the Philharmonia building. Partly housed in a crumbling, elegant oil 
mansion built by the Rothschilds, it contains Azeri and western art. Entry: 
12,000 manat (7,000 manat to £1).

 Carpet and Applied Art Museum 
The vast former Lenin Museum now contains a world-class collection of 
textiles. English-speaking guide available. Entry: 12,000 manat.

 Gobustan Archaeological Museum 
The museum itself is a decrepit one-room place, with hilarious life-sized 
models of cave women. But Gurban Aleskerov, the warden, will give you a 
fabulous tour of the prehistoric petroglyphs scattered around the mountain 
nearby.

 Where to eat and drink 

 It's worth bearing in mind that Azerbaijan is a cash-based society - even 
quite smart restaurants won't take credit cards, though the western hotels 
will. Most places take either dollars or manat.

 Karavanserai 
A fabulously atmospheric restaurant set off a leafy courtyard. The stone walls 
are hung with Azeri carpets. The food is traditional Azeri - lots of lamb, lots 
of aubergine. Don't miss the kutab, a thin pancake filled with herbs or meat. 
About $15 per head.

 Dostlar 
At the top corner of Fountain Square, this mid-range restaurant has pleasant 
tables outside under the trees. Wash down your kebabs with Xirdalan, the local 
beer. About $5 per head.

 Intergrand Turk 
Around the corner from the Azerbaijan International Office on Alizade Street. 
There are lots of cheap Turkish cafés in Baku that make useful lunch stops. 
This one has nice lentil soup. Lunch menu about $4-6 per head.

 Bar 103 
On Neftchilar, near Maiden's Tower. From the outside, a grandiose oil mansion 
(the very one where Charles de Gaulle stayed). Inside, a little bit of New York 
bardom, with martinis you could drown yourself in, at about $6 each.

 Favourite 
On Fountains Square, where you can watch the young and beautiful of Baku strut 
their stuff. About 5,000 manat for a beer.
 