
Wales have called up the 18-year-old wing Keelan Giles as they look to get up 
to speed against Argentina on Saturday after last weekend’s chasteningdefeat to 
Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/wales-australia-rugby-union-autumn-international-math-report>
 dropped them to seventh in the world rankings.

Giles, who has scored eight tries for Ospreys this season after impressing for 
Wales at under-20 level, replaces Hallam Amos, who suffered a shoulder injury 
that may require surgery after coming on as a replacement against the Wallabies.

Giles has trained with Wales this season but is now part of the squad for the 
three remaining autumn internationals against the Pumas, Japan and South 
Africa, with his side needing to sharpen their attack.

“We have a number of good wings and Keelan has got to take his chance with 
both hands,” said Neil Jenkins, Wales’s kicking coach. “He has got a bit of 
X-factor about him and is a bit different to some of the other guys we have.

“I know people will compare him to Shane Williams [Wales’s record try scorer] 
because he is not the biggest of players, is electric on his feet and he is 
brave. He has been doing well and I am sure that he will get his chance over 
the next couple of weeks.”

Wales name their team on Thursday, with Gareth Davies set to replace the 
injured Rhys Webb at scrum-half while Sam Warburton, Jonathan Davies and Alun 
Wyn Jones are all back in training after missing the Australia defeat. Liam 
Williams has been given more time to prove his fitness after an ankle injury 
ruled him out last weekend.

Wales’ Gethin Jenkins: ‘My whole life has been rugby, that’s not going to 
change’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/wales-gethin-jenkins-my-life-rugby-not-going-to-change>
Jones was absent following the death of his father. “Everyone should be 
available for selection, but it is a horrific position for Alun Wyn to be in 
and a decision [about his availability] will be made in the next couple of 
days,” said Jenkins.

Wales suffered their heaviest home defeat for 10 years last weekend and 
Jenkins, who won 87 caps for his country, appreciates what the players have 
been going through this week. “Playing for Wales is what you dream of and when 
things do not go to plan, it takes a few days to get over it.

“It was not down to a lack of effort and sport gives you the chance to go 
again and redeem yourself. Argentina will fancy their chances and it is up to 
us to make sure that we play like we can. If we do, we are more than capable of 
winning.”
 