
Disappointed that the Premier League lacks a genuinely exciting title race? 
Dismayed that the situation at the head of the Bundesliga and Serie A is 
similar? Then feast your eyes on Algeria’s top division. With four matches of 
the league season to go, a mere 11 points separate the leaders from the bottom 
club and no fewer than seven teams can win the championship.

Where nine games ago MC Alger were bottom of the table, now they are in the 
thick of the title race under their Portuguese coach, Artur Jorge. Top spot has 
been held by five different clubs and the battle to avoid finishing in the 
16-team league’s three relegation places is equally intense. USM Bel Abbès, who 
are 14th, are three points off the comfort of eighth spot.

In Algeria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/algeria>, though, debate has 
raged over whether this is the best or worst campaign in the history of the 
country’s domestic football. By this point last season USM Alger had secured 
their sixth title and opened a 37-point gap on the clubs in the relegation 
zone, so in some regards it could hardly look more exciting. Yet a lack of 
goals as teams adopt overwhelmingly conservative approaches means entertainment 
has too often been lacking. No team have scored more than 34 goals in the 26 
matches played so far.

A handful of factors have contributed to the topsy-turvy nature of the league. 
One constant in Algerian football is supreme domination of home teams. Only JS 
Kabylie, who played three-quarters of this season behind closed doors, have 
more defeats than victories at home. Algeria’s most successful club is now in 
danger of relegation.

Healthy attendances generate such intimidating atmospheres that visiting sides 
have developed a sort of inferiority complex and rarely go for it. They are 
often warned that they will face physical attack should they create an upset.

CR Belouizdad’s head coach, Alain Michel, told fifa.com of having to play away 
in Algeria: “It is practically impossible, for example, to win at RC Arbaa, who 
only lost one match from 12 at home. Visitors have to deal with a very hostile 
environment. Some are scared and don’t play at 100%.”

In April two Algeria goalkeepers – Azzedine Doukha and Cédric Si Mohamed – 
were hit by missiles in away fixtures that fortunately only resulted in 
superficial cuts on their heads.

Violence is a depressing feature of Algerian football. In August the 
Cameroonian striker Albert Ebossé died after he was struck on the head by an 
object following his club JS Kabylie’s defeat by USM Alger. The Federation of 
Algerian Football suspended the league for a number of weeks and convened to 
discuss crowd violence.

Suffice to say it is yet to find a permanent solution. A culture of violence 
reigns in virtually all north African leagues, where disenfranchised youth have 
claimed the terraces as a space to voice political dissent.

The Ebossé incident demonstrated that crowd violence is a threat to home 
teams, too, and they often adopt a negative approach for fear of losing.

MC Oran’s winger Kamel Larbi expressed his views on the defensive nature of 
the matches. “Each team has a tendency to defend. Their primary motive is to 
not concede goals. In such conditions, victory is seen as a bonus. Avoiding 
defeat can become an obsession because of the pressure exerted by the media and 
supporters.”

It also holds true that a uniform distribution of quality has helped make the 
league more competitive. A relatively small club such as MC El Eulma enjoy the 
luxury of fielding an attacking midfield of Ibrahim Chenihi, Walid Derradja and 
Samson Mbingui. Chenihi, whom the national team coach, Christian Gourcuff, has 
taken a particular liking to, is quite possibly Algeria’s hottest commodity and 
he will undoubtedly make a move across the Mediterranean in the off-season. 
Derrardja is this year’s leading scorer, and Mbingui is a Gabon international 
who competed in the Africa Cup of Nations.
 In the Algerian Ligue 1 table 11 points separate top and bottom. Photograph: 
Fifa 
Other clubs, such as second-placed MO Béjaïa and the newly promoted ASM Oran, 
have well-drilled squads that have displayed the tactical astuteness Algerian 
domestic football has long been lacking. Their coaches, Abdelkader Amrani and 
Djamel Benchadli respectively, along with ES Sétif’s Champions League-winning 
caretaker coach, Kheïreddine Madoui, provide plenty of optimism for the future 
of local coaching.

Overseas expertise has also helped establish an equilibrium in this season’s 
championship. Nicolas Anelka has been employed in a technical director role at 
NA Hussein Dey, which lifted the entire nation. He was, though, reportedly 
involved in a training-ground spat with Meziane Ighil, who has since quit as 
coach.

Jean-Michel Cavalli was brought in by MC Oran and the French coach, who led 
the Algeria national team for a couple of years, has masterfully set-up a fluid 
3-5-2 that attacks as admirably as it defends. Jorge has made a big impact at 
MC Alger.

As the league enters its final straight, sell-out matches will be played under 
the eye of menacing crowds. One team will lift the title and another will join 
them in the CAF Champions League; three will be relegated. Supporters across 
the country have drawn a collective intake of breath, excited by the finish but 
also hoping these next 360 minutes will unfold in the total absence of violence.
 