 Given the political situation in the United States, perhaps it was inevitable 
that The Gathering Storm, the acclaimed drama about Winston Churchill in the 
years before the second world war, should win an Emmy at last night's ceremony 
in LA.
Albert Finney <https://www.theguardian.com/film/albert-finney> won the award 
for best actor in a made-for-TV movie or mini series for his portrayal of 
Churchill, to whom President Bush now makes frequent references.

Finney, 66, won the US Television Academy of Arts and Sciences award in a 
category in which Kenneth Branagh and Sir Michael Gambon had also been 
nominated for their portrayals of the explorer Shackleton and former presi dent 
Lyndon Johnson respectively. For Finney, cheerfully and famously unimpressed by 
awards and titles, it was the latest in a long line of successes.

Band of Brothers, which has a large British contingent in its cast, won the 
best mini series award.

Two British musicians took trophies. Sting won the Emmy for best individual 
performance in a variety or music programme for A&E in Concert: Sting in 
Tuscany. Ozzy Osbourne and his family, who make up the cast of the reality MTV 
cult series The Osbournes, won the best non-fiction programme award. Osbourne's 
wife, Sharon, who has cancer, thanked her fans for their good wishes.

But the night belonged to the familiar talents of Friends and The West Wing. 
The latter won the Emmy for best drama for the third year in a row while 
Friends took the best comedy series prize. Since this is widely seen as the 
ninth and last series of the show, the prizes were regarded as a fitting way of 
saying goodbye to old Friends.

Jennifer Aniston won best actress in a comedy series. Ray Romano, of Everybody 
Loves Raymond, won the best actor in a comedy category.

Six Feet Under, the drama series about a funeral home, which has won most 
critical plaudits this year, was largely buried, to everyone's surprise. The 
series creator, Alan Ball, won a best director award for his pilot show but the 
acting members of the cast who had been tipped for awards were largely missing 
in action.

"We are just as surprised as you are," Aaron Sorkin, the creator of West Wing, 
told the audience at the 54th annual ceremony as he picked up his prize.

Stockard Channing had a double win with a prize for her role in The Matthew 
Shepard Story, the drama about a gay student murdered in a homophobic killing, 
and for best supporting actress for her role as the first lady in The West Wing.

Her co-star John Spencer, who plays the White House chief of staff, won the 
best supporting actor prize. Michael Chiklis was named best actor in a drama 
series for his part of a bent cop in The Shield.

There were other old friends among the prizes. Late Show With David Letterman 
scored in the variety category. Oprah Winfrey won a special new prize, the Bob 
Hope Humanitarian Award, which follows a $1m donation by Hope to the academy. 
Actress Julia Roberts described Winfrey in a pre-recorded tribute as "a 
girlfriend to the world".

The Governors Award was shared by the big networks for the post-September 11 
programme America: A Tribute to Heroes.

Night belongs to the West Wing and friends

 Best comedy series Friends 

 Best drama series The West Wing 

 Best mini series Band of Brothers 

 Best made-for-TV movie The Gathering Storm 

 Best variety, music or comedy series Late Show With David Letterman 

 Best variety, music or comedy special America: A Tribute to Heroes 

 Best actor, comedy series Ray Romano, Everybody Loves Raymond 

 Best actress, comedy  Jennifer Aniston, Friends 

 Best actor, drama series Michael Chiklis, The Shield 

 Best actress, drama series Allison Janney, The West Wing 

 Best actor, mini series or movie Albert Finney, The Gathering Storm 

 Best actress, mini series or movie Laura Linney, Wild Iris 

 Best supporting actor, comedy series Brad Garrett, Everybody Loves Raymond 

 Best supporting actress,  comedy series Doris Roberts, Everybody Loves Raymond

 Best supporting actor, drama series John Spencer, The West Wing 

 Best supporting actress, drama series Stockard Channing, The West Wing 

 Best supporting actor, mini series or movie Michael Moriarty, James Dean 

 Best supporting actress, mini series or movie Stockard Channing, The Matthew 
Shepard Story

 Individual performance in a variety or music programme Sting, A&E in Concert: 
Sting in Tuscany ... All This Time

 Best directing, drama series Six Feet Under (pilot) 

 Best directing, comedy series Sex and the City: The Real Me 

 Best directing, mini series, movie or a special Band of Brothers
 