
Long-term research in Britain on issues ranging from bees to tree disease 
could be threatened by plans to open up the environment department's science 
agency to private investment, MPs and unions say.

Officials are expected to announce on Tuesday that the Food 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/food> and Environment Research Agency 
(Fera) will become a joint venture with a private-sector investor.

Fera is responsible for research into ash dieback, a fungus devastating the 
UK's ash trees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/25/ash-dieback-somerset-trees-national-trust>
, the effects of pesticides on bees and other wildlife, a vaccination project 
for bovine TB in badgers, and tackling alien pests such as a caterpillar that 
is stripping oak trees around London.

Under the changes, 51-75% of Fera's science work will be undertaken by the 
proposed joint venture. It is understood that 29 private-sector organisations 
have expressed an interest. Defra said any changes "will safeguard the valuable 
work Fera does to protect tree and plant health, and food safety, while 
allowing it to grow and become more resilient".

But Geraldine O'Connell, the national secretary for the union Prospect, which 
represents scientists at Fera, said: "One of our biggest concerns is that 
science has a long-term responsibility. We don't know what a joint venture 
company is going to do. If you look at ash dieback, for example, what we've 
said is there needs to be horizon scanning to five to 10 years out. That sort 
of work could be potentially affected."

She said it was not clear yet whether the scientists would remain civil 
servants, what would happen to their pensions, who would underwrite any 
redundancies and how many people would be employed by the agency under the deal.

"It's all very unsettling for staff. We could lose significant senior 
scientific brains. With this sort of uncertainty we don't know if we are going 
to lose more scientists," O'Connell warned, describing Fera as unique. "Nobody 
else in the country does what they do."

Lois Austin, officer for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural 
Affairs (Defra) at the union PCS, which represents Fera's administration and 
lab technician staff, said a recent handover of Defra back office services to 
French outsourcing company Steria had led to 500 redundancies.

"We've got bad experiences of joint ventures, we don't believe this will be 
any different. We're very worried about science landing up in the private 
sector," she said. "We predict the private sector coming in to slash jobs and 
we predict that within months of taking over they'll announce cuts."

Maria Eagle, the shadow environment secretary, said: "The recent threat of ash 
dieback and the horsemeat scandal shows that Fera plays a vital role in 
detecting and responding to threats to our natural environment and food chain. 
The government must put robust safeguards in place to ensure that government 
science continues to take precedence over commercial interests."

Lord de Mauley, environment minister, said in November that the environment 
department would undertake a "market sounding exercise" to explore the option 
of a joint venture as a future business model for Fera.

He told MPs there was "a real opportunity for Fera to grow its non-government 
revenue. It will also help offset the expected reduction in government 
revenues. The constraints of operating within government, however, currently 
limit Fera's ability to exploit this opportunity fully." But bee health 
inspectors and the plant health and seed inspectoratewould remain within the 
government 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld201314/ldhansrd/text/131108-wms0001.htm>
, he said.

Mark Walport, the government's chief scientist, is undertaking a review of 
animal and plant health in the UK and is understood to have asked Defra's chief 
scientist, Prof Ian Boyd, to assess government capability in the face of a 
crisis, such as an outbreak of foot-and-mouth in livestock.

Sarah Main, director of the charity Campaign for Science and Engineering, 
said: "It's important that science capability isn't trumped by pure economic 
decisions. In and of itself it isn't a terrible thing [making it a joint 
venture]. But it can be hard for civil servants to understand why the long term 
is important sometimes. Fera is an important national research facility and 
gives us capability that we need and it's important we don't lose that."
 