
It was 30 years ago this week that we were among a group of healthcare workers 
at Sydney’s St Vincent’s hospital who felt compelled to resort to civil 
disobedience to start Australia’s first needle and syringe program.

It was a program that relied on the assistance and support of Australians who 
injected drugs.

Numerous attempts to obtain New South Wales health department approval for an 
official pilot had been rejected. It was estimated at the time that thousands 
of men who have sex with men living in easternSydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> had already become infected 
with HIV, which was then a fatal infection. We were concerned that if HIV also 
found its way to people who inject drugs then it was only going to be a matter 
of time before HIV would be widely felt and transmitted throughout the whole 
community.

The spread of HIV among people who inject drugs in some cities in Europe and 
the United States was so rapid that over 50% of people injecting drugs in 
Edinburgh had become infected in less than 18 months. We all knew the only 
option was to prevent or slow the HIV epidemic among small, high-risk groups.

If we want to stop drug-related deaths at festivals, we need a new strategy | 
Bill O'Loughlin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/01/if-we-want-to-stop-drug-related-deaths-at-festivals-we-need-a-new-strategy>
Setting up a needle and syringe program (NSP) was a very controversial issue 
at the time. We faced intense and relentless hostility. The staff who took part 
in setting up this program donated all of the funds needed to provide this 
service. We were prepared to take the substantial risks in breaking the law 
because we knew that HIV represented a serious health, social and economic 
threat to the nation.

Soon after starting, we tested used syringes for HIV. The percentage of 
positive syringes was rising. HIV was spreading, confirming our worst fears.

HIV levels among people who inject drugs has remained very low in Australia, 
most likely the lowest in the world. Most commentators are convinced that the 
early and rapid expansion of NSPs in Australia was a critical factor.

While all eight Australian governments approved “harm minimisation” as the 
nation’s official drug policy in 1985, the case for establishing an NSP to 
contain HIV was still difficult.

The Netherlands and the UK had already started NSPs. British health minister 
Norman Fowler managed to persuade prime minister Margaret Thatcher by comparing 
the financial cost of starting NSPs with the much higher costs of facing 
widespread HIV.

Opponents of NSPs were convinced that these programs would encourage increased 
illicit drug use and “send the wrong message”. There was virtually no research 
available 30 years ago to indicate the effectiveness or safety of NSPs. Such 
research was still banned in the US. However, we were sure that NSPs could slow 
the spread of HIV without exacerbating illicit drug use.

Three decades of research has confirmed that NSPs not only reduce HIV 
transmission among and from people who use drugs, but that they also are not 
accompanied by any significant adverse effects and are highly cost-effective.

However, we underestimated the likely magnitude of the benefits. Research 
showed that for every dollar spent, $4 was saved in healthcare costs. In the 
decade starting in the year 2000, NSPs directly averted 32,050 new HIV 
infections and 96,667 new hepatitis C infections, prevented 4,000 deaths and 
gave a return to taxpayers of over $5.8bn.

All Australian governments in the last three decades have strongly supported 
NSPs while in office (but sometimes not while in opposition). Over 30 million 
sterile needles and syringes are now provided every year. People who were 
disengaged from the health system are now being brought into contact with 
health professionals and able to access assistance earlier.

Hysteria about drugs and harm minimisation. It's always the same old story | 
Alex Wodak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/11/hysteria-about-drugs-and-harm-minimisation-its-always-the-same-old-story>
The Australian response attracted considerable international praise and proved 
very influential in many other countries. Now NSPs are provided in more than 80 
countries all over the world and really seen as a non-negotiable component of 
any serious attempt to reduce HIV and a range of other health related harms.

Thirty years ago, Australia was prepared to be flexible when it came to drug 
policy and this approach had significance internationally. But this is not the 
situation today. We know today’s challenges are different but Australia’s 
response is now far too rigid and mired in concern over possible wrong messages 
– something we thought as a country we overcame a long time ago.

Other countries are now prepared to be flexible by introducing prescription 
heroin programs, pill testing and safe consumption rooms, all designed to save 
lives, reduce harm and protect all the community, while Australia just watches 
from the sidelines.

Is it any wonder that our drug problems seem to steadily get worse?
 