
Each new month seems to bring with it another well-intentioned report on death 
and end-of-life care. So far in 2016 we have had theEnd of Life Care Audit: 
Dying in Hospital from the Royal College of Physicians, a report from the 
British Medical Association (End-of-Life Care and Physician-Assisted Dying), 
and a review from the Care Quality Commission (A Different Ending: End of Life 
Care).

These various reports are marked by a kind of cloying earnestness, or “chronic 
niceness”, in the phrase of the hospital chaplain the Rev Peter Speck. On 9 May 
we had the Dying Matters Awareness Week. The number of government agencies and 
charities jostling for ownership of death is growing steadily.

Western ideas about death are informed by secularism and individualism. The 
current discussion on death and dying, however, has been hijacked by the 
extremists on both sides. In the barren and neglected middle ground are truths 
that we have conveniently ignored. As contemporary issues, assisted suicide and 
advance directives are both a symptom of a deeper malaise (namely the obsession 
with personal autonomy and control) and a distraction. They are a distraction 
because the real issues are elsewhere.

Our sense of common decency – of kindness – has become sclerosed. Kindness was 
the ingredient most lacking in the care of patients at Stafford hospital. Can 
common decency be regenerated by regulation and government diktat? We have 
witnessed, to our cost, the poisonous effects of targets, and the paradox 
(pointed out by Onora O’Neill) that new regulations of professionals lead only 
to increased suspicion, rather than more accountability.

Death, we are constantly told, has become “medicalised”. Roughly half of all 
people dying in Britain or Ireland do so in a general hospital. Just over 20% 
die at home, and only 5% in a hospice. Large general hospitals are the best 
place to be when you are very sick but are ill-equipped to meet the needs of 
the dying. TheLiverpool care pathway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jul/15/liverpool-care-pathway-independent-review>
, a rather quixotic, tick-boxy attempt to give hospice-type care to people 
dying in general hospitals, was an abject failure. Acute hospitals are 
criticised, with some justification, for failing to care properly for the 
dying, yet society has handed over most of the responsibility for such care to 
these institutions.

We have thrust on to doctors and hospitals the messy, intractable and 
insoluble aspects of life, principally old age and death. Some patients and 
their families have wildly unrealistic expectations of medicine, and their 
frustration may occasionally prompt them to take legal action. Decisions that 
doctors used to routinely make themselves are now being made by the courts, and 
judges are likely to become increasingly involved in decisions relating to 
end-of-life care. The “lawyerisation” of death is as great a concern as its 
“medicalisation”.

Julia Neuberger, who chaired the inquiry that recommended the scrapping of the 
Liverpool care pathway, warned: “There needs to be a proper national 
conversation about dying. Otherwise doctors and nurses are likely to become the 
whipping boys for our inadequate understanding of how we die.” My only quibble 
with this powerful statement is that doctors and nurses already are, and have 
been for some time, the “whipping boys”.

Modern scientific medicine, for all its achievements, has never been so unsure 
of itself. We are now in a late period of doubt and uncertainty. Medicine has 
slowly, almost imperceptibly, been transformed from a profession into a service 
industry. I have witnessed a profound disconnect between our publicly 
proclaimed pieties and what we actually do every day in our treatment of the 
dying, which is notable not for kindness, but for evasion, humbug, and what Dr
Kieran Sweeney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/jan/22/kieran-sweeney-obituary> 
called “a hesitation to be brave”.

A 2003 study from Johns Hopkins University examined doctors’ preferences for 
their own care at the end of life. The overwhelming majority did not want 
cardio-pulmonary resuscitation, dialysis, major surgery or tube feeding.

Kindness should be a common currency for all – not something to be doled out 
solely by the professionals. Could the perceived “problem” with death be partly 
due to the fact that, after decades of our culture being dominated by 
individualism and consumerism, our respect for other people has diminished? We 
have witnessed the paradox of rising life expectancy accompanied by a 
contemporary culture obsessed with youth and beauty, dismissive of the old. The 
arid spiritual dwarfishness of materialism has hardly helped. We see ourselves, 
in the phrase of Ivan Illich, as “bundles of diagnoses”.

Our ancestors in pre-industrial Europe “tamed” death by communality and 
ritual. In our atomised societies, death has replaced sex as the new taboo; the 
churches have emptied and people no longer know how to “tame” death or how to 
mourn.

There is a perception – even a consensus – that death is a problem that 
medicine should somehow sort out, that a “good death” is something that doctors 
should be able to prescribe, as we might prescribe a course of antibiotics. But 
our needs are spiritual, not medical. Medicine’s dominion should be limited and 
explicitly defined.Medicine <https://www.theguardian.com/education/medicine>, 
and our culture, would be healthier and happier if we stopped expecting it to 
solve our existential problems, if we stopped thinking of our bodies as 
machines, and if we gave up our fantasies of control and immortality.

We cannot, like misers, hoard health; living uses it up. Nor should we lose it 
like spendthrifts. Health, like money, is not an end in itself; like money, it 
is a prerequisite for a decent, fulfilling life. The obsessive pursuit of 
health is a form of consumerism, and impoverishes us. Medicine should give up 
the quest to conquer nature, and revert to its traditional, creaturely role of 
accompanying the dying: the doctor as amicus mortis. It is as difficult, 
however, to advise someone how to die, as it is to advise them how to live. 
Death cannot be sanitised or workshopped. We are frail and vulnerable animals 
yet we have come to believe that everything that happens to us – including 
death – is our fault, our doing, our responsibility. Human agency has replaced 
the power of nature, in Freud’s words, “majestic, cruel and inexorable”.

Seamus O’Mahony is a consultant physician at Cork University hospital. His 
book,The Way We Die Now, is published by Head of Zeus
 