
There is a new prize for book reviewers! It's called the Hatchet Job of the 
Year award <http://hatchetjoboftheyear.com/>; the first recipient, named at the 
launch, isAdam Mars-Jones 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/books/2012/feb/10/adam-mars-jones-hatchet-job> for a 
piece in this very newspaper.

Yes, Hatchet Job of the Year. As the Leveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> lurches forward, spilling 
daily horror stories of hacking and bribes, the press has decided to create a 
special award for savagery. Marvellous: a flicked cape and a twirled moustache 
in the face of national disgust. The Evil Prize. That'll get the readers back 
onside.

I'm not saying Adam Mars-Jones is evil. His award-winning review (of Michael 
Cunningham'sBy Nightfall) is brilliantly written, although, not having read the 
novel, I can't know if it's fair. Also, the version that's up on the
Guardian/Observer website  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jan/23/by-nightfall-michael-cunningham-review>
currently includes a reference to a character inThe Great Gatsby called "Myrtle 
Wilsoncorrect", which, assuming he means Myrtle Wilson, hints at a sub-editor's 
helpful hand. Or, at least, the hand of a subeditor who started being helpful 
and then got distracted by something else.

The possibility that this Dickensian-sounding name is the ghost of a mistake 
from Mars-Jones lends a certain irony to his attack on Michael Cunningham's use 
of literary references.

Nevertheless, reviewers must be honest if something's no good. I've enjoyed 
temporary reviewing stints myself, but I don't think I'd have the stomach for 
it long-term. In order to be honest, you must dispel the image of a hopeful and 
hard-working human, or group of humans, slaving for months or years on a 
book/film/TV series, nervously emailing their friends about the launch, 
crossing their fingers, wishing and praying, then opening a newspaper and 
bursting into tears.

My brother, who is both a high-profile restaurant reviewer and a deeply 
soft-hearted and sentimental person who relentlessly feigns toughness in print, 
is at his funniest when describing a ghastly meal in a dreadful place. But if 
you say: "Oh dear, I hope the chef doesn't feel all disappointed and sad", 
Giles will wake up screaming in the night. He can't think about it. He has to 
think about the diners who might otherwise waste money on a grim experience. 
Yet "Hatchet Job of the Year" suggests the very goal is to be vicious.

The organisers of the award explain that it's intended to "promote integrity 
and wit in literary journalism". If so, I wish they'd had a longer meeting 
about its name. "Integrity" and "hatchet" aren'tprecisely the same thing. It's 
like callingBattersea Dogs & Cats Home 
<http://www.battersea.org.uk/?gclid=CMLf0KLVk64CFVAhtAodUmOKJg> The Glue 
Factory.

The reputation of journalists (using the term broadly to mean those who write 
for newspapers) is quite low enough, without the image of us all patting each 
other on the back for cruelty.

Do you remember the TV series State of Play? John Simm, James McAvoy and Bill 
Nighy played a dodgy but heroic group of newspapermen who, using deceit, 
espionage, secret tapes and stolen emails, expose murder and corruption at the 
heart of government.

Good luck making that today. Even if the hero did nothing wrong, the title of 
"journalist" would announce him immediately as a villain. Asked what I do for a 
living at parties, these days I call myself a professional gambler because it 
sounds more salutary. I definitely do that at parties where famous people are, 
in deference to their terror of the press.

The divide between "celebrities" and "journalists" is awkard for me because 
I'm neither, but less neither than a greengrocer is, if you see what I mean. 
Nervous yet well-known acquaintances worry about whether I'll spill their 
secrets at my evil writing desk, or protect them because I'm also on TV 
sometimes. They're missing the point, which is whether or not I'm aterrible 
person.

That's the only real distinction. There's no difference between journalists 
and non-journalists, only between those who abuse free speech and those who 
don't. Reporters who invade privacy for no good reason sit alongside 
celebrities who take money to be "spotted" on holiday, wealthy power-mongers 
who sue for libel on a technicality, rapists who (having got off in court) 
malign the victim in interviews, and anyone who writes nasty things anonymously 
on the internet.

The suffering non-abusers include anyone who gets written about nastily 
anywhere – you, me, Hugh Grant, innocent murder defendants, and the vast 
majority of journalists, who are decent, hard-working and socially vital.

In the great lost-privacy debate, newspapers are a gnat. Your own laptop and 
mobile phone are already sharing all your private information with anyone who's 
interested, from the government to shops who want your money. There is no 
privacy.

Surveillance cameras watch you. Google photographs your house. Authorities use 
spurious "national security" arguments to poke their noses through your deepest 
personal business. ID cards are coming. Your ex-lovers are writing about you on 
the internet. Unwitting snaps of you at parties are posted on Facebook. The 
huge, unregulated, free (in both senses) internet will drive newspapers to 
extinction sooner or later anyway; when we look back, I suspect it will be with 
a sudden sick sense that a big yellow taxi took away our old man.

Everyone says the Leveson inquiry will result in a new governing body for the 
press. That ambition is either futile or stupidly small in scale. What we want 
to see is an end to villainy (and "hatchet jobs") but with nothing lost: 
privacy, decency and freedom of speech cherished together, each protected 
without damaging the other.

If we can identify people clear and ethical enough to want the same, clever 
enough to find the balance, incorruptible enough to stick with it – and who are 
happy to accept power, yet without a dangerous thirst for it – then those 
people should not be in charge of newspapers. They should be in charge of 
everything.

www.victoriacoren.com
 