
The campaign for the parliamentary vote for women in Britain was a long and 
bitter struggle that began in the mid-19th century. However, it really took off 
in 1903 whenEmmeline Pankhurst 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/pankhurst_emmeline.shtml> 
founded the women-only Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU). With the 
slogan, "Deeds, not words", the charismatic Emmeline, a brilliant orator, 
together with her eldest daughter Christabel, the key strategist of the WSPU, 
roused the women of Britain to abandon the ladylike tactics of the National 
Union of Women's Suffrage Societies and to demand, not ask for, their 
democratic birthright.

The suffragettes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/gallery/2008/feb/06/1?picture=332400075> 
engaged in daring and brave deeds, often putting their own lives at risk, even 
when engaging in peaceful demonstrations. But from 1912, more violent tactics 
were adopted including window-smashing raids in London's West End and the 
vandalising of pillar boxes. Such a change in strategy, which never endangered 
human life, was a response to the stubbornness of the Liberal government of the 
day that, over a long period of time, had debated women's suffrage bills but 
never passed them, and then prohibited women from protesting in public arenas.

Many of the 1,000 women who were imprisoned adopted the hunger strike as a 
political tool, only to be forcibly fed by an unyielding government. At the 
outbreak of the first world war in 1914, the patriotic Pankhursts called a halt 
to all militancy and urged their followers to take up war work as a way to win 
their enfranchisement. That wish was partly fulfilled when, on February 6 1918, 
nine months before the war ended, eight and a half million women over 30 years 
of age – householders, wives of householders, occupiers of property of £5 or 
more annual value and university graduates – were finallyallowed to vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1918/feb/07/gender>.

The suffragette campaign was lead by and for women who wanted not just the 
vote, but wider social reforms that would end women's subordinate roles in the 
family, education and employment, as well as the double standard of sexuality. 
Yet the many male historians who have written about the movement usually see it 
as a single-issue campaign and fail to capture the sexual dynamics of the drama.

Of particular importance is George Dangerfield's The Strange Death of Liberal 
England <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Strange_Death_of_Liberal_England>, 
published in 1935, which discusses the suffragette movement as one of the 
forces in the downfall of the Liberal party. As the first male historian to 
treat the women's movement "seriously", his book was widely cited and reprinted 
well into the 1970s.

Writing from a perspective that sees the suffragettes as a deviant and 
marginal aberration from the main business of male political elites, 
Dangerfield presents them as irrational even dangerous beings whose deeds 
cannot be classified as political. Mocking what he terms these "daring ladies" 
with their high starched collars and "corseted bosoms", he presents them as 
demented creatures who chose the hardships of prison life, including forcible 
feeding, in a sado-masochistic way. Despite the gendered nature of 
Dangerfield's analysis, The Strange Death of Liberal England set the scene for 
many subsequent male historians who were unable to break free from the grip of 
his narrative, writing the suffragettes out of winning the vote or diminishing 
their contribution.

As a feminist historian steeped in the primary sources of the WSPU, I have 
frequently challenged such masculinist accounts and got into arguments, most 
recently withChristopher Bearman 
<http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/story.asp?storyCode=207572&sectioncode=26>
 in BBC History Magazine. As Bearman makes clear, he does not like feminists 
and believes that the suffragettes were lawless terrorists who delayed votes 
for women. Feminist historians, such as myself, he asserts, perpetuate a 
suffragette mythology – "that it was a mass movement, that militancy won the 
vote, that there was no threat to life, that forcible feeding outraged public 
opinion, and that they enjoyed popular support."

What is remarkable in Bearman's analysis is that nowhere does he listen to the 
suffragettes themselves. His "evidence" is based on newspaper accounts of the 
time, all filtered through a male gaze that thought the suffragettes – and 
their leaders - were irrational, even mad. Nor does Bearman consider his own 
standpoint, his own gendered interpretation of events.

That I should have been attacked in this way doesn't surprise me. Women's 
history is not just about finding women hidden in the past but about changing 
the way they have been traditionally represented, about letting their voices be 
heard. The suffragettes contributed to the making of our modern democracy by 
bringing about a cultural change in the way in which women were seen. They 
aroused a passionate discussion about women's status and inequality in society 
so that men's ideological hold over women was never the same. No longer 
doormats, but assertive, strong-minded women, without their struggle the 1918 
franchise act would not have been passed.
 