
My first encounter with modern art was in the botanical gardens in Edinburgh. 
I was four and just learning to read. On the walls of Inverleith House, a 
gracious Georgian mansion among the tall trees, was an enormous painting of a 
man with his arms defiantly crossed and the letters OK scrawled beneath like 
some terse approval. It seemed important that the artist had painted himself so 
much larger than life (this was Oskar Kokoschka’s self-portrait, I learned) and 
that he had written across his picture too. All at once, I discovered that 
artists could make art as angrily as any child and that they signed their own 
homework.

I would never have seen Kokoschka’s Self-Portrait as a Degenerate Artist  
<https://www.nationalgalleries.org/collection/artists-a-z/k/artist/oskar-kokoschka/object/self-portrait-of-a-degenerate-artist-gml-285>
had we not visited the Royal Botanic Garden (RBGE) most Sundays. My brother and 
I would clamber around the rock garden, collect exotic maple leaves and gaze at 
the scarlet fish in the pond in front of Inverleith House before going in to 
look at paintings by Miró, Picasso and Matisse or to gawp atDuane Hanson’s 
hyper-real figures <http://www.saatchigallery.com/artists/duane_hanson.htm>of 
tourists, who also seemed to be admiring the view. And what a view it was: the 
modern art inside and the green world outside, uniquely and exhilaratingly 
fused.

You walked to the art through the park, brisked along by the scented air. Or 
you came across it by chance, after rolling down grassy banks. Generations of 
children saw it, many for the first time, because Inverleith House was hearth 
and home to the Botanics, simply the place where everyone gravitated. From 1960 
until 1986, it was the Scottish Gallery of Modern Art; since then, it has been 
the most beautiful gallery of contemporary art in Britain. But not any more. 
For at 4.30 on Sunday, to the shock and grief of all who love it,this great 
gallery 
<https://www.list.co.uk/article/85538-inverleith-house-to-cease-being-a-gallery-after-30-years/>
closed.

On Wednesday, the RBGE management decided to close the building as a gallery. 
Nobody seems to have any idea what it will now become. Five days notice against 
56 years of art is an outrage in itself – there has been no public 
consultation, no forewarning, the entire future schedule axed in an instant, 
along with all of its profound potential – followed by some egregious nonsense 
about finding other places among the rhododendrons to show whatever can be 
shown, which certainly won’t be Oskar Kokoschka.

And it won’t be any of the tremendous artists whose work so many of us have 
witnessed here for the first time. I will never forget seeing the American 
painters Agnes Martin and Joan Mitchell here, the serenity of the former and 
the horticultural abundance of the latter so perfectly enhanced by the 
botanical surroundings. The first and best William Eggleston show in Britain 
was here (only now has theNational Portrait Gallery caught up 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/whatson/eggleston/exhibition.php> with this master US 
photographer). Inverleith House has had more shows by Turner prize nominees and 
winners than other British gallery apart from Tate Britain itself.

But Creative Scotland pulled its funding for Inverleith House two years ago 
and the keeper of the RBGE has said that the institution now prefers to 
concentrate on botanical studies – as if it did not already have a massive 
horticultural centre, stuffed with retail opportunities, quite apart from the 
magnificent gardens themselves. And before you imagine that CreativeScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> is thriftily withdrawing some 
extravagant sum, consider that its total funding in the 22 years since 1994 has 
been a tiny £1.5m. They give almost half of that amount to the Fruitmarket 
Gallery every year.

Last week, the BBC arts departments in London and Bristol were also wiped out. 
These are the people who brought us Simon Schama’sPower of Art and Robert 
Hughes’sThe Shock of the New, who made Andrew Graham-Dixon’s surveys of 
international art from Budapest to Saigon. Soon, there will be no staffBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> arts producers left in England (only 
the Glasgow department has survived).

The rationale is that arts programmes do not make a profit for BBC Studios, 
but arts programmes have never been profitable. They cost comparatively little 
to make, but they do not sell abroad like drama or reality television. So these 
venerable departments, which have nurtured so many talented film-makers and 
given us such brilliant insights into art, taking us up high to look into the 
eyes of a Giotto saint in Padua, taking us deep into the caves of Lascaux to 
look at leaping bison, will now be shut for ever.

With the disastrous decision to axe the art history A-level 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/12/last-art-history-a-level-axed-after-michael-gove-cull-of-soft-subjects>
 because – allegedly – not enough expert examiners can be found to mark the 
papers, we see another downgrading, another reduction in the opportunities to 
contemplate art. Who is to say that art history is less important than history? 
Why should the visual be demoted? Why is art not regarded as an expression of 
human experience in the same degree, for example, as literature?

To study art history at school, for me at least, was to look at vast 
enlargements of paintings in faraway museums that I might never visit and to 
understand more about life. To watch television cameras inch their microscopic 
way across a Bosch is to see almost more than one can in person (and almost 
more than the artist himself). But even these miracles of technology cannot 
transmit the experience of being in the gallery – of discovering that pictures 
are much bigger, angrier or more anxious, quieter, or more forceful, or simply 
infinitely greater than the image on the laptop conveys. Reproductions, as 
Hughes once wrote, are like shrunken heads compared to living people; the loss 
of a whole gallery is, by analogy, death.

Last week, Walsall council warned that it may close the New Art Gallery 
<https://www.architectsjournal.co.uk/news/council-cuts-could-close-caruso-st-johns-walsall-art-gallery/10012972.article>
, Caruso St John’s purpose-built museum, with its celebrated collection of 
British art. The gallery’s founder argues that closure would be “both unethical 
and impractical… and would destroy the atmosphere of many surrounding 
communities”. Even as the blade dangles, savage cuts in the offing, the council 
has at least conceded the sorrowful truth of his words.

But the finances at Inverleith House are not even an excuse. Director Paul 
Nesbitt, who has devoted 30 years to the gallery, is one of only two staff 
members (the Serpentine Gallery has more than 40). It is a wonder that 
curating, fundraising, invigilating, promoting and generally charming great 
international art to Scotland has not already killed him. And he has 
sensitively intermingled botanical art with work by contemporary artists such 
as Luke Fowler, Richard Wright and Douglas Gordon on the tiniest budget in 
Christendom. It would barely take a single philanthropist – or an honourable 
horticulturalist – to appear now and save it all.

We see art in time and place and always in the context of our own lives. We 
cannot see it otherwise, no matter how objective we might hope to be. To 
stumble upon paintings in such surroundings, and in such a gracious building as 
Inverleith House, was always to be doubly blessed. I doubt the RGBE has any 
moral right to close a gallery so important to our cultural life, and so 
perfectly constructed, with its high rooms and pristine large windows, to the 
display of art. And in so doing, it must understand that it has diminished not 
only our experience of art, but of life itself.
 