
Mark Hughes <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mark-hughes> did not raise 
his voice, roll his eyes or wave his arms but, even so, Manchester City's 
manager made it plain that he is growing angry with those who delight in 
predicting his dismissal.

Standing calmly in a corner of an executive lounge at Manchester airport 
before City flew to northern Denmark for the Uefa Cup tie against Aalborg, 
Hughes, whose side nurse a 2–0 first-leg lead, admitted he is unhappy at 
constantly being tipped for the sack. "I am getting a bit fed up of it all," he 
conceded, softly spoken as ever. "There's a great deal of negativity but maybe 
that makes it an easier story."

In reality the message emerging loud and clear from inside Eastlands is that 
the Welshman will still be in situ next ­season and Hughes certainly did not 
sound remotely insecure. Indeed, ­considering that City are the sole English 
Uefa Cup survivors and harbour ­realistic hopes of finishing seventh in 
­the ­Premier League, the constant ­speculation about their manager's position 
seems slightly embarrassing, faintly absurd even.

"The view this season was to make progress as a team and I think we have," 
said Hughes, who accepts that City's immense wealth attracts automatic envy and 
currently unrealistic expectations. "The chairman knows the situation, he 
understands where we are at this moment in time. We've already shown we can 
cause any team problems but we lost 1–0 at Chelsea on Sunday, after good 
results against Aston Villa and in Europe, and people want to start throwing 
sticks and stones again.

"It might be that some people want me to fail. If we lose, it's always we 
should do better because we're the richest club in the world. People throw 
things at us from ­predictable angles. We're an easy target. The negativity 
around us means a lot is made of it when we play poorly, which we do 
occasionally, but most people can see we have improved as a team. What 
continues to undermine us, of course, is our away form."

Such pronounced fragility outside Eastlands has detracted from some 
sporadically captivating City displays but one of Hughes's enduring problems is 
that the Brazilian Robinho continues to perform so badly on his travels.

The feeling is that City's Emirati owners will back their manager above an 
under-achieving £32m superstar who, despite protestations to the contrary, may 
well be offloaded this summer.

Although Aalborg was deceptively sunny, a real chill permeated the Jutland 
air. Should City somehow lose, their season, too, will suddenly revert to 
wintry bleakness.

"Two-nil is a little bit of a dangerous lead," cautioned Hughes. "But I'm sure 
we'll get scoring opportunities because Aalborg will have to attack us, which 
isn't their natural game. What we have to avoid is conceding an early goal.

"We've prioritised this competition so let's see how far we can go."
 