
A Clockwork Orange <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-clockwork-orange> opens 
with Alex and his Nadsat-speaking droogs sipping drug-laced pintas in the 
wonderfully over-the-top interior of the Korova Milk Bar. It is real 
"horrowshow", as Alex would say approvingly. A pop-art, 70s-kitsch S&M dungeon 
with pools of excessively bright light amid dense shadows, the Korova was 
designed by John Barry (not the composer) and was one of the few sets built for 
Kubrick's notorious film, re-released on Friday after an absence of 26 years.

Apart from two other interior sets, A Clockwork Orange was filmed on location 
in and around London. The immediate reason was cost: the film's budget was $2m, 
chicken-feed in Kubrick's terms, even in 1971. Yet, at the time, the locations 
that would best express the dystopian world Alex and his droogs inhabited had 
just been built by architects, most of them employed by local authorities. If 
the Korova had existed it would have been somewhere in the Tavy Bridge shopping 
centre, Thamesmead, London SE28.

The postcode is real, London's most extreme in numerical terms. This is where 
Alex lives in one of the concrete "neighbourhood" blocks linked by elevated 
walkways. It was underneath one of these, by the shopping centre, that Kubrick 
filmed the droogs attacking an old tramp. Later, when Alex (played by Malcolm 
McDowell) becomes the subject of medical research at the "Ludovico Institute", 
he is really in Brunel university, Uxbridge, another brand-new concrete 
megastructure.

Kubrick and his designers found the sets by trawling through the latest 
architectural magazines. These were mostly in love with Thamesmead. Naturally 
the mini-new town, planned from 1961 by the London County Council and built 
from 1965 by the architects department of the Greater London Council, won 
awards.

Thamesmead, a name chosen by readers of the now defunct London Evening News, 
was designed as a brave new home for 60,000 lucky Londoners, who were to live 
in a cluster of ostensibly rational, pre-fabricated concrete "neighbourhoods". 
Each neighbourhood would offer between 1,500 and 1,700 "dwelling units" for 
between 8,000 and 9,000 residents. Neighbourhoods would be connected, South 
Bank style, by elevated walkways, and meet in a large civic piazza with a 
shopping centre. The site, east of Woolwich and Plumstead marshes, is on wet 
ground, squeezed up beside the old Crosswell sewage treatment plant where the 
fine Victorian steam compound rotative beam engine that pumped London's 
effluence from its centres of population is now being lovingly restored.

More than 30 years on, Thamesmead itself would benefit from a little tender 
loving. In parts it looks like a film set, so strange is the town-planning 
premise on which it is founded. Concrete towers, flanked by two artificial 
lakes, rise around a set-piece square facing the Thames. This original core is 
then wrapped around with the sort of tweedy, bricky, neo-nothing family houses 
many of us fear will swamp the banks of the Thames as John Prescott's London 
overspill housing policy is translated into action. The strangest views of the 
area are those you can get from a boat heading towards Southend and the 
Channel, or those framed by the ruins of the abbey built from 1191 by Sir 
Richard de Lucy as a penance for the murder of St Thomas à Beckett.

What is striking about the locations chosen for A Clockwork Orange and other 
films documenting alienation is that they were meant to enhance human life. 
Today only the herons, swans and geese that haunt the lakes and riverside at 
Thamesmead seem serene. These and the carp and tench that idle through the dark 
waters of the lakes created by the GLC's landscape gardeners. And maybe those 
families in search of a four-bedroom detached home with 30ft lounge, double 
garage and front and back gardens for under £120,000 (there are plenty of 
them). The price they pay, if they commute (and most do) is a long bus ride, or 
an uncertain journey by train to London Bridge. This and a catalogue of worries 
to do with crime, schooling, the usual things. And a very specific sense of 
isolation.

One of the criticisms of Thamesmead and towns like it is that they are 
fundamentally middle-class constructs imposed on what were, at the time of 
their first building, working-class families. Those who first came here had 
given up life in inner-city streets. True, these were classified as slums, yet 
they were "home" in the sense that Thamesmead has never been.

Well-intentioned GLC architects and planners (several of those who worked on 
the design of Thamesmead had previously helped to develop London's South Bank) 
were genuinely surprised when residents said there was nowhere for children to 
play. What about the 300 acres of parks the GLC had generously provided? That 
wasn't the point. Previously children had been able to kick balls around local 
streets and alleys. The idea was that the middle classes would come here too, 
but they never really did. Thamesmead remains solidly Old Labour, despite being 
a new town. In the May 1997 election, the turnout was 66%. Labour held the seat 
with 62% of the vote. The extreme right-wing vote was low, with the British 
National Party wooing just 1.7%.

The working-class nature of Thamesmead was sympathetically depicted in the 
1996 film of Jonathan Harvey's play Beautiful Thing - though it stressed the 
lack of privacy so many people felt growing up in the world Alex and the droogs 
knew. In that future everything was exposed, up-front and violent. No secrets. 
How different, how very different from life lived behind the screen of privets 
in middle-class suburbs.

One could not say that Thamesmead was in any way cynical, a form of 
middle-class or local-government manipulation of the lives of those way down 
the pecking order. It wasn't. Nor was it cheap. A fortune was spent in the 
first five years (1965-70). Local government was a costly business in the 60s 
because there was a consensus that new housing, schools, hospitals, parks and 
other amenities were needed and that these could not, should not, be left in 
the hands of the private sector. Certainly the private sector would never 
attempt to build a housing development as complex and costly as Thamesmead. It 
was true, though, that the concrete flats leaked and were prone to 
condensation, and the smell of the sewage works on summer days was "strong 
enough to peel paint at 50 paces", according to one local. By 1974 just 12,000 
people lived there. Today the population is 30,000 and the mini-new town is 
considered to be no more than half-complete. After the abolition of the GLC in 
1986, it was handed over to Thamesmead Town Limited. Rents are high, residents 
say, and services are poor.

But at least Thamesmead was built with some sense of vision - however 
misguided. Nowadays, business parks, distribution depots and Prescott memorial 
housing threaten the marshlands that give this odd stretch of far-flung London 
its strangely haunting character and its glorious birds and other wildlife. 
Maybe it's still a tough and isolated place to live, but it has its 
"horrorshow" side.

A Clockword Orange opens on Friday.
 