
Sentencing has begun for 10 employees of a recruitment company that aimed to 
get people back into work who fraudulently claimed nearly £300,000 from 
taxpayers.

The staff members worked for Action 4 Employment (A4e), which was contracted 
by the government to help people from difficult backgrounds gain the necessary 
training and skills.

They made up scores of files, forged signatures and falsely claimed they had 
helped people find jobs, enabling them to hit targets and get bonuses.

Some even falsified documents, using the names of family members, while others 
offered bribes in the form of vouchers to get people to fill out bogus forms.

Four of the defendants were convicted in connection with the fraud in January 
after a 13-week trial at Reading crown court.

Ines Cano-Uribe, 39, of Madrid, Spain, was found guilty of two counts of 
forgery, while Zabar Khalil, 35, from Slough, Berkshire, Matthew 
Hannigan-Train, 31, of Bristol, and Hayley Wilson, 27, from Milton Keynes, 
Buckinghamshire, were each found guilty of one count of forgery.

Six others had previously pleaded guilty to their part in the fraud. Dean 
Lloyd, 38, of Milton Keynes, pleaded guilty to 13 counts of forgery; Julie 
Grimes, 52, of Staines, Surrey, pleaded guilty to nine counts of forgery; Aditi 
Singh, 32, of Slough, pleaded guilty to three counts of fraud and forgery and 
Bindiya Dholiwar, 29, of Slough, pleaded guilty to seven counts of forgery.

Nikki Foster, 31, of Reading, Berkshire, pleaded guilty to eight counts of 
fraud and one of conspiracy and Charles McDonald, 44, of Egham, Surrey, pleaded 
guilty to six counts of fraud and one of conspiracy.

Summing up for the prosecution, Sarah Wood said that between them they had 
created 167 false claims, costing the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP), 
which contractedA4e <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/a4e> to carry out the work, 
about £300,000.

The court heard that A4e ran the Aspire to Inspire lone parent mentoring 
programme between 2008 and 2011.

The contract, for which A4e was paid £1.3m and given £10,500 a month to 
implement, covered Berkshire, Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire and was funded by 
the European Social Fund. The company received payments for each person it 
helped gain employment.

The court heard that while A4e helped 558 people find jobs, staff lied about 
others. Wood said: “The total amount of fraudulent claiming was 167 files, for 
a total loss of £288,595.”




The hearing continues.

 