
The construction of a joint statue to honour Sir Alf Ramsey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alf-ramsey> and Bobby Moore at the new 
national stadium is being considered by the Football Association.

The FA intends to commemorate the manager and captain of England's World 
Cup-winning side of 1966 and believes the scene of their greatest triumph could 
be the ideal venue.

Talks will take place with the parties planning the redevelopment of Wembley 
before a final decision is made.

Although Ramsey's death last week has focused minds on a tribute to him, with 
members of the 1966 side calling for a permanent and fitting memorial, the FA 
has decided the achievements of Moore should also be recognised.

David Davies, the FA's interim executive director, said: 'The FA are looking 
at new and innovative ways of honouring football's greatest names.

'We want to put criticisms that the game hasn't done enough in the past behind 
us. With the new national stadium we have a unique opportunity to do so.'

Stephanie Moore, widow of the former England captain, welcomed the proposal 
and said: 'It would be lovely if they were both to be remembered in this way. 
Bobby's family are very grateful if the FA want to redress the balance.'

John Gregory, the Aston Villa manager, has made another outburst against his 
unsettled goalkeeper Mark Bosnich. Gregory said last night: 'I am sick to death 
with pampered prima donnas in football, and it's about time clubs looked after 
players who are totally committed to the cause.'

Gregory surprisingly omitted the 27-year-old Australian from the Villa squad 
for last weekend's game at Manchester United, and he is unlikely to figure in 
tomorrow's Premiership game at home to Charlton.

The manager claimed he left Bosnich out of the squad at Old Trafford because 
of a foot injury, but he has become disillusioned with Bosnich's refusal to 
sign a new contract and United's interest in him may also have strongly 
influenced his plans for last Saturday.

Bosnich's contract ends next month and he will then be able to leave for 
nothing under the Bosman ruling.

Gregory added: 'I have been trying to convince him to sign a new contract for 
16 months. But he doesn't seem to know his own mind. He doesn't know what he 
wants to do, but if he does he has not told us. However, it would come as a 
total shock if he stayed at Villa now; I just cannot see that happening.'

Gregory added: 'We have looked after Mark. He was injured for four or five 
months but we supported him, rather than let him rot. There is still room for 
negotiation, but it has to be on our terms now.'

Meanwhile, Gregory is lining up a £3m offer for Celta Vigo's Russian 
midfielder Alexander Mostovoi. Gregory has targeted the 30-year-old after he 
played an important role in knocking Villa out of the Uefa Cup. But Villa face 
competition from Real Madrid.

Villa's manager is also monitoring the unsettled Everton midfielder Olivier 
Dacourt's future, although the player says he will 'probably return to France 
this summer'.

Massimo Moratti, the multi-millionaire owner of Internazionale, has resigned 
as president of the club. Moratti had come under increasing pressure in recent 
months following Inter's dismal season, which has seen them slump to eighth 
position in Serie A and crash out of cup competitions.
 