
Slaven Bilic watched from the stands as his Europa League gamble ended with 
West Ham United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> going bust 
and crashing out to Astra Giurgiu on Thursday night.

The manager left a host of first-team players at home before this tie, despite 
the fact it was hanging in the balance followinga 2-2 draw at Upton Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/30/west-ham-astra-giurgiu-europa-league>
 a week ago.

Bilic was sent to the stands late on in that game and was not in the dugout as 
his Romanian roll of the dice did not see his side come up trumps, with the 
Astra captain, Constantin Budescu, scoring twice in four first-half minutes to 
cancel out Manuel Lanzini’s early opener and seal a memorable 2-1 win for the 
hosts.

The West Ham debutant Lanzini, who had already delivered a tempting free-kick 
and a corner which led to Kevin Nolan’s effort being hacked off the line, 
collected the ball and his low shot squeezed in off the post with only two and 
half minutes gone.

But Astra proved last week they can be a potent attacking force and almost 
levelled when the busy Budescu’s whipped free-kick caught out Darren Randolph 
in the West Ham goal and came back off the crossbar. It was a different outcome 
when Budescu next had a sight of goal as he collected the ball before driving 
forward unchallenged and arrowing a low 25-yard effort out of Randolph’s reach.

West Ham’s young defence had started well but the leveller seemed to knock 
their confidence and Budescu was on hand to capitalise on some indecisiveness 
at a cross as he finished coolly to put the home team in charge at the interval.

As many as six of the visitors’ starting lineup have never appeared in the 
Premier League for West Ham, while the defensive duo, Doneil Henry and Kyle 
Knoyle, and the new signing Lanzini were making their club debuts. Bilic had no 
obvious options on the bench as his experimental side toiled in the humidity 
inside the Marin Anastasovici Stadium, though Nolan went close on the hour as 
the captain looked to inspire those around him.

It was Astra who started to threaten again as the second half wore on and 
Fernando Boldrin almost followed up his goal from the opening leg with another 
here, only for Randolph to tip his effort behind.

Lanzini stung the palms of Silviu Lung with West Ham’s first effort of note 
since the break but there were only 12 minutes remaining and his side looked 
bereft of ideas.

Randolph was the busier of the two goalkeepers and was again at his best to 
push away two late Denis Alibec shots but his team-mates could not find the 
equaliser they needed to force extra-time and dreams of a lengthy European 
campaign to mark the final season at Upton Park came to an abrupt and feeble 
conclusion.
 