
Campaigners who believe that dolphins and whales should be granted rights on 
account of their intelligence are to push for the animals to be protected under 
international law.

A group of scientists and ethicists argues there is sufficient evidence of the 
marine mammals' intelligence, self-awareness and complex behaviour to enshrine 
their rights in legislation.

Under the declaration of rights for cetaceans, a term that includes dolphins, 
whales and porpoises, the animals would be protected as "non-human persons" and 
have a legally enforceable right to life.

If incorporated into law, the declaration would bring legal force to bear on 
whale hunters, and marine parks, aquariums and other entertainment venues would 
be barred from keeping dolphins, whales or porpoises in captivity.

"We're saying the science has shown that individuality, consciousness and 
self-awareness are no longer unique human properties. That poses all kinds of 
challenges," said Tom White, director of the Centre for Ethics and Business at 
Loyola Marymount University in Los Angeles.

"Dolphins are non-human persons. A person needs to be an individual. And if 
individuals count, then the deliberate killing of individuals of this sort is 
ethically the equivalent of deliberately killing a human being. The captivity 
of beings of this sort, particularly in conditions that would not allow for a 
decent life, is ethically unacceptable, and commercial whaling is ethically 
unacceptable," White said.

The group spoke at the annual meeting in Vancouver of the American Association 
for the Advancement of Science, to raise support for the declaration among 
scientists and the visiting public. The 10-point declaration sets out a 
framework to protect cetaceans' "life, liberty and wellbeing", including rights 
to freedom of movement and residence in their natural environment, and 
protection against "disruption of their cultures".

"The next step is taking the science and advocating for law in different 
places, from a regional point of view, from a national point of view, and 
eventually from a multinational and international view," said Chris 
Butler-Stroud of the Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society.

Decades of research on cetaceans, and dolphins in particular, has revealed 
that their brains, while markedly different from humans, are large, complex and 
capable of sophisticated behaviour. Observations of dolphins have shown that 
they can recognise themselves, use tools and understand symbols and abstract 
concepts.

In 2001, Lori Marino of Emory University in Atlanta, who is promoting the 
declaration,tested whether dolphins recognised themselves 
<http://www.pnas.org/content/98/10/5937.full> by drawing temporary marks on 
different parts of their bodies and watching them check the mark by swimming up 
to an immersed mirror. "When we did that with two dolphins they passed with 
flying colours," she said.

Orcas off Patagonia displayed a seemingly extraordinary act when an aged 
member of the group suffered jaw damage and could no longer eat properly. The 
whale's companions kept the animal alive by feeding it. "The animal, we would 
say, was past its sell-by date, an older creature. They must have 
conceptualised that if it wasn't fed, something would have happened to it, and 
they were able to work out what was needed to keep it alive," said 
Butler-Stroud.

At the Institute for Marine Mammal Studies in Mississippi, a dolphin named 
Kelly outwitted its human keepers and passed on some of its tricks to its 
offspring.Dolphins <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/dolphins> at the 
centre were rewarded with fish if they collected litter from their tanks and 
carried it in their mouths to the staff but Kelly found a weakness in the 
scheme. When people dropped paper into her tank, she hid it under a rock on the 
bottom. When a keeper next approached, she swam down and tore a small piece 
off, and returned to the surface to claim her reward. She worked out that a 
small piece of paper earned the same reward as a big piece, and so maximised 
her meals.

Then one day, Kelly managed to grab a gull that flew into the tank. When she 
delivered it to her keepers, she got an especially large fish reward. The next 
time Kelly was fed she hid the fish at the bottom of the pool, and later 
brought it to the surface to lure more gulls into the pool. The strategy proved 
so successful that she taught her offspring, who went on to teach others.

Though much of the declaration is intended to bring pressure on whaling 
nations and venues that keep cetaceans in captivity, the document has major 
implications for conservation programmes and environmental assessments that 
impinge on communities of dolphins, whales and other cetaceans.

As an early step, the special rights for cetaceans are being considered by the 
UN as part of its convention on migratory species, which aims to protect 
migrating species over their entire ranges.

Enshrining the rights in law could be some time, though. "If we are lucky it 
could take 10 years," said White. "We are at the stage of climate scientists 20 
years ago. This is the first step."
 