
Name: Alan Crompton
University/college: University of Wales, Aberystwyth
Student position: Editor of the student magazine, the Courier 
<http://www.thecourier.org.uk>
Studying: International politics and English

The questions

What's the price of a pint (of lager)?
At most union nights, you can usually get a pint for about £1.40.

And the price of a kebab?
The favourite kebab house in town is Sam's Fried Chicken, (it does kebabs, 
pizzas and great chips). A small doner will set you back about £3.

What's it like as a place to live?
Aberystwyth is small community town, and for many students coming from a big 
city it can be quite a culture shock. There are no shopping malls, no multiplex 
cinemas; Aberystwyth is a place where you come to appreciate the simple things 
in life.

The main street boasts the usual high street stores and local shops, and a bus 
service runs around the town - which most significantly stops at the top of 
Penglais Hill at the university, to save the march up and down the hill into 
town. Taxi services are plentiful, and the railway station is in the centre of 
town, ideally located next to the Wetherspoons.

There is a large local hospital at the bottom of the hill, as well as several 
doctors and dentists in town to cover all of your medical needs.

There are many supermarkets located around town, the most popular being the 
Co-Op next to the halls of residence, although there is a Somerfield and a 
24-hour Spar in town, as well as a Safeways on the local trading estate.

For the sports enthusiasts, there is a large local sports centre with an 
excellent swimming pool in addition to the university sports centre which 
offers extensive gym and fitness facilities.

What's it like as a place to study?
As a place to study, Aberystwyth is about as quiet a place as you're ever 
likely to find in Britain, except maybe the Shetland islands. With relatively 
few distractions compared to city universities, it is much easier to get work 
done.

Students have access to the Hugh Owen library on the main campus which houses 
over 1 million books, and will cater for most study needs for your full three 
years at the university. There is also a separate physics library, an education 
library at the old college in town, and the Welsh national library happens to 
be a stone's throw away from the university too, which just happens to house 
what seems like every book ever published ever.

Computer access is excellent, several halls of residence, (Rosser, Cwrt Mawr, 
Trefloyne, PJM) have access to the internet in each room, and 24-hour computer 
suites are available all around campus in case of emergency.

Bookshops are well catered for too. There is a major bookstore in the 
Aberystwyth arts centre on campus as well as several excellent local book 
stores in town to purchase course texts, (although from time to time, 
amazon.co.uk has bailed me out.)

What are the teaching staff like?
The staff members at both the university and in the students union are both 
very helpful. Most of the lecturers are friendly, sometimes funny and maybe 
even human, although there are a few which could be replaced by computers and 
you wouldn't notice their absence. The admin and finance staff are always ready 
to help you out of your financial crisis: they might not give you more money 
straight away, but they give good advice. Careers and job services are 
available to help you find part-time work in Aberystwyth in between your 
studies, and to help find you a job after you graduate. If you have any student 
concerns, you can discuss them with a union sabbatical officer or a counsellor. 
Overall, the majority of the staff are friendly and there to help you. Some can 
be frustrating from time to time, but hey, we all have our bad days.

What's the social life like?
Ah, the social life, or lack thereof. Aberystwyth is not renowned for its 
social life, although it does have one of the highest numbers of pubs per 
square mile anywhere in the country (63 I'm told). Anyway, the main student 
haunts tend to be the local Wetherspoons and Varsity. There are many local pubs 
which are excellent including the Castle Hotel (cheap vodka), the Ship & Castle 
(real ales), Rummers (politics students), the Academy (used to be a church), 
the Glen (bit of trek from town), the Bay (live music rocks) and the Pier (Inn 
on the Pier does great pizzas.) In terms of clubs, the main places downtown are 
Club Yoko's at the top of the high street, (pretentious, fancy bar, thinks it's 
in a city) and Pier Pressure, (cheaper than Yoko's, big dance floor, on a 
pier.) In competition with these two hubs of nightlife you have the union, 
which puts on several 'club' nights throughout the week and rotates theme 
nights on the weekends, (probably best in town, but get tickets in advance, 
otherwise long queues await).

What are the student societies like?
The student societies are many and diverse. Student media includes the 
Courier, Aberystwyth's student magazine and Bay Radio, the student radio 
station (although it only broadcasts to the union). Students can do everything 
from volunteering, to singing, drama, sailing, fencing, drinking to surfing.

There are several music societies, Indiesoc, Punksoc and Rocksoc, which are 
all very popular. There are many sports societies including American football, 
frisbee, badminton.

The best thing is though, if there isn't a society which appeals to your 
tastes, is to come and talk to the people in the union and they will help you 
set up your own society. But the societies that exist are all excellent, 
encouraging people to meet, interact, get drunk on socials and share the 
university experience. Brilliant.

What's the accommodation like?
 Student accommodation is generally cheap around Aber. Halls range from the 
ensuite (Rosser) to the uncarpeted (Cwrt Mawr) to the battery farm (Penbryn). 
Prices aren't too bad either, ranging from £50-70 per week. However, once you 
settle in, you find that it doesn't matter where you live, because everyone has 
a great time wherever they are. I personally lived in Rosser in my first year, 
and despite the added expense, (down to the ensuite facilities, bigger kitchen 
and carpets) it was fantastic.

In the second year most students live in town, forcing them to commute up the 
hill every day to get to the university. Not so great, but you do get good 
exercise out of it. Private sector accommodation is a lot more varied, and 
feels more like a home compared to the small hotel rooms in halls. Prices range 
from £30 on the seafront hovels, to £80 in the plush marina.

Living on your own is great, you're near to all the shops and pubs, and feel 
like part of the community rather than just a student at the university. The 
only downside is that you tend to see less of your hall mates than the first 
years, as everyone is spread out across the town.

Then in the final year most students opt to live in the student village back 
up by the university, which is basically a glorified housing estate. Here 
everyone is back together, to finish his or her final year in style. Families 
and disabled students are usually assigned to PJM as it is closer to the 
university, but less riotous and more spacious then the other halls.

What do the locals make of students?
The locals seem quite ambivalent towards the students. Sometimes they can be 
very friendly and pleasant to live with, then other time they can be a pain in 
the butt, most notably when they overrun the pubs and bars on weekends. But 
everyone mingles, gets along and lives happily in close personal community.

What's your favourite place in the university?
On a clear evening in the summer, you can sit on 'la scala' (a big staircase 
on the main campus concourse to sit on and socialise, and also a piece of art, 
apparently) and watch the sunset, whilst knocking back a cool beer. Peaceful, 
beautiful, magical.

What's the worst place?
Penbryn halls of residence. I personally like my space, and sharing a floor 
plate, a shower room and a small kitchen with over 20 people just doesn't do it 
for me. Plus the place is like some kind of weird labyrinth where you can be 
lost for hours - all the corridors look identical, you're never certain of 
which direction you're going in, and you can never find the damn exit.

What makes you proud of your university?
Aberystwyth is a place of community, it is a place which exists outside of 
civilisation, it is a place where for every 10 minutes in the real world an 
hour will have passed here. It is a place where you will meet some of your best 
friends, and where you will find a more simple way of life. You will leave a 
more relaxed person, less troubled by the crises of the world and more at ease 
with yourself and your direction in life.

And what makes you cringe about it?
The fact that once you arrive in Aber, unless you are lucky enough to have a 
car, you are trapped here for the entire term, unable to get fresh air or to 
escape from familiar faces. It exists at the end of the world, where there are 
no big shops, or cinemas, where the nightlife barely registers and where you 
are truly isolated from your parents (which maybe a good thing) and the rest of 
the world. The nearest major town is Swansea, two hours away by car or several 
hours by bus. Cardiff is two and a half hours by car, but no bus service goes 
from Aber to Cardiff, and the train goes via Shrewsbury. So in essence, if you 
come to Aber, you have to be prepared for the quiet life.

How would you recommend it to your little brother/sister?
I would recommend Aber to anyone. The university may not be the best in the 
country, but the courses are great, the people are fantastic and there's a 
beach. What more do you want?

And can you sum up the place in three words?
Quiet. Isolated. Community.
 