
Town 

Croeso i Gymru. Or, welcome to Wales. 50% of the population of Aberystwyth (or 
Aber, to its friends) are Welsh speakers, so a touch of bilingualism wouldn't 
go amiss. Only 10% of the university know their "bore" from their "prynhawn" 
though, thanks to the fact that most of them are English.

However you say it, there's no doubt that Aber is a beautiful and cosy - if 
remote - coastal town. It dates back to 1277 when Edward I started building the 
(now ruined) castle. Fishing, silver and lead mining have all been important 
here, and it enjoyed time as a fashionable seaside resort after the railway 
arrived in 1864 (it's still a seaside resort, but charter flights to the Costas 
have done for its fashionability).

Gown 

Aberystwyth was the first college of the University of Wales, founded in 1872, 
though the compact campus is mostly modern. It comes complete with centres for 
sport, music and art. The National Library of Wales, a copyright library, 
arrived in Aber in 1907. It's not part of the university but members get free 
access to its 6m titles, which makes research that much easier.

Top-rated teaching departments 

American studies, agriculture and forestry, geography and law are among its 
strongest performing subjects.

Top-rated research departments 

Politics and international studies and Celtic studies stand out, both having 
received a 5* rating in the 2001 RAE.

Celebrity academics 

The vice-chancellor, Derec Llwyd Morgan, is also a Welsh language poet and 
literary critic.

Head count 

Just over 7,000 students, a good balance of men to women (45:55) and a healthy 
state-to-independent ratio, too (92:8). Total number of academics is 319, with 
a male-to-female ratio of 77:23.

Academic pay 

A touch below middling. Arts professors on £42,000, language lecturers on 
£26,000 and science researchers actually doing quite well on £22,500.

Climate 

It's on the coast; you may expect a lot of weather. 

Transport links 

Trains can take forever, due to infrequent connections: Cardiff can take up to 
four hours, about the same to Bristol, five or so to London and as many as six 
to Swansea, which is under two hours in the car. Similarly, on four wheels it's 
two and a half hours to Cardiff, three to Bristol or Liverpool, though still 
five to London. Nip up to Holyhead in two and a half hours for the ferry to 
Dublin. Aber is small enough to make walking practical for most journeys, 
although buses link it with nearby towns.

Entertainment 

For a little place there's a lot going on, due to its twin roles as tourist 
destination and university town. Good job, too, as it's a fair old trek to the 
next big social centre. Much of the scene is pub-based - there's a wide 
selection. These bars support the thriving local music scene, hosting gigs and 
less formal gatherings. The university's arts centre is the largest in Wales 
and hosts film, theatre, dance, music, tours and other performances. There's a 
music centre and school of art gallery, too.

Town has the independent Commodore Cinema, a museum and the castle. The coast 
offers plenty of fun with the forces of wind and wave: surfing, windsurfing, 
kite-surfing. On a more sedate note, fishing is also popular, as are breezy 
walks taking in the view over Cardigan Bay, where you can try to spot 
bottlenose dolphins.

Schools 

You won't be agonising for hours over heaps of brochures and Ofsted reports: 
Aber has a grand total of five primaries and two secondary schools. Penglais is 
a mixed English language comprehensive, though Welsh is taught. Penweddig is 
the smaller Welsh school, with intense pride in its Welsh ethos. Both get 
excellent results.

House prices 

As you might expect, not too bad - though not at rock bottom. Average detached 
is £160,000; semi £129,000 and terrace £109,000.

What to say in the common room... 

Quote Douglas Adams, who, in The Meaning of Liff, defined Aberystwyth thus: "A 
nostalgic yearning which is in itself more pleasant than the thing being 
yearned for."

The essentials 

www.aber.ac.uk  <http://www.aber.ac.uk>

To order a copy of the Guardian University Guide 2004 for £14.99 with free UK 
p&p, call 0870-066 7850
 