
It's often difficult for school-leavers applying for apprenticeships as they 
may not have a wealth of work experience or previous jobs. While recruiters 
will certainly bear this in mind, there are other skills and personal 
characteristics you can highlight to wow them in your application and at the 
interview.

"We give many young people their first taste of work, so we understand that 
what they may lack in specific skills, they more than make up for in enthusiasm 
and an appetite to learn," says Jez Langhorn, senior vice president and chief 
people officer at McDonald's UK. "My advice would be not to worry about levels 
of experience and just let these qualities shine through."

The main thing employers are looking for in young people is a passion for 
their chosen industry, and their company. After all, they can train you in 
their systems, processes and knowledge specific to a role, but they can't give 
you genuine interest and enthusiasm or a willingness to work hard for them. 
These need to come from you.

Julie Taylor, National Careers Service 
<https://nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk/Pages/Home.aspx> adviser, says: 
"Employers are commonly looking for similar traits and characteristics in 
apprentices, regardless of the job role, including punctuality, reliability and 
having a real interest in the job, coupled with a willingness to learn."

Knowing and being able to explain exactly why you want the apprenticeship, 
apart from it being paid and a fantastic start to your career, is also key, so 
spend some time thinking about this. Researching the company and what the 
scheme will involve is just as important, as if you were applying for the 
second, third or fourth job of your career.

"For young people who haven't yet had a job, it's useful to know that many 
employers also value any voluntary work experience that a young person has had, 
particularly if it relates to that particular role or job sector – and it's 
even more highly regarded if this is something that the young person organised 
independently," says Julie Taylor.

When you're writing your application, it's worth going back to the job 
description, which will outline what the recruiter is looking for. Use this to 
pick the key things out, then refer to them in your application, showing how 
you have demonstrated those skills or qualities. Also think about what other 
skills you may have picked up at school, or elsewhere, that might benefit the 
employer. It may help to speak to someone who knows you well and ask them what 
you're good at.

"One area that many young people underestimate is their inherent digital 
expertise. Having grown up in the digital world, many tools and technologies 
are second nature to them. Now is the time to capitalise on these skills and 
show potential employers exactly how valuable they can be," says Ann Pickering, 
human resources director at O2.

When you're writing your applications, either online or as a paper CV and 
cover letter, you'll want to show how you have these key skills and qualities 
that recruiters are looking for.

Pickering says what impresses her the most is when she sees young people using 
technology to make a difference, whether it's through school, a community 
project or social activities with friends. "We believe there's never been a 
more exciting time to work in the mobile and telecoms industry, so if a 
candidate can show us how they're already making the most of their digital 
expertise it can really help them stand out," she says.

With competition so high, employers are also looking for the right sort of 
person to fit in with the team and company. If you visit the company's website 
you can normally find a section about their company values or people. And don't 
forget recruiters are usingstrengths-based interview questions 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/careers-blog/strengths-based-job-interviews> 
more and more, especially for young people who don't have much experience.

"We look for people with the right attitude, the right qualities and the 
desire to fulfil their potential – people who can stand out from the crowd and 
deliver the high standards of quality and service expected in our restaurants. 
Our apprenticeship takes at least 12 months to complete, so apprentices need to 
be dedicated, eager to learn, and keen to combine hands on work with part-time 
study," says McDonald's Jez Langhorn.

Like any other job you might apply for, apprenticeship schemes use online 
applications, phone interviews, one-to-one and group interviews, as well as 
assessment centres. As scary as these may seem, it's important once you've done 
your preparation to try and be yourself.

"It's not just a one-way process. We want to make sure applicants know enough 
about O2 and our scheme to make an informed decision. That's why we invite them 
and their parents to an immersion session so we can bring the roles to life and 
show what it's like to work for us. We're looking for our apprentices to lead 
our business in the future, so it's important that they want to be there as 
much as we do," says Ann Pickering.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 