
Thermodynamics is the study of heat and energy. At its heart are laws that 
describe how energy moves around within a system, whether an atom, a hurricane 
or a black hole. The first law describes how energy cannot be created or 
destroyed, merely transformed from one kind to another. The second law, 
however, is probably better known and even more profound because it describes 
the limits of what the universe can do. This law is about inefficiency, 
degeneration and decay. It tells us all we do is inherently wasteful and that 
there are irreversible processes in the universe. It gives us an arrow for time 
and tells us that our universe has a inescapably bleak, desolate fate.

Despite these somewhat deflating ideas, the ideas of thermodynamics were 
formulated in a time of great technological optimism – the Industrial 
Revolution. In the mid-19th century, physicists and engineers were building 
steam engines to mechanise work and transport and were trying to work out how 
to make them more powerful and efficient.

Many scientists and engineers – including Rudolf Clausius, James Joule and 
Lord Kelvin – contributed to the development of thermodynamics, but the father 
of the discipline was the French physicist Sadi Carnot. In 1824 he published
Reflections on the Motive Power of Fire, which laid down the basic principles, 
gleaned from observations of how energy moved around engines and how wasted 
heat and useful work were related.

The second law can be expressed in several ways, the simplest being that heat 
will naturally flow from a hotter to a colder body. At its heart is a property 
of thermodynamic systems called entropy – in the equations above it is 
represented by "S" – in loose terms, a measure of the amount of disorder within 
a system. This can be represented in many ways, for example in the arrangement 
of the molecules – water molecules in an ice cube are more ordered than the 
same molecules after they have been heated into a gas. Whereas the water 
molecules were in a well-defined lattice in the ice cube, they float 
unpredictably in the gas. The entropy of the ice cube is, therefore, lower than 
that of the gas. Similarly, the entropy of a plate is higher when it is in 
pieces on the floor compared with when it is in one piece in the sink.

A more formal definition for entropy as heat moves around a system is given in 
the first of the equations. The infinitesimal change in entropy of a system 
(dS) is calculated by measuring how much heat has entered a closed system (δQ) 
divided by the common temperature (T) at the point where the heat transfer took 
place.

The second equation is a way to express the second law of thermodynamics in 
terms of entropy. The formula says that the entropy of an isolated natural 
system will always tend to stay the same or increase – in other words, the 
energy in the universe is gradually moving towards disorder. Our original 
statement of the second law emerges from this equation: heat cannot 
spontaneously flow from a cold object (low entropy) to a hot object (high 
entropy) in a closed system because it would violate the equation. 
(Refrigerators seemingly break this rule since they can freeze things to much 
lower temperatures than the air around them. But they don't violate the second 
law because they are not isolated systems, requiring a continual input of 
electrical energy to pump heat out of their interior. The fridge heats up the 
room around it and, if unplugged, would naturally return to thermal equilibrium 
with the room.)

This formula also imposes a direction on to time; whereas every other physical 
law we know of would work the same whether time was going forwards or 
backwards, this is not true for the second law of thermodynamics. However long 
you leave it, a boiling pan of water is unlikely to ever become a block of ice. 
A smashed plate could never reassemble itself, as this would reduce the entropy 
of the system in defiance of the second law of thermodynamics. Some processes, 
Carnot observed, are irreversible.

Carnot examined steam engines, which work by burning fuel to heat up a 
cylinder containing steam, which expands and pushes on a piston to then do 
something useful. The portion of the fuel's energy that is extracted and made 
to do something useful is called work, while the remainder is the wasted (and 
disordered) energy we call heat. Carnot showed that you could predict the 
theoretical maximum efficiency of a steam engine by measuring the difference in 
temperatures of the steam inside the cylinder and that of the air around it, 
known in thermodynamic terms as the hot and cold reservoirs of a system 
respectively.

Heat engines work because heat naturally flows from hot to cold places. If 
there was no cold reservoir towards which it could move there would be no heat 
flow and the engine would not work. Because the cold reservoir is always above 
absolute zero, no heat engine can be 100% efficient.

The best-designed engines, therefore, heat up steam (or other gas) to the 
highest possible temperature then release the exhaust at the lowest possible 
temperature. The most modern steam engines can get to around 60% efficiency and 
diesel engines in cars can get to around 50% efficient. Petrol-based internal 
combustion engines are much more wasteful of their fuel's energy.

The inefficiencies are built into any system using energy and can be described 
thermodynamically. This wasted energy means that the overall disorder of the 
universe – its entropy – will increase over time but at some point reach a 
maximum. At this moment in some unimaginably distant future, the energy in the 
universe will be evenly distributed and so, for all macroscopic purposes, will 
be useless. Cosmologists call this the "heat death" of the universe, an 
inevitable consequence of the unstoppable march of entropy.
 