
So now that autumn is pretty much upon us, what are the big trends this season?
Mary-Catherine, by email

Well, Mary-Catherine, as if it's not enough that you cram two names into one, 
you ask a veritable mothership of a question, one that magazines this month 
take more than 400 pages to resolve, whereas we merely have this paltry column. 
Truly, it is quite overwhelming. I need to sit down for a second.

Right, that's better. OK, I just don't think I can handle this on my own, so 
I'm going to have to defer this question to the noble fashion council. Sorry, 
Mary-Catherine. I guess I just needed a bigger boat today.

Alexandra Shulman: Right, order, order! What are we decreeing is de rigueur 
for the next six months?

Alexa Chung: Pink! Lots of pink coats! I saw loads of them in the collection 
and they were GORGE.

Shulman (rolling her eyes): Yes, thank you, Alexa. That's all well and good 
for gamine young things like you, but for the rest of us who don't want to look 
like Grayson Perry, any thoughts?

Marc Jacobs: Yeah, I'm, like, really feeling the kind of dishevelled vibe, you 
know? Like, a super-sexy woman in a hotel who goes out in the middle of the 
night in just her negligee and a fur coat? That vibe is coming through really 
strongly for me. Is anyone doing a Starbucks run?

Shulman: Riiiiiight, thanks for that, Marc. Anyone have any thoughts for those 
of us who aren't Charlotte Rampling?

Miuccia Prada: Si, dishevelled, si! But not negligees, no. More, um, how you 
say, jumpers. Si, jumpers.

Shulman (perking up): Ooh, jumpers are good! Carry on, Miuccia.

Prada: Si, jumpers. A very thick cardigan. Then over the cardigan you wear a 
gold leather bodice and then a giant tartan coat. It's a mix of frumpy and 
sexy, you see?

Shulman: Er, right. Stefano Gabbana and Domenico Dolce? Do you want to 
contribute anything?

Domenico Dolce: Molto, molto gold!

Stefano Gabbana: E molto religious.

Dolce e Gabbana: Si si, the donne – scusa – the ladies should look like the 
roofs of grand cathedrals. Molto bella e molto sexy!

Shulman (head hitting her hands in despair): Uh, Karl? You want to step in?

Karl Lagerfeld (his ponytail is perfectly powdered, he is wearing giant 
sunglasses and a plump white cat sits in his lap, which he strokes with the 
menacing solemnity of a Bond villain): Over-the-knee boots. Chic.

Shulman: Right, that was, um, brief.

Lagerfeld: Brief is chic.

Shulman: Sure.

(Suddenly, a chill enters the room and everyone freezes. Everyone, even Karl 
Lagerfeld, looks momentarily terrified. Welcome, Anna Wintour.)

Shulman: Ah, Anna. How kind of you to make an appearance at the council. We're 
just …

Anna Wintour (pointing her finger imperiously, like Cruella de Vil): Silence! 
I know, of course, what you are talking about. And I have come to tell you 
this: the trends for this coming season will be extremely expensive furs, very 
high-heeled shoes and full-length ballgowns. Now I'm off to eat a raw cow for 
lunch. Good day!

(Exit Anna Wintour.)

Shulman: Well! Always nice to get a visit from our overlord. But perhaps we 
need a younger perspective. Not you, Alexa, and yes, I have already noted down 
your vote for peter pan collars. How about you, Cara?

Cara Delevingne (slumped in her seat, wearing a giant alligator onesie with a 
beanie on her head and gigantic Adidas trainers sticking out of the alligator's 
tail): Um, like, cropped tops and onesies?

Shulman (realising perhaps the voice of youth is a little overrated): Well! 
Maybe we'll get some words from the quieter women in the room. Phoebe?

Phoebe Philo: Whisper whisper whisper.

Shulman: Can you speak up, perhaps?

Philo: Whisper whisper whisper.

Shulman: Er, great, thanks for that, Phoebe. Look, does anyone have anything 
the least bit useful to add here? Rei?

Rei Kawakubo, the founder of Comme des Garçons: Weird pink kaleidoscope prints!

Shulman: Hedi?

Hedi Slimane, designer for Saint Laurent: Grunge and tuxedos!

Shulman: Tom?

Tom Ford: Sex!

Shulman: Philip?

Philip Green, CEO of Topshop: Hotpants!

Shulman: Mickey?

Mickey Drexler, CEO of J Crew: Preppy!

Shulman: Oh, for pity's sake … How about if we just tell them that tweed is 
back, coats are crucial, there's a bit of colour about, a bit of sexiness, 
fashion is fun, hemlines are both high and low, yadda yadda yadda. Will that 
do? Everyone happy with that?

(Non-committal grunts from the council.)

Shulman: Good – meeting adjourned. And Marc? Get me a latte from Starbucks.
 