
Like all new recruits on their first day, I'd been told to turn up 
"appropriately dressed and to be ready for anything". My assignment was to 
follow the footsteps of a 17-year-old apprentice in the support services team 
at one of London's best known and busiestNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> trusts, Guy's and St Thomas'. Knowing 
that I might need to slip on a uniform or sterile apron, I decided to exchange 
my usual businesswear for casual clothes and sensible, flat shoes!

I was met by the impeccably turned out, award-winning apprentice, David 
Lammas, who is working towards a level 2 certificate in support services in 
healthcare. I was instantly bowled over by his obvious competence and 
professional manner.

David's placement at Guy's and St Thomas', which started last July, has 
brought him to the hospital's inspiring Simon Hotel, accommodation designed to 
provide a safe and relaxing non-clinical environment for patients (either pre 
or post treatment) and families supporting a relative.

David explained that if the team caring for a patient feels they no longer 
need to stay on a medical ward – but still needs to remain close to the 
hospital for follow up care – the "lodge" provides the ideal half-way house.

He told me all about the experience he had gained training with the hospital 
catering teams and the housekeeping department but it was his current admin 
role in accommodation services and manning the main reception desk at the Simon 
Hotel that was giving him a clear steer towards a career path he now wants to 
pursue in the health sector.

After many years' experience in training, teaching and workforce development, 
I don't think I've witnessed such assured confidence in a young person and in 
such a potentially demanding position. David was quick to thank the support and 
encouragement he constantly receives from his team, as well as this expert 
hands-on training he feels he is so lucky to receive as part of his 
apprenticeship.

The National Skills Academy for Health <http://www.nsahealth.org.uk/> was 
officially launched last September and, alongside our own apprentice training 
agency, we are here to help NHS trusts, and other healthcare providers, take on 
apprentices. We help to guide them through the red tape, which can sometimes be 
off-putting, and ensure they are securing the very best in training and 
qualifications for their new recruits.

With a real prospect of permanent employment at the end of a 12-month 
apprenticeship scheme, this unique form of training – where you earn as you 
learn – is fast becoming a popular option for school leavers across the UK. 
Latest data published by the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills 
show there were 520,600 apprenticeship starts in the 2011-12 academic year – 
with health and social care remaining the most popular sector (67,020 new 
starts).

This underlines the fact that more young people are considering this route as 
a viable alternative to university. They tell us they are simply reluctant to 
take on the debt associated with three years of further education – often with 
no guarantee of a job at the end. Others just "want a break" from formal 
education or perhaps want to get stuck into work and start making their way up 
the career ladder.

What became clear to me though – after spending just one day with one of the 
35 apprentices employed by Guy's and St Thomas' – is that their enthusiasm, 
skills, insight and total commitment to raising the standards of patient care 
should not be underestimated or undervalued.

These young apprentices are the workforce of the future and organisations such 
as the NSAHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and hospital 
trusts should be harnessing and developing such talent.

I often hear it said that having a young trainee entering your workplace 
creates a real energy and buzz and helps to keep everyone on their toes.

We can learn from them as much as they will learn from us and our years of 
experience. Indeed, what I learned from David is that there is no such thing as 
a traditional route into the workplace and by being brave and stepping off the 
"sixth form, A-level, university" conveyor belt that he felt just wasn't right 
for him, he is now thriving in a bespoke and rewarding training programme that 
he will leave qualified, experienced and probably several rungs further up than 
many of his contemporaries.

I enjoyed my day shadowing David so much that I am now pledging to leave my 
desk and do it more often – meeting and shadowing young apprentices from a 
range of roles. And, I've invited David back to spend a day shadowing me, with 
the team at NSA Health head office, where he will sit in – and hopefully 
contribute to – some key meetings and understanding how and why we make 
decisions and run things the way we do.

Candace Miller is director of the National Skills Academy for Health  
<http://www.nsahealth.org.uk/>

 This article is published by Guardian Professional. Join the Healthcare 
Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/> to receive regular 
emails and exclusive offers
 