
Q Five years ago my husband and I were getting further and further into debt. 
We explained this to our bank, Lloyds TSB, but all they would help us with was 
short-term reduced payments.

Since we were lumbered with four credit cards and two loans, all with Lloyds 
TSB, we contacted an insolvency practitioner. He told us to stop making 
repayments, and said that he would speak to each department of the bank to 
which we owed money.

Unfortunately we didn't keep the paper work. As far as we were concerned, our 
debts were sorted out, with greatly reduced payments. We also thought the two 
loans were lumped into one. However, a year later I received a County Court 
Judgement regarding them.

This was the only correspondence that I ever received. Can you please advise 
me in this matter?

JK

A This is a cautionary tale about making sure that you understand the 
documents that you are signing, and the implications of the financial actions 
you have taken. It sounds as though the insolvency practitioner did not keep 
you fully informed of all the options that you had - although it is very 
difficult for me to make a judgement without seeing the relevant paperwork.

What's more, you are in a difficult position because although all your debts 
appeared to be sorted out, you don't have any records to show how you have been 
repaying them.

Your first step is to go back to the insolvency practitioner and ask him to 
send you a complete copy of all the documents involved in your case. Then make 
an appointment to see a money adviser at your local Citizens Advice Bureau. 
Take along these documents and show the adviser, who will be able to explain to 
you the legal and financial implications of what you have signed. He or she 
will also be able to advise you on what future action you should take.

In the future, be careful about signing agreements which have not been 
properly explained to you, or which you do not understand. Small print often 
contains hidden clauses which end up costing you much more than you think, and 
a good adviser or practitioner will be only too happy to spell them out to you. 
If they are reluctant to do this, you have reason to be wary of their advice.
 