
The Folio prize <https://www.theguardian.com/books/folio-prize> shortlist has 
been greeted with the kind of headlines that literary editors may yet be able 
to dust off later in the year when the Booker announces its longlist: Americans 
dominate. Five of the eight books shortlisted for the £40,000 award are by US 
authors – along with one Canadian, one Brit and one Irish author – which sounds 
about right, given the numbers involved. There are a lot more Americans than 
Brits writing books because there are a lot more Americans, full stop. They 
outnumber us by about five to one, as they do on the shortlist.

The prize was set up in response to the 2011 Man Booker shortlist, which 
disregarded too many literary big-hitters (previous winners Alan Hollinghurst 
andAnne Enright <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-enright> were among the 
snubbed) in favour of a word barely spoken without a sneer: readability. It is, 
of course, worth bearing in mind that whatever reservations people had about 
the list as a whole, the 2011 Booker prize was won by the undeniable literary 
heavyweight, Julian Barnes. It's also worth mentioning that "readability" is an 
odd insult to level at a book. Do any novelists, except the most experimental 
and avant garde, ever set out to write a book which is unreadable?

Certainly, Enright wrote an enormously readable book that year, in The 
Forgotten Waltz. It's a glorious, racing love affair between two people who 
should know better, set against Ireland's equally destructive infatuation with 
ever more expensive property. As the property market and the love affair spun 
dangerously out of control, the novel was never less than compelling. I should 
know: I was part of the Orange prize judging panel which shortlisted it in 2012.

And the Folio prize shortlist looks pretty readable too, though readability 
must be a subjective term. Through a combination of reviewing and 
prize-judging, I have read something like 300 novels in the past two and a half 
years, and virtually none of them was unreadable, aside from the proof copies 
set in the world's smallest type (that's my tip for publishers submitting their 
books: make sure the judges can read your book. Sounds easy, but for some it 
proved surprisingly difficult. And yes, publisher who submitted an ineligible 
book, taped inside the dust jacket of an eligible book, I mean you).

This year's Folio judges have read 80 books, which is just over half of the 
151 submitted to the Man Booker prize last year. The downside is that fewer 
books are being considered and some great ones might therefore be missed. The 
upside is that the judges won't be fighting the clock every moment, and that 
can only help.

The real problem with every prize I've judged (Orange, Man Booker, and now the 
Independent ForeignFiction <https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction> prize) 
is how to get to the good stuff without becoming bogged down in the sheer, 
crushing number of books. On top of that is the problem of repetition. 
Publishers tend to submit what they think the judges may like and, 
unsurprisingly, many make very similar choices. One year, I read so many scenes 
of gang-rape by Nazis that I began to wonder how they'd found time to invade 
Poland.

In which case, the Folio prize is off to a good start: by removing the 
submissions from publishers and relying on recommendations from an academy, 
they may have managed to skip some of the samey stuff. The only problem is, 
they might also have missed some tremendous books by authors who aren't 
sufficiently well known to be read by the 200 people who have a say.

But any prize that focuses attention on the wonderful Anne Carson 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/anne-carson> (whose illustrated Antigone I 
once gave away to a woman who told me, simply, that she longed for it) can only 
be a good thing. All prizes are subjective and the point of them is to bring 
more books to our attention. Readers and writers can ask for nothing more.
 