
How can an author navigate the competing imperatives of art, commerce and the 
public in theFacebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> age?

In a provocation delivered at the Manchester literature festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/19/joanne-harris-issues-call-for-greater-respect-from-readers>
 on Monday night, the novelist Joanne Harris complained that the digital age 
has left some readers feeling a misplaced sense that writers were required to 
be permanently available to their audience. In this new world, Harris proposed 
a 12-point writer’s manifesto, a compact between author and reader in which – 
among other pledges – she promised her readers “not to be aloof whenever you 
reach out to me – be that on social media or outside, in the real world”.


This promise was followed immediately by a caveat, the author reminding 
readers that she’s “human too – and some days I’m impatient, or tired, or 
sometimes I just run out of time”. But it’s clear Harris feels there’s some 
kind of obligation on authors to respond, to engage with readers who send them 
a tweet or track them down at a literary festival.


Joanne Harris issues call for greater respect from readers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/19/joanne-harris-issues-call-for-greater-respect-from-readers>
Authors may be struggling with the demands of the online world, but the writer 
AL Kennedy, who joined Twitter <https://twitter.com/Writerer> a year before 
Harris in 2009 and posts regularly on politics and the writing life, isn’t 
convinced that new forms of communication have imposed any new duties on them 
to connect with their audience. Readers should, of course, be offered the same 
courtesy any human being can expect from another, Kennedy says, but any 
engagement beyond the “usual human stuff” depends on the author.


“If you’re not that sociable, then it’s hard to fake sociability. I know some 
authors who would be their own worst enemy if they had to be very outgoing in 
certain contexts and who avoid them like the plague as a result.”


There may be some obligation to communicate for writers who are “involved in 
public life and [have] louder than average voices when it came to communicating 
with institutions”, Kennedy continues, “but that’s not necessarily all about 
writers being lovely and altruistic – anything that a writer does with the 
public might potentially increase their sales, or visibility.” A higher profile 
doesn’t always translate into higher sales, Kennedy adds, with some readers 
becoming disenchanted with authors because of their politics, or for other 
reasons. “I think that social media audiences have a fairly low tolerance for 
naked marketing disguised as chat, or activism.”


Emily St John Mandel <https://twitter.com/EmilyMandel> is another novelist and 
long-time Twitter user who says she enjoys interacting with readers, but 
doesn’t consider it a duty.


“Our sole obligation to readers is to write the best books that we possibly 
can,” she says. Mandel is always happy to “exchange a few words with readers 
when I meet them in person”, citing a tour to promote her novel Station Eleven 
that has involved 109 events in six countries, but attests to the increasing 
pressure on writers “to market ourselves, which in practical terms has 
translated to making ourselves available to fans via email and social media”. 
It may be easier than ever to talk with readers, librarians and booksellers, 
she continues, but “more time spent interacting with strangers on the internet 
means less time spent writing”.


More time spent interacting with strangers on the internet means less time 
spent writing
Emily St John Mandel 
“The only way I can get any serious work done is by limiting my availability 
online. I took the email address off my website because I found that I could 
either respond to emails all day or write, but not both, and am much less 
active on social media than I used to be.


“I’ve been avoiding Twitter lately, because I want to make some headway on my 
next book and findTwitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> too 
distracting. I deleted my Facebook account a few months back for the same 
reason.”


For all the dizzying whirl of the internet revolution, Kennedy isn’t sure all 
that much has changed.


“I no longer get many letters from readers, but now I get tweets or emails,” 
she says. “I haven’t noticed the numbers rising, despite – I suppose – the 
increased ease of communication. I think people are still a little nervous 
around strangers or people they feel will be standoffish, or busy, or adversely 
affected by their own famousness or whatever.”


Publishers and agents have always passed on letters, even from “unusual 
people” – usually enclosing “an apologetic note with the clearly strange 
letters”.


“Twitter reaches you faster,” says Kennedy, “but you don’t have to touch the 
same paper as an odd person or deal with their personal enclosures. In a way, 
the contact has been reduced.”


The rise of the literary festival means that there are many more opportunities 
for readers to see their favourite authors in the flesh, but “that’s not the 
same as knowing someone or spending real time with them”, Kennedy continues, 
and there’s little scope for any confusion: “Seeing me read is no more meeting 
me (although it’s billed that way sometimes) than my going to watch Benedict 
Cumberbatch being Hamlet would be me meeting Cumberbatch – it’s just being in a 
big room with him and staring.”


Kennedy prefers to take the long view, arguing that concerns over a new 
accommodation between writers and readers offer the familiar spectacle of an 
online version of a real-world phenomenon making us all “run about saying it’s 
different in some fundamental way”.


“I don’t suppose I tour as much as Dickens did,” she adds.


The writer Colm Tóibín is another who cautions against giving the 
opportunities afforded by the online world too much importance. He has watched 
the rise of literary festivals and the internet since he published his first 
novel in 1990, and has grown used tolive webchats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2012/dec/07/colm-toibin-live-webchat>
 andAsk Me Anythings 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/3olcj4/hello_im_colm_t%C3%B3ib%C3%ADn_ask_me_anything/>
. But Tóibín prefers to focus on Harris’s determination to deliver work “the 
best I could make it” rather than observe the duty Harris proposes that writers 
should connect with readers.


“I think your main responsibility is to your sentences, to work as best you 
can,” Tóibín says, “everything else is secondary.”


Joanne Harris’s manifesto

1. I promise to be honest, unafraid and true; but most of all, to be true to 
myself – because trying to be true to anyone else is not only impossible, but 
the sign of a fearful writer.

 2. I promise not to sell out - not even if you ask me to.

 3. You may not always like what I write, but know that it has always been the 
best I could make it at the time.

 4. Know too that sometimes I will challenge you and pull you out of your 
comfort zone, because this is how we learn and grow. I can’t promise you’ll 
always feel safe or at ease – but we’ll be uneasy together.

 5. I promise to follow my story wherever it leads me, even to the darkest of 
places.

 6. I will not limit my audience to just one group or demographic. Stories are 
for everyone, and everyone is welcome here.

 7. I will include people of all kinds in my stories, because people are 
infinitely fascinating and diverse.

 8. I promise that I will never flinch from trying something different and new 
– even if the things I try are not always successful.

 9. I will never let anyone else decide what I should write, or how – not the 
market, my publishers, my agent, or even you, the reader. And though you 
sometimes try to tell me otherwise, I don’t think you really want me to.

 10. I promise not to be aloof whenever you reach out to me – be that on 
social media or outside, in the real world. But remember that I’m human too – 
and some days I’m impatient, or tired, or sometimes I just run out of time.

 11. I promise never to forget what I owe my readers. Without you, I’m just 
words on a page. Together, we make a dialogue.

 12. But ultimately, you have the choice whether or not to follow me. I will 
open the door for you. But I will never blame you if you choose not to walk 
through it.
 