
The uncertainty principle is one of the most famous (and probably 
misunderstood) ideas in physics. It tells us that there is a fuzziness in 
nature, a fundamental limit to what we can know about the behaviour of quantum 
particles and, therefore, the smallest scales of nature. Of these scales, the 
most we can hope for is to calculate probabilities for where things are and how 
they will behave. Unlike Isaac Newton's clockwork universe, where everything 
follows clear-cut laws on how to move and prediction is easy if you know the 
starting conditions, the uncertainty principle enshrines a level of fuzziness 
into quantum theory.

Werner Heisenberg 
<http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1932/heisenberg-bio.html>
's simple idea tells us why atoms don't implode, how the sun manages to shine 
and, strangely, that the vacuum of space is not actually empty.

An early incarnation of the uncertainty principle appeared in a 1927 paper by 
Heisenberg, a German physicist who was working atNiels Bohr 
<http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1922/bohr-bio.html>'s 
institute in Copenhagen at the time, titled "On the Perceptual Content of 
Quantum Theoretical Kinematics and Mechanics 
<http://www.britannica.com/nobelprize/article-279991>". The more familiar form 
of the equation came a few years later when he had further refined his thoughts 
in subsequent lectures and papers.

Heisenberg was working through the implications of quantum theory, a strange 
new way of explaining how atoms behaved that had been developed by physicists, 
including Niels Bohr, Paul Dirac and Erwin Schrödinger, over the previous 
decade. Among its many counter-intuitive ideas, quantum theory proposed that 
energy was not continuous but instead came in discrete packets (quanta) and 
that light could be described as both a wave and a stream of these

quanta. In fleshing out this radical worldview, Heisenberg discovered a 
problem in the way that the basic physical properties of a particle in a 
quantum system could be measured. In one of his regular letters to a colleague, 
Wolfgang Pauli, he presented the inklings of an idea that has since became a 
fundamental part of the quantum description of the world.

The uncertainty principle says that we cannot measure the position (x) and the 
momentum (p) of a particle with absolute precision. The more accurately we know 
one of these values, the less accurately we know the other. Multiplying 
together the errors in the measurements of these values (the errors are 
represented by the triangle symbol in front of each property, the Greek letter 
"delta") has to give a number greater than or equal to half of a constant 
called "h-bar". This is equal to Planck's constant (usually written as h) 
divided by 2π. Planck's constant is an important number in quantum theory, a 
way to measure the granularity of the world at its smallest scales and it has 
the value 6.626 x 10-34 joule seconds.

One way to think about the uncertainty principle is as an extension of how we 
see and measure things in the everyday world. You can read these words because 
particles of light, photons, have bounced off the screen or paper and reached 
your eyes. Each photon on that path carries with it some information about the 
surface it has bounced from, at the speed of light. Seeing a subatomic 
particle, such as an electron, is not so simple. You might similarly bounce a 
photon off it and then hope to detect that photon with an instrument. But 
chances are that the photon will impart some momentum to the electron as it 
hits it and change the path of the particle you are trying to measure. Or else, 
given that quantum particles often move so fast, the electron may no longer be 
in the place it was when the photon originally bounced off it. Either way, your 
observation of either position or momentum will be inaccurate and, more 
important, the act of observation affects the particle being observed.

The uncertainty principle is at the heart of many things that we observe but 
cannot explain using classical (non-quantum) physics. Take atoms, for example, 
where negatively-charged electrons orbit a positively-charged nucleus. By 
classical logic, we might expect the two opposite charges to attract each 
other, leading everything to collapse into a ball of particles. The uncertainty 
principle explains why this doesn't happen: if an electron got too close to the 
nucleus, then its position in space would be precisely known and, therefore, 
the error in measuring its position would be minuscule. This means that the 
error in measuring its momentum (and, by inference, its velocity) would be 
enormous. In that case, the electron could be moving fast enough to fly out of 
the atom altogether.

Heisenberg's idea can also explain a type of nuclear radiation called alpha 
decay. Alpha particles are two protons and two neutrons emitted by some heavy 
nuclei, such as uranium-238. Usually these are bound inside the heavy nucleus 
and would need lots of energy to break the bonds keeping them in place. But, 
because an alpha particle inside a nucleus has a very well-defined velocity, 
its position is not so well-defined. That means there is a small, but non-zero, 
chance that the particle could, at some point, find itself outside the nucleus, 
even though it technically does not have enough energy to escape. When this 
happens – a process metaphorically known as "quantum tunneling" because the 
escaping particle has to somehow dig its way through an energy barrier that it 
cannot leap over – the alpha particle escapes and we see radioactivity.

A similar quantum tunnelling process happens, in reverse, at the centre of our 
sun, where protons fuse together and release the energy that allows our star to 
shine. The temperatures at the core of the sun are not high enough for the 
protons to have enough energy to overcome their mutual electric repulsion. But, 
thanks to the uncertainty principle, they can tunnel their way through the 
energy barrier.

Perhaps the strangest result of the uncertainty principle is what it says 
about vacuums. Vacuums are often defined as the absence of everything. But not 
so in quantum theory. There is an inherent uncertainty in the amount of energy 
involved in quantum processes and in the time it takes for those processes to 
happen. Instead of position and momentum, Heisenberg's equation can also be 
expressed in terms of energy and time. Again, the more constrained one variable 
is, the less constrained the other is. It is therefore possible that, for very, 
very short periods of time, a quantum system's energy can be highly uncertain, 
so much that particles can appear out of the vacuum. These "virtual particles" 
appear in pairs – an electron and its antimatter pair, the positron, say – for 
a short while and then annihilate each other. This is well within the laws of 
quantum physics, as long as the particles only exist fleetingly and disappear 
when their time is up. Uncertainty, then, is nothing to worry about in quantum 
physics and, in fact, we wouldn't be here if this principle didn't exist.
 