
Maxwell's Equations first appeared in "A dynamical theory of the 
electromagnetic field", Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London, in 1865. These are the equations of light, the mathematical 
relationships that showed us how to electrify our world and transmit energy and 
information through the air.

At the start of the 19th century, we lit our homes and offices with candles 
and oil lamps. Communications took the form of handwritten letters that took 
days to travel across the country, and several weeks across oceans. Today we 
use electricity to power everything and radio waves to talk to each other, 
anywhere around the world, instantaneously.

The seeds of that enormous change were planted in the 1830s, when the British 
physicist Michael Faraday built electric motors and showed that two natural 
forces, electricity and magnetism, were related. He proposed that these forces 
existed as "fields" that permeated space. In the latter half of the 19th 
century, the Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell formulated the equations 
that described these fields.

Maxwell modelled the fields as if they were invisible fluids that filled 
space. At each point in space, the electric field has a direction and a 
strength that can be measured if you put something there that can feel the 
effects of the field – an electron, say. If you could somehow measure the field 
at every point in space, you would know how it flowed and changed.

The two equations on the left in the picture show that the net flow of 
electric (E) and magnetic (H) field out of a closed volume of space, away from 
any electrical charges or magnetic materials, is zero. The triangle and dot 
symbol in front of the field symbols (called the "divergence" operator) is a 
mathematical way to measure if a field behaves as a source or a sink at a 
specific point in space.

The equation for the magnetic field (H) stays the same even when there's a 
magnet around – think of a bar magnet, the magnetic field lines around it start 
at the north pole and circle their way around to the south pole. And these 
field lines will always stop and start at a magnetic object, they do not appear 
or disappear in empty space.

The equation for the electrical field (E) is slightly different, though, when 
there are electrical charges around. A positive charge is a net source of 
electric fields and a negative charge is a sink. In that case, the net amount 
of field coming out of or into a volume is proportional to the charge contained 
within it.

The two equations on the right explain what happens when you move an 
electrical or magnetic field. The "curl" operator (the triangle and x symbol in 
combination) on the left of each equation is a way to measure a field moving in 
a tiny circle. A changing electric field (E) produces a changing magnetic field 
(H). And vice versa. The curly d/dts on the right measure a rate of change, a 
tiny change in a field (E or H) divided by a tiny change in time (t).

These equations are the basis of electromagnetic induction, the idea that if 
you move a magnet near an electrical conductor (or vice versa), you generate 
electricity. The electricity you use every day is made like this, using 
generators that work according to these equations.

Which leaves us with the letter "c" on the right side of the second two 
equations. This is a constant with a value of about 300,000 kilometres per 
second, which just happens to be the speed of light.

Bear in mind Maxwell did not put this in there because he was studying light; 
the number just popped out, unexpectedly, from the mathematics of the materials 
he was studying.

Maxwell had started by examining the properties of electricity and magnetism 
and stumbled upon a much deeper truth about them: the electromagnetic field was 
a medium for waves that, like ripples across the surface of a pond, travelled 
at a speed "c". And the light we see is one of those electromagnetic waves.

That meant there should be other electromagnetic waves. The wavelengths we can 
detect with our eyes appear to us as colours. Shorter wavelengths of light 
include UV and gamma rays.

Longer wavelengths include heat (infra-red waves), microwaves and radio waves. 
The latter, of course, are the communications method of the 20th century – 
everything from radios to televisions to radar to mobile phones are based on 
our manipulation of the electromagnetic field, as described by Maxwell's 
equations.
 