 "I always said that I would have a big think about my life before I'm 40," 
says Alan McGee, "well, I'm 39, so I'm having a big think about it." This is 
clearly a very, very big think. For 17 years, McGee's life has revolved around 
Creation Records. He founded the label and brought us Primal Scream, Jesus & 
Mary Chain, My Bloody Valentine, and Teenage Fanclub. More than anything, he 
brought us Oasis.
Now, he is leaving it all behind. It was announced yesterday that he will quit 
Creation in the new year, along with his partner Dick Green. What will happen 
to the label and to Oasis, is unclear.

McGee's private offices in the extremely fashionable north London 
neighbourhood of Primrose Hill (round the corner to Creation's much shabbier 
offices) are littered with signs of his success - a very 90s, very tasteful, 
very New Labour, and dare we say it, very cool Britannia kind of success.

The coffee table carries vintage copies of Life magazine and a toy ray gun. On 
the wall hang Oasis platinum discs, a Peter Blake print, signed football 
shirts, a Jimmy Cliff poster (he is a massive reggae fan), a photo of Paul 
Weller and a cutting from the Daily Mail, headlined 'Tony's Friends', where he 
is described simply as 'The Drug User'.

For most in the music industry, McGee's achievements would be more than 
enough, thank you very much. He has pretty much done it all, from signing one 
of the world's biggest bands to nearly killing himself with drugs.

For McGee, however, all this has simply been the start. And he now plans to 
relaunch himself. Forget Alan McGee record company boss, here isAlan McGee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alan-mcgee> multi-media entrepreneur.

Exactly why he has announced he is leaving now is unclear. He was due to start 
renegotiating with Sony (which part owns Creation) next year, but seems to have 
decided that there was going to be more to his life than simply running a 
record label.

"The way that I perceive the future," he says, "is having a record company, 
having a publishing company, having my internet start-up companies, having a 
film company and having a management company. The future for me is multi-media; 
the future is not being one-dimensional and having one record company. It's 
worked for the last 25 years, but it doesn't make sense any more. You have to 
be in lots of different areas to give yourself leverage - if you're not in all 
these business at the same time, you're going to be left behind.

"I think DreamWorks (the entertainment company started by Stephen Spielberg 
and David Geffen, home to George Michael) is probably the most modern record 
company - as a multimedia company it's the ultimate thing, and one way or 
another that's where I'm heading towards.

"I always want to have a record company, I just want to have other things as 
well, and the internet has just woken me up to the fact that you have to be 
multi-faceted."

He has already started his new career with an investment in Clickmusic, a UK 
music site. He has joined a raft of other big name investors, including Bob 
Geldof, Richard Branson, PR guru Matthew Freud, Julian Rich (of Richer sounds) 
and former Virgin boss Robert Deveraux in the project.

He is "pretty excited by that", but gets much more animated when talking about 
his next net project even though he refuses to give precise details about it.

"I've found this young black kid off a council estate in Hackney who's a 
genius with computers," he says, "and we're in the process of inventing 
something for the internet. I've got venture capitalists all over it... 
basically, it's a great idea that's going to hit the streets in February or 
March next year."

The frenzied world of the internet is clearly an environment he feels suits 
him. "I'm not saying that there's any sense to the financial aspects of it, 
what I am saying is people are paying you for ideas, and the thought that I've 
got for the kid from Hackney is an amazing idea... and that says to me this is 
my world, because what I am is great with ideas."

He also has clear plans for a film production company, with a "well-known 
director". "I'm going to make 10 movies for 100K each," he claims.

The first signs that McGee saw his future lay beyond simply running a record 
label came 18 months ago, when he launched a headline grabbing tirade about the 
state of the music industry in the NME. He said simply that the record company 
as we knew it was dead and the internet was going to change everything.

He predicted massive lay-offs within the industry, and that the net would mean 
major artists no longer needed big record labels; they would instead be able to 
distribute their wares over the net and contact their fans individually via 
email.

This caused something of an uproar, to say the least. Until then, there had 
been much talk of how the net might have changed things in the industry, but 
these were mainly thought to be the mutterings of techno- zealots who could 
easily be dismissed by the powers-that-be.

But when the man responsible for finding one of the world's biggest bands said 
this, it was a different matter.

"It doesn't go down very well with the music industry, because the music 
industry's made up of pretty square people. Taking drugs doesn't mean you're 
cool. Lots of people in the music industry takes drugs, but it just means 
you're fucked up... it doesn't mean you're on it. The music industry... I think 
it's not even in fear of the internet, it's disorientated by it."

Now he feels vindicated. "The things I predicated 18 months ago have now 
happened. The major record companies are absolutely running scared. I said 
there would be consolidation and there has been. In the last year-and-a-half 
probably 20-30% of people have lost their jobs, about 20-30% of bands have lost 
their contracts, there's been a huge bloodletting and there will continue to 
be, unfortunately."

The news of his departure has been accompanied with endless speculation about 
whether or not Oasis will stick with Creation. At present, the band have a 
three-album deal with Sony, but Creation are licensed to release their music in 
the UK. All McGee will currently say is that they will leave at the end of 
their contract simply because they will no longer need a label. "All they need 
is your email address, and then they can sell you a CD for £10 directly."

But for McGee, it is not just Oasis who will be leaving their label "it'll be 
every band that's got any clue whatsoever". However, he has a clear idea about 
how the industry might be structured, and how a future McGee label might fit 
into the system."You'll have three labels, X, Y and Z - Sony, Universal and 
somebody else and we will all be joined up to one of these massive 
organisations. I'll probably have a little indie label and I'll have 10 bands 
and we'll be signed up to it."

He is a man convinced of his vision, and with some justification. His real 
talent seems to be spotting something in its infancy and latching on to it, 
making himself a small fortune in the meantime.

He famously saw Oasis in a Glasgow club and turned them into one of the 
biggest bands in the world. He has even made a small fortune in property, 
having bought his personal offices in Primrose Hill for £700,000 during the 
property slump - they are now worth around £2m.

He realised the net was going to change the music industry while most of his 
peers were still to learn how to turn on a PC. And, given that simply attaching 
his name to an internet start-up will most probably add a zero to its value, it 
is likely that he will soon be joining the ranks of internet millionaires.

"I've never been more talented than the Gallagher brothers, the Mary Chain or 
the Primals, I'm just good at putting things together and making them work," he 
says.

Well, he seems to have plans to put plenty of things together. The next year 
will see whether he still has the knack of making them work.
 