
Nicola Dandridge, chief executive, Universities UK 
<http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/>

2012 will be the year in which we will start to see the impact of the 
government's reforms to teaching funding

It is likely that by September 2012 we will see an overall dip in student 
applications, though probably far less cataclysmic than many were initially 
predicting and more like the dip in 2006 when tuition fees tripled to £3,000 
which then rectified in subsequent years.

The main concern is whether the dip will disproportionately be made up of 
students from poorer backgrounds: whose families are more likely to be 
debt-averse and with less of a tradition of going to university. 2012 will show 
whether those concerns about the new funding system are justified.

Government policy has encouraged new higher education providers – for-profit 
providers from the UK and abroad, and further education colleges. In 2012 we 
will start to see the appetite amongst students to study with a range of new 
providers, as well as how the government intends to regulate for a level 
playing field in terms of financial and quality controls.

UK universities are well-placed to expand their international activities in 
2012. The forthcoming Brazilian student exchange programme will provide 
hundreds of under-graduate and post-graduate scholarships for Brazilian 
students to study in UK universities. This initiative is a measure of our 
strength and our international reputation. However, events such as the recent 
appalling murder of Indian studentAnuj Bidve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/dec/28/salford-shooting-four-held-police> 
in Salford, as well as the potentially protectionist policies of our UK Border 
Agency, will present some very real threats in 2012 to what is an increasingly 
competitive global industry.

2012 will also see universities play a major part in the Olympics. Throughout 
the UK, universities will be hosting Olympic teams, will have conducted much of 
the research that underpins the performance of athletes, and will have 
graduated or trained mainly of them. In May, Universities UK will be using the 
theme of the Olympics in our Universities Week 2012 to demonstrate the extent 
to which UK universities have contributed in so many different ways, 
culturally, economically and socially, to the Olympics and their legacy.

Conor Ryan <http://www.conorfryan.blogspotcom>, former government advisor, 
writer and consultant on education

2012 will be the year when the government's HE changes are properly tested

I think ministers will struggle to resolve the central tension in the 
government's approach to higher education: how to develop a market while paying 
the up front costs of higher loans. The redistribution of 20,000 places for 
those charging lower fees seems unlikely to do it, and FE colleges are finding 
it harder to gain university accreditation for their degree courses. 
Legislation due in the spring could see measures to try to force more of a 
market and a wider range of lower cost degree courses.The Open University 
<http://www.open.ac.uk/> will find itself accrediting many more courses than it 
does now.

If student numbers for 2012 are significantly down on 2011 figures, (as we now 
know they have 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/jan/04/uk-born-university-applicants-slumps>
) there will be growing Lib Dem and Labour pressure for stronger access 
regulation that will be resisted by universities. At the same time, the reality 
of the fees will see renewed pressure to increase contact time with students. 
Parents and students will demand more teaching and tutorial time to justify the 
fees they are paying, and this will become a big issue in the autumn.

The UK will struggle in the international market, as Australian, other 
European and South East Asian competitor universities successfully highlight 
the 'hostility' of the UK government towards overseas students, and offer 
attractive packages including English booster courses, simpler visa facilities 
and postgraduate work experience. Ministers will be forced to rethink this 
aspect of their migration policy as they see the economic impact.

Sir Rodney Brooke, chair, QAA  <http://www.qaa.ac.uk/Pages/default.aspx>board 
of directors

Students will be grateful to be in university and they will be expecting value 
for money

While the move of power from the supply side to the demand side will have 
predictable consequences, a cast iron prediction for 2012 is that the present 
raft of changes in higher education will certainly have unintended consequences.

The new exposure to fees will change student attitudes to higher education: 
they will expect value for money. They will seek greater engagement in the 
experience offered to them. Reciprocally, undergraduate teaching will overtake 
research and league tables in the priority rankings of many vice-chancellors, 
as their institutions compete for students.

Students will begin to demand clear and accurate information about what they 
can expect from their higher education experience. Ratings on quality and 
standards will be an important part of the information they seek when choosing 
an academic destination.

In addition, the government's requirement for risk-based regulation will 
increase the focus on quality and standards in higher education. The decision 
that an institution is 'risky' is, in itself, a judgement and as such, QAA's 
exposure to controversy will increase from its role in risk assessment its new 
responsibility for the educational oversight of private colleges, where 'highly 
trusted' status could be withdrawn by the UK Border Agency without a positive 
review.

In the seismic change faced by the sector, it is important that the student 
experience is enhanced and that the brand of UK higher education does not 
suffer. There is reason to believe that both will be enhanced by the changes.

Michael Farthing, University of Sussex VC and chair of the 1994 Group 
<http://www.1994group.ac.uk/>

Hopes for clarity over reforms and more uncapped places

It is difficult to predict what the year will hold but I can tell you what I 
hope. My sincere hope is that 2012 will be the year the government addresses 
some of the major uncertainties all of us in higher education are wrestling 
with.

First, I hope we'll see signs of a long term plan to give all talented 
students greater choice by expanding uncapped places beyond the current AAB+ 
proposals. Allowing all universities to compete for all students would create 
more opportunities for people to study at the universities best suited to 
develop their talents and potential.

Next, it has to be the year that the government wakes up to the importance of 
postgraduate study, and the risks being created by the lack of financial 
support for postgraduate students. Businesses are crying out for more and more 
employees with postgraduate level skills, just as the future success of the 
university research base rests on a pipeline of students progressing to 
doctoral programmes. We need to see some innovative thinking on how to 
incentivise and support postgraduates, particularly in light of the changes to 
undergraduate funding.

Finally, I hope that 2012 will see a major push on UK universities realising 
their global ambitions. Our excellent institutions are becoming ever more 
international in their outlook, and its good news that the government has 
recognised this with the launch of 'HE Global' and a new collaborative vehicle. 
More needs to be done though, particularly to ensure that international 
students and faculty are not deterred from coming to UK institutions.

These are some of the major issues troubling the sector as 2011 draws to a 
close. It's vital that 2012 heralds some much needed long term clarity.

Dr Wendy Piatt, director general, the Russell Group 
<http://www.russellgroup.ac.uk/>

2012 will see the appointment of a new director at the Office For Fair Access 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/access> and the rest of 
arbitrary, artificial targets

The new year will open with the government's grant letter to HEFCE for 
2012-13. We hope that this won't deliver any unwelcome shocks. What is 
essential is that the remaining teaching grant available to HEFCE is targeted 
at high-cost and strategically important subjects such as medicine, 
engineering, chemistry and physics which are vital to the future success of the 
UK's economy and cannot be sustained on tuition fee income alone.

2012 will see the appointment of new director for fair access and an increase 
in the size and scope of theOffice For Fair Access 
<http://www.offa.org.uk/universities-and-colleges/> (OFFA). We take access to 
our universities incredibly seriously, but OFFA must resist an emphasis on 
artificial targets which can distract attention, effort and resources from the 
many successful access schemes already in place. We hope that OFFA fully 
recognises the challenges of setting and achieving really quite specific 
targets for access when universities do not have the power to solve the root 
causes of the problem of the under-representation of students from 
disadvantaged backgrounds, which are underachievement at school and poor advice 
on the best choices of A-level subjects and university degree courses.

Cuts to capital spend for universities indicated in latest spending review 
will create serious difficulties for UK universities despite the additional 
research council capital investment announced in theChancellor's Autumn 
Statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2011/nov/29/george-osborne-science-autumn-statement>
. We must not forget that the world-class research and teaching infrastructure 
in universities is also essential to future economic growth.

We might expect an early announcement on migrant settlement in the UK. The 
present proposals on settlement must be modified to ensure that our 
universities can continue to attract international academics to this country in 
the confidence that the immigration system will allow them to continue their 
research so long as it continues to benefit the UK's economy and wider society.

Finally we must never forget that other nations are pumping billions of 
dollars into their leading universities and are already snapping at our heels. 
In 2012 we must not jeopardise the competitive advantage which has made our 
universities the envy of the world and the engine of growth for the UK.

Pam Tatlow, chief executive, university think-tank Million+ 
<http://www.millionplus.ac.uk/>

2012 will be the litmus test of the government's commitment to social mobility

Students will still be ambitious for themselves and for their futures and will 
apply and enrol in greater numbers for university than some expected. However, 
many HE pundits will monitor enrolments with a close eye to see if any 
particular groups have been deterred. This will be the litmus test of the 
government's commitment to social mobility. TheHE Bill 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201011/cmselect/cmbis/writev/885/m7.htm>
 will play second fiddle toLords reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lordreform> – but the Lords will be 
unimpressed by any attempt to allow non-teaching organisations to become 
universities in the future. Amid all of this, the challenges arising from 
instability in the global economy will continue to be played out. Even the 
sceptics will come to recognise that the role of all universities in promoting 
economic growth, innovation and social cohesion will be one of the key 
components of the recovery.

In light of the above, I have a few wishes for 2012: that ministers dismiss 
the siren voices calling for the abolition of the widening participation 
premium but also realise that to intervene further in the student numbers 
market without knowing the outcomes of 2012 enrolments would be more akin to 
playing roulette with every chance of producing losers in terms of student and 
subject choice. And of course it would be marvellous if the Home Office 
recognised that international higher education partnerships and international 
students were one of the key assets of the UK's excellent world-class 
universities system. That would be one New Year's wish really worth having.

Libby Hackett, director, University Alliance 
<http://www.university-alliance.ac.uk/>

The rapid acceleration of new technology will have a bigger impact on HE than 
economic crisis

Despite turbulent economic times in 2012, there is a bigger global picture 
that will have a greater impact on the future of higher education: the rapid 
acceleration of new technology, innovation, design and new knowledge.

The same thing could have (and has) been said for many years now but it is the 
accelerated pace of change that will define the future of our universities - 
much more so than immediate economic conditions or successive government 
changes to university funding. Yes, 2012 will see the beginning of a new era of 
increased contributions from graduates (although none of this will be paid 
up-front by students in 2012 of course) and universities, as businesses, will 
feel the impact of a difficult economic climate. However, what drives a freight 
train through this short-term turbulence is a long-term trajectory of the 
increasing economic impact of our universities and graduates. Universities are 
no longer just about generating new knowledge within a protected academic 
environment. The ivory towers have fallen. All of our universities are working 
closely with new industries, design and technologies to make new discoveries 
that will change lives and tackle global challenges; playing a central role in 
both our economy and society.

My prediction for 2012 is that the new student finance arrangements will begin 
with much less disruption than expected and that the UK higher education sector 
will continue to adapt, challenge and drive change in a way that benefits our 
society and economy. I also think that our sector, robust and with a long 
history of evolution, not revolution, will continue to demonstrate excellence 
in the traditions that it preserves as well as the barriers it breaks down in 
driving progress.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 