
Anatomy is the study of the structure and function of the human body, while 
physiology is concerned with living systems generally. During the course, 
students learn topics including the human evolution, stem cell development, 
genetics and biodiversity and dissect a human body. Make n o bones about it, 
after four years of study you will have a good knowledge of how the body works, 
opening up career options not only in health-related professions, but a host of 
other areas, too.

What skills have you gained?

As well as the laboratory skills gained in a practical, hands-on degree such 
as anatomy, you should also be adept at problem-solving, working as part of a 
team and IT literate. Most courses involve a project, so this will have 
equipped you with good research skills as well as an ability to analyse and 
interpret data.

What jobs can you do?

A range of professions, from pharmacology and forensic science to scientific 
writing. Teaching and jobs in the City are also options.

That said, of 2009 anatomy/physiology graduates, over half went into 
physiotherapy-related occupations. Another popular career route is exercise 
physiology – investigating ways to improve human performance. Fewer graduates 
in these fields end up taking jobs in retail or catering as other degrees, 
perhaps reflecting increased vocational opportunities relating directly to the 
subject.

A number of medical scientific careers are also options, such as cardiology, 
audiology, neurophysiology or speech and language therapy for private hospitals 
and medical services or the NHS.

"Physiology and anatomy graduates may work in the pharmaceutical or 
biotechnology industries as clinical research associates, research scientists, 
or pharmacologists. Laboratory-based jobs are commonly chosen," says Margaret 
Holbrough, a careers adviser withGraduate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/graduate-jobs> Prospects.

"Careers within teaching or scientific writing and journalism, as well as 
information science or medical sales may also be of interest. Alongside the 
wide range of scientific career options, science graduates are always sought 
after for analytical and quantitative roles in computing, accountancy, banking 
and other financial services."

This is borne out by World Cup- winning rugby union player Josh Lewsey , who 
has a physiology degree but seems inclined towards a management consultancy 
career when he finally hangs up his boots at the end of this season.

Postgraduate study?

Many graduates commit to a further four years of study for careers such as 
medicine or dentistry, or go on to do a PhD to become research scientists. Of 
the 2009 graduates, 16.9% opted for further study.

Data supplied by the Higher Education Careers Services Unit and Graduate 
Prospects <http://www.prospects.ac.uk> 
 