
So, Solan, as my guide, you'd better tell me what we do if we get capsized by 
a whale.' Whhhhooooosh! What the..? Yards away was a dark, fathomless eye and a 
velvet head bejewelled with barnacles. Our two-man kayak - more a skirt than a 
boat - suddenly felt very small. A humpback, perhaps 40 tonnes, the size of a 
Greyhound bus, let rip with a deep, shuddering foghorn of a groan and fired its 
spume, coating me with a foul film, a cross between rotting fish and rotting 
socks. It arched its back and dived, its vast fluke dripping diamonds, graceful 
and terrifying, the classic valediction of a million nature films. The oily 
waters closed and everything was still again.

'Wow,' said Solan. 'That was pretty close. Not everyone gets to swap fluids 
with a whale. Maybe you two should get married.'

I looked around, shaken. Above the Sitka spruce and hemlock on the shore, bald 
eagles rode the winds. Across the straits, the majestic, shark-tooth profile of 
the Fairweather mountains. Stella sea lions popped their heads quizzically out 
of the water and sea otters floated around on their backs like fat, bewhiskered 
holidaymakers on lilos. If marrying a whale was what it took to stay here, then 
it must be considered. Though the oral hygiene issue would have to be addressed.

Glacier Bay National Park in south-east Alaska is one of the last true great 
wildernesses. At 3.3 million acres, it is the world's biggest protected marine 
sanctuary. Until the late 18th century it didn't exist - covered as it was with 
ice 5,000ft thick. Then, for reasons known only to God/natural forces/aliens 
(delete where applicable), the ice receded more rapidly than ever recorded - 
galloping is the technical term - pulling back 70 miles in just under 100 
years. It unveiled a virgin landscape, one standing at the beginning of time - 
'a tabula rasa for total rebirth', as one local writer described it. 'A dark 
ages followed by a renaissance.'

And what a renaissance! The pioneer ground plants colonised the denuded 
landscape, which in time ceded to willow and alder and eventually to huge 
spruce forests. And all in a geological blink of an eye. The long days 
saturated the new bay with light, which sustained vast quantities of plankton. 
The whales followed, as did the salmon, as did the grizzly bears ... ah, yes, 
the grizzly bears.

'Did you hear what happened to that couple recently, not far from here?' asked 
one of my group. It was one of those questions that, instinctively, you know 
isn't going to include 'lived happily ever after' in the answer. 'Asleep, in 
the middle of the night. Big grizzly just sliced open their tent and ate them. 
Ate them! Can you imagine?'

I could imagine. Partly, because after my amorous encounter with a whale I had 
joined a party of kayakers on a camping trip into the heart of the park, an 
area with the greatest concentrations of grizzlies in the world. Partly, also, 
because I was standing on a tiny spit of land covered in blueberries and other 
assorted bear goodies, 70 miles from the nearest human habitation. But mostly, 
I could imagine because there, at my feet, were the enormous and unmistakable 
imprints of a grizzly - or maybe two - claw marks like Freddie Krueger, 
trailing off into the scrub not 50 yards away, where, for all I knew, they were 
stirring hungrily from a pre-prandial nap.

In the distance, I could see the rapidly receding wake of the two boats that, 
minutes before, had dropped off our party in this remote spot. I shouted after 
them. Actually, I didn't. I opened my mouth, but, eyeing the scrub, thought 
better of making any noise at all.

We were in Reid Inlet, towards the top of Glacier Bay's West Arm. We planned 
to paddle our kayaks for a week around some of the deep fjords lined by rock 
walls and encircled by the towering Fairweathers. We would camp at night, learn 
something of this unique environment, see some of the bay's 16 tidewater 
glaciers calving close up and, hopefully, emerge uneaten.

As I applied some lip balm and instantly became a human flypaper to the 
squillions of white sox that buzzed around, Leah, one of the guides, gathered 
the group together. 'OK, I have to go through some bear protocol with you,' she 
said. 'If a bear comes into camp and charges at you, stand your ground. Nine 
times out of 10, it'll just be trying to scare you. Talk softly to the bear. DO 
NOT RUN. If the unthinkable happens and you get attacked, just play dead. The 
bear will eventually leave you alone.'

I noticed that Leah had a can of pepper spray. I noticed, also, that I did not.

After dinner, I crawled into my tent, an object in the past that I had always 
associated with protection, but which now felt more like a doner kebab with me 
as the filling. I lay awake, the night filled with menace and noise; grunts, 
footsteps, rustling. I had my Swiss Army knife open beside me. It looked like a 
toothpick.

In the morning we broke camp and packed everything into the double kayaks. 
Luckily, the roll call tallied the same as the night before: eight tourists - 
two middle-aged Californian couples, a thirtysomething German couple and a 
young lawyer from the East Coast, plus the two guides, Leah and Judy, a 
sixtysomething native Alaskan with Glacier Bay deep in her soul.

We paddled out of Reid Inlet and into the main arm. The water, a toothpaste 
blue, was filled with chunks of floating ice, like croutons in a giant soup, 
calved from the immense Johns Hopkins glacier several miles away. Some of the 
chunks had become exquisite sculptures: a swan here, gliding serenely past, a 
griffin, even a hungry hippo, its gaping mouth flapping on the swell.

Judy pointed out the dryas flowers and arctic fireweed on shore, the second 
wave of flora in the reclamation. Further on up the glacial retreat, the dryas 
gave way to mosses and lichens, the first pioneer plants that take hold. It was 
a living classroom for the mechanics of plant succession, like being in a time 
machine.

Kittiwakes and oystercatchers fussed noisily around us as Judy explained that 
as the earth sheds the immense weight of the ice, it breathes a huge sigh of 
relief and, in a process called rebound, bounces back at nearly two inches a 
year.

As we rounded a headland, we were met with an icy blast and there, in front of 
us, was the vast filthy blue tongue of the Johns Hopkins glacier. We bobbed and 
slalomed through the floes, percussive thumps hitting our kayak's hull, until 
we were just a few hundred yards away, rendered speechless by what confronted 
us. Above, a twisted, fluted wall of ice two miles across and 250ft high, like 
a Brobdingnagian church organ, wheezing and uttering plangent groans that 
sounded like they came from the very centre of the earth. Dotted about the face 
were half-emerged boulders the size of minibuses, languidly being spat out like 
apple pips. Then, a crack, a thunderous rumble, and tonnes of ice crashed 
violently into the water, sending out waves that tossed our kayaks around like 
bath toys. We sat there for hours, mesmerised.

That evening, we set up camp on a remote beach, Johns Hopkins to our right, 
Lamplugh glacier to our left, sending out their apocalyptic soundtrack in 
stereo. There was not a vapour trail in the sky, no electricity pylons, no 
trails or roads. It felt like we were the only people on the planet.

Leah and Judy cooked fajitas, which we washed down with margaritas. The 
post-dinner routine was by now familiar. Everything gets washed, every crumb is 
picked up off the ground, all foodstuffs and toiletries - everything with a 
scent because bears are led by their noses - has to be deposited in bear-proof 
canisters which are then taken at least 100 yards from camp. 'A mother and two 
cubs were seen on this beach yesterday,' said Leah. 'Mothers with cubs are very 
volatile.'

I lay in my tent, toothpick by my side, cursing the torrent of glacial 
meltwater that cascaded down the mountain close to the camp. There is only one 
thing worse than being in a tent after dark in grizzly country - having to 
leave the tent to go to the toilet. I started reading Kim Heacox's beautiful 
book, The Only Kayak, about the naturalist's love of Glacier Bay and his 
friendship with Michio Hosino, a Japanese photographer who documented Alaska's 
bears. With increasingly heavy eyes, I turned a page to discover that Hosino 
was eaten in 1996. It was going to be another long night.

We spent the next few days kayaking along the West Arm among the groaning 
glaciers. On the ice floes, harbour seals and their pups lay, skittish and 
guarded, taking refuge from the orcas that lurked unseen save for the odd 
menacing flash of black dorsal fin. King and coho salmon pogoed out of the 
water. We saw a humpback asleep, willow ptarmigans (the Alaskan state bird that 
looks like a cross between a chicken and a Christmas pudding) and so many bald 
eagles that they became unworthy of comment. But one thing we still hadn't seen 
was a grizzly. Not yet. However, Admiralty Island, our next port of call, is 
1,700 square miles in size and has a population of around 1,700 grizzly bears; 
the maths isn't difficult.

As we approached in our kayaks in the morning mist, there was a distinctly 
primordial feel: ravens caw-cawed, western hemlock dripped with Spanish moss, 
prehistoric-looking blue herons circled above. On the beach there was a sign 
saying 'elcom to ack reek', which had once read 'Welcome to Pack Creek' before 
the bears had eaten half of it.

We set off into the Tongass National Forest which covers the island, guides at 
the front and the rear of our single column clapping their hands to scare off 
the bears - Hari Krishna meets Jurassic Park. Carpeting the ground, giant 
devil's club, with spiny thorns that break off and fester under the skin, and 
skunk cabbage. Both ambrosial to grizzlies. Every few yards a spruce was 
scarred with deep, truly terrifying, gouge marks.

About a mile into the forest, we reached a clearing. There, in a shallow 
creek, were tens of thousands of salmon, some eyeless bleached corpses on the 
bank with bite marks out of them, others still flapping limp and moribund in 
the water. They were summoning up the final energy after swimming across the 
Pacific from Russia to lay their eggs in the exact tiny creek where they'd been 
born five or six years previously - a miracle of navigation no one has 
explained properly. Once they spawn, they die. It felt ghoulish yet glorious to 
be watching such an intimate carnival of death.

We walked to the coastal flats and then, after a week of shadows and rustles 
and a creeping suspicion that my Briton-baiting guides spent their nocturnal 
hours with a rubber bear foot on a stick, there they were. Huge grizzlies, 
maybe up to 1,000lbs each, pure muscle on legs, some with cubs, others single 
males, just 100 yards from us. They belly-flopped into the water, scooping up 
salmon, impaling the hapless fish with their claws; taking just a nibble if the 
taste was not quite right before tossing the flailing beast to the cubs, 
snapping opportunistically at their heels.

These were the bears of Disney films, playing in the creek, cuddly and 
adorable. Then, one male walked towards us, sniffed the air like Hannibal 
Lecter and fixed me with a look that stopped my heart.

Before leaving Alaska, I returned to Point Adolphus, where, a week earlier, I 
had fallen in love with a whale. Solan and I camped on the deserted Eagle Beach 
and feasted on wild salmon. As the sun set over the Fairweather mountains, the 
sky burned with an intensity I had never experienced before, doubtless enhanced 
by the warm fug induced by the Laphroaig 10-year-old single malt Solan had 
thoughtfully brought along.

I lay on my back as the vast black canvas became encrusted with jewels. Then 
the Perseid meteor shower sent filaments of flames shooting across the heavens. 
All this accompanied by the elegiac melody of whales trumpeting in the dark 
just offshore.

I felt elated and sad. For one miraculous moment I had utterly forgotten 
myself, but that moment was already fading like a half-remembered dream. 'How 
could you ever top this?' I asked Solan.

'How about that?' he replied, pointing across the strait, as the pale dancing 
curtains of the Northern Lights began to fill the skies.

Essentials

Mike Carter explored Glacier Bay on Alaska Discovery's ultimate expedition (00 
1 907 780 6226;www.akdiscovery.com <http://www.akdiscovery.com>).

UK tour operator Windows on the Wild (020 8742 1558; www.windowsonthewild.com 
<http://www.windowsonthewild.com>) offers the trip (four nights camping, four 
nights lodging) throughout June, July and August, from £3,355 per person based 
on two sharing, including return airfare to Juneau, and a night in a Juneau 
hotel at each end of the trip.

For more information, visit www.travelalaska.com <http://www.travelalaska.com>
, or for brochures, emailalaska@mga-international.co.uk 
<mailto:alaska@mga-international.co.uk>.
 