
"Walnut Island?"

"No, Walney Island."

"Walney?"

"Yes, Walney."

"No, sorry, never heard of it. Did you just make it up?"

This exchange was typical of ones I had with friends when I told them I would 
be visiting England's eighth largest island. It's intriguing, really. The Isle 
of Wight, Sheppey, Canvey et al never suffer from such an all-embracing lack of 
recognition. Even really fiddly islands like Brownsea, Lundy and Lindisfarne 
have found renown. So how comeWalney <http://www.walney-island.com> has slipped 
through the net?

I was pondering this as my bus negotiated the busy streets of 
Barrow-in-Furness, a town tucked into the bottom left-hand corner of Cumbria. 
The 300-yard bridge connecting Barrow to Walney was built exactly 100 years ago 
and still stands today, a fine example of solid no-nonsense Victoriana. Such is 
its significance to the islanders that they threw a huge party to mark the 
occasion and repainted the whole thing in its original 1908 black and gold 
livery. The 12,000-odd Walneyites, as I was soon to discover, are immensely 
attached to their island and it doesn't take much of an excuse for them to 
celebrate the fact that they live there.

And the place where the majority of them live is a small town on the far side 
of the bridge. It's a community that very much wears its history on its sleeve. 
Established to house some of the tens of thousands of workers who migrated to 
Barrow to service the mighty Vickers shipyard, I encountered Amphitrite Street, 
Powerful Street and the wonderfully incongruous Himalaya Avenue (Walney is as 
flat as a pancake) – all named after ships built in the yard across the water. 
The settlement itself is called Vickerstown (what else?).

However, I was keen to search beyond the bricks and mortar to discover what an 
artist friend had promised me was the island's real gift to the visitor – its 
stark and wild natural beauty. Walney is shaped like the side view of a 
saucepan lid, with the handle, if it had one, pointing south-west. At about 11 
miles long but never more than a mile wide, you never have to go far to get a 
fix of the Irish Sea. And, unlike many parts of the coast I've visited so far, 
on Walney you don't have to battle past endless shoreline houses, shops and 
other sundry seaside trappings to get a view of the blue horizon. For as far as 
I could see, in both directions, there was nothing but open defenceless 
grassland to keep the waters at bay.

But where to explore first? I asked a couple walking their dog what they 
thought I should see. Thirty seconds later, I had been furnished with a hatful 
of ideas and a somewhat unusual starting point. "Before you do anything else, 
you really ought to visit Mr Walney," they agreed. Mr Walney, it turns out, is 
a man named John Murphy. "Everyone on Walney knows John Murphy." And within two 
minutes they'd kindly given me a lift to his house.

Perhaps it's something about small islands, but I found that everyone here 
exuded a natural friendliness. John was no exception and, on learning of my 
quest to get to know Walney, he immediately proposed a tour. Since the walks he 
has led here for the last 15 years have become so popular that they can attract 
over 300 people at a time, I could not have asked for a better guide.

We headed out in search of one of the world's rarest flowers. The Walney 
geranium is one of an astonishing 450 species of flowering plants carpeting the 
island and, as its name suggests, it grows nowhere else on the planet. In the 
south of the island there's a National Nature Reserve, a grey seal colony, and 
the largest gullery in Europe – 10,000 pairs of lesser blackbacks and herring 
gulls call Walney home. There are also fine views of tiny Piel Island, 
accessible with care at low tide and sporting amediaeval castle 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/server/show/nav.13860>, a few primitive 
18th-century houses, and a pub whose every landlord is crowned The King of Piel 
– a tradition harking back to the time when Lambert Simnel landed there with an 
army on his doomed quest to wrest the throne from Henry VII.

Heading north, we passed over the highest point of the island, Hillock Whins, 
a vertigo-inducing ridge 20ft above sea level. Walneyites have some idea of how 
the people of Tuvalu feel. It's along this line that the island will eventually 
snap into two, John says, "But that's a while off yet, with luck."

The north end, not to be outdone, also boasts views of the Isle of Man and has 
a National Nature Reserve of its own where natterjack toads abound. We cruised 
up there on all but empty roads – with nearly everyone living in the dead 
centre of the island the remainder is left largely untamed and practically 
deserted. John pointed out sandy Earnse Bay, a big name in the world of 
windsurfing and the setting for this year's National Kite Surfing 
Championships. Not for nothing is the island known as "Wet and Windy Walney". 
It's claimed to be the most blustery lowland site in Britain and there's an 
extensive offshore wind farm to back up its case.

Yet far from being the back end of nowhere, I discovered from John that Walney 
is on theCistercian Way 
<http://www.ramblers.org.uk/info/paths/pathscumbria.html#Cistercian>; and is 
the start/finish of the newW2W <http://www.cyclingw2w.info> (Walney to Wear) 
cycle route, specially designed for people who find the C2C a bit wimpish.

I asked John whether leading walks here had become his full time job. He shook 
his head: "No, I never charge for the walks – I do them because I'm proud of 
where I live." It's taken me a single day to confirm that he has every right to 
be.



Getting there

Stagecoach Northwest  <http://www.stagecoachbus.com>No.1 between Barrow and 
South Walney; Barrow Dayrider, for unlimited travel on Walney and in Barrow; 
adult £2.90, child £2; 0871 200 2233.

Murphy's Miles Guided walks with John Murphy; +44 (0)1229 473746.

Accommodation: Camp on Piel Island – it's free and there's no need to book. 
Just call in at the Bunkhouse Bar on arrival; Steve and Sheila Chattaway (the 
King an Queen of Piel) +44 (0)7516453784.

Find further information on Cumbria at golakes.co.uk 
<http://www.golakes.co.uk/>

· Dixe Wills is the author of Places to Hide in England, Scotland and Wales 
(Icon, £7.99)
 