
Let’s say – for the sake of argument – that you wanted to slash the welfare 
budget by £12bn while appearing to be fair and even-handed. How would you go 
about it?

First, you might turn the spotlight on individuals who play the system. Never 
mind thatfraud amounts to only 0.7% of the total expenditure on benefits and 
tax credits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/feb/01/welfare-fraud-tax-avoidance>
, according to Department for Work and Pensions figures. That inconvenient fact 
will get drowned out if you make enough noise about cheats and scroungers.

Cuts to UK mental health services are destroying young lives and families | 
Mark Austin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/27/uk-child-mental-health-services-destroying-lives-families>
Then, having set the tone of the discourse to blaming and shaming, you’re free 
to pursue cuts by less visible means. Such as a points system.

This is how it works. You tie benefits to points. Then, you award those points 
on the basis of what the most vulnerable people in society have to say about 
their own needs, whether or not they are capable of making such judgments. 
While you’re at it, ensure that the system remains in constant flux, so that 
claimants never know exactly where the goalposts are.

My daughter has suffered from a severe mental illness for many years. At times 
it’s so painful she wants to cut off her own head to shut up the damning voices 
inside it.

Outside hospital she depends on benefits to live with any degree of 
independence. But she feels deeply unworthy of them –as she does of all the 
help she has been given. These feelings worsen every time a form arrives from 
the DWP to establish her eligibility, which they do on a regular basis. I’m not 
talking about the mild unease with which most of us face an official 
assessment; I’m talking about a vortex of panic and distress and fear that is 
way off the scale.

The only way she could have been sicker at the time of her admission would 
have been if she were dead

In January this year, another form arrived in the post. As always, she 
struggled to complete it. Because how can you put the chaos in your head down 
on paper? In tick boxes? What do the words really mean? And how can you ask for 
any help when you are certain your needs are utterly bogus? How do you quantify 
terrifying, destabilising states of mind that change hour by hour, minute by 
minute?

But she did complete the form – with help – giving the same answers she had 
given before. Nothing about her situation had changed. If anything, it had got 
worse (at the time she was mid-relapse).

In April she was informed that her personal independence payment (Pip) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/09/disability-benefits-dwp-sorry-hardest-word-personal-independence-payment>
 had been cut to the lowest rate. She had scored 11 points. To carry on 
qualifying for the enhanced rate of Pip, which she has previously received, she 
would have had to score 12.

Put it another way. The loss of that one point has cost her half her Pip, 
which is about £50 a week. When she isn’t in hospital, my daughter lives in a 
small room in sheltered accommodation. Most of her things are in store because 
she has nowhere else to put them. Storage alone costs her £125 a month.

Encouraged by her key worker, she appealed against this decision.

Three months later, she was placed under 24-hour surveillance in an acute 
medical bay on a locked psychiatric ward. It’s like Russian roulette, her 
consultant explained when she was sectioned for her own safety: you never know 
when there’s going to be a bullet in the chamber.

Why sorry is the hardest word for the DWP over disability benefit fiasco | 
Patrick Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/09/disability-benefits-dwp-sorry-hardest-word-personal-independence-payment>
My daughter has severe anorexia <https://www.theguardian.com/society/anorexia>
. Her condition has the highest mortality rate of any mental illness. It has 
almost killed her a number of times. Sufferers also have to contend with 
intense feelings of guilt, shame and fraudulence.

The week her core temperature dropped so low she was at risk of heart failure 
– and I was asked to track down a woolly hat during a London heatwave to keep 
her head warm at night – she needed constant reassurance that she was ill 
enough to warrant the care she was getting round the clock.

On 30 August, while she was still in the bay, with three locked doors between 
her and the outside world, she received a letter from the DWP saying that her 
appeal had been unsuccessful. It went on to state that if she disagreed with 
this decision, she could apply to take her case to a tribunal within one month 
of the date of the letter. The letter was dated 30 July.

It is obviously in the nature of many mental health problems that reality is 
skewed. What a judgment like this tells my daughter is that she is not sick 
enough – which is something her illness also tells her. Yet the only way she 
could have been sicker at the time of her admission would have been if she were 
dead.

To assess eligibility for Pip, the DWP allocates scores based on what it calls 
descriptors. In their words, these are “sentences which describe how much 
support, and the type of support, you need. The number of points you get 
depends on how much help you need.”

My daughter scored 1 (0 is the lowest) for “managing therapy or a health 
condition”.

She scored 2 for “preparing food” and 4 for “taking nutrition”.

I’d be thrilled if that assessment of her ability to cope with her problems 
were true. It comes nowhere close.

Two weeks later, a nurse wheeled my daughter to an office in another part of 
the hospital site to see what could be done. There, an adviser leafed through 
the bulging file my daughter had brought with her and found a letter from the 
DWP dated 19 February.

The letter stated that my daughter was entitled to receive the enhanced rate” 
of Pip until late January 2016. The adviser explained to my daughter that this 
letter represented a contract from the DWP. She explained that there was no 
reason why she should have had to fill out the assessment form before that date.

Britain’s mental health is in crisis – a shadow minister can’t tackle it alone 
| Matt Haig
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/15/britain-mental-health-crisis-luciana-berger-labour>
Consulting a DWP rubric, the adviser said that in the light of my daughter’s 
severe ill health, she should have scored the maximum number of points in 
several of the “daily living” categories.

Pip is not paid when you’re in hospital, even though the bills do not stop 
coming, expenses that may directly arise because of your inability to live a 
full life, as is the case with my daughter. She has no argument with that, 
although I do.

Last week, after numerous representations made on my daughter’s behalf by 
three separate benefits officers over a period of nearly eight months – 
challenges that were repeatedly turned down – the DWP finally agreed to reverse 
their decision and restore my daughter’s Pip to the enhanced rate.

So what it amounts to is this. Benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/benefits> at rates already awarded are 
being cut on the basis of a points system, where points are allocated on the 
basis of what mentally ill people are able to say about needs they struggle to 
admit they have, in assessments carried out in advance of the date those 
benefits are due to be reassessed.

According to research published last year by Mind, people with mental 
illnesses are having their benefits cut more often than those with other 
conditions.

Who’s playing the system?
 