
Danny Meyer, the keeper of the golden flame of hospitality, did the 
unthinkable this week. He invited even more digital screens into his dining 
rooms.

 When it was announced that all the managers and sommeliers at his Union 
Square Cafe 2.0 would be sportingApple Watches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/07/apple-watch-tech-wearables-market>
 when it reopened this month, there was a palpable sense of panic among both 
patrons and pundits that the glow of organic bonhomie would be replaced by the 
cool inhuman luminescence of smartphones.

As the founder of Union Square Hospitality Group (USHG), whose domain includes 
upscale restaurants such as Gramercy Tavern, the Modern, Maialino and Untitled 
as well as the publicly traded fast-growing, fast-casual burger joint Shake 
Shack, Meyer is the smiley, hard-nosed Obi-Wan of restaurants.

Apple Watch 2 brings GPS, waterproofing and faster processing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/07/iphone-7-launch-apple-watch-2-gains-gps-longer-battery-life>
Meyer was one of the first and biggest New York restaurateurs to eliminate 
tipping in his restaurants, whichhe did last October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/15/danny-meyer-us-restaurant-group-no-tipping-policy>
. Because of Shake Shack’s success – it was valued at $1.6bn at its initial IPO 
last year – we live in a two-track world. Chefs such as David Chang of 
Momofuku, Mario Carbone of Carbone and Daniel Patterson of Coi have Michelin 
stars for prestige, but fast-casual diffusion for cash. Meyer is also one of 
the first to offer four weeks paid parental leave, which he also did this week. 
Now, he represents the first wave to break on a new shore of screens at dinner.

But nothing scotches a meal faster than a dining room full of diners lit from 
below, like Lugosi in Dracula, and staring into their screens. Not only do 
smartphones reportedlydecrease empathy 
<http://eab.sagepub.com/content/early/2014/05/31/0013916514539755.abstract> but 
their presence can result in a meal mitigated by their unseeing lenses. An 
entree becomes only as delicious as the number of likes it receives on 
Instagram or views it gets on Snapchat.

But at USHG, said Maureen Cushing, vice-president of technology, such concerns 
were unwarranted. “Human interaction in hospitality is the grounding foundation 
of USHG,” she assured me. “We would never want to compromise that.”

The technology, she insisted, will be felt, not seen. Each sommelier and 
manager will receive anApple Watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-watch>. These watches will be 
connected to an app developed by Resy, a tech-forward reservation system 
startup, and integrated into the restaurant’s point of sale system.

This technology, she said, will allow the restaurant to take better care of 
its guests. Managers will be able to monitor with statistical precision how 
long a table has been seated and thus when their order should be taken. 
Managers will also have the ability to trigger underground coat room attendants 
to fetch outerwear. Sommeliers will be able to more efficiently grab bottles of 
wine from the cellars. As for the danger of screen contagion, Cushing said 
fears were overblown. “Servers will not be wearing the watches,” she said, “and 
somms and managers wear long sleeves anyway.”

But even if the technology is invisible, the data is there. And, like a baleen 
whale, it’s always collecting. When she partnered with Resy, Cushing was 
looking for a partner to help her restaurants capture what she calls “guest 
metrics”. “We knew how many reservations we had,” she said, “and we know how 
many steaks we served. But we didn’t know who ordered steak. It was insane.”

Each guest using the Resy app will have a profile wherein preferences, 
allergies and past orders can be noted. The restaurant can also create profiles 
for every member of a party, not just the reserver. “That’s huge for us,” she 
said. “We used to be able to know only one person. Now we can truly know all 
our guests.”

But the dangers are twofold. With every step, every search, every phone call 
and text, how much do we really want the world to know about us? And at what 
cost is this efficiency?

As for the former, it admittedly isn’t the collection that’s changed, merely 
the container. Before, data was collected on paper slips called chits that were 
passed physically from servers to managers to sommeliers.

But what is lost as technology offers efficiency? The hallmark of a good 
restaurant wasn’t primarily its chef, but the vigilant restaurateur or maitre 
d’. Legendary men such as Sirio Maccioni of Le Cirque or Robert Meyzen of Le 
Pavillion, whose observational powers rivaled Sherlock Holmes, collected the 
old-fashioned way, by ceaseless observation. A manager might notice when a 
table needs to order not by a vibration on their wrist but by a patron’s subtle 
cues. Allergies and preferences might not be annotated on a digital profile, 
but in the memory of a career host.

But these are fast fading vestiges of a pre-phone past. They’re human, and 
like humans are inefficient and fallible. The future is coming to dinner and 
it’s accompanied by the notification of anApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> Watch.
 