
In contrast to television, which comes to you, the oldest form of drama 
demands that audiences go to it. The spread of NT Live and other performance 
broadcasts means that the venue is now as likely to be a cinema as a theatre. 
And one of the pieces of theatre screened in multiplexes recently belongs to 
the small group of plays in which transport is not merely a necessity for the 
audience but also a vital prop. Alfred Uhry's Driving Miss Daisy – shown in the 
UK in a recording of an Australian production starring Angela Lansbury andJames 
Earl Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/19/how-we-made-driving-miss-daisy-james-earl-jones-angela-lansbury>
 – is among the fleet of theatre pieces that demand a car on stage.

At the same time, Rachel De-lahay's play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/19/circles-birmingham-rep-rachel-delahay-review>
 Circles, which has travelled from the Birmingham Repertory theatre to the 
Tricycle in London, sets half of its scenes on the upper deck of a London bus. 
And, giving the Department for Transport a dilemma about which production to 
choose for a staff summer outing, a locomotive is on the boards inThe Last 
Train to Scarborough <https://www.sjt.uk.com/content/last-train-scarborough>, 
an adaptation of an Andrew Martin novel at the Stephen Joseph theatre in 
Scarborough, while another entry in this month's theatrical timetables, on the 
Brighton fringe, was Signal Failure, a romantic comedy set on the London 
underground.

Given that Lucy Kirkwood's recent hit Chimerica featured a key scene on a 
jumbo jet heading to Beijing – and was playing in London at the same time as an 
adaptation of Strangers on a Train, which starts in a steam locomotive 
compartment – theatre directors have collected the full set of transportation 
methods in the title of the 1987 Steve Martin film, Planes, Trains and 
Automobiles. And they've gone even further, as the present productions of Wolf 
Hall and Bring Up the Bodies include a number of crucial moments in boats 
floating up the Thames at night.

As is the case with many aspects of theatre, the biggest decision for 
directors and designers of travel scenes is whether the vehicles should be 
realistic or metaphorical. One of the oddities of theatre-going, in my 
experience, is that a real car driven (or even pushed) on stage will always 
elicit a gasp and often a round of applause.
 Right ho Jeeves … Robert Webb and Mark Heap in Perfect Nonsense. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton 
This rule applies not only when the motor is integral to the piece – as, most 
obviously, in the musicals Chitty Chitty Bang Bang and Grease, in which a 
T-bird has a song about it – but also when the vehicle is merely incidental: a 
jeep appearing from the wings in Tom Stoppard's Night and Day; a poor family 
sitting in their clapped-out banger in Simon Stephens' Port; a couple having 
uncomfortable sex on the back seat of a Cortina in Andrea Dunbar's Rita, Sue 
and Bob Too; or a cab driver who has murdered his passenger in Harold Pinter's 
short piece Victoria Station (1982), which is, as far as I know, the only play 
by a major dramatist that takes place entirely inside a car.

Jalopies presumably make such an impact on stage because entrances are an 
important part of theatre, but we expect the actors to walk on or, in certain 
cases such as Peter Pan, to fly in. Liberace was the first performer to make a 
point of being driven on in a limo, and a similar arrival was nicely given to 
Nigel Harman as Simon Cowell in the musical I Can't Sing!

With Liberace, the joke was partly about his grandeur – such a star, he 
couldn't even be asked to walk to his piano – but also about the lavishness of 
a production that can be run to a stretch limo coming on. Part of the reason 
that cars get an ovation is that audiences don't expect to see one in a theatre 
and instinctively understand that it must have been hard to get it there.

Given the difficulty of parking the real thing, many directors have 
understandably opted for pretence or suggestion. Despite the title and the fact 
that one of the characters is a chauffeur, Driving Miss Daisy wrylyfacilitates 
its road scenes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/oct/06/driving-miss-daisy-theatre-review>
 by the driver carrying on a fender and steering wheel, behind which he and the 
actress sit on conventional chairs. A similar trick, helped by Robert Webb 
donning driving cap and goggles, is used for a spin to the country in Jeeves 
and Wooster in Perfect Nonsense.

But, if putting a car on stage is hard, what do you do when the stage 
direction requires a bus? An early Alan Ayckbourn play that the dramatist has 
now suppressed – Standing Room Only – asked the designer to provide a deck, 
seats and a staircase winding upwards. In Circles, director Tessa Walker and 
designer Bob Bailey rely on a line of plastic chairs that alternately represent 
the top of the bus and a front room in Birmingham.
 Top-deck drama … Rachel De-lahay's Circles. Photograph: Graeme Braidwood 
The bus scenes are one example of how the audience at a good play – and 
Circles is very good – will willingly supply the pictures that the scenery 
doesn't. By lying across a pair of chairs, or sitting on the back-rest with 
their feet on the seat, the actors Toyin Kinch and Danusia Samal completely 
convince us that they are on a Number 11 bus and, by leaning across and looking 
or shouting downwards, that they are on the upper deck.

Similarly, in Wolf Hall, the shivering and rocking body language of Ben Miles, 
Paul Jesson and the other actors persuades the audience that they are in a 
barge rather than sitting on a shape hastily improvised from crates and 
furniture: a stage trick that was popularised more than 30 years ago by the 
RSC's Nicholas Nickleby, where hampers were suddenly arranged into a stagecoach.

Whereas Circles and Wolf Hall create their bus and boat from standard static 
furniture, another common way of dramatising transport is through customised 
seating. In Chimerica, a row of business class seats takes us to plane, just as 
a seduction on a London-Edinburgh train in Tom Stoppard's The Real Thing is 
economically set up by the trucking on of a pair of chairs from a first class 
InterCity (the play is set in the early 1980s) compartment. Indeed, from the 
type of seating and overhead racks in a train carriage, senior members of an 
audience will often obligingly infer the year of the setting.

But, however a means of conveyance is represented theatrically, the hardest 
element to reproduce is – due to the limited dimensions of even the biggest 
stages, and increasingly severe health and safety rules – movement. In Peter 
Stein's production of David Harrower's Blackbird, there was a startling moment 
featuring a moving car in a scene set in an underground car park, but, rather 
self-defeatingly, vehicles on stage generally have to stay static.

Video projection has made it easier to suggest movement, through flickery film 
of landscape speeding past behind the window. Publicity material promises that 
The Last Train to Scarborough will feature "film sequences shot on location and 
at the National Railway Museum". Even so, the reason that Stephen Poliakoff, 
who has written for both theatre and screen, chose TV for his magnificent 1980 
drama Caught on a Train was clearly that theatre could never depict train 
travel's sensations of confinement and motion in the way that a camera can. And 
one of the reasons that science fiction has been a much rarer genre in theatre 
than cinema is the difficulty of plausibly staging a spacecraft, weightlessness 
and interplanetary travel.

All travel, though, is tough to stage, unless you have a big budget or a 
complicit audience. In an example of life imitating art, Liberace used to leave 
the theatre in a stretch limo very similar to the one in which he had been 
driven on stage. And, fringe budgets being what they are, I suspect that the 
performers who have pretended to be on a bus in Circles are later to be seen on 
a real one.

• Rachel De-lahay: 'There was lots of flirting, lots of making friends on 
buses' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/25/rachel-de-lahay-flirting-friends-bus-birmingham>

• Angela Lansbury and James Earl Jones: how we made Driving Miss Daisy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/19/how-we-made-driving-miss-daisy-james-earl-jones-angela-lansbury>
 