
Worried about the future role of the book? Consider this tale of two novels. 
In France, disaffected voters have been defiantly readingLa Princesse de Clèves
, a tale of thwarted love by Madame de Lafayette first published in 1678. The 
book is taught in most French classrooms and is generally conceded to be a 
tough read.

But badges inscribed with "I am reading La Princesse de Clèves" were one of 
the most popular items at the recent Paris book fair, with public readings of 
the novel in theatres and universities. The explanation?La Princess de Clèves 
has become the focus of opposition to an unpopular president for one simple 
reason: Sarkozy hates it, and has often expressed his dislike of the book.

A world away, in Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>, another 
novel,The Yacoubian Building, has been attracting almost as much attention as 
its author, Alaa al-Aswany, one of the key players in Egypt's pro-democracy 
movement. His novel, an allegory of Mubarak's regime, privately published in 
2002 in defiance of state censorship, became an instant bestseller across 
the Arab world, a lightning rod for protest against a corrupt and 
dictatorial regime.

As much as Václav Havel in Czechoslovakia, or Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/solzhenitsyn> in the USSR, Aswany has been 
hailed by some commentators as "the voice of Egyptian revolution". We'll see. 
My guess is that this very private man, by profession a dentist whose first 
office was in Cairo's Yacoubian Building, will return to his surgery and his 
writing desk. His books will be published more freely, but he will not become a 
spokesperson for the Nile revolution.

Literature and protest is a romantic theme, but surprisingly rare. In Britain, 
once the battle for the vernacular Bible had been fought and won, very few 
writers ended on the scaffold. Raleigh was executed for plotting against James 
I, Bunyan imprisoned and Defoe pilloried, but the biggest threat to most 
writers was the violence of literary rivals. Later, in parliamentary politics, 
only two prime ministers, Disraeli and Churchill, can be said to have made a 
career out of authorship.

Anthony Trollope stood for parliament in 1868 as a Liberal and described the 
experience as "the most wretched fortnight of my manhood". He came bottom of 
the poll. Graham Greene never ran for office, but loved to flirt with danger, 
in Vietnam, Nice, Central America and Haiti. When President "Papa Doc" Duvalier 
denouncedThe Comedians, Greene boasted that "a writer is not so powerless as he 
usually feels, and a pen, as well as a silver bullet, can draw blood".

In France, Victor Hugo stood for president in 1848, and Emile Zola's 
"J'Accuse" sent shockwaves through the Third Republic during the Dreyfus 
affair, but mainly served to sell newspapers. Whatever the French like to 
believe to the contrary, Madame de Lafayette is the exception that proves the 
rule.

Crossing the Atlantic, it was Abraham Lincoln who signalled the importance of 
Uncle Tom's Cabin when he met Harriet Beecher Stowe. He is reported to have 
said: "So you're the little woman who wrote the book that made this great war." 
Subsequently in the US there has been a lively, almost frivolous, tradition of 
literature and politics.

Gore Vidal ran for Congress in 1960 and lost. His rival, Norman Mailer, stood 
for mayor of New York City in 1969 with the slogan "No more bullshit" and came 
fourth. My personal  favourite, the singer-crime writer Kinky Friedman, 
attempted to become Texas governor on the slogan: "Why the hell not?". He lost.

Even in Russia, the relationship between writers and revolution has its absurd 
as well as its heroic side. Solzhenitsyn fought against the Nazis in 1944 and 
became disillusioned with Stalin. Writing home, he made a joke about the 
leader's moustache and, when the letter was intercepted by the NKVD, was 
arrested and sentenced to eight years' hard labour for "disseminating 
anti-Soviet propaganda".

There was no trial, and he spent the next several years as a prisoner. This 
was the inspiration forThe Gulag Archipelago. When the Soviet Union collapsed 
in 1991, he was living in exile in Vermont. Great novelists tend to avoid the 
barricades, whatever our fantasies of dissent.

Borrowers can't get enough of the Gruffalo

I was pleased to see, from the Public Lending Right's latest figures, that The 
Gruffalo remains the most borrowed children's title in the UK. Its author, 
Julia Donaldson, took the opportunity to sound the alarm for the defence of 
libraries, which, she said, are how kids "find out which books they like best 
and develop a love of reading". The other message for hard times from the 
PLR data is that writing books for children might be one way to make money. Of 
the five authors who clocked up more than a million loans in 2009-2010, three 
(Daisy Meadows, Jacqueline Wilson and Francesca Simon) write for a juvenile 
audience. The most borrowed author in the UK turns out to be thriller writer 
James Patterson. JK Rowling, who hardly needs the money, is now just number 87 
in the UK charts.

A wild idea that wasn't just a flight of fancy


Vladimir Nabokov, the author of Pnin, Pale Fire and Lolita, was also a keen 
amateur lepidopterist, with heterodox ideas about the evolution of the species. 
In butterfly circles, his belief in the transmigration of thePolyommatus icarus 
(common blue) was treated as the whimsical speculations of a great fabulist. 
Happily, Nabokov has finally triumphed. An expert team of Harvard 
lepidopterists has now confirmed his theories in a paper just published by the 
Royal Society. Nabokov's blues did migrate to the New World from Asia, after 
all.
 