
 Ararat  (120 mins, 15) Directed by Atom Egoyan; starring Christopher Plummer, 
Charles Aznavour, Elias Koteas, Bruce Greenwood

 Werckmeister Harmonies (145 mins, 12A) Directed by Béla Tarr; starring Lars 
Rudolph, Peter Fitz, Hanna Schygulla

 Ghosts of the Abyss (61 mins, PG) Directed by James Cameron; starring Bill 
Paxton

 How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days (116 mins, 12A) Directed by Donald Petrie; 
starring Kate Hudson, Matthew McConaughey, Bebe Neuwirth

 Bulletproof Monk (105 mins, 12A) Directed by Paul Hunter; starring Chow 
Yun-Fat, Seann William Scott

Canadian filmmakers either migrate to Hollywood and lose their national 
identity or, likeAtom Egoyan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/atom-egoyan>, 
Denys Arcand and David Cronenberg, stay north of the 49th Parallel and attain 
an impressive degree of individuality. For 20 years now, Egoyan, an Armenian 
born in Cairo and raised in Toronto, has been making elaborately patterned 
movies that explore issues of identity and morality through the influence of 
technological media on our perceptions of ourselves and the world.

Most recently, he has adapted congenial novels and plays - Russell Banks's The 
Sweet Hereafter, William Trevor's Felicia's Journey, Beckett's Krapp's Last 
Tape. But with Ararat, he has written an original screenplay on a subject close 
to his heart - the genocidal programme conducted by Turkey against its Armenian 
inhabitants in 1915.

In this many-layered picture, a distinguished Armenian director (Charles 
Aznavour) comes to Canada to make a blockbuster movie centring on the 1915 
siege at the town of Van from a real-life memoir by an American medical 
missionary, Dr Clarence Ussher.

The making of the film is interwoven with various lives: a Canadian of 
Armenian descent whose husband was killed attempting to assassinate a Turkish 
diplomat; her son who's in search of his heritage; Arshile Gorky, a survivor of 
the siege at Van, who is seen painting his memorial portrait, The Artist and 
his Mother in New York in 1934; and a homophobic customs officer (Christopher 
Plummer) whose gay son lives with a Turkish-Canadian actor playing a sadistic 
villain in Aznavour's movie.

It's a fascinating approach to the way a controversial subject is remembered 
and mediated, an event the Turks deny ever happened and of which Hitler 
remarked to his associates: 'Who recalls the extermination of the Armenians?'

Sadly, the ingredients in this rich mix fail to gel or to compose themselves 
into a formally coherent mosaic. The private lives don't illuminate the public 
events, especially those concerning the household of the customs inspector, 
which come over like someone using a hammer to complete a jigsaw puzzle.

The Hungarian director Béla Tarr spent four years making  Werckmeister 
Harmonies. An allegorical movie in the manner of Tarkovsky, Herzog and Jancsó, 
it's set in a bleak village on the Hungarian plains that is being taken over by 
a strange pestilential force at some unspecified time in the past 50 years. The 
central character, a simple young man called János, is obsessed with the order 
of the cosmos and the disorder of the world, which he observes as he wanders 
around in the course of his job as postman.

The muttering natives are driven into an outbreak of violence and looting, 
seemingly due to the presence in a touring circus of a stuffed whale and an 
unseen figure called 'the Prince'. Meanwhile, János's aunt is organising a 
'Clean Town Movement' and the army arrives to establish martial law.

The central thrust of this pessimistic fable is obvious, though individual 
sequences are frequently puzzling. It's shot in static or very slow-moving 
long-takes; the monochrome images are deliberately oppressive; the pace would 
strike the organisers of a state funeral as excessively slow.

James Cameron's hour-long 3-D Imax documentary,  The Ghosts of the Abyss, is 
an appendix to the same director's Titanic. Cameron, the actor Bill Paxton 
(from the framing sequences of Titanic ) and various scientists and historians 
go down in mini-subs to explore the wreck of the Titanic and discover how much 
still survives. It's rather fascinating, though somewhat factitious, and one 
could have done without Paxton's 'gee whiz' commentary.

 How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days is an old-fashioned sex comedy starring Kate 
Hudson in the Doris Day role of an ambitious journalist writing the eponymous 
article for Composure magazine so she can move on to more serious assignments. 
The object of her attentions, Matthew McConaughey in the Rock Hudson role, is a 
womanising adman, who unknown to her has made a career-advancing bet that 
within 10 days he can make her fall in love with him.

So she tries to put him off by acting dumb and cosy, breaking up his poker 
night, taking him to a Celine Dion concert, giving him a puppy that pees on his 
pool table. He, of course, accepts every humiliation with good grace. It's a 
comedy of embarrassment, repetitive and overlong. The best performance comes 
from Bebe Neuwirth as the steel-fist-in-velvet-glove editor of Composure, an 
underwritten part that could not have been better played by Eve Arden or Lauren 
Bacall.

Chow Yun-Fat, the great Hong Kong star of John Woo action movies and Ang Lee's 
Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon, is ill-served by Bulletproof Monk, a 
flat-footed Hollywood comedy thriller in which he plays an ageless, Buddhist 
monk guarding a secret scroll sought after by Nazis in the 1940 prelude and by 
neo-Nazis in the rest of the film. It's a martial arts version of Raiders of 
the Lost Ark and strictly takeaway kung-fuey.
 