
The actor Christian Rodska <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Christian_Rodska> has 
an impressive list of credits: 1,500 radio broadcasts, not to mention theatre 
and screen work, we are told in the programme forLisa D'Amour's new play 
Detroit at the National theatre <http://www.lisadamour.com/>. Anyone looking 
forward to seeing him on stage here, though, is required to wait a long time. 
Rodska's appearance, though crucial, must rank as one of the latest in the 
theatrical canon: the acting equivalent of those footballers who come on in the 
89th minute and score the winning goal.

The last-minute entrance is a rare but intriguing theatrical convention, which 
places particular demands on the actor – who, after the "beginners to stage, 
please" call on the tannoy, can be required to spend hours in the wings or 
dressing room – and can significantly affect the audience's relationship with 
the story.

In classical theatre, such delayed participation is fairly common because so 
many plays deal with invasion or conquest, which – unless a cross-cutting 
technique is employed,as in Shakespeare's Antony and Cleopatra 
<http://www.shakespeare-literature.com/Antony_and_Cleopatra/0.html> – will 
inevitably prevent the victor from showing up until the final tableau. In 
Hamlet, for example, the performer cast asFortinbras 
<http://www.shmoop.com/hamlet/fortinbras.html> may have to wait for anything up 
to four hours to come on; likewise Richmond in Richard III (assuming, that is, 
that they haven't been playing other roles beforehand for reasons of artistic 
economy).

The economics of theatre have also had another effect on held-back entrances. 
In a large-cast historical play, only viewers who have studied the text have 
any sense of who will come on when. But in a new play such as Detroit, anyone 
who has bought a programme or picked up a cast list is aware that – with four 
of the five listed participants on stage from the opening scene and with this 
quartet remaining together for most of the rest of the play – there is one more 
intervention to come. This knowledge, I think, becomes part of the tension of 
the drama, making us wonder what circumstances will bring in the postponed 
presence and whether they will inflame or calm, complicate or resolve the 
situation.

A cast list can also have the contrary effect of reducing expectation. Even 
someone who is seeing Beckett's Waiting for Godot for the first time knows, if 
they have looked at the programme, that the title character remains an 
absentee. Aware of this risk, the playwrightAnthony Shaffer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/anthonyshaffer> used cunningly inaccurate 
entries in the programme to mislead the audience as to how many actors and 
characters are involved in his whodunnit Sleuth (1970) – sensible and necessary 
because an honest cast list would dramatically reduce the tension and ruin one 
of the most startling reveals in theatre. (Those who plan to see this fine play 
for the first time in the future should look away until the end of this 
bracket: Shaffer employed anagrams of names to prevent readers of the programme 
anticipating that a character crucially re-enters in disguise, and that there 
are more characters than there are actors.)

For me, the most effective use of delayed entrance in recent theatre occurs in 
Simon Stephens'Punk Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/sep/10/punk-rock-simon-stephens> 
(2009), a play that involves an act of violence in a school library. Those who 
have checked out the personnel in advance know that all of the characters are 
students, apart from one adult character. So, as the situation worsens on stage 
and the pupils speculate about the possible arrival of an authority figure to 
sort things out, informed viewers know that a grown-up will arrive at some 
point – although, vitally, we don't know when.

Personally, when attending a new or unfamiliar play, I always add up the 
characters listed in the programme and become intrigued if one is still in the 
wings as the action seems to be nearing its end. This arithmetic is part of the 
tactics of drama and, in different ways, D'Amour, Stephens and Shaffer all play 
the game with skill.
 