
National guidelines that advise people how to lose weight are seriously flawed 
and grossly overstate how quickly they will reach their targets, scientists say.

Researchers found people lost only half as much weight as expected in a year 
if they followed the advice given by theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> and US health organisations.

The problem came to light when government scientists at the US National 
Institutes ofHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> in Maryland 
realised standard weight loss advice – including its own – failed to account 
for changes in metabolism as people lost weight.

The rule of thumb used by the NHS and other health services assumes that if a 
person cuts 500 calories from their daily diet, they will lose about 450g (1lb) 
each week, regardless of how long they adhered to the regime.

But as people lose weight, their metabolism slows until they reach a new 
stable bodyweight. Their weight loss is further complicated by how much body 
fat and muscle they have when they start dieting.

"Dietitians and physicians have used this rule of thumb for a long time, but 
it turns out to be completely wrong. It doesn't account for metabolic changes 
that happen when people change diet," saidKevin Hall 
<http://www2.niddk.nih.gov/NIDDKLabs/IntramuralFaculty/HallKevin.htm>, who led 
the research.

"If you change calories, your metabolism slows down and eventually you reach a 
plateau."

He told the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of 
Science: "If you want to lose 10lb of weight eventually, you need to cut 100 
calories a day from your diet. You will get halfway there in a year, but then 
plateau after three years. The old rule of thumb predicts twice as much weight 
loss after a year and gets worse after that."

The glitch has consequences that go far beyond the frustration of obese and 
overweight people who are trying to shed weight. Public policies drawn up to 
tackle the rising obesity epidemic have to be reassessed, Hall said, and in 
cases where this has been done, their effectiveness looked much less impressive 
than before.

Hall re-examined a proposal for a "fat tax" that added 20% to the cost of 
sweet and unhealthy foods. Using the flawed weight loss guidelines, obesity 
rates in the US could be slashed from 67% to 50% in five years. But when he did 
the calculation again, taking metabolism into account, the figures were less 
rosy. After five years of the tax, obesity might drop to 62%, but crucially 
fall no further.

Last year, researchers writing in the Lancet called on governments to bring in 
measures <http://www.thelancet.com/series/obesity> to reverse the rise of 
obesity, which could affect an extra 11 million people in the UK in the next 20 
years. Almost 50% of British men could be obese by 2030, they wrote.

Based on the work, Hall and his colleagues have created an online tool 
<http://bwsimulator.niddk.nih.gov/> that people from adolescence to late middle 
age can use to get more accurate advice on how to lose weight. The tool, which 
can be used by GPs and patients, then works out how many calories they need to 
cut, either through dieting or more exercise, and how they can then maintain 
the healthier weight.

Rather than demoralising people, Hall hopes more accurate advice would help 
overweight and obese people have realistic expectations.

"If you expected to lose twice as much weight after a year than you actually 
lose, I think that's horribly demotivating for people. I would rather have 
realistic figures out there for people to gauge their expectations and gauge 
their interventions," he said.

The tool can be used to design personalised weight loss programmes that tailor 
the pace of a person's weight loss.

Hall said they provided "a good reality check for how long weight loss takes, 
and what changes in eating and exercise are required to achieve and maintain a 
goal weight."

A Department of Health spokesman said: "We do not give specific 
recommendations on how much people should eat while dieting as this will be 
different for each of us. Anyone who wants specific advice should speak to a 
health professional. We keep all international evidence under review."
 