
For Vanity Fair's annual ­Hollywood issue a few years back, photographer Annie 
Leibovitz <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/annie-leibovitz> created a 
classic image of a film director at work. Posing beneath a stormy sky, George 
Clooney stood with his shirt ripped open, trousers tucked rakishly into his 
boots, arms outstretched – a young Orson Welles meets Michelangelo's vision of 
God. His crew were a crowd of female models in flesh-coloured lingerie; not the 
obvious costume for a camera operator, but there you are. This was theauteur as 
masculine genius, a warrior amid a sea of passive women.

This has long been the archetype of the film director, but over the last few 
months a host of women have been making waves: Sam Taylor-Wood with Nowhere 
Boy, Lone Scherfig with An Education, Andrea Arnold with Fish Tank. Then there 
areKathryn Bigelow <https://www.theguardian.com/film/kathryn-bigelow> and Jane 
Campion, both trailing Oscar buzz for The Hurt Locker and Bright Star 
respectively.

So, is this a new era for female film-makers? Unfortunately, the numbers 
suggest otherwise. In a study published last year, Professor Martha Lauzen of 
San Diego State University found that only 9% of Hollywood directors in 
2008 were women – the same figure she had recorded in 1998. If Bigelow is 
nominated for the best directing Oscar in March, it will be only the fourth 
time a woman has been nominated, out of more than 400 director nominations 
altogether (the other three were Lina Wertmüller in 1976,Jane Campion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jane-campion> in 1993, and Sofia Coppola in 
2003). No woman has ever won. No wonder, then, that last year Campion entreated 
­aspiring female directors to "put on their coats of armour and get going".

Once, the dearth of women directors could be traced to the small numbers 
entering film school. These days, that's not the case. Lauzen says women are 
now well represented in US film schools, while Neil Peplow, of the UK training 
organisation Skillset, says women make up around 34% of directing ­students in 
Britain. That translates into a large number of female ­graduates making short 
films, but few moving on to features.

Over the years, this failure to progress has often been blamed on a chauvinist 
culture; and certainly, talking to ­established directors, it's easy to 
­uncover tales of overt sexism – from the mildly disconcerting to the downright 
illegal. The British film directorAntonia Bird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/antonia-bird> (Priest, Mad Love) says dryly 
that on her first directing job, "I was the only woman there, and all the guys 
just ­assumed I was the producer's PA. That was good." Director Beeban Kidron 
(Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit, Bridget Jones: The Edge of Reason) once sacked 
a male assistant director who called her "the little lady". At the extreme end, 
US film director Penelope Spheeris, who made the $100m-grossing Wayne's World, 
remembers meeting an executive at the Beverly Hills Hotel when she was at the 
start of her career. "And the guy was pretty drunk, and he ripped some of my 
clothes trying to take them off me, and when I got up and started screaming he 
said, 'Did you want to make this music video or not?'" She pauses. "You say 
sexist, I say felony."

When it comes to sexism, Martha Coolidge – director of Rambling Rose and Real 
Genius, as well as the first woman president of the Directors Guild of America 
– has heard it all. There was the story of the female president of a major 
studio who said "no woman over 40 could possibly have the stamina to ­direct a 
­feature film. I've heard ­people say that the kind of films they want to make 
are too big, too tough for a female director. The worst was when my agent sent 
another woman director in for an interview, and afterwards the guy called up 
and said, 'Never send anyone again who I wouldn't want to fuck.'"

There are signs that this culture is changing. A 2009 report – carried out 
by the UK networking organisationWomen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> in Film and Television (WFTV) 
and Skillset – found that, while "a number of older participants reported 
direct experience of overt sexism, none of the younger participants [did]". But 
Coolidge insists that the film industry – and Hollywood specifically – remains 
a minefield, because "there is such a ­sexual component for the men who go into 
it. If all they wanted to do is to make money, they could just go to Wall 
Street. If you're a male executive, a producer – and I'm not talking about 
everybody, but the vast majority – you're there partly because you're 
­surrounded by gorgeous girls. And that means that the older a woman is, the 
less they want them around. A woman would disrupt the flow of their lives." 
Coolidge and others point out that this is as true for black, working-class, 
and gay film-makers – in fact, ­anyone outside a small ­circle of privilege.

More subtle reasons have been mooted for the dearth of women at the top. One 
suggestion I heard is that women are brought up to ­negotiate in very 
­different ways from men, which is problematic in a male-dominated environment. 
Coolidge doesn't agree with this – "there are plenty of women who are good 
­negotiators" – but Kate Kinninmont of WFTV says she has noticed that, while 
"women are brilliant at pitching ­somebody else, they're not often good at 
pitching themselves". Lauzen says reporters have told her that "when they talk 
to the guys, they can't shut 'em up. But when they talk to the women, it's like 
pulling teeth . . . Women have to promote themselves, but when they do, it's 
seen as being unfeminine."

There is also the simple fact that the fewer women there are at the top, the 
fewer role models and mentors there are; those women who do forge ahead often 
talk of having to actively ignore the figures. Kidron says that when she was 
making her first film, she had "a phone call from a journalist who said, 'Do 
you know you're only the third woman ever to make a feature film in Britain?' 
And I said, 'Oh, please don't tell me,' and put the phone down, ­because I 
didn't want the pressure."

A lack of female film-makers also seems to have made it difficult for ­studios 
to imagine women in charge. Film is big business, filled with financial risk, 
and so "the whole industry is based on demonstrable success," says Peplow. 
"Unless something has worked in the past, it's very rare that people will take 
a risk. There's this perception that, well, traditionally it's a man's role, so 
we won't buck that."

It's true that men have directed the great majority of high-grossing films 
over the last decade. The website ­indiewire.com recently reported that, of the 
241 films that had grossed $100m or more in the US over the last 10 years, only 
seven were directed by women (Shrek, Shark Tale, Twilight, What Women Want, The 
Proposal, Mamma Mia!, and Something's Gotta Give).

But a closer look at the figures reveals that women film-makers aren't a 
bigger financial risk. In 2008, Lauzen conducted a study called Women@the Box 
Office, which found that the key to big grosses wasn't the gender of the 
film-maker, but the budget. Big budgets equalled big grosses. "When women and 
men have similar budgets," she wrote, "the ­resulting box office grosses are 
also similar."

The problem is that the biggest budgets tend to be given to films that appeal 
to teenage boys – still considered the most frequent, most enthusiastic 
moviegoers (this may be because so many films are aimed at them, but that's 
another argument). There's no reason why women can't make films for this 
audience – as Spheeris did with Wayne's World. But female directors say that it 
is difficult to get assigned to the kind of comedy, horror or action movie that 
would establish their box office chops.

Despite the enormous success of films such as Mamma Mia! and ­Twilight, 
executives often seem ­perplexed by films with female themes. "I've been there 
when a film with a female protagonist has been screened," says Lauzen, "and the 
guys at the top go, 'Well, I don't get it.' When the majority of people in 
power are male, who are they going to relate to most on screen, and who do they 
think other people are going to relate to? Males. That's no big conspiracy. I 
don't even think it's conscious, honestly." Bird agrees. "One of the big 
problems is that, 90% of the time, the people who you pitch your idea to are 
male, and even though they might be very ­sympathetic, they do look at the 
world from a different perspective."

I ask Lauzen whether she thinks ­female film careers are interrupted by 
motherhood, and she says no, as do Kinninmont and Coolidge (the latter has 
extensive experience of juggling the two). They point out that directors tend 
to be highly driven; there are many cases of heavily pregnant women and young 
mothers making films. "A lot of them will say, 'Look, I wouldn't let that get 
in my way,'" says Lauzen.

Kidron, however, says that motherhood has affected her ­career "more than 
gender . . . At a certain point I had to stop making films in America, and make 
them here, which made a huge difference. Obviously men also give up an 
­enormous amount for their families, but there are many male directors who have 
partners who take primary care of the family, or who are free to travel with 
them. That is rarely true the other way around. I absolutely don't want 
to suggest that women are unreliable ­because we're mothers – on the ­contrary. 
But the question of who brings up the kids has a material ­effect on all 
women's careers."

Bird agrees. "Film directing is more than a full-time job. When you're ­making 
a film, it takes up every day of your life, 16 to 18 hours a day, for a year. 
Trying to have children and being a film director is virtually impossible 
­unless you're rich." Bird doesn't have children: "If I look deep down inside 
myself," she says, "I'm quite sure that I never did it because I never really 
had time."

The problems facing female ­directors are structural and systemic, a tangled 
mix of sexism, cultural ­differences between men and women, and maternity 
issues; in this, they ­mirror the problems affecting many women in 
male-dominated workplaces. But the film industry magnifies all this. As 
Spheeris says: "When the stakes are high, when fame and ­extreme amounts of 
money and power are involved, it's a jungle out there. It's brutal. How hard do 
you want to fight?"

Thankfully, many women are ­prepared to fight. British director Lindy Heymann, 
for instance, whose second feature, Kicks, is released this year, says that one 
of the great lessons from shooting that film was the realisation that she 
"didn't have to be liked, that that's the last thing you should be thinking 
about". She's just one of the film-makers heeding Campion's ­rally cry, getting 
her armour on; given the high visibility of female film-­makers now – Drew 
Barrymore makes her directorial debut this year, and there are films in the 
pipeline from Claire Denis, Gurinder Chadha, Nicole Holofcener, Julie Taymor 
and Sofia Coppola – perhaps others will be ­inspired, too. If Bigelow raises 
that gold statuette in March, many more women might breach the boys' club.
 