
Moribundus sum was Martin Heidegger’s description of the human species. He 
turned Descartes on his head to proclaim, “I die, therefore I am”.

It is actually this that separates human beings from other animals: our 
consciousness of death and of its inevitability. A visit to any religious 
ceremony in the world will convince you of this statement. The constant cry of 
the priest and the supplicant throughout history has been a rejection of the 
finality of death. From the nubile virgins waiting beyond this mortal realm for 
some believers, to the various incarnations of nirvana offered by all world 
religions, the struggle against the anti-utopia that is death is ever present.

As we age we are visited by little splinters and shards of what awaits us in 
the form of illnesses and infirmities, and for those who are diagnosed with 
medical certainty rather than vague promise, death itself comes knocking at the 
door.

In 2010, I was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis, which I wrote about 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2012/may/03/atheist-diagnosed-ms-peter-thompson>
 at the time, thenagain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2012/sep/09/ms-cancer-god> 
when my wife was diagnosed with breast cancer. My point was to affirm that this 
mere accident of contingent existence had no rhyme nor reason and could not be 
blamed on anything or anyone. And yet, people I talk to still look for reasons, 
for explanations, for words of comfort.

The real question is whether we should have the right to make the decision for 
ourselves when the time comes

There also come very practical questions about how to face this certainty. Do 
werage against the dying of the light 
<https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/do-not-go-gentle-good-night> until the 
very last possible moment? Or do we welcome death in and deal with him like any 
other familiar face? If we all carry death within us, then surely we must 
recognise it when it comes calling.

I recently met someone with MS who has taken practicality to its ultimate 
limit and has already paid a deposit – literally – on their own mortality by 
arranging with Dignitas their own end. Metaphorically the bags are packed and 
waiting in the hallway for the moment when the Swiss organisation decides that 
they are ready to take the final step.

When they told me this, the very matter-of-fact delivery – because it was a 
matter of fact – took my breath away. Of course the visit to Dignitas or 
Switzerland has become a modern shorthand but I had never before met someone 
who had actually been to the edge, looked over and willingly commenced the 
journey into nothingness. For them nothingness was preferable to a life of pain 
and suffering in which their chosen career and intellectual interests could no 
longer be pursued. What this decision also made clear to me was that I would be 
one of the ragers who would kick and scream my way right to the very edge of 
that precipice.

If you are lucky enough to live in certain US states 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euthanasia_in_the_United_States> or Switzerland, 
then the opportunity for you to choose how and when you die is much easier. 
When I wrote about this previously, I was still in the middle of the 
decision-making process, but things have moved on. I have taken early 
retirement as the stresses and strains of working in an increasingly difficult 
university post grew to a point where I was sleeping on a foldout mattress 
under my desk for snatched moments of rest between lectures and meetings.

We need better palliative care, not assisted dying | Zara Aziz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/09/better-palliative-care-not-assisted-dying>
The real question is whether we should have the right to make the decision for 
ourselves when the time comes. There have been many documentaries and many 
thousands of words written about this conundrum, with those who have chosen to 
interpret their lives as not belonging to themselves but to their God at the 
forefront.

Fair enough, I always think; that is their decision and it should be 
respected. But often this respect is not reciprocated, so that the ethical and 
practical considerations about assisted dying are transformed into 
moral/religious ones, which carry within them fundamental opposition to the 
possibility of assisting at the end of life. Equally, disabled rights 
campaigners are right to say that life with a disability is still a precious 
and wonderful life, but the decision about when to end one’s life is not up to 
other disabled people any more than it is to priests. What is more, the 
decision to end it does not reflect a desire to end the lives of all disabled 
people, nor to denigrate their choices and lives.

As Jojo Moyes, the writer of the film Me Before You 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/02/me-before-you-disabled-backlash-not-pitied>
 – a less than satisfactory romantic take on the issue – says, the decision is 
one that has to be left up to the individual. Where it is right to intervene, 
however, is in the protection of the vulnerable who may be cajoled or forced 
into signing their own death warrants against their own interests or desires.

The very fact that my friend was not able to go through with their decision 
because Dignitas did not consider them to be ready shows that safeguards can be 
built in. However, philosophically and ethically, there is a powerful case to 
be made both for a Swiss solution in the UK, and that rules made by and for a 
predominantly religious society should not be adhered to in what is now a 
functionally secular state.

With the correct safeguards we can stop the demeaning and expensive trips to 
Switzerland and regulate what has long been going on behind closed doors anyway.
 