
I know exactly when I caught the bug for insects. It was in the French 
Pyrenees, at a now defunct scientific insect film competition called Fifi. I 
was sipping coffee in a square, listening to the natural soundtrack of cicadas, 
when I was suddenly surrounded by villagers dressed up as insects. Grandmothers 
with wings, kids wearing praying mantis masks, and a few exuberant youths on 
grasshopper stilts were all swarming around the plaza. At that moment, Pestival 
was born.

When I came down from the mountains, I knew I had to put on an insect arts 
festival – a festival that celebrates the importance of insects. Without 
insects, we wouldn't be here. They play a vital role in our web of energy 
exchange and, out of the 10 quintillion or so insects on earth, only a tiny 
minority are actually dangerous to us, the rest are working on our behalf, 
acting as caretakers for our planet and pollinating our flowers and crops.

I work beside the Snowdon aviary at London Zoo, which allows me to appreciate 
urban wildlife every day. I love all the exotic and endangered animals that 
call the zoo home, but I also love the other visitors that come and go as they 
please: the herons that steal the penguins' fish, the starlings that pick up 
the children's lunchtime leftovers, and especially the abundant insects. I like 
to imagine that they secretly rule the zoo.

Insects <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/insects> are supremely well 
adapted to city life. The city's hedgerows, brownfield sites, parks, meadows 
and reserves can all be used as foraging grounds. And our urban gardens and 
window boxes are in bloom all year round, providing insects with a varied, 
year-long supply of food. Cities also enjoy a milder climate, allowing insects 
to come and go much of the year. Our flower corridors and vegetable patches are 
helping the insect world as much as they provide pleasure to us, which is good 
news for everyone.

Our city critters may turn out to be very important in supporting insect 
diversity. The rise in urban beekeeping, for example, has led to an increase in 
urban colonies that are thriving at a time when many in the countryside are 
succumbing to the mysterious colony collapse disorder. Perhaps because bees in 
the city have a diverse diet, it keeps their immune systems strong, unlike 
those subject to intensive farming, pesticides and a predominantly monoculture 
food source.

There is something about insects that unites us all, I think. You can be 
anywhere in the world and be close to an insect. This is true whether you are 
in the city or in the wilds, inside your home or on your way to work. The fact 
that insects are busy getting on with their miniature lives alongside us is of 
constant comfort to me. So the next time you encounter one at home or on your 
urban journey, please greet it with a smile and not a stomp.

How to discover insects in the city

It's easy to get immersed in the world of urban insects: here are a few 
suggestions to start you off …
 Photograph: Alamy 
Seek out some rarities
• The stag beetle, a globally threatened species, has a stronghold in south 
London. Despite its fearsome appearance, Britain's biggest beetle is 
totally harmless.
• Streaked bombardier beetles are found in just one place in the UK, a 
brownfield site near London's City airport. They are harmless to humans but 
shoot predators with a boiling noxious spray, accompanied by a puff of smoke 
and a popping noise.
• Visit Burnham Beeches woods on the outskirts of Slough and become immersed 
in colonies of southern wood ants. Britain's largest ant, their nests are up to 
a metre high and contain up to 100,000 ants each.

Insect-friendly organisations 
• National Insect Week is 25 June–1 July (nationalinsectweek.co.uk).
• At the Science Museum (sciencemuseum.org.uk) you can dress up as a cockroach 
and see the world through cockroach eyes.
• Visit the great bug house at ZSL London Zoo (zsl.org), the butterfly forest 
at Bristol Zoo Gardens (bristolzoo.org.uk) or go pond dipping at one of the 
many WWT wetlands centres around the country (wwt.org.uk).
• Visit the Macclesfield Silk Museums (silkmacclesfield.org.uk) and learn 
about the story of silk, from cocoon to catwalk.
• Drop into London's British Museum (britishmuseum.org) and see a 
2,000-year-old giant scarab beetle from ancient Egypt.
• Keep up to date with urban events and rare sightings at the following 
websites: buglife.org.uk, ptes.org, royensoc.co.uk, wildlondon.org.uk, 
amentsoc.org.
BN

• Bridget Nicholls is the director of Pestival <http://www.pestival.org>. She 
is also the first artist-in-residence atZSL London zoo 
<http://www.zsl.org/zsl-london-zoo//>
 