
You've got the qualifications, you've got the experience, you've got the job, 
right? Wrong. You may very well have the brains but if you are as interesting 
as aPhil Neville commentary 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/football/world-cup/10902817/World-Cup-2014-445-viewers-complain-about-boring-Phil-Neville.html>
 then would an employer really want you to join their company?

Often degrees, qualifications and your education can be summed up with simple 
grades. This helps the interviewer narrow down their search from a mountain of 
eager candidates to a handful that meets, or indeed exceeds, the job 
description criteria.

Once this is done, then comes the tricky part. Having sculpted an idea of your 
academic background and your general presentation skills, employers must then 
attempt to build a picture of the type of person your CV portrays and most 
importantly, whether or not you are the right fit for the business.

It's no coincidence that in an increasingly competitive job market, more and 
more employers are looking beyond qualifications and focusing on personal 
interests to identify your individual talent, personality and creativity. In 
addition to enhancing your qualifications, your hobbies can actually fill the 
gaps in your work experience and even substitute for skills stipulated on the 
job description. Giving careful consideration to your personal interests can 
set you apart from the competition, give potential employers a more rounded 
view of your personality and clinch you that coveted spot on the shortlist.

There isn't necessarily a one-size-fits-all method for highlighting your 
interests and, arguably, some professions will rate your personal hobbies more 
highly than others, so consider how you tailor your interests. In sales-driven 
sectors, where client relationships are the heartbeat of the business, they'll 
be more interested in seeing how you interact with people outside work. If you 
identify yourself as a member of a sports team, for example, it's a good 
indication that you are sociable, committed and can mix with people from all 
walks of life.

Not only can your hobbies help you to stand out from the crowd but they can 
also provide you with those invaluable examples of where you've overcome 
adversity or tackled a difficult situation and emerged the other side. Be 
specific. Discussing how you came back from behind to win a football 
championship or stepped into a lead role at the last minute can set you apart 
from the competition and prove that you're able to think on your feet, helping 
you to stand out as a motivated and confident candidate. It also helps to 
elaborate on your leisure activities, rather than just supplying a long list. 
Anyone who's coached the under 11s: marshalled their team mates on a football, 
rugby, hockey or cricket pitch, on a netball or basketball court or on any 
other sporting platform will have shown the supervisory skills required to 
succeed in the workplace.

Match your hobbies to the attributes listed in the job specification and, 
where possible, mirror the language used at your interview. If an employer is 
looking for a candidate with an ambitious streak, highlight how you've improved 
your interpersonal skills and honed your competitive edge by joining a club or 
team and achieving success by developing within that environment.

Once an employer can understand your personality and what motivates you, they 
can then begin to see where you will fit in the team structure and the benefits 
you will bring to the business.

So how do I show off my interests?

Ultimately, hobbies demonstrate to an employer that you are a passionate, 
enthusiastic and engaging individual and that there's more to you than good 
grades. CV's are your foot in the door and, while you may be as qualified as 
Einstein, if your hobbies and interests lack any real substance, then why would 
an employer invite you to interview? It's important to have interests that 
actively promote you, and best reflect your skill set.

So, a few things to remember the next time you update your CV:

• Pick genuine hobbies that demonstrate an element of both your personality 
and your skills and how they will benefit the business. You might be keen on 
cats but unless you bring something to the table, such as volunteering in a 
cattery at the weekends, you're not giving them much to go on.

• Can you link your interests with any achievements? This way you can further 
highlight your passion, commitment and determination to succeed. Maybe your 
tennis team has gone up a league since you joined, or your amateur dramatics 
group has reached a regional final – think about how you can use your progress 
to highlight your drive and ambition.

• Make your hobbies sound appealing and interesting to employers. You don't 
want to give away the whole story, but capture their interest and make them 
curious to find out more about you. Your interests may also provide some of the 
best examples you have of overcoming a challenge or turning a negative 
situation into a positive.

• Be honest. Mentioning that you're a keen polo player when the closest you've 
come is a donkey ride at Blackpool might backfire if you're recruited for a 
charity polo match down the track. If you progress to interview stage and get 
rumbled, it's unlikely that you'll be joining the business any time soon.

The thing with hobbies is that, most of the time, it is all about being open 
to new experiences. Being a hobbyist is much more than collecting stamps, it's 
about following your passions, learning new skills and above all, enjoying 
yourself. If an employer can see that, then you are halfway through the door.

Chris Smith is chief executive officer at MyJobMatcher.com 
<http://www.MyJobMatcher.com>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook 
<https://register.theguardian.com/careers/?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
.
 