
It’s a disruptive world. Back when the current ruling class were at school, 
disruptive behaviour was punished. Today disruption is cool and SMAC (the 
acronym for the technologies driving business innovation, social, mobile and 
cloud) is the new normal. Businesses able to ride the tidal wave of disruptive 
change are steadily wiping out those that don’t and CEOs are left wondering if 
they’ll be the next to be Ubered or Amazoned.

The world has changed. The first industrial revolution mechanised the means of 
production using water and steam power; the second created mass production with 
electric power; the third used electronics and information technology to 
automate production. The fourth and current industrial revolution combines the 
physical, digital and biological worlds, bringing together previously 
unconnected areas such as artificial intelligence, machine learning, 3D 
printing, nanotechnology, genetics and biology. It’s the Internet of 
Everything, changing how people and things connect, how we collect and harness 
data, and how they all work together to facilitate intelligent processes.

Digital technologies are now changing the way education is delivered, 
accessed, assessed and perceived. And, across the world, new jobs are being 
created while others are ruthlessly eliminated at a pace humanity has never 
seen before.

With robots, is a life without work one we'd want to live?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/26/with-robots-is-a-life-without-work-one-wed-want-to-live>
A CSIRO report 
<https://www.data61.csiro.au/Our-expertise/Expertise-Strategic-insight/Tomorrows-Digitally-Enabled-Workforce>
 earlier this year estimated that nearly half of Australian jobs are at risk of 
computerisation. Early computerisation waves only affected jobs in 
labour-intensive, readily coded repetitive tasks but the evolution of cognitive 
computing has shifted into areas previously believed to be uniquely human. 
Driverless cars, wearable computing and DNA nanobots have quickly moved from 
science fiction to science fact and are desirable.

It is estimated 
<https://www.dol.gov/dol/aboutdol/history/herman/reports/futurework/report.htm> 
that 65% of children entering primary school today will work in jobs that don’t 
yet exist. Consider that less than a decade ago very few of us knew what an app 
was but today graduates have been educated as app developers, data analysts and 
social media managers. And tomorrow? Machine algorithmic designers or robotics 
lifestyle integration consultants?

A small number of companies – Facebook, Apple, Netflix and Google, or Fang – 
have changed the world in less than a decade. This is the age of Fang and, 
while many might hope this era is shortlived, educators must educate the next 
generation for a future that is unclear.

Universities are preparing graduates for 21st-century lives and careers in 
complex and unpredictable future. One certainty, in an age when vast quantities 
of information are available instantaneously and outdated almost immediately, 
will be the ability to deal nimbly with complex and often ambiguous knowledge 
rather than simply accumulate facts for detailed reports.

The skills with an enduring shelf life will be the uniquely human skills – 
emergent leadership, entrepreneurship, emotional intelligence, creativity and 
complex problem-solving. In our digitally enabled and hyperconnected world, 
graduates will also need cultural empathy, cross-cultural communication skills 
and global contacts. The connection between work and learning will also become 
closer and work-based learning opportunities will have a critical place in 
preparing for the jobs and skills of the future.

It's up to organised people to ensure the new economy serves the greater good
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/07/its-up-to-organised-people-to-ensure-the-new-economy-serves-the-greater-good>
The career of a lifetime will certainly no longer last a lifetime and workers 
will probably need to upskill multiple times throughout their working lives. 
Even jobs less directly affected by technological change will require very 
different skill sets as the ecosystems in which they operate are affected by 
the changes such as more flexible working conditions, teleworking and increased 
casualisation.

Certainly Stem will be important – science, technology, engineering and 
mathematics – but we must also invest in the arts and humanities. Consider the 
Fang companies that have made a fortune by creatively marrying technology and 
culture. It shouldn’t surprise us – creativity and innovation have always been 
the source of the very best ideas.

Until recently it would be fair to say that the buildings blocks of 
universities, their governance, their business model and their instructional 
design, had changed little since the first university was established in 1088. 
In the blink of one year, online education went from poor relation to 
leading-edge cool. Massive open online courses or MOOCs represent the first 
wave of disruptive change for universities and how they transmit knowledge. 
MOOCs have freed universities from fixed concepts of meritocratic selection and 
from preconceived notions of who should go to university and when. Just as 
iTunes unbundled songs from a CD, the digital revolution enables a university 
degree to be disaggregated into its component parts – vocational knowledge, 
generic professional skills, deep discipline knowledge, practical training, 
evidence of achievement, networking opportunities and student lifestyle.

The billion-dollar question for Australia of course is how will we keep pace 
with technological infrastructure and remain competitive in an increasingly 
complex global market? We must worry less about what the actual jobs are and 
more about equipping our people to be thoughtful, entrepreneurial and 
forward-looking. Whatever path eventuates over the decade, there are some 
things we can be fairly sure of: the pace of change will continue to be 
breathtaking and education will continue to be both a compelling indicator and 
a powerful instrument of human progress.
 