
When I studied horticulture in the 1960s, most wildlife in gardens was 
dismissed as a pest, a weed or a disease. In 1985, when I had the nerve to 
create the first wildlife garden at the Chelsea Flower Show, the Royal 
Horticultural Society was so nonplussed that it inscribed my medal "for a 
Wildfire Garden". How attitudes have changed. These days, Chelsea is awash with 
wild flowers, naturalistic ponds and butterfly borders, while garden centres 
have departments devoted to bird food and nesting boxes.

Our gardens have become enormously important for nature conservation and it's 
easy to see why. The countryside may still be green, but the postwar 
agricultural revolution, with its grubbed hedgerows, drained wetlands, 
fertilised fields and conifer-covered moorlands, has stripped out the space for 
nature. By contrast, many of our towns and cities have grown into mature 
broadleaved urban forests. The network of public parks, street trees, wild, 
post-industrial wasteland and other leafy open spaces is laced together by a 
web of canals, streams and railway embankments – and our domestic gardens play 
the role of forest glades.

Ecologists will tell you that the richest parts of any ecosystem are the 
edges. That is what we have seen disappear from so much of the countryside but 
it is the very essence of leafy residential neighbourhoods. In any suburban 
street there will be hedges, fences and boundary trees providing shelter, shade 
– and lots of edge.

The individuality of each household is also positive. Neighbouring gardens are 
often very different and this adds to the ecological diversity. One plot may 
have a kick-about lawn for the kids – and the daisies and starlings. Another 
may have herbaceous borders for cut flowers – and pollinating insects. A veg 
patch may provide food for slugs and robins as well as the family. As 
individual forest glades, each of these varied spaces brings people and 
wildlife into closer contact, but in combination they create a complex and 
ecologically diverse mosaic of habitats.

This physical richness can be made even better for wildlife through the 
actions of gardeners. By choosing our plants wisely, we can extend the nectar 
and pollen season way beyond the natural norm, with grape hyacinths and 
crocuses ushering in the first foraging bumblebees, and ivy flowers, sedums and 
Michaelmas daisies feeding the last of the autumn's red admirals. By planting 
hedges and borders of fruiting shrubs we can feed the flocks of redwings when 
the cold north-easterlies drive them down from Scandinavia. By sweeping the 
autumn leaves into a quiet corner we can offer the local hedgehog a safe haven 
for hibernation.

These days, many gardeners make special provision for wildlife. Nesting boxes 
on walls and fences are substitutes for the hollow branches, and birds as 
varied as wrens, woodpeckers and tawny owls make use of them. Bird feeding has 
become a sophisticated science. Thanks to the modern menu of sunflower hearts, 
niger seeds and fat bars, more than 80 species of wild birds now visit garden 
feeders. Water provides the most magical habitat boost of all, I helped my 
father to dig my first garden pond 60 years ago, and springtime frog spawn, 
summer dragonflies and bathing winter birds have graced it ever since.

We all need a daily dose of nature in our lives and, as a nation of gardeners, 
there is no doubt that nature needs us, too.

City safaris

Direct contact with nature is fundamental to the quality of childhood but 
parental paranoia and the small-screen communication revolution are denying 
kids the right to take risks and enjoy the living landscape. Here are a few 
ways to reboot common sense:

Open-air classrooms 
Encourage the school to teach outside from time to time. If the school grounds 
are uninspiring, make them better!Learning Through Landscapes 
<http://www.ltl.org.uk> and Garden Organic <http://www.gardenorganic.co.uk> 
both have national programmes for school grounds greening.

Explore your neighbourhood 
Use the school holidays to make a local habitat network map that will help to 
expand personal boundaries and build mutual confidence.

Encourage some serious study 
Try a mini safari through the long grass following a length of string with a 
magnifying glass; use the dawn chorus to locate bird nesting territories; plot 
the pecking order on the bird feeders; and work out who's eating who beneath 
the surface of the local pond. Don't let the wonder of wildlife miss a 
generation.

• Chris Baines is an independent environmental adviser and vice president of 
theRoyal Society of Wildlife Trusts <http://www.wildlifetrusts.org>. To order a 
copy of his book How to Make a Wildlife Garden (Frances Lincoln) for £13.59 
(RRP £16.99), visittheguardian.com/bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780711217119>
 or call 0330 333 6846.
 