
The physicist Stephen Hawking is convinced that intelligent extraterrestrials 
populate space, a view shared by many scientists. But his ruminations on this 
prospect have shifted from the aliens’ existence to their deportment.Maybe 
they’re dangerous. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/23/stephen-hawking-warns-against-seeking-out-aliens-in-new-film>

In a film recently released online, Hawking points to the potential peril in 
broadcasting signals to other star systems. After all, we don’t know who is out 
there, and they might not be well-intentioned. If we betray our presence with 
signals, maybe the aliens will fire up their interstellar artillery and take us 
out.

According to Hawking, extraterrestrial societies could be far more advanced 
than we are – perhaps by billions of years. Their sympathies for us might be 
meagre, and they “may not see us as any more valuable than we see bacteria”.

Leaving aside the rather considerable value of bacteria, Hawking is right: we 
have no clue as to the intentions of putative extraterrestrials. Perhaps they 
live in a utopian Shangri-La similar to the one we’ve always said we want for 
ourselves, a place that values peace as well as the neighbours. But, of course, 
no one can be sure. In any Darwinian system, there’s always a benefit to 
aggression by some. So maybe a warning is warranted. Who would want to make 
their mark as the person who triggered the destruction of Earth in a misguided 
attempt to start an interspecies conversation?

Our fastest rockets, as impressive as they are, would take 80,000 years to 
reach even the nearest star

Hawking frames his caution with a premise: that at some future date, we pick 
up the signals from another world. This is the goal of Seti –Search for 
Extraterrestrial Intelligence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/seti-search-extraterrestrial-intelligence> 
– a small-scale research project (where I work as senior astronomer) that uses 
large radio antennas in an effort to eavesdrop on alien transmissions. If Seti 
does succeed in plucking a broadcast from the ether, some people would 
undoubtedly agitate for sending a reply. Perhaps along the lines of: “We’re the 
Earthlings, and we’d like to get in touch.”

Such a response, which could alert the aliens to our presence and location, is 
what troubles Hawking. Lay low, he advises. Well, it’s too late.

Since the second world war, we’ve been broadcasting television, high-frequency 
radio, and – most conspicuously – radar into the heavens. Little of this is 
done with the intention of either entertaining or notifying aliens, but is 
simply an inevitable leakage of radio transmissions into space.

Now admittedly, these signals would be very weak at light years’ distance, and 
the alien antennas necessary to pick them up would be many times larger than 
our own. But the difficulty extraterrestrials would have in noticing our 
incidental emissions pales in comparison to the challenge they’d face in 
launching weaponry our way. Note that our fastest rockets, as impressive as 
they are, would take 80,000 years to reach even the nearest star. Aggressive 
aliens would obviously require far better hardware. Interstellar travel, let 
alone warfare, is easy only in the movies.

These simple arguments lead to a simple conclusion. Any society with the 
capability to threaten Earth is overwhelmingly likely to already have the kit 
required to pick up the leakage we’ve been wafting skyward for seven decades. 
The requisite radio technology is far easier than the necessary rocket 
technology.

Stephen Hawking warns against seeking out aliens in new film
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/23/stephen-hawking-warns-against-seeking-out-aliens-in-new-film>
And since we’ve been busy for a lifetime filling the seas of space with 
bottled messages marking our existence and position, it’s a bit silly to fret 
about new bottles.

So should we worry about a future, deliberate transmission to the stars? Nasa 
doesn’t seem concerned: in 2008,it broadcast a Beatles song in the direction of 
the north star <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/feb/02/usa.musicnews>. 
It will take four centuries to get there.

The space agency is obviously not troubled by the thought that this piece of 
pop culture will incite extraterrestrials to rain down weaponry on our planet. 
Yes, anything’s possible. But that doesn’t mean that everything’s plausible. 
Sure, Martians could mount an attack on Earth in the near future. But that’s 
one worry that won’t keep me awake at night. Nor should it trouble you.

If Hawking is really concerned, perhaps he should make sure his online movie 
isn’t broadcast.
 