
When James Chin Moody decided to give up his successful online sharing 
company, TuShare, he thought for “20 milliseconds”, about selling it. With 
almost 50,000 users, it could have been a lucrative proposition and would have 
kept alive a project that had consumed his time and energy for two years.

The company’s assets, however, consisted entirely of its database. Chin Moody 
realised that selling the business meant selling the users’ details: names, 
street addresses, email addresses. The answer arrived swiftly: “Absolutely not”

Users’ private information was not his to sell.

In a world in which governments and mega corporations collect, use, share and 
trade citizens’ and consumers’ personal data on a massive scale, Chin Moody 
took a stand. “Our overarching principle is that the personal information of 
our members is owned by our members,” he says. “They get to choose what to do 
with it, whether they share it with us, with others or ultimately delete it. We 
start from there.”

TuShare, established in 2012, matched people who no longer needed stuff with 
those who could use it. It was about not letting good things go to waste and 
not contributing to landfill. The only money involved was the cost of delivery, 
paid by the recipient.

Facebook users urged to check privacy settings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/26/facebook-check-privacy-settings-public-post-search-index>
Eventually, the courier side of the business emerged as the real innovation. 
Using economies of scale and making deals with large courier companies, whose 
business-to-business runs often return to base empty, Chin Moody was able to 
offer individuals and small businesses the heavily discounted rates for 
door-to-door parcel delivery that big business enjoys.

In November 2014, he launched Sendle <https://www.sendle.com/>, a dedicated 
courier company. A year later, he closed TuShare. “We can’t run two business 
well,” he says. “The thing about being a startup is you have to focus.”

He wrote in a letter to members, “Sendle began to grow more quickly than we 
had imagined, while at the same time, we were unable to fund the long-term 
costs of TuShare without breaking our commitment to remain authentically 
community-focussed.”

Sendle’s appeal comes from its simplicity: it has only four price points, 
across three service levels, which Chin Moody compares toAustralia Post’s 
<http://auspost.com.au/> cumbersome 5,200 price points. And that is made 
possible by sophisticated software engineering. “We consider ourselves a tech 
company, not a logistics company,” Chin Moody says. “Most of our people are 
writing code.”

Chin Moody sits on the World Economic Forum’s global agenda council 
<http://www.weforum.org/community/global-agenda-councils> on the future of 
software and society. Its recent document,Deep Shift: Technology Tipping Points 
and Societal Impact 
<http://www.weforum.org/reports/deep-shift-technology-tipping-points-and-societal-impact>
, looks at the effects of digital developments, including transparency and 
privacy. Next year, he says, the council will work on policymaking: what 
governments should be considering. “Things are moving very rapidly in the 
software world and how do we make sure government policy keeps up so the 
protections are in placebefore things happen?” he says.

The issues of mass surveillance and data retention are increasingly being 
discussed but we tend to overlook that the smallest daily transactions 
aggregate into our online profile. “When you go to the bank, when you order a 
book, when you use your bus-card, a company is watching what you do,” Matthew 
Rimmer, prof of intellectual property and innovation law at Queensland 
University of Technology, points out.

Five strategies for reclaiming our personal privacy online
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/26/online-privacy-security-tips>
Like frogs in slowly heating water, we have accepted the encroachments because 
each small step seems both useful and harmless. It’s handy to be told when the 
groceries we purchase most are on sale. The collation of data across phone and 
laptop is what makes communication increasingly seamless. We’ve even become too 
blase to check terms and conditions statements, and just click on the handy 
‘agree’ box.

Indeed several types of company are required by law to share the content of 
accounts with the government departments, for example, which is why 
“pre-filling” information about salary, bank interest and share dividends, and 
private health insurance makes preparing online tax returns so easy.

Governments, like banks, work hard to protect their data, though shocking 
breaches have occurred. Rimmer warns against taking anyone’s claims at face 
value, however. “Remember that Google, Yahoo, Facebook and co were part of the 
global network initiative, saying they respected human rights and privacy, at 
the same time, as they were secretlydealing with the NSA 
<http://www.globalresearch.ca/nsa-and-facebook-work-together/5439110> in its 
dragnet mass surveillance,” Rimmer says. “We need to change the creepy 
surveillance of our corporate world, and fight for the privacy of consumers.”

He also says it’s up to consumers to get behind entrepreneurs such as Chin 
Moody and “not support companies that are careless about protecting information 
security and privacy.”

For Chin Moody, ethics and profit are not mutually exclusive. “It’s about 
having the highest standards of ethics in business,” he says. “And we see that 
as a competitive advantage.”
 