
Q In May this year I took out an insurance policy for my car. With a two year 
no-claims bonus it was to cost £1,000 which at the age of 19 was OK. There were 
complications with my previous insurance company and I couldn't claim my 
no-claims bonus. This meant that my new policy would go up to £2,000 which was 
very much not OK. So I cancelled the policy and was told over the phone that I 
would owe the company £100 or so for which they would bill me.

 However, I recently received a call from a debt collection agency claiming 
that I owe them £1,800 for the outstanding balance on my cancelled insurance 
policy! There is no way that I can pay this and as far as I am concerned I 
shouldn't have to. The debt collection agency said that they would declare me 
bankrupt.

What does this mean to me a 19 year-old going to university next year? I have 
no written proof of what was said on the phone - does this mean that I have to 
pay them? Surely what the insurance company have done is illegal? I really am 
in the dark on this one and any help would be more than appreciated.

D 

A It sounds as though there may be crossed wires between you and your 
insurance company. You don't name the company involved, but your first action 
should be to speak to their customer services department to establish whether 
they have mistakenly taken this action against you. It is possible that they 
have a record of your conversation, and will be able to clarify what took 
place. You don't say how you cancelled the policy - did you write to the 
insurance company? If so it is possible that the letter has got lost and you 
may be able to sort things out with a telephone call. When you make contact, be 
sure to write down the date, time and to whom you are speaking in the customer 
service department, in case of any problems further down the line. Tell 
customer services that you are feeling pressurised by the debt collection 
agency and you would like this problem resolved as quickly as possible.

 As for the debt collection agency making you bankrupt, it would be of little 
advantage to them as I suspect you have few personal assets and don't own a 
home. However, if you are made bankrupt you may find it difficult to get credit 
in the future, and this includes a mortgage or credit card, so it is in your 
interest to sort things out as quickly as possible. You can get help from your 
local Citizens Advice Bureau (the number of your local branch will be in your 
phone book). If things are not resolved satisfactorily you can take your 
complaint to the financial services ombudsman.

 http://www.financial-ombudsman.org.uk/
 