
On the top floor of a crumbling four-storey building in downtown Addis Ababa, 
Birhani Haile holds the floor in front of a 30-strong audience. "I was a 
housemaid when I became pregnant," she says. "Unmarried and afraid to be found 
out, I took some pills to get rid of it. But they were pills for a cow." She 
woke up in the night, vomiting blood and bleeding heavily. "I went to a man who 
said he was familiar with this case. He gave me more pills but they were for 
malaria." She was lucky to survive.

In 2005, a year before Haile's desperate effort to abort her pregnancy, the 
Ethiopian government liberalised abortion laws. This effectively made treatment 
free and available to all women. But in a country where one third of 
pregnancies are thought to be unwanted, backstreet abortions continue to happen.

One of Addis Ababa's poorest neighbourhoods is Addis Ketema. The majority of 
its inhabitants work as house servants or weavers; it is a hand-to-mouth 
existence and many must beg to survive. Having a child outside marriage is 
taboo. Haile knows what would have become of her: "I would be outcast."

That is why she is here. Amid the heavy charcoal mist and fumes of roasting 
coffee beans, she and fellow members of the Addis Ababa Women's Association 
have called this coffee ceremony, to get down to the serious business of chat. 
Today they are talking not just about abortion, but reproductive health and 
family planning. In the climate of misinformation that is the backdrop to 
Haile's story, conversations like this can save a life.

Ethiopia is among the most dangerous places in the world to give birth: every 
year 25,000 women die from pregnancy-related problems. In a country that is 
predominantly rural, 94% of women deliver at home. "Lack of emergency obstetric 
services is a crucial factor," says Zewditu Kebede of Ethiopia's Consortium of 
Reproductive Health Associations. "Many women give birth too young and don't 
space their children, giving their bodies little time to recover between 
deliveries. On top of this, low levels of education in rural areas, hard work 
and poor diet contribute to poor maternal outcomes."

Government initiatives

But a progressive Ethiopian Ministry of Health is tackling this problem 
head-on, with a five-year plan to reduce maternal deaths drastically. At the 
forefront is a policy to make sure every child is wanted and every pregnancy 
planned.

The past five years have seen an innovative restructuring of the healthcare 
system. Special emphasis has been placed on the problems facing rural areas 
where 83% of the population live, distances are vast and infrastructure is 
non-existent. To challenge this, 30,000 trained and salaried Health Extension 
Workers (HEW) have been deployed all over the country.

"The extraordinary thing here is the high level of commitment that you see 
from the government in meeting Millennium Development Goals and the level of 
ambition," says Ali Forder, head of Department for International Development 
(DfID) Ethiopia. "When they said they wanted to train 30,000 health workers, 
people said it was impossible – but they have done it."

Wolita Mogosi is one of these health workers. Mogosi excelled at school in the 
remote south-westerly Oromiya region, and was recruited and trained for a year 
by her local health bureau. Now back in her village, she travels from house to 
house administering preventative healthcare. Today Mogosi has been enlisted by 
Marie Stopes International (MSI) to bring women from her area to a local health 
centre for long-term contraceptives. It is a four-hour walk and, with children 
to feed, farms to tend, and husbands to contend with, it is not one many women 
will do willingly or often.

In 2005 only 14.7% of women had access to contraception. In the past five 
years a government scheme to provide pills and three-month injectables freely 
has meant this number is likely to have doubled. Still, short-term methods like 
these are wholly unreliable when the nearest health centre is up to eight hours 
away. Implanon, an implant that protects women from pregnancy for three years, 
could revolutionise family planning for Ethiopian women and is part of a new 
government drive to increase access.

Fatuma Shekasim is walking with Mogosi today; she has nine children and has 
brought two of her married daughters with her. "They are using injectables," 
she says, "but heavy rain meant we couldn't come [to the centre]. Now my 
daughter may be pregnant again. We are poor and it is not a good time for a 
baby." She has brought her daughters to get Implanon. "This way I can ensure 
all my grandchildren will go to school."

Government schemes work for determined women such as Shekasim. But the vast 
majority are not in contact with such schemes. "People in Ethiopia rarely go to 
a health facility," says Grethe Petersen, country director of MSI Ethiopia. 
"When they do, we need to grab them. Every time a woman goes to a clinic for a 
cold or an injury, or treatment for malaria, it is an opportunity to talk about 
family planning."

Subsidised services

In the town of Minjar, 150km south-east of Addis Ababa, nurse Josef Asefa 
Mekonnen, has tapped into a new movement that could transform public 
perceptions of reproductive health. He runs a private health clinic accredited 
by MSI's pioneering BlueStar social franchise scheme. His contraceptive 
services are subsidised by the NGO, allowing him to supply comprehensive 
counselling for a nominal fee. Like most of Ethiopia, Minjar is not wealthy. 
"Last year there was a drought," Mekonnen recalls, "and people could not pay." 
But since joining the BlueStar network, his monthly income from contraceptive 
services has more than tripled. The network also runs roadshows, public 
performances and publicity campaigns, and even has its own catchy theme tune to 
draw in clientele.

But providing access is only half the battle. "Women at the grassroots level 
do not have adequate information on reproductive health. The services may be 
there but women do not know about them," says Mussie Yussein of the Addis Ababa 
Women's Association. "We need to raise this awareness." With 145,000 women and 
4,000 associate male members working at every level in the city, the 
association is doing its best to achieve this.

Back at the meeting another woman speaks. She has a neighbour who took 
contraceptives. "She heard that if you take more pills your uterus will be 
spoiled. She stopped taking the pills and now she has twins." As the group gets 
more and more animated, Haile smiles. She thinks it is time to bring this 
discussion out into the community. "Look," she gestures to the room. "The women 
are ready."

Underage marriages

Outside a cluster of shacks in the rural village of Cholga a group of women 
chat and laugh as conversation turns to weddings. "I was 16 years old when I 
got married," says Seada Abdella, "but the first baby didn't come for three 
years". When asked why she says: "I wasn't bleeding yet."

While officially illegal in Ethiopia since 1995, early marriage is still 
common practice. In the northern and most populous Amhara region, 40% of 
marriages are to girls under 15. As in Abdella's case, a baby will follow as 
soon as is physically possible. For many women, having a child so young can 
lead to complications in giving birth. Even more damaging for some is the 
effect early motherhood has on their education and empowerment. Abdella, for 
instance, left school after grade three and can barely read or write.

Statistics show that the less formal education a woman has, the less likely 
she will be to use family planning and, in turn, to have the means to send each 
of her children to school. But Abdella refuses to let the cycle continue. 
Unlike most of her neighbours she has only two children – the average in her 
village is six – and is here at this health centre to get a three-year implant. 
"If life is good I will have more [children], if not I won't."

Rural staffing difficulties

The government health centre at Moye is a quiet outpost halfway up a hill in 
the village of Cholga outside the bustling market town. In the height of the 
rainy season it is marooned by a sea of muck from the main road. This is where 
Kimem Eshetu spends her working day. At 23, she has just finished five years' 
training as a nurse and midwife, and has been deployed here, 400km away from 
home. Wages are low at 760birr (£40) a month and Eshetu is isolated here in 
this farming community where most woman her age are already married. "I like 
the job," she whispers, "but I don't want to stay here".

A small bespectacled figure, Eshetu's quiet presence belies the invaluable 
role she plays at the centre. She pulls out a crumpled list of medical 
supplies: "Delivery gowns, masks, resuscitation bags, chlorine, soap, blankets… 
It has been five months since I requested these things from the regional bureau 
and still nothing."

Ethiopia has a surplus of nurses, but skilled midwives like Eshetu are scarce. 
If circumstances don't improve here, it is likely she will leave for the city, 
or go to a private facility or abroad, contributing to the brain drain in the 
country's health sector. Asked where she will go she confides: "I want to work 
in an NGO."

Coupons for life

Shuffling through the mucky damp alleys of the Semeneida slum in Addis Ababa's 
Merkato area, Marie Stopes International's Sister Gennet is searching for 
expectant mothers. She finds Tigist Kefala sitting in the one-room shelter she 
shares with her husband and 16-year-old sister.

Tigist, 28 and pregnant, is afraid, and she explains why through shy gasps. 
Four years ago she was expecting her first child. When she went into labour, 
she travelled to her local health centre but – for reasons still unclear to her 
– was referred to Addis's main obstetrics hospital. When staff couldn't see her 
there, she was sent home. Tigist and her husband Meskalu have trouble recalling 
whether it was after two or three days of labour that she returned to the 
hospital. There, she gave birth to a stillborn child. She was sent home again 
that day.

Even in the capital, where most women give birth in a health facility, 
resources for the very poor are shockingly deficient. Health services are 
nominally free but facilities are under-staffed and when supplies run out 
families are expected to supply their own medicines or pay for tests. For women 
like Tigist who survive on less than 200birr (£10) a month, this is not an 
option.

Lucky to have survived the trauma of stillbirth once, Tigist is at high risk 
of complication again. But a flagship initiative launched by MSI has given her 
a voucher for free ante-natal and delivery care in the NGO's private obstetrics 
clinic. "Hopefully," she says, rubbing her enormous bump, "it will be better 
this time."

Sex-workers, contraception and HIV

"Mimi?" the nurse asks disbelievingly, and leans to me. "This is what we call 
a little girl." "That is my name," Mimi replies, punctuating her speech with 
confident and defiant gasps. Mimi sellstella, a homemade beer, in the local 
market at Minjar but it does not bring in enough money. "I am a sex worker," 
she announces unabashedly to a room of giggling women lined up on the 
upholstered chairs of Josef Asefa Mekonnen's waiting area. She is here for a 
three-year implant that he has provided for free, in the hope she will 
encourage more women to come. Mimi gave birth to her second child two years ago 
after missing by one day an appointment to have her injectible contraceptive 
renewed. She is alone and living on less than 250birr (£12) a month, so getting 
pregnant again is not an option.

When we talk outside, Mimi's bright eyes darken. "I am sick," she admits. Mimi 
has been diagnosed with HIV and doesn't want to sleep with men anymore. "But if 
they come I will." And if they refuse to use a condom? "What choice do I have?" 
she says. "At least this way I can protect myself."

Stephanie Hegarty's assignment in Ethiopia was hosted by Marie Stopes 
International
 