
"Remember your first colour bomb?" says the voice on the ad 
<http://www.ispot.tv/ad/7S9W/candy-crush-saga-color-bomb>. A fairly badly drawn 
stick-puppet girl and gorilla throw each other a chocolate sweetie covered in 
hundreds and thousands. The sweetie explodes in lightning bolts. Suddenly, many 
sweets appear, lined up in rows and columns. The lightning bolts hit them. 
"Tasty," says the voiceover. Whole lines of sweets vanish in zooming animation.

If this sounds like purest nonsense, you're not wrong. Although the ad ends 
with the encouragement to "downloadCandy Crush Saga now, for free", unless 
you're one of the estimated 500 million users of the developer King's game, 
none of that will have made any sense. It's not an ad designed to get you to 
download the game, not really.

Instead, it's designed to remind existing players of the thrill of success, to 
get them picking up their phone or logging on to Facebook for "just five 
minutes". Because the game is, as the ad says, free to download – it's only 
when you're playing, longing for an elusive "colour bomb", that you might be 
willing to pay King the few pence it'd take to get one.

This is a newish model for gaming, and one that is rapidly becoming the 
predominant way of doing game business on smartphones. It's called "freemium" – 
meaning that you get the game for free, but you have to pay to unlock certain 
features. Maybe you can only see some parts of the game if you pay. Maybe you 
can pay to speed up the replenishment of "lives". Maybe, as withCandy Crush, 
the game boards are calibrated to be almost-but-not-quite impossible to solve 
in the number of moves you get for free … but you can pay for extra moves when 
you've reached frustrated breaking point.

So what's going on here? What is the siren call of the colour bomb that would 
be worth King purchasing advertising space to entice players back to their 
phones? Why might these nonsense images actually work and persuade people to 
part with real cash?

Pondering these questions, I'm reminded of the philosopher Daniel Dennett's 
thinking on "supernormal stimuli". The term was coined by Nobel prizewinner 
Niko Tinbergen in his study of herring gull behaviour. Seeing that gull chicks 
pecked at the yellow-orange dot on their parent's beak to make the parent 
regurgitate food for them, Tinbergen presented the chicks with even bigger 
yellow-orange dots. He found that, as Dennett and Hurley say in their book
Inside Jokes: "The chicks would peck even more vigorously at exaggerated orange 
spots, brighter and larger than any in nature."

Dennett suggested that the same basic principle applies to many areas of human 
life <http://www.ted.com/talks/dan_dennett_cute_sexy_sweet_funny/transcript>. 
"Our sweet tooth," he says, "is an evolved and instinctual preference for 
high-energy food. It wasn't designed for chocolate cake. Chocolate cake is a 
supernormal stimulus." We'll peck at the cake – as it were – in preference over 
the original stimulus, sweet fruits and berries. InBreaking the Spell, Dennett 
quotes Pascal Boyer, who suggests that music is a supernormal stimulus which 
mimics and heightens the effects of speech, and that we make symmetrical 
patterns with textiles, buildings, gadgets to deliberately "overstimulate [our] 
visual cortex".

In other words, we distil the part of an experience that gives us the "buzz". 
And then we make it happen again, and again, and again.

Maybe it's just all the talk of sugar and of coloured dots and of repetitive 
patterns of behaviour, but this seems very reminiscent ofCandy Crush Saga. With 
500 million users, that game is stimulating something in the human mind. I'm 
wary of evolutionary psychology – a field that too often seems to be simplified 
in the media down to "women like pink and men like teenage girls because of 
science" – but, with caveats, it's interesting if not particularly scientific 
to speculate about what supernormal stimulus buttonsCandy Crush Saga might be 
pressing.

One drive it fulfils: the desire to feel that one has succeeded. That a task 
has been accomplished. The game can drip-feed players that feeling without ever 
letting you get to the stage of "and now I can stop". The game obviously 
fulfils the "bright colours, symmetrical shapes and simple sounds" elements of 
the supernormal stimulus theory. It might also fulfil our desire for order and 
tidiness – to "tidy up" all those pesky sweets. And perhaps the finding and 
matching of objects mimics tasks our brains are good at, but don't get to do 
very much any more, like searching for ripe fruit in tangled thickets, or 
picking stones out of dried lentils.

Whatever the answer, the nuanced position on supernormal stimuli isn't "ban 
them all" but "let's think carefully about how we want to live with them". Just 
because something is a supernormal stimulus doesn't mean it's bad for us – 
think music or visual arts. And sugar and alcohol are clearly supernormal 
stimuli, so we're continuing to debate and adjust our rules and societal norms 
about who gets unfettered access to them, what good limits are, and how often 
these things should appear in a "good life".

Adrian Hon, game creator and futurologist, recently suggested that we should 
introduce "nutrition facts" for freemium games, fact boxes that will let you 
know how much you're likely to spend on the game, andhow to set limits on your 
playing time <https://twitter.com/adrianhon/status/432120351724949504/photo/1>.

We need to recognise that we've created something magnificently compelling and 
pleasurable in video games – and that's a wonderful thing. And it's that 
magnificent compulsion that means we need to have a sane conversation about how 
to set limits for ourselves on another wonderful pleasure that has no natural 
limits.
 