
Few UK businesses can seriously compete with their American competitors these 
days, let alone emerge triumphant. So we should celebrate the achievement of 
City law firms that are doing just that.

As well as producing 1.8% of Britain's GDP, legal services generated £3.2bn in 
exports in 2009, nearly three times as much as a decade earlier. Putting aside 
the grumbling about overinflated pay and working practices, and a haphazard 
approach to diversity, the biggest City law firms are tremendously successful 
businesses, while the leading commercial QCs are in demand all over the world.

Kenneth Clarke <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/kenneth-clarke> last week 
said that he is "almost as much of an enthusiast for English law as I am for 
English cricket" and described the rule of law as "one of our greatest exports".

The justice secretary said: "Law as an industry has in the past sometimes felt 
itself to be something of an overlooked Cinderella in its treatment by 
government – certainly relative to financial services. I want to make it clear 
that, for this government, the City of London is a legal centre – not just a 
financial one."

There are various reasons for this success. There is the influence of the 
common law around the world, which naturally makes people look to its 
birthplace for guidance. Then there is a judicial system that is trusted to 
produce fair results, reflected by the ever growing number of commercial 
disputes heard in the high court where the parties have little or no connection 
with the UK but have chosen London as the place to settle their differences 
(there is also a thriving mediation and arbitration industry here). This will 
be augmented by the much-needed upgrade of the commercial court's facilities, 
with a new state-of-the-art building opening in December.

City law firms have also expanded aggressively around the world along with 
their global clients, often fighting protectionism from countries not keen on 
the competition. But through a variety of mechanisms, including international 
trade talks, many barriers have come down, helped by the UK's liberal regime 
which has allowed more than 200 foreign law firms to open offices in the UK. US 
firms have historically been slower to globalise, sated by a far bigger 
domestic market.

The government has finally cottoned on to this: ministers raise the barriers 
to practise with their foreign counterparts, lawyers join trade missions (a 
couple of City heavyweights were with David Cameron in Russia this month), and 
UK Trade & Investment has been working with the Law Society for some years to 
help smaller law firms in particular gain an international foothold. The 
society's international department, which has done so much good work over many 
years, is a jewel in its crown.

The UK has yet to conquer various jurisdictions, notably India, Brazil and 
Turkey. "Contrary to popular myth," said Clarke, "I do not wear Hush Puppies 
but I am nonetheless prepared to wear out much shoe leather making the case for 
liberalisation of those areas where protectionist regulations remain an 
impediment to exporting UK services."

He is visiting India shortly and said he will press the government to open up 
its legal market: "This is not about the UK's narrow mercantilist 
self-interest, but the interest of Indian business, which risks missing out on 
investment and growth because of restricted domestic legal provision."

The government's work is now underpinned by an "action plan for growth 
<http://www.justice.gov.uk/downloads/publications/corporate-reports/MoJ/legal-services-action-plan.pdf>
", which was launched in May with UK Trade & Investment, and a commitment to 
work with the Law Society, Bar Council and trade promotion body TheCityUK.

Hanging over all this good news is the shadow of alternative business 
structures (ABSs). Clarke lauded them for the potential they offer to promote 
growth in the legal services market, but the action plan also includes a 
commitment to monitor their international acceptance. This reflects concerns 
that many countries around the world will refuse to let UK firms that have 
become ABSs operate in their territories. Germany's legal regulator has 
consistently warned that firms owned by non-lawyers would be "inconsistent with 
the requirements of German law", while in the US the possibility of allowing 
forms of ABSs has recently been mooted, but passive non-lawyer investment and 
ownership is a step too far.

These reservations will significantly cool the desire of any firms with 
international operations to become ABSs. At the same time, there is some 
evidence that foreigners are eyeing up with possibilities they offer. The 
Solicitors Regulation Authoritysaid 
<http://www.lawsociety.org.uk/secure/meeting/192887/SRA_Board_Paper_Public_Item_10_Annex_1_13.07.2011.pdf>
 in July that it had already received "strong interest" in ABS investment from 
abroad and from non-English law firms that want to use the structure, including 
one of China's largest law firms. Separately, a leading City lawyer, Stephen 
Kines, ispromoting 
<http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/legal-services-act/market-monitor/top-city-lawyer-targets-chinese-and-indian-law-firms-for-abs-launch>
 the ABS structure as a way for Chinese and Indian law firms to start building 
their own global practices.

The prevailing mood of global liberalisation is unlikely to stop at the legal 
profession's door, so it would not be a surprise, in time, to see ABSs adopted 
more widely. If they are, UK lawyers will once again be ahead of the game, a 
position they are likely to maintain for many years to come.

Neil Rose is the editor of www.legalfutures.co.uk
 