
We returned home to Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> from Tangiers 
last week. I took my kids, aged 14, 11 and 10, backpacking around Morocco for a 
fortnight. The idea was to show them a different culture. The Black Mountains, 
where we live, is hardly a melting pot of diverse societies. I also secretly 
hoped to whisk them all away from their electronic devices.

To their delight and my consternation, we discovered frequently faltering but 
free Wi-Fi in every hotel, in many restaurants and even at railway stations. It 
was partly a blessing: they spent the hours of withering, mid-afternoon heat 
lying doggo, talking to their friends on Facebook, Snapchat and ooVoo, and 
watching videos on YouTube. Not once did anyone say: "I'm bored."

Being bored was a fundamental part of summer when I was a kid. I admit that my 
holidays were in North Wales, not buzzing around the Medina in Fez or swimming 
beneath waterfalls in the Rif mountains.

However, the increasing reach of Wi-Fi prompted me to consider the value, to 
adults as much as to children, of simply being unoccupied during the holidays. 
How many great guitar riffs have been written by bored teenagers?

Ninety years ago this month, AA Milne was on holiday in Wales, in the rain. 
"Screaming with agoraphobia", as he wrote, he escaped to the summer-house and 
penned the children's verses that becameWhen We Were Very Young – one of the 
bestselling books in publishing history.

Fifty years later, Colin Dexter, also bored on a wet, Welsh holiday in August, 
created the music-loving detective, Inspector Morse.

When I was young and bored, I used to escape to the woods for entertainment. 
Today, I go to the woods to rest my soul: in high summer, when the air between 
the trees turns viscous and the year stands still, there is no better place to 
do this.

Since we got back, I have been wandering regularly in the woods near my home. 
I haven't just been searching for serenity and solace, though.

The landscape here is heavily accented with ash, my favourite tree, and I have 
been looking for signs of ash dieback.

This disease, caused by the fungus Chalara fraxinea 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/ashdieback>, has – along with a host of other such 
pests and pathogens – the potential to cause great damage to our woodlands and 
perhaps even change how our landscapes look in the coming decades. Symptoms of 
ash dieback, particularly the dieback of leaves with brown leaf stalks, will 
start showing in stricken trees over the next few weeks. Thankfully, I haven't 
yet discovered any wilting ash trees near my home but the number of infected 
sites in the UK is now about 660 and steadily rising.

I have spent much of this year writing a book about getting a single ash tree 
converted into artefacts and products, including spoons, bowls, a paddle, a 
toboggan, arrow shafts, stools, worktops, tool handles, panelling, firewood, 
charcoal and the desk I'm writing this at.

The ash is perhaps the tree with which man has been most intimate over the 
millenna: "Its uses are infinite," William Gilpin wrote in 1791.

I wanted to celebrate our relationship with one of nature's great gifts to 
humanity, a gift that we may be about to lose, but the book has now emerged as 
something else. It's about the continuity of human sensibility for a single, 
remarkable material; it's about our quietly re-emerging interest in the 
provenance of things and how the pleasure we take from artefacts made that are 
from natural materials is an extension of the pleasure that we take from nature 
itself; it's about how we retain possessions that are well made and how, over 
time, they enrich our lives when we use them.

I have a bespoke steel bicycle that is also well made. On the journey back 
from Morocco, my son asked me what I was most looking forward to, on getting 
home.

I said riding my beautiful bicycle, a possession that would outlive his 
electronic devices by decades. What was he looking forward to? Good quality 
Wi-Fi, he said. Whatever.

Rob Penn is writing The Man Who Cut Down Trees, to be published by Penguin in 
2015.
 