
What next for the creator of shows including Wife Swap, Faking It and 
Undercover Boss? Stephen Lambert divulged some details on his next project 
during a keynote speech at the MipTV conference in Cannes.

"We're right now developing a show that has a very big second-screen element," 
said Lambert, who runs his own production company Studio Lambert as well as 
being chairman of its parent company All3Media's US arm.

"It's terrifically exciting to have that. The ability to get the focus group 
that is theTwitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> community – 
and the Facebook community – particularly as that community grows, is a 
wonderful tool for producers."

Lambert described the new show as "a hybrid between a reality show and a quiz 
game-show", said it has been in development for several months, and that he's 
"hoping to get good news this week" on distribution deals with broadcasters.

He added that he's enthusiastic about the potential for shows where the idea 
of "second screen" – viewers chatting about what they're watching on social 
networks or interacting with apps – is part of the format itself.

"When you realise you have an idea that has great potential in terms of 
second-screen, you get excited about that and put a lot of effort into that, 
and how to do it well," said Lambert. "But it's not a requirement to have that. 
That would be too limiting."

He praised Twitter for its ability to provide "second-by-second feedback" on 
shows as they air, comparing it to the past when producers would get "a few 
cranky letters and a spurious number which was the audience number" as feedback 
on their programmes.

He also delivered a warning to fellow producers. "The danger is that people on 
Twitter are not equal to the whole audience. You must not think everybody is 
thinking this way. But it's quite a revolution."

Lambert also talked enthusiastically about Gogglebox, the four-part 
factual-entertainment show screened by Channel 4 earlier in 2013, starring a 
collection of families and housemates from around the UK talking about the 
week's TV.

"A lot of people on Twitter thought it was the end of civilisation, that 
Channel 4 was making a programme about people watching TV. What a stupid idea!" 
said Lambert.

"It turns out it's a brilliant idea … and very funny, I think. There are lots 
of factual shows with humour in them, but the primary purpose is not to make 
you laugh. But what's exciting about Gogglebox is that its primary purpose is 
to make you laugh."

During his keynote interview, Lambert was asked whether he has ambitions to 
explore YouTube as the primary distribution channel for any of his new shows, 
following therecent launch by Simon Cowell's Syco TV 
<http://www.broadcastnow.co.uk/news/multiplatform/simon-cowell-launches-global-youtube-talent-hunt/5052490.article>
 of a talent show called The You Generation on Google's video service.

Lambert said that while All3Media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media>
 as a group is active in producing original YouTube channels, he's sticking 
with broadcasters for now.

"My primary interest is dealing with the traditional broadcast and cable 
buyers around the world. There's a lot of them, and there's a lot of business 
to be won from them," he said.

"But using YouTube and other things as a way of telling people about your 
shows – giving them a flavour and getting them excited about your show before 
it goes on air – becomes ever more part of the equation."

Lambert said his new hybrid reality/quiz show will be adopting this strategy. 
"It will be launched on social media long before it's launched on television."

This is increasingly a necessity for producers of non-scripted entertainment, 
particularly in the US where many new shows don't get recommissioned after 
their first series.

"The people who run cable networks in America are quite honest about this: 
they no longer think that their big marketing push should be on new shows in 
their first series," said Lambert.

"They put them out, and if the audience finds them, they go very big in the 
second series. They don't want to waste their limited marketing power on a 
whole load of new shows that they're not sure the audience will like."

This is where the incentive comes for producers to intensify their social 
media activities to foster a thriving community around shows.

In December 2012, Lambert was named as chairman of All3Media America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/dec/11/all3media-expansion-plans>, the 
super indie's US hub for its production companies from elsewhere in the world.

On-stage at MipTV, he noted that it's a "rethink about the way we should be 
doing things as a group". Before, All3Media's production companies had been 
encouraged to set up shop in the US on their own. Now, when they sell a format 
in the US, the show will be made by All3Media America.

Lambert said the changes have been handled "with tact and diplomacy" to avoid 
raising hackles among the individual subsidiaries.

"The way in which we've constructed it is very favourable for everybody," he 
said. "It means that the companies in the group are avoiding the enormous risk 
of starting up int he States. It is a very difficult place to operate if you're 
not used to it.

Shows that debuted in the UK will continue to cross the Atlantic – All3Media 
is working on "a US version of TOWIE" for example – but Lambert said the time 
gap between UK airing and US commission is narrowing considerably.

"We're currently making a show called Inside Job for the BBC, but we've 
already sold it [in the US], and I've just finished producing the pilot for a 
large US cable company. We just used the pitch materials that we used to sell 
it to the BBC."

Asked about the success of some of his most famous shows, like Wife Swap and 
Undercover Boss, Lambert isolated one key theme, and his preferred way of 
developing the formats while making the programmes.

"A lot of what I've done has been about class. Or not necessarily class, but 
values," he said. "I get very excited about ideas where we put people in a 
situation that challenges their values, and they learn from that and react to 
it. And that can be both comedic and dramatic."

On the production side, he said that some of his most successful shows haven't 
been set in stone before the cameras started rolling, and were all the better 
for it.

"Very often the best formats get sorted out when you're actually making it. 
Wife Swap we sold as a personal finance programme," he said. "It was only when 
we started making the first episode, we realised it was much bigger than that – 
it was about values."

Details like the wives starting each episode by reading their opposite 
number's "manual" on household values were thus only thought up during the 
production process.

"One of the things that kills ideas is when they get over-developed on paper 
before you get the chance to start making it," said Lambert.

"As we all know, the committee designing the horse often ends up with the 
camel. And there's a lot of camels on television."
 