
Jonny Wilkinson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jonny-wilkinson> will take 
the field for the first time since the World Cup final when he starts for 
Newcastle in their pivotal EDF Energy Cup tie at Wasps on Saturday. An ankle 
injury had prevented the 28-year-old fly-half from playing since England's 15-6 
defeat by South Africa on October 20 but club doctors say he can now take part 
in the shoot-out for a place in the Anglo-Welsh Cup semi-finals.

Toby Flood is also available for Newcastle after recovering from a groin 
problem, and the New Zealand prop Carl Hayman could play if he recovers 
sufficiently from jetlag after his arrival in Newcastle this week on a 
three-year contract.

"We definitely have Jonny and Toby back fit for Saturday and both will start 
the game," said Newcastle's director of rugby John Fletcher. "Jonny was very 
close for last weekend's Premiership game at Wasps after his ankle injury."

The Barbarians yesterday named a side to face the world champions on Saturday 
that included some of the most luminous talents on the planet. But it was the 
selection of three seasoned England internationals that raised eyebrows as the 
world's most famous invitational rugby side set out their stall for Twickenham.

The Springboks, for whom this is the last game under their departing coach, 
Jake White, will be up against new Barbarians in Jason Robinson and Ben Cohen 
in a side that is captained by Mark Regan. Appropriately for a famously 
peripatetic club, Robinson and Cohen, the wings in England's own World 
Cup-winning team four years ago, are also homeless.

Robinson retired from club rugby at the end of last season and was not 
expected to play again after he dislocated a shoulder in the World Cup final 
last month. The Barbarians coach, Eddie O'Sullivan, called his recovery 
"miraculous"; Cohen, named as a replacement, was released from his contract by 
Northampton last summer after refusing to train with the Saints after a row 
over the club captaincy and has been kicking his heels ever since.

The current England hooker Regan, meanwhile, is defying his club by playing. 
Bristol had refused to release the 35-year-old despite giving him the weekend 
off rather than play him in Sunday's EDF Cup game against a former club Leeds, 
which is a dead-rubber. Regan, who risks a fine for playing rather than resting 
before the next round of Heineken Cup fixtures, would only make a brief 
statement yesterday after training at Blackheath. "It is a massive honour for 
me to lead the Barbarians and I felt I wanted to play in a star-studded side," 
he said. "My children are the mascots and my elder daughter celebrates her 
ninth birthday this weekend and I wanted to make this a family weekend."

So Regan plays at Twickenham while his England front-row colleague Andrew 
Sheridan has dropped out - a South African J D Moller replaces him in the squad 
- to play a more meaningful EDF Cup game for his club Sale at Leicester 
tomorrow night.

Mike Burton, the players' agent and Barbarians committeeman who has helped 
bring the side together, said: "I've had a convivial talk with Brian Kennedy 
[Sale's owner] and we agreed that Andrew could play at Leicester. We didn't 
want this to be a source of conflict, even though Andrew had a specific clause 
in his contract allowing him to play. Ronnie [Regan] is in the autumn of his 
career and wanted to lead the team out. We will talk to Bristol next week. But 
he's on a week's holiday, he'd not been selected this weekend and I don't see 
this as a major disciplinary issue."

Joe Rokocoko, the New Zealand wing, meanwhile, will be wearing the black and 
red socks of Blackheath on Saturday. Rockocoko has been made an honorary member 
of the venerable south-east London club, which celebrates its 150th birthday 
next year with a fixture against the Barbarians, having forgotten to pack any 
socks of his own before crossing the globe.

Barbarians: Robinson (England); Rokocoko (Blues & NZ), Smith (Hurricanes & NZ),
Nonu (Hurricanes & NZ), Neivua (Warriors & Fiji); Giteau (Western Force & 
Australia),Marshall (Ospreys & NZ); Pucciarello (Munster & Italy), Regan (capt; 
Bristol & England),Ma'afu (Brumbies), Cockbain (Wales), Harrison (Ulster & 
Australia),Elsom (Waratahs & Australia), Williams (Cardiff & Wales), Collins 
(Hurricanes & NZ).

Replacements: Brits (Stormers), Moller (Stormers), Flavell (Blues & N Zealand),
Owen (Dragons & Wales), Shanklin (Cardiff & Wales), Grant (Stormers), Cohen 
(England).
 