
One or two people have been idealistic – and brave – enough to complain that 
there has been a lack of compassion inthe sentencing of 16-year-old Will Cornick
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/04/sentence-will-cornick-ann-maguire-teacher-western-europe>
 for the murder in April of his teacher, Ann Maguire. I’m not among them. What 
irks me is the lack of logic.

I don’t want a criminal justice system that exists to convert public outrage 
into incarceration years. I want a criminal justice system that stands above 
that, simply coming as close as possible to doing what is right, under the most 
challenging of circumstances. This case suggests that what we have instead is a 
system that doesn’t know what is right, but does know what is popular.

The judge, Mr Justice Coulson, imposed an indeterminate sentence on Cornick, 
who was 15 at the time of the murder, stipulating that he should serve a 
minimum of 20 years and warning that he may never be released. I’m not keen on 
indeterminate sentences anyway, and this case highlights their manifest 
shortcomings.

Is the judge saying that he simply doesn’t know how long Cornick should serve 
– that he doesn’t quite know whether the taking of Maguire’s life deserves a 
punishment of 20 years or 60? Or is he saying that he’s no expert, but that in 
his amateur opinion it’ll be at least 20 years before Cornick is rehabilitated 
and no longer a danger to the public, and maybe many more years than that?

Whatever. I’m afraid that one of these elements can’t help but contradict the 
other. If it’s truly a possibility that Cornick is so dangerous that he can 
never be released, then what is he being punished for? Having an unacceptable 
mind? Being Will Cornick?

It’s one thing to incarcerate a person because of what he has done, and quite 
another to incarcerate a person for who he is and what, therefore, he might do. 
This sentence seems to assume that it’s six of one and half a dozen of the 
other, as all indeterminate sentences essentially do. I’m not saying it’s wrong 
to lock people up for life, in order to protect the public from them. I’m 
saying that it’s wrong to present this as a punishment rather than pragmatism.

It has been agreed that Cornick was fit to plead guilty to murder – he is not 
considered to be criminally insane. But it is also acknowledged thathe must 
have some kind of personality disorder 
<http://www.itv.com/news/update/2014-11-03/maguire-killer-suffers-from-personality-disorder/>
 – “psychopathic tendencies” and “adjustment disorder” have been mentioned. I 
think it’s weird to punish people for their neurological deficits. I think it’s 
weird that releasing the teenager’s name to the media is thought to be helpful 
as a “deterrent”. What are other people going to be deterred from? Having 
similarly inadequate neurological systems? Developing similarly lethal 
personality disorders?

Is it possible that Cornick could have been deterred? Doesn’t logic dictate 
that he could have, if his example is considered to be a deterrent? The public 
debate around this, led by the media, seems confused. It’s shocking now to 
learn that Cornick’s antipathy towards Maguire had been publicly and 
flamboyantly advertised for three years, that his feelings of violent hatred 
for the popular teacher had been well known. Yet if one believes that the right 
intervention at the right time could have averted this tragedy, then how can 
one believe there may well be no right intervention, no right time, in even the 
near future?

At 15 or 16, a human brain is far from fully developed. The volatility of 
teenagers is partly a consequence of the accelerated neural sculpting that goes 
on in these years. We all understand this – it’s most probably the reason why 
Cornick’s rage against his teacher wasn’t seen as the extreme problem it turned 
out to be. It’s also the reason why the medical profession is reluctant to 
diagnose personality disorders before a child is 18.

Even then, the idea that personality disorders are permanent and incurable is 
no longer in the ascendant. It’s impossible to predict with certainty that a 
person who has “psychopathic tendencies” now will have them in five years, let 
alone 20 years.

Obviously, and thankfully, Cornick’s case is unique. But I have noticed that 
in the many reports about how bright and clever he is, that brightness and 
cleverness are seen as an advantage in life that should have gone some way to 
saving him from his awful course of action. In truth, however, intellectually 
gifted children quite often run into psychological difficulties. The rest of us 
tend not to understand how differently such children can see the world, and how 
isolated that can make them.

I’m struck by reports that Cornick says he wanted to be caught and wanted to 
be in prison. He clearly saw it as an environment where the burden of 
achievement would be removed from his shoulders.

As I said, I’m not interested in making a compassion argument against the 
sentence passed on Cornick. As it happens, I do have compassion for inadequate 
humans, humans who visit the degree of pain and suffering on other humans that 
he has. Fate dealt Maguire a terrible hand. But fate has not been kind to 
Cornick either.

Cornick – or any person who commits a crime at 15 years of age – is not a 
fully developed human being. The man serving Cornick’s sentences will have a 
materially different brain and mind from the boy who committed the crime. Child 
criminals should be treated differently to adult criminals for this reason, and 
I’m appalled that this country’s criminal justice system is unwilling to 
present this entirely logical argument to the public.

Cornick should have been given a sentence that pertained until his adulthood, 
at which point a judge would have been in a realistic position to receive 
information about the manner in which the rest of his sentence should be 
conducted. No one, not even a judge, can know at this point what kind of a man 
Cornick will become.

It is a terrible thing when a child commits such a crime. But children don’t 
stay children for ever, and our criminal justice system should be structured to 
reflect that.

It may well be that Cornick is no more amenable to rehabilitation at 21 than 
he is now. But it’s when he’s 21 that this matter should be decided.
 