
Youth justice <https://www.theguardian.com/society/youthjustice> campaigners 
have voiced concerns over the 20-year minimum tariff given to the 16-year-old 
schoolboy who murdered teacher Ann Maguire.

Will Cornick was given an indeterminate sentence “at her majesty’s pleasure” 
this week after pleading guilty to stabbing the 61-year-old teacher in a 
Spanish class at Corpus Christi Catholic College inLeeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/leeds> in April.

Mr Justice Coulson, passing sentence at Leeds crown court, warned Cornick that 
he might never be released from prison. Cornick will not be eligible to seek 
parole until he is 36 unless he applies to the high court to have his minimum 
tariff reduced. To be successful, he would have to show “clear evidence of 
exceptional and unforeseen progress” in his rehabilitation.

Psychiatrists who assessed the boy after the attack said he demonstrated 
“psychopathic tendencies” and could kill again.

Penelope Gibbs, who chairs the Standing Committee for Youth Justice (SCYJ) 
umbrella group of charities and campaign groups, said the sentence was too long 
and more emphasis should be placed on rehabilitation.

She said: “I don’t think a child – and he was a child – should get a life 
sentence, because they are young, their brain is not mature and a life sentence 
is indeterminate, it could last for ever. I think no other western European 
country would impose a life sentence on a teenager.

“Do we want him to be rehabilitated? Do we want him to leave prison the lowest 
risk possible of causing more harm to others? Yes. How long do we need to 
achieve that, rather than how long do we need to punish him for? We do need to 
punish him but I think to punish him for longer than he’s been alive for is 
disproportionate.”

Alistair Webster QC, head of Lincoln House chambers in Manchester, said he did 
not think the minimum tariff was out of line with the sentences given to other 
child murderers.

“It’s clearly severe,” he said. “But it’s intended to be. In 2006, I 
prosecuted a case involving a 15-year-old calledMichael Hamer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2006/oct/16/ukcrime>, who pleaded guilty to 
killing an 11-year-old boy with cystic fibrosis after luring him his house with 
a faked letter from a teacher. Hamer was 14 at the time of the crime. He had 
mental health issues but his minimum tariff was increased by the court of 
appeal from 12 to 15 years.

“There are a number of factors which seem to make this case even more serious, 
such as the evidence of premeditation and the fact Cornick killed the teacher 
in front of so many other children. The reality is that we don’t see many child 
murderers, so they do present particular difficulties for the criminal justice 
system.”

He said the system recognised that juvenile offenders ought to be treated 
differently from adults, as the minimum tariff for under-18s who commit murder 
was 12 rather than 25 years. According to theSentencing Council 
<http://sentencingcouncil.judiciary.gov.uk/docs/web_overarching_principles_sentencing_youths.pdf>
, this is because “young people may be more receptive to changing the way they 
conduct themselves and be able to respond more quickly to interventions” and 
“should be given greater opportunity to learn from their mistakes”.

It is believed that the last time a juvenile was given a 20-year minimum 
tariff was in 2011, when a 16-year-old thought to be Britain’s youngest 
contract killer was jailed for shooting dead a young mother for £200.Santre 
Sanchez Gayle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/may/24/britains-youngest-hitman-jailed-life>
, 16, was told he must serve at least 20 years behind bars for the murder of 
Gulistan Subasi, 26, in Hackney, east London, in March 2010.

In exceptional cases, a juvenile convicted of murder can apply to the high 
court to have their minimum tariff reduced. Case law says the defendant must 
demonstrate “clear evidence of exceptional and unforeseen progress”.

Last month, Mr Justice Wilkie knocked a year off 
<http://www.chroniclelive.co.uk/news/north-east-news/samantha-madgins-killer-jordan-jobson-7968837>
 the 12-year tariff given to Jordan Lucinda Jobson, who was 15 when she 
murdered an 18-year-old woman called Samantha Madgin in 2007 by stabbing her 
with a kitchen knife. The judge said Jobson had changed from a “wild and 
immature 15-year-old” into a “young adult who shows every sign of being mature, 
highly motivated, and responsible”.

Juliet Lyon, director of the Prison Reform Trust, said the justice system 
needed a rethink to focus on reparation rather than retribution. She said: 
“This is an exceptionally long sentence handed down in quite exceptional 
circumstances. It raises important questions about what is a just and 
proportionate penalty for such a terrible crime perpetrated by a child in front 
of other children.

“A much-loved teacher is dead – can there ever be any possibility of atonement 
or rehabilitation? Can you condemn the crime without condemning forever the boy 
who committed it? A system based on reparation rather than retribution could 
lead to fairer more hopeful outcomes.”

Adam Pemberton, assistant chief executive of the charity Victim Support said: 
“We believe it is essential when passing sentence that judges and magistrates 
consider the impact on the victim or the victim’s family, not just the nature 
of the offence. Victims, the bereaved and the public need to understand the 
reasons why a particular sentence has been handed down, and therefore good 
communication is key.

“To maintain public confidence in the criminal justice system it is vital that 
offenders are appropriately punished, that serious and violent crimes are dealt 
with robustly and that offenders are properly rehabilitated so they don’t go on 
to commit more crime.”
 