
The Ospreys <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> carried on from where 
they, in the form of Wales, had signed off with the grand slam here a week 
before. Thirteen of their players had been involved in the victory over France, 
a triumph engineered by a coach from Waikato, the New Zealand province from 
where the region signed the flanker Marty Holah.

Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> hoped it would take the 
Ospreys time to assimilate their Wales players back into domestic duty but 
there were less than three minutes on the clock when the player of the Six 
Nations, Shane Williams, squirmed over in the corner. He was denied a try for a 
foot in touch but the rare disappointment for the wing was followed by two 
typically opportunist tries which took him to eight in five games.

With Ryan Jones and Alun-Wyn Jones thumping into rucks, Gavin Henson making 
dents in his opposite numbers, James Hook fooling defenders and Lee Byrne 
offering solidity and adventure, and a blitz defence leaving Saracens with 
nowhere to go, it was like watching Wales. Saracens have a considerable amount 
to reflect on before the Heineken Cup quarter-final between the sides at 
Vicarage Road the weekend after next.

Saracens, top seeds in the Heineken Cup last eight, will need more than home 
advantage to make the last four. They were so comprehensively outplayed here 
that, had they lost by twice as many points, it would still have not reflected 
the superiority of the Ospreys, who have assembled a squad as strong as any in 
Europe.

Comparisons have been made between Wales's grand slam teams of this year and 
2005 after which, far from building on the achievement, the men in red 
self-destructed. One significant difference should not be overlooked. The 
success three years ago did not reflect what was happening below the national 
side. The four regional sides were then making no impact in Europe but last 
season the Llanelli Scarlets made the Heineken Cup semi-finals and the Ospreys 
and Cardiff Blues are in the last eight next month.

This year's Wales reflect the state of the domestic game and it was surprising 
when the Saracens director of rugby, Alan Gaffney, said he felt some of his 
players had judged the Ospreys by the reputation of the Magners League, which 
is seen as inferior to the Guinness Premiership. "I knew that was not the case 
after my time in Ireland but they are wiser now," he said.

At full strength the Ospreys are an international side. On the opening day of 
the Six Nations, they had 14 players in starting line-ups: 13 for Wales at 
Twickenham, where the Ospreys will play Leicester next month in a repeat of 
last season's EDF final, and the wing Nikki Walker in the Scotland side which 
lost to France at Murrayfield. Factor in three former All Blacks, Justin 
Marshall, Holah and Filo Tiatia, and some of Wales's key performers this year, 
such as Mike Phillips and Jonathan Thomas, are not regulars for their region.

When Wales picked 13 Ospreys at Twickenham, the two positions filled by 
players from other regions were the ones occupied by Walker and Holah at the 
Liberty Stadium. "They were much better than us and there was no holding back 
for their Wales players after the grand slam," said Gaffney. "It will give them 
great impetus ahead of the Heineken Cup quarter-final but we know what we have 
to work on."

The Ospreys were wasteful in the opening half before Williams put his left 
boot to the ball - after a thumping Henson tackle had dispossessed Glen Jackson 
- and beat three defenders to the bounce. Williams is in the form of his career 
and he finished the scoring by touching down from a deft chip from the 
second-row Ian Evans. Williams was playing on the right wing, having appeared 
on the left for Wales, but he is not one to stay where he is put. Only one of 
his six tries in the Six Nations came when he was stationed on the left wing.

In between Williams's tries Henson, who promised to get his hair cut after 
being named man of the match, shrugged off Andy Farrell's tackle to score and 
Tiatia forced his way over from short range. With Holah controlling the 
breakdown, Saracens had little in the way of sustenance and lost Neil de Kock 
and Chris Jack to injury. The Ospreys are soaring high.

Ospreys Byrne; Vaughton, Parker, Henson (Bishop, 76), Williams; Hook (Biggar, 
80), Phillips (Marshall, 73); James (D Jones, 64), Hibbard (Bennett, 64), A 
Jones, A-W Jones, Evans (Bateman, 78), Thomas (Tiatia, 64), Holah, R Jones 
(capt).

Tries Williams 2, Henson, Tiatia. Cons: Hook 2.

Pens Hook 2.

Saracens Russell; Haughton, Leonelli (Sorrell, 70), Farrell, Scarbrough; 
Jackson, De Kock (capt; Rauluni, h-t); Lloyd (Yates, 76), Ongaro (Kyriacou, 
61), Visagie, Jack (Ryder, 43), Vyvyan, Chesney (Gustard, 60), Barrell, 
Skirving.

Pen Jackson.

Referee W Barnes (England). Attendance 41,609.
 