
The most remarkable thing about the fast train between Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> and Leeds is that it doesn't exist. 
Sure, some trains move more swiftly than others, but there's none that even the 
most hucksterish rail operative would call fast. Not in 2014, between two of 
England's leading cities, both with aspirations to have futures as well as 
pasts.

So it is that an hour and three-quarters after setting off from Liverpool Lime 
Street, you arrive in Leeds, 60-odd miles away. A London train leaving 
Liverpool at the same time for the 210-mile journey would arrive only 20 
minutes later. And that train would be full of people doing business, preparing 
for meetings. TheLeeds <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/leeds> train is not full 
of anyone much at all.

"Yep, not the greatest of journeys," says Keith Wakefield, leader of Leeds 
city council when I fetch up in his office, "but I've got a better 
illustration." A better illustration, that is, of how the northern cities fail 
to connect.Manchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester>, Leeds's 
neighbour across the Pennines, is 35 miles away or an hour by train. "But only 
half a per cent of Leeds people ever go to Manchester; and it's the same the 
other way round."

Wakefield's "half per cent" statistic might seem arcane but it says plenty 
about how England operates. Open a map and you can draw a neat, relatively 
short line linking Liverpool, Manchester and Leeds, movingacross country. But 
people and businesses, tend not to move this way, as Wakefield suggests. 
Northerners who leave home, whether for the day or for good, tend to head 
south. All roads – and fast trains – lead to London.

This month, five northern cities – Leeds, Liverpool, Manchester, Newcastle 
upon Tyne and Sheffield – publishedOne North 
<http://www.manchester.gov.uk/downloads/download/5969/one_north> (pdf), a 
report calling for investment of £15bn in the region over the next five years, 
chiefly in transport infrastructure. Central to the proposals was a high-speed 
rail line, HS3, running from Liverpool to Leeds and, ideally, to the east coast.

Chancellor George Osborne, immediately supportive of the plans, talked of a 
"collective northern powerhouse" that could help fix the imbalances in the UK 
economy, over-reliant as it is on London and the south-east of England.

Spend time in the northern cities, and HS3, you sense, has become totemic. 
There's no objection to HS2, the planned high-speed link running north to south 
– the northern cities are all in favour of it. But HS3 offers something new,
beyond the practicalities. It suggests that the English north could operate 
another way, that cities could act, to borrow a phrase, better together.

Wakefield talks of a future of "dipping in and out" – live in one city and 
work in another; where businesses invest in the region because they see how an 
inter-city, collaborative chain might prosper. (He is thinking principally of 
the north-west and Yorkshire cities; Newcastle, at some distance removed is 
more tricky to "cluster".)

Over several days of some dipping in and out of my own, the potential and 
current frustrations make themselves clear. For some years, a walk along 
Liverpool's waterfront or through Leeds's Victorian arcades or Manchester's 
northern quarter has lifted the spirits – the handsome old streets and 
buildings bristling with life and enterprise. The issue was and remains: what 
lies beyond these central jewels? How broad is the potential economic 
regeneration? And can the local authorities deliver it?

Now the pizzazz comes with a deeper confidence. Talk to political and business 
players and you sense a greater urgency, too. Alongside the proposals for 
improved infrastructure, the northern city leaders insist that to transform the 
economy we need to transform local government. If there's a show to run, they 
want to run it. The prize, says Wakefield, is a huge one: "Together the north 
makes for one bloody big economy: the natural alternative to London."

We've been here before, of course. "What's to be done about the north?" is a 
long-running question, a national melodrama, played out with regular tantrums 
and tears. And we should not discount the possibility of easy promises – we're 
less than a year from a general election and the parties are vying to outdo 
each other with big-ticket proposals for the north.

This new impetus, however, is driven not only by economic reality but also by 
neighbourly example, finding its spur in the debate on Scottish independence. 
The referendum campaign, forcing the electorate to think throughwho should make 
what decisions where, has set much of northern England thinking.

"The genie is now out of the bottle," says Sir Richard Leese, leader of 
Manchester city council. "We're now on a slow road to devolution in England as 
well." The result of the referendum in Scotland is, in this regard, irrelevant. 
It will make no difference to the direction of travel, Leese reckons: the 
prospect of greater local control has already taken firm hold.

Devolution was once, he says, a word seldom heard in Manchester outside the 
haunts of political anoraks; now it's a routine topic of doorstep conversation 
– Mancunians fancy a bit of what their Celtic friends already enjoy. The 
economy ofGreater Manchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester>
 is larger than that of Wales, says Leese. "The idea that we should have any 
less control over our own affairs is just not sustainable any more."

This sharp desire for greater control – of money, power, responsibilities – 
runs through the arguments of Wilkinson, Leese and their counterpart in 
Liverpool, directly elected mayor Joe Anderson. "It's generally best to make 
decisions where there is greatest knowledge, and that tends to be at the local 
level," he says. "I bow to nobody in my respect for Whitehall" – a smart 
talker, he allows himself a little chuckle – "but my colleagues and myself 
probably are better judges of our cities' priorities."

There is an eagerness in the cities now to talk about the hard stuff – jobs, 
skills, education. None of the civic leaders promises – or threatens – to whisk 
me off to see some new cultural project, as they might have done a decade ago, 
an abandoned warehouse turned gallery, or a new series of "people's 
sculptures". There was a time when it felt as if we were dedicated to turning 
the north into some vast art installation. And yet you'd wonder what was going 
on in the jobs market, or how local kids were faring at school.

That was a necessary stage, says Tom Bloxham, who is well placed to survey the 
long view. Founder of the influential property regeneration company Urban 
Splash, he's now also chancellor of Manchester University, having arrived in 
the city in the mid-80s as an emigré from London. "You have to remember how 
these cities looked then. You really were talking 'dark satanic mills'. Now 
they are on the map, desirable places to live. When students come to study, 
they want to stay."

This is far from trivial stuff, he insists, but has been key to regeneration. 
He describes a process that's "halfway through … so the cities are now full of 
life, full of young professionals. We now need strategies for homes for 
families, need to see more kids in the centres."

Another (encouraging) change is the lack of anti-London talk. (I write as a 
northerner happily settled in the capital.) Instead, the leaders agree London 
need not lose so the north can gain. And this new mood is apt to recognise the 
virtues of having a world capital only two hours away with which to deal. But 
the north would prefer to do so from a more solid footing, armed with more 
power.

What's in play in the northern cities is nothing less than the chance to 
reverse a century-long drift of power to the centre. As things stand, the UK is 
the most centralised state in the western world. Across OECD countries, local 
and regional government finance, on average, about half of their expenditure 
from local tax revenues; in the UK this is less than a fifth.

In his 2012 report No Stone Left Unturned 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/no-stone-unturned-in-pursuit-of-growth>
 (pdf), which has become a bible for the northern rebalancers, Michael 
Heseltine details how, as Whitehall power increased during the last century, 
local authorities were relegated to "service providers", with few possibilities 
for initiative.

(It's a rare conversation in the northern cities that doesn't alight on 
Heseltine at some point. He's now something of a mascot, the Tory grandee who's 
been part of the family since championing Liverpool's regeneration after the 
riots of 1981. His Labour fellow traveller is Andrew Adonis. AlongsideNo Stone 
Left Unturnedand work from thinktank IPPR North, Adonis's Mending the Fractured 
Economy 
<http://www.policy-network.net/publications/4695/Mending-the-Fractured-Economy> 
(pdf) is the paper most likely to be found in council offices.)

The results of this centralising drive are neatly caught in a league table 
that doesn't make for pretty reading. It lists Europe's Top 100 cities, by GDP 
per capita. London comes second (after Oslo). But outside the capital, the 
highest English city is Bristol at 38. Leeds stands at 76, while the other core 
English northern cities just slip into the top 100.

There are eight German cities in the top 50, not including Berlin. In Germany, 
as elsewhere, these "second-tier cities" drive the national economy to a large 
degree, enjoying, to use Heseltine's words, the "power and initiative" not 
shared by their English counterparts.

When I call Lord Heseltine to congratulate him on his guru status among the 
Labourites of the north, he laughs and points out that the northern leaders are 
not to be messed with and are increasingly showing their clout: "They're 
realising they can exert power … When Ed Balls started to play party politics 
with HS2 [suggesting a cooling of Labour commitment], they got on to him pretty 
quickly."

Heseltine believes the move towards greater English devolution is unstoppable. 
He recognises that parties of all stripes have promised to cede power from the 
centre only to forget that promise once in office, "but it's different now: 
there's been a shift in the Whitehall machine, a realisation that this is not 
only the 'right' thing but that the country needs it".

In fact, so convinced is he of this shift that if he were starting in politics 
now, local leadership would be the way to go, he says, much in the way that it 
is often the springboard for the most garlanded of French political careers. He 
favours directly elected mayors – not something that has seduced the north, 
Liverpool aside. But as mayor or council boss, "leading a Manchester or 
Liverpool is a bigger job than half the cabinet. As a stepping stone to high 
office, what would be better than running one of our great cities?"

Now that the cities are on the map, in Bloxham's terms, they can settle into 
serious business. In Leeds, for instance, Wakefield celebrates "high-end health 
research"; in Liverpool, Anderson hymns the planned new deep-sea port (which, 
with HS3's help, will send goods across the north). It's notable how much of 
what you hear from the city halls is echoed by business leaders or within 
universities. You're struck by a shared endeavour. "I love London," says 
Bloxham, "but it's so big, people coming – and going – from all over the world, 
with not necessarily any 'allegiance'."

Easy to overlook too is the stability afforded by long-term planning, the 
absence of which often bedevils national endeavours. The northern cities are, 
by and large, one-party cities,Labour cities. Leese has been leader of 
Manchester city council since 1996.

The northern leaders also have a way of describing the future that sounds very 
close to the new models of capitalism – marked by partnerships – much discussed 
in Westminster Labour circles.

Plans for poverty – lest we forget in the talk of brave new worlds, there 
remains plenty of deprivation – are intertwined with plans for growth "When I 
first came on the Labour scene in the 1970s," recalls Wakefield, "we were 
throwing bricks at business. Now collaboration seems natural. Our businesses 
want the infrastructure as much as we do, as much as our young kidsneed it."

Leese views it as obvious that "economic and social policy should be 
integrated"; equally obvious is that this is best donewithin the cities. "For 
instance, work programmes administered nationally don't work. Let's commission 
them here. We're better at it."

Where exactly this "here" should be has provoked some lively speculation . Is 
there an argument for new regional structures, a council of the north for 
instance? Jim O'Neill – formerly of Goldman Sachs, now chairing a commission on 
the future of UK cities – even floated the idea of merged cities, a Manpool, 
for instance, born of the two north-western cities.

There's not much appetite for such a notion. Northern cities talk frequently 
to each other, have shared interests, proffer affection even; but don't see the 
need for mergers. There's not much appetite, in truth, for any huge shifts in 
governance structure (apart, that is, from the combined authorities model 
embracing smaller towns that feed into a city, following the example of the 
Greater Manchester combined authority). For Leese, the issue is getting more 
power within existing city structures.

"Of course, our national history could have been different, within politics 
and beyond," he says. "The national football stadium should have been anywhere 
but Wembley. And we could have had – and could still have – government 
departments here. But if we're successful on the devolution route, would that 
be necessary? It's all about the cities now."

That's where the energy is, he says, the drive, the enterprise: "Now we just 
need more power and that infrastructure. China wouldn't be much good if it was 
still relying on the Silk Road."
 