
And so to the continuing evolution of Alex Reid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alex-reid>, the ex-martial artist, ex-Mr 
Katie Price, who is somehow parlaying those stints in the fight game into a 
career in news punditry.

A couple of months ago, the self-styled Reidernator made the rounds of the TV 
studios to offer his views on the video of thosecagefighting kiddies in Preston 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dux5sd-QDDg>, and back then Lost in Showbiz 
voiced grave concern as to where this experiment might lead. I've seen 
Greystoke. These things never end happily.

The warning went unheeded, needless to say, and Alex has since graduated from 
speaking on subjects that might be vaguely within his terms of reference, to 
discoursing on all manner of newsy topics.

Yesterday morning found him on the sofa at BBC Breakfast, having been booked 
to talk about men crying in the wake ofEd Balls's claim that he cries at The 
Antiques Roadshow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/nov/22/antiques-roadshow-ed-balls>. 
My own preference would have been for Alex merely to have delivered a Big 
Lebowski impression, responding to the anchors' questions with a pained: 
"Strong men also cry. Strong … men … also ... cry." Instead, he began by 
delivering some suspiciously calculated non-sequiturs. "I go to the gym," ran 
one such declaration. "I've got my Alex Reid Academy ..."

What a deftly inserted plug – and how intriguing The Alex Reid Academy sounds. 
I suppose it might be a gym – but then, perhaps it's a school along the lines 
of Xavier's School for Gifted Youngsters? Unfortunately, Lost in Showbiz lacked 
the will to type it into Google and find out, but very much hopes to find the 
strength at some point in the coming weeks.

Meanwhile, however, the logical consequences of conferring pundithood on Alex 
were about to be laid all too bare on the BBC Breakfast sofa. The inevitable 
moment came when presenter Siân Williams mentioned that men had been 
traditionally expected to display stoicism.

A pause. "That's a big word," spluttered Alex. Another pause. "I don't know 
that word."

How long can this cruel experiment in so-called "civilisation" be allowed to 
continue? Release him back into the wild, telly bosses, or prepare for 
heartbreaking consequences.

• This article was amended on 25 November 2011. The original said that Siân 
Lloyd presented BBC Breakfast, rather than Siân Williams.
 