
Another resounding seven-try victory over English opposition sees the Ospreys 
requiring just a bonus point in their remaining group match at Harlequins next 
month to claim a place in the semi-finals for a second consecutive year.

But if they do reach the last four, which is now a near certainty, then the 
Welsh region can count themselves lucky about the draw they were handed. They 
breezed past an uncertain Worcester the weekend before and yesterday racked up 
the tries - six unanswered including a Shane Williams hat-trick - against an 
Exiles outfit which had ran out of ideas and puff by the interval. On the brink 
of the EDF knockout stages, and having chalked up 98 points in two games, they 
have set themselves up well for the Heineken Cup opener at home to Bourgoin on 
Saturday. Ospreys' coach Lyn Jones admitted they have much to consider 
selection-wise over the coming days. "The boys played well with a lot of spirit 
and imagination. We now have some big selection issues ahead of Saturday and 
there are going to be a lot of disappointed people," said Jones.

For London Irish <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/londonirish> it was a 
different story as a second group defeat puts them out of the competition. "The 
second half turned into a bit of a training run for them," said Irish's 
director of rugby Brian Smith. "It was good for the home spectators but not if 
you are an opposition coach." But for all that the Ospreys could have 
considered themselves fortunate that they had gone in at half-time 20-16 to the 
good after a difficult 40 minutes of error and rising penalty count. In between 
two fine tries - Gavin Henson having sent Jon Thomas in down the right and a 
masterly off-load from Ospreys' top performer Filo Tiatia to give Williams an 
easy run-in - the Welsh side had to respond to being down 10-3 and then 16-13.

But gradually Tiatia's influence on the match increased. He was again try 
provider at the start of the second half, taking the lineout ball which saw 
Phillips zip through a massive gap as Irish fell for a well-worked 
training-ground move. After that it was very much one-way traffic. Ben Lewis 
scored the bonus-point try on the hour mark before Marty Holah, the 36-times 
capped All Black, came on for his first Osprey appearance and was involved in 
the fifth try. Williams had the final say with two tries in eight minutes after 
James Hook had gone off to healthy applause following his 14-point effort with 
the boot.

Ospreys Byrne; Walker, Bishop, Henson, Williams; Hook (Connor, 74), Phillips 
(Marshall, 55); D Jones (James, 64), Bennett (Hibbard, 64), A Jones (D Jones 
74), Wyn Jones, Evans, Thomas, Lewis (Holah, 61), Tiatia (capt; Gough, 64).

Tries Thomas, Williams 3, Phillips, Lewis, Wyn Jones. Cons Hook 4, Connor. Pens
 Hook 2.

London Irish Curran; Ojo, Rennie (Ireland, 55), Mordt (Hodgson, 73), De Vedia; 
Hickey, Fury; Dermody (Skuse, 55), Coetzee (capt, Mackie, 61), Lea'aetoa 
(Warren, 61), Hudson, Johnson, McCullen (Fisher, 69), Thorpe, Murphy (Armitage, 
55).

Try De Vedia. Con Hickey. Pens Hickey 2.

Referee R Debney (Leicestershire). Attendance 8,356.
 