
Ann Maguire’s killer was just 15 when he walked up behind the Spanish teacher 
in a classroom at Corpus Christi Catholic college and stabbed her to death.

The court heard Will Cornick had been planning the murder for three years, but 
neither his teachers nor his parents saw it coming. The weekend before the 
killing he attended his grandmother’s birthday party and was “polite and 
apparently happy”, Paul Greaney QC, prosecuting, toldLeeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/leeds> crown court on Monday. His cheerful 
demeanour was, said the barrister, “one of the many extraordinary features of 
the case”.

Cornick came from a good family. Though separated, his devastated parents, Ian 
and Michelle, were described by one psychiatrist as “entirely responsible and 
caring people”. His family life was “marked by love and support”, said Greaney. 
Sentencing their son to 20 years in prison on Monday, the judge praised both 
parents for having the courage to sit in the dock with him.

A selfie Cornick posted on Facebook some time before the attack showed a boy 
with straight, shoulder-length brown hair covering his face. By the time he 
appeared in court a few days after the attack, his hair had been cut into a 
shaggy urchin crop, and he had bandages on one of his arms: injuries police 
said were sustained as he struggled with school staff after the attack.

When he started at Corpus Christi in year 7 he was a model student. His year 
head at the time described him as a “delightful pupil who always gave his best 
and was pleasant, polite and cooperative with 100% attendance”. In the four and 
a half years he spent at the school there were only five incidents of 
misbehaviour. He had no criminal record.

For reasons which have never become clear, in year 8 Cornick developed an 
“entirely irrational” hatred for Maguire. Perhaps it was a coincidence, but 
shortly beforehand he had collapsed on a family holiday in Cornwall and was 
diagnosed with a life-limiting illness.

“This seems to have had a major impact not only on his lifestyle but also on 
his mood and personality,” said Greaney. Afterwards, his mother noticed a 
period of self-harm, but it soon seemed to stop.

In 2013 he was unhappy to discover that he would not be able to join the army 
because of his medical issues and began to talk more and more about his dislike 
for Maguire. At a parents’ evening in November 2013, the boy refused to see 
Maguire, who had taught him Spanish since 2009. Late on Christmas Eve in 2013 
and into the early hours of Christmas Day he sent messages to a friend on 
Facebook where he talked of “brutally killing” Maguire.

He raised the idea of claiming to “hear voices” – something he later told 
psychiatrists, but which the experts never believed. As Greaney put it: “He was 
talking of killingAnn Maguire <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire> 
and then setting up a medical defence.”
 An image from Will Cornick’s Faebook page. Photograph: Facebook 
On 24 February this year, just over two months before the killing, he sent a 
message to a friend on Facebook saying of Maguire: “… the one absolute fucking 
bitch that deserves more than death more than pain torture and more than 
anything that we can understand.” A few weeks previously he had been put in 
“internal isolation” at school after getting in trouble with Maguire: he had 
failed to do his Spanish homework and as a result, she barred him from going on 
a school bowling trip. He disobeyed her and went anyway.

The boy later told a psychiatrist that he decided four days before the 
killing, on a Thursday, that he was going to murder Maguire rather than kill 
himself. He said that on the Friday he really made his mind up “after months of 
thinking life is pretty fucking shit. I couldn’t see myself passing college and 
had no hope of doing anything. I tried to apply for the army but they said no.”

He has never shown remorse for the killing, telling one doctor that he was 
proud of what he had done. “I wasn’t in shock, I was happy. I had a sense of 
pride. I still do. I know it’s uncivilised but I know it’s incredibly 
instinctual and human. Past generations of life, killing is a natural route of 
survival. It’s kill or be killed. I did not have a choice. It was kill her or 
suicide,” he said.

While psychiatrists concluded that he was of sound mind when he murdered 
Maguire, they found some evidence of a personality disorder. One said the boy 
had an adjustment disorder, writing in a report that he had “a gross lack of 
empathy for his victim and a degree of callousness rarely seen in clinical 
practice”.

The doctor said the boy “presents a risk of serious harm to the public and 
that this risk is present for the foreseeable future. The risk is of grave 
homicidal violence and this could easily involve the use of a weapon. The risk 
is immediate and unpredictable and could cause serious and lethal injury.”
 Flowers left in tribute to Ann Maguire outside Corpus Christi Catholic 
college in Leeds. Photograph: Dave Higgens/PA 
His home life was unremarkable. His parents had separated but records show 
they stopped living together in Leeds in 2003, when Cornick was four or five. 
Ever since, he had been living with his mother in a semi-detached house in a 
quiet cul-de-sac a mile from the school. Neighbours said they were a quiet 
family, nothing untoward.

These days the blinds remain closed all day, a swingball set in the back 
garden the only sign that a teenager used to live there not long ago. He still 
saw his father, a council worker who lived in a village outside Leeds with his 
new partner and their son, Cornick’s half-brother.

His family are understandably horrified at what their boy has done, devastated 
at the pain he has inflicted on Maguire’s loved ones. They have given no 
interviews and have asked for privacy as they struggle to process all that has 
happened. Their son has admitted he is a killer, responsible for murdering a 
woman cherished by generations of pupils before him.
 