
Shane Williams safeguarded the feel-good factor pulsing through Welsh rugby 
with two tries to send the Ospreys into an EDF Energy Cup final rematch with 
Leicester. Williams rounded off a stunning seven days in which he won the grand 
slam, became his country's highest try-scorer and was named player of the Six 
Nations by starting and finishing an emphatic Ospreys victory. The Wales wing 
raced over either side of scores from Gavin Henson and Filo Tiatia to send the 
Ospreys to Twickenham on 12 April, inflicting a psychological blow overSaracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> just a fortnight before they meet 
again in Heineken Cup quarter-final.

A half-full Millennium Stadium was always going to prove a huge anti-climax 
for the raft of grand-slam winners within the Ospreys squad, yet coach Lyn 
Jones turned to nine of the Wales team that beat France here a week earlier. 
Among those was the irrepressible Williams who brought the crowd to their feet 
every time he touched the ball and continued his red-hot streak by handing the
Ospreys <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> an 8-0 lead right on half 
time.

Williams took less than three minutes to find his way over the line only for 
the video official to rule that his foot stepped on the touchline as he dived 
in. Jonathan Thomas also had a try ruled out for a forward pass as the Ospreys 
threatened to overrun Saracens in the opening five minutes.

Three points from the boot of James Hook was all they could garner, until time 
was running out at the end of the first half. Williams was alive to any 
half-chance and when Glen Jackson fumbled possession under Henson's challenge, 
the poacher struck. Williams got foot to leather, kicked ahead twice before 
stepping on the gas to outrun the Saracens back line. The video official took 
his time to award the try, but the looks of utter bewilderment on the faces of 
three Saracens defenders sat behind the tryline said it all.

Jackson registered the first points of the second half, but that was as close 
as Saracens would get. Henson swatted aside Andy Farrell for a solo score on 50 
minutes before the strength of the Ospreys' bench took its toll.

Tiatia barged over before Williams raced on to Ian Evans's kick to strike the 
final hammer blow. The deftness of Evans the lock and the pace of Williams 
summed up the difference between the sides.

Millennium Stadium 41,018

Ospreys Byrne; Vaughton, Parker, Henson (Bishop 71), Williams; Hook (Biggar 
78), Phillips (Marshall 68); James (D Jones 61), Hibbard (Bennett 61), A Jones, 
AW Jones, Evans (Bateman 61), Thomas (Tiatia 61), Holah, R Jones (capt)

Tries Williams 2, Henson, Tiatia Cons Hook 2

Pens Hook 2

Saracens Russell; Haughton, Leonelli (Sorrell 68), Farrell, Scarbrough; 
Jackson, De Kock (capt; Rauluni ht); Lloyd (Yates 71), Ongaro (Kyriacou 59), 
Visagie, Jack (Ryder 44), Vyvyan, Chesney (Gustard 59), Barrell, Skirving

Pen Jackson
 