
I have a Victorian terraced house with old sash windows and a friend offered 
to do all the draught-proofing on my windows. He did it by filling the gaps 
with rubber silicone. I would really like to be able to open the windows again. 
Is there a way of removing it?
Susie

Friends like these are in danger of putting the cowboys out of business. While 
the silicone will draught-proof the window it does render it totally 
unopenable, and old buildings need proper ventilation to prevent rot from 
forming. The easiest solution is to use a product called Silicone Eater, which 
will break it down and allow you simply to remove it, leaving a clean frame. 
Proper draught-exclusion can be created by fitting the window with brush-pile 
strips which will seal the window from dust, draughts and water while allowing 
it to remain operational. You may be best to get the professionals in
(draughtsealing.co.uk) <http://www.draughtsealing.co.uk>), but you can also buy 
brush-pile draught-excluding strip (to fill gaps between 1mm and 4mm) in 5m 
rolls and do it yourself, tryfoxdiy.co.uk <http://www.foxdiy.co.uk>.

I have been searching for matching contemporary wardrobes to fit into alcoves 
either side of a chimney breast, with a maximum width of 85cm. The alcoves 
aren't very deep, so built-in wardrobes would mean a big construction job. I 
have tried high street outlets but can't find anything suitable. My budget is 
£600.
 Sioned Hughes, Cardiff

A These narrow niches are a problem: not deep enough for a coat hanger to hang 
side on, and the wrong size for most modern furniture. Have you considered a 
vintage piece? They're often solid, well made and designed to fit these spaces. 
Take inspiration from award-winning designers Jimmie Martin (jimmiemartin.co.uk 
<http://www.jimmiemartin>), who give old furniture a luxurious new lease of 
life - they repaint, wallpaper, stencil and gold-leaf their pieces to stunning 
effect. It's easy enough to do some of this yourself (not to mention 
cost-effective). This type of intelligent, creative reuse is very 'now', and 
can add real character to your home. For a great selection of vintage pieces, 
check out local markets, junk shops or the Furniture Reuse Network (
(www.frn.org.uk), <http://www.frn.org.uk> which has stores nationwide.

· If you have a home decor question for Oliver, email ask.oliver@observer.co.uk
 <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
 