
Genetically modified ash trees could replace the 80 million expected to die in 
the next 20 years from a deadly fungus, scientists have proposed.

The radical solution to the greatest woodland disaster of the last 50 years is 
being explored by research teams at London and Oxford universities with backing 
from the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, science bodies and 
the Forestry Commission.

With no hope of saving existing native ash trees from the “dieback” disease 
now spreading across the country, aGM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gm> solution could develop resistance 
faster than traditional breeding and start to repopulate woodlands within a few 
years, say scientists at Queen Mary, University of London.

The fungus, Hymenoscyphus fraxineus (previously called Chalara fraxinea – the 
disease is also known as chalara), causes leaf loss and crown dieback and has 
already wiped out 90% of ash trees in Denmark. It was first confirmed in the UK 
in 2012 and is expected to wipe out 90% of the ash population, which accounts 
for 20% of all UK trees.

Following a £7m government grant to study ash dieback, six breeding techniques 
to replace the trees have been put forward by Queen Mary biologists. These have 
been presented by Oxford scientists to groups of landowners, ecologists, tree 
specialists and others to gauge public opinion.

“It’s early days,” said Richard Buggs, lecturer in biological sciences at 
Queen Mary, who is sequencing the ash tree genome. “We don’t want to invest a 
lot of effort in developing GM ash trees no one wants. There are different 
options. We could use GM, or hybridise them, or back-cross them. We are looking 
at all 35 ash species in the world. Some which are resistant to ash dieback 
come from China.

“I see GM as one of several possibilities to explore both scientifically and 
with regard to public acceptability but I have not formed conclusions on 
whether it is a good choice or not. My current research is not developing a GM 
ash; it is simply trying to find genes within the ash genus for resistance to 
ash dieback,” said Buggs.

“If we discovered that people did not want GM [ash] and rather had no ash 
there would be no point developing a GM ash, and we would pursue a breeding 
approach. Potentially it could be quicker to develop GM trees resistant to ash 
dieback. Conventional breeding would take many decades,” he said.

A survey of 1,400 people revealed a mixed reaction to the prospect of GM ash 
trees, said Oxford University researcher Irina Arakelyan. “The three options 
with the highest acceptability were breeding native tolerant ash, using 
accelerated breeding to breed native tolerant ash, and cross-breeding of native 
ash with non-native ash.
Interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/10/ash-diebackmap/giv-31114FO0we3tlFvzu/>
“The two least preferred options, which were almost equally unpopular, were a 
‘no-action’ option to let nature take its course with the disease, and 
trans-genetics which would introduce a gene from another plant or animal into 
native ash trees,” she said.

But one of the most popular options was a GM method called “cis-genetics”, 
which transfers genes between different species of the same plant. Because ash 
trees genetically engineered in this way would contain only ash genes, 
scientists believe public objections would be less strong. The method was used 
in the US to develop poplars and GM chestnut trees which were decimated by a 
deadly fungus accidentally imported from Asia 100 years ago. By the 1950s the 
American chestnut had been almost wiped out. However, opposition to it and 
other GM trees in the US has led to the project being shelved.

GM trees are seen by some as a potentially lucrative development, able to 
speed growth and increase volume in plantations. But only three types of GM 
trees have so far been authorised for commercial use anywhere in the world, and 
little is known about how they might react in mixed forests. China has planted 
some GM trees, Brazil is close to planting eucalyptus and the US authorities 
are considering a request to plant a poplar.

Some ecologists and geneticists argue that the unregulated release of any GM 
trees in a forest or woodland could do massive damage. “A forest ecosystem is 
wildly complex and biodiverse, with little known about the natural interactions 
between soils, fungi, insects, understory plants, wildlife and trees. Any 
attempt to engineer genomes by invasive methods can cause unexpected effects. 
Cis-genesis is still genetic engineering and subject to unpredictable effects,” 
said Anne Petermann, director of the Global Justice Ecology Project.

“It would open the door to GM trees in Europe if Britain decided to go ahead,” 
she said. But others say that British trees like the ash face such a variety of 
pests that it is essential that every method be tried to save them for 
posterity.

The director of conservation at the Woodland Trust, Austin Brady, urged 
caution: “The test tube should be the last resort, only used when we have 
exhausted all the other options. We would steer away from any direct insertion 
or manipulation of genes until we have harnessed all the natural processes.”

The trust is working with Defra and the Forestry Commission to try to identify 
native ash trees that are resistant to dieback. It has planted 24,000 ash 
trees, gathered from all over the UK, to expose them to the disease to see 
which, if any, are suitable to be bred from.

Friends of the Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/friends-of-the-earth> chief executive 
Craig Bennett said: “This is not solving the original problem which was caused 
by the international horticulture trade. The science of the lab is very 
different from the science of the landscape. You have to be hugely cautious and 
be aware of unintended consequences. This could fundamentally change what we 
think of as nature.”

Paul Jepson of the University of Oxford school of geography and the 
environment said: “Tree diseases threaten the look and economy of the 
countryside. This situation needs a ‘talk it through’ approach to science: 
where scientists present the range of possible tree planting solutions and ask 
citizens what they think. It is about giving science and policy a steer.”

A Defra spokesperson said: “We want to ensure that the graceful ash tree 
continues to have a place in our environment. That’s why we’re protecting 
non-infected areas, managing affected plants and have invested over £21m into 
tree health research – including developing disease-tolerant ash trees though 
selective breeding.

“Defra is not developing GM trees.”
 