
The Milburn Report on Fair Access to Professional Careers 
<http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/sites/default/files/resources/IR_FairAccess_acc2.pdf>
 makes many important observations and recommendations for ways in which the 
professions should be opened up to ensure a more diverse workforce that 
supports social mobility. The report makes a strong case for why this is 
necessary, given the changing focus of the workforce towards professional roles.

At the Bridge Group, we welcomed the report and its focus on ensuring that 
social mobility is embedded into the professional strategies to tackle any 
potential barriers to entry. In fact, our Professions Expert Group has been 
looking at ways to address these barriers throughout the past year.

There is one crucial area that has been largely missing in the debate though. 
I was surprised to see that careers information, advice and guidance (IAG) in 
supporting access to the professions was not given greater prominence. This is 
increasingly one of the largest holes in the social mobility pipeline. There 
are potentially disastrous consequences if this lack of support is not dealt 
with quickly and effectively by the government.

It is crucial that young people, particularly those from disadvantaged 
backgrounds and those with no family history of higher education, have access 
to first class IAG about their options and how to navigate the minefield that 
is higher education and career progression. The professions and universities 
alike often argue that there is little they can do to counteract the impact of 
a student having studied the 'wrong' A-levels for the degree course or career 
that they wish to pursue down the road. This is particularly true for 
STEM-based (science, technology, engineering and maths) careers, which are one 
of the largest areas of potential growth for the UK economy. Despite this, 
recent cuts have meant that many students are without any satisfactory service 
to provide them with this kind of assistance.

The burden of responsibility has now been placed on schools to provide careers 
IAG. It is clear, however, that the parameters of this new statutory duty are 
far too narrow – 16-18 year olds are not yet covered by it, for example. With 
no additional funding, many schools will be unable to meet even the basic 
requirements. Alan Milburn originally recommended that £200m be transferred to 
schools from the previous Connexions budget to allow schools to tender for 
careers services a provider of their choice. This has not found its way to 
schools. Without a ring-fenced budget, and without much clearer guidance to 
schools on what good careers IAG provision looks like and how to provide it, 
the system will fail those who need it most.

Fair access to the professions is not going to become a reality for the 
majority of young people until they have systematic access, throughout their 
secondary education and beyond, to the high quality advice and guidance in 
addition to relevant work experiences and skills development, which is crucial 
in helping them pursue professional careers.

Outreach activities by the professions themselves, and by the universities 
that provide the bulk of their recruits, are seeking to plug this gap but it 
cannot possibly replace it. Without reconsideration of current policies, the 
schools that already do this well will continue to give their students the 
enormous advantages. For those without access to such advice, the gulf will 
widen further.

So, the schools that already do this well will continue to give their students 
the enormous advantages. For those without access to such advice, the gulf will 
widen further.

Dr Tessa Stone is chair of the Bridge Group <http://www.thebridgegroup.org.uk> 
and chief executive of theBrightside Trust <http://www.thebrightsidetrust.org/>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member of theHigher Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 