
"A i oow oow ooo ooo!" The back-to-pack wolf cry goes spiralling around the 
forest and in seconds, two wolves come tearing through the trees. They rush up 
to the pack leaders, eager to know what the emergency is. When they find there 
is none, they seem momentarily miffed but soon content themselves with pulling 
some classic wolfish poses on conveniently situated tree stumps. I'm a few 
yards from them, snapping away with my camera. Being photographed clearly 
stokes the smouldering coals of their vanity.

This brand new walking-with-wolves experience is a world away from your usual 
wolf-spotting trip. The latter has to contend with the fact that normally this 
noble creature, being a blithe and wily spirit, cares nothing for the fact that 
you have a limited amount of annual leave and an onerous bucket list to tick 
off. It thus cannot be relied upon to turn up at a prescribed venue at a 
pre-arranged time, but is happy to condemn you to days of aimless wandering 
across godless far-flung tundra in the hope that at some stage, your guide will 
point towards a distant wood and cry: "There's a wolf! That little speck to the 
right of the ... oh, gone now."

When my friend Kat and I went to see timber wolves Maska and Kajika, we didn't 
even have to leave the British mainland – we simply hopped on a train to the 
attractive Cumbrian coastal resort of Grange-over-Sands. Furthermore, after 
some initial sniffing, licking and gentle biting of our outstretched fists, the 
wolves let us join their incipient pack for an afternoon's sortie, which was 
pretty obliging really.

We met up with the surrogate leaders of the pack, human bipeds Dee and Daniel 
(it was they who had howled the back-to-pack cry) at their farmhouse at Ayside, 
a hamlet perched in the hills a few miles north of Grange. A swift Land Rover 
ride later and we were in a pine wood above Windermere where brothers Maska and 
Kajika piled out of the back to begin an instantaneous recce of the area (the 
wolves live at the farmhouse, under close supervision, rather than roaming 
completely free). This isn't quite the return of the wolf into the English 
wilds after 270 years, though, as Dee explains: "These are timber wolves with 
some Czechoslovakian wolf dog bred into them because it's illegal to let 
pure-bred wolves run free in Britain." Such a spoilsport, the government.

The siblings, just 24 weeks old yet already somewhat larger than full-grown 
Alsatians, are vying for the position of alpha male. Maska is noticeably bigger 
and edges the rough-and-tumbles we watch break out from time to time, but size 
isn't everything in the lupine world. "Kajika is the one with the natural 
leadership abilities," Daniel points out, "so he could end up as the leader 
with Maska as his enforcer." Apparently there are alpha, beta, gamma, delta and 
even omega wolves, so Maska and Kajika are necessarily keen to nab the top 
roles before their pack gets any bigger.

As we strolled through the pines the rivals foraged about beneath the trees, 
building up a mental map of smells while trying to outdo each other, not only 
in shows of strength but in their ability to make clever decisions and discover 
important information about their surroundings. We watched them fascinated and, 
I confess, somewhat smug that we were privy to what was going on in their great 
big heads. And great big they are, too – the brothers will double in size over 
the next 18 months, weighing in at up to a Baskervillian nine stone.

While Dee fed the boys a treat of cheese straight from a tube (it simulates a 
mother's teat, apparently), Daniel regaled us with wolfy facts – they have 
eight distinct howls, for example, and their hearing is nine times better than 
the average dog's – and taught us how to stroke them safely. This is essential 
knowledge when their bite can exert a pressure of 1,500lb per square inch. With 
my hand at Kajika's jaw-line, I slowly worked my way upwards until his 
flattened ears gave me the "yes, you can stroke my head" signal. I can tell 
you, gaining the trust of a wolf is the new swimming with dolphins.
 Touch type… timber wolves flatten their ears to show you it's ok to stroke 
them. Photograph: Walking with Wolves 
It's fitting that the first place in Britain where you can walk with wolves is 
very close to the spot where England's last wild wolf was reportedly killed, in 
the 14th century. TheUnsworth's Yard <http://www.unsworthsyardbrewery.co.uk/> 
micro-brewery, one of whose ales is the excellent Last Wolf, in the medieval 
village of Cartmel, is where we were shown a venerable copy of Mrs Jerome 
Mercier's tale of the killing of the country's final wolf. It involves an 
unjustly spurned son, a dashed romance, a mysterious knight and a happy ending 
for all – except the wolf.

It's all good courtly stuff. The only fly in the ointment is that wolves are 
known to have roamed England as late as the 1740s. A more plausible story is 
that a local landowner organised a mass hunt for a predatory wolf, who was 
finally cornered on a promontory called Humphrey Headcorrect and there 
dispatched.

In honour of this benighted beast, we wolfed down a delicious dinner at The 
Pig and Whistle <http://www.pigandwhistlecartmel.co.uk/> in Cartmel – L'Enclume 
chef Simon Rogan's first pub venture – that included wild mushroom broth and 
gariguette strawberry pannacotta. And thence back to Grange and theClare House 
Hotel <http://www.clarehousehotel.co.uk/>, with its old-school comfiness and 
startling array of local cheeses. Before we turned in for the night, we took a 
starlit walk along the promenade from where we saw Humphrey Head's huge bulk 
lowering in the darkness. But what was that sound we could hear on the breeze? 
The wind playing over the marshes perhaps? Or was it the ghostly howl of 
England's last wolf calling out to England's newest pack?

• The trip was provided by Predator Experience (07500 956348, 
predatorexperience.co.uk 
<http://www.predatorexperience.co.uk/walking-with-wolves/>, £85pp, minimum age 
16). Travel was provided by Virgin Trains (virgintrains.co.uk, singles from 
£14.50 <http://www.virgintrains.co.uk/>) from London to Lancaster, and by 
Northern Rail (northernrail.org <http://www.northernrail.org/>) from Lancaster 
to Grange-over-Sands. Accommodation was provided by Clare House Hotel (015395 
33026,clarehousehotel.co.uk <http:>); from £88pp half-board. Further 
information fromgolakes.co.uk <http://www.golakes.co.uk/> 

• This article was amended on 14 June 2013 to make it clear that the wolves 
are not allowed to roam free by themselves. They live with their owners and 
walk with guests under supervision.
 