 She makes an unlikely martyr. But Ayaan Hirsi Ali, a 32-year-old Somali-born 
Muslim immigrant to the Netherlands, who took cleaning jobs while she studied 
Dutch, has been forced to flee her adopted country under threat of death. Now 
she is becoming known as a latter-day Salman Rushdie.
Her crime is uncannily similar to that of the author of The Satanic Verses: 
she launched a stinging attack onIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>
, a religion she herself has rejected, and earned the enduring hatred of the 
mullahs. The fact that the criticism came from a woman made her situation all 
the more precarious.

Nor did she mince her words. A political adviser to the Dutch Labour party, 
she savaged what she saw as the cruelty and abuse meted out to many Muslim 
women living in Western societies - and she did so on national television. 
Calling Islam a "backward religion", she claimed that orthodox Muslim men 
frequently indulge in domestic violence against women as well as incest and 
child abuse. She said such unacceptable behaviour is routinely covered up and 
never spoken about. And she launched a strong attack on the Netherlands' 
programme of multiculturalism, saying that it encouraged the isolation of 
Muslim women.

Within days she had received several death threats - apparently from extremist 
Muslims - and had to go into hiding. Now she has fled the Netherlands, a 
refugee again, hounded out of her adopted home by messages of hate.

The anonymous phone calls branded her a traitor to Islam and a slut. Hate mail 
on the internet claimed she deserved to be knifed and shot. The police advised 
her to change address, and questions were asked in parliament about whether or 
not she warranted bodyguards.

At a time when the Netherlands' Muslims (nearly 1 million out of a population 
of 16 million) felt vulnerable to attack, her words seemed to some to play into 
the hands of their enemies. Uproar followed the first death threat. More than 
100 Dutch writers took out newspaper ads offering her their support. In an 
effort to distance themselves, 17 Muslim organisations signed a declaration 
condemning the death threats, but many Muslims felt betrayed by Hirsi Ali and 
took serious issue with her. Her comments had, they said, opened up a rift in 
their community at a time when it needed to be united.

The views of Ali Eddaudi, a Moroccan writer and cleric living in the 
Netherlands, were typical. He dismissed "all the fuss" over a Muslim woman who 
"pandered to the Dutch" and wanted to be a "model immigrant".

Now rumoured to be in either the US or Britain, Hirsi Ali has spoken out for 
the first time about why she felt the need to blow the whistle on "the 
unacceptable side of Islam", and has turned her fire and her back on the Labour 
party she used to work for.

"I had to speak up," she told the New York Times last week from her hiding 
place, "because most spokesmen for Muslims . . . are men and they deny or 
belittle the enormous problems of Muslim women locked up in their homes in the 
Netherlands.

"I've made people so angry because I'm talking from the inside, from direct 
knowledge. It's seen as treason. I'm considered an apostate, and that's worse 
than an atheist."

She explained: "Sexual abuse in the family causes the most pain because the 
trust is violated on all levels. The father or the uncle say nothing, nor do 
the mother and the sisters. It happens regularly - the incest, the beatings, 
the abortions. Girls commit suicide, but no one says anything, and social 
workers are sworn to professional secrecy."

She blames the Labour party for the apparent failure of the country's 
immigration and integration policy. Although no longer in power, Labour has 
governed the country for long stretches and has, she says, pursued a damaging 
"strategy of silence" when it comes to Islam. She argues that Labour's tactic 
of promoting the preservation of Muslim identity by subsidising special schools 
and associations has backfired. The result, she says, is segregation and misery 
for isolated Muslim women.

Hirsi Ali's views carry weight because they are perceived to come from someone 
who knows what she is talking about. Born in Mogadishu, Somalia, she underwent 
female circumcision when she was five and for much of her youth was kept veiled 
and locked indoors. At 22, her father tried to force her to marry a distant 
cousin she had never met, but she escaped to the Netherlands, where she 
obtained political asylum.

It was while working as an interpreter for the Dutch immigration and social 
services that she discovered "suffering on a terrible scale" among Muslim 
women. The solution, she believes, is to use Dutch law to pursue more 
vigorously Muslim men who beat their wives and daughters.

She would also like to see an end to the practice of teaching immigrants in 
their own language and to the Dutch authorities' contributions to the country's 
700 or so Islamic clubs, most of which, she says, "are run by deeply 
conservative men and perpetuate the segregation of women".

Hirsi Ali has refused to moderate her views and does not intend to hide for 
ever. "Either I stop my work, or I learn to live with the feeling that I'm not 
safe," she said. "I'm not stopping."
 