
A Moroccan woman with a criminal record whose fight against deportation has 
been boosted by the European court of justice’s (ECJ) advocate general is the 
daughter-in-law of the radical clericAbu Hamza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza>, a Tory MP has said.

The woman has a British son and, in a preliminary opinion, the ECJ advocate 
general has ruled that EU law means the UK cannot automatically deport her 
simply because she has a criminal record unless she is deemed to pose a 
“serious” threat to society.

The opinion, which emerged yesterday, states that deporting someone who is the 
sole carer for an EU national child is “in principle contrary to EU law”.

There is an order banning media from naming the woman, who is referred to as 
CS in court documents. But Conservative MP Philip Davies told the House of 
Commons on Friday that the woman is the daughter-in-law of Abu Hamza, adding: 
“This is a very serious matter and is something that this country and this 
House should be aware of.”

Raising a point of order in the House of Commons, Davies called for an urgent 
statement from a Home Office minister on the matter. “I’m very surprised that 
there isn’t a statement today in the House,” he said.

“You may have seen the reports in the newspapers yesterday that European 
judges have ruled that a foreign Moroccan criminal cannot be deported from the 
country despite the Home Office saying that she committed serious offences 
which threaten the values of society.

“Surely this is something that should be raised in this House, that the Home 
Office minister should be making a statement about today? Have you had any 
indication that the Home Office intend to make any kind of statement about this 
issue?”

Replying, deputy speaker Lindsay Hoyle said: “I don’t think I’m going to shock 
you by saying I’ve had absolutely no indication of anybody coming forward with 
a statement.

“What I would say quite rightly as ever – you have raised it, it is on the 
record and I’m sure that people will be listening in different departments as 
we continue with this debate.”

The Guardian reported on Thursday that the woman was jailed for attempting to 
smuggle a banned item, a mobile phone sim card, during a prison visit. While 
serving the sentence, she was told that she was liable for deportation from the 
UK.

The ECJ advocate general’s opinion follows a request from judges in the upper 
tribunal (immigration and asylum chamber) about the case.

In its press statement on the case, the ECJ said the UK had argued that “CS’s 
serious criminal offence represented an obvious threat to the preservation of 
that member state’s social cohesion and of the values of its society”.

It added: “The advocate general considers that expulsion is, in principle, 
contrary to EU law but that, in exceptional circumstances, such a measure may 
be adopted, provided that it observes the principle of proportionality and is 
based on the conduct of the person concerned (conduct that must constitute a 
genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the 
fundamental interests of society) and on imperative reasons relating to public 
security.”

The advocate general’s opinion is not binding on the ECJ and its judges will 
now deliberate and deliver a judgment at a later date.

The case remains before the upper tribunal in the UK, pending that final 
decision of the European court in Luxembourg.
 