

It's 50 years since Alan Sillitoe gave us Arthur Seaton's individualism. 
Photograph: Murdo Macleod
"Don't let the bastards grind you down." If ever a two-fingered refrain echoed 
through my 1970s north London council estate childhood it was this one. Spat 
out at the TV news footage of industrial disputes, conspiratorially muttered on 
parting by women in supermarket queues. But I never really understood the full 
force of that phrase until I read Alan Sillitoe'sSaturday Night and Sunday 
Morning 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/insideout/content/articles/2008/04/11/east_midlands_sillitoe_s13_w8_feature.shtml>
, 50 years in print this year.

What Sillitoe gave us in Arthur Seaton was the unabashed self-belief of a 
working-class with money in its pocket and a sense of its own worth: "And so it 
was possible to forget the factory, whether inside it sweating and straining 
your muscles by a machine, or whether swilling ale in a pub or loving Brenda in 
her big soft bed at the weekend. The factory did not matter. The factory could 
go on working till it blew itself up from too much speed, but I, he thought, 
already a couple of dozen above his daily stint, will be here after the 
factory's gone."

This brash and bold individualism coming from young working men was part of a 
sea-change in 1950s society. AsMick Hume on spiked 
<http://www.spiked-online.com/index.php?/site/reviewofbooks_article/5509/> puts 
it: "Viewed from the vantage point of today, some left-leaning observers might 
see Seaton's attitude as sowing the seeds of the personal greed and selfishness 
they claim is now destroying society. Yet it is equally possible to see the 
Arthurs of the postwar world as the generation whom the left lost".

In the postwar boom, deference was the product of a bygone age and knowing 
your place was no longer a default position. For some this felt like things 
falling apart, and literature captured the moment, spewing up some bitter 
prejudices and biting caricatures. Somerset Maugham, choosing Kingsley Amis's 
Lucky Jim as his Sunday Times book of the year in 1955, wrote of its "ominous 
significance". Maugham had apparently been told that 60% of young men at 
university now went on a government grant. For Maugham this heralded "a new 
class" that had "entered upon the scene ... the white collar proletariat", who 
in the words of Maugham "do not go to university to acquire culture, but to get 
a job, and when they have got one, scamp it. They have no manners and are 
woefully unable to deal with any social predicament. Their idea of a 
celebration is to go to a public house and drink six beers ... They are scum." 
Maugham's thumping snobbism is a mish-mash of many fears and prejudices.

The six-beers-at-a-sitting "scum" he fears are the Arthur Seatons of the 
world, full of brio and no longer prepared to kowtow to the way things are. But 
there's also another fear lingering in there - the fear of both society and 
self drained of any culture or purpose beyond getting a job and slotting in. 
Maugham is a curmudgeonly out-of-touch old git but in the midst of his disdain 
he identifies a very different kind of individualism as well. It is not the 
individualism of Arthur Seaton, one that wants to grab the world by the throat 
and shake it. This other individualism is one that shies away from 
confrontation, that obsessively ponders its own self as it tries to 
incrementally haul its way up the social ladder. In the literature of the 1950s 
these individualisms began to play themselves out. So while theJimmy Porters 
whinged <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v28/n14/edga01_.html> and the Jim Dixons 
connived, the Arthur Seatons were indeed lost.

You can easily trace out the collapse and demise of the strong working class 
individual in literature over the last 50 years. The spectrum is strung between 
uninspiring poles. At one end, quirky working class nutter, the archetype being 
the Beethoven loving sociopath Alex inAnthony Burgess' Clockwork Orange 
<http://www.time.com/time/2005/100books/0,24459,a_clockwork_orange,00.html>; at 
the other, the frustrated, invisible, powerless loser, the paradigm here being 
Amis junior's Terry Service in Success, who says of himself: "I look like 
educated lowerclass middlemanagement, the sort of person you walk past in the 
street every day and never glance at or notice or recognize again."

The poles of no-mark loser and antisocial manic come together and reach their 
apotheosis in Irvine Welsh's groundbreaking Trainspotting. It is a brilliant 
book and I hate it. It takes the collapse of the working class to its nth 
degree: the virtuoso set pieces of Leith dialogue enthral you as they repel you 
with their dripping despair. Yet the spirit of Arthur Seaton doesn't die that 
easily, at least not in literature. I may be being fanciful, but in Renton's 
last thoughts in Trainspotting I hear the echo of Arthur Seaton: "There he 
could not be anything other than he was. Now, free from them all, for good, he 
could be what he wanted to be. He'd stand or fall alone." Or as Arthur would 
say, "Well, it's a good life and a good world, all said and done, if you don't 
weaken, and if you know that the big wide world hasn't heard from you yet, no, 
not by a long way, though it won't be long now."
 