
The government's research has shown mandatory work activity does not help 
people get a job and that A4e, its flagship "welfare to work" company, has not 
met even the minimum target for finding work (just 3.5% of its "clients" have 
found long-term jobs). Yet such companies call for more punishments and for 
benefits to be stopped more often. The jubilee celebrations saw the scandal of 
unemployed people made to sleep under a bridge and work in terrible conditions, 
without pay. It is time to end the real "something for nothing" culture: this 
means ending the £5bn workfare schemes which subsidise a free workforce for 
multi-million pound companies and charities. Workfare does not create a single 
job. Indeed, we have seen it replace paid work. It's time to start helping 
people seeking work rather than punishing them. We support the 7-14 July week 
of action against workfare and call on all organisations to challenge forced 
unpaid work by boycotting workfare.
Mark Serwotka PCS general secretary
Aidan McQuade Director, Anti-slavery International
Richard Whittell Corporate Watch
Joanna Long Boycott Workfare
Kerry Jenkins Community and Youth Workers in Unite
Linda Burnip Disabled People Against Cuts
John McArdle Black Triangle Campaign
Ian Sandeman DLA help group
Georgina Bavetta Forum for Fair Employment
Daniel Garvin Pay Up
Steven Preece Social Welfare <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/welfare> 
Union
Ellie Schling London Coalition Against Poverty
Maria Warren Islington Poverty Action Group
Sarah Lasenby Oxford Save our Services
Michael Cormack Edinburgh Coalition Against Poverty

• The announcement that Holland & Barrett is to withdraw from workfare after 
being targeted by protesters is another welcome sign that protest works. Its 
attempt to slur anti-workfare protesters as a violent minority is not so 
welcome. The real violence is hugely profitable companies making even more 
money on the back of these labour schemes, while more than a million young 
people are left to rot on the unemployment scrapheap. Poundland, another 
workfare exploiter which recently announced profits up 27% to £40.1m, should 
take note.
Mark Dunk
Right to Work campaign <http://righttowork.org.uk/>
 