
After realising I wasn’t going to make it as an actress and then losing a 
long-term temping job I started on a fast decline to anorexia. During that 
time, six years ago, I had started volunteering at a youth club, and soon came 
to realise that maybe a career in the voluntary sector was the path for me. But 
with no applicable skills to speak of, I ended up working in admin at another 
youth charity.

I think struggling with mental health can sometimes make people better able to 
empathise

While it wasn’t my first choice of career, and after a bit of a bumpy ride 
trying to find the right role, I’ve realised the voluntary sector can be a 
great place for people with mental health issues to work. Colleagues have been 
sympathetic and understanding of issues, and flexible around the odd little 
habits I needed to create for myself to get better. This ranged from practical 
help, like being given time to attend therapy, as well as adjusting to routine 
around eating times by allowing flexible lunch breaks and snacking at desks. 
Things like this can seem small, but it was crucial for feeling in control of 
my day.

However, it’s not come without its challenges. When dealing with a client’s 
difficulties it can be hard not to feel like your personal problems are petty 
in comparison, but I’ve learned that although that sense of perspective may be 
useful my own feelings are still valid. Also, simply by working in this sector, 
you’re encouraged to recognise that everybody’s different issues are important 
because it’s something that matters to them, not because of how it compares 
with another case. This has helped me to remember that it’s OK to feel 
overwhelmed from time to time.

But working with people in their tougher moments helps me to realise how lucky 
I am to have survived my problems. I think struggling with mental health means 
I have been able to better empathise with clients; my problems may not be the 
same, but I know what it’s like to feel like you’re sinking under a life that’s 
become too much to handle.

The biggest difficulty I experienced arose because, as a sector, we’re not 
good at clearly defining job roles. The well known “all other reasonable 
duties”, which is written into our contracts, means we often take on tasks 
beyond our remit. We sometimes take on additional tasks without complaint – 
even if it’s too much to manage. In my case I just let it continue, even 
justifying that it would mean I could progress as I gained experience, so I 
shouldn’t argue.

My charity's cause may not be sexy but that doesn't make it less deserving
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/mar/22/my-charity-cause-may-not-be-sexy-but-that-doesnt-make-it-less-deserving>
And unfortunately, one charity I worked for was chaotic, not just in terms of 
workload but also disorganised. It felt like we were constantly figuring things 
out as we went along. Much of my eating disorder is triggered by feeling a need 
to control what happens to me, so this was a struggle. As funding cuts hit and 
jobs were lost, I ended up taking on more and more responsibility, and there 
was no time or scope for support and supervision to make sure I was managing. 
This often meant that chunks of my time in therapy sessions would be focused on 
helping me to cope, rather than getting well.

I now work behind the scenes at a national charity, and have realised that 
being busy and stretched doesn’t have to mean being unsupported – here, there’s 
always regular time set aside to make sure the workload is manageable and that 
I don’t have any concerns. I’ve never needed to talk about my mental health 
issues while working here, although I have mentioned it personally to some 
colleagues, and there would be additional support if I needed it.

I remember one occasion where a young person said at the end of a project I 
was working on that she’d loved coming to my meetings – it wasn’t huge, but 
knowing I had done something that made a difference for her made me feel 10 
feet tall; my coming to work every day can make a positive difference to 
people’s lives.

The fact that I get to come to work and fight to help people who need support 
does wonders for my feelings of self-worth, and doing a job that I love and 
feel passionate about day in, day out, means that now my general wellbeing is 
pretty high.

Confessions of a charity professional is the Guardian Voluntary Sector 
Network’s <https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> anonymous 
series where charity workers tell it how it is. If you would like to pitch us 
an idea,click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jan/02/confessions-of-a-charity-professional-we-want-your-blogs>
.
 