
1 Manuel Neuer Germany


Cristiano Ronaldo got an early clue that this was not going to be his 
tournament when Neuer produced a superb save from a stoppage-time free-kick to 
prevent Portugal from salvaging even a sliver of consolation from their 
crushing defeat byGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany>. But 
it is not his shot-stopping that has distinguished Neuer, it is the way he has 
practically redefined the role of goalkeeper, taking the sweeper-keeper 
function to an extreme never before showcased with such success.

His charges out of his box prevented Algeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/algeria>, in particular, from revelling 
in the space behind Germany’s high defensive line, compensating for Per 
Mertesacker’s lack of pace. In addition to the obvious effectiveness, the sight 
of the hulking keeper hurtling towards confrontation must have a potent 
mindgame value – Asamoah Gyan, for instance, fled ridiculously wide when 
presented with the chance to take on Neuer one-on-one. What is more, Neuer’s 
superb distribution makes him the first line of attack.

2 Guillermo Ochoa Mexico


Way to ace a job interview. Ochoa, a free agent after three outstanding 
seasons at Ajaccio, was unlikely to be short of offers before the tournament 
but his displays for Mexico may have endeared him to a new calibre of 
recruiter. The 28-year-old’s agility, reflexes and robust wrists enabled him to 
make an array of improbable saves.Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> players wondered whether there 
had been divine intervention when he helped Mexico to draw against them, while 
it took some devilry from Arjen Robben to beat Ochoa in the end.

3 Keylor Navas Costa Rica


The 27-year-old came into the tournament after a wonderful season in which he 
set a clean-sheet record for Levante but it has still been a major surprise to 
seeCosta Rica <https://www.theguardian.com/football/costarica> advance to the 
quarter-finals while conceding only two goals in five matches – Uruguay, Italy, 
England, Greece and Holland. Behind a solid unit, Navas was a secure presence. 
As the pressure increased, his performances rose accordingly, with his 
exhibitions of shot-stopping against Greece and Holland among the highlights of 
the tournament.

4 Vincent Enyeama Nigeria


Another goalkeeper who arrived after a record-breaking season at club level. 
Enyeama carried on the form that made him nigh-on unbeatable for Lille, pulling 
off a series of extraordinary saves, starting in the first match against Iran, 
whenNigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nigeria-football-team> 
dominated but would have lost if the goalkeeper had not kept enough 
concentration to tip away a header from Reza Ghoochannejhad. He then kept 
Bosnia-Herzegovina at bay before thwarting Lionel Messi and Argentina for long 
periods despite conceding three. When a goalkeeper falls below perfection, 
however, he can be punished severely and Enyeama’s mishandling of a cross 
against France enabled Paul Pogba to score the winning goal and ruined another 
otherwise immaculate performance.

5 Tim Howard USA


Even though he made a tournament-record number of saves against Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/belgium>, the American’s shot-stopping 
was not the most admirable aspect of his performances in Brazil – and not only 
because most of Belgium’s efforts were straight at the goalkeeper, their 
forwards’ odd lack of composure seemingly making them unable to spot Howard’s 
tendency to go low prematurely, a habit that Nani had exploited earlier. That 
quibble aside, Howard’s influence seemed immense as his leadership helped coax 
valiant resistance from defenders who might otherwise have been torn apart. He 
inspired his team-mates with words and deeds.

6 Rais M’Bolhi Algeria


The Algeria No1 did not arrive in Brazil with a big reputation. In fact the 
Hearts manager, Robbie Nielsen, admitted this month that he had no recollection 
of M’Bohli being at the Scottish club and they are one of nine sides where he 
did a stint before joining his present employer, CSKA Sofia, where he is not a 
regular starter. Like many of his team-mates, he earned new respect. His 
display against Germany was the crowning glory, as he repelled a fusillade with 
some spectacular blocks such as the reflex stop from a close-range Thomas 
Müller or, best of all, a diving, fingertip save to push a Philipp Lahm drive 
just round a post. Unforgettable.

7 Júlio César Brazil


Researchers and sports scientists spend lots of time and money trying to 
figure out how best to prepare for tournaments but none of them has ever 
submitted a thesis recommending a year on the Loftus Road bench followed by a 
sojourn in the boondocks of Toronto FC. But that was César’s prelude to this
World Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> and the 
34-year-old has so far justified the manager’s decision to keep faith with him. 
He made sharp saves from Luka Modric and Ivan Perisic to prevent Brazil from 
suffering a shock defeat in the opening game and made an outstanding save in 
normal time against Chile to keep out a shot from Charles Aránguiz. Before the 
shootout he told his team-mates to “hit them with confidence and I’ll stop 
three” and then turned away efforts from Mauricio Pinilla and Alexis Sánchez 
before Gonzalo Jara tried too hard to put the ball out of the goalkeeper’s 
reach and hit a post.

8 Thibaut Courtois Belgium


Playing in front of Courtois must give defenders the same sense of security 
that a slight time delay gives live broadcasters, who thus know they may escape 
punishment for any goof. Belgium did not sparkle in this tournament but nor did 
they ever really look in danger – except in the dying stages of the game 
against theUSA <https://www.theguardian.com/football/usfootballteam>, and in 
their moment of greatest need Courtois was on hand to bail them out, making a 
top block to thwart Clint Dempsey after a smart free-kick. And while Belgium 
left the tournament with a whimper, Courtois at least showed that his own 
defiance remained intact as he made a splendid late save to foil Lionel Messi.

9 David Ospina Colombia


Colombia entertained with their attacking play but on the rare occasion that 
their defence was infiltrated, Ospina proved a reliable guardian. His display 
in the second-half against Uruguay was especially impressive as he made four 
crucial stops to preserve his team’s lead, including one excellent intervention 
to deny Maxi Pereira. In the end it took a scrambled goal from Thiago Silva and 
an odd swirling free-kick to confound theColombia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/colombia> No1.

10 Tim Krul Holland


Was he really a penalty-saving specialist before Louis van Gaal introduced him 
from the bench just seconds before the quarter-final shootout against Costa 
Rica? His record did not suggest so but the unusual substitution planted the 
idea in the opposition’s mind and Krul’s two saves mean that now he really can 
be considered a specialist. A bluff that became a truth: masterful.
 