
It is in the nature of World Cups that they come pre-loaded with a wider sense 
of friendships renewed, horizons expanded, furious scowling hatreds rejoined 
and all the rest of it. As England prepare to take part in an authentically 
South AmericanWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> for the first time 
since Chile in 1962 – albeit with a couple of distinctly southern-flavoured 
Mexican affairs in between – it is worth reflecting that there are few 
footballing histories as nuanced or as quietly potent as England in the 
Americas.

For all the lack of obvious success, not to mention intermittent violent 
cultural misunderstandings,England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> in South America remains a 
courtly, understated kind of fascination, rooted to a degree in the historic 
spread of the sport across the globe in the early 20th century, when football 
was introduced to South America by Scottish and English rail and mine workers 
like a kind of irresistible sporting plague.

From the early days of empire the British sent guns, then trade, then 
religion. When these began to wear a bit thin it sent football. Charles Miller 
left Southampton forBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> in 
1894 with a ball and a set of rules and went on to become one of the founding 
fathers of South American football. In 1907 Jock Hamilton became the first 
foreign trainer at a Brazilian club, returning enthused by the fast-evolving 
skills of the local players and noting: "Their combination play is really quite 
clever."

From these founding boom years to the dawning superpower era of the 
Brazilian-Argentinian axis after the second world war, the rise of South 
America has been an object of unusually generous long-distance fascination. 
"Latin America is football mad. They're mad about the game in a way our 
somewhat insular outlook would scarcely credit," the great Geoffrey Green wrote 
in Soccer: The World Game in 1953. The same year Charles Buchan described 
Brazil's fantastical training methods at the 1950 World Cup, the futuristic 
glory of "the dazzling Maracaña" and the wondrous moment he first saw "Rio's 
fabulous harbour", albeit in true Buchan style he also felt bound to recount 
how he was subsequently drugged, robbed, ripped off and struck down with 
dysentery.

And for all the recurrent Buchan-esue cultural trauma of England's South 
American history this remains a fond, even quietly lustful relationship of 
footballing second cousins, in which South America, and specifically Brazil, 
has in the past been fixed as a kind of footballing-cultural ideal, a place to 
be visited only recently and with a due sense of ritual awe. Here they come, 
the English: tall and tan and young and lovely – not to mention sunburnt, 
hay-fevered, food-poisoned and, above all, gripped with a dreamy kind of 
long-range fraternal fascination.

The wider history of English football is a story of shrinking back, of a 
sporting culture that is even now struggling manfully to comprehend, after all 
these years, the oddly insistent entity that is "abroad". But there are still 
pockets of warmth within these chilly waters, and for all the pantomime 
politics of successive engagements with Argentina, South America has never 
really felt like the footballing enemy.

Alf Ramsey <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alf-ramsey> may have been 
appalled in public by the behaviour of Argentina's players at Wembley in 1966 – 
and later too by Colombians and central Americans – but he had been hugely 
impressed in by Argentina's tactics and organisation in the defeat in Buenos 
Aires in 1964, while England's players still talk with reverence of the skill 
and physicality of Antonio Rattín's team.

Similarly the defeat by Brazil in Guadalajara in 1970 – Bobby Moore, Pelé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/pele> and all that – has always been cast 
not so much as a defeat as a kind of coronational high, a shirt-swapping summit 
with these dreamy alien superiors.

Perhaps it is simply the sense of transatlantic otherness. Europe has always 
felt a little close, a little ordered, a little too scholarly and middle class 
in its superior refinements. But there is something comfortably distant about 
South America, a continent of brilliant but still recognisable street-football 
smarts – a bit like us, when we were still like us – married with a familiar 
ruggedness.

In South America even the light, the grass, the air feels intoxicatingly 
different, a place where English football has periodically lived out a desert 
island-ish vision of the footballing good life: tiny-shorted Moore lounging on 
Ipanema, John Barnes wowing the Maracanã, and the notion of Brazil and the 
slightly cliched Brazilian way – off the cuff, instinctive (never mind the 
three-month training camps and highfalutin modernism) – as a riposte to the 
stultifying long-ball theory of postwar England.

For all that, it has often been a painful affair on the pitch. England's 
record against allcomers in South America reads won 14, drawn eight lost 13, 
with two wins three losses and six draws against South American teams in south 
or central America since the 1970 World Cup. It is, of course, the defeats that 
have been most thrillingly salutary, none more so than the assorted horrors 
inflicted on Walter Winterbottom's team the last time Brazil hosted a World Cup 
in 1950. It is worth noting England were up among the favourites to win the 
1950 World Cup, their first. Argentina had pulled out.Germany were still 
excluded after the war. France withdrew late on. Hungary were sequestered 
behind the iron curtain. And England's own steamship party contained Stanley 
Matthews, Tom Finney, Billy Wright, Stan Mortensen, Wilf Mannion, and a 
pre-modern No10 in Chelsea's Roy Bentley, naturally forced to play out of 
position with England as a straight-up central battering ram. With Winterbottom 
not only coaching the team, but also occasionally cooking the meals and doing 
the dishes, England played the USA in the favourable mountain air of Belo 
Horizonte where they stayed at the hospitable Morro Velho gold mine, staffed by 
2,000 British workers.

Their lop-sided 1-0 defeat remains the greatest humiliation in English 
football history, given a final tickle along by the decisive loss to Spain in 
Rio. The next 20 years brought further trauma, from the 4-1 friendly trouncing 
by Peru in Lima in 1959, a defeat put down by many to the infamous "unlucky" 
royal blue kit, to the defeats by Hungary and a Garrincha-inspired Brazil in 
Chile in 1962. This was the tournament where England allowed a millionaire 
Australian businessman to join in training sessions, where they travelled to 
another continent without a doctor, and where Johnny Haynes did everything from 
free-kicks to throw-ins, and was duly marked out of the tournament.

England were back two years later for the famous 5-1 defeat by Brazil in Rio, 
accompanied on the newsreel footage by a brilliantly gurgling, chuckling, 
laughing commentary from Kenneth Wolstenholme, beside himself at such sublime 
footballing riches.

Then came the 1970 World Cup, staged in Mexico but in tone and texture and 
dominant force a decidedly South American affair. For England it was preceded 
by a genuinely disastrous continental tour during which Moore was accused of 
stealing a bracelet by the staff at the Green Fire Jewellery shop at the 
Tequendama hotel in Bogotá, and arrested twice before the charges eventually 
fizzled out in a fug of mystery and rumour. Stung by his experiences in Mexico 
the year before, Ramsey imported a tournament's worth of fish fingers and 
beefburgers, which Mexican customs officials incinerated on the quayside, plus 
also the team bus, which repeatedly blew up in the heat. A solid, serviceable 
England team, with no great flair but plenty of class in Bobby Charlton, 
Francis Lee, Terry Cooper and the rest – dubbed "a team of thieves and drunks" 
in the Mexican press – melted against West Germany in Guadalajara, Ramsey's 
reliance on overlapping full-backs a fatal flaw in the violent midday heat.

They were back in 1977 for a friendly in dictator-era Buenos Aires that saw 
Trevor Cherry punched in the mouth by Daniel Bertoni (and both men sent off). 
And then nine years later for Mexico 86, originally scheduled for Colombia but 
still a distinctly South American-tinged affair, withDiego Maradona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/diego-maradona> by some distance the 
dominant personality. For Bobby Robson's team the World Cup was a familiar 
shemozzle, as England lost to a rabble of a Portugal team in Monterrey on a 
horrible pitch, should have gone out against Morocco three days later but 
smuggled out a 0-0 draw after Ray Wilkins was sent off, and then finally 
progressed to the quarter-finals via a 3-0 defeat of Paraguay. After three 
weeks of air-conditioned hotels, tactical revolts and days spent lounging by 
the pool beneath Sony Walkmans listening to Lionel Richie, England finally lost 
out to Maradona'smalandro genius in a match that had scarcely seen an attack 
from either side before Maradona punched the opening goal into England's net 
early in the second half.

It seems fitting that the last competitive match England played in the 
Americas should end in such nuanced, twin-track drama. The relationship with 
South America remains gloriously potent even now, if only for its peculiar 
historic resonances, an arm's-length engagement undercut with either a giddy 
kind of reverence – witness England's worshipful surrender to Brazil's 10 men 
in Shizuoka in 2002 – or a spikily unspoken respect for those twin South 
American qualities of high technique and hard-edged physicality. England's 
adventures in South America, 42 years on from the last really authentic 
instalment, remain a minor but still fascinating subplot to a World Cup already 
groaning with narrative intrigue, and in its own way a very mannered kind of 
long-distance love story.
 