
Algeria heroes to donate prize money to Gaza 

The Algeria squad plan to donate their £5.2m World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> prize money to the 
residents of Gaza, according to the striker Islam Slimani. The generous gesture 
was announced after the players flew back to a heroes’ welcome following their 
extra-time defeat against Germany. Slimani said the players decided to make the 
donation to Gaza because “they need it more than us”. Algeria had never 
previously progressed beyond the group stage of the tournament. The high point 
of their group stage was a stylish 4-2 win over South Korea. They celebrated 
with an open-top parade through crowds of cheering supporters in Algiers.

Microsoft makes a sucker out of Paul the octopus 

The Diary has revelled in the wildly unsuccessful World Cup predictions of 
banking analysts, economists and data crunchers – most of whom have a 
considerably lower accuracy rate than Paul the octopus. But Microsoft now 
claims to have bucked that trend after their Windows mobile phone application, 
Cortana, notched up eight correct predictions in a row by adjusting for 
previous results, geography, climate and pitch conditions. The developer Mouni 
Reddy announced the result in a tweet saying: “It’s official we live in the 
matrix #Cortana 8-0”. The next test is on Friday, when Cortana forecasts wins 
for Brazil and Germany.

Rojo and Romero mock Brazil with twirling towels 

Jubilant Argentina players celebrated their progress into the quarter-finals 
by singing a rowdy, Brazil-taunting song in the dressing room. As the Diary has 
reported, the song “Brasil decime que se siente” has become one of the 
unofficial hits of the World Cup with its humorously provocative lyrics about 
past Argentina victories and the superiority of Maradona over Pelé. It was 
previously heard only on the streets and in the stands but now,a video 
<http://esportes.estadao.com.br/noticias/futebol,copa-do-mundo,jogadores-da-argentina-cantam-musica-que-provoca-brasileiros,1522448>
 is circulating online showing Marcos Rojo, Sergio Romero and others dancing, 
twirling towels and yelling out the lyrics after beating Switzerland 1-0 after 
extra time in São Paulo.

Argentina seat-breakers lead fan havoc ratings 

Argentina’s fans appear to be wreaking more havoc than any other at this World 
Cup, though levels of violence for all nationalities have so far been 
relatively low compared with tournaments in the 1980s and 1990s. Argentina 
supporters smashed more than 300 chairs at theArena Corinthians during their 
team’s 1-0 last-16 victory over Switzerland on Tuesday 
<http://rodrigomattos.blogosfera.uol.com.br/2014/07/03/recorde-itaquerao-tem-mais-de-300-cadeiras-quebradas-por-argentinos/>
. This exceeded the vandalism at the England against Uruguay match at the same 
stadium in São Paulo last week, when 175 seats were broken. Fifa has played 
down the damage, saying a few hundred broken seats is “not much in an audience 
of more than 60,000”.
 