
Birmingham Mac 
Mt Fuji Photographs by Chris Steele-Perkins 
January 19 - March 10 2002
Chris Steele-Perkins presents images of contemporary Japanese life. Inspired 
by 19th-century woodcuts, which showed people in front of Mt Fuji, engaged in 
urban and rural activities, he records today's world of allotments, gasworks, 
soldiers and bath houses - also against the ubiquitous image of the mountain.

Leicester Comedy Festival 
February 8-17 2002 
The largest comedy festival in Britain includes stand-up, plays, music, 
competitions and community events. Highlights (subject to confirmation) include 
Harry Hill, the Reduced Shakespeare Company and the festival interview - Ben 
Elton meets Perry and Croft.

Tate Modern
Warhol
 Feb 7 - Apr 1 2002
 Andy Warhol (1928-1987) - one of the most extraordinary, influential, yet 
enigmatic artists of his time. This major retrospective spans Warhol's entire 
career, bringing together over 150 paintings, drawings and sculptures.

Millennium Galleries, Sheffield
Moving Pictures
 14 February - 19 May 2002 A spectacular exhibition telling the story of 
cinema and television from the first experimental magic lantern shows to 
today's 21st century multi-media wizardry. Featuring live interpretation by 
costumed actors, hands-on activities, film clips, an in-house animator and 
priceless memorabilia including Marilyn Monroe's dress and Charlie Chaplin's 
hat.

Bath Literature Festival 
March 2-10 
The theme is "only connect" from EM Forster's Howard's End, addressing 
connections between cultures, races and religions. Writers appearing include 
Joanna Trollope, Louis de Bernières, Carol Ann Duffy, Jeanette Winterson and 
Jenny Eclair.

West Yorkshire Playhouse
The Wizard of Oz
 March 6 - April 13 2002
 Jude Kelly directs a spectacular new production of the classic story The 
Wizard of Oz at West Yorkshire Playhouse. Combining technical wizardry with 
dramatic magic, this production will feature live action and a virtual cast of 
hundreds, including film and stage actor Patrick Stewart as the virtual wizard.

Crucible Theatre, Sheffield 
Richard III 
March 13 - April 6 2002 
Political ambitions combine with personal tragedy in Shakespeare's epic 
portrait of a man who commits himself to murder and treason in his pursuit of 
power. Kenneth Branagh plays the title role in this new production directed by 
Michael Grandage.

Nottingham Film Festival 
Scene Stealing - Investigating British Silent Cinema and its Sources 
April 5-7 2002 
This event examines British cinema before 1930 and includes a programme of 
screenings, presentations and live music from international musicians Neil 
Brand, John Sweeney, Phil Carli and Stephen Horne.

Brighton festival 
May 4-26 2002
A wide range of cultural activities from street events, to Abdullah Ibrahim, 
to the National Symphony Orchestra from Washingon. Also welcome: February's 
re-opening of the historic Dome.

Royal Scottish National Orchestra 
May 10 2002 
World-renowned composer Gerry Goldsmith joins the RSNO for an evening of film 
music at the Glasgow Royal Concert Hall.

Baltic, the centre for contemporary art, Gateshead 
Summer 2002 The opening of the eagerly awaited new international art centre, 
based in a former flour mill, which will be the largest centre of its kind in 
Europe.

Chard festival of women in music, Somerset 
Summer 2002 
Every sort of music composed, played or enjoyed by women - from Japanese music 
to rock to chamber music - is featured here.

Re-opening of the Hackney Empire, London
 Following a £15M refurbishment in autumn 2002, the intriguing Bullion Room - 
a 250 seat temporary theatre that used to hold gold - will open with an 
exciting programme of local community theatre.

Welsh National Opera, Cardiff and touring
 Die Fledermaus
 September 14 - November 2002 Strauss's Die Fledermaus has some of the most 
seductively gorgeous music ever written. It is also one of the few operas which 
is populated only by nasty immoral characters. Director, Calixto Bieito and 
conductor Claude Schnitzler, are keen to explore to the full the potentially 
explosive theatrical fiction in this juxtaposition.

Sainsbury Centre for Visual Arts, Norwich 
Slip: Contemporary British and Dutch Artists working with Ceramic 
October 1-December 8 2002 
The exhibition presents the diverse work of British and Dutch artists, from 
vessels to large scale sculptures, providing an opportunity to see the range of 
ceramic work being undertaken today.

International festival of musical theatre, Cardiff 
October 14 -November 3 2002 
The inaugural festival, which will celebrate the musical theatre artform, 
whether it's old and new, large or small.

Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art 
Duane Hanson 
December 14 2002 - February 23 2003 
An exhibition of Hanson's extraordinary sculptures dating from the 1960s. Cast 
from life, Hanson's super-realist figures can easily catch the viewer 
off-guard. This only UK showing of the American sculptor's work will prove both 
amusing and thought-provoking.

Future Physical
 2002-2004
 A two year arts programme co-conceived by shinkansen and funded by East 
England Arts. It will explore the changing boundaries between the virtual and 
the physical, as well as future visions of the human body's interactivity with 
digital media.
 