
What price both Manchester clubs playing in a European final at the end of 
May? United are already safely ensconced in the Champions League quarter-finals 
but City also have aspirations of an open-top bus parade and, if Robinho, Shaun 
Wright-Phillips and Stephen Ireland can maintain this level of excellence, 
maybe this could be the season when they shed their reputation as a club that 
always conspires to mess things up.

There is a long way to go before then, of course, and the lesson of history is 
that it is never wise to look too far ahead when it comes to City. On this 
form, however, it is difficult to imagine them forfeiting their place in the 
last eight of the Uefa Cup by surrendering their two-goal advantage in Denmark 
next Thursday.

It was a stylish performance, full of attacking invention and slick passing, 
and Mark Hughes was entitled to feel it deserved a more handsome winning margin 
than that conjured up by Felipe Caicedo's and Wright-Phillips's first-half 
goals.

"We had good chances to score more but the order of the day was to get a 
positive result and keep a clean sheet, so in that respect we are really 
pleased," said Hughes.

"Ideally we would have put the tie to bed because it is still there for both 
teams but we have shown tonight that we always have a goal threat and I think 
we will have chances to score in Aalborg. We're in really good shape and I 
think the players really sense an opportunity to win it [the competition] now.

"We still have to get into the next round but once you get into the 
quarter-finals and the semi-finals you really do sense it might be an 
opportunity to do something great."

Certainly when Hughes's men pass the ball as elegantly as this it can seem 
like a trick of the mind that they dropped into the Premier League's relegation 
places over Christmas.

Aalborg might not be a particularly glamorous side but they have taken points 
off Manchester United and Celtic in the Champions League this season, and 
scored six times in their two legs against Deportivo la Coruña in the previous 
round.

It is just a pity for City that Robinho struggles to reach this level of 
performance away from their home stadium. The Brazilian was a constant menace, 
at one point doing six step-overs in succession inside the penalty area before 
one of the Aalborg defenders, Michael Beauchamp, chopped him down.

How the referee, Luxembourg's Alain Hamer, did not award a penalty was a 
mystery, although Hughes had his own theory.

"I think Robbie's feet were too quick for him," he said. "The referee was 
mesmerised and forgot to look for the tackle."

Robinho also began the move that led to the opening goal, gliding in from the 
left and playing the ball into Caicedo's feet on the edge of the area.

Thereafter, it was all about the Ecuadorian's body strength. Caicedo is built 
like a backstreet bouncer and, having received the ball with his back to goal, 
he shrugged aside his marker, Michael Jakobsen, before prodding the ball past 
the goalkeeper Karim Zaza.

The second goal was even more impressive – a classic Wright-Phillips run, 
starting on the right before darting inside, twisting and turning into space to 
find a shooting opportunity. Patrick Kristensen, Aalborg's left-back, was left 
trailing and Wright-Phillips struck his shot with the outside of his right boot 
so that it curled away from Zaza into the top corner of the net.

The disappointing part was the amount of empty seats. The supporters who did 
bother turning up were certainly unimpressed and, in a humorous sideshow, there 
were almost as many derogatory chants about the people "watching on telly" as 
there were about their reviled neighbours from Old Trafford. "Where are all our 
fans?" the crowd bellowed.

The attendance was 24,596, which meant the stadium was little more than half 
full. When it was read out there were loud boos.

It was generally light-hearted, though, on a night when City recorded a sixth 
straight win at home and Aalborg, fifth in Denmark's Superliga, seldom 
threatened Shay Given's goal. Caca, a Brazilian striker, forced a good save 
after 21 minutes and Thomas Augustinussen wastefully missed the target just 
after the half-hour.

That apart, however, it was a night of almost unremitting pressure from the 
home side. Ireland, in particular, seemed determined not to be outdone by 
Robinho. Wright-Phillips has reinvented himself and, crucially, the defenders 
Micah Richards and Richard Dunne appear to have rebuilt their confidence after 
some abysmal performances earlier in the season.

It was 1976 when City last won a trophy and, as Hughes said, that is "too 
long".
 