
More than two dozen prominent writers, including David Hare, Tom Stoppard, 
Hari Kunzru, William Boyd, Ali Smith, Sarah Waters and Monica Ali, have called 
onDavid Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> to urge the 
Turkish government to halt its crackdown on freedom of speech.

The campaign by writers’ associations English PEN, Wales PEN Cymru and 
Scottish PEN comes amid growing persecution of journalists, writers and 
publishers inTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>, with hundreds 
arrested, prosecuted or sacked over the past year.

In a letter to the prime minister, signed by 25 writers, the PEN branches warn 
that “over the past five months, intimidation, threats and even physical 
assaults against journalists, writers and publishers have become the norm”.

It asks Cameron to urge the Turkish prime minister, Ahmet Davutoğlu, who is 
visiting London next week, “to ensure that his government acts in accordance 
with Turkey’s obligations to respect the right to freedom of expression”.

Kunzru, one of the letter’s signatories, said the Turkish government had 
“revealed a deeply authoritarian streak”.

He added: “Absurd cases like the public health official prosecuted for a 
Facebook post comparing Erdogan to Gollum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/02/turkish-court-asks-gollum-experts-if-erdogan-comparison-insult>
 show a kind of sensitivity and vanity that suggests an incipient cult of 
personality.”

Among the incidents of intimidation highlighted by PEN are two attacks on the 
offices of the newspaper Hurriyet, including one supported by a serving Turkish 
MP; the raid and seizure of Koza Ipek Media, known for being critical of 
President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan; and the detention of three journalists working 
for Vice News. The letter warns that “independent journalism is now on its 
knees”.

The authors also raise concern for Can Dündar, editor-in-chief of Turkish 
daily Cumhuriyet, and Erdem Gül, the paper’s Ankara bureau chief, who were 
arrested on espionage and national security charges on 26 November.


The charges against the pair, who continue to be held in pre-trial detention, 
relate to an article and video published on the Cumhuriyet website on 29 May 
2015 about Turkey’s intelligence agency providing arms to Islamist rebel groups 
in Syria.

The authors write: “We are appalled that both journalists may face a maximum 
life sentence for the charge of divulging state secrets, a sentence of 20 years 
for espionage, and 10 years for membership of a terrorist organisation, for a 
story that the authorities appear to have accepted is true.”

Director of English PEN Jo Glanville said: “This is a crisis for democracy in 
Turkey that has repercussions not only for its citizens but for the rest of the 
world.

“Given the pressures that face the region, it’s more important than ever that 
Turkish journalists and writers are allowed to exercise their right to freedom 
of expression and inform public debate.”

Earlier this week Turkey’s main opposition party raised concern about the 32 
journalists currently held in the country’s prisons 
<http://www.telesurtv.net/english/news/Almost-800-Journalists-Fired-150-Arrested-in-Turkey-in-2015-20160111-0025.html>
.

The Republican People’s Party (CHP) said the government was using 
anti-terrorism laws to stifle press freedom, with 156 journalists arrested in 
the country last year.

Sezgin Tanrikulu, deputy chairman of the CHP, said on Monday that seven 
Turkish media companies came under investigation in 2015, 484 legal actions 
were launched against journalists, and 774 were fired for reasons related to 
their work.
 