
In 1930, France celebrated the 100th anniversary of the annexation of Algeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria>, claiming it as one of its own 
territories after a century of bloodshed on a huge scale, writing one of the 
most horrific chapters in colonial history in blood and ashes. But even if they 
had been wiped out on the battlefield, the Algerian people refused to fade 
away. They needed to rediscover a way of being visible that would remind their 
conquerors that they were still there. On paintings and in photographs, the 
Algerian was presented in rags; virtually part of a landscape as pitiful as it 
was picturesque. It couldn’t be further from the image of the intrepid warrior, 
majestic on his horse, his gun held aloft and his burnous catching the wind 
like a banner.

Mohammed Moulessehoul, the real 'Yasmina Khadra'
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jun/22/france.world> 
How to rid themselves of this cliche? With sport! Only sport could redeem 
their lustre of yesteryear.

First there was football. Teams of Muslim players looked forward to a time 
when they could take on their invaders, and their skills, dribbles and tackles 
light up the stands. But it was boxing, more than anything, that thrilled the 
Algerians. If, in football stadiums, the stands kept the different communities 
apart, the ring almost sealed them in; Algerians and Europeans, finally side by 
side, stuck together in those overheated rooms.

This is why I wanted to write the story of my fictional, exceptional boxer 
Turambo, who is an incarnation of all the Arab-Berber champions who bought 
pride to the region after the humiliating defeats of the invasions. Unaware of 
it themselves, the boxers were showing the Algerian people that they could 
still fight the good fight, and that even if the French government was 
sovereign, it was neither invincible, nor invulnerable.

The Angels Die was, for me, an opportunity to revisit a time that I feel has 
been unjustly ignored by writers and historians as a decisive moment for the 
destiny of Algeria. From the 1930s onwards, Algerian nationalism was beginning 
to reap the fruit of its labours. But while 8 May 1945 is celebrated as a day 
of freedom in Europe, it is a day of mourning for my people, as VE Day also 
marked the start of a bloody repression of the Algerian people by the French 
army: it is estimated that as many as 45,000 people died in theSétif and Guelma 
massacre <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S%C3%A9tif_and_Guelma_massacre>, and 
the shelling of the town of Kherrata (European estimates sit between 
15,000-20,000 <http://www.aljazeera.com/archive/2005/05/200841013384337401.html>
).

But I didn’t write this book to tell the story of that tragedy. My novel is 
first and foremost the story of a man searching for his path, torn between his 
need to create a legend, and his desire to fall in love. The Angels Die is a 
saga, a journey through a land of many battles: a battle against himself, 
against life’s absurdity, and especially a battle for love, the only miracle in 
man’s purgatory. It wasn’t on a whim that I chose to name the parts of my novel 
after the female characters. I believe in love, in what a woman has to offer to 
those seeking redemption. Women are the only hope that we have in this world. 
Those that manage to capture that hope, who try to earn it: they are the ones 
who will have found salvation. All my work as a writer has convinced me that 
this is true. I am a person who owes the foundation of their success to the 
love of a woman. Turambo never truly knows this, but he feels it deep down.

I wrote this novel to pay tribute to a country that could have been a paradise 
for all, if everyone had known how to share. Of all of my novels, The Angels 
Die has probably moved me the most. It is still my favourite, perhaps because, 
like me, it chases after love in a hostile world.

Extract

I owe my nickname to the shopkeeper in Graba.

The first time he saw me enter his lair, he looked me up and down, shocked by 
the state I was in and the way I smelt, and asked me if I came from the earth 
or the night. I was in bad shape, half dead from diarrhoea and exhaustion as a 
result of a long forced march across scrubland.

‘I’m from Turambo, sir.’

The shopkeeper smacked his lips, which were as thick as a buffalo frog’s. The 
name of my village meant nothing to him.

‘Turambo? Which side of hell is that on?’

‘I don’t know, sir. I need half a douro’s worth of yeast and I’m in a hurry.’

The shopkeeper turned to his half-empty shelves and, holding his chin between 
his thumb and index finger, repeated, ‘Turambo? Turambo? Never heard of it.’

From that day on, whenever I passed his shop, he’d cry out, ‘Hey, Turambo! 
Which side of hell is your village on?’ His voice carried such a long way that 
gradually everyone started calling me Turambo.

My village had been wiped off the map by a landslide a week earlier. It was 
like the end of the world. Wild lightning flashes streaked the darkness, and 
the thunder seemed to be trying to smash the mountains to pieces. You couldn’t 
tell men from animals anymore; they were all tearing in every direction, 
screaming like creatures possessed. In a few hours, the torrents of rain had 
swept away our hovels, our goats and donkeys, our cries and prayers, and all 
our landmarks. By morning, apart from the survivors shivering on the mud 
covered rocks, nothing remained of the village. My father had vanished into 
thin air.

More about the book

The book – set in Oran in the 1920s and 1930s – unveils a harsh picture of 
colonial life in Algeria: cacophonous streets, squalor, violence and 
destitution alongside luxury, with the Arabs dismissed as little better than 
animals by their European overlords. You feel a pang for the boy when an 
official points out, with condescending amusement, that the village he’s named 
after was not Turambo, but Arthur-Rimbaud, mispronounced by the illiterate 
peasants. There are ominous hints here of the hatred that would later explode 
into the bloody war of independence. – Lee Langley, the Spectator 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/2016/08/the-angels-die-spares-no-punches/>

Buy the book

The Angels Die by Yasmina Khadra, translated by Howard Curtis, is out now, 
published by Gallic Books for £8.99.It is available from the Guardian bookshop 
for £7.37 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/angels-die.html>.
 