
Now that the battles fought by the dissident movement and by the thousands of 
individuals who voiced their opposition to the Soviet state have been swallowed 
up by the larger events of history, only a few names will be recalled. Yelena 
Bonner's will be one of them. She and her husband, Andrei Sakharov, symbolised 
– within the Soviet Union and throughout the west – the strength and courage of 
those opposed to state socialism. Bonner, who has died aged 88, was often 
portrayed merely as the wife of the Soviet Union's most famous dissident 
scientist, but her history as an activist was as lengthy as her husband's. Her 
determination, organisational skills and often fiery temper consistently drew 
attention to human rights issues.

Sakharov and Bonner were a team, bound together by the conviction that freedom 
of conscience was a prerequisite of any civilised state and that east and west 
should move towards reconciliation. This conviction helped them survive the 
ordeals of surveillance, harassment, arrest and internal exile.

The two first met in the autumn of 1970 outside a courtroom in Kaluga, central 
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, where a scientist, Revolt 
Pimenov, and a puppet-theatre actor, Boris Vail, were on trial for distributing 
the samizdat human rights journal Chronicle of Current Events. Sakharov had 
already achieved worldwide attention for publishing his essay Reflections on 
Progress, Peaceful Coexistence and Intellectual Freedom, in the New York Times 
in 1968, but Bonner was the practical and already experienced organiser of the 
group – it was she who found rooms for both the defendants and the observers of 
the trial.

Like Sakharov, Bonner came from the Soviet elite. Unlike the brilliant 
physicist, who was recruited straight from university to the team that 
developed the Soviet Union's first hydrogen bomb and then became the youngest 
member of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, Bonner had seen the brutality behind 
Stalin's Soviet Union early on.

She was born in Merv (now Mary), a town in Turkmenistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkmenistan>, the eldest child of Bolshevik 
revolutionaries, who named her Lusia. Her father, Georgy Alikhanov, was first 
secretary of the Armenian central committee and her mother, Ruth Bonner, was a 
committed party activist. Yelena's earliest years were spent in Chita in the 
Soviet far east, where her father had been sent after a political falling out 
with Grigory Zinoviev, a leading member of the politburo. The family then moved 
to Leningrad, where they lived among the city's Bolshevik elite.

At one stage, they had a flat in a house where Sergei Kirov, secretary of the 
Leningrad party, also lived. In her second book of memoirs, Mothers and 
Daughters (1991), Bonner recalled being taken out by Kirov in his car and 
standing on the dais with him at an official demonstration. It was the murder 
of Kirov in 1934 that signalled the beginning of the Terror and Stalin's purge 
of the old Bolshevik cadres. By 1937 the family were living in Moscow, where, 
some time before the winter of 1938, during the first wave of the Terror, 
Bonner's father was arrested and shot.

Her mother was arrested as the wife of an enemy of the people and sentenced to 
10 years in a labour camp. Bonner herself was taken to the "big house", the 
secret police headquarters in Leningrad, for questioning. She remained in 
Leningrad to be brought up by her grandmother. When she was eligible for her 
internal passport she discovered that her parents had failed to register her 
birth. Free to chose her own name, she picked her mother's surname and Yelena 
after the heroine of Turgenev's novel On the Eve.

When the Soviet Union was invaded in June 1941, Bonner volunteered for the Red 
Army's hospital trains, becoming head nurse. The after-effects of a shell 
attack that October, which left her temporarily blinded, led to her being 
invalided out of the medical corps in early 1945. She returned to Leningrad and 
in 1947 was accepted as a student at the city's medical institute. After 
graduating, she specialised in paediatrics. She met her first husband, Ivan 
Semyonov, at medical school and they had two children, Tanya and Alexei. In the 
1950s Bonner spent six months working inIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> for the Soviet ministry of health and 
contributed articles to medical newspapers, as well as to literary journals.

In 1965, after her first marriage had fallen apart, Bonner moved into her 
mother's flat in Moscow. Her upbringing had seemed conventional enough: 
childhood membership of the Komsomol, followed by an application for full party 
membership after her parents had been rehabilitated in 1954. However, the fate 
of her family and friends and her Jewish/Armenian parentage – which made her 
politically suspect to the authorities – encouraged Bonner in her scepticism of 
the officially presented party line. The crushing of the 1968 Prague uprising 
marked for her, as for many dissidents of her generation, the beginning of her 
questioning of the basis of the Soviet state. Gradually, she moved into 
dissident circles, although it was not until 1972 that she renounced her party 
membership.

Bonner and her mother introduced Sakharov to the wider dissident movement. As 
he wrote in his memoirs, it was she who "taught me to pay more attention to the 
defence of individual victims of injustice". Their flat became a clearing house 
for those involved in the Helsinki Group, the human rights group set up to 
monitor Soviet violations of the Helsinki Accords, and for groups fighting for 
the rights of Christians, ethnic minorities and of Soviet Jews who wanted to 
emigrate to Israel.

When Sakharov's children complained to him about his increasingly vocal 
opposition to the Soviet state, as well as about his friendship with Bonner so 
soon after his first wife's death from cancer, he moved into the Bonners' flat. 
He and Bonner married in 1972.

With Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/aug/04/nobelprize.russia2?intcmp=239>'s 
expulsion from the Soviet Union in 1974, they became the central focus of the 
dissident movement. Sakharov went on his first hunger strike in 1974, during 
Richard Nixon's visit to Moscow, to publicise the plight of political prisoners.

That winter, Bonner's eyesight – already damaged by her wartime injury, 
thyroid problems and glaucoma – deteriorated sharply and she was warned that, 
without an operation available only in the west, she would go blind. While she 
was in Italy in 1975 recovering from the eye operation, Bonner heard of 
Sakharov being awarded aNobel peace prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nobelpeaceprize>, and she remained in the 
west to attend the prizegiving ceremony and to deliver her husband's Nobel 
lecture that December.

The KGB had now resorted to sending the couple obscene pictures and 
photographs of dismembered corpses through the post, and accusing Bonner in 
particular of being a "money-grubbing Jew" who had married Sakharov for his 
privileged position. Despite such harassment, the couple continued to highlight 
the plight of political and religious dissenters in Leonid Brezhnev's stagnant 
Soviet state. Sakharov's position as a state scientist and Bonner's status as 
an Invalid Veteran of the Great Patriotic War prevented the KGB from attacking 
them too openly. But their friends and fellow human-rights activists were 
picked off the streets, given summary trials and exiled or imprisoned. The 
Sakharovs, both in poor health, remained at liberty to speak, write and give 
interviews to foreign correspondents. However, at the start of 1980, after the 
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, Sakharov's open call for an international 
boycott of the Moscow Olympics led to his arrest.

Sakharov was stripped of his awards and exiled to Gorky (now Nizhny Novgorod) 
by decree. Bonner remained free to travel between Moscow and Gorky, give 
interviews and publicise her husband's plight. She was Sakharov's lifeline to 
the outside world. She was, as Sakharov put it, "always a doer" and refused to 
stop her activities because of her husband's arrest. But the strain immediately 
began to affect Bonner's health. Stripsearched on a train on her way back from 
Gorky in the winter of 1982 and left to find her way back to Moscow alone, she 
suffered her first heart attack the following spring and another more severe 
one a year later.

Then, in 1984, she too was arrested, charged with slandering the Soviet state, 
sentenced and exiled to Gorky. Bonner's health deteriorated further and 
Sakharov went on hunger strike on three occasions to demand that she be allowed 
to travel to the west for treatment. Finally, in 1986, she was allowed to 
travel abroad for heart surgery. She took with her a volume of memoirs of their 
internal exile, which appeared as Alone Together in the same year.

The release of Bonner and Sakharov from their exile came suddenly and 
unexpectedly. One day an engineer turned up at the flat in Gorky to install a 
telephone. The following morning they received their first telephone call. It 
was from Mikhail Gorbachev, telling them they were free to return to Moscow. 
Their release was one of the most tangible signs that glasnost had begun.

Although some of Gorbachev's policies seemed close to fufilling demands made 
by the dissidents of the 1970s, the Sakharovs continued to dissent from the 
official party line. They were instrumental in forming the unofficial 
organisation Memorial, set up to campaign for the rehabilitation of political 
prisoners. In 1989 Sakharov was elected to the Congress of People's Deputies 
and during its first session criticised Gorbachev for refusing to relinquish 
the Communist party's monopoly on power. On 14 December that year, after a 
particularly tense session of the congress, during which Gorbachev had demanded 
Sakharov sit down, he returned home and told his wife that he had work to 
prepare for the next day's session. In the morning she found him dead from a 
heart attack.

Bonner, grief-stricken, had to face Yevgeny Primakov, one of Gorbachev's 
aides, who wanted to give the former dissident a state funeral. She also had to 
endure the row that had erupted when the congress did not honour Sakharov with 
a day's recess. In distress, Bonner shouted to waiting reporters from the flat 
where her husband's corpse still lay: "You all worked hard to see that Andrei 
died sooner, by calling us from morning to night, and never leaving us to our 
life and work. Be human beings. Leave us alone."

When Gorbachev appeared at the funeral and asked her if there was anything he 
could do, she requested that Memorial should be registered as an official 
organisation. Many reformist politicians rushed to her side. Boris Yeltsin was 
not slow to show his support of her ideas, but Bonner distrusted politicians 
wanting to use Sakharov's memory for their own ends. In early 1991, when 
Gorbachev, also a Nobel peace prize winner, crushed a pro-independence 
demonstration in Vilnius, the capital ofLithuania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/lithuania>, with force, she requested that 
Sakharov's name be removed from the list of laureates. Later the same year she 
spoke to the crowd outside the White House, the Russian parliament building, in 
support of Yeltsin during the abortive coup.

As the Soviet Union fell apart, Bonner continued working to support human 
rights and democracy. By 1996, she was calling for democrats not to vote for 
Yeltsin in the presidential elections; the war in Chechnya had dashed her hopes 
for him as a democratic leader. She became an outspoken critic of Yeltsin's 
successorVladimir Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, and 
last year was among the prominent signatories of a petition calling for his 
resignation.

Bonner divided her time latterly between Russia and Boston, Massachusetts, 
where her son and daughter, who survive her, had lived since the 1970s, and 
where she died.

• Yelena Georgievna Bonner, human rights activist, born 15 February 1923; died 
18 June 2011
 