 That Ayaan Hirsi Ali, the controversial Dutch MP, had dangerous enemies 
determined to kill her for her outspoken views on Islam was well known. What is 
surprising is that it is those closest to her who have now betrayed her. She 
has been the victim of misrepresentation and caricature, and become a pawn in a 
wider ideological battle.
Her latest battering came after a Dutch documentary film crew, which had gone 
to Kenya to interview various members of Hirsi Ali's family to unearth the 
story of her origins, misleadingly claimed to reveal that Hirsi Ali had lied 
about her country of origin and the arranged marriage from which she was 
fleeing when she arrived in Holland in 1992. It claimed she had not been forced 
into the marriage and that she therefore had nothing to flee from. When the 
film was shown on 11 May, it prompted the Immigration Minister to write a 
letter to Hirsi Ali stripping her of her Dutch citizenship.

Hirsi Ali had long ago alerted her party to the 'lie' in her 1992 asylum 
application. She had claimed to come from Somalia (where she lived as a child) 
because, being a wartorn country, it would qualify her for asylum. She has 
publicly stated several times she was ashamed of doing so. The truth was that 
she had lived for 10 years as a refugee in Kenya.

Immigration Minister Rita Verdonk, her political ally and friend, and long 
aware of the facts, responded to the 'revelations' by revoking Hirsi Ali's 
citizenship. Verdonk, who has her eye on the leadership of the Liberal party, 
claimed she could not make exceptions for an MP.

Hirsi Ali certainly lied, but the exploitation of that lie by her detractors 
has been outrageous. The rules (and prejudices) surrounding asylum do not cater 
for female refugees fleeing the will of a family. They are designed for those 
fleeing a government or a war.

Her father had arranged her marriage to a distant cousin. Though she refused 
to turn up at the ceremony, the family signed the documents and she became 
legally married. 'My father is not a man who takes no for an answer,' she said.

En route to Canada to join her appointed husband, she applied for asylum in 
Holland, claiming she was from Somalia, believing that had she told the truth, 
she would have been returned to Kenya. So she lied and in a moving statement 
last week explained why.

'I felt I had no choice. I was frightened that if I simply said I was fleeing 
a forced marriage, I would be sent back to my family. And I was frightened that 
if I gave my real name, my clan would hunt me down and find me. So I chose the 
real name of my grandfather. I claimed my name wasAyaan Hirsi Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayaan-hirsi-ali>, although I should have 
said it was Ayaan Hirsi Magan.'

And Hirsi Ali is surely right. A woman fleeing domestic oppression is unlikely 
to find her asylum claim a priority in any country.

Some see her as the victim of a growing anxiety in the Netherlands about 
immigration, to which Hirsi Ali herself has contributed. Others are determined 
to discredit her for her atheism, her rejection of Islam and her exposure of 
the way Muslim women are often forced to submit to their men.

But why, Hirsi Ali might ask, is it so difficult to forgive a falsified asylum 
application and so easy to ignore the abuses daily suffered by immigrant women? 
Such abuses include domestic violence, honour killings and genital mutilation, 
all practices which Hirsi Ali has witnessed directly as an interpreter for 
Somali women in Holland.

And yet, as the debate on immigration becomes polarised, in the Netherlands as 
in Britain, the left remains silent, fearing that to speak out would be 
anti-immigrant. At the same time, it is equally peculiar to hear elements of 
the right embracing women's liberation, the easier to bear down on Muslims.

Hirsi Ali's more nuanced views are frequently caricatured. She once questioned 
whether the morality of the Koran should apply literally in the 21st century, 
pointing out that Muhammad had been married to a nine-year-old and that that 
might be considered perverted today. Her words provoked the headline 'Hirsi Ali 
Calls the Prophet a Pervert'.

The conservative American Enterprise Institute has offered Hirsi Ali a job. 
She will not make life easy for her new colleagues and certainly oppose many of 
its views on social policy.

Instinctively anti-authoritarian, Hirsi Ali has always raised difficult 
questions. It is a tragedy that such a brave and honest figure has been forced 
out of European politics. And a deep irony that such an honest woman has been 
brought down by a necessary lie.
 