
The Better Together campaign is to unveil later this week a phalanx of UK 
celebrities ready to lovebomb the Scots into sticking together for the union.

One of the more enjoyable sideshows of the Scottish independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence> campaign has been 
counting in the entertainers as they step forward to give us their considered 
opinion on the issue. Many of the big names who have spoken so far live in 
England or abroad and will not even be allowed to vote. Sir Alex Ferguson, 
Billy Connolly, Sir Sean Connery and Alan Cumming have all spoken eloquently 
about their vision for Scotland inside or outside the Union – yet none of them 
is permitted to participate.

Among the rest it seems that the pro-independence camp holds sway. Writers, 
actors and musicians are coming forward in their droves to give their backing 
to independence.

Celebrity endorsements in the campaign have elicited mixed responses. How, for 
instance, could the Yes camp reasonably be expected to criticise such a 
cultural heavyweight as David Bowie when he espoused his preference for a No 
vote?

Yet when Steve Coogan similarly urged us to vote No, you could sense the 
relief among nationalists that he hadn't come out for them.

Here we present some of those celebrities who have already made their views 
known, some urging people to vote to retain the union and others who want
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> to stand alone.

The celebrities who say no

Sharleen Spiteri: 'As far as I'm concerned, I'm British. And, yeah, I'm 
Scottish but I feel I'm part of the UK'

Professor Hugh Pennington: 'The absence of barriers allows not just funding 
and people, but ideas and innovation, to flow'

David Wilkie: 'I'm against. I just do not get it. I just can't understand why 
we're even discussing it'

Sir Alex Ferguson: 'We don't live in a foreign country; we are just in another 
part of the family of the UK'

Susan Boyle: 'I am a proud, patriotic Scot, passionate about my heritage and 
my country. But I am not a nationalist'

David Tennant: 'Why do we want to become smaller? Surely we want to expand and 
look outward?'

John Barrowman: 'We are stronger when we stand together. Alex Salmond is the 
pudding of our chieftain race'

Gavin Hastings: 'I am totally against independence. No, I think that would be 
the worst possible thing for us'

The celebrities who say yes

Sir Sean Connery: 'The yes campaign centres on a positive vision for Scotland. 
It is rooted in inclusiveness … equality'

Robbie Coltrane: 'I'd eventually like to see independence – but only an 
independent Labour Scotland'

Irvine Welsh: 'I always think the Union is nature's way of stopping the Scots 
ruling the world'

Frankie Boyle: 'It's an aye from me, man' 

Gerard Butler: 'I can't see why Scotland shouldn't be independent – it has 
different attitudes, people and outlook'

Alan Cumming: 'In the past 15 years we have become stronger. The world is 
waiting for us and I know Scotland is ready'

Ken Stott: 'A vote for self-determination would raise our profile with lots of 
benefits for the arts'

AL Kennedy: 'Salmond is a sharp, charismatic presence; he would do well in any 
environment'
 