
Alex Rodriguez does not owe you an apology. And if you think Alex Rodriguez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-rodriguez> does owe you an apology, no 
apology he could ever give you would be enough.

That’s the lesson to be learned from Tuesday’s handwritten release, the 
capstone on the slugger’s weeks-long attempt in the dead of winter to 
rehabilitate something resembling his public image. Or at least to the point 
where the team that’s tried desperately to get out of his contract and the 
media that’s bayed for his blood for over a decade now let him focus on getting 
ready to do the only thing he’s ever really wanted to do in New York City: play 
baseball.

This is hardly a unique take – Craig Calcaterra over at HardballTalk expressed 
a very similar thought 
<http://hardballtalk.nbcsports.com/2015/02/17/please-allow-me-to-tell-you-what-to-think-about-alex-rodriguezs-apology/>
 in a bit more situationally-appropriate fashion – but it’s an important one to 
remember over the rest of the week, as the frozen city and its stir-crazy 
writers in the dailies work themselves up into another frenzy over A-Rod’s 
latest, and hopefully last, public statement. Who knows? Maybe this time Bill 
Madden and the rest of his ilk will be satisfied by something Rodriguez says or 
does. If so, that’d be a first.

Alex Rodriguez issues handwritten apology statement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/17/alex-rodriguez-issues-handwritten-apology-statement>
The apology tour – and the fact that Rodriguez has been forced to abase 
himself in this manner – is mainly about power, and the exercise thereof. 
Yankee executives feel they’re owed an explanation, as if there’s any other 
explanation necessary than “I wanted to help the baseball team I play for win 
baseball games.” You want an explanation for why a player uses steroids? Take a 
look at that ring that says “2009 World Series Champions.” You want to play 
moralist? A-Rod was a monster in that postseason for New York. Hand back all 
those rings, vacate that World Series championship, and then go to the New York 
Daily News andtalk about all the apologies that you’re owed 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/baseball/yankees/sources-yankees-offer-stadium-a-rod-apology-article-1.2114630>
.

Yankees ownership wants Alex Rodriguez to know that they won’t forget his 
“scorched earth” tactics from the summer of 2013, which has all the moral 
rectitude of the Wolf lecturing Peter on the evils of eating meat. But it’s 
also about money, too, because when it’s about power in this country, it’s also 
almost always about money. The Yankees were only successful in getting one year 
of Rodriguez’s contract voided – and even then still had to pay him about $3.2m 
for off-days last year, something they first tried to fight then tried to get 
the rules changed to avoid in the future. Now, they’re taking the stance that 
the milestones Rodriguez hits over the remainder of his time with the club just 
don’t count for bonus purposes. Again, fair’s fair – if those runs, those hits, 
don’t count for his contract, don’t put them on the scoreboard.

And that brings us to the letter to the fans. This letter, which was either 
encouraged or explicitly ordered by the Yankees brass, serves one purpose: to 
allow the average Joe whose full investiture in theNew York Yankees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-yankees> is a couple hundred of 
dollars for tickets a year and a whole lot of feelings to pretend he’s Alex 
Rodriguez’s boss. That’s what this is: vicarious bossing. This is not a letter 
to the victim of an assault, or to someone who has been substantially deprived 
of life or property. This is a letter primarily intended to make the people who 
read it feel superior, as if they’ve taught a subordinate an important life 
lesson. It is a letter meant to assist in preening.

That’s what you’re doing when you type “Apology not accepted,” into social 
media and hit the send button. That’s what you’re doing when you opine that the 
letter is “too combative,” or that you don’t believe a word in it, or that 
there’s just simply not enough grovelling. You’re preening. You’re pretending 
Rodriguez actually exists to make you happy not by hitting baseballs a very 
long distance, but by allowing you to exert moral power over him. And that’s 
fantasy. That’s not real life. A-Rod is not, should not be, and never will be 
accountable to fans on the street who are angry he didn’t play a moral game of 
baseball – something that never has existed; something that never can exist.

Everyone knows this. That’s why this apology was a bad idea, and why it was so 
stridently demanded by people with no interest in seeing Rodriguez succeed: 
fans who demand apologies from players do so because they dream themselves 
bosses, and some will never accept them because they have no power to fire the 
players instead.

Take former Yankees pitcher Andy Pettitte, who will be having his number 
retired by the Yankees in a ceremony on “Andy Pettitte Day” this August. 
Pettitte was listed in the Mitchell Report as a user of performance-enhancing 
drugs and admitted to his use, apologizing to Yankees and Astros fans. He was 
not suspended, as his transgressions came before the league instituted 
punishments for PED abuse; by retiring his number, the Yankees are making clear 
that they have no problems with how Pettitte has comported himself.

By and large, New York fans had no desire to fire Andy Pettitte. Partially 
that comes from the team not wanting to fire Pettitte – they never signed him 
to an interminable long-term deal, felt disrespected by him and limited by his 
contract, and pursued a vengeful buyer’s remorse through the local media. 
Yankees fans loved Andy Pettitte, because he was an affable, fan-friendly 
family man, instead of an aloof, standoffish gun-for-hire. He was also a 
pitcher who was able to spin his use as purely for “rehabbing from injury,” 
instead of being a power-hitter, the near-ubiquitous stereotype of a selfish 
PED user only doing drugs to juice his stats.

Pettitte’s apology was one of the very few that will ever be accepted. 
Rodriguez’s will not be. Nothing Rodriguez can say or do will be enough. Some 
people have no interest in being pleased. All they want is an admission of 
guilt, so they can fantasize about how they’d punish it.

Ask Mark McGwire how that worked out for him.
 