
Everyone says the recession has ushered in a fashion for the smaller scale. 
Bicycles not 4x4s, bedsits rather than loft extensions, allotment veg instead 
of the weekly Ocado. Ever modish, I'm going to offer you a downsized column: 
small, home-made observations rather than a great palatial sweep.

Secretly, this is nothing to do with the general 1950s-isation of Britain and 
simply because I'm doing jury service. I am literally under scrutiny from the 
thought police. I'll tell you about it at some point, once I've worked out what 
I can and can't say without going to prison. (One thing I've learnt is that you 
certainly can't bank on a sympathetic jury).

I thought I'd make a rather good juror. I am a professional poker player, 
after all: I spend half my life staring into men's faces, trying to work out 
whether or not they are telling the truth. And I am heterosexual, so I also 
spend the other half doing that.

Everyone said it would be fun. Turns out it's not fun. It is the least fun and 
most stressful thing I've ever done. And I've flown Ryanair.

I am told by stern judges every day that I "must not speculate". This is 
hardcore CBT for a columnist. No speculating? I'd like to see them give that 
direction to Jan Moir. There'd be nothing left but a pile of smoking ashes, a 
pointy hat and the echo of a shrieking voice: "I'm melting! I'm melting!"

Nevertheless, my brain has been re-trained. If you find anything speculative 
among the statements below, go straight to the law. But I am confident you will 
not. I'm keeping it local. I have scrutinised the evidence that the world put 
before us last week and the following is nothing but pure, rational, 
narrow-eyed logic.

The tabloids are excited by news that the late film director Anthony Minghella 
 <http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1225574/Minghella-left-son-will.html>
"left his son out of the will". Twenty-four-year-old Max received nothing from 
the £7.5m estate, most of which was left to his mother, Carolyn.

Is this odd? I don't think it's remotely odd. It tells us nothing about the 
relationship between the two men. It's just normal. My father's estate was 
inherited by my mother; we didn't think that was a Massive Snub for Kids from 
Genial Humorist Alan Coren.

Then again, there was no £7.5m and nary a single Oscar.

Why should people's kids get their money? It is the husband or wife who has 
lost their partner, the person with whom all finances are shared. That 
partnership is not dissolved until both parties are no longer extant. The 
working bankroll and premises belong to the remaining co-founder, not the 
subsidiaries who were taken on at a later date.

In aristocratic families, widows are shoved out of the house so the newly 
entitled son can move in, living high on the hog while his mum scavenges for 
berries around the doorway of her spidery cottage. I'm not sure that principle 
should be rolled out nationally.

It occurs to me: wouldn't abolishing intergenerational inheritance be a great 
way out of the recession? Not only would plenty of money be restored to the 
national coffers, it would really get the old people spending. What an economy 
boost. They'd be splashing it about on all sorts of gold baths and bottles of 
ancient whisky, if the only alternative was leaving their loot to the Treasury.

Advertisers would have to target them. That means television would have to 
respect them. Older women would be allowed to read the news again.

When the old folk died, if they were unmarried or widowed, the rule would be 
that the money would have to remain within their generation. It would be 
collected by the government and used to create new, fat pensions for the 
deceased's wizened peers to buy heating, carpet, Murray Mints and gin. No more 
problems with "ageing Britain" or questions about whether we can afford to 
support it.

Dammit, this idea is brilliant. I may be a terrible juror, but I'd make a 
great chancellor.

I was sorry to read about the traumas of Moira Cameron, the Tower of London's 
first female yeoman warde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2009/nov/02/tower-london-beefeaters-harassment-inquiry>
r, who was allegedly subjected to a campaign of harassment from long-standing 
Beefeaters which included nasty notes and the defacing of her uniform. 
Goodness, who would have expected such sexism from an all-male collective of 
royal guards in a 522-year-old post?

I hope Moira will be comforted by the thought that this is an inevitable part 
of being the first woman to do anything. She should have seen life in the poker 
room 15 years ago. You don't know you're breaking ground until you get hands on 
your arse, jokes about your tits and anonymous jibes about your ability.

Don't worry, Moira, it won't last. Think of it as no more troublesome than 
trying to get seven-year-olds to eat spinach: keep trying and they'll swallow 
it eventually.

Actress Martine McCutcheon  
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/celebritynews/6509533/Martine-McCutcheon-is-heroine-of-her-own-novel.html>
has revealed that she wrote her novel,The Mistress, in the hope it would be 
adapted for a film in which she could star. She told the press: "I deliberately 
made the lead character the supermodel version of me."

I've since been trying to imagine the supermodel version of me. She's tall, 
thin and gorgeous. As a result, she was happy at school and had boyfriends from 
an early age. She never started making stupid jokes as a defence mechanism. 
She's confident at parties. She talks sincerely and directly, rather than 
saying any old rubbish to make people laugh because she can't imagine 
impressing them any other way. She enjoys shopping and dancing. She is 
un-selfconscious in a bikini. She and I haveabsolutely nothing in common at all.
Right now, we're not speaking.

It's so depressing. Not only could I never be a supermodel for a living, it 
turns out I can't even be one in my own head.
 