In the first James Bond book, Casino Royale (1953), Bond orders a martini. How 
does he famously take it?  "Three measures of Gordon's, one of vodka, half a 
measure of Kina Lillet. Shake it very well until it's ice-cold, then add a 
large thin slice of lemon peel."  "Three measures of Bombay, one of vodka, half 
a measure of vermouth. Shake it very well until it's ice-cold, then add an 
olive."  "Three measures of vodka, one of gin, half a measure of vermouth. 
Shake it very well until it's ice-cold, then add a large thin slice of orange 
peel."  "Three measures of Beefeater, one of vodka, half a measure of Pimms. 
Shake it very well until it's ice-cold, then add a large chunk of onion." 
According to the obituary Fleming wrote for Bond in You Only Live Twice, what 
nationalities were Bond’s parents?  Scottish and English  English and French  
Scottish and French  Scottish and Swiss How many people does Bond kill across 
all of the books?  183  279  352  469 Which of these names is not the name of a 
Bond girl?  Gala Bland There is a Gala Brand, however, in the third book 
Moonraker.  Viv Michel  Domino Vitali  Mary Goodnight In the Bond story 
Octopussy, who or what is Octopussy?  An enchanting femme fatale  An octopus, 
named PussyThere was no sexy cult leader for Bond to have sex with in this 
story; instead, the octopus is a pet owned by the villain Major Dexter Smythe.  
A ship  A particularly odd curse word In one Bond book, Fleming ends on a scene 
that could be construed as Bond dying, leaving the author a way out if he 
decided against writing more. Which book almost saw the end of Bond?  Diamonds 
are Forever - Fleming's fourth Bond book  From Russia, With Love - Fleming's 
fifth Bond book  Dr No - Fleming's sixth Bond book  Thunderball - Fleming's 
ninth Bond book In which of the following stories does Bond's nemesis Blofeld 
NOT appear?  Thunderball  On Her Majesty's Secret Service  You Only Live Twice  
Quantum of Solace Only one Bond story is told from the point of view of a 
woman. Which story is it?  On Her Majesty's Secret Service  You Only Live Twice 
 The Hildebrand Rarity  The Spy Who Loved Me Q never appears in the novels. 
What is the name of MI6 armourer in Fleming's stories?  Boothroyd  Bigby  
Blanche  B In a profile read by M in one of the stories, which Bond villain is 
believed to be a latent homosexual because he cannot whistle?  Ernst Stavro 
Blofeld  Francisco Scaramanga  Le Chiffre  Sir Hugo Drax  You got…  Challenge 
your friends Submit answers  