
In the spring of 1820, Thomas Jefferson, who, in an early draft of the 
Declaration of Independence, had launched a withering assault on slavery, 
confessed to an associate that the plight of the American negro was a momentous 
question, which, “like a fire bell in the night, awakened and filled me with 
terror”.

Race, still the greatest of the unresolved issues within America, has already 
inspired one entry on this list – No 5,Dreams From My Father  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/29/100-best-nonfiction-books-5-barack-obama-dreams-from-my-father>
by Barack Obama. With James Baldwin, African-American literature reaches one of 
its 20th-century masters in fiction (Go Tell It on the Mountain 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/go-tell-it-on-the-mountain.html> and 
Giovanni’s Room <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/giovanni-s-room-2.html>), a 
name to stand alongside Langston Hughes, Richard Wright and, most recently, 
Nobel laureateToni Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/04/toni-morrison-god-help-the-child-new-york>
.

Baldwin is also the author of some important nonfiction, several landmark 
essays of great power and beauty on the place of the black writer in white 
America. In this genre,Notes of a Native Son is a recent classic. For Henry 
Louis Gates Jr, it was Baldwin who “named for me the things you feel but 
couldn’t utter… articulated for the first time to white America what it meant 
to be American and a black American at the same time”. The 10 essays collected 
inNotes of a Native Son – on subjects ranging from Uncle Tom’s Cabin to 1940s 
Harlem – distil Baldwin’s thinking. It is a source book for a subject that 
Langston Hughes described in a review ofNotes as “the troubled problems of this 
troubled Earth”.

Throughout his writing, Baldwin never shies away from a frank and disquieting 
acknowledgement of feelings

Baldwin frames his work as a crucial journey of self-discovery. He had, for 
instance, first to confront his complex relationship with his father, a 
preacher: “He [Baldwin’s father] could be chilling in the pulpit and 
indescribably cruel in his personal life and he was certainly the most bitter 
man I have ever met; yet it must be said that there was something else in him, 
buried in him, which lent him his tremendous power and, even, a rather crushing 
charm.”

At the same time, almost as taxing, he had to investigate himself: “I was 
trying to discover myself – on the whole, when examined, a somewhat dubious 
notion, since I was also trying to avoid myself.”

In Notes, Baldwin is much franker about the “condundrum of colour” than the 
complexity of his life as a gay man, perhaps because race could be rhetorically 
linked to a historical crime: “It is a fearful inheritance, for which untold 
multitudes, long ago, sold their birthright. Multitudes are doing so, until 
today. This horror has so welded past and present that it is virtually 
impossible and certainly meaningless to speak of it as occurring in time.”

Describing himself as “a survivor”, Baldwin senses the stirrings of liberation 
in postwar America and notes the changes that have begun to occur in his 
lifetime:

“When I was young, I was being told it will take time before a black person 
can be treated as a human being, but it will happen. We will help to make it 
happen.”

On top of this struggle, there was for Baldwin the continuing problem, common 
to all artists, of authenticity: “One writes out of one thing only – one’s own 
experience… The difficulty then, for me, of being a negro writer was the fact 
that I was, in effect, prohibited from examining my own experience too closely 
by the tremendous demands and the very real dangers of my social situation… I 
have written about being a negro… only because it was the gate I had to unlock 
before I could hope to write about anything else.”

At the same time, unique as it is, Baldwin insists that his is an authentic 
American story, even if it’s one that “no American is prepared to hear”. He 
writes: “The story of the negro in America is the story of America… it is not a 
very pretty story, a shadow which lies athwart our national life. [The negro] 
is a social not a human problem; to think of him is to think of statistics, 
slums, rapes; it is to feel virtuous, outraged.”

‘In Negroland we thought of ourselves as the Third Race’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/22/negroland-margo-jefferson-extract-postwar-black-america>
Baldwin is edgy and provocative about this idea: “In our image of the negro 
breathes the past we deny, the beast in our jungle of statistics. It is this 
which defeats us, which lends to interracial cocktail parties their rattling, 
genteel, nervously smiling air: in any drawing room at such a gathering the 
beast may spring, filling the air with flying things and an unenlightened 
wailing.”

Finally, Baldwin goes on to nail the problem with passion and persuasiveness: 
“The making of an American begins at that point where he himself rejects all 
other ties, any other history, and himself adopts the vesture of his adopted 
land… In the case of the negro the past was taken from him whether he would or 
no; yet to foreswear it was meaningless and availed him nothing, since his 
shameful history was carried, quite literally on his brow.”

Throughout his writing, Baldwin never shies away from a frank and disquieting 
acknowledgement of feelings: “There is no negro living in America who has not 
felt, briefly or for long periods… naked and unanswerable hatred; who has not 
wanted to smash any white face he may encounter; to violate, out of motives of 
cruellest vengeance, their women, to break the bodies of all white people...”

Despite this admission of rage, Baldwin can also be entertainingly satirical, 
as in his essay onCarmen Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/feb/09/musical>: “Hollywood’s peculiar 
ability to milk, so to speak, the cow and the goat at the same time – and then 
to peddle the results as ginger ale – has seldom produced anything more 
arresting than the 1955 production ofCarmen Jones.”

All of the foregoing culminates in the title essay, Baldwin’s declaration of 
independence. Speaking of his struggle to vindicate himself as an artist, he 
writes: “This fight begins, however, in the heart and it has now been laid to 
my charge to keep my own heart free of hatred and despair.”

This becomes a statement of intent which Baldwin would fulfill many times over 
in the career that followed.

A signature sentence

“I knew about jim-crow but I had never experienced it; I went to the same 
self-service restaurant three times and stood with all the Princeton boys 
before the counter, waiting for a hamburger and coffee; it was always an 
extraordinarily long time before anything was set before me; but it was not 
until the fourth visit that I learned, in fact, nothing had ever been set 
before me: I had simply picked something up: negroes were not served there, I 
was told, and they had been waiting for me to realise that I was always the 
only negro present.”

Three to compare


Richard Wright: Black Boy <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/black-boy.html>
 (1945)

Ralph Ellison: Shadow and Act 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/shadow-and-act.html>
(1964)

Alex Haley: The Autobiography of Malcolm X 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/autobiography-of-malcolm-x-2.html> (1965)
 