 After a day of terror in Belfast, in which at least 13 people were killed and 
more than 120 injured, the secretary for Northern Ireland, Mr Whitelaw, last 
night authorised action against terrorists.
A statement after a two-hour emergency meeting at Stormont Castle, said that 
Mr Whitelaw, the defence secretary, Lord Carrington, and army and civilian 
advisers, had considered the Provisional IRA's "bombing outrages".

"They deplored the slaughter and maiming of men, women and children, which 
took place today on Provisional IRA orders, clearly acting with the utmost 
ferocity. In the light of these murderous attacks, the ministers authorised 
certain operations against the terrorists to be undertaken forthwith."

Early today Mr Whitelaw gave an interview to the BBC about forthcoming 
security measures. He said: "I am going to make an immediate and clear response 
to the ghastly attacks on innocent people that have taken place in the last 24 
hours.

"This will be a clearly determined operation that will do everything possible 
to root out those responsible for these appalling crimes." He added that the 
measures would become apparent "very soon".

On the question of the possible reintroduction of internment, he said: "The 
internment of suspects is never ruled out, but I don't contemplate it with any 
pleasure."

Shootings in Belfast had continued last night. In one incident, a man was 
killed and five more were wounded, in a battle between troops and terrorists in 
the Markets area. The army claimed to have hit three gunmen.

Later, a man was shot dead when he answered a knock at his door in Deerpark 
Road, in the Old Park district of the city.

Just after 11.30pm a wave of shooting broke out in the main Catholic areas. 
The army said that the initial shooting incidents did not involve the security 
forces, but that after midnight their posts in Anderstown and the Old Park Road 
came under intense gunfire. There were no military casualties.

In the afternoon, during an hour of concentrated bombing at least 11 people 
died. They included two soldiers, a little girl and a messenger boy. Ninety six 
people were detained in hospital, and about 24 others were allowed home after 
treatment.

The Provisional IRA accepted responsibility for the bombings, which seemed to 
be aimed at civilians. It claimed that at least 30 minutes' warning was given 
before each explosion, but the warnings which were received were so vague as to 
be almost useless.

A spokesman for the Belfast Brigade of the Provisional IRA pointed out that 
telephoned warnings were given to the Samaritans, the police, newspapers and 
the local Rumour Service and Public Protection Service at least thirty minutes 
before each explosion. In the case of the two worst explosions at Oxford Street 
and the Cavehill Road, warnings were given well in advance. The Oxford Street 
warning was heard over the military radio net at 2.10pm, and a woman telephoned 
the police telling of a box in the back of a car on the Cavehill Road an hour 
before the explosion.

Huge explosive decides were detonated at places certain to be thronged with 
people - bus termini, railway stations, and shopping centres. It was calculated 
that over 1,000lb of explosives had been used.

At 2.45pm, when the bombing began, and for much of the afternoon, Belfast was 
reduced to near total chaos and panic.

Girls and men wept openly, hugging each other for safety in the main streets, 
as plumes of smoke rose around them, and dull thuds echoed from wall to wall.

It was impossible for anyone to feel perfectly safe. As each bomb exploded 
there were cries of terror from people who thought they had found sanctuary, 
but in fact were just as exposed as before.

Thousands streamed out of the stricken city immediately after the attacks, and 
huge traffic jams built up. All bus services were cancelled, and on some roads 
hitch hikers frantically trying to get away lined the pavements.

By the time it was all over, some 21 bombs had gone off in Belfast and there 
were fears of more to come. Sources close to the Provisionals indicated that 
more were planned for last night and for the weekend.

Mr Whitelaw and Lord Carrington immediately flew back to Belfast in an RAF 
transport plane for their emergency meeting. The army GOC, Sir Harry Tuzo, the 
acting chief of the RUC, Mr David Corbett, and one of Mr Whitelaw's juniors, Mr 
David Howell, also attended.

From at least two Ulster Protestant politicians, there were urgent demands 
last night for an immediate resumption of the internment policy. One of them, 
Mr William Craig, leader of Ulster Vanguard, and a former Stormont Cabinet 
Minister, called for its "immediate massive resumption".

While this course was not thought one of those Mr Whitelaw was more likely to 
pursue, it was felt that stringent security measures must now be enforced.

The possibility that a major cordon-and-search operation may now be undertaken 
in one of the prime Republican areas - possibly even in the Andersonstown 
estate where the Belfast IRA leaders meet and plan their main operations - is 
becoming very real indeed.

If Mr Whitelaw does not act swiftly, there is little doubt here that 
understandably militant Protestants, headed by the huge and formidably well 
disciplined Ulster Defence Association, may decide to take the law into their 
own hands.

Last night the UDA leaders were meeting in emergency session in a house in the 
city and refused to comment on their plans. They did stress, however, that no 
action was contemplated for some hours. But only four hours after the bombing, 
UDA car and foot patrols were seen on the streets in East Belfast. Presumably 
they were there in a defensive role for a very frightened and intimidated 
Protestant population.

The bombs began to explode before 3pm. Then for roughly 20 minutes they 
exploded roughly at one a minute. Smoke appeared in all directions above the 
roofs of shops and offices. As the attacks continued, and the whole city centre 
echoed to the crack of the bombs, a few people began to panic. Weeping children 
had to be comforted by their mothers, and passers-by had to strike hysterical 
girls to bring them under control.

The worst explosion was at the busy Oxford Street bus station, where at least 
six people were killed. Reports by witnesses said that the bomb had been 
planted in a car. As a Land-Rover containing Welsh Guardsmen arriuved, it 
exploded, killing two soliders instantly and tearing through the waiting-room
 