
The tragic and inevitable doomsday situation which has been universally 
forecast forNorthern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> 
arrived in Londonderry yesterday afternoon when soldiers firing into a large 
crowd of civil rights demonstrators, shot and killed 13 civilians.

Seventeen more people, including a woman, were injured by gunfire and another 
woman was seriously injured after being knocked down by a speeding armoured car.

The army reported two military casualties and said that their soldiers had 
arrested between 50 and 60 people, who had been allegedly involved in the 
illegal protest march.

After the shooting, which lasted for about 25 minutes in and around the 
Rossville Flats area of Bogside, the streets had all the appearance of the 
aftermath of Sharpeville. Where, only moments before, thousands of men and 
women had been milling around, drifting slowly towards a protest meeting to be 
held at Free Derry Corner, there was only a handful of bleeding bodies, some 
lying still, others still moving with pain, on the white concrete of the square.

The Army's official explanation for the killing was that their troops had 
fired in response to a number of snipers who had opened up on them from below 
the flats. But those of us at the meeting heard only one shot before the 
soldiers opened up with their high velocity rifles.

And while it is impossible to be absolutely sure, one came away with the firm 
impression, reinforced by dozens of eyewitnesses, that the soldiers, men of the 
1st Battalion, The Parachute Regiment, flown in specially from Belfast, may 
have fired needlessly into the huge crowd.

Miss Bernadette Devlin said it was "bloody cold-blooded murder." Mr John Hume 
said it was "another Sharpeville," and he demanded the immediate withdrawal of 
all these "uniformed murderers." Mr Michael Canavan of the Derry Citizens' 
Central Council said "It was impossible to say who fired first. Personally I am 
sure it was the army, but it doesn't really matter. What was so terrible and so 
tragic was that the soldiers fired into a huge crowd of people, and fired 
indiscriminately at that. The death toll must show us that their firing was 
indiscriminate."
The death toll at 7.30 pm, three hours after the shooting, was said to be 12, 
all men and all said to be in their mid-twenties. A thirteenth victim was 
reported later. The assistant secretary of the Altnagelvin Hospital, Mr L 
Thompson, said: "I have seen 12 bodies here that have all probably been killed 
by gunfire. There are 16 people in the wards. Fifteen of these have gunshot 
wounds and one of them is a woman. There is also a girl, named as Miss Burke, 
aged 18, who is seriously injured after being struck by a vehicle. I understand 
it was an army truck."

An army statement at 7.30 pm said that after an hour of heavy stoning, men of 
the 1st Battalion, The Parachute Regiment moved into the William Street and 
Rossville Street areas from behind the units who were manning barricades. "They 
went in to arrest people in the crowd and chased and caught several men who 
were running away," the statement said. "While this operation was in progress, 
gunmen opened up from rubble at the base of the Rossville Flats and soldiers 
returned the fire. Casualty returns are still coming in."

It is understood that about fifty people were taken in army vehicles to a 
nearby naval base and were then handed over to the RUC, many to be charged with 
riotous behaviour. The 1,500 troops came under the direct command of the 
commanding officer of Five Brigade, Brigadier Pat MacLellan, though the 
commander, Land Forces, Major General Robert Ford, was also there in a 
supervisory capacity. Assistant Chief Constable David Corbett directed the 500 
policemen deployed in the city.

The march got under way from the Bishofields, three miles from the centre of 
the city at about 2.30 pm, almost on schedule. Taking part was certainly the 
largest crowd of civil rights protestors ever seen in Londonderry, and 
estimates of the number of participants ranged from 10,000 to 20,000. The crowd 
was led by an open-topped lorry with the speakers, Miss Devlin, Lord Brockway, 
and Ivan Cooper, and the organisers on board. The crowd behind filled the 
streets and stretched back for about 1,000 yards.

Trouble was inevitable and when, after passing down Lecky Road, Rossville 
Street and William Street, the crowd encountered the first of the army 
barricades which were to prevent them getting into Waterloo Place and the 
Guildhall, fierce rioting started.

Men of the 2nd Battalion, Royal Greenjackets, in William Street, endured a 
full 10 minutes of heavy stoning before opening up on the mob with CS gas and a 
dozen hefty shots from a large water cannon, drenching hundreds of marchers and 
journalists in purple indelible dye.

This happened at about 3.30 pm and from then until about 4.15 the mob, growing 
angrier by the minute, was engaged in a fierce tussle with soldiers at this 
barricade and others in Great James Street and Sackville Street. Huge 
quantities of gas and hundreds of rubber bullets were fired at this stage and 
many of the rioters were injured.

Then, at 4.05 pm, a single shot was fired in William Street, presumably by an 
IRA man. The Provisionals had been under strict local orders to keep their guns 
at home and the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association stewards did their 
best to keep order and look out for possible gunmen. Lord Brockway praised the 
discipline of the crowd.

The single shot was ignored, though some people in the crowd, which had now 
concentrated in front of the flats, spent several minutes pushing marchers out 
of the way at an entry in which, it was presumed, another sniper was lurking.

Shortly before 4.15 pm Mr Kevin McCorry, the civil rights organiser, began to 
walk through the crowd, telling them through a megaphone that a meeting was 
starting at Free Derry Corner and that Miss Devlin, Mr Cooper, and Lord 
Brockway were to speak.

Just as this meeting was getting underway four or five armoured cars appeared 
in William Street and raced into the Rossville Street square, and several 
thousand people began to run away. The move had been expected and it is a 
tactic we have all seen before - nothing, not even gas, breaks up a crowd more 
effectively than several huge armoured cars careering through the streets.

But it was then that the situation changed tragically. Paratroops piled out of 
their vehicles, many ran forward to make arrests, but others rushed to the 
street corners. It was these men, perhaps 20 in all, who opened fire with their 
rifles. I saw three men fall to the ground. One was still obviously alive, with 
blood pumping from his leg. The others, both apparently in their teens, seemed 
dead.

The meeting at Free Derry Corner broke up in hysteria as thousands of people 
either ran or dived for the ground.

Army snipers could be seen firing continuously towards the central Bogside 
streets and at one stage a lone army sniper on a street corner fired two shots 
towards me as I peered around a corner. One shot chipped a large chunk of 
masonry from a wall behind me.
Then people could be seen moving forward in Fahan Street, their hands above 
their heads. One man was carrying a white handkerchief. Gunfire was directed 
even at them and they fled or fell to the ground. A priest giving the last 
rites to a dying man was reportedly grabbed and taken away by the paratroopers.

There was certainly some firing from the IRA. I heard one submachine-gun open 
up from inside the flats and heard a number of small-calibre weapons being 
fired intermittently, but the sound which predominated was the heavy, hard 
banging of the British SLRs, and this continued for about 10 or 15 minutes.

Intermittent firing went on until about 5.05 pm. During one stage I was 
sheltering in a Roman Catholic church and as, with two other reporters, I went 
around a corner, a civilian armed with a 22 rifle, opened up at us. He may have 
been a short-sighted IRA man, but whoever he was he was firing from a 
Protestant part of the city.

Weeping men and women in the Bogside spent the next half hour in Lecky Road, 
pushing bodies of dead and injured people into cars and driving them to 
hospital. I saw seven such cars drive away with some of the bleeding bodies on 
the back seats, inert and lifeless.

By 5.30 pm it was all over. A full moon was rising over a shocked and still 
numbed Londonderry, and heavily armed soldiers were still keeping Bogside and 
the Creggan cordoned off.

Mr Finbar O'Kane, one of the civil rights organisers, said he had never 
thought that the Ulster crisis would ever get as bad as this. "It was a 
shocking, terrible thing," he went on. "Those soldiers shot into a crowd and 
shot down innocent men. What on earth will happen to us all now?"
 