
SEX AND THE CITY


1. PRAGUE

Snowflakes blowing across the Charles Bridge, music recitals in candelit 
churches, underground bars, firelit restaurants serving huge plates of comfort 
food and fine red wines... How could your lover fail to be won over? Forget 
worries about rampaging stag parties – Prague has withstood far worse in its 
1,000-year history, and its charms remain undiminished. Sip cocktails among the 
beautiful people at Tretters (V Kolkovne 3), or plunder the impressive wine 
cellar at Monarch (Na Perstyne 15), before dinner at Nostress (Dusni 10), an 
elegant fusion restaurant.

• A three-night break at the four-star Charles Hotel costs from £349pp, 
including flights from Gatwick, through Cities Direct (01242 536900;
citiesdirect.co.uk <http://citiesdirect.co.uk/>)

2. DUBROVNIK

Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor used to escape to this beautiful Croatian 
city for a bit of holiday loving, and it still has the right atmosphere for a 
glamorous romantic break. The centre of the compact walled town is full of 
gorgeous boutiques and unusual jewellery stores (in case gifts are in order), 
pretty cafes with flower-filled gardens (should the Mediterranean sun make an 
appearance) and tiny bars with plenty of private nooks and crannies.

• Hidden Croatia (0844 477 9999; hiddencroatia.com 
<http://www.hiddencroatia.com>) has three nights at the five-star Hotel 
Excelsior and Spa from £355pp, including flights and transfers

3. ISTANBUL

Exotic, frenetic and and utterly unique, Istanbul is European Capital of 
Culture in 2010 (en.istanbul21010.org <http://www.en.istanbul2010.org>), 
meaning that as well as the beautiful mosques and chaotic bazaars, there's a 
whole range of new exhibitions, shows and galleries to explore. The city can be 
hectic, so to slow things down and keep a romantic feel, stay on Heybeliada, 
one of the Princes' Islands that lie just a short ferry ride from the centre of 
the city. There is no traffic on the island so the best way to explore the 
stunning Byzantine monasteries and Greek Orthodox churches is by bike or 
horse-drawn carriage. Stay at the Karamanyan, a mansion converted into four 
stylish apartments.

• A four-night break at the Karamanyan costs from £140pp, booked through 
Istanbul Islands (020 7436 8009;istanbulislands.com 
<http://www.istanbulislands.com>). Easyjet (easyjet.com) flies from Luton and 
Gatwick to Istanbul

4. MARRAKECH

There is something hugely romantic about disappearing through an unmarked door 
in the medina into a coolly elegant hotel or ornately tiled cafe. Many of the 
riads in Marrakech have roof terraces where you can laze together, glass of 
wine in hand, watching the sun set over the rooftops, while the hustle and 
bustle carries on in the streets below. Stay at the elegant Riad Kniza. The 
owner, Mohammed Bouskri, has 50 years of guiding experience, and hundreds of 
tales to tell.

• A four-night break at the Riad Kniza costs from £589pp, including flights 
from Gatwick, transfers and one dinner, through Prestige Holidays (01425 480400;
prestigeholidays.co.uk <http://prestigeholidays.co.uk/>)

5. VIENNA

Coffee, cake, coffee, more cake – there are plenty of opportunities to spend 
time gazing into each other's eyes in Vienna's elegant coffee houses. Going for 
a February weekend means you'll have a good chance of snow, but that will just 
add to the romance. If you're a couple who thrive on intellectual discussion, 
drop into Café Central (Herrengasse 14), preferred hangout of Lenin and Trotsky 
in their pre-revolution days, or for more basic stimulation try a hotBuchtel 
(jam-filled bun) at Café Hawelka (Dorotheergasse 6).

• Ebookers (ebookers.com <http://www.ebookers.com/>) has a three-night break 
at the five-star Vienna Hilton from £318pp, including breakfast and flights 
from Heathrow

INDULGENT ESCAPES


6. LUDLOW

One of the best things about Valentine's Day is that it's a good excuse for a 
glass or three and a slap-up supper after a parsimonious January. The 
Shropshire town of Ludlow is a great place for foodies – though getting a table 
at Mr Underhill's, last week named best restaurant in Britain by the Harden's 
restaurant guide, might be tricky. Instead, you could follow the sausage trail 
to the six butchers in town (perfect for a Valentine morning's fry-up), pick up 
some yummy cheeses at the Little Big Cheese Shop, and stop for pastries at De 
Grey's coffee shop. .

• Dinham Hall (01584 876464; dinhamhall.co.uk <http://www.dinhamhall.co.uk>) 
has a two-night break, dinner, B&B from £350 for two, or double rooms from £140 
per night, B&B

7. BRUGES

Medieval Bruges must be one of the most romantic and beautiful cities in 
Europe, just made for slow strolls with a lover along canals and cobbled 
streets, and with dozens of lovely warm restaurants for a few hours of Belgian 
beer-fuelled heart-to-hearts. You can't visit Bruges without having a plate of
moules marinière, follow it up with handmade chocolates and sipping a cup of 
hot chocolate at De Proeverie (Katelijnestraat 6) and trying one (or several) 
of the many beers at 't Brugs Beertje (Kemelstraat 5).

• A two-night break, including rail travel from St Pancras and B&B 
accommodation at the four-star Hotel Aragon, costs from £258pp through 
Inntravel (01653 617000;inntravel.co.uk <http://www.inntravel.co.uk/>) 

8. TURIN

Italians love their food, and if you're after a foodie break on a budget, 
Turin – the country's capital of theaperitivo – is the ultimate treat. Starting 
at about 6pm, the grand old cafes and bars in the central grid of streets lay 
on sumptuous buffets to accompany early-evening drinks... and best of all, 
they're free (just don't tell your date that). Make sure you try the famous
grissini (breadsticks). Mingle with the locals at Caffè Roberto at Via Po 5 and 
Caffè San Carlo on Piazza San Carlo, then, if you're still peckish, head for 
dinner at one of the city's elegant world restaurants, serving Piedmonte's 
specialities, such as porcini mushrooms and (when in season) white truffles.

• L'Orso Poeta (00 39 011 5178996; orsopoeta-bed-and-breakfast.it 
<http://www.orsopoeta-bed-and-breakfast.it/>) has doubles from €110, including 
breakfast. Fly from Stansted with Ryanair (ryanair.com <http://ryanair.com>)

9. SAN SEBASTIáN

With more Michelin stars per capita than any other city, San Sebastián on the 
north coast of Spain is a mecca for foodies, and can be lovely at this time of 
year, with few tourists and mild weather. Work up an appetite with a walk along 
the palm-studded Playa de la Concha or through the old town, before feasting on
pintxos – Basque tapas – in Bar Txepetxa (C/Pescadería 5), known for 
award-winning anchovies, or Bar Bergara (C/Artetze Jeneralaren Kalea 8), where 
thepintxos are like mini works of art. Or push the boat out at Zuberoa (00 34 
943 491 228;zuberoa.com <http://www.zuberoa.com>), a two-Michelin-starred 
restaurant in a 14th-century farmhouse in nearby Iturriotz.

• The boutique Astoria7 (00 34 943 445 000; astoria7hotel.com 
<http://astoria7hotel.com/>) has doubles from €115 a night, including 
breakfast. Easyjet flies from Stansted to Bilbao

10. THE ISLE OF WIGHT

The Isle of Wight a gourmet destination? Well yes, actually. Away from the 
family-filled summer months, the island is blissfully peaceful, with plenty of 
just-long-enough-to-justify-a-pig-out walking routes, interrupted with unspoilt 
beaches and excellent gastropubs. Try the New Inn at Shalfleet (01983 531314;
thenew-inn.co.uk <http://www.thenew-inn.co.uk/>) or the Red Lion at Freshwater 
(01983 754925). If you feel like a splurge, book the Valentine's package at the 
Hambrough hotel in Ventnor in the south of the island, with a six-course dinner 
in the hotel's Michelin-starred restaurant on the Saturday, including 
langoustines, champagne and canapés, plus a bottle of champers in the room and, 
yes, more bubbles at breakfast. It costs £230pp, including ferry crossings from 
Portsmouth to Fishbourne or Lymington to Yarmouth.

• Book on 0871 376 0013; wightlink.co.uk <http://www.wightlink.co.uk> or 
thehambrough.com <http://thehambrough.com>

GLORIOUS ISOLATION


11. TUSCANY

If there's one thing that takes the romance out of a stay in rural Tuscany, 
it's falling over other holidaying Brits. Head to the hills in February, 
however, and you may have this beautiful countryside all to yourself. Stay at 
Il Ruscello, a beautifully restored watermill for two people, with terracotta 
floors, beamed ceilings, exposed stone and French doors opening out onto a 
terrace. The picturesque village of Comano is close by and the surrounding area 
of Lunigiana is famous for its castles and the ancient Roman town of Luni.

• A three-night break at Il Ruscello costs £325 through Holiday Lettings (
holidaylettings.co.uk/22359 
<http://holidaylettings.co.uk/rentals/lunigiana/22359>). The nearest airport is 
Pisa, served by Easyjet (easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com>) from Gatwick, 
Luton and Bristol

12. DORSET

As peaceful retreats for two go, The Orchard, set deep in rural Dorset near 
Sturminster Newton, ticks all the boxes. Pull back the curtains of this 
one-bedroom, weatherboarded cottage and you have endless views of open fields 
and the orchard from which the property takes its name. Don your walking boots 
for a ramble, visit the nearby towns of Bath, Shaftesbury or Salisbury, and 
then wrap up warm for a meal on the decked terrace.

• Three- to six-night breaks covering the Valentine's Day weekend start from 
£216 per couple, through Classic Cottages (01326 555555;classic.co.uk 
<http://classic.co.uk/>)

13. AUSTRIA

British snow is all very well, but it doesn't hold a candle to the gleaming 
white mountains of the Tyrol. For an unforgettable Valentine's break, curl up 
in your own igloo in the Alpeniglu village in the heart of the Kitzbuehler 
Alps. Couples ride up the mountain on the Hochbrixen gondola and can then take 
a torchlit stroll through the forest and have a candlelit supper in the igloo 
dining room before snuggling up in super-cosy sleeping bags on an ice bed for 
two swathed in fur. Eat breakfast while watching the sun rise over the empty 
pistes – then ski down before the crowds arrive.

• A night costs €210pp, including dinner, breakfast, torchlit walk and drinks. 
Book on 00 49 711 3416 9090;alpeniglu.com <http://www.alpeniglu.com>. Easyjet (
easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com>) flies from Gatwick, Liverpool and Bristol 
to Innsbruck

14. YORKSHIRE

On a crisp winter's day the North York Moors are spectacular. Near Osmotherly 
on the edge of the national park is Mount Grace Priory, a 14th-century 
monastery. Nestling against the walls of the original manor house is a stunning 
place to stay: the single-story Prior's Lodge. Residents have the grounds to 
themselves before the priory opens to the public at 10am each day. The cottage 
is ideally placed for romantic walks across the moors and along the Cleveland 
Way long-distance footpath.

• A three-night stay at Prior's Cottage costs £395 through English Heritage 
(0870 333 1187;english-heritage.org.uk/holidaycottage 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk>)

15. PEMBROKESHIRE

Perched on the edge of Martletwy village and surrounded by rolling fields on 
three sides, the two-bedroom Tin Bungalow is perfect for an away-from-it-all 
weekend. When you're not curled up in the glass sun room lapping up those 
views, take a walk to the Daugleddau Estuary or to Cresselly Arms at Cresswell 
Quay, an old fashioned country pub serving real ale, both just two miles away. 
There's even a shed for storing bikes.

• Three nights costs from £214 through Under The Thatch (01239 851 410; 
underthethatch.co.uk <http://underthethatch.co.uk/>)

COASTAL RETREATS


16. SUFFOLK

Britain's beaches are often at their best beneath sharp, blue winter skies – 
and the long stretch of sand at Southwold is particularly lovely when there's 
barely anyone else to share it with. The area is surrounded by creeks, marshes 
and reed beds where you can have fun bird-watching or fishing for crabs before 
enjoying a warming pint by the fire in the Lord Nelson.

• Oak Beam Cottage is a short drive from Southwold in the pretty village of 
Eye; a two-night break costs £250 through CV Travel (020 7401 1086;
cvtravel.co.uk <http://www.cvtravel.co.uk>)

17. ILE DE RE

The pretty clapboard houses and cobbled streets of the Ile de Ré – a small 
island linked to the French city of La Rochelle by road bridge – are idyllic at 
any time of the year, with long sandy beaches and pine forests to explore on 
foot or by bike. The island is also home to the fabulous Hôtel de Toiras, a 
classically French hotel situated at the entrance to the port of Saint Martin 
de Ré, the atmospheric and historic island capital.

• A one-night package at the hotel, including champagne, flowers, dinner and 
breakfast, costs from €300 per couple (00 33 5 46 35 40 32; hotel-de-toiras.com 
<http://hotel-de-toiras.com>)

18. DORSET

Famous as a location in the book and 1967 film of Far From the Madding Crowd, 
the graceful, almost circular, sweep of beach at Lulworth Cove is one of the 
most stunning in the UK. On a wintry February weekend it's barely recognisable 
from its summer incarnation as tourist honeypot, and it's possible to do the 
spectacular walk over the cliffs to the Durdle Door without seeing another 
person. The Manor House Tack Room is a beautifully converted cottage in the 
nearby village of Winfrith Newburgh; its luxurious double bedroom has oak beams 
and a vaulted ceiling. The Weld Arms in East Lulworth a couple of miles away 
serves great suppers.

• A three-night break at the Tack Room is £153 with Dorset Coastal Cottages 
(0800 980 4070;dorsetcoastalcottages.com <http://www.dorsetcoastalcottages.com>)

19. LIGURIA

If you really like to make a big thing of Valentine's Day, there's only one 
place to head for – the small town of Camogli on Italy's Ligurian coast. In the 
run-up to the big day, the town celebrates its own festival of love: local 
residents submit love poems to the municipal authority, which chooses 20 to 
display as posters along the Camogli waterfront. There's also an annual art 
competition to find the official image of the "Lovers in Camogli" festival – 
with all the paintings shown in an exhibition.

• I Tre Merli is a charming boutique hotel with two-night packages, including 
breakfast, access to the spa and a discount at a nearby restaurant, for €260pp. 
Book onalbergohotelcamogli.it/en <http://albergohotelcamogli.it/en/>. Ryanair (
ryanair.com <http://www.ryanair.com/en>) flies from Stansted to Genoa

20. GRAN CANARIA

If wrapping up warm for wintry romance isn't your thing, escape for a week in 
the Canary islands, where winter temperatures are usually around 20C. Gran 
Canaria, with its rolling sand dunes and lush palm plantations, has a stark 
beauty and, perhaps more importantly, a smattering of slick spa hotels. The 
five-star Palm Beach is located in a romantic 1,000-year-old palm garden close 
to the dunes at Maspalomas, and has a spectacular spa specialising in 
thalassotherapy treatments.

• A five-night break at the Palm Beach costs £875pp half-board, including 
flights from Gatwick through Sovereign (0871 200 6677;sovereign.com 
<http://www.sovereign.com/>)
 