 The bomb which exploded in the House of Commons yesterday, injuring 11 people 
and setting offices and a canteen ablaze beside the ancient Westminster Hall, 
raised the urgent question in the minds of MPs and police of how a building 
used daily by so many people can ever be made even moderately secure.
The bomb went off at 8:28 a.m. when very few people were in the Palace of 
Westminster. Five minutes earlier, a warning was telephoned by a caller with an 
Irish accent to the Press Association. The caller used the code word which 
identifies IRA calls and said that a bomb would go off in five minutes. The man 
would not give a more specific location and rang off.

The police received the warning at 8:26 a.m. and seconds before the bomb went 
off, workmen on the site of an underground car park being built for MPs and 
overlooked by the canteen were given notice by the police of an imminent 
explosion. According to eyewitnesses, the explosion was followed by intense 
heat and blinding smoke inside the building. Glass was blown out of several 
windows. Clouds of black smoke could be seen miles away.

Mr Albert Quigley, a workman on the car park site was standing outside the 
canteen when the foreman told him to go and warn the men underground that a 
bomb might be about to go off. "I was just walking away when the blast came and 
blew glass from the canteen windows all around. Three of my mates were working 
on the tip of a corner tower and could not get down for dust and smoke when the 
blast went off."

The works foreman, Mr Alex Maxwell, aged 35, said that when the bomb went off 
everyone was in a state of panic "We heard a woman crying 'get me out' from a 
first floor window. There were flames on the ground floor but a couple of the 
lads got a ladder and climbed up to get her, but the heat and smoke were so 
intense that they could not reach her."

One of the men who went up the ladder, Mr Pat Arundel, a scaffolder, said: "We 
smashed a window but we could not have gone in more than three steps because of 
the dust and smoke. We never saw the woman but we said to her to come to the 
window. She cried that she could not, her leg was broken."

Firemen later brought the woman, Mrs Patricia Gaskin, a cleaner, down by 
ladder. She was taken to St Thomas's Hospital.

Mr Maxwell said the Keirs, the contracting firm building the car park employed 
about 140 men on the site. Many of them were Irish, Mr Maxwell said, but he 
added: "All the men carry passes to get into the site but there is no 
differentiation between the Irish and non-Irish. They are first class lads all 
of them."

Four of the people rescued from a first floor office in Westminster Hall 
annexe were almost asphyxiated by the time ambulance men reached them, Mr 
Ernest Jacob, an ambulance crew leader, said: "When we arrived a group of 
people were shouting at a first floor window. They were engulfed in black smoke 
and I do not know how we got them out alive. There were four people, two 
dressed in overalls and two in suits, and below them the fire was an inferno.

"If they had not been rescued they would have been asphyxiated in another two 
minutes. They were all in a very shocked condition and we gave them oxygen in 
the ambulance on the way to hospital.

MPs and Ministers arriving at the scene expressed anger at what had happened. 
Mr Edward Short, the Leader of the House, said that such intimidation would not 
affect the workings of Parliament.

Mr Bob Mellish, the Government Chief Whip, said: "It is a tragedy that these 
awful people should destroy part of a great heritage. I suppose we ought to be 
grateful they did not throw a bomb in the Chamber, and if it had been later in 
the day there might have been a few lives lost."

Mr David Steel, the Liberal Chief Whip, was one of four MPs at their desks 
when the bomb went off. "I heard the blast, I waited until the noise subsided 
and then went out to look at the damage, but there was so much dust and smoke 
it was impossible to see anything at all. The building was then ordered to be 
cleared."

Assistant Fire Officer Trevor Watkins said that the greatest danger had been 
that the timbered Great Hall would catch fire. MPs' desks and secretaries' 
rooms in the annexe were badly damaged when the burning roof caved in on them, 
and firemen had to hack at the lead and tiles on the hall's roof in order to 
check that the flames were not spreading through the beams inside. Some MPs 
lost all their files and correspondence.

Seven of the injured, six men and one woman, were treated at St Thomas's 
Hospital after the blast. Mrs Patricia Gaskin, aged 43 of Westbridge Drive, 
Battersea was found to have her leg broken in three places.

The others were less seriously injured. They were; Mr Leonard Lee, aged 62, of 
Whitestile Road, Brentford, Middlesex: Mr John Thomas, aged 34, Pendennis 
Close, Basingstoke; Mr John Byrne, aged 35, Portland Avenue, Sittingbourne, 
Kent; Fireman G L Hill of Greake Road, Gillingham; Mr Wigginton, aged 57, 
Canton Street, Poplar; and Mr William Fairweather of Blondel Street, Battersea.

Four people were treated for shock. Mr Lee and Mr Thomas are resident Post 
Office engineers in the Commons and they were in the north-western Turret on 
the second floor when the bomb went off. They and two other Commons staff were 
rescued by Mr Jacob's ambulance team.

After the blast, security warnings went out from Scotland Yard to all 
Government and public offices, and patrols around Whitehall were increased.

A number of men, including, it is believed, Irish workmen from the Parliament 
car park, were interviewed at Cannon Row police station.

Commander Wilford Gibson of A Division, who is responsible for security 
outside the Commons and for some security arrangements inside the building said 
that it was impossible to make Westminster totally secure unless policemen were 
placed shoulder to shoulder around the buildings. Talks on security were held 
almost continuously.

There were renewed requests from some MPs for measures to prevent more 
violence. Mr Patrick Cormack, Conservative MP for south-west Staffordshire 
said: "Although I have not been one of those who have advocated it in the past, 
Parliament should bring in the death penalty immediately for all crimes of 
terrorism committed in the United Kingdom."

Mr Alex Fletcher, Conservative MP for Edinburgh North, agreed and said that 
"this is not a dispute between two people - they are at war with us."

In the House of Lords, Lord Vernon said that security was little better than a 
joke at Westminster. He suggested that everyone who worked in the building, 
including MPs and Lords, should be given a pass.

Security at Westminster was tightened in 1970 after two CS gas canisters were 
hurled from the gallery on to the floor of the House by a man shouting: 
"Belfast, see how you like it."

In 1885 a bomb planted by Irish nationalists damaged the windows and roof of 
Westminster Hall when it exploded on the pavement after being snatched out of 
the crypt by a policeman. Two policemen were seriously injured in the blast. 
The hall was built in 1097 and its famous hammer-beam roof was built by Richard 
II 200 years later.
 