
She’s being hailed as the Bradman of women’s cricket and now Meg Lanning is 
promising yet more runs in what promises to be an explosive start to the WBBL 
on Saturday.

Lanning’s Melbourne Stars will take on defending champions Sydney Thunder in a 
day-nighter to complete an opening round treble of matches at North Sydney Oval 
to launch the second Women’s Big League Bash.

Lanning is fresh from equalling former England captain Charlotte Edwards’ 
world record of nine one-day international centuries in Australia’s 4-0 series 
drubbing of South Africa.

Meg Lanning: 'I don't see myself as the best player in the world'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/18/meg-lanning-i-dont-see-myself-as-the-best-player-in-the-world>
That the 24-year-old racked up her ninth ODI ton in just her 54th innings – 
compared to Edwards scoring her nine in 180 digs – has Lanning being lauded as 
possibly the greatest women’s batter ever.

“She’s a once-in-a-generation player,” Edwards told AAP

“From the moment I saw her play in Perth in 2011 and she scored a hundred in 
her second game, I realised then I was watching a special talent and she keeps 
on performing and producing.

“She’s going to set a record for the women’s game. She’s got a massive future 
ahead of her and she’s only so young as well.

“I always look forward to playing against her, but I’m glad I’m not a bowler, 
to be honest.”

Lanning warmed up for the WBBL with a century off just 48 balls in a practice 
match in Wellington.

The Australian captain said the influx of some 24 international players this 
season, including Edwards, the West Indies’ big-hitting allrounder Stafanie 
Taylor and the first two Indian players to feature in the competition should 
ensure some massive totals over the summer.

“There’s certainly going to be some very high quality cricket played,” Lanning 
said.

“You’ll see some high scores and some high scores chased down as well. The 
quality of cricketers we’ve got here is great.”

Edwards rates the WBBL the “pinnacle” competition in women’s cricket and the 
Sydney Sixers’ superstar sports allrounder Ellyse Perry believes it’s every bit 
as entertaining as the men’s equivalent.

“The skill level and the athleticism and the abilities of the females is 
incredibly high and is continuing to develop,” Perry said.

“You look at some of the catches that have been taken in our recent series 
against South Africa, some of the shots that clear boundaries.

“Someone like (Brisbane Heat’s) Deandra Dotton from the West Indies is an 
incredibly big hitter. I’ve never seen someone who hits the ball as hard or as 
far as her.

“We’ve got people bowling very quickly; players like (the Melbourne 
Renegades’) Shabnim Ismail from South Africa. So it’s a really exciting and 
talented product.”
 