
Charlie Hughes didn’t want to go to university. He wanted to join a company 
and work his way up. When he did decide to go, he wasn’t expecting to be able 
to fast-track his original plan and work his way up to university board level 
just after graduating – but that’s exactly what happened.

“I went to a grammar school and everyone was expected to go to university,” 
Hughes explains. “But I found A-levels difficult and felt that I had a better 
chance of success if I found a job and worked my way up.”


Facing the future: how can university boards stay ahead of the game?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/may/05/facing-the-future-how-can-university-boards-stay-ahead-of-the-game>
But it didn’t work out that way. After applying for jobs for six months, he’d 
only had one interview and was stacking shelves in Sainsbury’s to make money.

“I wasn’t very happy with my life,” he says. “Everyone was looking for 
graduates, so I decided apply to do a business degree and I got in to the 
University of Bedfordshire.”

When he arrived at university, he quickly got stuck in with extra 
responsibilities. He ran as vice-president and then president of the Students’ 
Union, roles which came with the opportunity to become a student governor on 
the university board.

“I wanted to be a part of the board because I thought it would be a great 
opportunity to apply my learning from my degree,” he says.

But he also wanted to make a difference. “Shelf-stacking was hard work but I 
didn’t feel like I was making a positive difference. It did teach me to apply 
myself to any role.”

Speaking up

When he became a member of the board, Hughes used his knowledge from degree 
modules in financial accounting and project management to scrutinise the 
university’s capital projects and progress towards strategic objectives. In 
return, the other members asked him about what life was really like for 
students.

“They wanted to try to contextualise what the experience of students was 
really like on the ground. ‘What do students think about accommodation?’ ‘Have 
they noticed an investment in academic staff or does more need to be done?’ and 
so on.”


He was also able to secure a monthly meeting with the vice-chancellor. “We 
discussed all kinds of subjects: live issues on campus, the political 
environment in higher education, investment, redundancy, pay cuts – everything 
really,” he explains.

On board: how universities are leading the way for female leadership
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/31/on-board-how-universities-are-leading-the-way-for-female-leadership>
“Not many twentysomethings get to have a say in high-level decision-making but 
I was sitting there on the board on the first week of my role, surrounded by 
other governors who have been successful over their lifetime of work. I was 
making decisions and holding the university to account.”

Among his successes, Hughes managed to lower the rent for student 
accomodation. “Many student halls now cost more than the maintenance loan and 
lots of students have to work to supplement their loan,” he says. “I was able 
to table a discussion at the vice-chancellor’s executive group and over a 
number of meetings I secured a £10 per week reduction in university-owned 
halls. Plus they agreed to ask the private halls to lower their planned rent 
rise.

“And just before I left my role as president in July I secured £400k for 
renovations in the Students’ Union social spaces which I was really pleased 
about.”

From the top

Hughes also found the role useful in gaining experience of speaking at 
meetings and building relationships – and would recommend the experience to 
other students.

“I think there is a perception that only the really outspoken people go for 
these roles,” he says. “I was a very shy student – I never thought I’d end up 
being the president of my students’ union. I’ve done so much over the last two 
years and I’m now a confident graduate who is ready to go out into the working 
world.”

Hughes says the key for any university that wishes to develop the student 
voice is to ensure that the motivation comes from the very top.

“If the vice-chancellor and his deputies don’t believe in it then it will not 
trickle down to every corner,” he adds. “Don’t be afraid of what could come of 
including the student voice – they often have the answers to the problems 
universities are facing.”

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 