
A bakery in Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> 
owned by evangelical Christians has lost an appeal to overturn a conviction 
that found it guilty of discrimination for refusing to bake a pro-gay-marriage 
themed cake.

The court of appeal in Belfast on Monday upheld a previous judgment last year 
that Ashers Bakery had discriminated against a customer on the grounds of 
sexual orientation.

The family-owned firm in the original case was also ordered to pay £500 
compensation to the local gay rights activist Gareth Lee, whose legal action 
was backed by the Equality Commission for Northern Ireland.

Lee had tried to buy a cake depicting the Sesame Street characters Bert and 
Ernie below the motto ‘Support gay marriage’ for an event to mark International 
Day Against Homophobia in 2014.

The Ashers case has received international attention, and highlighted the 
tensions between gay rights reformers and the politically influential and 
socially conservative born-again Christian lobby within Northern Ireland.

The three appeal judges on Monday were Northern Ireland’s lord chief justice, 
Sir Declan Morgan, and Lord Justices Weatherup and Weir.

In delivering their judgment, Morgan rejected the argument of lawyers for 
Daniel McArthur and his family that the bakery would have been endorsing gay 
marriage equality by baking the cake.

“The fact that a baker provides a cake for a particular team or portrays 
witches on a Halloween cake does not indicate any support for either,” the lord 
chief justice said.

Following the judgment, Daniel McArthur, flanked by his wife Amy, said: “This 
ruling undermines democratic freedom, religious freedom and freedom of speech.”

Supporters of the family firm, including former Democratic Unionist minister 
in the devolved government at Stormont Jim Wells, described the judgment as “an 
awful decision”. Wells said an appeal would be mounted against the ruling at 
the supreme court in London.

Morgan declared that the original judgment at Belfast recorders court had been 
correct in finding that, “as a matter of law”, Ashers had “discriminated 
against the respondent directly on the grounds of sexual orientation contrary 
to the Equality Act (Sexual Orientation) Regulations 2006”.

He said the legislation on equality in the region could not be changed to suit 
one particular religious or political group.

On Ashers’ stance regarding the cake, Morgan said: “The supplier may provide 
the particular service to all or to none but not to a selection of customers 
based on prohibited grounds. In the present case the appellants might elect not 
to provide a service that involves any religious or political message. What 
they may not do is provide a service that only reflects their own political or 
religious message in relation to sexual orientation.”

The lord chief justice criticised the Equality Commission for Northern 
Ireland. He said the publicly funded body should also have offered the McArthur 
family advice during the case, as the bakers believed their rights as people of 
faith within the commercial sphere were being undermined.

Lee was embraced and shook hands with supporters after the judges left the 
court, and made a brief statement outside court expressing his relief. “The 
only thing that I would like to say is I’m relieved and very grateful to the 
court of appeal for the judgment,” he said.

Speaking before going into the appeal court on Monday morning, Daniel McArthur 
had said: ”This has never been about the customer. It has been about a message 
promoting a cause that contradicts the Bible.”

Lee placed his order at the bakery shortly after the Democratic Unionist party 
used its power of veto in the Northern Ireland assembly to block moves to make 
gay marriage legal in the province. The region is the only part of the UK where 
same-sex marriage is still not recognised in law.

The DUP has a strong base in the province’s evangelical Christian community 
and was founded out of the late Dr Ian Paisley’s Free Presbyterian church. The 
party has consistently blocked proposals in the assembly from other parties 
including their main partners in government, Sinn Féin, to legalise gay 
marriage.

During a four-day hearing at the court of appeal in Belfast earlier this year, 
lawyers for the McArthur family said they challenged the finding because in 
their eyes it would have been sinful for them to complete the order.

In their legal battle to overturn the ruling, the McArthur family won the 
support of Northern Ireland’s attorney general, John Larkin QC.

During the hearing in May, the attorney general argued in court that the 
McArthur family was entitled to constitutional protection for turning down a 
customer’s order based on their personal religious beliefs.

Following Monday’s ruling one of the main gay rights organisations in Northern 
Ireland welcomed the judges’ decision.

John O’Doherty, the director of the Rainbow Project, said: “Ashers Baking 
Company entered into a contractual agreement to make this cake and then changed 
their mind. Sympathetic as some may be to the position in which the company 
finds itself, this does not change the facts of the case. The judgment clearly 
articulated that this is direct discrimination for which there can be no 
justification.”

O’Doherty added: “We once again extend the hand of friendship to all people of 
faith, churches and families. We would encourage faith leaders to engage with 
our community to ensure better relations and to develop trust and respect 
between our overlapping communities for the betterment of our society.”


 