
Jeremy Hunt has described child and adolescent mental health services (Camhs) 
as the“biggest single area of weakness in NHS provision” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/20/jeremy-hunt-promises-better-mental-health-services-children-adolescents>
. That may be the case, but what are those on the frontline faced with? A 
psychiatrist, psychologist, social worker, GP and a student counsellor reveal 
their day-to-day reality.

Why do we fund expensive drugs for already dying patients when we could fund a 
nurse for a year who could transform a child’s life?


I have seen ups and downs over the years as regards service provision, notably 
huge hits on services in 2004 and again in 2008/9 when reduced funding to 
councils decimated the support for children within schools and within social 
care. Both times the lack of ringfencing around services for children allowed 
them to be targeted. You could see that a generation of children were about to 
be hit with those losses – and it could be the impact from that time that has 
so affected our teenagers today.

I have for years heard about wonder drugs or equipment in other areas of 
healthcare that, for example, will give an adult an extra month of their life 
before they die (usually it’s so they can spend time with their kids). The cost 
of a few months of expensive drug treatment for one adult who is about to die 
anyway could fund a Camhs nurse for a year. That nurse could turn around a 
child’s mental health helping them to be settled in their family, to achieve 
both socially and in school and to go on to be a productive member of society, 
working, paying tax and caring well for their own children. Without Camhs 
treatment that child has a higher chance of school and work failure, or needing 
benefits or of costing the tax payer through substance misuse or crime. They 
are less likely to have settled relationships and to become good parents 
themselves. Our health services are massively skewed away from helping the many 
towards helping the (voting) few.

In the end, working in an under-resourced team within a poorly managed system 
and in a society that fails to value children and the future took its toll. I 
left and retired far too early in order to save myself.

Retired consultant psychiatrist

I almost lost my daughter because of her mental health problems
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2016/dec/05/almost-lost-daughter-mental-health-problems-camhs>
It is not all doom and gloom – I love my job and it’s a privilege

I have worked in a number of different Camhs services and each has had 
difficulties with budgets and waiting lists. In my current service young people 
and families can wait for many months to be seen. Often people on the waiting 
list have made suicide attempts yet no therapy can be offered.

Many people deteriorate while waiting for therapy and I often receive calls 
from distressed families asking for more immediate support. Unless someone is 
at immediate risk of trying to end their life, there is very little we can do. 
Even then, it is extremely unlikely they would be moved up the waiting list.

We are further hindered by lacking the very basics we need to do our jobs; 
there are often no desks, we have no drawers/lockers to keep things in, there 
are no felt tips/crayons/stickers (I buy them myself now). Often there are no 
rooms to see people in. Time seems to be wasted doing very arbitrary paperwork 
and more and more is expected of us.

It is not all doom and gloom – the professionals I work with (qualified and 
unqualified) are motivated and caring individuals who do their very best to 
help children and families move forwards in their lives. Equally, many of the 
teachers and social workers I liaise with are caring people who go above and 
beyond. I love my job and I feel it is a privilege to hear people’s stories and 
try to help them make sense of their experiences.

Clinical psychologist, south England

I’m one counsellor in a school of over 1,000 students; I feel unsupported by 
Camhs

The new referral criteria is very restrictive which makes me reluctant to even 
attempt referring young people. I find that when referrals are accepted Camhs 
still recommend the young people carry on seeing me as they don’t offer 
counselling. There’s no attempt at communication with me about these individual 
students. I’m one person in a school of over 1,000 students, I feel unsupported 
by Camhs.

Student counsellor, north-east England

Children’s mental health seems worse with more self harm and depression than 
before

There isn’t anything like enough capacity to support child mental health 
within our local Camhs so they often reject referrals by referring people on to 
what little charities there are, or to web-based resource. Even when they 
accept someone for assessment they often refer people on after as they don’t 
have any capacity to provide therapy within the service; if they do offer to 
work with a child, inevitably the waiting lists for this work are long so 
families are left struggling.

It’s tragic and desperately hard when you know how important it is to work 
preventatively

Some of the local support for parents has been helpful but the children’s 
centres are losing their funding. The local schools don’t have good support 
with long waiting times for the in-house services. In any case, 11- to 
18-year-old pupils can feel stigmatised by going to the counselling in school 
so are often reluctant. The support for the transition age 16-18-20 has been 
awful and we have been pressing for a specific focus for this group by the 
adult provision. Children’s mental health seems worse with more distress, 
self-harm and depression than before.

GP, south England

It’s tragic that I can’t get care for my daughter because as a social worker I 
know how important preventative work is

I not only have a great deal of involvement with Camhs professionally, as a 
social worker working mostly with looked after children, but also in my 
personal life – as I have been trying to access Camhs support for my daughter 
for over two years now to no avail.

 Professionally, I find Camhs is a very helpful and supportive service of 
looked after children. We can always access their service. Where we struggle is 
the transition to adult mental health services as the needs don’t miraculously 
disappear when the child turns 18, but services do.

 Then there is my own, very different, experience as a mother as opposed to a 
social worker. It’s essential to access Camhs help in the early stages of any 
difficulties with mental health in children. However, I have not been able to 
as my daughter has not resorted to physical cutting. The GP actually implied 
she would need to hear my daughter “draws blood” in order for a referral to be 
accepted.

 We have been directed to school nurses, mentors, teaching assistants and 
primary health workers. We’ve been moved around and being dealt with by workers 
not qualified to assist with her specific issues. Your child needs to be 
threatening to jump off a bridge to access Camhs.

 It’s tragic and desperately hard when you know as a social worker how 
important it is to work preventatively, or the problems simply grow into a huge 
longer term mental health issue.

Social worker, north of England

There has been an explosive rise in emergency admissions following overdoses 
among mostly teenage girls

There has been an explosive rise in emergency admissions following suicidal 
self-poisoning (overdose), the vast majority are girls around 15. What was 
quite infrequent when I started 35 years ago is now an epidemic, with often 
several admissions a day. Each one takes hours to sort out. This is always a 
family crisis and we uncover long histories of loss, betrayal and grief in 
every case. It’s no respecter of social class either; we see plenty of starred 
A-level students from select schools too. And of course, even though the young 
people do not seem concerned about it, there is a social context. Their despair 
reflects the prevailing view of society as unstable and insecure. Social media 
is clearly a factor because you can’t get away from your tormentors, but it is 
too convenient a scapegoat when the world of their parents is falling apart.

Consultant emergency and liaison psychiatrist, London

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 