
Senator Jeff Sessions <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jeff-sessions> – 
who accepted Donald Trump’s nomination as attorney general on Friday and now 
faces a Senate confirmation – has been down this road before.

Nominated by Ronald Reagan for an appointment as a district judge in 1986, the 
former US attorney was rejected by the Senate judiciary committee, for 
allegedly havingmade racist remarks to colleagues. 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/trump-attorney-general-jeff-sessions-racist-remarks_us_582cd73ae4b099512f80c0c2>

The response to his nomination from civil rights groups has been swift. “Our 
question for members of the United States Senate is simple: do they support 
racism, or do they not?” said Color of Change executive director Rashad 
Robinson. “In 1986, the Republican-controlled judiciary committee refused to 
confirm Sessions to the federal bench. In 2017, the Senate should be just as 
unequivocal: ‘no’ to racism means ‘no’ to Jeff Sessions.”

The testimony which ultimately seemed to sway the committee some 30 years ago 
suggested that Sessions referred to black coworkers as “boy”, told one to “be 
careful what you say to white folks” and surmised that a white lawyer in his 
office might be a “race traitor”. Sessions admitted some of the claims, but 
called the allegations he was a racist “ludicrous”.

Since then, the highly conservative Sessions has enjoyed a long civil career 
as the attorney general of Alabama, and as a senator for that state from 1996 
to the present. Looking past the accusations of casual workplace racism to his 
record, the picture is bleak for activists and reformers beginning to consider 
what the implications would be of Sessions as the nation’s top lawyer. The 
senator has, throughout his career, been openly hostile to many of the criminal 
justice reform priorities that haveincreasingly garnered support from both 
parties and the American public 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/05/criminal-justice-reform-obama-executive-power>
 in recent years.

Sessions strongly opposes the reduction of the US prison population, despite 
the fact that the nation incarcerates more people per capita than any other. 
“The wise approach is to slow down and evaluate the trends before accelerating 
prison population decline,” Sessions said in opposition to a bipartisan 
sentencing reform bill that would have decreased mandatory minimum sentencing, 
including for nonviolent drug crimes.

“Senator Sessions has opposed even modest reform,” said Kevin Ring, 
vice-president of Families against Mandatory Minimums, an advocacy group 
pushing for the curbing of harsh Reagan-era sentencing for drug crimes.

“Whether reform is on just hold, or completely dead remains to be seen,” Ring 
added. “From President Trump benign neglect may be the best we get.”

Ring holds out hope that Sessions’ declared priorities on terrorism and the 
department’s limited resources may curb his appetite for ramping up nonviolent 
drug prosecutions by the Department of Justice.

“Hopefully, if not a great sense of compassion or enlightenment, budget math 
is going to help push him in the right direction,” Ring said.

Sessions has expressed particular disdain for marijuana use, and even with 
national headwinds in their favor, the possible appointment has cannabis 
reformers reeling.

In one of the most startling revelations of Sessions’ failed district court 
nomination, a former coworker testified that Sessions once stated he found the 
Ku Klux Klan “OK, until I found out they smoked pot”. Sessions later defended 
the comment as a joke.

“If Trump allows Senator Sessions personal preference to dictate policy, we 
could be seeing a return to ‘reefer madness’ rhetoric and efforts to shut down 
voter-approved initiatives,” said Erik Altieri, executive director of the 
National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws (Norml).

Earlier this month, California, Nevada, Maine and Massachusetts doubled the 
number of states where the drug is completely legal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/08/state-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare>
 for medical or recreational use to eight. A majority of Americans now live in 
states where marijuana has either been legalized or significantly 
decriminalized in recent years.

At the federal level the drug remains illegal, meaning that an especially 
zealous attorney general could influence federal agents to raid otherwise legal 
commercial operations, make arrests and seize property.

“Sessions has a long history of supporting what I like to call legalized 
robbery on behalf of the state, said Altieri, referring to the practice of 
civil forfeiture. “He could use this as a mechanism to shake down otherwise 
law-abiding business owners, rob them of their profits and put them in the 
federal coffers.”

Broadly speaking civil forfeiture allows law enforcement to take property from 
individuals suspected of crimes, even without charging or convicting them. In 
April 2015Sessions said he was against “any reform” 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/federal-eye/wp/2015/04/15/grassley-clashes-with-police-association-over-controversial-asset-seizures/>
 of civil forfeiture statutes.

Any failure to pursue meaningful criminal justice reform is bound to affect 
black Americans disproportionately, as they are overrepresented at every level 
of the system, from policing and use of force through arrest, detention and 
sentencing, something that increases the relevance of his alleged racist 
comments, no matter how long ago they occurred.

“When Trump rhetorically asked African Americans what they had to lose in this 
election, this was a big one: a justice department that believes justice for 
all is its highest mission,” said Lisa Graves, executive director of the Center 
for Media and Democracy. “With Sessions, ‘justice for some’ would likely be a 
more accurate motto.”
 