
The crew of a speedboat labelled “Libyan coastguard” attacked a migrant boat 
carrying about 150 people, beating them with sticks and causing many to fall 
into the water and at least four to drown, a humanitarian group has said.

 The Germany-based Sea-Watch <http://sea-watch.org/en/> group, one of several 
non-governmental organisations operating vessels off the coast of Libya, said 
the speedboat swooped in just as the NGO’s personnel were about to go to the 
aid of the overcrowded rubber boat.

“The violent intervention of the Libyan coastguard caused a situation of mass 
panic on board the rubber boat in distress,” Sea-Watch said in a statement. 
“One tube of the rubber boat collapsed, causing the majority of the 150 people 
to slip into the water.”

The Sea-Watch crew recovered four bodies, spokesman Ruben Neugebauer told 
Reuters, and was still conducting rescues.

About 120 others were brought safely on to the Sea-Watch 2 ship, while four 
were unconscious and receiving treatment. Italy’s coastguard said there were 
nine rescue operations under way on Friday, and that Sea-Watch was involved.

A spokesman for Libya’s naval forces in Tripoli said he had not heard about 
the incident. Italy’s coastguard and a spokesman for the EU’s anti-smuggling 
Operation Sophia also said they had no information about the attack.

Italy has taken in more than 146,000 boat migrants so far this year and is on 
track to see more arrivals than last year, when 153,000 arrived. Since Sunday, 
some 2,200 have been rescued.

It was not immediately clear if Libyan coastguard members were responsible for 
the attack, or if the incident would affect the planned start of training next 
week of up to 100 Libyan coastguard members as part of Operation Sophia. The 
spokesman for Sophia had no immediate comment.

The US military, which also operates ships in the region, had no immediate 
comment on the incident.

“Next week training starts with the Libyan coastguard,” Sea-Watch’s Neugebauer 
said. “We think it’s quite important to think about with whom we are 
collaborating.”

According to information the German government has provided to parliament, the 
first tranche of training is to take place on two ships – one Italian and one 
Dutch off the coast ofLibya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>, with 
equipment and trainers provided by Germany, Italy, Greece, Belgium and Britain.

The Libyan coastguard currently has three boats in Tripoli, three boats in 
Misrata and two boats in Zuwarah, according to the German government report. 
The German military said it had no information about the incident.

In August, another humanitarian group that operates rescue ships off the coast 
of Libya,Médecins Sans Frontières 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/medecins-sans-frontieres> (MSF), said it had 
beenattacked and boarded by armed men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/28/libyan-navy-admits-confrontation-charity-rescue-boat-msf>
 on a Libyan navy boat. The Libyan navy said it fired “warning shots” because 
it thought the vessel was involved in people smuggling.
 