
What makes readers fall in love? You might want to start your answer by 
explaining Ursula Le Guin. I can only speak for one childhood — and one 
adulthood — spent reading Le Guin, but I’d bet my last nickel there are 
thousands of us out there. Tolkien knew how to conquer Evil; Beverly Cleary and 
Louise Fitzhugh put their finger on childhood woe and its embarrassments. But 
the nightly dreams of deep, deep blue water, of looking out from the crow’s 
nest of a battered clipper as it rounds a cliff, I owe to nobody but Le Guin. I 
can still close my eyes and count that ship’s sails. She owned me at age eight, 
on the overlit and understaffed second floor of the DC library (Chevy Chase 
branch). Four decades and God knows how many rereadings later, she owns me 
still.

David Mitchell on Earthsea – a rival to Tolkien and George RR Martin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/23/david-mitchell-wizard-of-earthsea-tolkien-george-rr-martin>
If you think you have Le Guin pegged because you know young adult fantasy, 
think again. Like other protean, inventive writers who move between speculative 
and realist fiction (Margaret Atwood, Doris Lessing, David Mitchell, Kazuo 
Ishiguro), Le Guin drops her reader into an uncanny double of our own world, a 
dream where somebody changed the names and shapes of everything and forgot to 
let you in on the secret. Le Guin’s peculiar gift, though, is to make the 
ordinary feel as important as the epic: mundane questions about who’s cutting 
firewood or doing the dishes share space with rune books and miscast spells. 
Her Earthsea has less in common with Narnia, Hogwarts, and Percy Jackson’s Camp 
Half-Blood than it does with medieval romances and Icelandic sagas, where 
dragons and death keep company with fishing yarns, goat-herding woes, and 
village quarrels.

Perhaps what most sets Le Guin apart from her peers is the vivacity of her 
worlds, the way she makes readers accept a world simultaneously distinct from 
and entirely a part of life as it’s ordinarily lived. I’m not talking so much 
about the vividness of a well-rendered video game as a curiously open-ended 
quality that makes you feel that her world is both very far away and right here 
in your own bedroom.

To be a Le Guin reader is to become accustomed to thinking on your feet, and 
to noticing that what you think has no guaranteed permanence:

Several black stones eighteen or twenty feet high stuck up like huge fingers 
out of the earth. Once the eye saw them it kept returning to them. They stood 
there full of meaning, and yet there was no saying what they meant. There were 
nine of them. One stood straight, the others leaned more or less, two had 
fallen. They were crusted with gray and orange lichen as if splotched with 
paint, all but one, which was naked and black, with a dull gloss to it. It was 
smooth to the touch, but on the others, under the crust of lichen, vague 
carvings could be seen, or felt with the fingers—shapes, signs. These nine 
stones were the Tombs of Atuan.

Full of meaning, and yet there was no saying what they meant; that sums up 
just about everything you come across in a Le Guin story. You believe in her 
novels as a world apart, yet also find yourself struggling to relate that world 
to your own life. A double exposure. Jetlagged and homesick in a tiny, stuffy 
attic bedroom, I started reading A Wizard of Earthsea to my daughter once: “The 
island of Gont, a single mountain that lifts its peak a mile above the 
storm-racked Northeast Sea, is a land famous for wizards.” We were at home away.

I have previously praised Jean Stafford 
<http://www.publicbooks.org/fiction/jean-stafford-antisocialite> and Doris 
Lessing 
<http://www.publicbooks.org/fiction/feeling-like-a-stoic-doris-lessings-experimental-fiction>
 as writers who made careers out of rejecting proper places and suitably 
feminine roles: recalcitrants. Stafford hates the smothering effect of social 
norms; she spends her career inventing alternatives to cocktail parties and the 
(sexist and racist) rules of the game. But she can only imagine her antisocial 
alternative as austere, internal, unpopulated, and impossible. Lessing takes 
resistance a step further: she denies that social rules bind us the way we 
think they do, and she offers up a frequently impolitic vision of ways to stand 
apart from the flow of coercive empathy and misleading sympathy. If Stafford 
thinks to herself: “I’m in Hell,” Lessing tells the rest of the world to go 
there.

Le Guin’s struggle is a subtler one. She’s against the notion that a unitary 
plot exists, one that knits every life together. Why should I be expected to 
join forces with my fellow Americans down the block? Her avowedly anarchist 
politics shape the way that her stories resist mobilization, and turn away from 
allowing anyone to stand in symbolically for the body politic.

Le Guin’s most influential booster, Fredric Jameson, praises in her work an 
impulse toward “world reduction.” He means that her writing presents a viable 
real-world politics because in it our crazily complex world is stripped, by 
fantasy, to its bare essentials. To Jameson, both the gender-bendingThe Left 
Hand of Darknessand the battle between anarchist Annares and capitalist Urras in
The Dispossessed are simplifying allegories: they make our own world’s power 
elites visible, and hence resistible.


What Le Guin reduces she immediately builds up again. She fines things down 
precisely in order to show readers how even the simplest world is fractured and 
multifarious. Consider not only the subtitle ofThe Dispossessed: An Ambiguous 
Utopia but also the complications that attend its opening image:

There was a wall. It did not look important. It was built of uncut rocks 
roughly mortared. An adult could look right over it, and even a child could 
climb it. Where it crossed the roadway, instead of having a gate it degenerated 
into mere geometry, a line, an idea of boundary. But the idea was real … The 
wall shut in not only the landing field but also the ships that came down out 
of space, and the men that came on the ships, and the worlds they came from, 
and the rest of the universe. It enclosed the universe, leaving Anarres 
outside, free.

 Le Guin undoubtedly wants readers rooting for Anarres and its barren freedom. 
But the idea of creating your freedom by shutting out the big bad universe is a 
slippery one, and Le Guin wants to be sure we miss none of that slipperiness: 
Can’t you imagine an East German saying something like this about the Berlin 
Wall in 1974? Walls don’t close off possibilities in Le Guin. In fact, walls (a 
crucial one divides and in a sense joins the living and the dead in the 
Earthsea books) are what let possibilities multiply, giving readers the chance 
to stand on either side, or even to perch uncomfortably on top, looking both 
right and left.

Another hint of Le Guin’s views about world-reduction shows up in her most 
famous short story. “The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas” is about a city whose 
universal joy and prosperity are paid for by a single jailed child’s pain (as 
the philosophy professors who keep on assigning it will happily tell you, it 
makes Shirley Jackson’s The Lottery seem like a pleasant stroll through the 
park). That suffering child is a very potent symbol for what it means to rest 
the whole world’s burdens on one set of shoulders: make the single stand in for 
the general and bad things happen. Individual character’s actions cascade, and 
at times they ramify; when I act, others make choices triggered by that action, 
and on it goes. There can be solidarity, yes, arduous, complicated and worth 
fighting for; to Le Guin, though, collective action is an oxymoron. At moments 
when crowds mobilize in obedience, or condense into a single all-defining 
order, an Omelas-like price always has to be paid.





You might think of the remarkable run of novels Le Guin produced during 
Nixon’s reign as a bulwark against what his presidency wrought on the body 
politic. Under Nixon, nearly a century’s worth of movement toward economic 
equality in America slowed, stopped, and reversed. 1970 marks the inflection 
point on the curve that charts waxing income inequality in America. Meanwhile, 
Nixon’s illegal war overseas and dirty tricks at home laid the groundwork for 
the post-9/11 notion that government’s perpetual war against enemies both 
external and internal justifies its unsupervised surveillance over all 
citizens, all the time.

Ursula Le Guin's advice for aspiring writers: 'There are no recipes'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/03/ursula-le-guin-launches-online-fiction-writing-workshop-book-view-cafe>
To that vision of mobilized might, Le Guin offered a subterranean alternative. 
President Nixon was the country’s master plotter; Le Guin stood off to one side 
and instead told its stories. It’s not that we would have been better off with 
her as president, it’s that her books remind us how little of our world belongs 
to those who think they rule it. There is no more significant moment in a Le 
Guin novel than the instant when a character suddenly discovers the larger 
fabric into which her own thread is woven — that others around her also have 
names, views, and quests all their own. It happens to Tenar early on in The 
Tombs of Atuan:

There was something underneath Penthe’s words with which she didn’t agree, 
something wholly new to her, frightening to her. She had not realized how very 
different people were, how differently they saw life. She felt as if she had 
looked up and suddenly seen a whole new planet hanging huge and populous right 
outside the window, an entirely strange world, one in which the gods did not 
matter.

There’s sly humour in a line like this, coming from a science-fiction writer 
whose work it is to create those worlds. I thought of myself as a world, asthe 
world; all around me are other worlds, equally significant, looming equally 
large.

Even when our actions suddenly make us part of a greater world, the everyday 
surrounds us, makes even what’s most memorable mostly ordinary. The wall that 
may free Anarres from the universe is also just a rough-and-tumble mass of gray 
stones; and the hero “who talked with dragons, and held off earthquakes with 
his word … lay asleep on the dirt, with a little thistle growing by his hand.” 
Stalin said that the poet should be the engineer of human souls. Le Guin is the 
anti-engineer. Precise, evocative, and vivid as her writing is, we should think 
of it less as architecture than as roadmaking: readers are not settled down by 
her writing, they are moved by it. Even her most polished books are open-ended 
and deliberately ragged. The final line of The Left Hand of Darkness is a boy’s 
stammered question: “Will you tell us about other worlds out there among the 
stars—the other kinds of men, the other lives?” Le Guin sets readers adrift 
among those worlds: peripatetic but somehow at home.

*****

John Plotz is professor of Victorian literature at Brandeis University and the 
author ofThe Crowd (2000), Portable Property (2008), and a young-adult novel, 
Time and the Tapestry: A William Morris Adventure (2014). His Public Books 
essays on Jean Stafford, Doris Lessing, and Ursula K. Le Guin are part of a new 
study called The Recalcitrants.
 