
I met Sukri in the women’s ward of a leprosy hospital in rural West Bengal, 
India. The ward was basic. Women and girls of all ages sat or lay on 
old-fashioned metal hospital beds wearing their own brightly-coloured clothes.

Their ulcers and wounds – mainly on feet, legs and hands – were laid bare for 
all to see, as the nurses had removed the dressings for inspection. I took a 
deep breath knowing that what I would see would be distressing and 
stomach-turning.As the doctor examined each patient she would tell me a little 
of their story and show me the impact of leprosy on their body.

Sukri was sitting on the bed at the far end of the ward, and as we reached her 
I asked if it would be OK to ask her a few questions and take her picture. She 
nodded shyly as the request was translated.

India rolls out world's first leprosy vaccine as fight goes on 'war footing'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/01/india-rolls-out-worlds-first-leprosy-vaccine-as-fight-goes-on-war-footing>
I asked Sukri how she came to be in the hospital and she chatted to Dr 
Joydeepa, who explained that Sukri had been found on the railway station, 
living on the platform. A stranger who knew of the hospital saw her ulcers and 
brought her there. I glanced down at Surki’s feet, her left foot a stump with 
all the toes missing, her right foot severely deformed, with a large ulcer deep 
into the flesh. Her hands were bent, with some fingers shortened and misshapen, 
and the rest frozen and drawn in towards her palms. I looked at her face, 
noting the flattened appearance of her nose and deformed jawline.

Dr Joydeepa told me that when Sukri’s mother died, her uncle and cousins 
turned against her. They poured petrol on her and tried to set her alight. When 
she survived, managing to put out the flames, they chased her from her home and 
village with knives and sticks. They wanted to kill her, or at least drive her 
away, because of her leprosy.

I felt a cold wave of emotion hit me, although the ward was hot and humid.

It was a matter-of-fact, straightforward account. I felt a cold wave of 
emotion hit me, although the ward was hot and humid. This hatred towards Sukri 
had been fueled by a terror of leprosy – not centuries ago but in 2014.

Sukri had escaped with her life but I was struck by her immense loss – of her 
home, community, family and friends. My work as a fundraiser changed that hot 
August day in 2014 when I met Sukri. I realised that without this hospital she 
would truly be an outcast, a victim of brutality and ignorance. Because of the 
hospital and its staff, she was welcomed, accepted and valued. In that moment, 
this seemed so much more important than medical treatment.

A few months prior to this trip, I had joined the Leprosy Mission England & 
Wales as head of fundraising. This was my first time meeting people affected by 
leprosy and seeing the charity’s work in action. I was prepared to see the 
deformities that leprosy causes, stumps where feet had once been, blind 
unblinking eyes and terrible sores and ulcers.

But I was not prepared for a true story of utter hatred aimed towards an 
innocent person with a curable disease.

Sukri is the reason I press on when my work is hard. When I am at my desk in 
Peterborough worrying about how we are going to meet our fundraising targets, I 
think of Sukri. I know that when our supporters make donations they are giving 
people like Sukri the chance of a new life and a new family.

People affected by leprosy in India face stigma reinforced by cruel colonial 
law | Amrit Dhillon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/10/people-leprosy-india-stigma-reinforced-cruel-colonial-law>

As a fundraiser, my job is very much behind the scenes. I’m not the person 
administering medication to cure people of leprosy, or undertaking surgery on 
unusable hands. I’m not even the person giving the money to make this work 
possible. I’m just a conduit between the donor and the beneficiary, telling the 
donor about the needs of people living thousands of miles away, relaying to 
them the difference their giving is making, and getting their donations to the 
doctors who can make miracles happen.

But on that day, in a hospital ward in India, I realised that this flow of 
giving, leading to needs met and lives changed, wouldn’t happen without me and 
others like me. Without fundraisers, Sukri would at best still be living on a 
railway station with terrible sores, begging for survival, rejected by everyone 
she knew and loved. This was the day I realised that I make a difference.

Sukri is a pseudonym.

The day I made a difference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/series/the-day-i-made-a-difference>
 is theGuardian Voluntary Sector Network’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> series that showcases 
the work of people involved with charities. If you have a story you want to 
share emailvoluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:voluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com> with a short summary of your 
experience.

Talk to us on Twitter via @ <https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>Gdnvoluntary  
<https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>and join our community 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> for your free Guardian 
Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to 
you on the first Thursday of the month.
 