
The stunning fortunes of Elena Ferrante’s Neapolitan novels in the United 
States have only recently begun to affect their reception in the author’s 
native country, giving rise to competing theories and occasionally ugly 
polemics: Are Italians simply unable to recognize greatness in one of their 
own? Are American readers uncritically falling for sentimental “women’s” 
novels? Is the real Elena Ferrante actually a man, or even a collaboration 
among several writers? Should a pseudonymous author with no public profile be 
eligible to compete for Italy’s most prestigious literary award? Then, just 
this week,came the apparent unmasking of the author’s identity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/02/elena-ferrante-literary-storm-as-italian-reporter-identifies-author>
. What should we stateside sufferers of “Ferrante fever” make of it all?

The unmasking of Elena Ferrante has violated my right not to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/03/unmasking-elena-ferrante-italian-journalist-claudio-gatti>
In 1991, on the eve of the publication of her first novel, Troubling Love, 
Elena Ferrante sent a letter to her publisher explaining her decision to use a 
pseudonym and make no public appearances to promote the book. The letter set 
out a theory of the author with the declarative texture of a manifesto: “I’ve 
already done enough for this long story: I wrote it. If the book is worth 
anything, that should be sufficient.” Ferrante continues, comparing literary 
texts to gifts from the Italian Santa Claus, the Befana: “True miracles,” she 
writes, “are the ones whose makers will never be known.”

Until recently, the fact of Ferrante’s pseudonymity played a fairly small role 
in the reception of her work. WhenTroubling Love originally appeared, in 1992, 
it generated a small but devoted readership and garnered the attention of a 
handful of literary critics in Italy and the United States, particularly those 
interested in gender and sexuality and Italian feminist theory. Three years 
after the publication ofTroubling Love, Mario Martone adapted it for the 
cinema, introducing Ferrante to a broader audience. In 2005, her second novel,
The Days of Abandonment,was the first to be translated into English, followed by
Troubling Lovein 2006. Both were “Briefly Noted” in the New Yorker, and Daniel 
Soar reviewed the former for theLondon Review of Books. Ferrante’s third novel, 
The Lost Daughter, was published in 2006 in Italy and in 2008 in the United 
States. With three novels in translation, she had a considerable readership in 
Italy and beyond, but it wasn’t until the 2012 publication of the first of the 
Neapolitan novels,My Brilliant Friend, and James Wood’s glowing 2013 New Yorker 
article, that we could really speak of the “Ferrante phenomenon” or “Ferrante 
fever.”

A friend of mine recently asked me: “But are the Neapolitan novels political? 
Or are they about women?”

Ferrante’s ascent, in the United States, to the status of “literary rock star” 
has changed the conversation about her in Italy, which now seems polarized into 
two camps, the self-flagellating and the snidely condescending. The 
self-flagellating insist that Italy is unable to recognize and retain its 
native talent. This is the subject of much public concern in Italy, and of 
Marco Mancassola’s 2015New York Times op-ed, “Embracing the Other Italy 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/10/opinion/embracing-the-other-italy.html?_r=0>
.” Ferrante herself addresses this problem insofar as, by the fourth and final 
Neapolitan Novel, Elena’s grown-up daughters live outside of Italy: “They 
consider Italy a splendid corner of the planet, and at the same time, an 
insignificant and inconclusive province, liveable only for a short vacation.”

The snidely condescending faction may best be illustrated by Paolo di Paolo’s 
2014La stampa article 
<http://www.lastampa.it/2014/10/13/cultura/il-caso-ferrante-il-romanzo-italiano-secondo-il-new-yorker-k6z6crdyRB5A6Z4ycRUrIO/pagina.html>
, which credits the success of Ferrante in the US to well-oiled plots, a solid 
narrative hand, plain language, and a touristic rendering of Naples. He 
attributes the praise offered to Ferrante by venerated Italian cultural critics 
like Goffredo Fofi, on the other hand, to her facelessness. Cristiano de Majo 
offers a somewhat more perceptive reflection on the topic by comparing the 
Neapolitan novels to Paolo Sorrentino’s Oscar-winning filmThe Great Beauty, 
which was derided — or worse, slept through — in Italy. Both works, de Majo 
notes, feature Neapolitan protagonists who have emigrated north and achieved 
success as writers. He asks whether the nostalgia for a lost Naples of 
childhood poverty might resonate not just with American descendants of 
Neapolitan emigrants, but with the kind of longing that guides touristic 
sensibilities. In a short “Central Park West” video for RAI (Italy’s national 
public broadcasting company), Antonio Monda proposes that the excitement about 
Ferrante coincides with a tendency in American universities to all but ignore 
19th-century greats like Ugo Foscolo, Manzoni, and Giacomo Leopardi in favor of 
mystics and other women writers. Mirroring the dichotomy he laments, the video 
cuts from Monda, seated in front of a wall of bookcases and solemnly addressing 
the camera, to what appears to be softly lit stock footage of a young woman 
curled up on a cushioned bay window seat, sensuously turning the pages of a 
book.

A friend of mine, perhaps imagining such a scene of cloistered reading 
reverie, recently asked me over what became a contentious dinner: “But are the 
Neapolitan novelspolitical? Or are they about women?” The a priori exclusion of 
women from the political, presupposed by my friend’s question, is often 
implicit in speculation about Ferrante’s identity. Some who dismiss her writing 
as plot-driven and sentimental seem to accept that she is a woman. Others, 
noting an epic sweep of historical and political significance, attribute the 
works to a man.Those Who Leave and Those Who Stay engages directly with these 
positions, as Elena begins writing about the sociopolitical turmoil of the 
so-called Years of Lead and reflects on both her own insecurity in handling 
such material and her envy of male writers who seem to do so with an arrogant 
ease.

Sister act: female friendship in fiction from Woolf to Ferrante and Zadie Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/06/women-friendship-wold-ferrante-zadie-smith-fiction-alex-clark>
Academics tend to remain aloof from speculation about Ferrante’s identity; for 
these readers her work is most certainly that of an implied writer textually 
constructed as a woman. And I too might be happy to repeat that the author is 
dead, and the Befana’s gifts delivered, were there not so much evident sexism 
in the speculations about the gender of Ferrante, and were such sexism not also 
addressed explicitly in the novels.

I must also confess that, as a reader impassioned by “Ferrante fever,” I found 
it unbearable to imagine her as a man. And yet as an equally passionate reader 
of Judith Butler, I was unsettled by my emotional investment in essentializing 
gender. And so I set about trying to hedge my bets: to come to terms with the 
possibility that she might be a man or, as one rumour had it, a collaboration 
between the husband-and-wife founders of Edizioni E/O, Sandro Ferri and Sandra 
Ozzola, and an intimate circle of friends. This possibility holds a certain 
appeal insofar as it both presents a challenge to the “authorialism” identified 
by Benedetti and evokes another recent Italian literary phenomenon: the 
Bologna-based collaborative writing group Wu-Ming, founded in 2000. (When I 
first heard the collaborative-author theory of Ferrante, I figured it was a 
rumor started by members of Wu-Ming to bring attention to their own 
“Unidentified Narrative Objects” and “New Italian Epics.”) Despite the interest 
that collaborative authorship would thus hold, the idea still seemed somehow 
insulting to the reader: as though the novels were cooked up by focus groups 
bent on exploiting our narrative desire and producing escapist diversions. Like 
my resistance to the possibility of Ferrante being a man, my discomfort with 
the idea of collaborative authorship revealed some hypocrisy. Am I really so 
committed to the ideologies of individualism and artistic genius, despite all 
my Barthesian, Foucauldian, and Benedettian posturing? Why should a work by one 
author be any more authentic, sincere, or true than a collaboration?

In Italy, as the 2015 deadline approached for nominations for the country’s 
most prestigious literary award, the Strega Prize, concerns about the 
possibility of a pseudonymous awardee escalated into front-page news and 
scathing polemic. Raffaella de Santis’s article inLa repubblica, “Who’s Afraid 
ofElena Ferrante <https://www.theguardian.com/books/elena-ferrante> for the 
Strega?,” described and stoked the controversy. She reported that Sandro 
Veronesi, a past Strega winner and thus a member of the association of literary 
elite known as the Amici della domenica that forms the prize jury, threatened 
to resign if Ferrante was nominated, declaring: “If you decide not to exist, 
don’t participate in the most important literary competition in Italy!” As de 
Santis and many others have noted, Ferrante was nominated for a Strega in 1992 
forTroubling Love, but her candidacy attracted little attention at the time 
because there was little chance of her winning.

On February 21, Roberto Saviano, Strega Prize–winning author of Gomorra,the 
enormously successful exposé of organized crime in Naples, wrote an open letter 
to Ferrante, published inLa repubblica:

Dear Elena Ferrante, I write not as someone who knows you in person but as a 
reader, and I believe this is the kind of acquaintance you prefer. I have never 
been interested in uncovering who hides behind your name, because since I was 
young I have always had your pages available to me, and that was enough—and 
still is enough—for me to believe I know you, to know who you are: a person 
close and familiar to me.

Saviano continues to make a case for her participation: “It would add fresh 
water to the long stagnant swamp” of the Italian literary establishment. 
Ferrante responded three days later with a letter in the same publication:

I am glad that you read one of my books and wish to make it the banner of a 
small cultural battle, but it’s useless to ask my permission. No reader writes 
to me for permission to useMy Brilliant Friend to prop up a table with a broken 
leg. … I completely share your opinions about the Strega, which in my view is 
one of a great many tables in our country whose legs have been devoured by 
woodworms. … The use of my book will serve only to prop up an old worm-eaten 
table for another year, as we wait to see whether to restore it or to throw it 
away.

Over the next week, at least two more letters from Ferrante—quickly revealed 
by Edizioni E/O to be fakes—appeared in Italian newspapers, as did a fake 
interview that made Ferrante a dialect-speaking, bearded old lady hitting on 
her young Neapolitan interviewer. Amid this cacophony, devoted readers chimed 
in on Twitter and beyond to obsequiously repeat the metaphor of the Befana, 
urging everyone to read the novels and to stop worrying about Ferrante’s 
identity.

My curiosity endured.

In response to de Santis’s article, the gossip blog DagoSpia declared the 
debate about the possibility of Ferrante’s nomination for a Strega ridiculous, 
because: “Even the stones know that Elena Ferrante is Anita Raja.”


'Stop the siege of Elena Ferrante,' says publisher amid unmasking row
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/03/elena-ferrante-anita-raja-unmasking-publisher-outing-my-brilliant-friend>
I wouldn’t always be so quick to believe the words of a disreputable gossip 
blog, but the more I read about Raja, the more convinced I become that she is 
indeed Ferrante. Raja is among those long rumored to be Ferrante, as is Raja’s 
husband, the Strega Prize–winning Neapolitan novelist Domenico Starnone. But 
more importantly, she is the translator, for Edizioni E/O (which has published 
all of Ferrante’s novels), of the East German writer Christa Wolf. Raja 
translated Wolf’sMedea (1996), a novel that, like The Days of Abandonment, 
which it must have in some part inspired, sets the myth in modern times. 
Stefania Lucamante, a professor of Italian and comparative literature at the 
Catholic University of America, finds a critical precursor in Wolf’sMedea:

It is not until Christa Wolf’s version of the myth … that we see Medea’s 
torment suddenly appearing in the garb of an “everyday” life experience: being 
left by your beloved husband for another woman. Wolf speaks often of the 
usefulness of myths to represent the present in the process called in German
Vergangenheitsbewältigung, or “the process of getting over the past.”

Another Wolf title translated by Raja is The Quest for Christa T (1968). Like 
MyBrilliant Friend and the rest of the Neapolitan tetralogy, Wolf’s novel is 
the story of a woman who becomes a writer by piecing together the traces of a 
lost friend — one who seems sometimes to disintegrate into and become 
indistinguishable from the narrator herself. WhileMy Brilliant Friend opens 
with Lila’s disappearance without a trace,The Quest for Christa T. begins with 
the following reflection: “Christa T. was timid. Mainly it was the fear that 
one might vanish without a trace, a frequent enough event in those days. She 
compulsively left traces, hasty and careless ones.” The premises may be 
reversed; the influence seems clear.

After Wolf’s death, in 2011, Raja wrote a short essay to commemorate her dear 
friend, inspiration, and mentor:

The assiduous study of the words of an author generates affinity, closeness. 
If the person writing is a great writer, translating becomes an experience that 
profoundly enriches she who translates. Her work of verbalization acted upon my 
poorer and more common work of welcoming into my language. Her work 
strengthened mine, leading me to paths I never would have thought of taking. To 
the point that I had the impression that the texts of Christa were expressing 
me, that I would have liked to write them just as they were written, that 
Christa wrote them thinking of me. But translating Christa Wolf I also—and 
above all—came to understand that the relationship between two languages ends 
up developing though the relationship between two people: and Christa, whom I 
met in 1984, revealed herself from the very first moment to be a model of 
humanity, closeness, concreteness, curiosity, attention, generosity. Always, 
right up to the end, when we heard from each other, she would first of all ask 
questions about children, family, health, work, about politics and vacations, 
about common and quotidian things, at length and with real attention, and then 
almost seamlessly we would be talking about books or problems of translation.

The complex relationships between the narrator of The Quest for Christa T.and 
Christa T., and between Elena and Lila, are echoed in the relationship Raja 
describes between herself and Wolf. The Italian feminist Luisa Muraro — who has 
interviewed and influenced Ferrante — has developed a theory ofaffidamento, a 
practice of “putting faith in” or “entrusting” between women that would be the 
basis for a new symbolic order to counter patriarchy. The relationship Raja 
describes between herself and Wolf — one of apprenticeship and friendship — 
seems like anaffidamento. But it is also a tradimento, for it is the 
relationship between translator and translated, betrayer and betrayed. This is 
the horrifying ambivalence of friendship, and of working with words.

 * Rebecca Falkoff is an assistant professor of Italian Studies at New York 
University. Her research interests include modern and contemporary Italian 
literature, psychoanalysis, biopolitics, and thing theory. She is currently 
working on a cultural history of hoarding.  