
Avon Beach is a typical English seaside resort; windswept children dangling 
crabbing nets off the quay, a giftshop selling thermal gloves alongside sticks 
of rock, a kiosk that rents deckchairs by the hour. But to Victor Derham, 76, 
it is more than that.

Until the end of last year, the beach, near Christchurch, Dorset, was his 
family business, bought by his grandparents George and Annie in the 1930s and 
later developed by his father, Ken. Victor was born there and began his married 
life in the flat above the beach cafe, where his wife, Margaret, gave birth to 
their first child. Four generations of Derham family life is bound up in this 
half-mile of sandy beach.

Since his children made the difficult decision to sell the business – which 
includes the gift shop that Victor designed in the 50s, the cafe, the stretch 
of beach and 125 beach huts – he does not like to visit any more. Although 
happy with the choice of new owner – another family – things are very 
different. Sandwiches and chips have been replaced by slow-roasted pork belly 
and Thai-style mussels; the extension that he built to house a bookshop now 
sells leisurewear.

"I feel very odd walking past now, after nearly 84 years of it being in the 
family. I forget I can't just walk behind the counter to speak to people I used 
to work with. It's a bit like seeing strangers living in your home."

We meet, instead, at the other end of the beach, in the RNLI lifeboat station 
that grew from the unofficial one-man rescue service his father operated when 
he ran the resort. A dinghy in which his dad performed a dramatic rescue in 
1959 hangs from the rafters. A fishing boat had been smashed to pieces in a 
storm and its crew thrown into the sea. Victor's voice cracks as he recalls 
having to push his father out into the 7ft swells. "I thought, what the hell am 
I doing to my dad? I was about to pull him back in again, but I knew he'd kill 
me if I stopped him." His father managed to save two of the three crew, and was 
awarded the RNLI's silver medal for gallantry.

Although sympathetic towards his children's reluctance to carry on the 
business, Victor has the air of a man who has lost his sense of purpose. 
Retirement can be a difficult adjustment at the best of times and he has lost 
more than most. "It was a life," he says of Avon Beach. "I used to breathe a 
sigh of relief at the end of the season, but I did enjoy it all."
 Victor Derham at work in the Avon beach cafe, 1953. 
His is a sprawling fishing family whose ties with the area stretch way back. 
The Avon Beach chapter begins with his grandparents, who lived on a houseboat 
off Mudeford sandspit, which stands across the water. Victor's grandmother 
started an informal cafe from the boat during the late 20s, then the couple 
bought Avon Beach when it came up for sale in 1934. It was commandeered by the 
army six years later during the second world war, and his grandfather was given 
three days to find the family somewhere else to live.

Victor recalls a frantic rush to dismantle the 90-odd wooden huts that came 
with the resort – those left behind were razed to the ground, along with the 
bungalow where Victor was born in 1937. A mysterious fire in the tearooms later 
destroyed the dismantled huts stacked inside.

The family rebuilt the resort after the war – Victor recalls a seemingly 
interminable summer when he did nothing but construct beach huts alongside his 
father. They still stand today, coveted by tourists who queue overnight to 
secure a season's lease. "It wouldn't have been so bad," he laughs, "except 
I knew I'd have to take them all down again when winter came."

He began work alongside his father and aunt, who had by then taken over from 
his grandparents. But the war wasn't the end of the family's troubles; in the 
late 50s the sea began to erode the sandbank and flood the foundations of the 
tearooms. Victor's father despaired at the thought of watching all that the 
family had worked to rebuild being washed away. "He was looking around and 
saying we'd have to get out and find another business," says Victor. The family 
reluctantly agreed to give the freehold of the beach to the council in return 
for sea defences that would save the property. Again, they breathed a sigh of 
relief.

There followed golden years for the business. In photographs of the beach in 
peak season – part of Victor's extensive, dog-eared file of deeds, 
certificates, watercolours and postcards – it is impossible to see the sand for 
daytrippers. He took responsibility for designing and opening the shop that 
stands there now.

The Derhams' elder daughter, Sandra, was born in the flat above the cafe, 
where the family lived until the birth of their second child, Jackie. In 
summer, Avon Beach demanded 18-hour days, seven days a week. The family didn't 
take their own holidays until December or January, when they would bolt to the 
Scottish Highlands and rent a cottage somewhere remote.

When his daughter Jackie and son Ian, agreed to take over Avon Beach, Victor 
was thrilled. Jackie worked there for more than 30 years, but in 2012 she and 
her brother decided they had had enough. Their father says: "Jackie had back 
trouble and they both felt it was all too much pressure. It's manic in the 
summer and people aren't as patient as they used to be. They complain if they 
have to wait even a few minutes and I know it was really getting to them both."

Victor had hoped there would be a fifth generation of the family to take over 
the business, but things haven't panned out that way and it became clear that 
Avon Beach had to go.

If moving house is an emotional experience, imagine leaving a place that has 
been at the centre of your family for four generations. As we talk, Victor's 
face lights up as he recalls learning to ride his trike at Avon Beach as a 
toddler – a brave journey down a steep slope rewarded with a spectacular crash 
– the joyful VE Day celebrations in the cafe and the bliss of shutting the door 
at the end of another long season.

There are so many memories for Victor that it's understandable when he says, 
"I don't think I'll go back."
 