
In 1993 Norman Brown was told he would die behind bars. He was among 17 people 
found guilty of distributing crack cocaine after an FBI sting that involved 
tapping drug dealers’ phones. Due to a previous minor offence with two criminal 
counts, he was sentenced to life without parole. Even the judge said the 
punishment was too harsh but his hands were tied by mandatory minimum 
sentencing laws.

Then, last July, Brown walked free after being granted clemency by Barack 
Obama. And on Wednesday, the US president commuted the sentencesof a further 61 
drug offenders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/30/obama-commutes-prison-sentences-drug-offenders>
. In all he has now commuted 248 sentences,more than the previous six 
presidents combined 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2016/03/30/president-obama-has-now-commuted-sentences-248-individuals>
. “It does not make sense for a non-violent drug offender to be getting 20 
years, 30 years, in some cases life in prison,”Obama said at a lunch 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2016/03/30/remarks-president-commutations-prison-sentences>
 with Brown and some of the other former inmates. “That’s not serving anybody. 
That’s not serving taxpayers. It’s not serving public safety. And it’s damaging 
families.”

Such words strike a chord with Brown, 48, who lost his mother, father, brother 
and grandmother during his incarceration and missed his daughter’s entire 
childhood (he is separated from her mother but on friendly terms). He recently 
told his story to the Guardian at the Washington office of the policy group
Families Against Mandatory Minimums (Famm) <http://famm.org/>. Brown recalled a 
middle-class upbringing in the US capital with a father who worked for the 
Marriott hotel group for 40 years and a mother who was a schoolteacher. “There 
was nothing that we needed,” he said.

When he was 13, Brown was the sole survivor of a horrific car crash, 
undergoing open heart surgery and suffering third-degree burns. He went to 
college and was a fine basketball player but acknowledges he made mistakes with 
drugs. “I think I became involved because of what I was seeing, because of TV 
and me trying to figure out what it took to be a man. I was trying to look up 
and see people ahead of me that was involved in the wrong kind of lifestyle and 
I was trying to mimic it. And before you know it you’re in something and you 
don’t really know the ramifications of it. And by then it’s too late and you 
have to pay.”

His first offence came in 1987 when, still a teenager, he sold a small amount 
of powder cocaine to an undercover police officer. He was arrested again in 
1990 after the FBI recorded him telling a co-defendant whose car had been found 
with a pound of cocaine inside to call the police and say the car had been 
stolen while he was playing basketball. He was cleared of more serious 
conspiracy charges but, with a total of three criminal counts against him, the 
judge pronounced a life sentence. Even his defence team were aghast.

“It was a shock to them because of the fact that even when we talked in our 
meetings, it was like well you may get 17 years, you may get 20 years and I was 
like, 20 years? But then I ended up getting life. I couldn’t really process 
life without parole. Never being in a situation like that before, how can you 
process that? So at the moment in which I was receiving it and looking at my 
family, they had a look of surprise on their face because we really didn’t 
understand it, to be honest.”

He would spend the next 24 years in four different prisons. The first was in 
Lewisburg, Pennsylvania <https://www.bop.gov/locations/institutions/lew>, which 
dates back to 1932. He commented: “I’m talking about my experiences of walking 
into a penitentiary that I would see in a movie likeShawshank Redemption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/aug/22/film>, because it was an old 
prison. It was infested with mice and you put your food in a locker and the 
mice would eat before you could eat it.

“I have to say it’s very animalistic because you have people that are there 
actually turning into animals in environments like that for so long. You’re 
seeing people licking glasses and growing crazy hairstyles and yelling from 
behind as if you were in an insane asylum. And to try to process all this and 
thinking that I may not ever go home, well, how do I survive in here? What am I 
going to have to do? So my experiences from the beginning were kind of frantic.”

When he moved to newer prisons the living conditions and hygiene were better 
but there were other problems.

“I know I’m not in Club Med where I’m going to get some elaborate diet but 
overall the food is worsening as time goes on. Healthcare is worsening. Because 
people are literally losing their minds from these sentences. Counsellors 
cannot handle the overcrowdedness and people’s issues are not being addressed 
and people are literally in lines to get medicated so they can sleep. These are 
just some of the harsh realities of what I’ve experienced for 20-something 
years.”

But Brown was determined to keep going. There was solidarity among other 
inmates from Washington and he did not cross the wardens. He played sport and 
took part in anger management classes and self-help groups and even created 
some. He was a model prisoner and never gave up hope.

“I never bought into the life sentence,” he said. “I just could not believe 
that if there was a god that by me not directly killing anyone that God would 
see me staying in jail for the rest of my life. And I saw so many things 
changing. I was within the 20-year cycle of change that I figured eventually I 
might have a shot so let me keep fighting.”

He filed for clemency in 2010 and made contact with lawyers and Famm in 2012. 
But the process was slow until Obama’s clemency programme in 2014. Then one day 
in July last year Brown was summoned to his case manager’s office to take a 
phone call – “My heart is beating real fast” – and informed that Obama had 
granted his application. “I didn’t have any tears left to cry because I was too 
excited and all I wanted to think about was all the people that I had to thank. 
That believed in me and trusted me enough to back me.”

Brown’s daughter’s birthday falls in July so he called her and asked what she 
wanted as a gift. He said: “‘How about if I tell you that daddy’s coming home?’ 
Before I told her that, I told her to pull over, and she screamed and hollered 
and yelled and it was just a highlight of my life.”

Later that day fellow inmates were running to Brown’s cell and banging on the 
window with joy because the decision had been announced on CNN. But when the 
moment came to depart, the ecstasy of freedom was tinged with something else. 
“I was sad but happy because that was my family,” he said. “Twenty-four years, 
the ups and the downs. We are all we have that you can touch.

“So to leave them was leaving a part of me and not to know if I would ever see 
any of them again regardless of what they’d done. I wasn’t there to judge them, 
it was just that we were there to support each other when we had no one else. 
So the joy of leaving was great but the heartache of me leaving them was 
bittersweet.”

His daughter, Kyler, 24, a graduate who works for returning military veterans, 
and sister Chrishena Brown Dorsey, 52, were waiting for him outside the prison. 
“So we’re hugging in the parking lot but the bus was transferring some inmates. 
I said, ‘Baby we can hug somewhere else? We gotta go!’ We got in the car and we 
went to a restaurant and we finished hugging. I didn’t want to hug on the 
premises too long.”

Brown is living in a house with his sister, has part-time work at a friend’s 
law practice and volunteers helping vulnerable young people. One day he hopes 
to find a job counselling former inmates as they undergo a re-entry transition 
like his own.

Famm argues that one of the unintended consequences of mandatory minimum 
sentences is an 800% increase in the federal prison population over the past 30 
years, making Americathe incarceration capital of the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/jan/14/the-injustice-system-us-prisons-tyra-patterson-michelle-lai-dayton-ohio-montgomery-county>
. The aggressive “war on drugs” disproportionately punished African American 
men.

There were hopes that Obama would have reduced thousands of sentences of drug 
offenders by now but progress has been slow. Nevertheless Brown, himself 
African American, praised the president’s efforts toreform the criminal justice 
system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/14/obama-prison-reform-speech-naacp-philadelphia>
 and give offenders a second chance. “That’s my man. We’re very grateful to 
have a president with that spirit of trying to correct some of the wrongs in 
these laws. He’s only one man and you can’t fix everything in one night but he 
is putting forward the effort.”

Brown knows that his case is not an outlier but that many of the inmates he 
saw every day would not be behind bars in a more merciful time. He reflected: 
“There’s some that I wouldn’t want to live next to, just to be honest, but 
there are a whole lot of them that are there who made mistakes when they were 
young, understand the mistakes that they’ve made and have actually changed 
their life.

“I was studying fruit and vegetables during my incarceration because I was a 
vegetarian there for the last 19 years and I realised that a fruit or a 
vegetable can be ripe for picking and the next step after being ripe is rotten 
and, when you look at people there are, a lot of us are ripe for picking that 
could add a whole lot to society if released in time. And there are those of us 
that are sitting in there, that if we’re not picked in time, we’ll go rotten. 
So many of us sitting in there under these draconian laws need to be picked.”
 