
They called him Mr Lobban. That was his name, as far as anyone knew. An 
elderly gentleman of extreme frailty, who died one late October afternoon in 
2012, as the skies darkened and the clocks were about to turn.

The Edinburgh nursing home in which he had lived out his last few years did 
what they always do when one of their patients is gone. They withdrew from his 
room and locked the door. Then they called the GP to sign the death certificate 
and start Mr Lobban on his final journey to the grave.

There was nothing suspicious, nothing untoward. Just a blank on his file in 
the section marked “next of kin”.

Edinburgh is a small city, a place of roughly half a million people that can 
feel like a village – scratch beneath the surface and everyone and everything 
seems connected. Yet there are people every day who die alone or with no 
apparent family, dead in their bed in a hospital ward or lying face down on 
their living room floor.

None of us imagines dying without any friends or family nearby. But more and 
more people live in single-person households. We are living longer, and many of 
us, inevitably, will outlast every one of those we hold dear.

Public health funerals – those organised and paid for by local authorities – 
have been on the rise for some years: in November 2015 research by the BBC 
identifieda growth of 11% across the UK since 2009-10 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-34943805>. Scotland saw one of the biggest 
increases: up 28% in just four years.

Having a public health, or indigent, funeral does not necessarily mean there 
are no next of kin; it could be that those relatives who have been identified 
are remote, geographically or otherwise. Or perhaps there simply isn’t enough 
money to pay for the service. Yet, of the 200 or so public health funerals 
conducted in Edinburgh each year, there will be at least two or three a month 
where no next of kin have been traced.

The GP noticed that Lobban seemed to have two dates of birth. And several 
names. Enter Mr St John Shurley and Mr Krebs

When the GP arrived at the nursing home where Mr Lobban had died, she was 
confident about the cause: extreme frailty, and peripheral vascular disease. Mr 
Lobban had been old. That was that. But there was one thing that made her pause 
before signing off the necessary paperwork – Mr Lobban appeared to have two 
dates of birth. And several names. Enter Mr St John Shurley. Also, Mr Krebs.

In Scotland, cases of unexplained or unexpected death are the responsibility 
of the Procurator Fiscal’s office – the Crown. As are establishing identity and 
cause. In practice, it is the police who step in when an investigation is 
required.

PC Barry Gordon works in Stirling now, but he is Edinburgh born and bred. He 
is a methodical man. For several years until 2013 he worked in the Edinburgh 
inquiry team, a group of officers dedicated to dealing with all non-suspicious 
and unexplained deaths in the city. It’s a very particular kind of work. As 
Gordon puts it, “There are some strange deaths where, because of the causes of 
death or where the person is similar to your age, it’s only natural to impose 
your own feelings on what that might be like.” As his former colleague, 
detective constable Steven Donaldson says, “It takes time to get used to death.”

It was PC Gordon who took the call about Mr Lobban. It was he and Donaldson – 
a reflective, insightful man – who tried to establish who Mr St John Shurley 
was. And Mr Krebs. And how the three were linked.

***

PC Gordon and DC Donaldson dealt with an average of two to three cases of 
unexpected death a day while on the inquiry team – many involved people who had 
been discovered alone. Some cases were more memorable than others, because of 
age or circumstances, or how the family reacted once they were traced. There 
was the person who turned out to be a stock wizard with millions in the bank 
and a long-lost sister in California who had not seen him for 30 years (she 
came over for the funeral and went home with the lot). There was the individual 
who died alone in squalor, with £52,000 in cash in a holdall in his living 
room. The man who couldn’t be identified by the photograph on his passport, 
because he died in summer and the window he was lying in front of faced south – 
the sun had disfigured his face. His flat was a tip, everything all over the 
floor, all the drawers empty except one in the bedroom, in which Donaldson 
found an immaculate set of tools. “Spanners and screwdrivers never been out of 
the box. Really, really neatly positioned. Really bizarre,” he says.

There was the man who died alone in squalor, with £52,000 in cash in a holdall 
in his living room

Early identification of the deceased is key – it is required for the death 
certificate and to satisfy the procurator fiscal. “You can’t register the death 
until you know who the person is,” Donaldson says. “But they may [also] have 
family out there, and you want to be able to find and tell them.”

Establishing identity is not usually a difficult matter these days – there are 
contacts on mobile phones, utility bills, post piled up behind the door. 
Sometimes, it simply involves holding a bus pass next to the face of the 
deceased. Failing that, for the police, it is about checking names and dates of 
birth against various records or, in the worst-case scenario, resorting to 
fingerprints or DNA.

But when it came to Mr Lobban, none of these methods proved useful. There was 
no official paperwork in the nursing home file that could establish beyond 
reasonable doubt who he was. There was no birth certificate or passport, no 
driving licence or former tenancy agreement. He did not appear to be known to 
the police, or to any religious organisation in the city. The nursing home said 
that he’d always had cash, but there was no indication of a bank account. 
Gordon reports that Mr Lobban had talked to staff at the nursing home about 
having a lock-up near the Bridges in the city, but there was no evidence of 
that either. Nor were there any marriage or birth certificates that suggested a 
link between any of Mr Lobban’s names, nor his two dates of birth.

What Gordon and Donaldson did have were stories from the nursing home staff: 
that Mr Lobban had once lived in Italy. That he had coxed in the Oxford v 
Cambridge boat race. That his father had been a diplomat in London. “They 
seemed fantastical,” Gordon says. “But then, some people have fantastical 
lives.”

They did manage to find a previous address. As the two police officers set off 
in pursuit of this lead, Mr Lobban was kept safe in a steel-lined fridge.

***

Edinburgh City Mortuary is an unassuming place. A 1970s building huddled at 
the tail end of Cowgate, an ancient chasm of a street, it is here that 90% of 
the individuals who die alone in the city are brought for formal identification 
and to establish the circumstances of death.

Vicky Squires has worked at the mortuary for more than 13 years, first as a 
technician, latterly as the manager. “Though I prefer the term team leader,” 
she says. A young woman in her 30s, wearing a discreet work shirt, the black 
lace tied around her neck the only outward sign that she has found her 
vocation. “I love this job. Every day is different. Even at school, I knew 
there was no danger I’d end up sitting behind a desk.”

She says with some pride that when she started, some of her colleagues 
suggested she wouldn’t last two weeks, because she was female. “They’ve all 
gone now and I’m still here.”

Six autopsies a day, more after Christmas and New Year, and at any one time 
the mortuary fridges will host at least two or three individuals destined for 
an indigent farewell. “Some of them are here for two to three months, maybe 
more,” Squires says. “It’s not at all uncommon – we had a case of a gentleman 
who came here in December 2014 and didn’t leave us until December 2015. A year 
to the day.”

'I'll always put a bobble back in their hair if they had one, or rollers for 
old people,' says the mortuary manager

All the names of the deceased are registered in the mortuary ledger – a large, 
leather-bound book, with thick leaves made of special paper that has to last 
for at least 40 years. Their belongings stay with them: the clothes they came 
in with, any jewellery the police were not able to remove and secure. They are 
weighed and tagged and placed on a shelf in the fridge that will become their 
home until their postmortem has taken place. Then they will wait some more, 
until the procurator fiscal has released the case and a funeral director has 
been instructed to take them forward to the next stage.

“I take pride in my work,” Squires says, “regardless of whether the person was 
a drug user or died of natural causes. I always do my best stitching, make them 
clean. I’ll always put a bobble back in their hair if they came in with one, or 
rollers for old people.”

Most cases are routine and she doesn’t ask about their stories, but 
occasionally she does want to know. Her personal thing, apart from a dislike of 
maggots, is a soft spot for the elderly. “I’ve been told I don’t have a heart, 
but when elderly people come in I call them ‘my poor wee scone’. In my eyes, 
they shouldn’t get a full postmortem [where everything is opened, including the 
brain]. They’ve had their life, they’re elderly. Don’t cut them up.”

***

Mr Lobban’s house before he moved to the nursing home in 2008 was in the 
Inverleith area of the city, a leafy suburb near the Botanic Gardens. Except it 
turned out not to have been Mr Lobban’s house at all. He lived there for 
several years, but the property had been owned by the woman he lived with. She 
was long deceased, and was called Lobban, too. It transpired that she was his 
former partner, but they had never married, so there was no record of their 
relationship for the police to find. Apart from the fact that Mr Lobban had 
decided to take her name.

But Gordon and Donaldson knew then that they were on to something. With a bit 
more digging into the property’s records, the officers established that the 
house had been sold after Mr Lobban moved out. The beneficiary of the sale was 
his former partner’s sister. And she was still alive.

The tale they heard from the sister was familiar – one of family breakdown and 
estrangement after death. When his partner died, Mr Lobban’s handling of her 
affairs had led to some acrimony. He hadn’t notified her relatives of the death 
when it first occurred, and he had stayed living in the house when really it 
belonged to them.

“In Scotland, anyone can act on somebody’s behalf [as next of kin] if they 
want to approach the Crown Office to be established as such,” Gordon explains.

Lobban’s sister had no desire to take on that role – she lived in England – 
and besides, she was elderly herself. Still, for Gordon and Donaldson there was 
one piece of information she provided that was useful: the name of a school in 
England where Mr Lobban had taught years before.

Luckily for the officers, the school still existed. Even more unexpectedly, so 
did its old employment records. And they produced gold: a file for a man who 
had worked at the school in the 1960s with a name and a date of birth that 
matched one of those belonging to Mr Lobban. Here, at last, was a suggestion of 
his life beyond the Edinburgh nursing home where he had ended his days.

For Gordon and Donaldson, searching for Mr Lobban had been frustrating. With 
only a couple of names and ambiguous dates of birth to go on, it was a little 
like fishing in a huge ocean with a tiny rod. But now their persistence paid 
off. The officers approachedthe National Archives 
<http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/> at Kew in London with all the information 
they had secured. Three names, two dates of birth, two former addresses. One of 
them came good: not paperwork for a Mr Lobban, but a death certificate for a 
woman named Sarah Cornwich, who had died in the 1970s in a hospice in Sussex.

“I remember it,” Donaldson says, “because it wasn’t too long after I was born.”

The death certificate had been signed off by her son, a man of the right age 
and profile to be Mr Lobban. The signature given was of a Mr St. John Shurley. 
The woman’s former name was Krebs.

***

At last the police could connect the dead man in the nursing home with a 
teenager who escaped Nazi Europe for a new life

We all die eventually. Some of us will do it surrounded by friends and family. 
Some without anyone by our side. But, however it happens, wherever it takes 
place, what we can know is that, in the UK, somebody, somewhere will make an 
effort to see that we are not forgotten. They will confirm our identity. They 
will make sure that the reasons for our passing are established beyond 
reasonable doubt. They will let our relatives know, wherever they may be and 
whatever the circumstances of our relationships at the time. They will see to 
it that, at the least, a modest but proper funeral can take place. And, perhaps 
most significantly, in making this effort they will ensure that at least some 
of the stories of our life, even in the briefest of outlines, survive.

If you search online now for Mr Lobban, formerly known as Krebs, you will find 
him as a boy called Robin Alfred, born on 19 July 1927 in Merano, Italy. He 
arrived in the UK from Austria some time between 1939 and 1942. His mother, 
Sarah, accompanied him at the time or arrived later, but no record was ever 
found of his father, Martin, despite the efforts of the Edinburgh inquiry team. 
That is a story yet to be told.

Robin Krebs was 21 when he was naturalised as a British citizen in 1948, a 
student then living in Lewes, Sussex. Even at that young age, he had an alias: 
Robin Iain Alfred St John Shurley. Gordon and Donaldson never did find out why 
but, for them, what mattered was that at last they could connect the elderly 
man dead in an Edinburgh nursing home with a teenager who escaped Nazi Europe 
and came to the UK to make a life.

Like so many other indigents, Mr Lobban’s funeral took place at Mortonhall 
Crematorium in Edinburgh. It was attended by a few staff from the nursing home 
in which he had passed away. Gordon and Donaldson did not go. “I’ve never been 
to one [of those funerals],” Donaldson says. “I’ve thought about it, but we’re 
dealing with death constantly. You have to keep a bit of a distance or it’ll 
start to play on your mind.”

An indigent funeral service in Edinburgh is a short and simple thing: no 
flowers, no hymns or speeches, just a basic coffin and a notice in the local 
press. The service will be presided over by a minister or celebrant from the 
area in which the deceased lived. And while there may be a few members of the 
family who come along, it could just as easily be a neighbour or an old school 
friend. Very occasionally there will be no attendees at all.

I'd been at one funeral where the only people were the funeral director, the 
deceased and me… this isn't right

The Rev Alex McAspurren grew up an atheist in the new town of Cumbernauld. “My 
family were to the left end of socialism,” he says. After school, he worked as 
a civil engineer technician and at the passport office, at various temp jobs 
before getting involved in a homeless charity. Then he became a priest.

It was during his probationary training in Edinburgh that McAspurren first 
came across the idea of inviting members of a congregation to attend the 
funeral of someone they did not know. “I’d been at one [indigent funeral] where 
the only people attending at the crematorium were the funeral director, the 
deceased and myself,” he says. “You just know this isn’t right. It’s an 
intuitive thing. Nobody’s born to be alone.”

To the rest of us, having no apparent next of kin to attend a funeral seems 
sad – an indictment of society, perhaps, of how we all lead more isolated lives 
now. But agreeing to take on the burden of a funeral for someone from whom you 
are estranged can be a difficult moral decision.

Ivan Middleton used to be a social worker, but now he is a humanist celebrant. 
“Some newspapers like to make out that people just don’t want to pay [for an 
indigent funeral],” he says. “But I don’t see it like that. There are a hundred 
and one reasons that lead to this happening.”

It can be about money, especially with funerals costing upwards of 
£3,000-4,000 nowadays, but Middleton suggests there is also the fear of 
neighbours turning up out of the blue, of friends the relative doesn’t know 
asking questions about the family that they would prefer to keep private. “It 
can be quite uncomfortable to be the relative everyone defers to,” Middleton 
says. Especially if the deceased is someone who has actively made the decision 
to lead a solitary kind of life.

Yet as McAspurren says about the members of his congregation who take on the 
job of mourning a stranger, “It’s about witnessing to their faith that there is 
hope in this life.”

***

Gordon and Donaldson never did find out why Mr Lobban had ended up in 
Edinburgh. “All that time,” Donaldson reflects, “and what’s he done, who were 
his pals, where did he go? You’ve got to be curious.”

But Mr Lobban’s story didn’t end once he had been interred. Just as the 
inquiry team report was being completed, the local authority delivered an 
inventory made in 2008 for a property in Inverleith. Environmental health 
officers had visited the house that year, following a dispute between the 
resident and the owner. The resident was required to leave, but he was known as 
a hoarder, and environmental health had called in the local police to help.

'It's funny how life works out,' says the police officer. 'So many people die 
and nobody has really known them'

“Oh, I just couldn’t believe it,” says the PC who attended. “Belongings, 
newspapers, furniture… just everything that had been kept.” He recalls an 
elderly gentleman at the door and his colleague requiring a ladder to get 
inside, such was the amount of stuff blocking the entrance. The man at the door 
was known as Mr Krebs. The constable’s name was Steven Donaldson.

“It’s funny how life works out,” Donaldson says now, on realising he had met 
the man before. “How these things come around. So many people die and nobody 
has really known them.”

But when it came to Mr Lobban, formerly known as Krebs, “He was there. He 
existed. He had a life.”

Some names have been changed. Mary Paulson-Ellis 
<http://www.marypaulsonellis.co.uk> is the author of The Other Mrs Walker 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-other-mrs-walker.html> (Mantle, £12.99). 
She appears at theBloody Scotland Festival <https://www.bloodyscotland.com> on 
10 September.
 