
A Republican congressman is under fire for shouting "You lie" during Barack 
Obama's speech to Congress on healthcare reform.

In an extraordinary breach of political protocol, Joe Wilson, a Republican 
representative for South Carolina, shouted at Obama as the president told the 
joint sitting that his plan for a universal healthcare system would not cover 
illegal immigrants.

Obama looked in the direction of the shout, said "It's not true" and went on 
with his speech. But the outburst stunned both Democrats and Republicans and 
drew condemnation from the public.Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> froze, with several looking 
in Wilson's direction.

Wilson later tried to call Obama to apologise in person but ended up speaking 
to the White House chief of staff, Rahm Emanuel.

The congressman "expressed his apologies", Wilson's office said.

By that time, Wilson's website had crashed and he had been fiercely criticised 
on Twitter for breaching protocol and good manners.

"This evening I let my emotions get the best of me," Wilson said. "While I 
disagree with the president's statement, my comments were inappropriate and 
regrettable. I extend sincere apologies to the president for this lack of 
civility."

Democrats said his outburst showed a lack of respect for the office of the 
presidency and was reminiscent of Republican activists' heckling at recent 
public forums to discuss the president's healthcare reforms.

John McCain, Obama's Republican rival for the presidency, said Wilson's 
behaviour was "totally disrespectful". The Arizona senator told CNN: "There is 
no place for it in that setting, or any other, and he should apologise for it 
immediately."

The House majority leader, Steny Hoyer, said Wilson's outburst was "a shameful 
act" and he would work with Republicans in deciding whether to punish him.

"I have never in my 29 years heard an outburst of that nature with reference 
to a president of the United States speaking as a guest of the House and 
Senate."
 