
Distance 3 miles (4.8km) 
Classification Gentle
Duration 1 hour 30 minutes
Begins Burrell Collection car park
OS grid reference NS555622 

Walk in a nutshell
Pollok country park has over 360 acres of woodland and open countryside within 
its boundaries as well as a superb network of paths and trails. This particular 
walk follows easy paths through beautiful woodland and parkland and visits 
Pollok country park's two finest visitor attractions: the sumptuous Pollok 
House and the Burrell Collection.

Why it's so special 
Glasgow (which translates from Gaelic as "the green place") has more than 90 
parks, and Pollok – which sits just a few miles from the city centre – is 
perhaps the finest. Voted Europe's best park in 2008, it provides a much-needed 
breathing space away from the industrial backdrop of Scotland's biggest city.

Keep your eyes peeled for
Pollok House. Handed to the National Trust for Scotland in 1998, it was here 
in 1931 that Sir John Stirling Maxwell (the Maxwell family have had links to 
Pollok House for over 700 years) arranged a meeting that eventually led to the 
creation of the Trust.

Recover afterwards
The district of Shawlands is only minutes from Pollok country park and is home 
to some great pubs and restaurants. Perfectly situated within Shawlands is the
Granary <> , a traditional pub serving hearty food and a choice of 
award-winning ales.

If it's tipping down
Seek refuge in Pollok House and/or the neighbouring Burrell Collection. The 
halls of Pollok House display a large collection of Spanish paintings, 
including works by El Greco and Goya. Meanwhile, the Burrell Collection – 
gifted to the city by shipping magnate Sir William Burrell in 1944 – contains 
more than 8,000 works of art collected during his lifetime.

How to get there
There are regular buses from Glasgow to Pollokshaws Road and regular trains 
from Glasgow Central to Pollokshaws West railway station, which lies adjacent 
to Pollok Park.



 <>Step by step

1 From the car park take any path through the strips of trees and turn right 
with the Burrell Collection ahead of you. Fork left on a surfaced path, 
initially parallel to the exit road but then curving left, climbing gently by 
a large open area to the left. At a triangle of paths keep right then continue 
ahead, and at the next junction turn left (there are benches here). Soon you 
will reach a pond on your right.

2 Continue till you reach a main path and turn left along it. Cross an open 
area with a carved wooden seat, pass through more woodland and then pass 
another open area. The path curves left and runs downhill. Pass a barrier and 
cross the road ahead to Pollok House.

3 On leaving Pollok House, turn left through the courtyard, under an arch and 
left again by the White Cart Water. For the main walk, continue by an old 
bridge and walk on the path beside the river, passing a weir and then 
a courtyard. Continue past a wildlife garden (currently closed) and at a fork 
go right, still by the tranquil river. You will pass the attractive grounds of 
Pollok cricket club before arriving at the main Pollok Park road.

4 Cross the road, then turn left on the path, where a sign will direct you to 
a winding path and the Burrell Collection car park. Alternatively, once you 
reach the main road, it's a short walk to the right to Pollokshaws West station.
 