
Distance 20 miles
 Classification Moderate
 Start/finish The Boathouse, Wylam, NE41
Duration 3 hours
Route NCN route 72, 141, 14
 Map Hadrian's Cycleway <http://bit.ly/Ind24X>, OS Explorer 316 

Route notes

Part of the Hadrian's Cycleway, this is a pleasant ride along the banks of the 
Tyne. The route gives a flavour of the area's engineering and brewing heritage. 
Starting from Wylam, birthplace of George Stephenson and home to the 
well-stocked Boathouse Inn, it follows the Wylam Waggonway (sic) past 
Stephenson's cottage to Newburn, where the Big Lamp Brewery and Keelman pub are 
found in a 19th-century pumping house. The route then loops through Newcastle 
city centre, before returning to Wylam via the south bank of the river.

Terrain and gradients

Flat with good surfaces throughout. Almost all of the route is traffic-free. 
Part of it merges with Hadrian's Way once you get into the city, so watch out 
for walkers.

How to get there/away

The route is circular but there are hourly trains between Newcastle, Dunstan, 
Blaydon and Wylam. Bikes can be taken on board free of charge.

What to see

In Newburn, you will find the Big Lamp brewery (keelmanslodge.co.uk), the 
oldest microbrewery in the north-east. It relocated from the part of Newcastle 
after which it is named to the derelict former Whittle Dene Water Company 
pumping house in 1996. The former engine room now houses the brewery, while the 
boilerhouse is home to the Keelman pub, so called after the keels or 
flat-bottomed boats that were used to transport coal from the nearby Isabella 
colliery.

The pit has now been transformed into the Tyne Riverside country park, whose 
81 hectares (200 acres) is home to all sorts of wildlife, including otter, grey 
seal, roe deer and all varieties of birds. Stop for a picnic or explore its 
miles of footpaths and bridleways.

Watering holes

With a brewery onsite, the Keelman has an excellent selection of ales, and 
offers a tasting tray so you can try as many as you like. It also serves 
generous pub grub in its light, airy restaurant. Once you've completed your 
circuit, head to the Boathouse Inn (Station Road, Wylam NE41 8HR). Duck under 
the low-beamed ceilings and you'll discover a bar decorated with tankards and 
station signs from a bygone era. It has 15 regularly changing hand-pulls, with 
three dedicated to cider and inexpensive, no-nonsense food. There are also beer 
festivals every bank holiday.
 