
It's not really a gherkin. It's a pine cone, or perhaps a poplar. Anyway, 
Norman Foster and Partners' Swiss Re building is, as well as defiantly modern, 
resonantly classical. All that nonsense with Prince Charles and neo-Georgian 
conservatism, which has been getting away with opposing the classical to the 
modern, distracts from the formal beauty of the skyscraper that, rightly, won 
the RIBAStirling prize <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/stirling-prize>
 on Saturday night.

I don't know what the Prince thinks of 30 St Mary Axe, as it prefers to be 
known. Perhaps he sees in it the ominous shape of a vertical zeppelin, menacing 
St Paul's. It has everything that used to be scorned by the British public: 
radical shape, industrial materials, imposing itself on a City skyline that 
some argue should be reserved for Wren and Hawksmoor. Laughed at when it was 
announced, instantly popular when (quickly) built, this is the first great 
skyscraper to be built in London.

It instantly exposes the banal ugliness of the NatWest tower or Canary Wharf. 
Because it has no British rivals, you have to go to New York to see how 
original Foster's tower is. It is comparable with the Chrysler building, the 
glorious art deco skyscraper built in Manhattan in the 1920s. But it has one 
over the Chrysler. Stripped of its glittering chrome crown, the New York City 
landmark would be straight-lined, regular, even ordinary. The gherkin, cone or 
conifer that expands as it rises, before narrowing again to a dome, does not 
have a single orthodox aspect. Its entire body curves at every point. It 
glitters and reflects all over, creating optical patterns that change with 
distance, and with the times of day. It is a masterpiece that opens new 
possibilities for world architecture. And it's in London, a city whose 
architectural history can best be described as sad. But then, architectural 
masterpieces are appearing all over the world nowadays.

The revolution began in Bilbao, when Frank Gehry's glistening, 
titanium-skinned mountain range of a Guggenheim Museum not only competed 
successfully with Frank Lloyd Wright's original Guggenheim in New York City but 
redefined what architects are capable of doing. The combination of digital 
design and new building materials enables architects to create shapes that were 
never possible before. Gehry's multifaceted, warped spaces finally achieve what 
architects dreamt of doing a century ago - translating cubist painting into 
real space. Daniel Libeskind does the same thing for expressionism: in early 
20th-century German paintings by Ludwig Kirchner rapidly moving, jagged shards 
splinter the world in a way that communicates anxiety. Libeskind's Jewish 
Museum in Berlin is the architectural equivalent.

Cubism, expressionism, futurism, surrealism - in trying to describe the 
proliferating originalities of contemporary architecture, you find yourself 
reaching for analogies with the great art movements of the last century. And 
that is why I am interested.

Delightful from a distance, 30 St Mary Axe is even richer as you approach past 
an ancient London church and see that wonderful inflation shimmying out of the 
earth. The triangular panels create a complex of colour and shade. At the 
bottom of the skyscraper, stone benches carved with classical epitaphs remind 
us that this, as much as the World Trade Centre site for which Foster failed to 
get the commission, is a place of memorial and pain, devastated by an IRA bomb. 
Cypresses, whose elongated curves are echoed here, were planted around tombs in 
the classical world.

Everyone talks about the "gherkin" as if it were weird and unprecedented, but 
it is not. Where other recent architecture has a lot in common with the 
extravagance of the baroque, Foster and his team have created a form that is 
manifestly in the classical tradition. The Swiss Re building is not irregular - 
it is regular; its expansiveness culminates in a dome that rhymes with that of 
St Paul's. Far from being a stranger on the London skyline, this is a shape 
that Wren, or Michelangelo, or any of the architects of the European great 
tradition would have recognised, admired and envied.

The building is surrounded, on a weekday lunchtime, with admirers. Architecture
 <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> fans from all over the 
world are here, taking photographs, begging the security guards to let them in 
to the lobby. I'm here for a different reason. Art, rather than architecture, 
concerns me. And this is the most satisfying new work of art I've seen in years.

It is modern and ancient; it is site-specific; it sculpts the sky. It is a 
monument and a mirror. It makes you see London in a new way. It does things 
that artists - people who are officially called that - have given up even 
trying to do.

The new architecture that announced itself to the world with Gehry's 
Guggenheim does not bear simply a superficial resemblance to the art of 
Picasso, or Kirchner, or Michelangelo. It really is doing things we once 
expected sculpture to do. It has obliterated the difference between 
architecture and art. More than that, it is filling the space contemporary art 
has abandoned. Walk from Foster's Bishopsgate masterpiece and over the formerly 
wobbly footbridge to Tate Modern, and you can contrast architecture's current 
creativity with contemporary art's refusal of the same.

Art has never, in history, been more talked about, venerated, and valued than 
it is now. The opening of Bruce Nauman's installation in the museum's Turbine 
Hall is a national event. But Nauman has left the hall physically almost empty, 
except for the speakers that relay his sound piece, a collection of statements 
sampled from his previous works.

Nauman, it says on a white placard against the grey wall, is one of the most 
revered artists in the world. And so he is, which makes the contrast between 
his art and that ofNorman Foster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/norman-foster> all the more telling.

The respect that accrues to Nauman comes from his restraint, his refusal to 
add to the world. He is a pithy commentator, a Beckettian joker. But he is not 
someone who creates form. That old job of the artist is rejected by the art 
world that lauds Nauman. Don't get me wrong, and think I mean to equate Bruce 
Nauman with "modern art". Modernism never rejected imagination, poetry, or 
images in the way that this chewing wail of a work in the Turbine Hall does. 
It's not just that art now does not add new forms to the world, it is 
specifically praised and valued for not doing so. Which means that the only 
real sculpture of our time is being made by architects.

Architecture is art's last, best hope. Architects are escaping all the cliches 
by which art is entangled. In art, there is a perpetual, facile argument 
between ancients and moderns, conservatives and champions of the new. You have 
to either like Bruce Nauman or Raphael. There isn't really a cultural space 
that can contain the two: past and present are no longer on speaking terms. In 
the arcane discourse that museums of modern art have lost themselves in, both 
Raphael and Picasso are considered old hat. Show me someone who can see Picasso 
as a lame old conservative and I'll show you mental collapse. But that is the 
insidious message you are fed by the contemporary Kunsthalle.

This is the self-delusion of a bronze age. A hundred years ago, western art 
experienced its second renaissance. The two greatest periods in the history of 
art are 1430-1540 and 1860-1920. The creativity of modernism at the beginning 
of the 20th century will always stretch minds: cubist paintings will never be 
easy.

Art now deflects comparison with Picasso, Matisse, Kandinsky, Malevich. What 
can you do? Critics and curators shy away from the history of modern art into a 
narcissistic relativism. According to this easy argument, Bruce Nauman 
challenges us, now, in a comparable way to how Picasso challenged people in 
1907 when he painted Les Demoiselles d'Avignon.

It's nonsense. Picasso, for one thing, still looks hideous to many visitors to 
Tate Modern - that is, he's still new. Cubism has not been assimilated. And 
with Nauman, there's almost nothing to assimilate. It's all content - all 
ideas, expressed in words. Once you get the depressing message, you can move on.

Modernist art - all great art - threatens and delights formally, visually, 
spatially. This formal creativity is what artists have run away from into art 
whose melodramatic "content" will in future mean nothing to anyone. It will 
look as boringly prosaic as moralising Victorian paintings do to us. For art to 
triumph as art it must have the flame of formal abandon that is in Stravinsky's 
Rite of Spring, or Matisse's Dance - or Norman Foster's erotic gherkin.

Why is architecture so much less hyped than art? The fact is that artists are 
more glamorous than architects. Building is a business, and even younger 
architects find it hard to accept that Foster, a business genius, is also an 
aesthetic one. Carping about him is rife in professional journals. It's easier 
to see how Daniel Libeskind is an artist. But even he has a global studio.

Art in 2004 revels in the lo-fi, the amateurish, the readymade. You can be an 
"artist", in the almost religious way Tracey Emin talks of being an "artist", 
with nothing but a pencil and paper or, yes, some dirty bedding; or, as in 
Nauman's case, a sound system. It gives us all hope. Architects are far more 
arrogant, capitalist types. Architects don't appeal to the romantic myth of the 
artist.

There was an interesting episode when Norman Foster and his team were 
designing the footbridge connecting St Paul's cathedral and Tate Modern. It was 
reported that Foster wanted a sculpture by Anthony Caro to stand at the Tate 
side of the bridge. Tate director Nicholas Serota said no. Caro is one of the 
last modernists, his sculpture Early One Morning a three-dimensional abstract 
painting. He wouldn't sit well with Tate Modern, that's true. It seems the 
modernist tradition - which is also the Renaissance tradition - of optical form 
is not dead. It has moved across the river, and into the sky.
 