
Distance 6 miles (9.6km) 
Classification Moderate 
Duration 3 hours 
Begins Ickworth main car park 
OS grid reference TL810610

Walk in a nutshell
A gorgeous mixture of the muddy and the manicured. Tramp along the woodland 
lanes, gaze across Fairy Lake in search of waterfowl, nose around the beautiful 
walled garden. The circuit is fairly long, but you could easily cut it short if 
necessary.

Why it's special
For a walker with a taste for wine this is a rare opportunity to combine the 
two. There cannot be many English vineyards prettier than Ickworth's, with its 
18th-century perimeter walls and handsome rose and lavender bushes. Tours and 
tastings must be booked in advance (ickworthvineyard.co.uk; 01284 723399). The 
wine is on sale in the National Trust shop on site.

Keep your eyes peeled for
The house's Rotunda is a monument to – and a warning against – thinking big. 
It was the vision of the 4th Earl of Bristol, took 47 years to build, and was 
still far from finished when he died.

Recover afterwards
At the trust's pleasant, spacious West Wing restaurant, which serves a full 
lunch menu every day and delicious cakes for tea. Cooks often use produce from 
Ickworth's own gardens. There are some excellent pubs in Bury St Edmunds about 
3 miles away. TheFox Inn <http://www.thefoxinnbury.co.uk> offers gastropub 
food, while theBeerhouse <http://www.burybeerhouse.co.uk> has an outstanding 
range of beers, including some brewed on the premises.

If it's tipping down
For children of all ages, try CurveMotion <http://www.curvemotion.com> 
(curvemotion.com) just north of Bury. This giant indoor venue has a great range 
of "mega slides", a roller-skating rink and several soft-play areas. For 
something more genteel, local artists in Bury holdopen studio sessions 
<http://www.suffolkopenstudios.co.uk/artists/st-edmundsbury>. Or there's always 
the spectacularSt Edmundsbury Cathedral <http://www.stedscathedral.co.uk>.

How to get there
A train to Bury St Edmunds is the best option. You can then catch the 344/5 
bus towards Haverhill.



 <>Step by step

1 From the car park head towards the front of the play area and turn left. 
Follow the path and turn right at the gate marked Albana walk. Follow this path 
and turn right at the first T-junction.

2 Follow the path past an old shelter on your right and take the right fork by 
the sign for the Trim Trail. Follow this path downhill. At the bottom of the 
hill bear right at the orange arrow.

3 This path will bring you to the edge of a field. Follow the field downhill 
to a wooden bridge over a stream, then turn right and follow the path over 
a stile (keep dogs on a lead as there may be sheep in this field). 
After crossing a second stile, turn right on to the track until you 
reach a left turn.

4 At the left turn go into a field to the right of the hedge and up the grassy 
slope (again a possible area for sheep). Follow the red route waymarked signs 
to the main Ickworth entrance gate.

5 Cross to the gate marked Adkin's Wood, cross the stile and follow the path 
until it forks then keep right. A little further on at the T-junction, bear 
right again and then take the next right by the sign for Fontainbleau Grove. 
Follow the path round a sharp corner to the left and past a pond until you 
reach a sign for Lady Hervey'sWood.

6 Go straight on by the sign for Lady Hervey's Wood. Follow the path until, 
shortly after, it crosses a wooden bridge. Continue on until reaching apost 
with red waymarker, then turn right. Follow the path past a row of oak trees 
and keep straight on by another post with a red marker.

7 After going up a slight incline, at a red post turn left and follow the path 
to a T-junction. At this point turn left and then left again to view the Fairy 
Lake. Continue part way over the dam, and take the next turn to the right down 
some steps. Follow the river Linnet valley along the blue waymarkers.

8 Walking along this path there are good views of the rotunda and church to 
your right. At the next intersection take the left fork, keeping beside the 
river. You've now reached another lake known as the Canal Lake.

9 Turn right to the entrance to the walled garden (a black metal gate at the 
bottom of the hill). After looking at the garden continue diagonally to the top 
of the walled garden and exit through the gate.

10 After exploring the garden turn right and retrace your steps along the road 
back to the family church, or cut diagonally across the field towards the 
rotunda and back to the car park.
 