
On a cold Tuesday morning last February, Angie Jenkins, 51, climbed into the 
backseat of her son’s Toyota pickup truck and settled in for a long drive to 
visit her probation officer in a neighboring county. Dressed in jeans, a 
T-shirt and a heavy blue parka, she sifted through a stack of mail while her 
son, Ruben, quietly navigated the frost-covered backroads of southern Oregon.

“It’s about an hour and a half to get to Medford,” she said. “We have to go 
there once a week.”

Related: Gift of freedom: how Obama's clemency drive tackled aftermath of 'war 
on drugs' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/obama-clemency-pardons-commutations-war-on-drugs>

In a previous life, Jenkins had married, bought a house and raised two 
children. But now her husband was dead, her house gone, her children grown. And 
in place of the life she’d once imagined for herself, Jenkins had an 18-year 
void spent in prison. But now, thanks to an executive clemency issued by Barack 
Obama, she had a second chance at life: with the stroke of his pen, the 
president had set Jenkins free 12 years ahead of schedule, just like he’s done 
for 1,323 others since 2014.

Obama’s historic number of commutations and pardons has been focused on 
scaling back some of the most egregious sentences imposed on non-violent drug 
offenders prosecuted during the Reagan and Clinton presidencies – the peak 
years of America’s “war on drugs”.

In fact, Jenkins’ story was typical of the times that produced it.

She left home at 17 to escape an abusive and alcoholic father, became addicted 
to cocaine and heroin, and had two children, Ruben and Francine, whom she 
struggled to support as a single mother working minimum wage jobs. Then in 
1989, at age 24, she married Wayne Jenkins, a roofer 20 years her senior. For a 
time the family was stable enough that she was able to take in two children 
whose troubled parents could not support them. But Angie and Wayne never 
stopped using drugs themselves, and when the company he worked for went out of 
business, they began making and distributing methamphetamine. The criminal 
enterprise grew into a kind of family business that included her brother, 
Marcos.

Eventually it grew large enough to attract the attention of the Oregon state 
police and the US Drug Enforcement Agency. Angie, Wayne, Marcos and three other 
conspirators were arrested early in 1997 and prosecuted soon thereafter. 
Because federal drug laws carried tough “mandatory minimum” sentences at that 
time, and because they called for sentencing to be based in part on a drug 
lab’s potential capacity rather than its actual output, Angie Jenkins was 
sentenced to 30 years in prison.
 Paintings done by Angie Jenkins during her time in prison. Photograph: Joshua 
Hunt 
It was no accident that Obama chose her for his clemency program – she had 
little criminal history before her federal conviction, and had been a model 
inmate for almost 18 years. Her application for executive clemency also 
included strong letters of support from the detective who arrested her and the 
US attorney who prosecuted her, each of whom said they were “haunted” by her 
excessive punishment. A judge who presided over her case agreed that “the 
punishment was more severe than necessary”, and that the same crime would 
probably warrant a much lighter sentence today.

Jenkins’ case was far from the most shocking: 395 prisoners granted clemency 
by Obama had been serving life sentences, some of them for selling marijuana, a 
drug that is now sold legally in several states. But more than 6,000 clemency 
applications are still under review, and those that remain when Obama leaves 
office are unlikely to be considered by his successor, Donald Trump, who 
criticized Obama’s use of executive clemency and called some of the people he’d 
released “bad dudes”.

Trump’s tough-on-crime bluster stands in stark contrast to Obama’s beliefs, 
which he recently outlined in the Harvard Law Review:

How we treat those who have made mistakes speaks to who we are as a society 
and is a statement about our values – about our dedication to fairness, 
equality, and justice, and about how to protect our families and communities 
from harm, heal after loss and trauma, and lift back up those among us who have 
earned a chance at redemption.

In 1971, Richard Nixon declared drug abuse “public enemy number one in the 
United States” after a congressional report revealed widespread heroin abuse 
among soldiers returning to the US from Vietnam. But Nixon advanced the 
so-called war on drugs in a way not seen since – with treatment. And despite 
his founding of the Drug Enforcement Administration, Nixon remains the only US 
president to have spent more money treating America’s drug addicts than jailing 
them.

Related: 'We go rotten': man granted clemency describes life in the US prison 
system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/31/norman-brown-obama-clemency-us-prisons-drugs-mandatory-minimum-sentence-reform>

By the time Ronald Reagan signed the $1.7bn Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986, 
priorities had shifted: the bill earmarked $97m for building new prisons, in 
addition to funds for education and treatment. But its most significant feature 
was the creation of mandatory minimum sentences for drug crimes.

The sale of five grams of crack cocaine, for instance, was punishable by a 
mandatory term of five years in prison. This made penalties far stiffer for 
users of crack, which was cheaper and weighed more than powder cocaine. In 
1995, the US Sentencing Commission, which is responsible for federal sentencing 
guidelines, released a report that showed a marked racial disparity between 
those sentenced for crack and those sentenced for powder cocaine, and it 
recommended revising mandatory minimums to correct the disparity.

Congress refused.

Twenty-two years after signing a 1994 federal crime bill that created harsher 
sentences for a variety of crimes, Bill Clinton acknowledged at a convention 
for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People that he 
“signed a bill that made the problem worse”, especially for people of color. 
Eventually some 2.4 million Americans ended up behind bars, and more than half 
of all federal inmates were there because of drug convictions.

During Obama’s presidency, however, a rare bipartisan consensus emerged on 
criminal justice reform that focused on reducing sentences for non-violent 
crimes, and for drug offenses in particular. And as Obama entered his second 
term, his then attorney general, Eric Holder, unveiled a series of reforms that 
included reducing what Holder called “draconian mandatory minimum sentencing 
for low-level drug offenses”.

Statistics seemed to indicate that federal prosecutors were beginning to 
follow Holder’s mandate: mandatory minimum penalties, which had been sought by 
prosecutors in more than two-thirds of the drug trafficking cases tried in 
2013, were requested for less than half of the cases tried the following year. 
Then, for the first time in more than three decades, the federal prison 
population declined in consecutive years. This coincided with a drop in crime 
throughout the US.

Related: 'Justice for some': advocates worry Jeff Sessions could halt criminal 
justice reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/jeff-sessions-trump-attorney-general-criminal-justice-reform>

As a presidential candidate, Trump refused to acknowledge any such drop in 
crime, and his rhetoric suggested that he would be a “law and order” president. 
Now, as president-elect, he appears to be following through by choosing Alabama 
senator Jeff Sessions as his attorney general. At a hearing last April, 
Sessions said that “good people don’t smoke marijuana”. And in a2011 letter to 
Holder 
<http://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/amendment-process/public-comment/20110602/Sessions_Grassley_Cornyn_Comment.pdf>
, Sessions claimed that “reducing sentences … harms public safety, promotes 
recidivism, and increases the negative, often devastating effects of illegal 
drugs, both for those whose sentences are reduced and in the consequent 
diminished deterrent effect on other potential drug offenders”.

•••

Angie Jenkins’ 30-year prison sentence had no deterrent effect on the 
manufacture, sale and use of methamphetamine in Klamath Falls, according to her 
son Ruben. His opinion means something: after a stint in Iraq with the Marine 
Corps, he worked in the drug squad for the Klamath County sheriff’s department. 
He’s now an officer with the Klamath Falls police department and says little 
has changed when it comes to drug crimes in the area.

“It’s about the same,” he said. “The only real difference is that you see more 
heroin than you used to.”

While his mother was behind bars, Ruben and his sister were raised by their 
74-year-old grandmother, Nicky.

Ruben is tall and strongly built, with olive skin and a bright smile, and when 
he’s not wearing his police uniform he dresses in jeans and long-sleeve shirts. 
He recalls a tough conversation with his father after returning home from Iraq 
in 2007.

“I remember my dad asking me what I wanted to do and I told him law 
enforcement,” Ruben said. “My dad quit talking to me and I never really had any 
closure with him during those last six or eight months before he died. For him, 
it was sort of like I was betraying them because my dad blamed everything on 
the law. My mom, when they got arrested, was like, ‘Yeah, we fucked up.’ But my 
dad thought it was the law that ruined our family.”

The problem, as Ruben sees it, is somewhere between the way things are and the 
way his father thought things should be. Every day he sees local drug offenders 
given a slap on the wrist, while cases that go federal result in spectacularly 
harsh sentences.

“At the local level, we’ve got a revolving door,” he said. “And the next step 
is a tough federal system. There’s no middle ground.”

•••

In 2013, the US Sentencing Commission changed its guidelines, which consist of 
a points system used to calculate sentences for federal crimes: a drug offense 
might, for instance, call for a two-year sentence if the offender has no 
criminal history, but a four-year sentence if he or she has one felony 
conviction, which is equal to two points under the sentencing rubric. 
Misdemeanor offenses add one point, which means that a serial traffic violator 
or the town drunk might be considered a “career criminal” – like a cartel boss 
– should they ever find themselves involved in a federal drug case.

The new guidelines made some non-violent drug offenders with mandatory minimum 
convictions eligible for a two-point reduction. Since then, more than 6,000 
inmates have been released early due to those. A few months before Angie 
Jenkins was granted clemency, her brother and co-defendant, Marcos, was 
released early because of it.

One evening last February, Marcos met Angie and Nicky for dinner at a Dairy 
Queen in Klamath Falls. He wore blue jeans and a light gray hooded sweatshirt 
flecked with paint and drywall chips. He’s compact and muscular, with dark, 
neatly trimmed hair thick enough to hide a scar that sits just above his left 
ear, where fragments from a bullet remain and still give him migraines. His 
soft brown eyes never seem at rest, and might be off-putting if not for his 
warm smile.

Angie had just struggled through her first day of secretarial work, learning 
to use email and answer telephones and adapt to a world dominated by technology 
that did not exist when she went to prison. But Marcos seemed to struggle more 
with his inner world than with the one around him. The fact that he had been 
shot led the Bureau of Prisons to place him in a penitentiary full of hardened, 
violent criminals. He refused to join a gang in prison, and because of this he 
was vulnerable and lived every day in fear for 18 years.

Angie’s incarceration had caused her great suffering, but Marcos had been 
shattered.


“There were so many days when I would walk the yard,” he said. Then, in the 
middle of his thought, he froze. His right hand began to tremble violently and 
he pressed it against the hard wooden table to try to steady it. Thick tears 
welled up in his eyes, but he fought them back before speaking again.

“It’s a wasteland,” he said of the American penitentiary system. “I never 
expected to survive.”

If Trump’s “bad dudes” are out there, Marcos hardly seem to be one of them. 
When he was first released from prison, he couldn’t find anyone willing to hire 
him, but instead of turning to crime he volunteered for eight weeks at 
Goodwill, a nonprofit group that helps the needy but does not hire convicted 
felons. And when he finally did find work in construction, he refused to blame 
those who had shunned him.

Marcos now shares a home with his two adult sons, one of whom is a combat 
veteran who fought in Iraq. Shortly after moving in together, his son, who 
suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder, realized that his father showed 
signs of having developed PTSD while in prison.

“The violence, the fear of death, I guess it’s the same,” he told me. “But we 
help each other get through it.”

•••

Last February, when Angie looked through her stack of mail, she considered the 
future suggested by the contents of each envelope: credit card applications 
with bad rates, information about setting up a bank account, a voter 
registration pamphlet. She had asked Ruben about her voting rights, and he 
explained that Oregon is one of a handful of states that automatically restore 
voting rights for ex-convicts.

“Maybe I’ll vote in this next election,” she said. “I’ve never voted in my 
life.”

Hillary Clinton would have won Oregon without Angie Jenkins’ vote, but that 
hardly diminished what it meant to cast that vote less than a year after being 
given a second chance at life by the only person in a position to show such 
mercy – a mercy and a humanity rapidly fading, but recorded forever in the 
final lines of a letter she received from her president one cold day in 
December of 2015.

“I believe in your ability to prove the doubters wrong, and change your life 
for the better,” President Obama wrote. “So good luck, and Godspeed.”
 