
I have been fascinated by performances since I was three years old. But in my 
younger days my performances were very special—I performed in my mind. So no 
one around me knew my secret dramas.

Sometimes alone in my room, I would begin my drama. There was a fire and a lot 
of smoke in my home, and my grandma was too sick to move, so I supported her by 
her arm and ran out of the room with her. How happy both of us were!

Or sometimes at midnight, a tiger was chasing after me. I ran and ran, 
exhausted. Then I closed my eyes and said to myself: “Jump!” And I did jump, 
down from a steep cliff. I knew I would still be alive. When I woke (I always 
woke at the crucial moment), I found that I was.

The time came that I went to a primary school. My teacher was a poor young 
man; his face was not good-looking. It seemed that no young woman would be 
happy to get married to him. In the classroom, I listened to him, but my 
thoughts went in another direction. I would help him, to make him happy. One 
day I wrote a beautiful composition; it was so beautiful that it made a 
sensation in the school. “Whose student is she?” people asked. “Teacher Wen! 
Teacher Wen!”

Teacher Wen and I were very happy, and we went to the playground to take a 
walk. We talked and talked and talked…Of course the whole thing never happened 
in real life. My performances became longer and more complicated the older I 
grew.

Why did I learn to make clothes?… I badly needed time for my performances

Then came my thirteenth or fourteenth year. I began reading fiction and 
science fiction, and some of them were great books. Reading this fiction made 
me long to love someone. But who? My family was very poor. The authorities had 
put my father in a program of “reeducation through labor” (cleaning the 
library). In daily life, most people gave me supercilious looks when I went out 
in public. Additionally, I had lost my chance of receiving an education at a 
school.

All this meant that I could only come into contact with a few girls around me. 
So I stayed at home alone most of the time. I went to a small eating 
establishment nearby for my simple lunch and supper twice a day. One day (that 
was a shining day) when I returned from the eating establishment, I saw a 
healthy boy playing basketball on the playground. He was a little older than I 
was. I thought he was beautiful. I became so excited that my face blushed with 
shyness. Of course, he didn’t pay attention to me at all—boys were always like 
that. That night at home, I was so happy with the chance meeting. When I lay in 
the dark, the scenes of us appeared in my mind again and again. I worked out 
all kinds of new scenes in which the boy and I came face-to-face. My life of 
paradise lasted for the whole summer. Every day when I walked near the 
playground, I listened attentively to the sound made by the bouncing 
basketball. As I walked across the playground, I dared not turn my face; I had 
to pretend that I wasn’t paying any attention to him. How vigorous and nimble 
he was! What a beautiful body! Last night I had been in the park with him. We 
sat in the meadow, watching doves in the sky. But like all teenagers in those 
times, we didn’t touch each other. I only touched him with my eyes in my mind.

Time flew. One day the boy disappeared from the playground. He never 
reappeared, but my drama lasted for a whole other year.

I didn’t begin writing until I was almost thirty years old. During that time I 
had been a “barefoot doctor,” a worker at a small workshop in a lane, and a 
temporary teacher. My last job before I became a writer was as a self-employed 
tailor. Why did I learn to make clothes? One reason was because my husband and 
I wanted to earn money to feed our child and ourselves. But the main reason was 
that I badly needed time for my performances. That was my ideal since my early 
childhood, and I had never forgotten it, even for a minute. And my husband 
helped me to realize the ideal. Time is money.

Both of us learned to make clothes according to a magazine called 
Dress-cutting and Sewing. We worked hard from morning to midnight every day. 
After half a year, we became two tailors—worthy of the name. The apartment 
changed into a workshop, and we even hired three helpers. We began earning some 
money. That was 1983, and at that time only a few people in cities owned their 
own business. But we made it. It was not much money, and our work was very hard.

In the same year, I began writing at a sewing machine. A strange thing 
happened: I found that when I was writing fiction, I didn’t need to work out 
plots or a structure or anything beforehand. No matter, a short piece or a long 
piece, it was the same. I just sat down and wrote without thinking. That’s all. 
Back then during the daytime, our customers always interrupted my writing. So 
my time was fragmentary—ten minutes, fifteen minutes, a half hour at most. In 
the evening, my four-year-old son (he was naughty) occupied almost all of my 
time.

So during these ten minutes, fifteen minutes, or half hour, I even managed to 
write a small novel—my maiden work. And the plot went smoothly in the novel! It 
was a perfect whole.

Writing fiction freely was dangerous in those dark days in China

I was so amazed, What I achieved was something that I hadn’t expected—when I 
wanted to perform, I performed; when I decided to stop, I stopped. But I could 
always come back to it. How strange! I thought maybe I was a little bit like 
those ancient poets, who could write their poetry in an open county while they 
drank wine, or talked with their friends, or just stayed alone in a beautiful 
scenery. It seemed they could write any time they wanted. But not quite. It 
seemed that there was a logic that pushed my pen forward, as if it was 
impossible for me to write down wrong words and sentences. All of the plots and 
dialogues that I wrote down were so right, so beautiful, just like my childhood 
performances. The only difference was that I did it more sober-mindedly and 
with greater determination now. I found that I enjoyed these activities so much 
that I wrote every day, even when our business was so busy. It was not long 
after that I understood that my writing was a special kind of performance—a 
performance of one’s soul.

For all of my life, my soul has longed to go out. But the opportunity didn’t 
present itself until I was thirty years old. How miserable but at the same time 
how lucky it was! Writing fiction freely was dangerous in those dark days in 
China. But I was given the chance at long last. The long waiting made one so 
vigorous and original, it was impossible to do wrong.

Like the dancer Isadora Duncan, I didn’t need to work out things in advance 
because for me writing was the most natural thing to do. When I no longer 
needed to worry so much about money —that was after writing for five years—I 
just made a rule for myself: write for an hour every day, usually in the 
morning when I finished my running. Every day—one hour, no more, no less. No 
matter what I wrote—a story, or a novel—I wrote it smoothly, then left it as it 
was. The next day, I wrote from where I had left off the day before. I would 
hold a pen in my hand, think for a minute or two, at most five minutes; then 
the first sentence would appear in my mind. I wrote it down. Then the second 
sentence appeared, the third … How happy I was!

Our customers always interrupted my writing. So my time was fragmentary—ten 
minutes, fifteen minutes...

The more I wrote, the more I wanted to write. My kingdom of fiction grew 
larger and larger, its boundary extending in every direction. Gradually I 
understood: since I was a dancer of the soul, this sort of performance just 
couldn’t stop. It was impossible. Another thing that occurred was that my 
personality began to change so much after I became a dancer —it became brighter 
and brighter. I had always loved worldly life, and now I loved it more! Now to 
me, every day became so beautiful. Cooking a meal in the kitchen, cleaning the 
apartment, washing clothes, helping my son with his homework, going to the 
market to buy meat and vegetables, running in the rain four kilometers with an 
umbrella. My everyday life was arranged in perfect order, so I was full of 
vigor. I felt that I lived a dual life. It was my worldly life that fed my 
performances, and at the same time, it was performance that gave the meaning to 
my worldly life. I loved both. Actually I thought the two were one. I still 
think so today.

Sometimes as I recall my childhood performances, I ask myself, why did they 
happen? Why was it that the performances made me happiest? As I grow older, I 
know the answer: it is because I wanted to live a full life. I wanted my body 
and my soul to dance at the same time. I am a daughter of Greater Nature, a 
nimble daughter, so nimble that I heard Mother’s calling even at three years 
old. The calling was from that deep, dark place, and very few people have the 
ability to hear it, but I had. But this ability brought with it a great 
responsibility upon me when I grew up.

In my writing life, I have observed that there are other people besides myself 
who have heard the calling of Great Nature when they were very young. But they 
didn’t concentrate on it, so they lost it very easily and never heard it again. 
For example, in the 80’s in China, some writers wrote beautiful experimental 
fiction, but after three or four years, all of them returned to traditional 
writing. I know that for a writer it is very difficult to concentrate on your 
performance all the time. There are too many temptations in the world, and 
nowadays it is easy for a famous writer to get more money if he or she wants to 
by dropping experimental writing and choosing realistic stories or film and TV 
plays. Almost all of my colleagues turned toward that road.

In the 80s in China, some writers wrote beautiful experimental fiction, but 
all of them returned to traditional writing

But for me, it was another story. From the beginning, I wrote just for my 
ideal. But what is a life devoted to this ideal? I think it should be this: 
giving a performance every day, reading beautiful books, enjoying beautiful 
things—sex, food, comfortable clothes, and so on—in short, making my life 
always happy and keeping myself always curious about the things around the 
world. That means I must keep my body in a healthy condition. That’s it. Money 
is important because it can buy time or prolong my life (I have a serious 
rheumatism). But I always know that I want to live a life that is worthy for me 
to live. Year in and year out, I found that I was the only writer from my 
generation who still wrote experimental fiction in China. I was so sad, but at 
the same time, I was so proud!

I am proud because this kind of performance needs a great talent and courage, 
and very few people can achieve this. Inspiration is not the only thing that 
the writer has to have; at the same time you must have a strong rational 
faculty, because you will be demanding of yourself to do a sort of very special 
thinking, and this sort of thinking is not reasoning. I now call it “material 
reasoning.” Maybe it is a little mysterious, but looking at my day’s 
performance and the performances of my childhood, you may get some clues.

“Material reasoning” is not just thinking—it’s doing. That is why I call it a 
performance. In that atmosphere when you move your body, your action is 
following a strict logic. You perceive the logical structure directly through 
your senses. The more you do it, the more the structure appears in various 
forms. But from my experience, one must do it often if one longs to see the 
structure. Slacking off for a year or two, it’s very possible that the 
structure disappears totally. This happened to two of my friends. Both of them 
were highly talented in experimental writing when they were very young. I think 
Great Nature is fair to every human being. She always gives you a gift that you 
are worthy of. But some people lose it even if they don’t perceive it.

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
Now I’m full of gratitude to our Great Nature. In 2015, I’m 62 years old and 
still brimming with inspiration. Except for taking part in literature 
activities abroad once or twice a year, I write almost every day. Writing gives 
me strong confidence, keeping my body healthy. I feel that my life has become 
some kind of music. Every morning as I open my eyes, I see the sun rising 
differently. To me, every day is a brand new day!

Usually I study Western philosophy and literature in the daytime. At eight 
o’clock in the evening (I changed my morning performance to evening ten years 
ago), I give a performance. That takes almost an hour. But some times 
forty-five minutes will be enough. I look at the words and the sentences in the 
notebook (from the beginning, I have always written in a notebook). Ah, they 
are so neat! The strange thing is that my handwriting is usually ugly when I 
write into a contract or on an envelope. But with fiction, my handwriting is 
neat and tidy. The notebooks are so beautiful as a whole. In the beginning I 
didn’t know I could write like that. Now I know that it’s Great Nature who 
gives me the ability and lets me write beautifully. Actually as I grow older 
every year, my hand often shakes when I’m writing. But as soon as I begin to 
perform, the words and sentences, as if hearing the calling, become full of 
life!

 * Translated by Jonathan Griffith 
 * This is a shortened version of a piece by Can Xue. Read the full version 
here 
<http://electricliterature.com/a-special-kind-of-performance-can-xue-on-the-course-of-a-chinese-writer/>
.
 