
He was born in the mountains, where only goats and beasts of that kind live - 
so said Leonardo da Vinci of Giotto, the man he regarded as his greatest 
predecessor. Giotto taught himself to draw in the earth while he watched his 
flocks. Years after he had escaped these primitive beginnings to become a 
famous painter (with a workshop in Florence, students, followers and 
commissions all over Italy), Giotto found himself one day back in the 
countryside - to believe another of the medieval tales about him, this one told 
in The Decameron, the compendium of stories Boccaccio wrote shortly after the 
Black Death.

One of the young people, who according to Boccaccio tell stories to while away 
the plague, relates how Giotto was riding back to Florence with a friend of 
his, a famous lawyer, when they were caught in the open countryside by a 
thunderous rainstorm. As the horses trudged along, they kicked up mud that 
spattered the men's robes and faces. Giotto and his companion suddenly looked 
at one another and laughed; who would ever guess these were famous men?

We think of celebrity as a modern phenomenon. Yet it has a long history, and 
for quite mysterious reasons, artists have always been in its vanguard. The 
first person in European history, other than a king or queen or emperor or 
soldier or saint, to achieve something like modern celebrity was Michelangelo 
in the 16th century. The man who carved David and painted the Sistine Chapel 
saw two rival biographies of himself appear in his lifetime; there are few 
individuals before modern times about whom we consequently know so much. Yet 
two centuries before Michelangelo, the Tuscan painter Agnolo di Bondone 
achieved, as Giotto, spectacular fame. In fact, in medieval literature, he is 
an archetype of fame.

Giotto was admirable, says Boccaccio in The Decameron, for "wearing his 
celebrity with the utmost modesty" - and this is what his story illustrates, as 
Giotto laughs at his own unimpressive, mud-besmirched appearance. Clearly, he 
would have been a popular bug-eating winner of I'm a Celebrity ... Get Me Out 
of Here. To this day, he is so famous that even an imitation of one of his 
paintings is news. The National Gallery has just bought and put on display a 
painting by Giotto's follower Bernardo Daddi. The Coronation of the Virgin, 
with its powerful modest figures and intense feeling, is recognisably derived 
from Giotto and is in fact based on one of his paintings. Giotto is famous 
enough for the National Gallery to promote this work by his pupil as a 
connection, albeit second-hand, with the master. Seven centuries ago, he was 
famous for being famous.

Fame is fickle, the gift of Fortune, who readily and inevitably takes it away. 
Every celebrity learns this in the end. But the great 13th-century painter 
Cimabue learnt it in the cruellest way, according to Florentine legend handed 
down to the 16th-century artist and storyteller Vasari. Before Giotto came 
along, Cimabue was celebrated. He was the first Florentine - rivalled only by 
his Sienese contemporary Duccio - to reject the hieratic stiffness of what 
Italians came to scorn as the "Greek style" in painting.

One of the cliches about the history of Italian art is that the Renaissance 
began with the import of Greek learning from Byzantium. But in painting, it 
began in the opposite way - with the repudiation of Byzantine art in the 13th 
and 14th centuries. Compare a Byzantine-influenced painted crucifix or icon 
with its gold and its incised caricatures of flesh and physiognomy with 
Cimabue's Maestà from Santa Trinita or Duccio's Maestà from the Rucellai Chapel 
in Florence that was for centuries attributed to Cimabue and the revolution is 
obviously beginning - there is still plenty of gold, but the faces are tender, 
expressive, the painting modulated, the image humanly compelling.

But Cimabue's fate was to be eclipsed - and by the boy he himself plucked from 
pastoral obscurity. It was said that Cimabue found the young Giotto tending his 
flocks, and saw him drawing in the earth with a stick. He instantly recognised 
the child's natural talent, and took Giotto as his pupil.

There they are in Lord Frederic Leighton's Victorian history painting 
Cimabue's Celebrated Madonna is Carried in Procession Through the Streets of 
Florence. Vasari, who relates how Cimabue discovered Giotto, tells how when 
Cimabue painted his captivating altarpiece for the Rucellai Chapel at Santa 
Maria Novella, the Florentine people were so delighted they staged a solemn 
festival. The painting was borne through the streets with music and prayers. It 
is a spectacular image of medieval fame, scarcely diminished by the fact that 
the Rucellai Madonna is by Duccio. In Leighton's picture, Cimabue, dressed in 
white and wearing a laurel wreath, holds the hand of his young pupil, Giotto. 
Tragedy was just round the corner.

Giotto owes his mythic status to his contemporary, and probably his friend, 
the poet Dante Alighieri. Dante tells the story, in the early 14th century, in 
his Divine Comedy. The pilgrim Dante, given the privilege of seeing the places 
we enter after death while still alive, is climbing Mount Purgatory when he 
meets a man renowned in his lifetime as an illuminator of manuscripts. Oderisi 
of Gubbio is one of those being punished for pride. He warns Dante of the 
emptiness of earthly glory, the transitory and worthless nature of fame. And he 
mentions a glaring recent example:

"Cimabue believed he held the field in painting, and now Giotto has the cry, 
so that the fame of the other is dark ... Giotto, the boy folklorically plucked 
from his herds by Cimabue, has ruined his master's reputation. Cimabue is 
already obscure (la fama di colui è scura)."

Dante is talking as a contemporary, as a compatriot Florentine, and as someone 
who probably knew Giotto personally. So his declaration that Giotto's fame 
obscured Cimabue is not folklore - it is reliable reportage. And even seven 
centuries later, it is not hard to see why Giotto had the cry.

Giotto's painting stands to Cimabue and even Duccio as the Messiah to the 
Baptist or the revolution to its prophets. Other medieval Italian painters are 
recognisable as forebears of what was to come. But Giotto is not an ancestor, a 
predecessor, an influence. He is the thing itself. His paintings are utterly 
overwhelming in their honest authority and humble graceful dignity. He is the 
master of masters - the father of modern art. If you see Leonardo's The Last 
Supper and Michelangelo's Sistine ceiling already anticipated in his heroic 
subtle images, you also see Picasso. No one has ever painted better than 
Giotto, and only a handful have equalled him.

Leonardo said this was because he did not learn from masters, but drew 
directly from nature. It was because Giotto was an unspoiled rustic, sketching 
as he tended his flocks, that he became great, thought Leonardo - because 
nature is the true teacher.

It is exactly that fidelity to the real, organic living world - especially the 
world of human beings, their gestures, faces, sorrows and joys - that marks 
Giotto out from all previous painters whose works survive. Classical sources 
that speak of the famous Greek painters of antiquity attribute to Apelles, 
Zeuxis and the rest this same fidelity to nature. Their works are entirely 
lost. However, paintings that do survive from the ancient world - frescoes from 
Pompeii and from villas in Campania frozen in time by the eruption of Vesuvius 
- include captivating still lifes and portraits that reveal a very high level 
of mimesis.

The ways medieval writers praise Giotto echo classical accounts of the extreme 
naturalism of ancient artists. "So faithful did he remain to Nature (who is the 
mother and motive force of all created things, via the constant rotation of the 
heavens)," says Boccaccio of Giotto, that "one often finds, with the works of 
Giotto, that people's eyes are deceived and they mistake the picture for the 
real thing."

With Giotto, unlike Apelles, we can test this with our own eyes. And although 
his frescoes are too different from our own art in manner to deceive us 
optically, they convince at a more profound level. Few later artists - I think 
of Caravaggio and Rembrandt - have touched the essence of human life as 
directly as this.

You experience it overwhelmingly in the Scrovegni Chapel in Padua, where his 
scenes tell the stories of the Virgin and Christ with marvellously explicit 
medieval gestures, peasant bodies, ordinary yet monumental faces. You 
experience it in The Death of Saint Francis in Santa Croce in Florence, the 
grief-stricken expressions and raised horrified hands of the friars making you 
too mourn the saint who preached humility and emotional openness.

Humility was Giotto's saving grace, claims Boccaccio in The Decameron . The 
Middle Ages believed that fame is a worthless and hollow thing. Celebrity 
always ends in loss and anguish. It is best to be modest, as Giotto was. Born 
in the mountains, raised among goats, caught in the rain: Giotto was not, after 
all, famous for being famous, but for being humble.
 