
RESTAURANTS

JoJo's, Whitstable, Kent

It's a boon that JoJo's <http://jojosrestaurant.co.uk/> is even open – the 
owners were considering going travelling. But business in their new restaurant 
on Whitstable's Marine Parade is booming. They moved to this bigger site this 
year but remain on first-name terms with most of their customers, which adds to 
the living-room-meets-supper-club feel. Dishes such as calamari, chargrilled 
sardines, mutton koftas and meze are prepared in front of you. JoJo's is great 
value for such a trendy seaside resort – and it's BYO, too. If you're too late 
to get a booking, grab a sandwich at their coffee shop.
• 2 Herne Bay Road, Tankerton (01227 274591, jojosrestaurant.co.uk 
<http://www.jojosrestaurant.co.uk>); mains £6-£8.50 

Jeffers by the Marina, Bangor, County Down

It's only in recent years that decent restaurants that are worth visiting for 
more than the pretty views have opened on Northern Ireland's coast – 
previously, most of the best grub was found inland. One of those to receive top 
marks from both locals and reviewers is Jeffers by the Marina, housed in a 
bright townhouse on the seafront, and doing spot-on sea bream, smoked cod and 
meat dishes, risotto packed full of fresh fish, plus excellent breakfasts.

• 7 Grays Hill (02891 859 555, jeffersfood.com <http://www.jeffersfood.com/>); 
mains £11.95-£19.95

The Gurnard's Head, Cornwall
 Gurnard's Head hotel, Cornwall. 
There's a new head chef, Bruce Rennie, at this cliffside spot, and he's 
dedicated to using the freshest seasonal produce, often stuff that has been 
dropped at the back door by locals. It's an ideal stop-off for hikers heading 
along the South West Coast Path from St Ives to Zennor, and has a big enclosed 
garden with a smattering of picnic benches, palm trees and a view from the 
headland over the craggy Atlantic coastline. The new Kitchen Garden menu offers 
more veggie choices such as garlic veloute with grapes and almonds and gnocchi 
Parisienne with samphire and vierge dressing. Make a day of it and take in a 
performance at theMinack <http://www.minack.com/> alfresco theatre (01736 
810181,minack.com <http://www.minack.com/>) nearby. 
• Near Zennor, St. Ives (01736 796928, gurnardshead.co.uk 
<http://www.gurnardshead.co.uk>); mains £12-£16

The White Horse, Brancaster, Staithe, Norfolk

The views from the terrace here, overlooking the salty marshes stretching 
towards the horizon, have always been fabulous, but it is only in recent years 
that this formerly chintzy Norfolk pub has made the most of its location. These 
days the food and the slick conservatory restaurant are a match for the views 
over this area of outstanding natural beauty. The seafood – Cromer crab, 
cockles, mussels and oysters – is very local, some coming from the fishermen 
down on the beach, or the next-door-neighbour "mussel men" who deliver to the 
kitchen door. The bar menu is good value (seafood platter £9.95, half a dozen 
oysters £9.50, grilled mackerel £9.50) but for a summer treat eat on the 
restaurant's sun deck terrace (bouillabaisse with saffron new potatoes and 
sauce rouille £13.95, fillet of turbot with spring onion potato cake, broad 
bean and wild mushroom jus £17.95), then walk it off on the quiet, vast sandy 
beaches.
• 01485 210262, whitehorsebrancaster.co.uk 
<http://www.whitehorsebrancaster.co.uk/>

FISH AND CHIP SHOPS

The Rockfish Seafood & Chips <http://rockfishdevon.co.uk/>, Dartmouth, Devon

 Photograph: Chris Terry 
This snazzy chippy, just opened in June, is the new endeavour from Mitch 
Tonks, the former Fishworks owner. It feels like a big beach hut, all bleached 
walls and wooden floors, and sits right on the seafront in Dartmouth so you can 
watch the estuary bustle outside. Most of the fish are fresh off the boat from 
round the bay in Brixham, although the crab and lobster comes from Dartmouth 
and the salmon is home-smoked by Mitch. The menu has five white fish, served 
battered or breaded with chips, but also includes scallops, oysters and 
classics such as jellied eels, cockles, cracked crab and potted shrimp.
• 8 South Embankment (01803 832800, rockfishdevon.co.uk 
<http://www.rockfishdevon.co.uk>)

Colman's, South Shields, Tyne and Wear

This acclaimed chippy has been feeding fish and chip fans (including local MP 
David Miliband) for four generations. Along with the usual cod, haddock and 
plaice – all sustainably procured, wild and locally caught, and available in 
gluten-free batter on request – there are crab cakes, battered scallops and 
squid, mussels and lobster. Settle down in Marine Park to stare out at sea with 
your chip shop dinner, or wander a little further to South Shields's blue-flag 
beach.
• 182-186 Ocean Road (0191-456 1202, colmansfishandchips.com 
<http://www.colmansfishandchips.com>)

Anstruther Fish Bar, Fife
 Photograph: Alamy 
It's all hands on deck at Anstruther's, where the whole family pitch in with 
fishing and frying duties. Everything is locally and sustainably sourced or 
personally fished or hand-picked by them. Footage of the family fishing plays 
on loop in the restaurant and shows 50 years of angling prowess. Even the 
tatties are grown exclusively for them by farmer friend Kenneth. Expect a catch 
of the day that was caught a couple of hours before you sit down to eat. And it 
makes a great refuelling stop for walkers on the Fife Coastal Path (see page 
17).
• 42-44 Shore Street, Anstruther (01333 310518, anstrutherfishbar.co.uk 
<http://www.anstrutherfishbar.co.uk>)

The Fish and Chip Shop, Aldeburgh, Suffolk

On a sunny day, or any day really, you can expect to queue with a horde of 
fish fanatics. Thankfully, there's a pub across the street to pop into to sink 
a pint while you wait, or bring it back to the queue. Don't be deterred; 
service is speedy, and that batter is worth waiting all day for. There's no 
seating, so take your fish supper straight down to the shingle beach.
• 226 High Street (01728 452250) 

Fish Tram Chips, Llandudno, Gwynedd

Fish Tram Chips is just opposite the tram terminal that heads up to the Great 
Orme from Llandudno. It holds many industry awards and has repeatedly been 
voted the best fish and chips shop in north Wales. If you're not too stuffed, 
head toBadgers Tearooms <http://www.badgersgroup.co.uk/tearooms/> in the 
Victoria Centre for a tea and cake afterwards, then walk it all off on the 
longest pier in Wales.
• Old Road (01492 872673)

Mungos kiosk, West Beach, Dorset

For freshly cooked fish and chips, this place, among a collection of stands on 
the seafront, is unbeatable. The woman behind the counter takes your order, 
then freshly batters the fish in front of your eyes, creating a light, thin 
crisp and non-greasy coating that melts in the mouth, served alongside perfect 
crescent-shape chips, pleasantly squishy and slightly darkened round the edges, 
and – the impressive finishing touch – beautiful homemade tartare sauce. Have a 
portion for lunch before a big walk along the cliffs at the end of the beach 
and you'll probably be tempted to have another for dinner on the way back.

SEAFOOD SHACKS

Old Leigh High Street cockle sheds, Leigh-on-Sea, Essex
 Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
Stroll down this quaint cobbled street and choose from the handful of cockle 
sheds winding their way down to the sea wall. Once you've picked up some 
cockles or mussels, whelks or jellied eels, wander to the end of the high 
street and sit on the sea wall overlooking the fishing harbour. You might spot 
some cocklers at work once the tide goes out. A walk to the end of the high 
street will reap a Rossi's ice-cream or a stick of rock.
• oldleigh.com/cocklesheds.html <http://www.oldleigh.com/cocklesheds.html>

Wheeler's Crab Shed, Steephill Cove, Isle of Wight 
 Wheeler's Crab Shed, Isle of Wight. 
Two picnic tables and a wooden hut mark this modest eatery right on the beach. 
Since Steephill Cove is one of the Isle of Wight's best-kept secrets, it seems 
apt that no road leads there. The only way to access it is to hike along the 
cliff path from Ventnor (a 15-minute walk) and wander down into the cove, or 
park up in Love Lane nearby, although spaces are limited. The simple menu is 
based on what owner Jim caught at sea that morning, but staples include crab 
pasties and sandwiches, mackerel ciabatta and salads and lobster. If the catch 
has been rich, you could also find king prawns or fish pie.
• 01983 852177, steephillcove-isleofwight.co.uk 
<http://www.steephillcove-isleofwight.co.uk>

Skipness Seafood Cabin, Tarbert, Argyll

The cabin has been here, and run by the same family, for 22 years. It has the 
grounds of Skipness Castle as its garden, and the Kilbrannan Sound across to 
Arran as its view. Work up an appetite with a walk around the glens on the 
estate, then head to a picnic bench outside the green oak cabin for a salmon 
roll from the family smokery, a home-grown salad or a seafood platter. Other 
popular choices include the crab and grilled queenies (scallops), and 
everything is modestly priced.
• Skipness Estate (01880 760207, skipnessseafoodcabin.co.uk 
<http://www.skipnessseafoodcabin.co.uk>)

Kishorn Seafood Bar, Strathcarron, Ross-shire

This popular wooden lodge, right in the Highlands, has delicious, cheap 
seafood and a lovely verandah that looks out over the sea to Skye. Try a Blasan 
Bradan (a platter of four different treatments of salmon), garlic scallops 
served with a croissant, homemade cullen skink soup, or choose from any seafood 
you can imagine that's come straight off the boat.

• 01520 733240, kishornseafoodbar.co.uk <http://www.kishornseafoodbar.co.uk/>, 
open March to November

ICE-CREAM PARLOURS

Morelli's Gelato, Broadstairs, Kent
 Photograph: Alamy 
Take a walk along the Broadstairs front – and back in time – to the land of 
the ice-cream sundae. A soda fountain, pink leather booths, Formica tabletops 
and 1950s music blaring from the jukebox make Morelli's rather special, and 
ice-cream has been made fresh on site every day since it opened in 1932, 
including Ferrero Rocher, raspberry ripple, and banana and marshmallow. You can 
even invent your own and order it a week ahead.

• 14 Victoria Parade (01843 862500, morellisgelato.com 
<http://www.morellisgelato.com>)

Sunset Ices, Morecambe, Lancashire

A vintage Bedford ice-cream van pulls up on the promenade next to the Midland 
Hotel from Thursday to Sunday all summer, and sells 99s, Angostura ices, 
oysters, snowball toppers and waffle cones. All the ice-cream is fromWallings 
farm <http://www.wallingsfarm.co.uk/> nearby, and you can also get soya 
ice-cream. This is a snapshot of the seaside glamour that is fading fast – in 
fact this may be Sunset Ices' last summer here. Its motto, "Everyday is like 
sundae", is a big camp homage to Morrissey's song, written about Morecambe.

• Midland Hotel, Marine Road West (everyday-is-like-sundae.co.uk 
<http://www.everyday-is-like-sundae.co.uk>)

Lickety Split, Seaham, Durham

Across the Pennines at Lickety Split, there's more rock'n'roll kitsch, 
including a Wurlitzer, Elvis impersonator and red vinyl booths. There are dream 
boat floats (a fizzy drink with a scoop on top), sundaes with names such as 
Chantilly Glace and Choc Berry, and smoothies called The T Bird and Flake, 
Rattle and Roll. You get the picture.

• 13 North Terrace (0800 917 5531, lickety-split.co.uk 
<http://www.lickety-split.co.uk>)

TEA SHOPS AND CAFES

Metro Deco, Brighton, East Sussex
 Metro Deco, Brighton, East Sussex. 
Brighton's only 1930s Parisian-style tea salon and art deco furniture shop is 
less than five minutes' walk from the pier, and is as forward-thinking as it is 
vintage-focused. In this beautifully furnished cafe, you'll find a delicious 
breakfast menu, lunchtime specials and an impressive array of ethically sourced 
green, black and white teas as well as homemade cakes. And the cafe has a 
strong online presence, with its owners tweeting constantly and offers for 
users of the Foursquare app.

• 38 Upper St James Street (07956 978115/07878 508719, metro-deco.com 
<http://www.metro-deco.com>)

Sandside Cafe, Sandsend, North Yorkshire 

Coastlovers have been enjoying this cafe-in-a-cabin for more than a century. 
Sandside sits right on the beach at the edge of Sandsend village, with stunning 
views all round the heritage coastline, the North York Moors and Whitby Bay. 
The cafe has been completely rebuilt, with beautiful wooden panelling and 
comfortable seating, indoors and out, reworking the cabin's old rustic charm 
with a modern touch. On offer is a rich assortment of homemade pies, cakes and 
pastries, fresh seafood and other locally sourced goods, which you can eat in 
or take out for a seaside picnic.

• East Row (01947 893916, sandsidecafe.co.uk <http://www.sandsidecafe.co.uk>)

Poldhu Beach Cafe, Mullion, Cornwall
 Poldhu Beach Cafe, Mullion, Cornwall. 
A popular family destination, Poldhu beach is one of the largest, and safest, 
on the Lizard Peninsula. Enjoy a lunchtime barbecue or an evening pizza while 
looking out on to the clear blue water and the rolling green fields that frame 
the seafront. And if you've forgotten anything, it has a shop, too.

• 01326 240530, poldhu.net <http://www.poldhu.net>

The Boat House, Stonehaven, Aberdeenshire

A half-an-hour's drive south of Aberdeen in picturesque Stonehaven, the Boat 
House on the old pier in the harbour is a small cafe with a huge reputation. 
The daytime menu is fairly simple, with homemade soups and sandwiches, but in 
the evenings you can tuck into Portlethen prime fillet steak or fresh fish from 
Gourline – while feasting on the views of the bay to the north and Doonie Point 
to the south. The atmosphere is intimate and relaxing, with a maximum of 25 
people of an evening, so be sure to book.

• The Old Pier (01569 764666, boathousestonehaven.co.uk 
<http://www.boathousestonehaven.co.uk>)

Rendezvous Cafe, Whitley Bay, Tyne and Wear

Housed in a 1930s art deco building right on the seafront, the Rendezvous is a 
nostalgic gem serving excellent traditional ice-creams, pastries and hot-dogs. 
Largely unchanged since the 1950s, it has bags of old-world charm and homemade 
goodness.

• Dukes Walk, Northern Promenade (0191 252 5548, rendezvouswhitley bay.com 
<http://www.rendezvouswhitleybay.com>)

Additional research by Dale Berning
 