
One remarkable feature of the Brexit debate is the sense of resignation with 
which the losers accepted defeat. The rooted constitutionalism of the English – 
and the same is true of the Scots – is so far taken for granted that we think 
of it as a genetic trait rather than the product of fortunate historical 
circumstance.

In Northern Ireland, where I grew up, habits of constitutionalism were weak. 
Mass protest and violent confrontation were part of the political culture, and 
substantial minorities on both sides supported or tolerated paramilitary 
shootings and bombings. The Irish border passed my hometown, a few miles to the 
west, and looped southwards. The militarised villages and farmlands of south 
Armagh were close by, where IRA teams built the bombs designed for Bishopsgate 
and Canary Wharf, and the last British soldier to die during the Troubles,Lance 
Bombardier Stephen Restorick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/mar/09/stephen-restorick-northern-ireland>
, was shot by a sniper, just a year before the Good Friday Agreement. That 
irregular, porous, 300-mile line, with its rich traditions of smuggling, 
sectarianism and armed insurgency, is now set to become the border between the 
UK and the European Union.

Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> was never 
regarded as legitimate by all of its citizens. The state, founded in 1921, 
contained two distinct communities with mutually conflicting interpretations of 
what democracy meant, each of which had perfectly rational reasons for fearing 
the dominance of the other.

The fault line between unionists and nationalists is still the basic fact of 
the Northern Irish situation, but the EU referendum in Northern Ireland was not 
simply another sectarian headcount. As elsewhere, the assumption was that the 
UK would remain. Unionists therefore felt no pressure to choose between being 
British and being European.

That Ireland can be both one unit and two separate ones has enabled former 
enemies to live in peace

It is true that those constituencies where Brexit triumphed – seven out of 18 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2016/jun/23/eu-referendum-live-results-and-analysis>
 – were unionist strongholds. The message that European bureaucracy, immigrants 
and cosmopolitanism all pose a threat to British values resonated strongly 
there. And it is true that nationalist areas, like west Belfast and Derry, 
voted overwhelmingly to stay. But precisely because the referendum was not a 
border poll, it also expressed many of the wider social, cultural and 
generational divisions found in England and Wales. The 56% majority for remain 
contained many liberal unionists who felt the EU offered them economic 
security, political stability or broader cultural horizons.

Theresa Villiers, then Northern Ireland secretary, was correct to say that the 
conditions for a border poll, as envisaged by the Good Friday agreement, do not 
exist. But that doesn’t mean the peace process is safe. During the 1990s the EU 
provided a stage on which Irish and British politicians met as equals. The 
wider context of European integration also took much of the heat out of the 
border issue. It made the idea of a region whose inhabitants had the right to 
be “Irish, British, or both” easier to imagine.

A significant proportion of the €1.5bn (£1.3bn) of the EU’s Northern Ireland 
peace programme went to border communities and helped to ensure that both 
nationalists and unionists felt they benefited. Indeed the cross-border bodies 
set up under the agreement have been one of its least controversial areas. It 
has become unthinkable for the inhabitants of Derry or Newry that they should 
once again be cut off from their natural hinterlands in the Irish republic.

In addition to a complex network of political institutions, the Good Friday 
agreement formulated a knotty political doctrine. Irish nationalists believed 
the proper unit of decision-making was the island of Ireland, and the Irish 
people had therefore been denied their right of self-determination since 
partition. Ulster Unionists insisted that the constitutional future of Northern 
Ireland must be decided only by the people of its six counties. The agreement 
presented a superbly Jesuitical solution: it was “for the people of the island 
of Ireland alone, by agreement between the two parts respectively and without 
external impediment, to exercise their right of self-determination”.

So Ireland was a single, self-determining unit – and without explicit 
recognition of that principle the IRA and Sinn Féin could not have been 
persuaded to accept the agreement – but it took the form of two distinct 
jurisdictions. In May 1998 the Belfast agreement achieved overwhelming support 
in two simultaneous referendums north and south of the border.

There is nothing in the agreement to stop the British government taking 
Northern Ireland out of the EU. Ireland’s right of self-determination applies 
to one question only – whether Ireland should become united. But Brexit 
undermines the spirit of Good Friday in several ways.

The Guardian view on the Act of Union: time to reimagine the UK | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/10/the-guardian-view-on-the-act-of-union-time-to-reimagine-the-united-kingdom>
First, the agreement clearly envisaged that Northern Ireland’s future 
constitutional arrangements would be worked out in the context of continuing 
partnership between the north and the south, and between politicians in London 
and Dublin. To remove Northern Ireland from Europe without its consent is not 
only morally wrong and politically risky; it is also a rejection of the 
fundamental bilateralism of the peace process.

Second, the all-Ireland dimension of the Belfast agreement was fundamental to 
securing the support of nationalists. It established the conditions within 
which the republic felt able to revise its constitution, recognising fully the 
legitimacy of partition for the first time. That Ireland can be both one unit 
and two separate units may be a bizarre political fiction, but it is a fiction 
that has enabled former enemies to live with one another in relative peace. The 
creation of a hard border along a line that has been invisible for many years 
is at odds with the full recognition of nationalist aspirations enshrined in 
the settlement.

The irony of this predicament is that it comes so soon after the ghosts of 
Irish history were apparently laid to rest.The centenary of the 1916 rising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/27/easter-rising-centenary-to-be-marked-in-dublin-gpo-amid-heavy-security>
 produced plenty of self-congratulation, hagiography and commercial 
opportunism. But above all the Easter commemorations were characterised by 
maturity and inclusivity. What made this possible, of course, was confidence 
that there had been honourable compromise in the north, and the republic was at 
last free to focus on its own future.

England’s unilateral declaration of independence means that the border will 
dominate politics again, in Dublin as well as Belfast. In addressing this 
problem, we can only hope politicians there will demonstrate more 
responsibility than their counterparts in London.
 