
As a community organiser in Chicago's south side, Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> once managed to secure an 
event with the city's first and only black mayor, Harold Washington. He primed 
the women he was working with to press the mayor to attend their forthcoming 
rally to improve conditions in the run-down area.

But instead they fawned and got their picture taken with him. Afterwards he 
asked if they had extracted a promise about the rally. "What rally?" said one. 
Obama stormed off in frustration. "Here we are with a chance to show the mayor 
that we're real players in the city," he told a colleague. "A group he needs to 
take seriously. So what do we do? We act like a bunch of starstruck children."

As a community organiser Obama was well aware that it was only by making 
demands on the powerful that the powerless could further their interests. As 
president he must be delighted to realise that all too few of his progressive 
supporters have grasped that reality.

The last week has felt very familiar. Just like four years ago, black people 
in Chicago have been swapping knowing smiles, liberals are watching Fox News to 
gloat and Democrats have been revelling in the charisma, eloquence and 
intelligence of their candidate. Their affection for him is rooted in politics 
but their assessment of him owes more to psychoanalysis. At the celebrations in
Chicago <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chicago> on Tuesday most believed 
he would be more radical in the second term. Ask them what that expectation is 
based on and they shrug. Ask them what they will do to make sure he meets it 
and they shrug again. If the devotion is not blind then, at the very best, it 
is not clear-sighted.

The lesson of the past four years shows that if they want to be taken 
seriously this time around they will have to stop behaving like a bunch of 
starstruck children. When it comes to progressive policies Obama will do what 
he is made to do. He is a centrist, liberal Democrat. There's nothing radical 
about him beyond his rhetoric. But he will respond to radicals if they put 
sufficient pressure on him –not because he is mean or cynical, but because 
that's how politics works.

There has been plenty of evidence of this in the past six months. In May, 
after years of unconvincingly claiming that his view on gay marriage was 
"evolving", it miraculously matured five months before an election as support 
from gay and lesbian voters and young people – who are far more likely to 
support marriage equality – appeared to be softening. A month later he halted 
the deportation of thousands of young undocumented immigrants with an executive 
order. He could have done either one at any time.

He did them when he did because he faced two well-organised communities who 
held his feet to the fire.

When trade unionist and civil rights leader A Philip Randolph demanded that 
President Franklin Roosevelt integrate the military, Roosevelt responded: "I 
agree with you. I want to do it. Now make me do it." They made him do it.

Even before Obama starts his second term he will have once again have to 
negotiate with Republicans over where the burden for this financial crisis and 
two failed wars should fall – with the poor and the public sector or the 
wealthy. Polls show an overwhelming majority in favour of raising taxes on the 
rich, maintaining a range of entitlement programmes, cuts in defence spending 
and stricter financial regulation. The problem is there are precious few 
lobbyists advocating for those popular positions. So the degree to which Obama 
sides with those who backed him on Tuesday will entirely depend on the degree 
to which they mobilise in the coming months, not for him but for their own 
interests.

"What we saw in Occupy Wall Street, the demonstrations in Wisconsin and the 
teachers' strike in Chicago was a glimpse of our own power," said Jesse 
Sharkey, the vice-president of the Chicago Teachers Union, which recently ran a 
successful strike against pay cuts, crude teacher evaluation and 
part-privatisation (which had been pursued by Obama's former chief of staff, 
Rahm Emanuel, and championed by Obama). "The difficulty is that the size of the 
forces that support austerity may be greater than those that will fight against 
it but the potential of opposition to austerity is far greater than most 
realise."

Obama's election is important, explains Sharkey, because it offers an 
opportunity that would not have existed if Mitt Romney had won. "Democrats 
respond when they're pushed. They're much more a weathervane than Republicans. 
If the wind's blowing hard enough they'll move."

The trouble is this works both ways. Just a couple of months into his first 
term Obama called a meeting of banking executives, who feared the worse. "The 
president had us at a moment of real vulnerability," Ron Suskind quotes one of 
them as telling him in the book The Confidence Men. "At that point, he could 
have ordered us to do just about anything and we would have rolled over. But he 
didn't – he mostly wanted to help us out, to quell the mob."

"I'm not going after you," Obama told them. "I'm protecting you. My 
administration is the only thing between you and the pitchforks." It was the 
people with pitchforks who voted for him on Tuesday. They should sharpen them 
for the months ahead.
 