
A vivid memory of my own first week as a PhD student: overhearing the senior 
members of the lab talk about the scientist in charge – a frighteningly 
brilliant woman they joked was “out of touch” in the lab.

I was shown – somewhat reverentially, with a warning to steer clear – a tidy, 
approximately two-foot square section at the end of one lab bench dedicated to 
her infrequent forays to the coal face. The boss reserved a few hours a month 
from writing successful grants and high-profile papers for risky, exploratory 
experiments that allowed her to keep her hand in, generate new lines of 
enquiry, and keep an eye on our wayward exploits.

My PhD supervisor aside, the journey from fledgling researcher to established 
lab head usually involves the step-by-step, inexorable dismantling of crucial 
lab nous. I’ve seen a lot of scientists transition from full-time researcher to 
office-bound scholar, some more gracefully than others.

As for my own group, it’s been relatively small for the past few years. This 
year however, thanks to new funding and increased interest from visiting 
scientists, we’re set to expand. This will inevitably require more office-time 
for me. But I am keen not to become the butt of anyone’s jokes, affectionate or 
otherwise, so in the spirit of looking the new year square in the face, here is 
what I will strive to do – and not do – to keep my inner bench-scientist alive.

Grants, cupcakes and the delicate balance of being a scientist mother
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/occams-corner/2016/sep/22/grants-cupcakes-and-the-delicate-balance-of-being-a-scientist-mother>
1. Maintain a realistic sense of time

All young scientists have probably been hauled up by their bosses for not 
having nailed a crucial piece of data to a time-frame that would clearly 
violate the laws of physics. Much like Captain Kirk and the bunged-up warp 
core, it’s common for the office-bound group leader to lose track of how long 
things actually take in real life. So I’m going to think very carefully when 
setting goals and milestones for my team – and build in buffering for the 
inevitable and unforeseen, from shattered test tubes to sensible theories that 
nevertheless prove to be wrong.

2. Keep up with the latest

And speaking of which, I’ve known some lab heads as they age to cling tightly 
to hypotheses they held dear in their glory days. In this psychological state, 
they can fail to factor in new information and ideas. Favoured notions can 
become cemented into ‘fact’ at any age, but I think established scientists are 
more prone to entering ruts and rattling along on the wrong path indefinitely, 
even in the face of contrary evidence. The only cure is, first, to keep totally 
on top of all the latest news in the field, in the form of papers and 
conference talks. And second, to actually consider whether conflicting ‘facts’ 
might mean thatyou are wrong, not they – and to take action accordingly. Here’s 
a concrete example: in my own lab, we’ve entertained a key assumption about the 
habits of the bacteria we study, worked out from some indirect evidence. This 
year, it’s time to find out one way or another if it is actually true.

3. Don’t shy away from new tech

I think it’s human nature to become increasingly resistant to change, to 
embrace and defend your increasingly embarrassing retro habits – sending 
Christmas cards, reading paper-based books, using correct punctuation in 
emails. The technology used to study the life sciences moves at breakneck 
speed. My PhD supervisor was an early pioneer of PCR, which now feels as quaint 
as needlepoint compared with the genome-editing prowess of the latest upstart, 
an astonishingly powerful technique called CRISPR whose potential my lab has 
yet to explore. And this is just one of dozens of new methods that have 
sprouted up over the past few years. It will be crucial to pay attention to 
what my younger researchers are interested in and to support them when they 
decide to give it a go. If my lab doesn’t move forward with the times, it’s not 
going to thrive – or do my trainees any favours.

4. Know how to do everything

And speaking of tech, if a postdoc brings in a new method or piece of kit, I’m 
going to do my utmost to make the time to try it out myself, and learn it well 
enough so that I feel confident interpreting the results it may generate. It’s 
very tempting to let a confident postdoc blaze the trail and own a new way of 
doing things completely, but in the long run, I need to put in the time to be a 
student once again, whenever it’s required. And if my name is last on a paper, 
I’m ultimately responsible for everything that it contains, so I can’t allow 
myself to be smoke-and-mirrored by the latest inscrutable craze – no matter how 
time-poor I happen to be. This will pay off even more when the postdoc moves on 
and I’m the only one in the lab who can teach the new recruits how the shiny 
machine actually works.

5. Keep a hand in

Since founding my own lab, I’ve managed to maintain small but interesting side 
projects, tinkering on them whenever I can carve out a few hours out of my 
week. I suspect that the added imperative of supervising more people on top of 
my teaching and other academic obligations will make this difficult. 
Nevertheless, I’m determined to emulate my PhD supervisor’s strategy. These 
efforts will keep me young – and most likely provide a good source of 
entertainment for everybody else.

6. Listen: don’t assume your way is the best way

At a Q&A for International Women’s Day last year, Nobel laureate Elizabeth 
Blackburn said that the best supervisory relationships are like equal 
partnerships, not those of the master and apprentice. I’m fortunate in my 
career to have been on both sides of this sort of relationship, and I can 
attest that science is easier, faster and far more fun with a partner in crime, 
the mature experience of one synergising with the creative enthusiasm of the 
other. In that spirit, I think it’s important to realise that I don’t always 
know best – that new ideas come from allowing fresh eyes to see the way forward.

7. Avoid mission creep

On the other hand, there is also a time and place for taking the lead. It is 
very easy for the young scientist to get lost down a rabbit hole, enticed by 
signs and signals that might ultimately mislead or are too far from the main 
question. With the benefit of experience – having made the same mistakes in the 
past – a good group leader will help steer her researchers back onto a 
productive path. Sometimes you just have to say: you did your best, but this 
angle is dead. Let’s move on now.

8. Be generous – with territory, with futures

Most scientists have known clingy lab heads who don’t want their postdocs to 
take ownership of a project, or to take projects and techniques with them when 
they leave the lab to set up their own independent shop. Empire-building at the 
expense of temporary research staff is the worst kind of selfishness. Yes, it’s 
a partnership, and the postdoc might not have been able to do it without the 
lab head, but equally, could the lab head have done without the postdoc? And 
how can the young ever flourish if we do not give them intellectual freedom?

In closing, I’m reminded of that famous quote ascribed (probably incorrectly) 
to Mark Twain: “When I was a boy of fourteen, my father was so ignorant I could 
hardly stand to have the old man around. But when I got to be twenty-one, I was 
astonished at how much he had learned in seven years.” It’s true that things 
look very different on the other side, and I was not able to truly appreciate 
my seniors until I’d walked in their shoes. But with a little effort, I hope to 
never stop seeing things from the vantage of the new.

 