
English cricket is nothing if not cussedly predictable. For all the 
restlessness of the past few years there are still few things more likely to 
induce a funk of self-destructive confusion than the sight of uncooperative, 
unorthodox, unarguable talent. At which point enter Alex Hales of the Mumbai 
Indians, who has this week flown out to play for them in theIPL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ipl> on a short-term deal, despite a clash 
with the start of the NatWest T20 Blast. And who is, age 26, already close to 
becoming an English cause célèbre before he has even had the chance to explore 
his full potential as an international cricketer.

This is not to suggest Hales belongs in the established A-list of maverick 
English talent. He’s not a Botham, a Gower, a Snow or a Pietersen. In fact, he 
is in his own way more interesting, a player who stands at one remove simply 
because of theway he plays, the nature of his talent as much as its extent.

England’s tough time could get trickier against strong New Zealand | Vic Marks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/may/16/england-tough-time-new-zealand-kevin-pietersen-peter-moores-andrew-strauss>
Only in England could the style of a man’s cricket – the ability to hit a ball 
with exhilarating venom outweighing his ability to block it out on a difficult 
pitch – become a kind of macro-political issue. But this is the way we seem to 
be heading, with Hales as a kind of Princess Diana for theTwenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> generation; not to mention 
providing all the evidence you need in one under-explored international 
cricketer of the basic stodginess that threatens to stifle not just the England 
team’s success but its connection with a broader, younger public.

One thing is clear – Mumbai have cherry-picked English cricket’s most 
exhilaratingly pure striker of a ball, not to mention its most modern, state of 
the art, new world-ish talent. Jos Buttler has a case, too, on this front, 
although England are currently doing their best to sweep him under the carpet 
by batting him down at No8. But Hales has the runs, the ICC ranking and the IPL 
bench spot.

And yet, for all that, he also has just 10 ODIs to his name, no central 
contract or prospect thereof, no immediate hope of playing Test cricket, and is 
of most interest currently as an example of how not to cultivate an outsize but 
unorthodox talent. Certainly letting him fly across the world to warm the bench 
in cricket’s glitziest domestic competition is not the worst thing English 
cricket has done to Hales this season: that would be flying him around the 
world to play only one live match at England’smeekest, most abject World Cup  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/mar/09/england-v-bangladesh-cricket-world-cup-live>
to date.

With this in mind there is an element of just deserts for anybody concerned 
with Hales’s absence from the ECB’s relaunched T20 competition – albeit for 
just a single match – is in some way a show of disloyalty. Frankly who could 
blame him? “It has been my aim and goal to get into this tournament. When I 
found out for sure that I would be a part of it, it was just elation for me,” 
Hales said on Monday. Contrast this with the sheer sense of all-consuming blue 
Lycra gloom around England’s tearfully-borne World Cup campaign. Or indeed with 
the weary disappointment in Hales’s own reaction to England’s then-coachPeter 
Moores musing publicly on his being “found out” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/mar/07/england-bangladesh-cricket-world-cup>
 by international bowlers able to duck the ball into to him.

“I got bowled once by Bhuvneshwar Kumar with an in-swinger. That’s not being 
worked out, that’s a good delivery,” Hales pointed out, rightly miffed. More 
striking is the urge to dismiss a talented player so easily. This is enough to 
make you weep a little in itself, with the suggestion that even at the highest 
level, cricket in England is still as it was in the 1950s: a sport where 
weakness trumps strengths every time; where selection must be based above all 
on even-handed blanket competence; and where concentrating on what a player 
can’t do is more important than glorying in what he can.

In this sense the real point here is not about Hales at all, but about the 
ability to promote and nurture the most talented in what is, like it or not, a 
glorious public entertainment rather than a self-nourishing corporate bubble. 
Hales may or may not be good enough to flourish more broadly. But as ever, a 
player other selectors and coaches might have treated like a new toy, to be 
cherished and allowed to fly, will instead have to ferret at the fringes, to 
doubt his methods, and to knock twice as loud as a more orderly talent just to 
make it to the same place.

This despite the fact England’s only successful modern short-form team, the 
2010 World Twenty 20 champions, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/may/16/england-australia-world-twenty20-final>
 were notable for their startling boldness, with openers who simply attacked 
without fear of censure (a policy that has not been seen since). Not to mention 
the fact Hales himself has achieved enough in a cut-and shut international 
career to deserve a little faith.His unbeaten hundred against Sri Lanka last 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/27/alex-hales-england-sri-lanka-world-t20>
 is up there with the best international Twenty20 innings ever played. He has 
353 T20 international runs at an average of 44 in the past year. In first-class 
cricket he has scored 1,693 runs at 55 with five hundreds over the last two 
years batting No3 for Nottinghamshire (Hales would make a thrillingly potent 
Test No5).

There is no template for how an international cricketer should emerge these 
days. Hales is neither a David Warner, authentic child of Twenty20; nor a Kane 
Willamson, whose orthodox success opened the portals of the Twenty20 circuit. 
He is simply a curiously unexplored talent who faces a vital year or two. Some 
success next season in the IPL (he probably won’t play this time round: Mumbai 
have only just settled on an opening pair) could yet kickstart his career in 
another direction. Alternatively, a new England regime might feel emboldened to 
trust in an uneven but undeniably exhilarating batsman.

Either way we will probably never know how good he might have been. Hales has, 
to an extent, already been decisively mucked about and under-nurtured, 
challenged to justify his sense of adventure when he might have been encouraged 
simply to go with it.

What is certain is there will be others, that the future, even in England, is 
roughly Hales-shaped. And that English cricket would be a happier place all 
round with the knowledge that talent, however ragged-edged, will find a home.
 