
After Lancashire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> slipped to 299 
for seven in the final over of day one, not even the most optimistic supporter 
could have hoped for a first-innings score a whisker away from 500. But, thanks 
to the lower order trio of Jordan Clark, Arron Lilley and Kyle Jarvis, that is 
what they got to put themselves on terms against the buoyant defending county 
champions, who are still 209 from the 345 follow-on target.

County cricket: Lancashire v Yorkshire and much more – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/14/county-cricket-live> 
The all-rounder Clark and last man Jarvis, the former Zimbabwe Test seamer, 
hit career best half-centuries during an exhilarating morning’s batting in 
which 195 runs came inside 38 overs.

The record books were being furiously thumbed as Clark, who shared 87 inside 
the first 14 overs for the eighth wicket with Lilley, and Jarvis hit strongly 
down the ground with regularity on the way to a 10th-wicket stand of 107 to 
advance from 387 for nine in the 110th over.

Yorkshire’s only reason for cheer before lunch was a third bowling bonus point 
courtesy of wickets for Steve Patterson and Tim Bresnan in the 109th and 110th 
overs. Patterson had Lilley caught behind for 45 trying to uppercut before 
Bresnan trapped Nathan Buck lbw with a leg-stump yorker.

Clark’s 84 not out included a six straight down the ground off the part-time 
off-spinner Adam Lyth, and Jarvis hit two sixes in the same region off Bresnan 
and Adil Rashid. The latter helped him reach a maiden first-class 50 and post 
the highest 10th-wicket partnership for Lancashire againstYorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/yorkshire>.

Their alliance beat the previous best of 82 between Ian Austin and Peter 
Martin at Scarborough in 1991. Neither Bully nor Digger, as they are 
affectionately known, were present for the annual LCCC former players dinner in 
the Old Trafford pavilion.

England provide plenty of entertainment but selectors need a new hunch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/14/england-selectors-hunches-james-vince-pakistan>
Unfortunately, Clark and Jarvis, with a point to prove having been 
surprisingly demoted below Buck in the batting order, fell one run short of 
equalling the overall Roses record of 108 shared between the Yorkshire pair 
Lord Hawke and Lees Whitehead here in 1903, with Rashid trapping Jarvis lbw to 
signal lunch.

Yorkshire are far from on the rack. They slipped to 55 for two following the 
loss of Lyth lbw to Jarvis and Jack Leaning caught at slip off Tom Smith before 
Alex Lees and Andrew Gale batted confidently together after tea to share 81 
unbroken.

But this is a match they hoped to win, not just draw – the most likely outcome 
at present – as they bid to become the first county to win a hat-trick of 
trophies in a season since Warwickshire in 1994.

Middlesex’s position of strength against Durham at Lord’s is not ideal for the 
back-to-back champions given they started this round with a 14-point deficit to 
the leaders.

For the opener Lees, an unbeaten 62 represents an encouraging start to a big 
week for the 23-year-old. As Yorkshire’s limited overs captain, he will lead 
his side into a 50-over quarter-final against Kent at Canterbury on Thursday 
and then only their second Finals Day appearance on Saturday at Edgbaston. He 
reached 50 off 155 balls with four fours inside the last hour of play.

Gale, meanwhile, has scored only one Championship 50 all season and spoke last 
week about the possibility of dropping himself should other options arise. He 
will begin day three unbeaten on 36 having played Lancashire’s three spinners, 
Lilley, Simon Kerrigan and Liam Livingstone, confidently.
 