
There has been an urban farm here for almost 40 years. Today its thriving 
crops and animals were a popular attraction with parents with small children on 
school holidays, but we had come to explore the land beyond, in the triangle 
formed by the convergence of the Byker, east coast mainline railway and Tyne 
and Wear metro viaducts. We turned off the footpath near the old humpback 
bridge over the Ouseburn, into a field whose recently planted community orchard 
was already bearing fruit and where skilled habitat management has created a 
crucible of urban biodiversity.

Two speckled wood, a comma and a red admiral butterfly, basking in the sun, 
rose from the path as we approached the pond. We watched small skippers and 
meadow browns on the scabious flowers and were buzzed by red darter dragonflies 
chasing over the water. Purple loosestrife, wild parsnip and teasels teemed 
with bees and hoverflies. Then we spotted what looked like a scrap of silvery 
litter in the mud. It fluttered into the air then landed again: aholly blue 
<http://www.ukbutterflies.co.uk/species.php?species=argiolus> butterfly.

Holly blues have always been scarce in our region, which marks the northern 
limit of their distribution. It’s predicted that climate change will allow 
their northward migration, but this was the first I’d seen. Kneeling in mud was 
a small price to pay to admire its lustrous pale blue wings while it extended 
its proboscis to suck moisture from the soil, before it settled on a pond-side 
plant. Traffic growled and trains rumbled overhead, but here was a fragile 
insect of exquisite beauty, in a place that had once been one of the most 
industrialised, polluted parts of the city.

There’s great local pride in progress made in cleaning up and redeveloping 
this area, which is now a centre for the arts and is fast becoming a 
fashionable place to live. Nurturing this flowery haven with its wetland, reed 
beds, woodland and flowery meadow, making it fit for a holly blue, is no less 
of an achievement.

@seymourdaily <https://twitter.com/SeymourDaily>
 