
Cricket Australia might let Andre Russell use his black bat again, provided he 
can prove it will not mark the ball, after officials banned the bat following 
Tuesday night’sBig Bash League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/big-bash-league> Sydney derby.

The West Indian originally had permission to use the eye-catching bat, which 
has a pink handle and a black blade but that approval was withdrawn after match 
officials discovered the bat had marked the white ball.

Sixers open Big Bash League season with win over Thunder in Sydney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/sixers-open-big-bash-league-season-with-win-over-thunder-in-sydney>
“We have decided to withdraw our approval for Andre to use the bat that was 
used last night as the colour solution used by the manufacturer was 
discolouring the ball,” BBL boss Anthony Everard said.

CA have not ruled out Russell being able to use a coloured bat again in the 
BBL.

“Should Andre, or any other BBL or WBBL player ... wish to use a bat with a 
different colouring solution to the one used last night that doesn’t result in 
the discolouration of the match ball, they will be permitted to do so subject 
to CA being satisfied that the bat won’t compromise the integrity of the game,” 
Everard said.

Under BBL regulations, a player can use a coloured bat, subject to approval. 
It must be black or the same as the team’s primary colour. Match umpires can 
also ask a player to change the bat if they feel it is affecting the integrity 
of the game.

Russell scored nine from seven balls for Sydney Thunder in their nine-wicket 
loss to the Sixers on Tuesday.

In Wednesday night’s game, Brisbane Heat recruit Alex Ross revealed he was the 
subject of some verbal barbs from his former Adelaide Strikers team-mates 
before having the last laugh in his side’s hard-fought 10-run win at Adelaide 
Oval.

Ross, who switched from Adelaide to Brisbane in February, copped it mostly 
from Strikers skipper Brad Hodge after walking out to the middle to a few boos 
from the outer.

But Ross was undeterred, thumping 64 to help the Heat to a formidable 206-5, 
which proved just enough when Adelaide’s chase faltered at the death.

“There were a few cheeky words,” Ross said. “There were a few more lippy 
players than what I actually would have thought. They might have got a bit of 
confidence from the booze in the crowd. He [Hodge] had a few kind words for me. 
It’s all in good fun, it’s professional sport.”

Ross finished off the earlier good work of Brisbane openers Jimmy Peirson (46) 
and Brendon McCullum (42), before new Striker Ben Dunk set a sizzling pace 
early in the run chase.

Dunk’s dismissal for 85 combined with Samuel Badree’s maiden the very next 
over swung the pendulum back Brisbane’s way. “We were a bit nervous ... he 
[Dunk] strikes them beautifully,” Ross said. “In hindsight it [Badree’s maiden] 
was a pivotal over – it turned the game.”

Dunk was impressive in his first outing in Adelaide colours, dispatching the 
Heat bowlers to all corners before holing out off the bowling of Ben Cutting.

Dunk believes his dismissal turned the match in Brisbane’s favour. “When 
you’re chasing 200, everything needs to go right,” he said. “I thought [Jake] 
Weatherald batted beautifully and between us, we gave ourselves a chance but 
full credit to the Heat who produced some really good death bowling.”
 