
I never intended to write a book. My parents were struggling, impoverished 
writers and I’d always vowed not to go the same way. But then I stumbled across 
Lucia Joyce, daughter of James and a dancer in 1920s Paris. I still didn’t want 
to write a book, but I wanted to know more about her life, her alleged affairs 
with Alexander Calder andSamuel Beckett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/beckett>, and why she spent the latter 
half of her life in a mental asylum. When I couldn’t find the answers in her 
biography, something happened that I still don’t fully understand. I felt a 
compulsion to uncover and fictionalise her story.

I discovered that many of her letters had been purposefully destroyed and this 
enraged me. At the time, I was intending to become a photographer, but instead 
I stopped my classes and bought or borrowed every book I could find on Joyce 
and his circle. Books spilled from every stair, towered from every table-top, 
squatted in trembling piles on every floor.

That should have been a warning sign. The project was too ambitious, too 
unwieldy. But I couldn’t stop. The story had chosen me and Lucia wasn’t letting 
go. I’d never been on a writing course and I quickly realised that creating 
plots, characters and convincing dialogue was far more difficult than it 
looked. I looked at the roof-scraping stacks of books and panicked. There was 
no time for a course; I had too many books to read, too many trips to make – 
and I had to learn to dance. How could I write about a dancer without learning 
to dance?

I decided to teach myself creative writing and started ordering how-to-write 
books. The piles grew. The insomnia deepened. I seemed to read all night, every 
night. And in the grey light of dawn I tossed and turned: Lucia was a very 
difficult character to construct, and capturing her life was proving more 
difficult than I could ever have imagined. Still she did not let go.

Several people had told me my novel was too highbrow for the ordinary reader 
and too lowbrow for the Joyceans

As part of my research I started rereading Joyce. Dubliners and A Portrait of 
the Artist as a Young Man were a joy. But then there was Ulysses and – oh God! 
– Finnegans Wake. There they sat, beside my bed, accusatory and demanding. I 
tried to tell myself this was Lucia’s story, it was not about Joyce. I wasn’t 
even writing in an experimental style. To no avail. Ulysses and Finnegans Wake 
started following me round the house like hungry dogs. By this point, several 
people had told me my novel was too highbrow for the ordinary reader and too 
lowbrow for the Joyceans. A friendly agent suggested I was trespassing on 
hallowed ground and should find another story that didn’t involve so many 
iconic men. Meanwhile, my children were asking for a proper meal and my husband 
was politely suggesting I move to the spare room. Still, Lucia gripped me.


Finally, I bit the bullet and picked up Ulysses. Within minutes I was 
panicking – again. I’d read Ulysses before – twice – but I’d clearly wiped the 
experience from my mind. This was not a book to be read by torchlight in the 
early hours of the morning. What was I thinking! I googled Ulysses courses and 
found a six-month salon. I enrolled, read all the background books, listened to 
the audiobook and scoured the web for sources. But would it help me understand 
Lucia’s predicament? Would it help me imagine myself into her elusive, shifting 
character?

The answer is yes, it did. Studying Ulysses in a group rather than reading it 
alone forced me to pause, to scrutinise every line, to search beyond the words 
to the author lurking behind. Suddenly facets of Lucia that I hadn’t fully 
grasped began to fall into place. And I became more and more absorbed by some 
of the thrilling prose, and by the way Joyce built his protagonist, Leopold 
Bloom. I may not have learned much about plot, pace and tension (which I was 
determined to have in my novel), but I learned about prose, character and 
resilience. And so Ulysses ended up being both research into Lucia and a guide 
to crafting fiction.

Extract

Mama writhed and twisted in front of the mirror. “This hat or the black one, 
Lucia?”

Her words floated across the air like vapour. I barely heard them as I stared 
out of the window, straining in the direction of the rue d’Ulm. The last few 
leaves clung to the boughs of the trees. And beneath them the street lamps cast 
ragged circles of light onto the cobbled road. The smell of roasting chestnuts 
from the braziers on the rue de Grenelle seeped through the ill-fitting window 
frame, but I barely noticed that either. I moved as though in a dream, unable 
to feel the floor beneath my feet. All I saw, in every direction, was Mr 
Beckett’s face – his cheekbones in the bare branches of the trees, his eyes 
reflected in the darkening swell of the sky. My skin prickled all over and I 
felt light and tight at the same time. I said his name, wordlessly, again and 
again. Mr Beckett. Mr Beckett. Mr Beckett.

More about the book

Dancing, declares Lucia, is “the most important thing in my life” and she has 
a great gift for it, evoking the euphoria of performing before a rapturous 
audience. Dancing was her “lifebelt”, but when distracted from her vocation, 
manacled to her father as his muse and fatally attracted to his protege Samuel 
Beckett, she starts sinking.

Here is a powerful portrait of a young woman yearning to be an artist, whose 
passion for life – and rage at being unable to fulfil her talent – burns from 
the page. –Anita Sethi

Read the full review. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/12/the-joyce-girl-annabel-abbs-review>

Buy the book

The Joyce Girl is published by Impress Books at £8.99 and is available from 
the Guardian Bookshop for £6.99 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-joyce-girl.html>.
 