
Rhapsodie Française – or French Rhapsody – was thought up as a global novel 
about the state ofFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> today. I 
live in the same era as you; the news I see in newspapers, on TV or on the 
internet is the same as it is for you. You can’t always simply rely on 
make-believe to write a novel. Sometimes real life makes its way into the story 
– and from then on, it’s your job to come to terms with that “real life” 
because, whether you like it or not, it’s there.

I’m now into my 40s. I’ve always lived in France, I can speak of it as my 
country. In many ways, it is very similar to the country I remember as a child, 
and in others, very different. A lot has changed. Time has sped up and the 
world has become faster. The advent of the internet changed the game. Problems 
in far off countries have become ours. The economy is now global. It’s rare to 
have a career for life in the same sector. More than half of all marriages end 
in divorce after just 10 years. You no longer meets girls in cafes, you make a 
profile on a dating app. Politicians, both on the left and the right, have 
never been more unpopular, while extremist and nationalist sentiment has never 
felt more pronounced. I’m not judging this era. I’m simply noting.

My country is probably not so far from your own. The United Kingdom and the 
United States are going through the same change. Does this worry you? Me too. 
Do you nonetheless remain optimistic? Me too. Is it possible to talk about all 
this in the space of a novel? Yes, I believe so. Seriously, but in a 
light-hearted way? Yes, I believe that too. One can be profound but still keep 
one’s sense of humour, and this is the idea behind French Rhapsody.

My main character is a GP called Alain Massoulier – he could just as easily be 
called John Smith or Alan Brown – who receives a letter that has been lost in 
the postal system for more than 30 years. Parallels between his life today and 
his youth begin to emerge. I called the book Rhapsody because nothing is 
certain in a rhapsody. It’s a very particular musical form, free, full of 
movements, and most of all, as unpredictable as the times we live in.

French Rhapsody was written in French but you can read it in any language as 
the themes and the characters are universal. I am hugely thankful to my 
publisher Gallic Books, and to my translators Emily Boyce and Jane Aitken, who 
have been able to, with their great talents, render my French prose accessible 
to English-speaking readers. It’s extremely rare for a French author to be 
translated into English and it is rarer still to have a readership. As with my 
previous books,The President’s Hat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/mar/19/presidents-hat-antoine-laurain-review>
 and The Red Notebook, it’s the case that what you’ll read in English (for I 
can and do read my English translations) is exactly what I wrote in French. I 
hope you enjoy French Rhapsody. One day, what I write will happen.

Extract

The notice showed a joyful team of postmen and -women all giving the thumbs 
up. Running across the top in yellow letters were the words ‘The future: 
brought to you by the Post Office.’ Alain chuckled mirthlessly. ‘Great slogan.’
 ‘No need to be sarcastic, Monsieur,’ replied the civil servant calmly.
 ‘Don’t you think I’m entitled to a little sarcasm?’ demanded Alain, pointing 
to his letter. ‘Thirty-three years late. How do you explain that?’
 ‘Your tone is not helpful, Monsieur,’ replied the man drily.
 Alain glared at him. The assistant manager held his gaze for a moment, then 
slowly extended his arm towards a blue folder which he opened with some 
ceremony. Then he licked his finger and started turning the pages, rather 
slowly. ‘And your name is?’ he murmured, not looking at Alain.
 ‘Massoulier,’ replied Alain.
 ‘Ah, yes, Dr Alain Massoulier, 38 Rue de Moscou, Paris,’ the civil servant 
read aloud. ‘You’re aware that we’re modernising?’
 ‘The results are impressive.’
 The man with the moustache looked at Alain again in silence and seemed about 
to say something sharp, but apparently thought better of it.
 ‘As I was saying, the building is being modernised, so all the wooden shelves 
dating back to its construction – in 1954 – were taken down last week. The 
workmen found four letters which had fallen down the back and were trapped 
between the floor and the shelves. The oldest dated back to … 1963,’ he 
confirmed, reading from the file. ‘Then there was a postcard from 1978, a 
letter from 1983 – that’s yours – and lastly, a letter from 2002. We took the 
decision that, where possible, we would deliver them to their recipients if 
they were still alive and easily identifiable from their addresses. That’s the 
explanation,’ he said, closing the blue file.
 ‘But no apology?’ said Alain.
 Eventually the assistant manager said, ‘If you wish, we can send you our 
apology form letter. Would that be of use?’

Buy the book

French Rhapsody by Antoine Laurain, translated by Jane Aitken and Emily Boyce, 
is published at £8.99 by Gallic Books and isavailable from the Guardian Bookshop
 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/french-rhapsody.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 for £7.37.
 