
Looking for work – whether fresh from school, straight from university or as 
part of a career change – is fraught with difficulties. This is particularly 
true for people who have gained qualifications or experience that appears to 
have no relevance to the job they are applying for and passionately want.

So how do you demonstrate to an employer that your skills, education and 
experience are relevant to the job in hand?

If you are in this frustrating situation it is essential to highlight the 
skills and abilities you already possess that are directly transferable across 
to the position you are applying for. You need to demonstrate that you have the 
ability and desire to constantly learn new skills, as well as have a strong 
commitment to self-leadership and, in turn, self-improvement.

Knowing the relevance of your skill set

Some educational qualifications, such as law, engineering and medicine, shine 
clear career paths. In contrast, geography, sport science and criminology are
ranked lowest for helping graduates attain employment within six months of 
graduation <https://www.hesa.ac.uk/>.

This isn't because these courses have no inherent value or use (quite the 
opposite), it is just that the skills and knowledge obtained are so specific 
many employees fail to appreciate how they would be of use in a non-specialist 
field.

That is why it is vital you communicate the relevance of your skillset. For 
example, take a student who had previously studied, for example, performance 
studies at university. Wanting to work outside of acting and performing after 
university, potential employees might see no relevance in your qualifications.

However, the auditioning skills you have learned from acting could give you 
the confidence to pitch new business to clients. Your ability to project your 
voice to an audience makes you ideal for giving a company presentation. Knowing 
how to organise a theatre production gives you excellent event management 
skills, and having to read an audience and improvise in reaction to their mood 
makes you a huge asset in meetings.

Think hard, therefore, about what your education has given you the ability to 
do and how you can apply it to other areas. If studying sports science meant 
you had to study high volumes of data and process large amounts of information, 
that is what you need to sell on your CV, LinkedIn profile, or in an interview. 
Push your relevance to the specific job you want.

Show you can learn, relearn and learn again

The rapid advances in technology in recent years have produced the greatest 
shift in working culture since the industrial age. The ability to constantly 
learn new skills is vital for the workforce of the future.

Knowing how to code in a specific language, for instance, may be irrelevant in 
a few years as new forms of coding make it obsolete. So the key thing for 
developers to demonstrate to employers is that they have the work ethic and 
ability to learn any coding language.

Likewise, it's important to realise new tools and technology do not make your 
current skills instantly outdated. For example, many older people are wary of 
social media and think employers will favour younger candidates in jobs 
involving these platforms. But many forms of social media are simple, easy to 
learn communication tools. The hard skill is the ability to write clearly and 
engage with people and, therefore, that's the skill that needs to be sold to an 
employer.

Make sure to view new tools and trends with this in mind, you may already have 
the core competencies in place to master them.

Lead yourself

One skill many people possess but fail to sell is self-leadership. It is the 
ability to not only be aware of your own feelings, thinking and behaviour, but 
to constantly look to improve and develop these aspects of your personality.

Whether through setting personal goals, seeking out alternative viewpoints or 
proactively seeking and responding to professional feedback, self-leadership is 
about taking personal responsibility for your own actions. The ability to drive 
your own professional and personal progression can have a transformative effect 
on an organisation. It is a hugely attractive trait for employers and is, of 
course, transferrable to all jobs.

In your CV, online profiles and interviews give clear examples of any training 
completed or qualifications achieved within previous jobs. Make it crystal 
clear how this has developed you professionally. Don't forget to highlight 
skills acquired in personal hobbies, while volunteering or studying 
independently. Shout loudly about your adaptability, curiosity and openness to 
ideas.

Show you value feedback and give examples of how you have adapted previously 
due to both positive and negative feedback.

The skill of self-leadership is eternal, no technology will erase it. So sell 
it.

Selling yourself is a skill in itself

Don't just regurgitate a list of your skills and qualifications when 
communicating with employers. Each time you apply for a role go over all your 
attributes and look at them from the precise perspective of that particular 
job. You will most likely need to present the same skill differently to one 
employer than to another.

This may make job hunting more time consuming than you are used to, but five 
jobs applied for with precision is better than 50 applications written 
generically.

If you have the skills, make sure you make the most of any opportunity to 
demonstrate them. Indeed, just showing you have an awareness of your 
transferable skills and their relevance to another role indicates that you are 
someone capable of seeing the bigger picture. That can only be a good thing.

David McCall is managing director of Hyper Island UK 
<https://www.hyperisland.com/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 