
Arlene Foster had a very different upbringing to that of Peter Robinson, whom 
shecould succeed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/19/peter-robinson-to-step-down-as-northern-ireland-first-minister>
 as first minister of Northern Ireland. Robinson grew up in the safe unionist 
heartland of east Belfast; Foster in County Fermanagh, within a border 
Protestant community that throughout the Troubles felt under existential threat 
and that perceived the IRA’s campaign in the frontier zone as sectarian and 
aimed at driving them off the land.

The IRA once tried to murder her father, a part-time Royal Ulster Constabulary 
officer. She survived a bomb attack on her school bus when the Provisionals 
attempted to kill the driver, a part-time soldier. Foster knew personally many 
of the 11 Protestant civilians who died in the IRA’s bombing at the Cenotaph at 
Enniskillen on Remembrance Sunday 1987, one of the most notorious of the many 
massacres of the Ulster Troubles.

Foster is aware of the latent suspicion and hostility that many in her 
community still harbour towards Sinn Féin, and particularly towards leading 
republicans such as Martin McGuinness who once held sway in the Provisional 
IRA. Sheopposed the Good Friday agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2002/sep/20/northernireland.northernireland1>
 in 1998, and was part of a rightwing cabal within the UUP known as the “baby 
barristers” who remained a thorn in the side of their leader David Trimble. She 
and others defected to the DUP in 2004.

In 2010, Foster was appointed acting first minister when Robinson temporarily 
stood aside after the BBC investigative programme Spotlight revealed that his 
wife, Iris, had been having an affair with a 19-year-old man and that the 
Robinsons allegedly received financial backing from wealthy builders and 
property speculators. Her appointment fuelled suggestions that she would one 
day take the job on a more permanent basis.

Personally charming and embodying Fermanagh’s friendly reputation, Foster has 
had to work hard to establish a support base within the DUP. To some she 
remains a “blown in”, and she may still face opposition to her candidacy for 
promotion. That might lead DUP strategists to split the leadership, with the 
North Belfast MP Nigel Dodds leading the party from Westminster while Foster 
operates as first minister at Stormont.
 