
This year has not delivered the united Ireland nationalists predicted for the 
centenary of the Easter Rising, Northern Ireland’s new first minister has said.

Arlene Foster will become the first female and youngest ever first minister of 
the region when she takes over from Peter Robinson on Monday afternoon.

Before her elevation to the top job in Ulster politics, the first woman to 
lead theDemocratic Unionist party (DUP) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/dup> said she believed support for the 
union across Northern Ireland was growing. The Fermanagh-born politician said 
the unionist sense of dread over 2016 had gone.

Writing in the Belfast Telegraph on Monday, Foster said: “When I was growing 
up in the 70s and 80s, 2016 was often talked about in our home. People thought 
there would be a united Ireland by then. There’s not and, as a committed 
unionist, I’m glad support for the union is growing in every area ofNorthern 
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>.

“Being first minister is not about holding the office. It’s about leading this 
country in the right direction and ensuring our children grow up in a better 
Northern Ireland than I did. The real measure of success is not in obtaining 
the office, but in how it enables me to help others realise their dreams, 
ambitions and aspirations.”

The new first minister caused controversy over the weekend by stating that she 
would not be travelling to Dublin for the official centenary celebrations of 
the 1916 uprising against British rule. Nationalists have denounced her 
decision as a sign of “narrowness” in outlook.

The DUP leader described the Easter Rising as “an attack on democracy”. She 
claimed previous commemorations had only aided “violent republicanism” and it 
would be “wrong for me to give any succour to those people”.

In her article, Foster refers to the IRA’s attempt on her father’s life when 
he was a police officer living on the family farm close to the border with the 
Irish Republic. She also recalls escaping death after the IRA bombed her school 
bus.

“I remember when the bomb went off on my school bus like it was yesterday. I 
even remember the smell and the deathly silence in the immediate aftermath, 
before the screaming started. Of course, we are all shaped by our experiences. 
Some of us live with scars. But while those scars show where we have been, we 
can’t allow them to cloud our vision in making progress. That is how we show 
that terrorism did not succeed,” Foster writes.
 