
Democratic Unionist leader Arlene Foster has hailed her party’s “tremendous” 
performance in theNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> assembly election after an 
unexpected repeat of its best ever Stormont haul.

The 38 seats won by the party is the same number it secured in 2011 in an 
election that many, including party strategists, viewed as a one-off historic 
high watermark.

While much of the campaign focused on whether Sinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> could eclipse the DUP as the 
region’s largest party – a possibility Foster herself repeatedly warned of – in 
the event the gap between the two main Stormont parties actually grew, albeit 
slightly.

Sinn Féin’s 28 seats was one short of its tally in 2011. It was also shy of 
the significant 30-seat threshold that would have handed the republican party 
extra power to veto assembly legislation.

In an election that saw most of the main parties consolidate their seat 
strength, there were also some notable victories for the smaller parties, with 
the People Before Profit Alliance (PBPA) and Green party both winning two seats 
each.

The DUP’s showing is undoubtedly a strong validation of Foster’s leadership, 
coming six months after she replaced the retiring Peter Robinson.

“It has been a tremendous election and I feel very energised by the fact the 
people have put their trust in us,” said Foster, who topped the poll in her own 
Fermanagh and South Tyrone constituency.

“It’s a strong endorsement of the direction of travel. We set out a five-point 
plan for a safer, stronger Northern Ireland, that is what have discussed right 
across the country as I criss-crossed across the country.”

Foster will now return as Stormont first minister. The former Ulster Unionist, 
who defected to the DUP in 2004, said she “wanted to get things done” in the 
term.

“I am very determined, and I am incredibly proud to be the leader of this 
great wee country that we call Northern Ireland and I am looking forward to 
leading it over the next mandate,” she said.

Long-time Sinn Féin deputy first minister Martin McGuinness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/martin-mcguinness> said he was pleased 
with his party’s performance, insisting it had to be viewed in the context of 
the “challenges” the executive had faced in the last mandate, highlighting the 
economic downturn and UK government “austerity policies”.

“That is a pretty remarkable performance given the challenges we have faced 
over the course of the last assembly term,” he said. The Sinn Féin veteran said 
he was now looking forward to the “new assembly and new executive” and focusing 
on what could be delivered.

Of the 108 candidates elected to Stormont, the DUP has 38, Sinn Féin 28, the 
Ulster Unionists 16, the SDLP 12, Alliance eight, PBPA two, Greens two, with 
the Traditional Unionist Voice (TUV) and independent Claire Sugden winning one 
each.

The turnout of 54.91% was down, but only slightly, on the 55.64% in the 2011 
Stormont election.
 