
Northern Ireland’s finance minister, Arlene Foster, will be elected leader of 
the Democratic Unionist party on Thursday night, paving the way for her to 
become first minister of the region.

A special electoral college will gather at an east Belfast hotel, and Foster 
is the only candidate for the leadership.

The outgoing DUP leader, Peter Robinson, will stand down as first minister on 
11 January, when the Stormont assembly returns from holiday.

Foster will take over that position, too, meaning Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, Scotland and Wales will all 
have female first ministers.


The Fermanagh-born former Ulster Unionist, who defected to the DUP in 
opposition to David Trimble’s moves towards compromise with republicans, has 
pledged to lead Northern Ireland “into an even better place”.

During the Troubles in Northern Ireland, Foster witnessed at first hand IRA 
violence against the unionist community in the border region. Her police 
officer father was shot and wounded by the IRA at her family’s farm, and a few 
years later a school bus she was travelling on was bombed. The IRA’s target in 
the latter attack was the bus driver, a part-time member of the security forces.

Foster has said it is now right to share power with the IRA’s political allies 
during the conflict, Sinn Féin. On Wednesday she joined Sinn Féin’s deputy 
first minister, Martin McGuinness, on a visit to a temporary refuge centre for 
the first of 50 Syrian refugee families to be relocated in Northern Ireland.

Foster said of her DUP leadership candidacy: “There can be few people in 
Northern Ireland who grew up during the Troubles who were not acutely aware of 
politics. My own personal experience has obviously shaped my views but my 
involvement in politics was not based solely as a reaction to the IRA terrorist 
campaign but on the firm belief that the union is good for Northern Ireland, a 
desire to strengthen that link and to make Northern Ireland the best it can be.

“I love this country. We only have to look at the sporting world to see the 
success this small place has on the global stage. I want to make Northern 
Ireland great again.”
 