
Arlene Foster has been formally elected as leader of the Democratic Unionist 
party.

The Stormont finance minister was the sole nominee to replace Peter Robinson 
as head of the largest unionist grouping inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>.

The 45-year-old is the DUP’s first female leader, and she will become the 
first woman to lead Northern Ireland when she takes on the role of first 
minister next month.

In a speech to the DUP party faithful at the Park Avenue hotel in east 
Belfast, she said: “The style of leadership may change, but the fundamental 
values of this party will not.

“I want to take our cause and our case to every part of the province. I want 
to make the case for the Union to every class and creed. I want us to help make 
the lives of our people better.”

Her appointment followed a vote by DUP assembly members and MPs, which was 
ratified by the party executive.

Two other contenders, deputy leader Nigel Dodds and Sammy Wilson, had ruled 
themselves out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/09/arlene-foster-likely-to-become-northern-ireland-first-minister>
 of the race for the leadership.

Foster, a Fermanagh and South Tyrone MLA, made a high-profile defection from 
the Ulster Unionist party in 2004, over the early release of paramilitary 
prisoners and the decision to share power with Sinn Féin.

Her father was targeted by the IRA when she was aged eight, and then as a 
teenager she survived a republican bomb attack targeting the driver of her 
school bus who was a part-time Ulster Defence Regiment soldier.

She said: “The Troubles have scarred Northern Ireland’s history, but we must 
not let them shape our future. We have an opportunity to build the best legacy 
possible to those who lost their lives during the Troubles – a prosperous 
Northern Ireland, confident, outward looking and at peace with itself.

“The people of Northern Ireland don’t want to hear their politicians 
squabbling about issues that seem unconnected to their daily lives.

“People who get up early in the morning, get their kids to school, go and do a 
hard day’s work and come home tired, don’t want to turn their TVs on and hear 
us sound completely and utterly out of touch with real life, arguing over 
things that don’t matter to them or their family.

“They want to know that when they work hard and pay their taxes that their 
government is doing its best to ensure that their children get a good 
education, that their parents will get the healthcare they need when they need 
it and that they will be supported if times get tough.”

Hinting at a change of direction for the party, founded by the late Ian 
Paisley, Foster said: “We will never resile from our belief that Northern 
Ireland is best served being part of the union.

“But unionism is about all of us and not anyone alone. It is about everyone 
working together as one, for the greater good, to build a Northern Ireland we 
can all be proud of.

“I want people to support the DUP because we are the best defenders of the 
union that is so important to the success of Northern Ireland.

“But I also want people of all religious persuasions, from all social 
backgrounds to make this party their home because we are the ones who can 
create a growing economy, who can best reform our NHS and who can tackle 
educational underachievement in our working class communities.”

Robinson, 66, announced his intention to resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/19/peter-robinson-to-step-down-as-northern-ireland-first-minister>
 as DUP leader and Stormont first minister in November, days aftersigning a 
political deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/17/northern-ireland-power-sharing-saved>
 with Sinn Féin and the British and Irish governments to stabilise the rocky 
power-sharing administration in Belfast.

Among the first to offer congratulations to Foster was Northern Ireland 
secretary Theresa Villiers.

She said: “I am sure that Arlene will be committed to doing the right thing 
for everyone in Northern Ireland.

“I very much look forward to working with her.”
 