
The Democratic Unionist leader, Arlene Foster, has been appointed Northern 
Ireland’s new first minister, becoming the first woman to hold one of the 
power-sharing executive’s two top jobs.

Her elevation, replacing the retiring Peter Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/peter-robinson>, was confirmed during the 
first assembly sitting of the new year at Parliament Buildings in Belfast. The 
45-year-old lawyer, who representsFermanagh and South Tyrone, had already 
replaced Robinson as leader of the region’s largest political party, the DUP.

Arlene Foster: Easter Rising was attack on democracy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/11/arlene-foster-easter-northern-ireland-first-minister-dup>
Robinson, 67, announced his intention to retire from frontline politics last 
November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/19/peter-robinson-to-step-down-as-northern-ireland-first-minister>
, days after signing a political deal with Sinn Féin and the British and Irish 
governments to stabilise the tottering administration. The transition of power 
has been smooth, with Foster facing no challengers from within the DUP, and 
assuming office alongside the long-serving Sinn Féin deputy first minister, 
Martin McGuinness.

In his farewell speech at Stormont on Monday, Robinson told the assembly that 
“after centuries of division, we had to outlive the growing pains of learning 
to work together, fashion shared policies, and create a more inclusive 
society”. He added: “I hereby resign the office of first minister with 
confidence that the political institutions we have together created will be 
here for generations to come.”

Foster paid tribute to Robinson, admitting she had big shoes to fill. “Three 
minutes cannot do justice to the career of the person who has been the most 
astute unionist political leader of this, or for that matter any, era in 
Northern Ireland’s history. But when the history of this time comes to be 
written, his leadership will define this period. In his time he has helped 
redraw the unionist political map and ensured a better future forNorthern 
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> in the most 
challenging of circumstances.”

She told a packed assembly chamber she was “tired of Stormont being a 
watchword for arguing and bickering. That’s not why our people elected us. They 
did so to provide a better future for us all. I will do all I can to change the 
political culture of this place but I can’t change that alone. We can only do 
it by working together.

“I know from experience it won’t be easy. Real change never is. But I ask 
today that we find a new way of doing business, one that places a greater 
premium on consensus than on conflict.”

Mike Nesbitt, whose Ulster Unionist party pulled out of the power-sharing 
executive in the wake of the IRA-linked murder of a man in Belfast last August, 
offered congratulations on her “personal achievement”, but warned of difficult 
times ahead. “Mrs Foster has the baton and we await to see what sort of music 
she can squeeze out of the discordant executive,” he said.

Sinn Féin’s education minister, John O’Dowd, said Foster would require 
determination to face down the enemies of the peace process and spoke of the 
loneliness of leadership. He told MLAs: “There are many enemies of the peace 
process in society and all do not wear balaclavas.”

Foster’s DUP colleagues described her “feisty and fiery” personality but 
hailed her political mind and drive as well as her love for Northern Ireland. 
The employment minister, Stephen Farry, who attended Queen’s University in 
Belfast when Foster was studying law during the turbulent 1980s, described her 
appointment as historic.

The independent MLA Clare Sugden said she hoped young women would be inspired 
by Foster, whom she described as a great politician. “This is an incredible 
day. I am inspired and I hope all young women will be inspired,” she said.

Although there has been a generational shift in politics, said John 
McAllister, the MLA for South Down, the new first minister and her deputy face 
some old problems. He said: “The challenge is to end the us and them in our 
politics and our society.”

The new first minister caused controversy over the weekend by stating that she 
would not be travelling to Dublin for the official centenary celebrations of 
the Easter rising – the 1916 rebellion against British rule. Republicans 
criticised her decision, saying it showed a narrowness in outlook.






 