
Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> historians have revealed 
that a forgotten painting stored for decades at a US museum is a work by the 
Dutch master Hieronymus Bosch.

The surprise discovery comes as ’s-Hertogenbosch, the hometown of the artist 
whose nightmarish visions earned him the moniker “the devil’s painter”, marks 
the 500th anniversary of his death.

The painting lay in storage for years at the Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art in 
Kansas City, Missouri, which acquired it in the 1930s.

Entitled The Temptation of St Anthony, it shows the saint gathering water in a 
jug as he leans on a staff in what was probably part of a larger panel, 
possibly a triptych.

Initially it had been believed to be the work of one of the many students who 
flocked to Bosch’s workshop in ’s-Hertogenbosch.

But an international team who carried out a five-year research project using 
sophisticated infrared technology determined that the painting was in fact by 
the master himself.

Dutch museum achieves the impossible with new Hieronymus Bosch show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/21/hieronymus-bosch-exhibition-holland-small-museum-host-largest-ever>
The canvas, which is likely to have been painted between 1500 to 1510, “is a 
significant addition to the small body of existent work produced by Hieronymus 
Bosch”, the researchers said in a statement.

“Although the image was heavily retouched and overpainted during a 
20th-century restoration, Bosch’s hand is still clearly recognisable in the 
original brushwork,” they said.

The painting was unveiled on Monday at the Noordbrabants Museum in Bosch’s 
hometown, which has succeeded in bringing together more than 20 of his 25 or so 
surviving works for an unprecedented retrospective, which opens on 13 February.

“The little monsters in the panel are typically Boschian,” the researchers 
said, highlighting a monster with a fox’s head, and a toad clambering out of 
the water.

Even the floating sausage that features in the painting can be found in other 
works by Bosch.

New stop on Delft tourist trail after Vermeer's Little Street identified
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/26/new-stop-on-delft-tourist-trail-after-vermeers-little-street-identified>
It is the second work that the Bosch Research and Conservation Project (BRCP) 
has recently determined was by the Dutch master. Late last year, the team also 
revealed that a drawing called The Infernal Landscape was drawn by him.

The exhibition marks the culmination of a nine-year quest by the museum 
director Charles de Mooij to reunite Bosch’s unique artistic legacy in the 
place where he worked, lived and died.

It kicks off a year of events in the medieval town in the southern Netherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> to honour its most famous son, 
who was born Jheronimus van Aken in about 1450.
 Photograph: PR 
The newly discovered work will join 20 paintings and 18 other drawings among 
about 100 works on display in the exhibition Hieronymus Bosch - Visions of 
Genius, which runs until 8 May.

But Bosch’s most famous work, The Garden of Earthly Delights, which journeys 
from Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden to a terrifying vision of hell, will 
not be on display.

The triptych hangs in the Prado Museum in Madrid, and has never travelled 
abroad. But in a remarkable coup, the Prado has agreed to allow Bosch’s The 
Haywain to leave Spain for the first time in 450 years.
 