
In 2014, Robin Conibere made the leap from working in a local pharmacy to a 
role as a clinical pharmacist at Beacon Medical Group in Devon. The key driver 
for Conibere was the opportunity to move out from behind the pharmacy counter 
and play a greater role in providing one-to-one health advice for patients.

Conibere says: “I felt I could do more with my skills. I always enjoyed the 
contact with patients and thought I could do more to help them with their 
health conditions, which is what drew me to working in general practice as a 
clinical pharmacist.”

Clinical pharmacists work from GP practices alongside GPs, nurses and other 
primary care staff. Their role involves assessing and treating patients using 
their expert knowledge of disease and medicines. Conibere says: “It is now 
common for patients to have a number of conditions, often long term, where they 
might have more complicated medication needs. Helping patients manage and get 
the most out of their medication really does make a difference to their health.”

The physician associate will see you now - new role to assist patients in 
primary care
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/nhs-england-and-health-education-england-partner-zone/2016/nov/30/the-physician-associate-will-see-you-now-new-role-to-assist-patients-in-primary-care>
While the role of the clinical pharmacist in general practice has been 
developing for some time, it is now an integral part of a transformation in GP 
services. NHS England has committed to get an additional 1,500 clinical 
pharmacists working in general practice by 2020-21. This is in addition to a 
pilot scheme launched in July 2015, which has already seen 490 clinical 
pharmacists working in around 650 GP practices across the country. A further 
rollout towards the 1,500 target has now been launched and GP practices will be 
able to apply for funding in January 2017.

It is the benefits that clinical pharmacists can bring to general practice 
that lead to such widespread support from GPs. Dr Lawrence Brad, a GP for 20 
years, who works at Westbourne Medical Centre near Bournemouth, says: “We’ve 
had a clinical pharmacist in practice for around five years and benefits 
include the impact of providing advice relating to the increasing number of 
patients with complex issues and their medication needs, helping follow up on 
patients with one or more long-term conditions, as well as helping us manage 
everyday prescription queries. Patient safety is improved if clinical 
pharmacists can help oversee patients’ transition from hospital, often with 
multiple medications, back into the community.”

Clinical pharmacists play a vital role in helping general practice integrate 
further with wider healthcare teams. “We are only starting to realise the 
possible benefits for the public, general practice and the wider healthcare 
system,” said Keith Ridge, NHS England’s chief pharmaceutical officer. 
“Clinical pharmacists in general practice can really help to provide a seamless 
service for patients, joining up care with hospital and community pharmacists 
and other health professionals, whilst reducing the workload for GPs by 
utilising their specialist knowledge of medicines, and alleviating pressures on 
hospital services by helping reduce avoidable admissions”.

That is why Keith is encouraging pharmacists to be part of the national 
rollout programme. ‘‘It is an exciting and promising career opportunity for any 
pharmacist,” he said. “The role enables you to use your expert skills and 
knowledge to help deliver the best form of care to the public by working in 
collaboration with other healthcare professionals.

“This programme is the start of great things to come. I envisage that there 
will be a clinical pharmacist working in every general practice across England. 
I hope we see an increase in the number of pharmacist partners working in 
general practice too.

“It helps improve access to healthcare, ensures that patients get the best use 
out of their medicines, and improves patient quality of life.”

Conibere hasn’t looked back. He argues that “by not having a pharmacist in 
general practice historically, we’ve been missing a trick, especially when the 
most common intervention is the prescribing of a medicine. By having a 
pharmacist there, it makes it a bit easier for patients and GPs to have more 
in-depth discussions about their medicines.

‘Being a GP and trying to solve patients’ problems is a privilege’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/nhs-england-and-health-education-england-partner-zone/2016/nov/07/being-gp-trying-solve-patients-problems-privilege>
“And for me, it’s all about the difference you feel you have made in a 
patient’s life. Sometimes patients aren’t really keen on seeing a clinical 
pharmacist at first, but they give you a chance and when you help them out it’s 
great to see them come back to you again and it’s that which is really 
rewarding. As a profession, we now need to build on this to show patients that 
getting the best care doesn’t always mean having to see the GP.”

This is certainly the experience for Philip Varlow. Aged 63, he’s a patient 
from Stratford, east London and was first introduced to the clinical pharmacist 
in his GP surgery several years ago. Varlow says: “I’m a passionate believer in 
self-care and the expertise that the clinical pharmacist can offer helps me to 
do this, managing multiple medications and giving me broader clinical advice.”

For Varlow it’s all about the wider benefits to the health of the nation. He 
says: “The way clinical pharmacists in general practice can help to educate 
patients and support them in managing their healthcare is so important. It 
supports people to live their lives as best they can and helps prevent more 
serious illness.”

You can read more about the NHS England’s clinical pharmacy rollout programme 
here <https://www.england.nhs.uk/gp/gpfv/workforce/cp-gp/>.

Content on the page is paid for and provided by NHS England and Health 
Education England.
 