 Ten Protestant workmen were callously shot to death on a country road in 
County Armagh last evening after a gang had stopped their mini-bus and ordered 
them to line-up.
A Catholic youth on the bus was told to "make himself scarce" before the 
murders took place.

An eleventh man in the line-up escaped death but his injuries were said to be 
serious.

The victims were on their way home from the Glenanne linen factory, near 
Markethill, when the gang of between 10 and 12 halted the mini-bus with a lorry 
drawn across the road. There were 12 men in the bus, including the driver.

The murders are thought to be in retaliation for the murders of five Roman 
Catholics in the same area on Sunday night.

Police estimate that about twenty weapons of all forms were used, from pistols 
to sub-machine guns.

All 12 men in the bus were going to their homes in Bessbrook, a mainly 
Protestant village, three miles from the strongly Republican border town of 
Newry and close to the village of White Cross where Sunday's murders happened.

Police said that the victims were aged between the teens and the sixties.

Mr Merlyn Rees, Secretary of State for Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, condemned the killings as 
"straight gangsterism." He forecast that the murders would not stop with the 10 
people in the mini-bus.

In a television interview he said that the killings had been ,"sectarian 
murders pure and simple, a hand-gun, Al Capone kind of gangsterism, call it 
what you will. It is the changed nature of violence we saw in the course of 
last year. And now in the new year there is now this violent outbreak.

"It will escalate. This is the way it will go on unless someone in their right 
senses stops it, it will go on."

Extra security forces had been put into the area, but that was not the answer. 
"Unless people down there realise the wicked nonsense of what they are doing to 
their fellow men, this will go on and on. Something must emerge in the 
community because extra police and soldiers by themselves will not do it."

Leaders of all the political parties in Ulster have accepted an invitation 
from Mr Rees to discuss the deteriorating sectarian situation. They will meet 
him at Stormont Castle today. There is no precedent for such a meeting.

Cardinal Conway, Roman Catholic primate, said he was "shocked beyond words." 
He added: "These foul murders stand condemned in the sight of God and men. I 
pray that all responsible for the killings in recent days may be brought to 
justice even in this life, as they certainly will be in the next. Those who 
take a life for a life are spitting in the face of Christ."

The Protestant primate, Dr George Simms, Archbishop of Armagh, said: " I am 
deeply shaken at this latest terrifying atrocity. For God's sake, listen to the 
pleas of the bereaved for no retaliation. For God's sake, come to your senses 
and stop the killing now."

A spokesman for the Moderator of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland said: 
"Where does this end? Sane people must stop the Province sinking into a 
holocaust of self-destruction."

Mr Brian Falkner, Leader of the Unionist Party of Northern Ireland, said that 
neither words nor the good intentions of those who used them were enough to 
deal with the situation which "is escalating so rapidly." There must be action 
and it must come form the Government!

Mr Ernest Baird, Leader of the United Ulster Unionist Movement, called on Mr 
Rees to provide realistic security. "We have had another tragic and brutal 
massacre of Protestants from Bessbrook. This and other events over the weekend 
demonstrate that the IRA can strike at will without any fear of being 
apprehended."

The Dublin Prime Minister, Mr Liam Cosgrove, said: "I wish to express my 
profound sympathy to the relatives of those who lost their lives last night and 
tonight in the brutal murders in Armagh. No words can express strongly enough 
my condemnation of these terrible sectarian killings."

Mr Alan Beith, Liberal spokesman on Northern Ireland, said that unless the 
people of South Armagh gave information about murders in the county, the two 
communities faced the alternative of "mutual extinction."

A policeman was shot and killed in an ambush near Castledawson, County Derry, 
last night. Two other policemen were reported wounded in the same ambush. The 
death raised the casualty toll for the first five days of the new year to 18.

Earlier in the day, as a result of Sunday's murders, Mr Rees announced three 
measures:

· More troops and police have been sent to the county. · A battalion of 
part-time men of the Ulster Defence Regiment has been partially mobilised. · 
The entire anti-sectarian "A Squad" of 40 senior RUC detectives has been 
ordered to suspend all other investigations and hunt down the two groups 
concerned in Sunday's killings.

There was some progress in the first 24 hours of the police investigation. 
Three men, all Protestants, were being questioned, and the car used by one of 
the groups has been found abandoned and burned out.

The five victims of Sunday night belonged to two families with isolated homes 
in Armagh.

In the first attack, three brothers were shot by a group of at least three 
gunmen. Two died. The brothers, John, Brian, and Anthony Reavey, were watching 
television in their cottage home near Whitecross when the armed gang burst in 
and opened fire.

John, aged 24, was shot dead almost instantly, and Brian, aged 22, was killed 
as he made a dash for the living room door. Anthony, aged 18, was the only one 
to survive. He threw himself under a bed and one of the gunmen fired a burst of 
automatic fire at him. Anthony was hit several times in the leg and was grazed 
in the chest but then the gunmen left, presumably thinking that he was dead. 
The wounded youth crawled about 100 yards to the nearest cottage to raise the 
alarm.

Ten minutes after the tea-time attack on the Reavey home a group of as many as 
six masked men burst into another isolated Catholic household at Ballydougan 
about a mile from Lurgan in North Armagh. There, the O'Dowd family, which has 
close links with the moderate Social Democratic and Labour Party, was having a 
family reunion. There were at least two women in the house and several children.

In front of the children, Barry O'Dowd, aged 24, and his brother, Declan, aged 
19, was shot dead in the living-room. Their uncle, Joseph O'Dowd, aged 61, also 
died in the hail of bullets, and the father of the two brothers, Mr Bernard 
O'Dowd, aged 52, was critically wounded.
 