
Australia cricket captain Steve Smith has reinforced his position as the 
heart, soul and rock of the side, scoring a dominant 164 in the first one-day 
international against New Zealand at the SCG.

The 157-ball knock, which included 14 fours and four sixes, not only anchored 
Australia’s 8-324 from their 50 overs, but further etched Smith’s name into the 
record books.

Smith’s century was the highest in ODIs at the SCG, surpassing AB de Villiers’ 
brilliant 162 off 66 balls against the West Indies at the 2015 World Cup.

Australia v New Zealand: first ODI – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/dec/04/australia-v-new-zealand-first-odi-live>
It was the fourth highest one-day score by an Australian on home soil, the 
seventh highest ODI score by an Australian and was the best 50-over innings of 
his career.

It was also the equal highest total by an Australian captain in an ODI, 
standing alongside Ricky Ponting’s innings in a memorable loss to South Africa 
at the Wanderers in 2006.

Of the 76 centuries by Australian batsman in all forms of the game over the 
past three years, Smith has been responsible for 21 of them.

“It’s a nice feeling. I had a bit of luck but you’ve got to take it where you 
can get it, and try to make the most of it,” Smith told the Nine Network.

“It was nice to get a big score on my home ground and I love batting here; 
it’s a great place to play.”

Smith arrived at the crease on Sunday with his side in big trouble at 1-1 
after Aaron Finch was bowled for a golden duck.

He should have been out to Trent Boult on 14 with replays showing that Black 
Caps captain Kane Williamson made a major blunder by not reviewing an 
unsuccessful appeal for lbw.

But as wickets fell around him, Smith pressed on, making New Zealand pay in an 
innings that lasted three hours and 24 minutes.

And it wasn’t just with the bat that Smith starred, taking a spectacular 
one-handed catch at backward point to dismiss BJ Watling.

With the Kiwis fighting back at 3-140, the Australians needed a dose of 
inspiration and it was Smith who once again proved the source.
 