
Thomas Pynchon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/nov/18/fiction.ianrankin>’s Captain 
Blicero appears to be an archetypal baddie: a sadomasochistic, sexually 
indiscriminate pederast Nazi and the source of the mysterious 00000 V-2 rocket 
that is the white whale of Pynchon’spostmodern masterpiece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2014/jun/18/thomas-pynchon-what-art-can-learn-pop-author>
 Gravity’s Rainbow.

Blicero made his first appearance in Pynchon’s 1963 debut, V, as Lieutenant 
Weissman, a decadent German army officer stranded in the former South-West 
Africa seven years after it ceased to be a German colony. In this earlier 
novel, he is a mysterious, occasionally transvestite figure who appears to be 
engaged in a sadomasochistic relationship with the German agent Vera 
Merovering. He is sneaky too, potentially drugging and then stealing from 
another character, Kurt Mondaugen. More droll than disquieting, he is not yet a 
fully-fledged bad guy.

By the time he crops up again in Gravity’s Rainbow, 20 years later, he has 
metamorphosed into something quite different. Now an SS major, he is the 
commander of a V-2 rocket battery in the Netherlands, where he has imprisoned a 
young Dutch woman and a German boy. Blicero is a shocking figure; the prisoners 
are his sex slaves and when he first appears in the action he is “in high drag” 
and in the act of having sex with the young German, Gottfried. When it is 
revealed that his hostages are playing roles in a skewed Hansel and Gretel 
fantasy, in which he is the witch trying to lure the children into his 
Kinderofen, things do not get any less bizarre.

Over the course of the novel’s dense and plentiful pages, Blicero/Weissman is 
revealed to have first been the lover of a young Herero male in colonised 
South-West Africa, and later to have been a key figure in the Nazi 
rocket-building programme, during which he tortured a technician into designing 
a customised V-2 rocket for his own ends. With his penchant for quoting his 
favourite poet, Rilke, Weissman cuts a singular figure. He is described as both 
“balding, scholarly, peering up … through eyeglass lenses thick as bottles” and 
as “a brand new military type, part salesman, part scientist”. He is brutal: 
“the sadist [with the] responsibility for coming up with new game variations 
building towards a maximum cruelty.”

There is little doubt that Weissman is death-obsessed. He even takes the name 
Dominus Blicero as his SS codename because it was a Teutonic nickname for death 
himself. In the novel’s penultimate section, we see him “in his final madness” 
as he abandons humanity altogether and embraces the ultimate destructiveness of 
the rocket. He has mutated into “another animal … a werewolf … but with no 
humanity left in its eyes”.

As long-time readers and viewers of the recent Inherent Vice adaptation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/01/inherent-vice-review-mark-kermode>
 can attest,Pynchon can never be accused of stinting on his creations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/16/inherent-vice-why-thomas-pynchon-is-made-for-the-movies>
. He is often criticised for creating cartoonish characters, and Weissman at 
first seems to fit this mould. But his African partner’s description of the 
early Weissman casts him in a more wistful light. He was, Enzian says, “a young 
man, in love with empire, poetry, his own arrogance”, but at the same time his 
“thirst for guilt was as insatiable as the desert’s for water”. He is human 
after all: another son of empire who is ultimately corrupted by its “mission to 
propagate death”.

Despite the satirical and ridiculous nature of Blicero, he embodies an 
important real-world point. He is a composite of the fears and prejudices of 
the post-Cuban missile crisis era in which this 1973 novel was composed. 
Perverse and unsettling, he represents the unabashed wickedness that lies at 
the heart of man’s romance with deadly technologies. His corrupted idealism is 
meant to bring to mind the Nazi rocket scientists, such asWernher von Braun 
<http://history.msfc.nasa.gov/vonbraun/bio.html>, who were transplanted from 
Germany to Texas immediately after the war to work on the American space 
programme.

Many of those scientists were exonerated of crimes they committed or were 
privy to, and became fixtures of American public life. Thus the anger in the 
line: “If you’re wondering where he has gone, look among the successful 
academics, the presidential advisers, the token intellectuals who sit on boards 
of directors. He is almost certainly there. Look high, not low.” For all his 
preposterousness, an uncanny undercurrent of history underpins this baddie. 
Pynchon characterises evil in such a way as to confront us with history’s 
complacent attitude to the baddies of the real world.
 