
Severiano Ballesteros of Spain gave everyone except himself a severe attack of 
palpitations yesterday before winning the 1980 Masters tournament by four 
strokes over the soggy Augusta National course. He added this classic title to 
the British Open Championship he won at Royal Lytham last year to establish 
himself undisputedly as the greatest golfer in the world today.

With nine holes to play Ballesteros seemed to have the 44th Masters firmly in 
his pocket. He had stretched his overnight lead of seven strokes to 10 with a 
typical display of swashbuckling golf and sublime putting and the only 
remaining questions were statistical. Could he beat the record winning margin 
of nine strokes? Could he improve on the Masters four-round record of 271, or 
17 under par? Could he become the first man in history to play four rounds at 
Augusta with scores below 70?

Those questions were forgotten as the main issue suddenly and dramatically 
reasserted itself: Ballesteros dropped a stroke at the 10th and then hit his 
tee shot into the creek at the short 12th. Memories were stirred of how Tom 
Weiskopf had splashed five balls into the water here to run up a score of 13 in 
the second round.

Was there a possibility that a similar cataclysm might befall Ballesteros? He 
got away with a five, but now his rivals, who had been playing walking-on parts 
in the great Ballesteros one-man show, began to assert themselves.

The unconsidered Gibby Gilbert, who started the day nine strokes behind 
Ballesteros, had a brilliant run of five successive birdies. Jack Newton of 
Australia, playing with the Spaniard, had three birdies in a row. In the space 
of four holes Ballesteros' lead in relation to in relation to par had been 
trimmed from 10 strokes to two.

A reverse of that magnitude, heralding what would have been an upset of 
unprecedented proportions in the annals of championship golf, might well have 
rattled a lesser character and induced a total collapse.

Ballesteros is nothing if not mentally tough and well accustomed to riding out 
a crisis. He went boldly for the long water carry at the par five 15th and 
earned a birdie, whereas Newton's charge ran out of steam. Gilbert dropped a 
stroke at the last hole, but Ballesteros played out the round with solid 
error-free golf to take the green jacket, becoming the youngest player at just 
23 to wear it.

The figures make it look a comfortable victory: Ballesteros with a final 72 
and total of 275, Gilbert with 67 and Newton with 68 in joint second place on 
279. Exciting, richly deserved and a tonic for the game of golf it may have 
been, but comfortable it most assuredly was not.

With Ballesteros out on his own the rest of golf was mainly concerned with 
side issues. Sandy Lyle, for example, was playing to finish in the top 24 and 
thereby assure his automatic invitation to next year's Masters. On his 
three-round total of 216 he was in joint 25th place but he soon ran into 
problems in his attempt to advance up the list.

In the third round he had looked for eight holes to be moving almost into 
contention. He was playing powerful, controlled golf and had picked up four 
birdies when he made that ridiculous lapse on the 9th green, hurriedly putting 
out in a rain squall and missing a 6-inch putt. From that moment he became a 
different player, his composure shaken and the rhythm of his round destroyed.

He was still unsure in the final round, struggling right from the first hole. 
Out in 38, he dropped four strokes to par in the next four holes and fell well 
down the rankings with a 78.

Another side issue was contrived by the committee, which paired Arnold Palmer 
with Jack Nicklaus to provide a special attraction for the spectators. Nicklaus 
had made it clear on his arrival at Augusta that he did not see this tournament 
in make-or-break terms for his career.

If he could win a record sixth Masters then that might indeed constitute a 
turning point and inspire him to further triumphs. However, he added, failure 
to win would in no way affect his outlook or his plans to play this season with 
a new and serious commitment to the game.

At the age of 40, and following the most disappointing year he has ever 
experienced, Nicklaus would not be human if he did not entertain doubts about 
his future and the events of this week may well add to those doubts.

US MASTERS (Augusta) - Final Scores (US unless stated):

275 - S. Ballesteros (Spain) 66, 69, 68, 72

279 - J. Newton (Australia) 68, 74, 69, 68

 G. Gilbert 70, 74, 68, 67

280 - H. Green 68, 74, 71, 67

281 - D. Graham (Australia) 66, 73, 72, 70 
 283 - J. Pate 72, 68, 76, 67

 L. Nelson 69, 72, 73, 69

 T. Kite 69, 71, 74, 69

 G. Player (S. Africa) 71, 71, 71, 70

 E. Fiori 71, 70, 69, 73

 