
The US Department of Justice and the city of Baltimore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/baltimore> have announced details of a 
court-enforceable agreement that outlines sweeping reforms to the city’s police 
department. A federal review last year uncovered racially biased policing 
practices after the death in custody of Freddie Gray, an unarmed African 
American.

The announcement, made after weeks of hurried negotiations, comes just days 
before the inauguration of Donald Trump and the expected confirmation ofJeff 
Sessions <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jeff-sessions> as US attorney 
general. Both men have criticised police reform efforts spurred by the federal 
government.

If Baltimore is serious about police reform, give citizens more say | Lawrence 
Grandpre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/12/baltimore-police-reform-bias-citizens-accountability>
The agreement, known as a consent decree, will ensure an independent monitor 
oversees departmental reforms, including an emphasis on community-oriented 
policing, more training on de-escalation and proportional use of force by 
officers, and the introduction of a community oversight taskforce to strengthen 
civilian engagement with the department. The agreement has yet to be approved 
by a federal judge.

At a press conference in Baltimore, the US attorney general, Loretta Lynch, 
reminded reporters and community members that she had assumed office on the day 
of Gray’s funeral in April 2015 and visited the city on her first trip as the 
country’s top law enforcement officer, to meet community leaders and local 
politicians.

“In each meeting, what we heard was loud and clear: the people of Baltimore 
love their city – and because of their love, they were disturbed by the deeply 
rooted mistrust between law enforcement officers and the community they serve. 
They could not abide the breakdown of that trust. They wanted to make things 
better,” Lynch said.

A scathing federal civil rights investigation published in August 2016 
uncovered extensive evidence of racial disparities in policing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/09/baltimore-police-department-justice-department-investigation-findings>
, including that African Americans accounted for 95% of people stopped more 
than 10 times by police. The justice department concluded: “BPD’s systemic 
constitutional and statutory violations are rooted in structural failures.”

As well as racial biases, the report found evidence of routine excessive 
force, patterns of unconstitutional arrests, and inadequate responses to sexual 
assault claims, which investigators found could be attributable to “underlying 
gender bias”.

The 227-page consent decree will establish stronger policy and training for 
the handling of sexual assault allegations and strengthen supervision and 
internal oversight of investigations into such cases.

The city of Baltimore descended into days of violent unrest following the 
death of Gray, 25, who died from a broken neck after he was placed in the back 
of a police van following an arrest local prosecutors described as unlawful. 
Six Baltimore police officers were criminally charged for their involvement in 
the incident, but none were convicted after some cases fell apart in court.

The consent decree also mandates that all police vans used to transport 
individuals be equipped with video cameras. No footage of Gray’s alleged “rough 
ride” was captured from inside the vehicle, which was not equipped with a 
camera.

The city settled a $6.4m wrongful death lawsuit with Gray’s family in the 
months after his death and the consent decree is expected to cost millions to 
implement. The city’s spending board approved the agreement without disclosing 
financial details,according to the Baltimore Sun 
<http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/baltimore-city/doj-report/bs-md-ci-doj-consent-decree-20170112-story.html>
.

Baltimore’s newly elected mayor, Catherine Pugh, a former Maryland state 
senator who appeared on the streets of West Baltimore calling for calm during 
the unrest, said that agreement marked “a wonderful and great day for 
Baltimore, that we’ve taken a step forward”.

“The intent of this agreement is to make sure that we accommodate every single 
citizen, every single citizen regardless of their age, their residency, 
whatever their problems may or may not be is considered in this document, 
because every single citizen in this city deserves fair treatment,” Pugh said.

The enforcement of consent decrees has proved a frequent tool of the Obama 
administration in dealing with police departments accused of routine civil 
rights violations. The city of Ferguson, Missouri, whose local force was the 
subject of international attention after the fatal police shooting of unarmed 
black teenager Michael Brown, committed to a similar agreement last year and 
the justice department is currently enforcing 15 consent decrees.

But these agreements are unlikely to be the priority of the incoming 
administration under the guidance of Sessions. During his confirmation hearing 
earlier in the week,Sessions said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/jeff-sessions-police-reform-excessive-force-racial-bias-justice-department>
 he would not rule out the “withdrawal or modification” of such agreements, 
which he said tended to “undermine respect for our police officers”.



 