
As we approach the end of summer, it seems appropriate to take stock. How was 
the weather?Not bad, though it was both too hot and too cold, too wet and too 
dry. How was the sport? Great, fantastic, era-defining, shame he's Scottish, 
how could you lose to a 10-man Hull? How were your holidays? Lovely, terrible, 
could have done with longer, just too trendy for me I'm afraid.

Er, you what? Your holiday was too trendy? Yes, too bloody trendy, I'm 
furious. And the art was crap. Really? Sorry to hear that. Where did you go? 
Brighton. Ah well, you may have asked for that one then.

As a way to pad out the final dog days of summer, an online poll to find the 
country's worst seaside resort would seem to be a winner. Everyone has an 
opinion and laughing at "shit towns" has been something of a sport these last 
few years. But the results of this latest questionnaire seem to have bucked the 
trend by naming Brighton and Hove as the worst resort in the country. Not for 
being dilapidated or short of attractions, but because – well – it's all a bit 
too edgy.

The Telegraph reports 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/10265120/Brighton-Its-just-full-of-bohemians-and-bad-art.html>
: "Brighton was criticised for its 'right-on' attitudes, awful parking and 
clubbers wearing garish outfits. The poll, by the travel website Real Holiday 
Reports, found that tourists thought it 'full of bohemians and bad art'. There 
were complaints about the council's decision to install gender-neutral public 
lavatories and an 'Mx' alternative to Mr and Mrs for transsexuals on official 
forms."

However spurious or non-representative these opinions might be they're 
certainly eye-catching. I'm not the world's foremost expert on Brighton – both 
my brothers studied at Sussex University but that was back in the days when 
Brighton and Hove Albionplayed at an athletics track 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Withdean_Stadium> and every Friday was given over 
to thecelebration of Norman Cook 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Floor-Beat-Boutique-mixed-Fatboy/dp/B00000G6GF>. From 
what I understand, however, Brighton's basic principles are still the same: 
remaindered hippy culture is matched with nightclub hedonism, gay pride, 
south-eastern wealth and bien-pensant London refugees to create a vibrant, 
progressive, occasionally overblown new city. Personally I find it hard to 
imagine complaining about Brighton for any reason other than it having 
Britain's most uncomfortable beach with stones buried under more layers of dirt 
than your averagePlantagenet king <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/richard-iii>. 
It turns out though that they do. But why would you want to do that?

Maybe because Brighton is a symbol of something greater than itself. A symbol 
of progressivism, of liberal tolerance. And right now, we're in a Conservative 
moment. When my brothers were resident in Brighton a dozen years ago, the UK 
was awash in the optimism of early Blairism, people believed in progress, in 
things getting better, in finding a use for the Millennium Dome. Today, Britain 
is broke and broken, everyone's on the scam and excessive right on-ism is 
forcing ordinary Britons into retreat. The idea of Brighton is not one suited 
to these current times. Complaints about parking and taxpayer-funded art sound 
about right.

I wonder whether the people who dislike Brighton have always done so or only 
feel emboldened enough now. Have people's attitudes changed or, freed from the 
yoke of political correctness, are people finally able to say what they feel?

One of the criticisms often levied at liberals, progressives, PC Nazis, 
whatever you want to call them, is that they're so convinced of the virtue of 
their own beliefs that they patronise those who think differently. But those of 
a conservative persuasion are not immune from such behaviour. And if you were 
to wildly extrapolate from the results of one tinpot poll (something which has 
never been a problem for me) you might come to the conclusion that now is their 
moment.
 