
In the age of steam this mile-long tunnel was notorious among train crews: a 
place of choking smoke and red-hot flying cinders. Next month, a gentler, less 
hazardous stage in the varied history of the Combe Down tunnel in Bath begins 
when it opens for much cleaner modes of transport.

Billed as the longest purpose-built cycling tunnel in the UK, the Two Tunnels 
path will be open for fans of pedal power along with hikers and train 
enthusiasts. The more energetic can follow a 13-mile loop taking in another 
reopened tunnel, the Devonshire, and a refurbished viaduct. But the idea is 
that the route will also be used daily by local people as part of their 
exercise regime, dog-walking routines or simply when they go to the shops or to 
work.

"We can't wait for it to open," said Frank Tompson, a keen cyclist and the 
chair of theTwo Tunnels community group <http://www.twotunnels.org.uk/>. "It's 
been a long, hard journey to get here but we believe it's going to be 
fantastic. We've already had messages from people all over the world – the US, 
France, Indonesia – who are planning to come."

In advance of a grand opening on 6 April 
<http://www.sustrans.org.uk/sustrans-near-you/events/bath-two-tunnels-festival-grand-opening>
, the Guardian was given a sneak preview of the tunnel on the day the lights 
were turned on for the first time. We did not cycle all the way – that honour 
goes to people who will donate money for the tunnel's upkeep – but saw enough 
to know it will be a memorable experience.

The tunnel curves at both ends but at the centre there is a straight stretch 
of about 1,000 metres. Lights are seven metres apart but the crown remains dark 
for the sake of the bats, creating a calming, even hypnotic, effect. There are 
still furrows on the roof created by years of steam condensing just above the 
funnel.

Most the tunnel is built out of Staffordshire blue brick, though in places 
where the craggy limestone was sound the Victorian engineers left it in place. 
The worst of the soot lower down on the walls has been scraped off.

The project began seven years ago over a few drinks in a Bath pub when Tompson 
and a few friends wondered why they couldn't get the tunnels re-opened to 
create a route heading south from the city centre towards the Mendips. They met 
officials fromSustrans <http://www.sustrans.org.uk/>, the charity that aims to 
get more people on bicycles, foot or public transport, and Bath and North East 
Somerset council.

The following year Sustrans was awarded £50m from the Big Lottery Fund for its 
Connect2 project <http://www.sustrans.org.uk/what-we-do/connect2> to improve 
sustainable transport links and put £1m aside for theTwo Tunnels project 
<http://www.sustrans.org.uk/what-we-do/connect2/schemes/south-west/bath-two-tunnels>
. Tomson's community group received £200,000 from the sale of more than 100
life-sized model pigs <http://www.kingbladudspigs.org/auction/index.php> that 
were displayed around Bath in summer 2008, while the council chipped in 
£400,000.

There were problems. As well as the engineering challenges, new homes had to 
be found for the protected bats – and snakes. There were delicate negotiations 
with landowners along the route including the actor Nicolas Cage, who for a 
time owned Midford Castle, near the tunnel's south entrance. Gradually the 
obstacles were surmounted and the tunnel brought back to life.

Opened in 1874, the tunnel is part of the Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway 
line, referred to as the S&D or, more unkindly, the Slow and Dirty or Slow and 
Doubtful. The line carried freight over the Mendips and, in the summer months, 
transported many thousands of holidaymakers to Bournemouth.

Building the tunnel beneath the high ground south of Bath was a major feat of 
engineering and when it opened the structure was the longest in the UK without 
intermediate ventilation. It was also very tight.

This led to tragedy in November 1929 when the driver and stoker of a goods 
train were overcome by smoke because their heavily laden train was moving so 
slowly. Once it had crested the last hill before Bath, it careered down the 
slope and crashed, killing the driver and two goods yard workers. There is talk 
of a ghost train sometimes going through the tunnel, which will cause an extra 
frisson for thrill-seekers visiting between 11pm and 5am when the lights are 
off.

Despite the tragedy and the unkind nicknames, the S&D was a favourite with 
railway enthusiasts and was mourned when it closed as part of the Beeching cuts 
in the 1960s.

Former railway workers will be at the opening, including ex-stoker John 
Sawyer, 66, who first travelled through the tunnel on the footplate aged 17. 
"The driver and fireman didn't tell me what to expect. It was a kind of 
initiation. They put soaking rags on their faces as they went into the tunnel. 
I didn't know what they were doing." He soon did when he was blasted with 
smoke, hot cinders and stream. "It was terrifying. It really frightened me. I 
must have gone through hundreds of times and I never got used to it."

Sawyer, a keen cyclist, plans to pedal through the tunnel. "I'm very excited 
about it. I didn't used to look forward to going through the tunnel. I can't 
wait now."
 