
For Simon Callow <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/simon-callow>, 
biography, like acting, is about impersonation – appropriating the body and if 
possible the mind of someone else. In hislife of Charles Laughton 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/charles-laughton.html>, Callow probed the 
sexual self-disgust of a man who felt himself to be a bloated gargoyle; he then 
devoted aseries of fine volumes 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/orson-welles-445611.html> to the equally 
portly but more recklessly over-extended Orson Welles. Now, after trying out 
the role in a one-man show calledInside Wagner’s Head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/sep/15/simon-callow-inside-wagners-review>
, he has decided to be Richard Wagner.

Related: Simon Callow: Inside Wagner's Head – review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/sep/15/simon-callow-inside-wagners-review>

The cover of his new book shows Wagner scalped or trepanned. His skull, a 
cosmic dome, insecurely balanced on his dwarfish body, has its top sliced off 
so that Callow can wriggle inside, like Santa Claus squeezing down a chimney. 
The result, however, is not the psychological penetration the image promises. 
Callow describes Wagner’s mannerisms – the mad monologues he delivered with 
bulging eyes and bursts of fiendish laughter, the nervous frenzies caused by 
his raw, inflamed skin, the drooling endearments he lavished on his pet dogs – 
and pays careful attention to his wardrobe: velvet cloaks, floppy bohemian 
berets, and frou-frou undies confected in pink silk by a Viennese milliner. But 
the portrayal remains superficial, content with exaggerated mockery of the 
man’s quirks.

The emphasis throughout is on Wagner’s self-dramatising thespian foibles. “The 
theatre,” Callow believes, “was where he found himself”; not coincidentally, 
it’s also whereBeing Wagner began, with that solo performance commissioned by 
the RoyalOpera <https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> in 2013. Given 
Callow’s collegial enjoyment of Wagner’s histrionics, he has fun with the 
backstage chaos occasioned by the impossible demands his operas made on 
musicians and technicians. During preparations for the first Ring cycle at 
Bayreuth in 1876, Siegfried’s dragon malfunctioned, Brünnhilde’s horse ran away 
with her, the chief machinist quit after a hissy fit, and a violinist dropped 
dead. Such anecdotes are calculated to amuse, but Callow misses the crucial 
point of Wagner’s theatricality, which was his alarming capacity for 
metamorphosis. At those Ring rehearsals he acted all the parts, from gods to 
mermaids, a bear and a hopping toad. His genius was not for being himself; it 
lay in his capacity to become other creatures.

Callow is best when discussing the devious combine of masculine and feminine 
traits in the wily fellow’s character

Preoccupied with Wagner’s misbehaviour, Callow reduces the operas to facetious 
synopses or relies on lengthy quotes from the libretti. His tone tends to be 
bluffly dismissive. He says that Wagner “knocked off” a begging letter to a 
patron, then three pages later adds that he “knocked off” a treatment for a 
play about Christ as a revolutionary; elsewhere we’re told that he “had a 
breeze” writingDie Meistersinger. A low point comes when Callow adopts the 
hucksterish idiom of advertising and callsRienzi a “drop-dead, knock-down, 
mega-hit”.

Wagner’s music certainly fascinates and excites Callow, and he claims that in 
early adolescence he already understood the technicalities of the unresolved 
chord that beginsTristan und Isolde. But he excuses himself from analysing the 
enchantment. Instead he sings along, like those irritating operagoers who hum 
the tunes and gesticulate to help the conductor: he praises a “rum-ti-tum 
finale” inRienzi, and transcribes an early overture as “dum dum, dum dum, dum 
dum, dum dum THWACK”, with the capitalised blow signalling a full stop banged 
out on a kettledrum.

Callow rattles off some adjectival arias of his own, as when he blathers about 
“the restless, unsettling, destructive, sublime, dynamic spirit of Richard 
Wagner”. Even more breathlessly, he says that Wagner saw man as “a turbulent, 
troubled, writhing, longing, betraying, creating, destroying, loving, loathing 
mess of instincts”. Could this logorrhoeal burbling be a contagious effect of 
Wagner’s endless melodies and their mutable motifs? Opera singers need elastic 
lungs as part of their technical kit; the equivalent in a writer is mere 
long-windedness. Wagner may have “talked, talked, TALKED”, as Callow noisily 
puts it, but he also composed silence: the shimmering air out of which the 
redeemer materialises in theprelude to Lohengrin 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lqk4bcnBqls>, the underwater gloom where life 
almost inaudibly starts to throb inDas Rheingold.
 Richard Wagner in 1868: ‘His genius was not for being himself; it lay in his 
capacity to become other creatures.’ Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty Images 
Though Callow rightly deplores Wagner’s antisemitic bigotry, it’s a cheap shot 
to deploy a Third Reich slogan as his subtitle, given his awareness that 
Wagner, “loathing both militarism and imperialism”, would have “despised” the 
Nazis. In any case Callow seems unclear about what the will is, since he 
equates it with both heart and soul. By way of compensation, Wagner earns moral 
credit for tolerating an entourage of gay acolytes, and Callow is best when 
discussing the devious combine of masculine and feminine traits in the wily 
fellow’s character: managing his followers and helpers, he alternated between 
domination and seductive entreaty, and “provoked, almost flirtatiously, love 
and hate simultaneously”.

In conclusion, Callow denies Wagner classic status and excludes him from “the 
pantheon”, pronouncing anathema in a judgment so portentous that he gives it a 
paragraph of its own. “He cannot bring comfort,” Callow sternly declares. The 
remark betrays a weird incomprehension of great art. Is Stravinsky’s ritualised 
violence comforting, let alone the battering onslaught of political power that 
we hear in Shostakovich? Verdi’sRequiem fades out in metaphysical doubt and 
dread, and Puccini’s operas mostly conclude in acts of abrupt extermination. 
It’s muzak not music that aims to ease us through the day, and Wagner’s heady 
ecstasies have their consummation in individual death or global meltdown. If 
you want comfort you should buy a sofa, not a ticket to the opera.

• Being Wagner: the Triumph of the Will by Simon Callow is published by Harper 
Collins (£14.99). To order a copy for £12.74 go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/being-wagner.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99
 