
Martin Heidegger <http://www.iep.utm.edu/h/heidegge.htm> (1889-1976) was the 
most important and influential philosopher in the continental tradition in the 
20th century.Being and Time, first published in 1927, was his magnum opus. 
There is no way of understanding what took place in continental philosophy 
after Heidegger without coming to terms with Being and Time. Furthermore, 
unlike many Anglo-American philosophers, Heidegger has exerted a huge influence 
outside philosophy, in areas as diverse as architecture, contemporary art, 
social and political theory, psychotherapy, psychiatry and theology.

However, because of his political commitment to National Socialism in 1933, 
when he assumed the position of Rector of Freiburg University in south-western 
Germany, Heidegger continues to arouse controversy, polemic and much heated 
misunderstanding.

The hugely important matter of the relation between Heidegger and politics is 
the topic for another series of blogs entries. Indeed, to my mind, the nature 
and extent of Heidegger's involvement in National Socialism only becomes
philosophically pertinent once one has begun to understand and feel the 
persuasive power of what takes place in his written work, especiallyBeing and 
Time <http://www.librarything.com/work/8987/details>. 

The task I have set myself in this series of blogs is to provide a taste of 
the latter book and hopefully some motivation to read it further and study it 
more deeply. But once you have read Being and Time and hopefully been compelled 
by it, then the question that hangs over the text, like the sword of Damocles, 
is the following: how could arguably the greatest philosopher of the 20th 
century also have been a Nazi? What does his political commitment to National 
Socialism, however long or short it lasted, suggest about the nature of 
philosophy and its risks and dangers when stepping into the political realm?

Being and Time

Being and Time is a work of considerable length (437 pages in the German 
original) and legendary difficulty. The difficulty is caused by the fact that 
Heidegger sets himself the task of what he calls a "destruction" of the 
philosophical tradition. We shall see some of the implications of this in 
future entries, but the initial consequence is that Heidegger refuses to avail 
himself of the standard terminology of modern philosophy, with its talk of 
epistemology, subjectivity, representation, objective knowledge and the rest.

Heidegger has the audacity to go back to the drawing board and invent a new 
philosophical vocabulary. For example, he thinks that all conceptions of the 
human being as a subject, self, person, consciousness or indeed a mind-brain 
unity are hostages to a tradition of thinking whose presuppositions have not 
been thought through radically enough. Heidegger is nothing if not a radical 
thinker: a thinker who tries to dig down to the roots of our lived experience 
of the world rather than accepting the authority of tradition.

Heidegger's name for the human being is Dasein, a term which can be variously 
translated, but which is usually rendered as "being-there". The basic and very 
simple idea, as we will see in future entries, is that the human being is first 
and foremost not an isolated subject, cut off from a realm of objects that it 
wishes to know about. We are rather beings who are always already in the world, 
outside and alongside a world from which, for the most part, we do not 
distinguish ourselves.

What goes for Dasein also goes for many of Heidegger's other concepts. 
Sometimes this makes Being and Time a very tough read, which is not helped by 
the fact that Heidegger, more than any other modern philosopher, exploits the 
linguistic possibilities of his native language, in his case German. Although 
Macquarrie and Robinson, in their 1962 Blackwell English edition, produced one 
of the classics of modern philosophical translation, reading Being and Time can 
sometimes feel like wading through a conceptual mud of baroque and unfamiliar 
concepts.

The basic idea

That said, the basic idea of Being and Time is extremely simple: being is 
time. That is, what it means for a human being to be is to exist temporally in 
the stretch between birth and death. Being is time and time is finite, it comes 
to an end with our death. Therefore, if we want to understand what it means to 
be an authentic human being, then it is essential that we constantly project 
our lives onto the horizon of our death, what Heidegger calls 
"being-towards-death".

Crudely stated, for thinkers like St Paul, St Augustine, Luther and 
Kierkegaard, it is through the relation to God that the self finds itself. For 
Heidegger, the question of God's existence or non-existence has no 
philosophical relevance. The self can only become what it truly is through the 
confrontation with death, by making a meaning out of our finitude. If our being 
is finite, then what it means to be human consists in grasping this finitude, 
in "becoming who one is" in words of Nietzsche's that Heidegger liked to cite. 
We will show how this insight into finitude is deepened in later entries in 
relation to Heidegger's concepts of conscience and what he calls "ecstatic 
temporality".

Being and Time begins with a long, systematic introduction, followed by two 
divisions, each containing six chapters. I have just finished teaching the 
whole book in a 15-week lecture course at the New School for Social Research in 
New York and I estimate that I spoke for about 2 hours a week. As they say here 
in New York, just do the math! Therefore, in the following 7 short blog 
entries, I can only give a taste of the book and offer some signposts for 
readers who would like to explore further.
 