
Northern Ireland’s police watchdog has launched a formal investigation into 
the death of a man who was sprayed with CS gas by police officers inBelfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast>.


Gerard McMahon died in the early hours of Thursday after an altercation with 
officers in Great Victoria Street.

He was arrested after what the Police Service of Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> (PSNI) said was a “violent 
incident” between himself and a number of taxi drivers in the city centre 
thoroughfare at about 5am.

The Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Ombudsman’s Office in 
Belfast, which is investigating McMahon’s death, said “it appeared that CS 
spray was used” during his arrest.

It is investigating if McMahon, from the Short Strand area of east Belfast, 
had a heart attack after he was restrained and CS gas was sprayed on him by 
PSNI officers.

Police officers administered first aid to McMahon but he died at the scene 
close to Belfast’s Opera House theatre.

Ch Supt Chris Noble said: “Police wish to pass on our condolences to the 
family of the deceased. We will fully cooperate with the police ombudsman’s 
inquiry and at this stage it would not be appropriate for the police service to 
comment further.”

The dead man worked buying and selling cars, and also part-time as a DJ.

Tributes were paid to him on social media by family and friends.

Emma McMahon wrote on Facebook: “Can’t believe my cousin … never know what’s 
round the corner.”

Robert Fitzsimons wrote: “Shocking news to say the least. RIP Geraldo McMahon. 
One of the good guys. No one would ever deserve that!”

Gerry Kelly, a Sinn Féin member of the Northern Ireland assembly and junior 
minister, said he was shocked to learn of the death.

“My thoughts are with his family at this tragic time,” he added. “I have been 
in touch with senior police about the circumstances which led to Gerard being 
rushed to hospital,” he said.

“The ombudsman has already launched an investigation into the detention of 
Gerard McMahon. That investigation must be thorough so that his grieving family 
get the full facts as quickly as possible.”

Irritant spray, also called CS spray or Pava spray, is used on a fairly 
frequent basis by officers and is one of the items in the standard police 
toolkit.

Exposure to CS spray causes a burning sensation and significant watering of 
the eyes to the extent that the subject cannot keep them open and is thus often 
incapacitated.
 