
Two of the first legal challenges to Brexit have been rejected by a Belfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> court.

A high court judge ruled that the Good Friday agreement in 1998 could not be 
used to grantNorthern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> 
exemption from the UK’s decision to leave the European Union.

A victim of loyalist terrorism, Ulster politicians and community groups argued 
in court that because 56% of the Northern Ireland electorate voted to remain in 
the EU, the region’s devolved parliament should have the right to vote on 
staying inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.


But Mr Justice Paul Maguire dismissed this argument, pointing out that the 
Good Friday agreement was constitutionally relevant only “in the particular 
context of whether Northern Ireland should remain as part of the UK or unite 
with Ireland.”


Delivering his judgment in the high court on Friday morning, Mr Justice 
Maguire said the implications of Brexit for Northern Ireland were still unclear 
after the prime minister indicated she would start negotiations to leave the EU 
before March 2017.

Article 50 legal case 'is attempt to reverse Brexit', court told
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/17/article-50-legal-case-is-attempt-to-reverse-brexit-court-told>
“While the wind of change may be about to blow, the precise direction in which 
it will blow cannot yet be determined, so there is a level of uncertainty, as 
evidenced by the discussion about how the Northern Ireland land border with 
Ireland was affected by withdrawal from the EU,” he said.

Maguire said it was not in the court’s power to overturn a political decision 
but the judgment in Belfast would not prejudice other challenges to Brexit in 
English courts.

“It is the court’s view the prerogative power is still operative and can be 
used for the purpose of the executive giving notification for the purpose of 
article 50. This, however, is said without prejudice to the issues which have 
been stayed and which are under consideration in the English courts,” the judge 
said. “In respect of all issues, the court dismissed the applications.”

Among those who took the legal challenge to Brexit was Raymond McCord, whose 
son was murdered by loyalist paramilitaries. He had argued that Brexit would 
endanger the peace process and undermine the Good Friday agreement.


After the judgment, McCord said he was disappointed, adding that he would take 
his case to the supreme court in London. ”We live in a democratic system,” he 
said. “56% of the people of this country voted to remain.”

A separate case to grant Northern Ireland the right to be exempt from Brexit 
was taken by a cross-party group of Stormont assembly members, including Sinn 
Fein’s former regional education minister John O’Dowd and the former justice 
minister David Ford.

A government spokesperson said: “We welcome the court’s judgment, which agrees 
with us that the government can proceed to trigger article 50 as planned.

“As we have always made clear, we stand by our commitments under the Belfast 
agreement and the outcome of the EU referendum doesn’t change this. We will now 
await the outcome of the parallel cases under consideration by the England and 
Wales high court before setting out our next steps.”

The Ulster Unionist party said the judgment in Belfast meant that “the days of 
Brexiteers and remainers are over”.

Stephen Aiken, an Ulster Unionist member of the Northern Ireland Assembly, 
said: “Whether people like it or not, the United Kingdom is leaving theEuropean 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

“What the people now need is a united front, battling for the best deal 
possible for Northern Ireland. We would appeal for everyone’s energy to now be 
dedicated to that cause.”
 