


The game is all about timing but this does not apply solely to an exquisite, 
effortless cover drive. Good timing has an impact on the reputations of 
captains as well. There are some fortunate enough to hold the reins when a 
charismatic cricketing all-rounder begins to blossom.

Mike Brearley would acknowledge he was blessed to have a young, extremely 
hungry Ian Botham in his ranks. In the late 70s Botham could swing the ball 
prodigiously at pace and, both on and off the field, he recognised no 
boundaries. Even better, there was soon a bond between this pair, who revelled 
in their contrasting characters. They remained good mates throughout their 
careers and beyond.

Michael Vaughan’s two great years as England captain coincided with the 
relatively brief period, ending in 2005, when Andrew Flintoff was the most 
potent all-rounder in the world and his body was strong, his will indomitable. 
Now we can legitimately muse about the good fortune of Alastair Cook, who has a 
fast-maturingBen Stokes <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ben-stokes> in his 
side.

Bangladesh v England: five talking points from the first Test in Chittagong
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/23/england-bangladesh-first-test-chittagong-talking-points>
Trevor Bayliss is not a bad witness here – the England coach is as fond of 
hyperbole as the majority of the European parliament is of Nigel Farage. After
the 25-year-old’s barnstorming performance in the first Test against Bangladesh 
in Chittagong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/24/bangladesh-fall-short-as-england-secure-victory-on-final-day-of-first-test>
, Bayliss was asked how good Stokes can be and by his standards he gushed.

“How long’s a piece of string?” Bayliss said. “He’s only young in his career. 
It’s going to be easier to judge the longer he goes. The potential of the guy – 
he could be right up there with some of the all-time best all-rounders. The 
strides he’s made here on the subcontinent playing spin have been top class.

“It wasn’t all that long ago we were wondering how he might go on 
spin-friendly pitches but he’s a guy that works extremely hard in the nets. I 
think it’s his defence against spin that has improved out of sight. In the past 
he probably hasn’t had a lot of footwork, playing from the crease and backing 
his eyes and hands. But as we saw in the one-dayers and the Test he defended 
really well off the front foot – he got right forward and smothered the ball 
before it had a chance to spin and jump past the outside edge.”

The Durham player did not bowl too badly, either. He is the master of reverse 
swing in this pack of seamers (given Jimmy Anderson’s absence) and his pace was 
surprising. His overall figures in Chittagong, six for 46, were remarkable but 
no fluke.

Bayliss reiterated the plan to rotate his fast bowlers on this expedition. He 
was asked whether Stokes, who is after all part of the pace department, would 
play all seven Tests this winter. “It would be a brave man to bet against it 
with Stokesy. I’m not sure we’re game enough to drop him out anyway – we might 
get a thump in the head. He’s a resilient person, let alone cricketer. We’ve 
got to watch what he does between the Tests to make sure he’s available for all 
the matches.”

England will shuffle their pack for the second Test in Dhaka. After the first 
Test, Cook suggested there would be a couple of changes. Bayliss confirmed that 
notion and added those changes were likely to occur among the bowlers. “The top 
four guys found it very difficult against the new ball facing the spin – it was 
an upside down sort of Test match,” he said. “But I don’t think there’s any 
reason to change.”

Among the bowlers there is the expectation Stuart Broad will be rested, which 
means his 100th Test is likely to be the series opener against India in Rajkot. 
Steven Finn has been impressing in the nets, according to the England captain 
and others, and would therefore be the likeliest replacement for Broad assuming 
England stick to the balance of attack they used in Chittagong.

Bayliss can be engagingly blunt but when discussing the performances of 
England’s spinners in Chittagong he was unusually cagey – and protective. “I 
think we did pretty well,” he said. “There’s still some work to be done and 
we’ve spoken about our consistency of length more than anything. They are good 
players of spin and you do not have to be too far off and they take full toll.”

There is the possibility of Zafar Ansari coming into the side in Dhaka for 
either Gareth Batty or Adil Rashid. Batty is dispensable in the sense England 
will surely not agonise too much about the psychological effects of dropping 
him. He is too gnarled for that to be a worry, while Rashid is younger, with 
the possibility of a long future ahead, and more fragile.

There is also a cricketing issue to consider that can only be debated after 
perusing the pitch in Dhaka. If England spy another big turner like Chittagong, 
the virtues of Rashid are not so attractive. When finger spinners, who should 
be more accurate since it is an easier craft, are capable of extracting sharp 
turn why bother with the luxury of wrist spin? So the flatter the surface, the 
stronger the argument to retain Rashid. There is also a case for juggling the 
batsmen as well – when will there be a better chance to give those on the 
sidelines in Chittagong an outing? – but that is unlikely to happen.
 