
Another captivating game is moving at incredible speed and under the 
floodlights of late afternoon it appeared to be racing away from England. 
Bangladesh wereso close to their first Test victory against England in 
Chittagong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/24/bangladesh-fall-short-as-england-secure-victory-on-final-day-of-first-test>
 but this time they may not freeze – for want of a more appropriate expression 
since every Dhaka day is sweltering.

To their frustration Bangladesh had to yield a 24-run first‑innings lead, but 
in the final session this often appeared no more than a pinprick as their 
batsmen cruised along at almost five runs an over on a pitch that is supposed 
to be a spinner’s paradise. In fact, it probably is a spinner’s paradise.

England hang on with late strike but Bangladesh build lead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/29/bangladesh-england-second-test-day-two-live>
However, the last ball of the day offered England a hint of respite. 
Bangladesh had plundered 152 for two from 30.5 overs when Mohammad Mahmudullah 
suddenly swished to leg, missed and was bowled, thereby donating Zafar Ansari a 
second Test wicket. In this game that might be construed as a critical moment – 
but there can be no certainty about that since these moments are coming thick 
and fast in this helter-skelter series.

England celebrated with relief at Mahmudullah’s dismissal for 47 and maybe 
upon their return to the pavilion they clutched at the sequence of figures that 
highlights the capacity for Bangladesh to collapse. They read 27 for six and 36 
for five in Chittagong and 49 for nine in the first innings here. But nothing 
can be taken for granted in this series.

Certainly there is no guarantee that miserly English bowlers will stifle 
Bangladesh’s batsmen. Once again Tamim Iqbal, as if batting on marble rather 
than in a sandpit, blazed away quite brilliantly in that final session. He sped 
to 40 with an array of strokes, both daring and deft, before he became Ansari’s 
first victim, neatly caught by a relieved Alastair Cook at leg slip.

When Cook, now at first slip, grasped another chance off Ben Stokes to remove 
Mominul Haque two balls later, one might have expected Bangladesh to dig in 
dutifully. Instead, Mahmudullah immediately counterattacked alongside the 
impish Imrul Kayes and there was Cook with his uneven sextet of bowlers doing 
his King Canute impressions. He has plenty of bowlers but he cannot trust many 
of them.

For England the pursuit of answers to all their selectorial conundrums for the 
India section of the tour will have to wait until the end of this frenetic 
game. When defending their battered bowlers they will be quick to point out – 
justifiably – that Tamim has played two astonishingly bold and skilful innings 
here on an untrustworthy surface. Yet they must be especially concerned about 
the value of Adil Rashid on pitches where finger spinners can make the ball 
leap so regularly, despite the leg-spinner’s defiant innings in the afternoon 
session, which was the one dominated by England.

England are still in a muddle over their batting and bowling hierarchies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/29/england-batting-bowling-steve-finn-zafar-ansar-chris-woakes>
In the morning Bangladesh held the upper hand. The ubiquitous Moeen Ali 
clipped an easy boundary off Mehedi Hasan but then gifted him a wicket. What 
would Moeen, the bowler, have thought if one of his opponents had swept so 
early in his innings only to see the off-stump catapulted out of the ground? A 
bit of a bonus perhaps.

In the next over Taijul Islam managed to find the outside edge of Joe Root’s 
bat. It might have been caught at slip but the batsman escaped with three runs. 
There was no such luck for Stokes. He defended his first ball from the 
left-armer; it turned, bounced, caught the inside edge and then the hip and was 
caught at forward short-leg by Haque. Mortality had returned with a bump.

No matter. Now we were into England’s sixth-wicket partnership and we have 
learned that this has been their most fertile source of runs this year. There 
was promise of more. Jonny Bairstow settled in with Root; there were usually 
three fielders around the bat but the rest were deep set as a matter of 
routine. The two Yorkshiremen picked off their singles expertly as 45 
relatively risk-free runs were added. Then Mushfiqur Rahim recalled Mehedi and 
his first delivery found Bairstow sleeping on the back foot.

Ansari’s first run in Test cricket was a precarious affair. He pushed forward 
to a textbook off-break from Mehedi, which found the edge of the bat. From 
there it brushed the gloves of Mushfiqur before scuttling to the left of first 
slip.

Ansari might have been caught twice; instead he trotted a single with as much 
nonchalance as he could muster, which was not much in the circumstances.

Thereafter, Ansari defended stoutly and correctly until another exploding 
Mehedi off-break took the outside edge and Shuvagata Hom held a sharp catch in 
the gully. The Bangladesh celebrations were more vigorous at the fall of the 
next wicket since it was that of Root.

Tamim Iqbal tucks in and gives spinners and Alastair Cook food for thought
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/28/tamim-iqbal-england-spinners-bangladesh>
This time a skidding delivery did the damage. Root was stuck on the back foot 
and lbw and his frustration was personified by a vigorous swish of the bat at 
the turf. Until then Root had batted with excellent judgment and discretion for 
his 56, which was probably worth twice that number on the flat tracks of St 
John’s Wood. Later he would be beset by a stomach bug and unable to field.

So it had been a most satisfactory, elongated morning for Bangladesh in which 
England had lost five wickets for 113. The afternoon was more frustrating for 
the home side. The ball was softer; the fingers of their main spinners, Mehedi 
and Taijul were weary: Shakib Al Hasan, used more sparingly, was less 
threatening. Chris Woakes and Rashid surveyed the field and sensibly opted to 
score from a stream of singles.

Soon Mushfiqur began to experiment with his fourth spinner, Hom; he even 
bowled his solitary pace bowler, Kamrul Islam Rabbi, for three overs. Finally, 
he turned to his semi-professional leg‑spinner Sabbir Rahman, which produced a 
bizarre moment that cannot have improved the fielding side’s state of mind. A 
high full toss from Sabbir was hit straight into the hands of midwicket but 
after consultation with the third umpire Woakes was able to continue batting 
since a no-ball was called on the grounds of height.

This seemed to sum up Bangladesh’s lost opportunity as the ninth-wicket 
partnership reached 99. But the second new ball came to the rescue. Woakes was 
neatly caught at leg-slip off the precocious Mehedi, who finished with six for 
82; soon after Steven Finn was caught behind and England had their lead of 24. 
It seemed significant until Tamim and co set about England’s attack in that 
final, brow-furrowing session.
 