
Ben Stokes was charged with using offensive language on the field of play 
during the first day in Mohali following a heated exchange with India’s captain,
Virat Kohli <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/virat-kohli>. But while Stokes 
was given an official reprimand by the International Cricket Council after 
stumps, Kohli escaped any censure from the governing body despite an apparent 
send-off when the all-rounder was dismissed during the afternoon.

Jonny Bairstow shows defiance but India dominate England on day one
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/england-india-third-test-day-one-match-report>
Kolhi, who had earlier been spoken to by the umpires for throwing a ball at 
Jonny Bairstow, is understood to have sworn at Stokes after he was stumped for 
29 off left-arm spinner Ravi Jadeja, with the all-rounder then stopping on his 
way to the pavilion and offering a retort of a similarly crude nature.

Only this response from Stokes was reported by umpires Marais Erasmus and 
Chris Gaffeney, however, and he was called in front of ICC match referee Ranjan 
Madugalle after the close. A level one charge followed but, by accepting this, 
he avoided a fine.

Bairstow, who was at the non-striker’s end at the time, said: “I didn’t 
actually hear anything, because there are a lot of squealing people in the 
crowds. I couldn’t (tell you) the exact words that were said.

“It’s something that’s probably going more out of the game, verbals and things 
like that. If you go back 10 years it was a bigger part of the game. But I 
think you’ve also got to respect you’ve got guys out there who are very 
passionate, representing their country in the heat of battle.

“At some point, there are going to be words said. That’s the nature of 
professional sport. But I don’t know what was said. I don’t really get too 
involved with all that kind of stuff.”

Jos Buttler reins in attacking instincts to help rescue England | Ali Martin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/26/jos-buttler-england-india-third-test>
It is the second time Stokes has been disciplined for verbals this winter 
after being fined 15% of his match fee for an exchange with Bangladesh batsman, 
Sabbir Rahman, during the second Test in Dhaka last month. The 26-year-old now 
has two demerit points on his disciplinary record and should two further points 
be incurred in the next 24 months, a ban will follow.

News of Stokes’ reprimand completed a tough first day for England. Bairstow, 
who from his new position at No5 marshalled a lower order rally, remained 
upbeat at the close despite venting his own frustration at being dismissed 11 
runs short of what would have been his fourth Test century this year.

He added: “Obviously, having won the toss, it was disappointing to lose the 
wickets we have. But at the same time, it could have been a disastrous day if 
we hadn’t knuckled down and worked hard. We’re fighting; we’re in the battle.

“The confidence the captain has shown in me, to bat me at five, is really good 
– and I’d like to think I’ve repaid that faith today.

“I was really cheesed off to get out like that this evening. That hurt me 
pretty bad to get out like that, because I thought I’d played quite nicely 
throughout the day.”
 