
England’s two one-day victories against Pakistan have been so straightforward 
that even one of their most gung-ho cricketers is warning against any 
complacency throughout the rest of the series.

Pakistan’s Ol’ Man Misbah cements his legend by just saying nuthin’ | Rob Smyth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/28/pakistan-misbah-ul-haq-legend-cricket>
After Saturday’s win at Lord’s, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/27/england-v-pakistan-second-odi-live>
 Ben Stokes said: “We could spill into dangerous territory if we start to think 
too far ahead. We have gone 2-0 up in the series because we have been playing 
the better cricket.” He then pointed out, like the cagey old pro he isn’t, the 
dangers of thinking the series is already done and dusted.

There are three 50-over matches remaining, with the next one taking place at 
Trent Bridge on Tuesday.

England’s simple victory at Lord’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/27/england-pakistan-second-odi-match-report>
, fashioned by the capture of three wickets before everyone had found their 
seats, was mighty efficient. The fast bowlers bowled fast and straight; the 
catchers caught – with Liam Plunkett producing a dazzling one-handed snatch at 
cover. With the senior batsmen Joe Root and Eoin Morgan to the fore, a modest 
target was knocked off without alarms.

In fact, the England side should be stronger at Trent Bridge because they will 
have the benefit of another bowler. Stokes, who has had the unusual experience 
of playing as a specialist batsman in the first two matches, expects to be fit 
enough to give Morgan more options with the ball on Tuesday.

Stokes said: “The plan from the start was to be fit and ready to bowl by the 
third ODI, and it is looking likely that I will be there for Eoin if needed. 
I’ve done all the prep and I’m ready to bowl. Hopefully I’ll be asked.”

The Durham all-rounder hates being out of the action and admits to be 
uncomfortable in the field when there is no prospect of bowling. “It’s so 
boring,” Stokes said. “It makes the fielding session seem so much longer. 
Obviously, if you bowl 10 overs it kind of takes 20 overs out of the game for 
you. I pride myself on my fielding, so that has kept me switched on.” However, 
there was no hiding a frustration for Stokes, which England hope will not arise 
too often.

It was an indication of how highly regarded Stokes has become that he was 
selected as a pure batsman. The Durham diplomat admitted: “I was a bit 
surprised I got the nod ahead of Jonny [Bairstow] after his Test series against 
Pakistan – and South Africa. He has shown amazing form. At the same time, it’s 
nice to get confidence from your captain and coach saying they want me to play 
as a specialist batsman. So I have wanted to make sure I got some runs in the 
first two matches.”

For all the apparent bluster, Stokes, like the vast majority of cricketers, 
needs bolstering occasionally. He responds well to expressions of confidence 
and to being given additional responsibility. Moreover, the brief opportunity 
to concentrate solely on his batting has led to more consideration of how best 
to go about his business. In the last 12 months he has improved significantly 
against spin bowling.

“I think sometimes I have been drawn into trying to be too aggressive too 
early,” Stokes said. “I have learnt that I can give myself time. I don’t need 
to be going out reverse-sweeping for six and four straightaway. Singles can be 
just as important as boundaries, rotating the strike and not letting the 
bowlers settle. I have also worked hard on my defensive game after the UAE 
tour, where I struggled against spin especially.”

Wise words from a maturing cricketer. But let us hope that he has not 
forgotten the joy of smashing the ball all around the ground – after 
appropriate reconnaissance. I doubt this is the case. At Lord’s on Saturday he 
played the only skittish innings of the day – 42 runs from 30 balls – and he 
will hope to proceed at a similar rate in Nottingham, ideally in addition to 
producing 10 hostile overs for a grateful captain. We do not want Stokes being 
too sensible.
 