
Ben Carson finally ended his presidential campaign on Friday, two days after 
announcing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/02/ben-carson-political-path-forward-super-tuesday>
 that he didn’t see “a political path forward” and long after his 
once-promising campaign for the Republican nomination had imploded.


The retired neurosurgeon announced he was suspending his campaign in a speech 
at CPAC, the annual conservative political conference.

“I’m leaving the campaign trail,” Carson said. “I will still continue to be 
heavily involved in trying to save our nation. We have to save it.”

In a rambling speech, Carson, who justly noted “there are a lot of people who 
love me; they just won’t vote for me”, buried his announcement in between 
digressions about the late community organizer Saul Alinsky and attacks on the 
Federal Reserve for “suppressing interest rates”.


Explaining his decision to drop out, Carson said: “I did the math, I looked at 
the states, I looked at the delegate counts. I simply realized that it wasn’t 
going to happen. And if that was the case, I didn’t want to interfere with the 
process.”

In a press conference afterwards, Carson said he had “probably” decided who he 
would now vote for but he would not make an endorsement, saying simply he was 
backing “we the people”.

He did speak fondly of Donald Trump in response to a question from a reporter, 
noting that “Mr. Trump really does want to be successful. That’s a huge part of 
him. He would feel terrible if he had a presidency that was not successful and 
he’s smart enough to know he would not have a successful presidency if he does 
some of the stuff he’s talking about.”

Carson concluded that Trump would “appoint people who are very, very good and 
very, very smart and largely stay out of the way” if the real estate mogul was 
elected president.

The decision marked a fall from grace for Carson, the only Republican 
candidate besides Donald Trump to have led in multiple national polls since the 
current frontrunner’s emergence over the summer. Carson has also raised more 
money than any other Republican candidate for the White House.

The mild-mannered neurosurgeon, famed for being the first person to separate 
twins conjoined at the head, became a prominent political figure in 2013. Then, 
as the keynote speaker at the National Prayer Breakfast, he launched a furious 
diatribe against Barack Obama and the Affordable Care Act as the president sat 
just feet away. The speech turned the 64-year-old African American doctor into 
a beloved figure among conservatives and fueled his insurgent presidential bid, 
which began last year.

However, Carson, a first time candidate for elected office, was plagued by a 
disorganized campaign that never built up the political apparatus necessary to 
win. There was never the political and press operation necessary to mount a 
winning effort in a campaign plagued by infighting and in which Carson 
confidant Armstrong Williams played an outsized role and often undermined paid 
staffers. But many of the issues came from a campaign where even the candidate 
admitted that his staffers “didn’t really seem to understand finances”.

Much of the money raised by the campaign went to the firms of top consultants, 
including Mike Murray, who founded American Legacy Pac, one of a number of 
organizations that have beencriticized 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2013/09/newt-gingrich-american-legacy-pac-infocision>
 for raising considerable amounts of money but spending comparatively little on 
political issues, instead directing most of the money raised to consultants. 
Before launching his presidential bid, Carson was chair of American Legacy Pac.

Carson’s campaign has followed the same blueprint, with most of the $58m 
raised going back into fundraising costs. The result has raised questions about 
whether Carson was taken advantage of by his aides. When asked by the Guardian 
in January if his campaign was a direct mail scam, Carson simply replied: “Not 
that I know of.”

Carson addressed the issue at his press conference on Friday, saying: “I 
should have done a better job of monitoring what was going on. I placed trust 
where I shouldn’t have.”

But the retired neurosurgeon seemed unconcerned about his legacy. “I’m not a 
big legacy guy, I’m going to be honest with you.”

While Carson’s campaign was one of the few, along with Trump’s, to file 
complete lists of the delegates they might win in nearly every state, he had 
little success actually accumulating delegates. Carson has only won eight 
delegates, in contrast to Trump’s 329, and his best state so far was Alaska, 
where he received the support of 10.9% of caucus-goers.

With his candidacy ending, Carson will take a new role as chair of My Faith 
Votes, a non-partisan group that will focus on turning out Christians in 
November.

 