
Just after I published my first novel in Guatemala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/guatemala>, in 2003, I had a beer with the 
Salvadoran writer Horacio Castellanos Moya, who was living there at the time. 
We met at an old bar called El Establo. As soon as he saw me walk in, he raised 
his bottle of beer, congratulated me, smiled a crazyman’s smile, and then 
warned me to leave the country as soon as possible.

My entrance into the literary world had been both unexpected and unplanned. I 
was 32 years old and had never before published anything, anywhere. Not only 
did I know very little about the Guatemalan literary scene, I knew even less 
about Guatemala in general. I had left the country in 1981 —on the day of my 
tenth birthday— with my parents and brother and sister, had grown up in Florida 
and then studied engineering in North Carolina. At school, I was always the 
math kid. Never read books. Never even liked them. I finally returned to 
Guatemala in 1993, after spending more than twelve years in the United States, 
to a country I barely knew anymore, and with a minimal grasp of Spanish. I 
started working as an engineer in my father’s construction company and slowly 
began finding my way back into the country, and into my mother tongue —but 
always marred by an extreme sense of frustration or displacement, a sense of 
not belonging. Today I understand that this existential angst is more or less 
normal at that age, right after college, but back then I felt like a man 
without a country, without a language, without a profession (I was, quite 
literally, in my father’s), without a sense of who I was or what I was supposed 
to do. This lasted for the next five years, and only got worse. Until I finally 
decided to seek help. But my definition of help, being a rational and 
methodical engineer, was to look for answers not in psychology or even 
religion, but in philosophy. I went to one of the local universities, 
Universidad Rafael Landívar, and asked if I could enroll in a couple of 
philosophy courses, thinking that maybe there I’d find some kind of answer. But 
in Guatemala, as in much of Latin America, it’s a joint degree: Letras y 
Filosofía, Literature and Philosophy. If you want to study one, you have to 
study the other. And so I did. Within weeks I was smitten with literature. 
Within a year I had quit my job as an engineer and was living off of my savings 
and reading fiction full time, a book every one or two days, like some sort of 
literature junkie.

I wanted to write a story before I could write one good sentence

A year later I started working at the university—as an assistant, then as a 
professor of literature—while at the same time I shyly, and secretly, started 
to write my first stories. All very bad, of course, very poorly written. I 
wanted to write a story before I could write one good sentence. I didn’t yet 
understand that typing isn’t writing; that writing is much closer to music, to 
breathing, to walking on water. But I was hungry to learn, and I was lucky to 
find the right teachers, particularly two: Ernesto Loukota and Osvaldo Salazar, 
both philosophers and colleagues of mine at the university. Ernesto Loukota 
taught me the craft of language. He would ask me to write a line about 
something—a tree, a dog, a chair—and the following day we’d get together at the 
university and go over that line, its grammar and punctuation. He’d then assign 
me a line about something else for the next day. And so on. Only one line, 
every single day. Like our own daily zen ritual. It was at least a month before 
he allowed me to write two lines. Osvaldo Salazar taught to me be my own 
reader. Every so often, I’d give him something I’d written and we’d study it 
together, take it apart, edit not its language, but its structure, its 
development and themes and overall content. If Ernesto Loukota taught me the 
craft of language, Osvaldo Salazar taught me how to be my own most demanding 
reader.

I was spending my days teaching, and reading books like some kind of addict, 
and learning to write as if my life depended on it (maybe my life did depend on 
it?), and before I knew what was happening I published my first novel. Just 
like that. Almost by accident. I stumbled onto books, and then fell into 
writing. But something was finally starting to make sense, about myself, about 
my country. And now I was being warned by a crazy Salvadoran writer that I 
should leave.
 Clockwise from top left: Mario Payeras, Carlos Solórzano, Augusto Monterroso, 
Luis Cardoza y Aragón, Luis de Lión, and Miguel Ángel Asturias. 
For the past century, Guatemalan writers have been writing, and dying, in 
exile. Miguel Ángel Asturias, who received the Nobel Prize for Literature in 
1967, wrote his books about Guatemala while living in exile, in South America 
and Europe. He died in Paris, and is buried at Père Lachaise. The great 
short-story writer Augusto Monterroso, after being detained by the military 
forces of dictator Jorge Ubico, was forced to leave the country in 1944. He 
fled first to Chile, then to Mexico, where he lived the rest of his life, and 
where he wrote most of his stories, and where he’s now buried. Luis Cardoza y 
Aragón, arguably Guatemala’s most important poet of the last century, suffered 
a similar fate —he was also forced into exile in Mexico in the 1930s, where he 
wrote his poetry and where he, too, died. Guatemala’s greatest playwright, 
Carlos Solórzano, fled the country in 1939—first to Germany, then to Mexico—and 
never returned. The writer Mario Payeras, a guerrilla commander in the 1970s, 
also wrote while exiled in Mexico, where he suddenly and mysteriously died (his 
remains were buried in a cemetery in the southwest of the country, but have 
since vanished). One of the most important Guatemalan novels of the last few 
decades,El Tiempo Principia en Xibalbá (Time Commences in Xibalbá), was written 
by the indigenous writer Luis de Lión, who in 1984 was kidnapped by military 
forces, tortured during twenty days, and then disappeared. His murder wasn’t 
confirmed until fifteen years later, in 1999, when his name and number appeared 
in the now infamous “Military Diary”, a haunting military document that 
secretly listed the fate of all the Guatemalans disappeared by the military 
forces between August of 1983 and March of 1985. Luis de Lión, born José Luís 
de León Díaz, is number 135. His novel was published posthumously, that most 
extreme of exiles.


Certain things in Guatemala are simply not spoken or written about

Guatemalan writers, and Guatemalans in general, have lived for almost a 
century now in a climate of fear. If anyone dared to speak out, they either 
disappeared into exile, or disappeared literally. This fear is still prevalent, 
woven deep into the subconscious of the Guatemalan people, who over time have 
been taught to be silent. To not speak out. To not say or write words that 
might kill you.

The first consequence of this, of course, is overall silence. Certain things 
in Guatemala are simply not spoken or written about. The indigenous genocide in 
the 1980s. The extreme racism. The overwhelming number of women being murdered. 
The impossibility of land reform and redistribution of wealth. The close ties 
between the government and the drug cartels. Although these are all subjects 
that almost define the country itself, they are only discussed and commented in 
whispers, or from the outside. But a second and perhaps more dangerous 
consequence of a culture of silence is a type of self-censorship: when speaking 
or writing, one mustn’t say anything that puts oneself or one’s family in 
peril. The censoring becomes automatic, unconscious. Because the danger is very 
real. Although the days of dictators are now gone, the military is still 
powerful, and political and military murders are all too common.

How can a journalist be a journalist, then, if his or her life is at the mercy 
of the articles he or she writes? How can a novelist or a poet say anything 
truthful about their own people, about the social inequality, about the 
intolerable levels of racism and poverty, if their very life hangs on the words 
of those novels or poems? They can’t. The journalist can’t be a journalist. The 
novelist can’t allow him or herself to be truthful. And the poet simply ceases 
to be a poet. Unless, as recent history shows, and as I was told by a 
Salvadoran writer, they leave.

I started being followed. Or so I thought. It was a few months after my novel 
came out. At first I dismissed it as a coincidence, the black sedan always 
parked too close to my house, constantly appearing in my rearview mirror. But 
after a few days, coincidence gave way to paranoia, and I started doing all the 
things Guatemalans do in their normal, everyday psychotic state: frequently 
altering my route to work, avoiding dead-end streets and dark alleys, never 
driving alone at night (I have a friend who even bought a mannequin, and would 
sit it next to her in the passenger’s seat and pretend they were having a 
conversation as she drove). I also remember that one morning, during that time, 
while I was teaching at the university, a couple of guys just stood outside the 
classroom, and stared in at me through the window. They looked like thugs or 
maybe bodyguards. I went on teaching, trying my best to ignore them in the 
window, and after a few minutes they left. When I finished, I made sure to walk 
out with my students, in a group.


Days later, I was approached.

It was at a bookstore called Sophos. I was browsing some books on the table 
when an elderly man came over and introduced himself. He was dressed in a coat 
and tie. He said he had read my novel, and talked for a few minutes about his 
impressions. He then shook my hand again and, still holding on to it, said it 
had been a pleasure to meet me, that I should take care, be careful. I asked 
him careful about what. He just smiled politely and went on his way. I 
considered it strange, but didn’t give it much thought. Maybe he was just being 
nice? Maybe I misinterpreted his greeting (usted cuídese, you take care)? 
Anyway, I had almost forgotten about it until several weeks later, when I 
received a phone call.

The voice on the phone said that I didn’t know him, but that he was calling as 
a friend, to warn me about my enemies

It was late at night. The voice on the phone said that I didn’t know him, but 
that he was calling as a friend, to warn me about my enemies. What enemies? I 
had no enemies. I’ve never had any enemies. He ignored me and chatted on and I 
couldn’t understand what he was referring to. Was it something I’d written in 
my novel? Something I’d said in one of the recent interviews? Some critical 
comment about the country, or its politics, or about Guatemalans in general? I 
suddenly got so nervous on the phone that I almost stopped paying attention. I 
barely heard what followed. And I’ve now forgotten most of what the man said. 
But I distinctly remember three things. One, thinking that his voice sounded 
familiar, as if I’d heard it somewhere before. Two, the sudden mention of my 
parents and siblings. And three, the last words he said to me:Mejor no andar 
hablando demasiado. Better not go saying too much. And then he hung up.

The next day I changed my cellphone number. I even changed my provider. But I 
started sleeping less. I lost weight. I now left my house only when absolutely 
necessary. I even cancelled two radio interviews I had scheduled, giving them 
some excuse about my work or my health. I had no idea what was going on, what 
I’d done or said or written about, but something was definitely going on. Or 
was it? And then, late one afternoon, someone showed up at my house.

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
Still today, for safety reasons, I can’t give too many details. But I knew him 
from before. So when I opened the front door and saw him standing there, I 
didn’t think anything of it. I did think it was weird, though, him showing up 
at my house. I knew him, but only casually. I hadn’t seen him in years. And 
he’d never before been to my place. He smiled and shook my hand and even said 
he was sorry to bother me at home. But he walked in without being asked, and 
immediately, as he sat down on one of the sofas, took out a big black gun and 
placed it loudly on the living room table. I was speechless. I sat down on the 
other sofa, across from him. And there the gun lay in all its metallic 
blackness, between us. He was wearing cowboy boots and a thick vest lined with 
pockets, like the ones used by photographers. He made some small talk, asked if 
I’d seen this friend or that, and then remained silent for a few seconds, which 
to me seemed liked minutes, before he started to talk about Hitler. I was lost. 
My head was reeling. I remember feeling the sweat rolling down my back. I 
couldn’t keep my eyes off the gun, although I was trying my best to be discreet 
and not stare at it. And he just kept talking about Hitler —to me, a Jew. He 
said that Hitler was one of his heroes. He said that Hitler was one of the 
greatest of men. He said that he admired how Hitler always knew exactly how to 
dispose of his enemies. He said that we should all learn from Hitler. He then 
asked me if I understood and I managed to stutter that I did and he grabbed his 
gun from the table, got up, and walked silently out of my house.
 