
Chris Lynn has punished the Perth Scorchers in a batting masterclass, leading 
the Brisbane Heat to a nine-wicket win and top spot on the BBL table. Lynn 
smashed an unbeaten 98 runs from just 49 balls, including three fours and 11 
sixes, making light work of the 174 runs set by the Scorchers at the Waca 
Ground.

The Heat reached 174-1 in the 15th over, with 32 balls to spare. James Peirson 
and Brendon McCullum set the tone of the Heat’s innings, racing to 38 from the 
first three overs. And Lynn continued the attack when David Willey knocked over 
Peirson’s stumps when the score was 26.

Lynn reached his 50 from just 27 balls, including one four and six sixes. In 
BBL06, he now has 309 runs from five innings at an extraordinary average of 
more than 154.

Nathan Lyon spins Australia into strong position despite Younis Khan century
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/nathan-lyon-spins-australia-into-strong-position-despite-younus-khan-century>
Willey wore the brunt of the Heat attack early, with figures of 0-30 from two 
overs in his last game before he joins the England one day team. He also caught 
Lynn on the boundary line when he was on just 35, but landed on the rope before 
he could throw it up in the air and regroup.

Ashton Agar, returning from duties with the national team, was the pick of the 
Scorchers’ bowlers, with 0-36 from 3.4 overs. McCullum also had a couple of 
lives on his way to an unbeaten 50 from 31 balls.

Earlier, Scorchers batsman Mitch Marsh hit an entertaining 70 runs from 41 
balls, his highest score of this campaign. The Scorchers posted 6-173-6 from 
their 20 overs to set what should have been a competitive score in the top of 
the table clash. 

Shaun Marsh managed a run-a-ball 32 after struggling earlier in his innings, 
while Ian Bell copped a rough decision when given out caught by Heat keeper 
Peirson in front of the wicket for 11 with the ball appearing to hit only pad. 
Heat leg spinner Mitch Swepson took that wicket and that of Shaun Marsh to 
finish with figures of 2-27 from four overs.

Lynn admitted after the match he was in such a zone that after hitting the 
winning runs, with a six, he walked down the wicket and told McCullum that he 
was going to push a two on the next ball to bring up his ton - unaware that the 
match was finished.

“I have had a couple of nice Shield innings, but that was right up there,” he 
said of clean striking. “Obviously I was trying to utilise the Waca with the 
strong breeze. It’s like Rafael Nadal, when he sets up for every point. Same 
routine, whether it’s the first set or the last set. I take that theory into my 
cricket, whether it’s the first ball or the 50th ball.”






 