
Children often don't get the concept of city breaks – all that walking! – but 
add two wheels and you can sell an urban holiday to those who prefer Minecraft 
to map-reading. This was the thinking behind taking Dylan, eight, and George, 
11, on a biking and sightseeing break in Brighton & Hove.

This south coast city is big on bikes. Between 2001 and 2011 there was a 109% 
increase in Brightonians cycling to work and, in addition to the city's miles 
of cycle paths, a cycle hub is planned for behind Brighton Station, complete 
with hire and repair shop and storage for 500 bikes. It's a cycling 
destination, too – and this September stage seven of the Tour of Britain will 
finish on the seafront.

To keep things green, we arrive by train and base ourselves at Sea Spray, a 
family-friendly boutique hotel in Kemptown with themed rooms. Owner Tania takes 
us to the Brighton family room, complete with pier mural, outside courtyard, 
inside lamp-post (which the kids loved) and an activity pack and sweets on the 
pillow (ditto). Brighton Sports Co – which rents out dinky Dawes folding bikes, 
as well as the comfy Californian beach cruisers we opt for – is just a short 
stroll away and, handily, next to the seafront cycle path, which runs four 
miles from Hove Lagoon to Brighton Marina.

No maps required
And then we're off. It's pretty hard to get lost: if you're heading west, as 
we do, just keep the sea on your left. Running alongside us is the quaint Volks 
Railway – the world's first public electric railway – and there's the Brighton 
Wheel, too – a more petite version of the London landmark. The Brighton Pier 
provides tacky fun – all noisy arcades and stomach-churning rides – and the 
seafront's elegant Regency houses reveal how Brighton would have looked to the 
original holidaymakers of this, the original seaside resort.

Finding your dinner is easy in Brighton – it's packed with cool, informal 
eateries. We tuck into inspiring Indian cuisine at Chilli Pickle (great masala 
dosas) before a well-earned sleep. Next day, after a full English (Dylan will 
take a sausage over cereal any day), we pedal beyond the pier and walk through 
the Lanes, the twisting remains of the pre-Regency fishing village now rammed 
with jewellers. Then it's on to the Royal Pavilion, George IV's iconic and 
extravagant homage to exotic India.

From here, a cycle path runs up North Street into North Laine. If you fancy 
popping into the independent shops lining the narrow roads of this boho 
quarter, there is bike parking outside the Jubilee Library.

Back on the front, we pedal west, passing the remains of the West Pier. Plans 
to restore this Grade I-listed structure were scuppered by storms and arson, 
but the skeletal remains are dramatic. From here, the path flanks Hove Lawns, a 
busy green expanse bustling with keep-fit fanatics.

The boys are not ones for exertion without incentives, so I have promised 
ice-cream at Marocco's, an Italian seafront restaurant. Sitting on the pebbles 
eating our cones is a great way to end the day. We could go on to Hove Lagoon, 
for water sports and Fatboy Slim's Big Beach Cafe, but decide to just linger 
for a paddle before cycling  back.

Thanks Brighton, it's been fun. We're ready for anything now: the world 
on two wheels!

visitbrighton.com <http://visitbrighton.com>

Brighton by numbers

1750 The year Dr Richard Russel recommended bathing in and drinking sea water, 
sowing the early seeds of seaside tourism

128 acres of water is covered by Brighton Marina, making it one of the largest 
in Europe

Useful information

How to get there
Southern trains run every half an hour from London Victoria. First Capital 
Connect runs four services per hour from Bedford, through London to Brighton. 
Restrictions apply to non-folding cycles. There are also direct services east 
to Eastbourne and Hastings and west to Southampton.

Where to eat and drink
Big Beach Cafe <http://www.bigbeachcafe.com>, Hove Lagoon, owned by Fatboy 
Slim, has well-priced, hearty grub.Chilli Pickle <http://thechillipickle.com> 
on Jubilee Square serves tasty, regional Indian cuisine in buzzy surroundings.

Where to stay
Sea Spray <http://seaspraybrighton.co.uk> in Kemptown (family rooms from £120, 
doubles from £89)has 16 luxury themed rooms (Venice, New York, Morocco etc), 
including five family-friendly rooms, containing everything from fridges to 
cots and baby baths.Fab Guest <http://fabguest.co.uk> (singles from £75 per 
night) has 14 contemporary rooms in a Georgian townhouse on a quiet street near 
the seafront.Hotel Una <http://hotel-una.co.uk> (doubles from £115) is a 
family-run boutique hotel in central Brighton.

Bike hire and tours
Brighton Sports Co <http://brightonsports.co.uk> on Madeira Drive hires out 
Californian beach cruiser bikes, children's bikes, tagalongs and child seats. 
Prices start at £6 per hour, including helmets and locks.Amsterdammers' 
<http://brightoncyclehire.co.uk>, just below Brighton station, has the largest 
fleet of hire bikes in the city, including tandems, children's bikes and 
"mother" bikes with two child seats. Prices start at £7 for three hours.
Brighton Bike Tours <http://brightonbiketour.com> runs two-and-a-half-hour 
tours starting at the station (£19.50) or one hour twilight tours (£12.50). 
Private family tours are also available.

For more information on holidays in England, go to VisitEngland.com 
<http://www.visitengland.com/>
 