
The film-maker Blake Edwards <https://www.theguardian.com/film/blake-edwards>, 
who has died aged 88, will be best remembered as the creator of the Pink 
Panther films, and as the husband of the entertainer Julie Andrews. But Edwards 
was a third-generation show-business figure whose complex and controversial 
career spanned more than 50 years, initially as an actor and writer and 
subsequently as one of America's most prolific producer-directors, primarily 
concerned with the popular genres of comedy and musicals and with creating 
television series.

Despite working in mainstream cinema, his maverick spirit and ego made him an 
uneasy partner with Hollywood studios. He famously savaged the hand that had 
fed him so well with S.O.B. (1981), a raucous, vitriolic attack on Tinseltown. 
His sophisticated work drew strongly on his love of early cinema (his 
stepgrandfather had directed silent films), and on his own life and 
psychological problems (he wrote two movies with his psychoanalyst, Milton 
Wexler). He also reworked his own films and remade those of other directors.

Edwards was born William Blake Crump in Tulsa, Oklahoma. His parents divorced 
when he was young and he moved to Los Angeles with his mother. He began work as 
an extra, partly thanks to his stepfather, Jack McEdward, a film production 
manager. During his early 20s he appeared in some decent movies, including A 
Guy Named Joe (1943), which gave him income and time to write.

He created a radio series, Richard Diamond: Private Detective, for Dick Powell 
in 1948, and that year also wrote and starred in a modest western, Panhandle. 
He followed this with the screenplay for another western, Stampede (1949), and 
then concentrated on screenplays for the actor-turned-director Richard Quine, 
including All Ashore (1953) and the racing drama Drive a Crooked Road (1954), 
which starred Mickey Rooney. Edwards then devised a sitcom for Rooney, called 
Hey, Mulligan (1955).

Also in 1955, he cleverly updated My Sister Eileen for Quine, who had starred 
in the 1942 version. This bright musical introduced him to Jack Lemmon, one of 
many actors to feature regularly in Edwards's later films. Edwards then wrote 
and directed two films for the popular singer Frankie Laine, Bring Your Smile 
Along (1955) and He Laughed Last (1956).

By the age of 35, Edwards had served a successful Hollywood apprenticeship. In 
1957 he joined forces withTony Curtis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/30/tony-curtis-obituary> on their 
first movie together, Mister Cory, starring Curtis as a guy who uses the path 
of a crooked gambler to escape the Chicago slums.

Edwards enjoyed his first real commercial hit with the second world war comedy 
Operation Petticoat (1959), cleverly uniting Curtis with the actor's hero Cary 
Grant. This and two successful TV series, Peter Gunn (1958-61) and Mr Lucky 
(1959-60), led him into the most successful decade of his career. The 1960 Bing 
Crosby vehicle High Time (in which Crosby dresses as a woman – an early example 
of one of Edwards's fixations) was followed by the sparklingBreakfast at 
Tiffany's <https://www.theguardian.com/film/breakfast-at-tiffany-s> (1961), an 
adaptation of Truman Capote's novel, starring Audrey Hepburn, George Peppard 
and Rooney. It compounded his longterm relationship with Henry Mancini, whose 
score and theme song, Moon River, both won Oscars. They collaborated from High 
Time onwards, not least in the Panther movies, on a total of more than 20 
movies.

Until 1962, Edwards had mainly worked on comedies and musicals, so he seemed 
an unlikely choice to direct Days of Wine and Roses, in which Lee Remick and 
Lemmon played a married couple whose descent into alcoholism is depicted in 
harrowing detail. Often recalled as his best feature, it contains performances 
of great intensity and probes darker corners than any of his other films.

He hit the jackpot with The Pink Panther (1963) and its first sequel, A Shot 
in the Dark (1964), with Peter Sellers as the bungling Inspector Clouseau. As 
the writer, producer and director of such hits, he could subsequently do as he 
wanted. The result was Hollywood's most expensive comedy to that date, The 
Great Race (1965), starring Curtis and Lemmon. This sprawling homage to silent 
cinema was dedicated to Laurel and Hardy. Although popular, it was not the 
box-office success its cost demanded.

In 1967, Edwards revived the private eye character from his earlier TV series 
and directed the feature film Gunn (1967), a quirky thriller in which Craig 
Stevens reprised his role. The clever but protracted comedy The Party (1968) 
revealed Edwards's disillusionment with the movie world, and starred Sellers as 
a famous Indian actor who, when invited to a swish Hollywood soiree, totally 
wrecks it.

Apart from Edwards's marriage (after a divorce from the actor Patricia Walker) 
to Andrews in 1969, the decade had ended less auspiciously than it began. He 
devised an elaborate wedding present for Andrews in the form of a lyrical 
love/spy story, Darling Lili (1970), set during the first world war. Time has 
been kinder to it than contemporary critics and audiences. It was the first of 
his films to suffer studio interference. When both his western Wild Rovers 
(1971) and a thriller, The Carey Treatment (1972), were also re-edited, he and 
Andrews set up home in Switzerland and began to work in England.

Another romantic spy drama, The Tamarind Seed (1974), enjoyed only modest 
success, so Edwards revived the Clouseau series with The Return of the Pink 
Panther (1975), The Pink Panther Strikes Again (1976) and Revenge of the Pink 
Panther (1978). The first was highly successful, but the last suffered from 
Sellers's increasingly mannered performance. Nevertheless, the director's 
rehabilitation seemed complete enough for the US to welcome him back, and he 
made the riotously successful 10 (1979), withDudley Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/dudley-moore> as a randy, middle-aged 
composer who grades his girlfriends numerically. Andrews co-starred, but it was 
Bo Derek who took the attention and the project was his greatest non-Panther 
hit.

It allowed him extraordinary licence resulting in S.O.B., in which a suicidal 
director, played by one of his stalwarts, Richard Mulligan, is so dismayed by 
the response to a film that he revamps it as a porn flick. Edwards surrounded 
himself with other regular collaborators, headed by Andrews, who famously 
appeared topless, bringing an end to her wholesome Mary Poppins image. S.O.B. 
was described as tasteless. It was also a virulent and comic attack on the 
idiocies of showbusiness and a complex referral to both Edwards's past work and 
Hollywood itself.

Edwards once more returned to movie history with Victor Victoria (1982), a 
triumphant revamping of a 1933 German film. Andrews played a destitute singer 
who, with the connivance of a gay friend, poses as a man, impersonating a 
female singer. The film challenged the audience's notions of sexuality, not 
least through the hero (James Garner), who finds himself attracted to the 
(supposedly) male singer. It was an archetypal Edwards film with a glittering, 
stylish surface and a dark undertone.

Trail of the Pink Panther (1982) and Curse of the Pink Panther (1983) enjoyed 
less acclaim, especially the former, which dredged up material from earlier 
films, after the death of Sellers in 1980, and constructed a movie around them. 
Edwards was now co-writing with his son Geoffrey, and they were joined by 
Wexler for The Man Who Loved Women, a reworking of a 1977 François Truffaut 
film. The project gave full rein to the director's concerns with death, 
psychoanalysis and sex.

He resorted to his writing pseudonym, Sam O Brown, after an extremely unhappy 
period of work on the crime comedy City Heat, starringClint Eastwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/clinteastwood> and Burt Reynolds, which he 
had been slated to direct. He went on to direct Micki and Maude (1984) after 
the collapse of yet another project, then settled to reworking a Laurel and 
Hardy masterpiece, The Music Box (1932). The resulting film, A Fine Mess 
(1986), was to feature a version of the duo's great piano-moving sequence from 
the original film, but it was removed by the studio and the film stands as one 
indebted to silent cinema as a whole, not to a specific film.

For a modest $1.5m, Edwards made the apparently autobiographical That's Life 
(1986), again co-written with Wexler. He described it as a belated follow-up to 
10, with Lemmon playing a 60-year-old character. The film was shot at Edwards's 
Malibu home and starred Andrews as well as his daughter Jennifer (a regular 
performer in his films) and many other friends and collaborators.

He enjoyed popular success by directing Blind Date (1987), in which Bruce 
Willis <https://www.theguardian.com/film/brucewillis> played an executive who 
arranges a business date, only to discover that she is dangerously incapable of 
holding her drink. He then returned to television, directing Justin Case (1988) 
and a remake of Peter Gunn (1989). Of his final features, among the best was 
Sunset (1988), in which Willis played the silent movies western star Tom Mix 
opposite Garner's ageing Wyatt Earp. A delightful portrait of a lost Hollywood, 
combined with a factually based thriller, the film failed commercially.

It was followed by the comedies Skin Deep (1989), infamous for its luminous 
condoms, and Switch (1991), starring Ellen Barkin, in which a chauvinist male 
is returned to earth as a woman. This complex, very funny movie showed that 
Edwards had retained his stylish, ironic and adult view of sexuality and 
relationships – a sophisticated attitude increasingly at odds with mainstream 
audiences.

Once again aiming at popular appeal, he returned to Clouseau, directing Son of 
the Pink Panther (1993), which starred Roberto Benigni as the illegitimate son 
of the legendary inspector. Aged 73, Edwards then directed Andrews in a 
Broadway production of Victor/Victoria, which opened in 1995 and ran for more 
than 700 performances.

He was awarded an honorary Oscar in 2004 and had been preparing a stage 
musical based on the Pink Panther films. Andrews survives him, along with their 
children Amy and Jo, his stepdaughter Emma, and the children from his first 
marriage, Jennifer and Geoffrey.

• Blake Edwards (William Blake Crump), film director, screenwriter and 
producer, born 26 July 1922; died 15 December 2010
 