
Michael on Rebecca 

What were you hoping for?
Best-case scenario: a new relationship. Worst-case scenario: a new friend.

First impressions?
Attractive and well-dressed, with a fun personality.

What did you talk about?
Charity work, my creative writing, her comedy work, near-death experiences.

Any awkward moments?
I can’t remember any.

Good table manners?
Magnificent.

Best thing about Becca?
Her sharp mind and sense of humour.

Would you introduce her to your friends? 
Absolutely. But I may not need to: we have 12 mutual friends on Facebook.

Describe her in three words
Smart, funny, engaging.

What do you think she made of you?
She gave me the reassuring vibe that I wasn’t boring her.

Did you go on somewhere?
We didn’t need to; I only just caught the last tube home.

And... did you kiss?
We didn’t.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
We let the chef decide what we ate. I wouldn’t have picked spaghetti for main 
course on a first date.

Marks out of 10?
I refuse to grade people, because this isn’t Tinder, but if I had to grade the 
evening, I’d give it a solid 9.

Would you meet again?
We swapped numbers at the tube station – I would like to see her again.

Rebecca on Michael

What were you hoping for?
Not many awkward moments.

First impressions?
Very sweet – he brought roses to make it a “proper date”.

What did you talk about?
Books he’s written, living abroad, good jobs, bad jobs, comedy, poetry, 
erotomania.

Any awkward moments?
We thought he’d missed the last train, which I felt terrible about.

Good table manners?
He managed the spaghetti very well, despite his fears.

Best thing about Michael?
He thinks deeply, but can also laugh at himself.

Would you introduce him to your friends? 
Some would get on with him, but others would eat him alive.

Describe him in three words
Interesting, intelligent, honest.

What do you think he made of you?
Glad I was relatively normal.

Blind date: ‘I could have gone easier on the booze’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/26/peigi-jamie-dublin-blind-date>
Did you go on somewhere?
We stayed in the restaurant.

And... did you kiss?
Just a hug at the station.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
He had to drive home from the station, so it would’ve been fun to let the wine 
flow.

Marks out of 10?
7.

Would you meet again?
He’s really interesting but, romantically, he’s not for me.

• Rebecca and Michael ate at LiveLi <http://www.liveli.co.uk/>, London WC2.

Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. For a free three-day 
trial of Soulmates, go to soulmates.theguardian.com
 