 It was difficult to encourage conversation among Catholics in Derry yesterday 
about the Anglo -Irish agreement and what it might mean to them. The most 
forceful reply was given in two short words, which translated into principal 
English, meant 'nothing.'
No other place in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> so graphically illustrates the 
gulf that exists between the two communities, or the obstacles facing the 
London and Dublin Governments' declared intention of opening the way for 
reconciliation in the province.

In 1920 the retention of Derry or Londonderry - depending on whether you are a 
Catholic or Protestant, a nationalist or Unionist - in the UK after the 
partition of Ireland was itself a political act. It was fraught with dangers 
for the Westminster politicians who drew the border across the island's map.

Even though it lay on the western, Irish side of the river Foyle the city was 
included in Ulster because of its historical and emotional significance to 
Loyalists. They slammed its gates on the army of King James II in 1689 and 
stemmed the advance of Catholicism.

It might be expected that in any other European city of the 1980s such an 
event would have been consigned to the history books and municipal museums.

But in Londonderry it is as symbolically potent today as it was three 
centuries ago.

In the city's Catholic Bogside, 'Free Derry' proclaims the famous gable wall 
which is all that remains of a terrace of houses that stood in 1968 when the 
current wave of unrest began in Northern Ireland with the civil rights marches.

It was in the Bogside Inn, a drab dark public house near that continuing 
symbol of nationalist protest, that yesterday's agreement was being dismissed 
as meaning precious little to those on the western shore of the Foyle, who 
regarded themselves as Irish.

' It still means plastic bullets and supergrass trials without juries. It 
still means the RUC and the UDR doesn't it?' said one customer. He was 
referring to the Ulster police and army forces who maintain security in the 
province with what many Catholics regard as a sectarian disregard for 
evenhandedness.

Further into the Bogside are the local offices of Sinn Fein, the political 
wing of the IRA whose electoral advances in recent years arguably accelerated 
the willingness of London and Dublin to recognise the changing situation in 
Northern Ireland.

There, Martin McGuinness, the Republican party's chairman, dismissed the Anglo 
-Irish agreement as an attempt to maintain partition and to bolster the 
electoral fortunes of the more moderate Catholic party, the Social Democratic 
and Labour Party. Its initial letters are derided in the Bogside as standing 
for the Stoop Down Low Party.

Mr McGuinness said: 'The whole operation as far as we are concerned is an 
attempt by the Dublin and London Governments to get the nationalist people here 
to relate to the British legal, judicial and administrative system. This 
'agreement' has come about as a direct result of the successes of Sinn Fein and 
the military struggle of the IRA.

'It is all about defeating Republican resistance. We view that attempt very 
seriously, but it will not succeed because what has happened today ignored the 
basic fact of partition and our support will therefore remain strong.'

But on the other side of the river, where Protestants have moved increasingly 
in recent years, the Anglo -Irish accord represented the world being turned 
upside down.

Mr Glen Barr, who, as chairman of the Ulster Workers' Council, led the strike 
in 1974 which brought down the last attempt at power-sharing between the two 
communities, said he regarded yesterday's events as 'total defeat.'

Mr Barr has dropped out of politics in Northern Ireland and now runs a youth 
employment training project in the city. It aims to help young people from both 
sides of the sectarian divide.

But he said: 'Loyalists are sickened and stunned. How can they be expected to 
support an agreement about the future that involves a foreign power in decision

'The writing is on the wall for them today. It is that the link between the UK 
and Northern Ireland is over. I'll tell you this now and it gives me no 
pleasure - what the IRA have been doing in Northern Ireland for the last 15 
years Loyalist paramilitaries are going to start doing now in this reunited 
Ireland.
 