 Four people were killed and 40 injured by bomb explosions in two public houses 
in Guildford, Surrey, last night.
Some of the dead were women.

The first blast was at the Horse and Groom in North Street, and half an hour 
later the second bomb went off in the Seven Stars, 100 yards away in Swan Lane.

Mr Peter Matthews, Surrey's Chief Constable, said some people who were inside 
the Horse and Groom had spoken of a warning being given shortly before the 
explosion.

Both pubs are frequented by WRACs from Queen Elizabeth Barracks, Stoughton, 
and by guardsmen from Pirbright and Aldershot.

Most of the casualties were in the Horse and Groom. An eye-witness said the 
front of the building was blown into the street.

As firemen searched the debris for casualties, and angry crowds gathered in 
the town centre, a police spokesman said: "We have sealed the town to enable 
emergency vehicles to move easily. We are trying to empty all the other pubs."

A woman working in the nearby Post Office said: "We heard the explosions. The 
second, in the Seven Stars, sounded louder than the first. We're 400 yards 
away. "

"Both these pubs are crowded in the evenings, especially on a Saturday."

"Within minutes of the first explosion, the streets were filled with 
ambulances, fire-engines and police cars. It must have been terrible."

"The explosions were dull thuds really, more like massive fireworks."

An eye-witness passing the Horse and Groom when the explosion occurred said: 
"It was a bang, a scream and then all I saw were cars - and horns and policemen 
and all the rest."

Mr Andrew Fisher, who lives near North Street, and is a St John Ambulance 
trained nurse, said: "I was walking down the street and there was this bang and 
I went in and tried to pick them up and I couldn't until I got help."

"There were some of them crushed, and when we couldn't do anything for those 
we got the others and we thought some of those were dead. We tried to pump some 
air into some of those who needed it and I don't think it worked. I was shocked 
- so was everybody. "

Relays of ambulances took the injured to the Royal Surrey Hospital, Guildford, 
and Farnham District Hospital and the Cambridge Military Hospital.

All cars entering and leaving Guildford were stopped and searched at police 
roadblocks.

An army spokesman said about 500 soldiers would probably have been in the town 
. "In plain clothes, not in uniform," he said.

Belfast issued a warning on Friday night to firms in England and Northern 
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> to be careful in 
opening their mail on Monday, as information had been received that a number of 
parcel bombs were in the post.
 