
Ian Botham has produced three noble performances in the third Cornhill Test at 
Headingley, but sadly all they are likely to amount to are glorious defiant 
gestures in a lost cause. His six wickets, 50 in England's first innings and 
then yesterday an undefeated innings of 145 which by any and every definition 
was great, deserve more.

Sometime on the final day today Australia should complete their second win of 
the series, but should they do so they still have to capture England's last 
wicket and then score at least 125 runs to win. That, thanks largely to Botham 
and the support from Dilley and Old is in itself scarcely believable. Even in 
sport that throughout its history has thrown up the odd unexpected event there 
was nothing more certain than that Australia would complete their victory 
yesterday... by teatime at the latest.

Botham no doubt will still tell you that his poor form of the past year has 
had nothing to do with his being captain but he will find it increasingly 
difficult to justify that assertion. In this match, released of the fetters of 
responsibility, he has been a man reborn and his spirit - depressed for so long 
- has soared,

When he was appointed captain it seemed doubtful that he could sustain the 
burden of office as well as those of major attacking batsman and front line 
bowler. The collapse was swift and extensive. His bowling declined and his 
captaincy was never inspired enough remotely to make compensation. But the 
regeneration had been worth the wait.

The media no doubt will be criticised for their fickleness but most members of 
this heartless breed, like the majority of English cricket followers, have been 
saddened at the decline of an exceptional all-rounder; it was no pleasure to 
watch or report performances that had become consistently undistinguished. This 
Test has been the vindication of the relief of the captaincy. Botham began his 
unforgettable innings when England were 105 for five and still 122 runs away 
from making Australia bat again. When he returned, applauded and acclaimed, to 
the pavilion at 6pm. England were 351 for nine, leading by 124 runs and a 
Headingley crowd which had, with forbearance, endured a laborious Test thus far 
must have wondered if they were watching the same game that started last 
Thursday.

Botham throughout his year of captaincy has never lost his public self-esteem. 
Headingley will never forsake him after this.

Although his innings cannot disguise the deep-seated problems that affect 
English cricket, it was possible yesterday to forget for a while the problems 
and enjoy one of the finest most sustained pieces of aggression I have seen. He 
had his moments of luck, a number of his 26 fours came off the edge of his bat, 
he played and missed. But whatever the flaws it remained batting in the great 
tradition.

His progress from 39 to his seventh Test century was made in the most 
astonishing fashion. The 64 runs that took him to 103 came by virtue of 14 
fours and a six and a six and two singles. Along the way Alderman, for the 
first time in the series, found himself flogged mercilessly to distant parts of 
a ground on which the fieldsmen had become merely adornments.

The Australian captain, Kim Hughes said that it was "one of the all-time great 
Test Innings - he might never play another one like it." Hughes will have gone 
to bed last night praying that he does not.

Botham hit the ball with such power that anything taking the edge of his bat 
was moving at such speed as to remove all risk. His mistimed strokes were 
powerful enough to smack the boundary boards. Those many shots that he hit with 
timing and off the middle of his bat were blows of blistering power. It was 
impossible to believe that a cricket ball could have been struck harder than 
Clive Lloyd struck it in the Bridgetown Test during the winter. But Botham 
yesterday was possibly even more punishing.

Before Botham and Dilley joined forces in an exhilarating stand of 127 for the 
eighth wicket the day was a slow but steady march towards that inevitable 
Australian win. Gooch, of course, had gone in the gloom of Saturday and the 
fourth day opened with Boycott and Brearley in occupation and facing nothing 
more appealing than a great deal of hard work.

Boycott was mentally equipped and technically equipped for the job and was the 
sixth out after a painstaking, nay flawless, 46 but on a wicket still offering 
help to the bowlers but not perhaps as awkward as it had been on Saturday, the 
rest of the English batting did not look as secure.

Brearley briefly played well but fell to the combination that had removed 
Gooch on Saturday and when Gower was out to Alderman, playing loosely outside 
of stump, and Gatting was adjudged leg before to the same bowler, England were 
41 to four, and in a hopeless position. Monday night's hotel cancellations at 
that stage seemed justified.

The first serious resistance came from Boycott and Willey, who had the heart 
for these situations but the fall of this pair, and then Taylor after lunch 
plunged England closer still to the innings defeat that had long appeared 
certain.

But by now Botham four-square, arrogant and compellingly impressive was in 
flow. Dilley, helped at times by a ball that refused steadfastly to catch the 
edge of his swirling bat, was of a similar mood. The runs came in a flood, 
Hughes was powerless to set fields to the pair, and the Australians were forced 
into ever deeper defence.

When Dilley, after completing his highest Test score, finally swung once too 
often at the suffering but persevering Alderman, England astonishingly were in 
credit; and that credit was stretched by another profitable partnership between 
Botham and Old, who found nothing to seriously trouble him in a tiring 
Australian attack.

Even after Old went, Botham was in such control that he could make runs where 
and when he wanted, He farmed the bowling so expertly that Willis was 
adequately protected and another 32 had accrued before the Australian bowlers 
were able to find the sanctuary of the pavilion. By then Botham had completed 
his highest Test score and ensured the day of cricketing immortality.
 