
In February 2008, a few days before I began my MA in creative writing, an 
administrator in University of Cape Town’s English department asked me if there 
were any particular writer I wished to have for my advisor. The one I had been 
originally assigned, an American, had been let go, apparently so that the 
department could make a quota hire. Rumor said a Zambian poet had been taken on 
but I never learned the truth of this, nor ever met the poet. It was an 
incident of significance: Apartheid was not yet fifteen years dead and Black 
Economic Empowerment (BEE), South Africa’s affirmative action program, was a 
contentious issue in the worlds of sport, academia and business.


 While inquiries went out to a novelist I admired, an interim advisor was 
named for me, a well-established Afrikaans-language writer who warned, on 
meeting me for the first time, that I should not expect much in the way of 
friendliness from Capetonians. He may have said something about Table Mountain 
having something to do with this, about nature exerting an influence on the 
temperament of locals but it may be a false memory.

 * * *

 A month earlier, with post-election violence breaking out in Kenya, I’d left 
Nairobi for Cape Town. I chose UCT for its affordable tuition and because I had 
a vague idea JM Coetzee taught there.

 Coetzee of course decamped to Australia – to Adelaide – in 2002, a few years 
after the publication of his novel Disgrace.

 Another Cape Town novel influenced my decision to relocate, K Sello Duiker’s 
Quiet Violence of Dreams. I’d read Quiet Violence, in the nights, while working 
on a short project at Gulu in Northern Uganda (the brutality conveyed in one 
particular chapter is as persistent in memory as what I observed in the 
child-soldier rehabilitation camps). The lurid Cape Town Duiker depicted in 
Quiet Violence scarcely resembled the bright and glinting place I had visited 
on holiday. Now I intended it as an escape from Nairobi, which was itself a 
refuge from New York, the city where I’ve lived longest. In Nairobi there was a 
divide between expatriate and Kenyan, and after three years I’d wearied of 
straddling it and of being unable to go about on foot. Cape Town, as it seemed, 
promised something intermediate between New York and Nairobi.

‘Cape Town, as it seemed, promised something intermediate between New York and 
Nairobi’

 I was going there with no other occupation but I did not yet think of myself 
as a writer. I had produced two short stories, neither of which had been 
published. I’d attended one or twoKwani sessions in Nairobi but I did not see 
my own likeness in the young Kenyans giving earnest readings of poetry and 
fiction; they took care to set themselves apart in dress and manner.

 * * *

 Perhaps my placeholder MA advisor was hinting in that first meeting that he 
would offer little in the way of literary guidance. Each of us had been saddled 
with the other: I was writing a novel about Africans in New York; a powerful 
short story of his that I read in translation was set in the Karoo. We were no 
natural match

 He wrote what he knew. And in South Africa, where the roles of transgressor 
and aggrieved seemed so fluid, so exchangeable, the boundaries of identity and 
empathy are stark. Marketing concerns deterred some writers from devising 
characters outside their own demographic but it was also about appropriation 
and the fear of committing new forms of imperialism. Much later I understood 
these things.

 * * *

 Cities contain paradoxes within them but none I have lived in had so many as 
Cape Town. The environment – land and sea – is romantic in a German,Sturm und 
Drang sense. Table Mountain looms like a panopticon tower over semi-desert; the 
rocky Atlantic “wild sea” throws up high, cold waves.

 And yet Cape Town has a European look, and its suburbs and wilderness areas 
contain little wildlife. Looking up from the shoreline, one sees bare, sere 
slopes on which nothing stirs.

 Nor was I easy in mind about whether this was a city, or just a downtown of a 
few blocks surrounded by suburbs. There’s a nickname for the city,Slaapstaad, 
which plays on its Afrikaans name,Kaapstad. Slaapstad means sleepy city, a 
reference to the comparatively short work day but also to a general 
complaisance.

 Cape Town stood apart, its citizens were aware of how far away Johannesburg 
was. Durban was also remote but Cape Town’s distinction was geographicand 
political: the Western Cape was the sole provincial government in South Africa 
not controlled by the ANC. During apartheid the city had a reputation as the 
most liberal in the country. That aura of exceptionalism persisted after 1994, 
but Johannesburg, larger and more commercially focused, has become better 
integrated. In Cape Town, there are currencies other than money.

 * * *

 Cape Town’s writers reflected the wider community. And UCT, with its writing 
program and the bright names attached to it, Coetzee and Andre Brink foremost, 
carried an outsize literary prestige. In Johannesburg there was Nadine Gordimer 
but she did not quite loom over that city in the same way.

'It seemed the mark of an excellent novel that it should piss off black and 
white alike in this fractured country'

 Of Coetzee, I learned from those he had taught that he was laconic in the 
extreme, had rarely been seen to laugh. White South Africans in publishing 
circles, seemed not to likeDisgrace. The novel – and Coetzee himself – had come 
in for criticism also from black politicians, including Thabo Mbeki. It seemed 
the mark of an excellent novel that it should piss off black and white alike in 
this fractured country.

 Coetzee had gone but Brink remained at UCT – I’d see him at readings, the 
beaky face – and other writers besides that were less well known. By and by, I 
met them, writers of poetry, crime novels, memoir, literary fiction of a 
pastoral nature.

 The community of writers and poets in Coetzee’s long shadow seemed small, a 
little incestuous but I have no point of comparison; perhaps literary Brooklyn 
is the same. Spats flared, also feuds and there were accusations of plagiarism 
and bad faith. In such a close environment having no opinion seemed most 
politic and I did not try to ingratiate myself.

 There were two English-language literary poles in Cape Town. There was a 
mainstream centered more or less on UCT but taking in also the local publishing 
houses like Umuzi and Straik, which is now part of Random House. Members read 
from their work in Kalk Bay or at the Franschhoek Literary Festival.

 The other sphere had at its center Chimurenga magazine  
<http://www.chimurenga.co.za/>and its founder Ntone Edjabe. Edjabe had strong 
ties to thinkers at University of the Western Cape, a stalwart in the Apartheid 
struggle. Chimurenga thrived in Cape Town’s insular and cagey cultural arena 
precisely because it was eclectic and unafraid of esotericism; Edjabe seemed to 
have noticed before anyone else that Cape Town was an excellent place, because 
cloistered, from which to survey and probe the world.

Chimurenga was a refutation of Cape Town’s major tropes – romantic isolation, 
exceptionalism, sacred nature

http://www.chimurenga.co.za/ <http://www.chimurenga.co.za/>I was drawn to both 
of these as I tried to teach myself to write, and to live in a new way. There 
was little traffic between the two. You had to “get” Chimurenga to appreciate 
its value and influence in the city and not many were knowledgeable or even 
curious about the phenomenon offarotage, or the footballer El Negro Jefe. But 
Chimurenga was also a refutation of Cape Town’s major tropes – romantic 
isolation, exceptionalism, sacred nature.

 Equally, Coetzee’s austere rectitude colored my aspiration, as it did many 
local writers, and I hoped to emulate not only his writing but his evident 
unwillingness to perform the subterfuges that are part of the human game. 
Although in Coetzee’s case it was perhaps inability rather than reluctance. I 
found it easy to connect the region’s history and geography with Coetzee’s 
temperament and to convince myself that seclusion and a curt manner were 
necessary conditions for advancement as a writer.

 * * *

 At no time were my feelings of sacrifice to a craft stronger than in the damp 
low season when the city acquired an abandoned, dispirited character. During 
that first Cape winter I hunkered for four or five hours each day over my 
computer drinking cups of tea, an electric oil heater by my knee.

 In June – summer in the Northern hemisphere – holiday quarters in the city 
were more or less shuttered and rather than taking a sundowner drink as in the 
Cape summer, I escaped for long shivering walks with a friend along the misted 
strand near Cape Point. By such rituals I prolonged the romance of the city.

 While it did not seem strange to be engaged in writing fiction about West 
Africans in New York at the austral tip of the continent, I became impatient 
with that manuscript. I had been at work on it, off and on, for too long. But 
there was more: I was eager to write about Cape Town. I’d arrived with 
honeymoon ideas of the place after one or two previous holiday visits, and been 
disabused within a few months.

'It was in Cape Town that the last vestige of New York went out of me'

 But my impressions of the city, of my own place in it did not stay still. By 
coincidence I was writing about New York and thinking about that city over many 
months in Cape Town. Coincidence because it was in Cape Town that the last 
vestige of New York went out of me, that I ceased to be a New Yorker although I 
had already ceased to think of myself as one.

 I did not become a Capetonian, nor do I believe this was possible even had I 
wished it, in the way an outsider who’s lived in a Spanish village for twenty 
years knows he will never belong. But I’d found in Cape Town a city more 
vexing, slippery and contested than even the fast-gentrifying New York I fled 
in 2003. And I, a longtime student of tribe and social class, became somehow 
more and less conscious of both.

 * * *

 Eventually, and after very nearly the same interval of time I spent in 
Nairobi, I left Cape Town. The reasons had little to do with writing, nor was 
there the urgency I had known in quitting Nairobi. I had published a bit more 
than on my arrival, including a short story set in Cape Town. I had eked out a 
space for myself but there was a familiar listlessness and claustrophobia.

 When I moved to Germany, I was no closer to publishing the New York novel. 
And at last a moment came when a choice presented itself: rework it 
further—just one more rewrite—or start something entirely fresh: a narrative 
that had been working in my head for a year, the Cape Town novel I’d wished to 
read since Quiet Violence and Disgrace but had never discovered. And I set the 
New York novel to one side.

Olufemi Terry is a Sierra Leone-born writer. He won the 2010 Caine Prize for 
African Writing for his second short story Stickfighting Days, which was 
originally published in Chimurenga.
 