
A former resident from Kincora boys’ home has described being stripped naked 
and sexually assaulted on his first day at the Belfast facility.

The man, given the cipher HIA199/R3, broke down in tears after telling the 
Historical Institutional Abuse (HIA) inquiry, how he was singled out and abused 
over four years.

He said: “When I came to Kincora I was an an innocent 14-year-old boy. I never 
had a sex education and this is what I had to deal with for four years.”

The witness, who spent his entire childhood in care, had three separate stints 
at Kincora during the 1960s and 1970s. He left shortly after turning 18.

On the day he was admitted from Purdysburn hospital, he said he was taken into 
a bathroom and assaulted by warden Joseph Mains during what was supposed to be 
a medical examination, the HIA was told.

“The first thing he did to me was he took me into that bathroom, he stripped 
me naked, made a comment about my private parts and started to fondle me,” he 
said. “That was on my first day at 14.”

There was systemic abuse with rewards and violent punishments such as being 
punched in the stomach or slapped in the face if he did not perform, it was 
claimed.

He added: “The punishment was cleverly worked out so that there would not be 
any bruising. It was done in private, in his office. It wouldn’t happen very 
often but it would be often enough to remind me of the consequences if I did 
not perform.”

The boy, who considered Kincora the only home he ever had, was threatened with 
borstal and feared speaking out because of Mains’ influential friends, it 
emerged. Mains later pleaded guilty to two counts of sex abuse against the boy.

It has long been alleged that a high-ranking paedophile ring preyed on 
vulnerable boys at Kincora during the 1970s. It is further claimed that the UK 
security services knew about the abuse but did nothing, instead using the 
information to blackmail prominent people such as politicians, judges, civil 
servants and police officers who were the perpetrators.

In 1980, Mains and two other senior care workers, Raymond Semple and William 
McGrath, were convicted of abusing boys at Kincora during the 1970s. It was 
widely believed McGrath, who had links to a shadowy Protestant paramilitary 
organisation, was working as an MI5 agent.

HIA199/R3 said he had no knowledge of any vice ring or of boys being taken 
elsewhere to be prostituted.

The witness said he was glad to have had the opportunity to speak out. “For 55 
years I have had this hanging on my head,” he said. “No one believed me. I am 
just so glad for this committee, at last, to listen to the truth of what 
happened at Kincora.”

The HIA was set up by the Northern Ireland Executive in 2013 and has been 
examining allegations of physical, emotional and sexual abuse at state and 
church-run residential institutions between 1922 and 1995.

It is chaired by retired high court judge, Sir Anthony Hart, sitting alongside 
Geraldine Doherty, a former head of the Central Council for Education and 
Training in Social Work in Scotland, and David Lane, who was director of social 
services in Wakefield, West Yorkshire.
 