
Australia made a noble effort to win the fifth Cornhill Test at Old Trafford 
yesterday. They failed, by 104 runs, but went a long way towards recovering the 
self-respect so badly bruised at Leeds, Edgbaston and on the second day here.

To score 506 runs, at a rate of 100 runs a session, was an almost impossible 
target, but they made sure that England shed some sweat before they captured 
their last five wickets. Victory gave England an unassailable 3-1 lead in the 
series and ensured retention of the Ashes.

On Sunday Australia's batting attained previously unachieved heights, largely 
through Yallop's brilliance. Yesterday it was Allan Border who forced a 
revision of the strength of this Australian team. Given at last a wicket that 
everyone agreed was outstandingly good Border produced batting that met all the 
criteria of excellence.

It was a slow innings, the second slowest by an Australian against England, 
but all that that proved was that speed is not necessarily a true measurement 
of an innings' quality. Border had made 123 when the last wicket, that of 
Whitney, fell soon after tea. By then he had resisted pace and spin for 415 
long minutes.

That was laudable enough in itself: to have remained at the crease for that 
length of time while suffering the discomfort of a broken finger showed 
exceptional character. Border emerged with considerable credit from the 
Edgbaston holocaust and no one on either side posses more guts.

Kim Hughes, the Australian captain, was passionate in his praise of Border 
afterwards. "People tell me what the greats would have done," he said, "what 
Harvey would have done and not done. But I think that Allan, after this 
performance, deserves to be ranked with the all time greats."

Had Australia lost not only three, or at most four wickets on Sunday, the task 
of scoring 506 on the flattest, truest wicket of the series would not have 
seemed quite so outrageous. But Border and Marsh resumed at 210 for five, 
knowing that the fall of a quick wicket would almost certainly be the prelude 
to Australia's demise.

There were to be no quick or easy pickings for England, however. Marsh has 
looked the best wicketkeeper in the world in this series but not, until 
yesterday, such a distinguished batsman. Old Trafford well remembers his 91 in 
1972, an innings that almost earned an improbable victory for his side. The 
ground seems to bring the best out of him and yesterday he was again the Marsh 
of old - pulling powerfully anything short and punching the ball firmly off his 
leg.

The English captain, Mike Brearley, knew he was as secure as he could be with 
so many runs in credit, but he confessed afterwards that he was perturbed, 
first by the Hughes-Yallop stand of Sunday and the Border-Marsh and 
Border-Lillee partnerships yesterday. Like most spectators he must have known 
in his heart that Australia needed a miracle but there was always that nagging 
doubt ... could it just possibly happen?

The first hour was a tense one for Australia but they negotiated it admirably, 
without losing a wicket or without looking likely to lose one. Marsh moved 
confidently to 36 and their formidable target was reduced by another 54 runs. 
It looked too as if luck was going to run kindly for them. Marsh might have 
been caught when he flogged Emburey high to long leg but instead scored a six 
as the ball bounded from Gower's fingers over the boundary rope.

When Kim Hughes was asked afterwards what had been the chief difference 
between the sides since Leeds he replied instantly. "Simple," he said. "Ian 
Botham." Brearley agreed. He said: "What Kim says is fair. Take Botham out of 
our side and it would make us look ordinary."

Hughes also acknowledged the considerable part Bob Willis has played in this 
series. Alderman has taken most wickets and has been consistently admirable, 
but Willis has certainly been the quickest and most intimidating bowler on 
either side.

Willis it was who punched the crucial hole in Australia's resistance inducing 
Marsh to drive fatally outside off stump. Marsh looked disgusted when umpire 
Palmer upheld the appeal for a catch at the wicket, but the disgust was almost 
certainly with himself.

Bright scored only five but helped Border add 26 runs for the seventh wicket 
before the same combination that accounted for Marsh accounted for him too, 
although this time Knott had to dive far to his left to take the catch. There 
was a great deal of sympathy for Taylor when he was left out of this test but 
Knott, keeping wicket impeccably and scoring valuable runs, had justified his 
recall.

The end should now have been near but England had to endure an eighth wicket 
stand of 51 between Border and Lillee before they knew they were really home. 
It was during this stand that Australia, for the first time in the day, seemed 
to lose their concentration and their way. Lillee can rarely have batted better 
and made 26 handsome runs when Border, deciding to keep the strike, started to 
refuse singles. There must have been method in their policy but with Lillee 
looking in no need of protection it was not clear what it was.

Lillee eventually departed to an exceptional catch, held by Botham of course. 
Allott's delivery was short but Lillee struck it away firmly, probably 
believing he would collect four down to third man. Botham moved with the 
agility of a goalkeeper to clutch an improbable catch two-handed. There were 
still Alderman and Whitney to dismiss but that was really the final word, and 
it was fitting that Botham should have it.

Praising Botham, Hughes commented: "It is important that people do not try to 
change him or the way he plays. If they do then England will start to lose Test 
matches." So England now move on to the Oval and the sixth Test, with Brearley 
having completed his third series win against Australia - beating Greg Chappell 
in 1977, Graham Yallop in 1978-9 and now Kim Hughes. His contributions with the 
bat may have been disappointing but his captaincy has been excellent, and 
English cricket should be grateful to him alone for playing an obviously 
important part in restoring Ian Botham to his former pre-eminence.
 