
Blind animals have had their vision partially restored using a revolutionary 
DNA editing technique that scientists say could in future be applied to a range 
of devastating genetic diseases.

The study <http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature20565> is the first to 
demonstrate that agene editing tool, called Crispr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/sep/02/genome-editing-how-to-modify-genetic-faults-and-the-human-germline>
, can be used to replace faulty genes with working versions in the cells of 
adults - in this case adult rats.

Previously, the powerful procedure, in which strands of DNA are snipped out 
and replaced, had been used only in dividing cells - such as those in an embryo 
- and scientists had struggled to apply it to non-dividing cells that make up 
most adult tissue, including the brain, heart, kidneys and liver.

The latest advance paves the way for Crispr to be used to treat a range of 
incurable illnesses, such as muscular dystrophy, haemophilia and cystic 
fibrosis, by overwriting aberrant genes with a healthy working version.


Professor Juan Carlos Izpisua Belmonte, who led the work at the Salk Institute 
in California, said: “For the first time, we can enter into cells that do not 
divide and modify the DNA at will. The possible applications of this discovery 
are vast.”

The technique could be trialled in humans in as little as one or two years, he 
predicted, adding that the team were already working on developing therapies 
for muscular dystrophy.

Crispr, a tool sometimes referred to as “molecular scissors”, has already been 
hailed as a game-changer in genetics because it allows scientists to cut 
precise sections of DNA and replace them with synthetic, healthy replacements.

In stable cells in living organisms, however, the DNA is less accessible, and 
scientists had not managed to achieve the same “cut and paste” editing. This 
meant that while Crispr could potentially be used to remove genetic mutations 
from embryos it not clear whether it also could be harnessed as a therapy for 
children and adults with genetic disorders.

The latest study, published in the journal Nature, demonstrates that adult 
rats that had been engineered to have a genetic form of blindness called
retinitis pigmentosa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/nov/09/glimmer-of-hope-for-children-facing-blindness-retinitis-pigmentosa>
 could be treated using Crispr gene therapy.

The condition, which affects about one in 4,000 people, occurs when a faulty 
gene causes retinal cells to gradually die off, leading to blindness. The 
scientists targeted the retinal cells by injecting a virus, carrying a package 
of gene-editing instructions, into the eyes of blind three-week-old rats.

When the rats were eight weeks old, the animals were shown to respond to light 
- although their vision was not fully restored - and they passed several tests 
indicating healing in their retinal cells.

“We were able to improve the vision of these blind rats,” said co-lead author 
Reyna Hernandez-Benitez, also of the Salk Institute. “This early success 
suggests that this technology is very promising.”

The treatment could be improved by being administered earlier, when less 
damage had been done, the scientists said. Before being used in humans, it 
would also need to be made more efficient, as only about 5% of cells had their 
faulty DNA replaced, the study found.


Professor Robert MacLaren, who works on gene therapy at the University of 
Oxford and was not involved in the research, said: “Getting the DNA into cells 
that are not dividing is quite an advance. This has got huge potential.”

However, he said that the authors’ predicted timeline for clinical trials was 
“extremely optimistic”, suggesting that more extensive safety studies would be 
essential first. “The potential drawback is that you’ve got something that goes 
around in cells snipping DNA. Assuming that safety studies show Crispr doesn’t 
damage healthy DNA, I think we could see this in clinical trials within five 
years.”
 