
A legendary piece of 20th-century art and literary history, André Breton's 
1924 Surrealist Manifesto, an attempt to define "once and for all" the nature 
of surrealism, which instead provoked decades of argument, is on display in 
London ahead of an auction in Paris.

The document is Breton's 21-page hand-written manuscript of a text championing 
dreams, madness and the force of the human imagination over logic, reason and 
artistic rules - which was also his attempt to seize back control of the 
artistic movement from rival dreamers.

It was written at the flat in the Rue Fontaine in Paris shared with his first 
wife (of three), the artist Simone Collinet, which became the centre of the 
surrealist movement, a showcase for his work and a meeting point, debating club 
and workshop for its followers. Famous experiments were conducted there in 
"automatic writing" where the pen was simply allowed to travel apparently 
undirected across the paper, and in pictures and poems constructed by chopping 
up texts and images and collaging them back together into new and startling 
forms.

Collinet kept the manifesto and other Breton manuscripts, which are now being 
sold by her heirs at a Sotheby's auction in Paris in May. The manifesto alone 
is estimated at 500,000 euros (£372,000), and the manuscripts of the automatic 
writing texts - published and heavily edited despite the claim of the 
untrammeled spirit, under the title "Poisson Soluble" (Soluble Fish) - at up to 
80,000 euros (£59,000) each. The manifesto was originally intended as a short 
introduction to Soluble Fish, but grew into a major statement in its own right.

The manifesto was immediately recognised as a landmark intellectual statement, 
though like James Joyce's Ulysses, which shares surrealist traits including the 
famous stream of consciousness final passage, it has probably more often been 
cited as an authority than read in full.

It is the only surviving original copy, and has only been exhibited once 
before, in a major surrealist exhibition in Paris in 2002.

Breton died in 1968, and there was a public outcry by French intellectuals 
four years ago when the flat, which had been preserved with all its original 
contents, including works of art by Joan Miró and René Magritte, was scattered 
at auction instead of preserved by the state as a museum. The sale was picketed 
by protesters who distributed fake 10-euro notes, reading "your money stinks of 
the corpse of the poet that you never dared to become."

"This is an extraordinary piece of literary history, unquestionably one of the 
major artistic statements of the century", Thomas Bompard, an expert on books 
and manuscripts at Sotheby's in Paris, said. "Before it the surrealists were 
regarded as very happening people, interesting noisy people to invite to a 
party but not serious, more revolutionary people than revolutionary writers. 
With the manifesto all this changed - and it is also a beautiful piece of 
writing itself."

The manuscript and Soluble Fish, along with a selection of surrealist works of 
art also coming up for auction, is on display at Sotheby's in London until 
February 4 2008.
 