
A Hong Kong-born former Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> assembly member has said the 
Brexit vote will deter other ethnic minority people from entering politics as 
racism and xenophobia intensifies.

Anna Lo, who retired from the assembly partly due to racial abuse she says she 
has received, also predicted that anti-foreigner violence and intimidation 
would increase in Northern Ireland as the UK’s withdrawal from the EU 
approached.

Speaking before the launch of her memoir, The Place I Call Home, the president 
of the cross-community Alliance party said the EU referendum result had built 
“dangerous expectations” among pro-Brexit voters that immigrants would leave 
Northern Ireland and other parts of the UK.

“Shortly after the referendum the Northern Ireland Council for Ethnic 
Minorities organised a conference about Brexit’s impact on this place. Even 
only a few weeks after the vote I heard dozens of immigrants stating that they 
were starting to hear their fellow workmates asking them: ‘Well then, when are 
you all going home?’ Brexit has raised dangerous expectations as well as 
putting out lies about immigrants taking up benefits, houses, jobs,” Lo said.

“I have been the victim of racist abuse and threats in the recent past but I 
fear more than ever for immigrant communities living in Northern Ireland 
following the Brexit vote. It has stirred up so much negativity towards people 
from ethnic minorities. I am worried like never before about racism and 
anti-immigrant feeling after Brexit.”

Lo said she doubted anyone from her ethnic background would be prepared to 
enter British orNorthern Irish politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/northernireland> in the post-Brexit era. 
“It was hard enough being in the devolved assembly before the referendum, but 
given the atmosphere since the Brexit vote I would be very doubtful that anyone 
from a background like mine would stand up and enter politics now. It is going 
to get even harder to persuade people from ethnic minorities to come forward 
and stand for election, but especially in Northern Ireland.”

In her book, Lo says she was on the receiving end of racist abuse and 
intimidation because she was the public face of the immigrant community in 
Northern Ireland.

She writes: “One Thursday, on my way from Stormont to my constituency office 
after a committee meeting, I stopped in Connswater shopping centre to get a 
picture taken for a new passport. On my way out of the centre to the front car 
park, I heard people shouting my name. As they did not sound particularly 
friendly, I quickened my pace and got to where my car was parked.

“Then a car passed me. A young woman was practically hanging out of the back 
passenger window, screaming abuse at me. I was extremely glad that they did not 
catch up with me and that there was a barrier between the road where the 
vehicle was travelling and my car. I was quite sure that, if they had got 
closer to me, there would have been an ugly scene.”

Tackling racism in Northern Ireland must start with the first minister | Anna 
Lo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/03/racism-northern-ireland-muslims-peter-robinson-resign>
Lo says she was appalled by alleged anti-Islam remarks made by the former 
first minister Peter Robinson two years ago. She said Robinson’s comments in 
defence of a Christian preacher, James McConnell, who said Islam was “satanic”, 
were themselves inflammatory.

“I was utterly incensed and disgusted when Peter Robinson, then first minister 
of Northern Ireland, made comments in defence of the pastor. He added fuel to 
the fire by stating that he would not trust Muslims involved in terrorism or 
devoted to sharia law, but would trust Muslims to go down to the shop for him 
and to give him the right change.”

Lo settled in Northern Ireland in 1974 after marrying a Belfast-born 
journalist. She worked as a freelance contributor for the BBC Chinese Service 
and as a secretary for the World Service in Belfast before taking a break to 
raise her two sons.

In 1997 she was appointed director of the Chinese Welfare Association, and she 
has been at the forefront of the promotion of racial equality ever since. In 
2000 she was awarded an MBE.

Lo joined the Alliance party in 2006 and was elected as an assembly member for 
Belfast South the following year, becoming the assembly’s first ethnic minority 
member. She served two terms at the regional parliament and retired in March 
this year. The Place I Call Home is published by Blackstaff Press Belfast this 
week.
 