
I am an Irish citizen. I am the child of Northern Irish parents. My husband is 
a British citizen and so is my daughter. I am 40 years old, and for 20 of those 
years I’ve lived in Britain. I was born here, raised and educated in Ireland; 
went to college here, spent my 20s here, then the first part of my 30s there. 
I’m here again, and I hope to stay. Ireland runs through my blood. It makes me 
the writer I am. English may be my first language but it was Ireland that 
taught me how to make it sing, andNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> that never lets me forget 
there are two sides to every tale.

But if Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> made me, Britain 
showed me how I wanted to live. The Britain I’ve always known was one that 
constantly struggled against the fear of opening itself to “the other”. It made 
room for the distances between people, between cultures, religions and 
traditions; it allowed for opposing positions; it strove to be true to its 
complex, jigsawed past.

Ireland is looking forward. Britain after the Brexit vote is looking back | 
Chris Haskins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/18/ireland-looking-forward-britain-brexit-vote-looking-back>
Not that its opposite wasn’t present in the shadows. Racism has always been a 
dangerous canker, kneejerk suspicion of foreigners a wearisome truth. I have 
occasionally despaired at the basic uninterest in the histories of nations who 
have been wholly altered by British imperialism and colonialism. I find the 
absence of any sense of fellowship with, or historical responsibility towards, 
the populations of these countries pretty infuriating. But I thought, and still 
want to think, that British society aimed for a higher standard – that in its 
heart it despised displays of littleness and penalised those who indulged in 
them, whoever they were. Yet here we are, all the same, utterly changed by 
whatever limped out into reality on 23 June and sure of nothing more than the 
rapidity with which that familiar Britain, along with its ideals, is being 
forced through the looking glass.

It is for this wholesale purge of inclusive values that I most object to 
Brexit. TheEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, whatever its 
faults, and burdensome bureaucracy, represents a new way for nations to 
function together. It was forged to overcome the rank, jingoist nationalism 
that wreaked such havoc across the continent and the world in the 20th century, 
subjecting its population to previously unimaginable sufferings. Its purpose 
was to lead us to a place where such horrors would become unimaginable once 
more.

Surely no small measure of its success is that war between Britain and 
Germany, or any other EU country, seems inconceivable to us now. In the light 
of this Brexit is all the more illogical.

Where is either side’s concern for the people of Northern Ireland?

Why has the British population, which shows such reverence for the memory of 
those who sacrificed their lives in the world wars, turned its back on a union 
founded to ensure that the peace those deaths paid for be guarded and 
strengthened for successive generations?

I come from a country where the ravages of historical division, and the 
sectarian violence that inevitably follows, are not such a distant memory. The 
paramilitary organisations of Northern Ireland are largely quiet now, but the 
structures that have allowed for this transformation are still febrile.

Irish, British and Northern Irish politicians have worked tirelessly for 
peace, for years, in order to provide Northern Ireland’s wounded communities 
with a chance to move beyond the hurt of their divided histories. Those 
communities themselves have sacrificed much so their future generations may be 
free of the poisonous cycle of violence and terror. That this delicate, 
hard-won and harder-maintained web of hope has been so carelessly, 
thoughtlessly jeopardised by a handful of bloviating careerists unashamed to 
fan fear and division in British society in order to achieve their personal 
ambitions is a disgrace they will forever bear.

Even after Brexit, hard borders won’t be returning to Ireland | Charlie 
Flanagan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/16/brexit-hard-borders-ireland-trade-peace-agreement-brexit>
Pandora’s box is open now, though, and how can the fragile peace withstand the 
demands from both right and left for unthinking adherence to uncompromisable 
principles when compromise is the very life blood of peace? And where is either 
side’s concern for the people of Northern Ireland? Who is fighting for their 
right to live without the threat of violence? They are entitled to expect the 
British and Irish governments to do everything possible to support peace. 
Creating the toxic political environment that has allowed Brexit to become 
future fact is an almost unquantifiable failure to do so. There was also more 
than an echo of imperialisms past in the initial batting away of serious 
questions about what the re-introduction of border controls withEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> would mean for Northern 
Ireland. The more recent attempt to shift responsibility for finding a solution 
on to the Irish government and the EU smacks of nothing more than a desperate 
attempt at self-justification from those who rushed headlong into voting for 
Brexit without serious consideration of what the consequences would be for the 
non-English members of the UK.

But if history has taught British politicians nothing, they should at least 
remember that the people of Northern Ireland, on all sides, have no tradition 
of lying down and taking whatever scraps Westminster doles out. The Brexiteers’ 
reliance on hazy, emotive grandstanding won’t solve the problems facing 
Northern Ireland, and the gravity of what it may unleash means there can be 
little relish in pointing out that fact.

Instead, I wonder how many ways there are to describe heartbreak? The Britain 
I’ve known is disfiguring itself, and soon it will not even remember what it 
looked like – while both Irelands of my youth, having struggled for so long to 
make a mirror in which all citizens may recognise themselves, are left waiting 
for the hammer to fall.
 