
My colleague and friend Brian Taylor, who has died aged 66 after suffering an 
aneurysm, was a lecturer in sociology at the School of Cultural and Community 
Studies (CCS) at theUniversity of Sussex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofsussex>. He was a genuine 
polymath at a university characterised by interdisciplinary teaching and 
research.

His teaching career began with a year at Queen’s University, Belfast, before 
his move to Sussex in 1977. There he initially focused on aspects of deviance 
and religion but his main interest was literature, especially Ulster novelists 
of the early 20th century.

He wrote the definitive biography of the Irish author Forrest Reid 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Green-Avenue-Writings-Forrest-1947/dp/052113563X>, 
biographies of the late 19th-century nature writer Richard Jefferies and of 
James Owen Hannay (who wrote under the pen name George A Birmingham), and 
co-edited, with Paul Goldman, another volume on Forrest Reid.

Born in Aberdeen into a Salvation Army family, Brian was the son of Ronald, a 
bus conductor, and Margaret (nee Guyan). When Brian was 11 the family moved to 
Bracknell, Berkshire, and he attended Forest grammar school, Winnersh. He 
studied sociology at the University of London and at postgraduate level at the 
University of Essex, and in 1976 obtained a DPhil from the University of 
Aberdeen, where he focused on the subject of religious conversion.

At CCS Brian contributed to the fields of art, literature and society and 
helped develop the first Sussex degree course in media studies. He was on the 
editorial board of the journal Theory, Culture & Society and was joint reviews 
editor ofSociology <https://www.theguardian.com/education/sociology> in the 
1990s.

Brian’s teaching was inspiring, his lectures packed and delivered with 
erudition and humour. Utterly dependable, and a reflective and critical 
thinker, he was also valued for the support he gave his colleagues at times of 
stress.

Private, enigmatic, vulnerable, conservative in dress and demeanour, Brian 
nevertheless held firm views, for example, in his criticism of British 
compromises with the IRA inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>.

After Brian left Sussex in 2001 he retired to Prades, in southern France, with 
his partner of 40 years, Brian Barfield, who survives him, as does his sister, 
Pat.

The two Brians met when Brian Barfield, a radio features editor who was 
planning a programme to mark the centenary of Forrest Reid, received a letter 
from Brian Taylor, as the writer’s biographer, who was subsequently invited to 
present the programme on Radio Ulster and Radio 3.

Leaving academia behind, together they shared passions for reading, for music 
from Bach to Boulez, and opera in particular, and for offering guests good 
cuisine, hospitality and the Taylor views on political events in France and 
Britain, always rounded off with a cheery “Pip! Pip!”
 