
At my first festival, I naively assumed I could survive on nothing but cider. 
I quickly discovered two things: dancing in the mud works up quite an appetite; 
and everything on site costs an arm and a welly-clad leg. Eating may not be 
your top priority, but a little prep goes a long way.

1 Pack with precision

Remember, you’re unlikely to be able to park within a country mile of your 
tent at most big festivals. One sharp knife, plus a spoon, a bowl and a cup per 
person, a bottle and tin opener and some wet wipes for washing up, is probably 
the bare minimum, but I would also suggest a camping stove or a portable 
barbecue if you have one – you will thank me when you wake up to hot tea in the 
morning.

2 Keep it real

You’re probably not going to want to rush back to the tent to knock up a 
risotto between acts. Stick to as much room-temperature food as you can to 
leave more space in the cool box for essentials such as milk and, um, beer (but 
bear in mind that most sites don’t allow glass; take cans, plastic bottles or 
boxes instead).

3 Breakfast like a champion

Breakfast is the one meal you won’t want to stray too far from your tent for, 
and there’s nothing to beat the smug joy of a fry-up while everyone else is 
tucking into cold pizza. Eggs and dry-cured meat such as pancetta or chorizo 
will be fine if kept cool in the shade for a couple of days, while halloumi and 
tomatoes make a very good vegetarian alternative. Bread can be toasted on the 
grill.

4 Go big on carbs at lunch

If, like me, you like to sneak back to the tent for a mid-afternoon disco nap, 
take the opportunity to fill up on energy-giving carbs. Dried pasta or couscous 
can be dressed with olive oil, grated parmesan, olives, anchovies and 
ready-prepared grilled vegetables, while good-quality instant noodles (Korean 
brands are usually reliable) are easily pepped up with pickles, chilli sauce 
and a boiled egg, if you’re feeling fancy.

5 Don’t overdo the snacks

Although festival food has got a million times better over the past decade, 
sourdough and artisan cheddar don’t make a cheese toastie a healthy dinner. If 
you’re the kind of person who fancies a quinoa salad at 2am, you’re better than 
me; if not, snacking on things such as fresh fruit (robust citrus and apples 
will travel better than delicate peaches and berries), nuts, cereal bars, 
wholegrain crispbreads and peanut butter will help balance out those late-night 
cheesy chips.

6 Trust the queues

The busier the stall, the fresher the food is likely to be. You may be 
desperate to get to the front of the Pyramid stage, but, believe me, a good 
view of Adele’s tonsils isn’t worth the hell a dodgy burger can wreak in a 
long-drop loo scenario.

7 Think crisp

Light, cheap and great with a beer: you can never turn up to a festival with 
too many crisps.
 