
No 164, Mudeford Spit, Dorset

More than 350 multicoloured beach huts stretch along Mudeford Spit – a long, 
thin sliver of sand, bordered on one side by Christchurch harbour and on the 
other by the Solent. All privately owned, many are available to rent over the 
summer. No 164 is a newly built hut facing the sea, with an upstairs sleeping 
area, kitchen with fridge and cooker, and solar-powered lighting. Sunbathe on 
the sand dunes, go walking through the nature reserve at Hengistbury Head 
(adjacent to the spit), or hop on the ferry to Christchurch harbour. Sleeps six.
Price from £600 per week in July
Book it 023 8073 0956; beach-huts.com <http://www.beach-huts.com>

The Beach Hut, nr Plymouth, Devon

This former boathouse is tucked in a tiny cove at the bottom of a steep cliff 
path, overlooking its own private beach. Rustic but cosy, it has a double bed, 
which you reach via a ladder, table with bench seats and a small kitchen with 
running water. Outside you'll find the compost toilet and shower (both in a 
shed), barbecue and a wood-fired hot tub. There's no electricity; instead light 
is provided by wind-up lanterns. Explore the nearby coastal villages of Newton 
Ferrers and Holbeton or walking the South West Coast Path. Sleeps two.
Price two-night weekend stay from £399
Book it 01752 830 020; carswellcottages.com/thebeachhut 
<http://www.carswellcottages.com/thebeachhut>

Flying Boat Club, Tresco, Isles of Scilly

These 12 chalet-style cottages are strung along Tresco's shorefront, with 
steps right on to the beach. Sleeping between six and 10 people, each cottage 
has oak flooring, sleek furnishings, original art and views of Bryher island, 
with plenty of luxury add-ons – Wi-Fi, satellite TV and state-of-the-art 
kitchen (though if you don't fancy cooking there's a restaurant next door). 
After a day exploring the car-free island by bike (there's a hire shop on 
site), kick back in the spa and indoor pool, which are shared by the cottages.
Price three-bedroom cottage from £1,375 per week
Book it 01720 422 849; tresco.co.uk <http://www.tresco.co.uk>

Ledge Beach Hut, Bembridge, Isle of Wight 
 Ledge Beach Hut, Isle of Wight. Photograph: Ben Wood 
This chalet-style hut boasts one of the best locations on the Isle of Wight: 
right on the beachfront at the end of the Bembridge peninsula, with unrivalled 
views over the English Channel. Simply decorated but homely, it sleeps up to 
six and has an open-plan living room with a dining area and kitchen. You'll 
most probably spend most of your time on the decked terrace, but you can drive 
or hire bikes (hire shops nearby) to explore the coastal towns of Sandown, 
Shanklin and Ryde.
Price from £355 per week
Book it holidaylettings.co.uk/p46001 <http://www.holidaylettings.co.uk/p46001>

The Beach House, Cellardyke, Fife 

Located on the shorefront on the site of what was once a smokehouse, this 
four-bedroom house boasts uninterrupted views across the sea to the Isle of May 
and Bass Rock. Ideal for families, it sleeps seven and has a spacious living 
room with a wood-burning stove and kitchen/dining room with floor-to-ceiling 
windows and French doors giving direct access to the beach. Kids will love 
searching in the rock pools. Or head to the Isle of May (boat trips from 
Anstruther) in search of seals and Eider ducks.
Price from £340 per week 
Book it 01228 406 731; scottish-cottages.co.uk 
<http://www.scottish-cottages.co.uk/property-details.aspx?productcode=526001&dorefsearch=>
 (ref: 526001)

The Wharf, Mousehole, Cornwall

Perched on the quayside overlooking a small beach, this Grade II-listed 
cottage for two feels more like a boutique hotel suite. Recently refurbished, 
it combines seagrass matting and handmade oak table and chairs with bright 
curtains, window seats and lots of local artwork. The views are unbeatable: 
multicoloured boats in the harbour, with St Michael's Mount in the distance. 
Wake up with a dip in the water, then walk to nearby Newlyn with its bustling 
fish market.
Price two nights from £290
Book it 01736 731 270; thewharfmousehole.com <http://www.thewharfmousehole.com>

Southwinds, Selsey, West Sussex 
 Southwinds, Selsey. 
If it's an eco-friendly break you're after, this new four-bedroom house, with 
its own private access to the beach, ticks all the boxes. It has solar heating, 
there's rainwater harvesting, and it's built from environmentally friendly 
materials. The design is slick and minimalistic – wood flooring, whitewashed 
walls and lots of huge picture windows. There's even a secret bathroom hidden 
behind a bookcase with a glass roof for bathing under the stars, as well as two 
terraces (one with a barbecue) with sweeping sea views.
Price from £200 a night; £1,000 a week
Book it 07734 319 081; holiday-rentals.co.uk/p447172 
<http://www.holiday-rentals.co.uk/p447172>

Seal Waters, Bamburgh, Northumberland

A private track through open countryside leads you to this converted old farm 
steading, perched on a headland above the beach. Sleeping four, all the rooms 
(except the bathroom) boast views of Budle Bay; whether you're lazing in the 
sitting room next to the wood burner, cooking supper in the open-plan kitchen 
(complete with underfloor heating) or enjoying the dining room/conservatory 
with its floor-to-ceiling windows, you can't escape them. Walk along the beach 
to Bamburgh Castle, or go rambling through the Cheviot Hills, a few miles 
inland.
Price from £495 per week
Book it 01434 632 839; sealwaters.com <http://www.sealwaters.com>

Seascape, Camber Sands, Sussex 

This one takes the prize for the most gorgeous master bedroom: a huge 
driftwood bed encircled by picture windows, with a wood burner, en suite shower 
room and private balcony boasting sea views. Downstairs there's a lounge which 
opens on to the beach, a pull-out sofa bed, single bedroom, washroom and 
kitchen. Each room is beautifully decorated, with stripped floorboards and 
objets d'art. Take long walks along the beach, fire up the barbecue for 
seafront grills, or have a holistic massage: owner and trained therapist Julie 
will pop over from her house next door to pamper you.
Price from £125 per night; one-hour massage £45
Book it 01797 224 754; camberbeach.co.uk <http://www.camberbeach.co.uk>

Kelly's Chalet, Dunster Beach, Somerset 

The best thing about this timber beach hut is its views: from the front it 
looks on to Brendon Hills, and to the rear double doors open on to 440 acres of 
sandy beach. Simple but cosy, it sleeps four, with a double sofa bed and two 
single beds, and has a separate kitchen and toilet. Stock up on provisions at 
the twice-weekly market at nearby Minehead, and go rambling through the Exmoor 
national park. Just remember to bring lots of £1 coins for the electricity 
meter.
Price from £265 per week
Book it 07737 718620; kellyschalet.co.uk <http://www.kellyschalet.co.uk>
 