
Krishna Maharaj, a British national who has maintained his innocence over more 
than 30 years of incarceration in aFlorida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/florida> prison, is being denied emergency 
medical care, according to his lawyer, and could die very soon as a result.


“This is dreadful stuff. They almost had to amputate his leg last time and 
this time it will kill him,” his attorney Clive Stafford Smith told the 
Guardian.

Maharaj has contracted necrotizing fasciitis, sometimes described as 
“flesh-eating bacteria”, at least twice since his incarceration due to what 
Stafford Smith described as “horrific” sanitation conditions in South Florida 
Reception Center prison near Miami, where he is being held. Maharaj’s 
supporters, including his wife, Marita Sabino-Maharaj, are concerned that 
Maharaj, 77, cannot survive another bout with the skin disease without 
immediate and aggressive medical care.

“I am desperately worried about Kris. He is asking for the [UK] government to 
call the Florida government officials in Tallahassee so that they will send him 
to the hospital at once,” Sabino-Maharaj said in a statement.

Maharaj was convicted of a double murder of a father and son in Miami in 1986 
and was initially sentenced to the death penalty before the sentence was 
commuted to life in prison in 2002. Since his trial, Maharaj has maintained 
that he was framed for the killing by the cartel of the notorious Colombian 
cocaine kingpin Pablo Escobar.

In 2015, Maharaj was denied a retrial in the case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/09/british-businessman-krishna-maharaj-denied-retrial-1986-florida-murders>
 despite the fact that a chief lieutenant and assassin who worked for Escobar 
waswilling to testify to the cartel’s involvement. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/13/kris-maharaj-pablo-escobar-hitman-hearing>

The victims, Derrick Moo Young and his son Duane, allegedly owed Maharaj, a 
multimillionaire and one of the UK’s richest men, $400,000 in relation to a 
property deal. Prosecutors said this motive, coupled with physical evidence 
such as Maharaj’s fingerprints in the Moo Young’s hotel room, constituted proof 
of his guilt.

Reprieve, a UK-based legal defense organization that has been advocating for 
Maharaj, is prepared to file what will probably be his last appeal next Monday. 
On Thursday, Reprieve renewed its calls for the UK government to file a brief 
on Maharaj’s behalf requesting a new trial, a request the Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office has previously declined.

The last time Maharaj fell ill with the debilitating skin infection in 2010, 
Reprieve accused the Florida department of corrections of acting with “sloth” 
to provide Maharaj with care, to the point where he nearly lost his life. The 
organization accused the department of refusing to tell his wife or anyone else 
where he was or the status of his condition.

“The history of medical malpractice in the Florida prison system is shocking,” 
Stafford Smith said. “If [Maharaj] dies, we’ll sue them, but I don’t want that 
to be the case. I want to keep him alive.”

The Florida department of corrections did not respond to a request for comment.
 