
The Promenade, Blackpool, Lancashire by Wayne Hemingway, designer

I was born in Morecambe and lived there till I was seven. Later, I returned, 
every school holiday, from the dark satanic mills of Blackburn to the seaside 
kitsch that adorned my nan's bungalow, a stone's throw from the promenade, 
funfairs and piers.

Over the past few decades Morecambe has lost its piers and funfairs and 
realised that there can only be one King of Kitsch in Lancashire: Blackpool.

Growing up among sangria decanters and velvet Spanish bulls, flamenco dolls 
artfully positioned on home bars in the shape of a ship's bow, with walls 
adorned with prints of crying boys and dogs with oversized sad eyes, has 
impregnated me with a healthy (some would say unhealthy) appreciation of kitsch.
 Photograph: Alamy 
I get excited when I see the "giant mouth" to Luna Park in St Kilda, 
Melbourne. A startling sight it is … a kitsch icon in a sea of urban cool. But 
Jeff Koons, as hard and as skilfully as he may try, will never trump Blackpool 
prom in its full illuminated autumn evening glory. Dozens of trams, lit up as 
trains, planes and cruise ships, rattle underneath miles of garish light bulbs, 
dozens of arcades playing everykitsch anthem  
<http://observer.guardian.co.uk/omm/the10/story/0,,1689255,00.html>there has 
ever been, fromAgadoo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theobserver/2009/mar/21/agadoo-black-lace> to the 
Nolans, while families in daft hats eat candy in the shape of giant penises. 
Las Vegas seems like a minimalist's dream by comparison.
• blackpoolpier.co.uk <http://www.blackpoolpier.co.uk/>
Wayne Hemingway runs Hemingway Design and the Vintage at Goodwood festival (
vintageatgoodwood.com <http://www.vintageatgoodwood.com>, 13-15 August)

Treasure Island park, Eastbourne, Sussex by Travis Elborough, author 

As a nation whose empire was forged by the dubious activities of maritime 
privateers, it is not so surprising the British continue to find the pirate an 
object of romantic if kitsch fascination, commemorated in pub names, 
restaurants, fairground rides and theme parks in seaside towns around the 
country.

I was hooked early. My grandparents ran a pirate-themed eatery in Polperro in 
Cornwall, which we visited every summer. Called the Jolly Roger, its walls were 
lined with real cutlasses and its leatherette-bound menus were decorated with 
compass points and written in an indecipherable copperplate script that made 
ordering an ice-cream float feel like a hunt for buried treasure. The 
cutlasses, as I learned much later, had been picked up as a job lot in some 
auction in the 1950s by the ever-canny Great-Uncle Bob. They were of 
questionable vintage but against a backdrop of spongy-white plaster and dark 
wood beams, their buccaneering credentials appeared unimpeachable. To an 
impressionable child, anyway.

That restaurant is long gone. But another piratical place that was aanother 
mainstay of my childhood is still going strong. The Treasure Island family 
adventure park is just off the Royal Parade on the seafront at Eastbourne. And 
while in the 18th century, the local beach and isolated coves of nearby 
Pevensey Bay were a particular favourite of smugglers, it is perhaps the slight 
incongruity of this location that makes it so endearing.

Eastbourne, a comparative latecomer as a resort, was developed by the Duke of 
Devonshire and to this day retains much of the elegance its autocratic, 
aristocratic landowner originally insisted upon. Thrillingly, this only 
enhances the sense that the Treasure Island complex, with its ship-shaped 
climbing frames and timbered crazy golf course, was some kind of marauding 
vessel that had simply grapple-hooked itself to the front one stormy night, 
never to set sail again. Or at least, that is what I liked to imagine, when I 
was small.

Back then, pirates were more like swivelly eyed Robert Newton  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theguardian/2010/mar/10/pirates-notes-and-queries>or 
Captain Pugwash than Johnny Depp. And Treasure Island has naturally enough 
moved with the times, with ahoy there face-painting and a fan page on Facebook. 
But, essentially, it persists by glorying in the fantastic, if basic, idea that 
a batch of old barrels, an outdoor paddling pool, a sand pit and some 
strategically arranged planks and ropes can successfully transport kids to a 
world of larceny on the high seas.

• 01323 411077, treasure-island.info <http://treasure-island.info/>; children 
£5, adults £2.50, half price after 3pm

Travis Elborough is author of Wish You Were Here: England on Sea

Handpainted signs in Norfolk by Teena Vallerine, blogger on kitsch 

All along the Norfolk coast – from Hunstanton through Wells and Cromer, all 
the way around to Great Yarmouth – there are seaside towns that bring out the 
child in me. Towns where I am inexplicably drawn to buy unnecessary plastic 
objects. Towns spattered with advertising graphics that fill me with the urge 
to eat things I would not normally feed to the dog. The excitement of garish 
neon lights, giant plastic ice-creams and – my favourites – the hand-painted 
signs that demand that I buy shocking-pink candyfloss, acid-green ice-cream or 
giant sugary dummies.

Hand-painted signs that say to hell with 21st-century computer-generated 
graphics – no room for tidy fonts here. Barmy scale, wonky lines, clashing 
colours, misspelt words (well, it makes them fit) all put together to create an 
irresistible command to buy, eat or do everything that the seaside has to offer.

"Candy floss £1.00 a bag" on Hunstanton Cliffs, "Seal Boat Trips" at Blakeney 
Point, "Award winning Chips" to throw to the gulls off the quay at Wells, 
"Crabbing Bait" on Cromer Pier, and "5 do-nuts for a Quid" on Great Yarmouth's 
prom. They're an invitation to become a part of all that is happy and kitsch 
about the great British seaside.
Teena Vallerine blogs on kitschenpink.blogspot.com 
<http://kitschenpink.blogspot.com/>

Pett Level, East Sussex by Stephen Bayley, design critic

All Manhattanites who can afford it, and plenty who cannot, go to the Hamptons 
to suffer the polished cruelty of top-end American leisure. The south coast of 
England is to London what Long Island is to New York – a fine littoral in easy 
access – but the capital does not have a Hamptons.

In fact, the south coast seems almost repellent to discretionary spending: for 
the disdaining, the continent, or even the West Country are more alluring.
 Photograph: Nick Downey/Alamy 
This gives the Sussex coast a peculiar, almost renegade, value. Maybe it is a 
racial memory of the humiliations of 1066 but Hastings – despite the good 
buildings, fine environment and lots of fish – has been specially blighted.

But then there is Pett Level, five miles north-east of Hastings: a hinterland 
of a hinterland of a dump. Here, on what was once marsh, is a fine collector's 
piece of English eccentricity, a genuine curiosity. Pett Level is where the 
Royal Military Canal, a defence against Napoleon, exhausts into the sea. It is 
scarcely a village, more a concept, and the conceptual centre is called Cliff 
End. That "end" bit has a peculiar resonance. A caravan park competes with a 
small handful of masterpiece houses along the shifting, mountainous shingle 
strip with its crashing waves and howling blasts.

There is a sense of determination about these houses, the architectural 
equivalent of putting a brave face on bad holiday weather. People go to the 
Hamptons to be seen but surely people come to Pett Level to become invisible. 
Perhaps they go to the pub to eat the same local turbot and drink the same 
contraband Hollands gin that Byron enjoyed hereabouts.

Outside The Smuggler inn a man with one leg once told me – somewhat awed – 
about a telly celebrity who owned one of the houses on the shingle. I think it 
had a red and yellow plastic slide in the drive, the Pett Level equivalent, 
perhaps, of a Cadillac Escalade. It's what you might call bottom-end British 
leisure.
• The Smuggler, Pett Level Road

Mumbles Pier, Swansea, Amanda Baillieu, architecture journalist

Built in the 1880s to encourage more passengers onto the Swansea and Mumbles 
railway,Mumbles Pier <http://www.mumbles-pier.co.uk/pier.htm> boasted a 
one-legged diver, an ornamental swimmer, fireworks displays, choral 
competitions and concerts. When the railway closed in 1960, the pier tried to 
reinvent itself as a funfair (a move that led pier historians to dismiss it as 
"really a fairground built on water"). But even that failed to work, and these 
days its only amusement is a very real-looking electric chair next to a 
head-through-the-hole "executioner".

And if it's architecture you're after, don't bother. Mumbles Pier is not 
blessed with ornate pavilions like St-Annes-on-Sea, and it's also on the short 
side – just 255m compared with Llandudno's 700.

Neither is it falling down in spectacular style, as piers are meant to do. The 
lacy steelwork is rusting away, but slowly. And although the decking feels so 
loose you can become seasick simply watching the water rise and fall beneath 
you, locals still fish off the side below polite signs telling visitors to 
"take care".

The pier is best appreciated from the town – a brisk 10-minute walk away – 
when the mist is thick enough to disguise the rust, and the red-roofed lifeboat 
station linked to one end of the structure by a rickety walkway looks like a 
tiny Arts and Crafts house.

But it's for the views of Swansea Bay that keep people coming back. The 
majestic sweep of water – best seen from the pier's sea end – is often compared 
to the Bay of Naples. This might seem like wishful thinking: the town lacks 
chic seaside tavernas and boutiques, or even a decent pub.
 Photograph: Alamy 
This could change. The pier's owners say they can't afford the repairs, and 
have just unveiled a £36m redevelopment that includes a hotel and "luxury" 
holiday apartments, cafes and restaurants.

Supporters say the town where Dylan Thomas used to party and where Catherine 
Zeta-Jones grew up, is struggling and the proposed "leisure and entertainment 
centre" is Mumbles' last chance. But when the pier finally goes, some of the 
town's fragile charm will go with it.

• 01792 365220, mumbles-pier.co.uk <http://www.mumbles-pier.co.uk/pier.htm>)

Amanda Baillieu is editor of Building Design (bdonline.co.uk 
<http://www.bdonline.co.uk/>)

Beach huts, Whitstable, Kent, Michael Smith, novelist

The beauty of beach hut life is the way it reduces everything to its simplest 
terms. I hang out there until it gets dark or come very early, just as it's 
getting light. The first half hour after waking up follows a familiar ritual: 
set a coffee pot up on the stove, hook the doors open, fold out a beach chair, 
and survey the sea and sky.

The strange thing about this Whitstable seascape is that it looks equally 
fascinating in good or bad weather, and all the weather in between. It is often 
in between, never quite making up its mind, and I can lose whole days watching 
the many mood swings of sky and sea.

I say good morning to my favourite lesbian neighbours. Half of them are 
lesbians on my stretch; the seaside is a site for sexual liberty, just as it 
always was. It was also the site of the first flush of love between me and the 
missus – this little bit of coast is part of us and our story, it played the 
role of midwife in our early romance. She brought me to a similar hut a few 
doors down on date number three; there were storms all weekend, and you 
couldn't go outside without getting drenched – we didn't, all weekend, and it 
was heaven . . . when I told this story to my granny she chuckled with a cheeky 
glint in her eye and said, "Aah, memories! Eh, son?"

I bought the hut when I was flush, over-reaching myself as one always does in 
those circumstances. Now all the cash is spent, it's still the grand romantic 
gesture, in another kind of way: dangling a line off the wall at high tide and 
waiting for a crab, taking him home in my bucket, cooking him on the Campingaz 
stove, cracking him open and eating him – one of the sea's great bounteous 
luxuries for nowt. In this way beach hut life transforms poverty into something 
glorious. The hut was the glory of my flashy times, and now it's the glory of 
the lean ones.
 Photograph: Alamy 
I have no electricity: the emails remain unread, the mobile phone stays off. 
Candlelight is fine. Night time is the most magical. The wind howls, the walls 
creak like they might cave in, the candlelight flickers, I write this down, and 
I am happy. I thank my lucky stars for this seaside retreat – the lucky stars 
that line up in the vast, sprawling marine sky and stand guard above my tiny 
weatherbeaten hut.
Michael Smith is author of The Giro Playboy 

Caravan parks, St Osyth, Essex, Jonathan Glancey, Guardian architecture 
correspondent

When I first came to St Osyth, or "Toosey" as it's known locally, it wasn't 
for the delights of the "Essex Sunshine Coast"; this is the driest recorded 
place in Britain. No, it was to see the magnificent 15th-century gatehouse and 
ruins of St Osyth's Priory, one of the great religious settlements of medieval 
Europe.

What caught my eye and drained my senses, though, wasn't the priory but the 
biggest settlement of caravans I'd ever seen. Between the priory and the North 
Sea sprawls a gor'blimey of caravan parks, all net curtains, half-naked Brits 
and an underlying feeling that foreign holidays are for idiots.

The caravan parks of St Osyth won't be to everyone's taste, and certainly not 
if your idea of a proper family holiday at home is a Cornish beach and Swallows 
and Amazons-style pottering about in boats. St Osyth is earthier than this, 
even though you'll find Rollers parked next to the fanciest caravans. Even the 
beach is something of a challenge, with its particular stretches for nudists, 
gays, couples-at-it and peeping Toms.

Somehow, though, this Carry On, if slightly punchy, seaside resort is as 
rock-solidly English as a jaw-jutting bloke in a pub who might just grunt "You 
looking at my caravan?"

Llandudno cable car, Wales, Claire Gogerty, editor, Coast magazine 
<http://www.natmags.co.uk/index.php/v1/Coast_magazine_wins_PPA_Award>

Clamber aboard Llandudno's cable car, feel it lurch into space, and for one 
breath-holding moment, your confidence may falter. Will this brightly coloured, 
comical vehicle constructed in the 60s make the one-mile journey from the Happy 
Valley park to the summit of the Great Orme?

Its silent glide begins and as it gains altitude, gardens and fields roll by 
beneath its thin, tin floor. The wind whistles in through the open sides and 
passengers clutch the grab rail a little too tightly.
 Photograph: Alamy 
But then on it swings, over sleepy cows and determined ramblers, and views of 
the ragged Welsh coastline to Anglesey and the Conway estuary open up all 
around. There are panoramas of Llandudno's ornate cast-iron pier and the town's 
handsome Victorian promenade to enjoy and any doubts about personal safety 
recede with its sedate progress toward the summit.

This is the longest passenger cable car system in Britain, and although the 
ride was overhauled in 2006, the four-seater cars have kept their original 
Toytown character.

Some passengers alight at the summit for refreshments and mini golf, but the 
lacklustre food and tired cafe dilute the day's pleasure. Best to stay on and 
come straight back down.
• Happy Valley, Great Orme, Llandudno (01492 877205, greatorme.org.uk/cablecar 
<http://www.greatorme.org.uk/cablecar.html>). Adults £7, Under 14s £5, family 
£19. Open 10am-5pm, Easter-October depending on the weather
 