
Great views are normally linked to great heights. The Earth's curve requires a 
decent perch to take in far horizons, or else a towering landscape which you 
can see from miles away.

This panorama breaks those rules and in a thoroughgoing manner. It lies 76 
metres below the streets ofDudley <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/dudley> in 
Britain's Black Country. Most drivers rushing past on the M5 motorway have no 
idea that it is there.

Duddle-eye! Not often a British destination of choice. Who would go there 
without being paid? Such scorn has an answer that goes back 440 million years, 
when tropical reefs south of the equator began a slow journey to the site now 
occupied by the town.

Great sections of their seabed, showing those ripples of sand familiar to 
anyone who has swum or paddled off shallow beaches, now lie tilted high above 
Birmingham in theWren's Nest nature reserve 
<http://www.dudley.gov.uk/environment--planning/countryside/nature-reserves/wrens-nest-national-nature-reserve>
. Vast fossils, the petrified "ripple beds", are the top of a thick vein of 
limestone which runs through the range of small hills, culminating inDudley 
castle and zoo <http://www.dudleyzoo.org.uk/home.htm>.

They are picturesque and scientifically important internationally, but the 
hidden world below them had more to do with manufacturing and money. In 1678 a 
child was born in a manor house on Wren's Nest and christenedAbraham Darby 
<http://inventors.about.com/od/britishinventions/a/AbrahamDarby.htm>. His 
perfection of the blast furnace began Britain's first Industrial Revolution, 
hugely increasing production of iron by using limestone ore and coke to 
superheat the foundry smelters.

Hence the fossil on Dudley's municipal coat of arms 
<http://www.ngw.nl/int/gbr/d/dudley.htm>, one of only two in British heraldry. 
The other is Whitby's ammonite, symbol of the thousands of millennia exposed on 
the crumbling cliffs of the North Sea coast in Yorkshire.

Dudley's fossil is a perfect trilobite, the celebrated Dudley Bug 
<http://www.geowestmidlands.org.uk/wiki/index.php5?title=Fossil_Fact_File/The_Dudley_Bug>
, which was found by quarrymen hacking out limestone from Wren's Nest to feed 
Darby's invention. In the course of this work, which began in the early 18th 
century and lasted for more than two centuries, an extraordinary labyrinth was 
created.

Down in its darkness, whose three levels of caverns are separated only by 
three-metre-thick thick floors of rock, lie marvels left by a troglodyte race 
of navvies who worked by candlelight in cold made worse by piercing draughts. 
One chamber is called Singing Cavern, from the sough of these winds.

They left behind such marvels as a subterranean wharf for 30 narrowboats, a 
two-mile tunnel where boatmen "legged" barges through by lying on the roof and 
pushing, and most extraordinary of all, theDark Cavern 
<http://users.hal-pc.org/~hickmagp/bcgsweb/wren.htm>, where Sir Roderick 
Murchison lectured on geology to 15,000 people in 1839.

"It must have been a fantastic sight," says Graham Worton, Dudley's keeper of 
geology (and how many councils have one of those?) as George, our narrowboat, 
edges into the gloom. A lifelong enthusiast, Worton was ticked off by his 
mother for fossil-hunting in the wall while waiting for the bus to primary 
school, in case neighbours thought the family "peculiar".

No one thinks that now, with Worton a prime mover in events and fund-raising 
which are bringing the Dudley tunnels to more and more visitors. Aglow about 
Murchison's caper, he says: "There was a great curving stone staircase down 
which he processed, with other dignitaries of the British Association. Gas 
lamps flared at intervals along a balustrade of iron railings. And at the end 
of it all, the Earl of Dudley organised underground fireworks."

The Dark Cavern is off limits now; too dangerous to visit, although there are 
hopes of changing that in the same way that the main tunnel sections were 
rescued by enthusiastic volunteers 45 years ago. In 1964, after no barges had 
passed through the tunnel from Birmingham to Staffordshire for 10 years, 
British Waterways called it a day. Local people rose up, formed theDudley Canal 
Trust <http://dudleycanaltrust.org.uk/>, and gradually brought the bulk of the 
system back to life.

Trust staff such as Alan Ward, a former gearbox builder in the Black Country's 
famous engineering industry, now pilot silent electric boats through the maze. 
This is our Britain's Best View; and although it includes stalagmites and 
stalactites, and the eerie patterns of rippling water on pallid limestone, 
there is more than predictable spelunking to the trip.

Within minutes of creeping into the tiny entrance to Lord Ward's Tunnel, the 
snuggest fit a narrowboat could contrive, the barge emerges through a curtain 
of Tarzan-like creepers into Shirts Mill and then Castle Mill Basins, 
extraordinary tranquil lagoons beneath one of the most exploited landscapes in 
Britain.

They were once underground limestone quarries themselves but their roofs fell 
in, so now they form strange water-filled holes, like a Yucatancenote 
(sinkhole) with other tunnel entrances leading off on all sides. The trust tour 
slides into several of these, twisting through one passage lined with 9,000,000 
early 18th-century bricks and another simply hacked from the rock.

At the furthest point of the trip, balconies and lamps like Murchison's shine 
red, purple and gold in a shifting light show. This is Singing Cavern, which is 
now used for weddings – by devoted potholers presumably – concerts and a 
Christmas panto. Disembarking from George, we pad through tinsel and scraps of 
crepe used for Cinderella, while Graham Worton makes straight for a tiny 
trilobite in a slab of ripple bed.

More than 85,000 people now make this trip every year, without spoiling the 
strange atmosphere; indeed in spookier parts of the warren, you are glad of 
company. In the future, apart from the Dark Cavern, Dudley hopes to link its 
underworld to Wren's Nest via a natural staircase through caves known as the 
Seven Sisters. No one will be sneering about "Duddle-eye" then.
 