
Two street names stick in my mind above all others: Nice View in Leeds and 
Perfect View in Bath.

They seem to send out the same message but no two roads could be less alike. 
Nice View's red-brick terrace looks out to the blank, back wall of a former 
factory – its neighbour, Milan Street, gives the game away so far as the name's 
Mediterranean origins are concerned.

But Perfect View, poised on a ledge above Snow Hill and beneath Richmond 
Heights, gazing serenely across to Bathampton and what – in my young day as a 
cub reporter on the Bath Chronicle – we called the Admiralty hutments: Perfect 
View is the real thing. Start tapping it into your SatNav and the computer will 
flick you straight to Bath after P.e.r.f. There is only one Perfect View in the 
UK.

To reach it, you hack up some of Bath's impossibly steep streets, wondering 
how low-powered vehicles can ever haul themselves to the shops and cafes of 
Camden Road. Reliving the drive for this film took me right back to my 
first-ever visit to Perfect View, to buy a Morris Minor in 1974 for £80.

"Perfect condition, my dear," said the railwayman, retired from the Somerset 
and Dorset line when they closed Green Park station, who pocketed my fivers. 
"Brakes like a knife." I had no option but to test this immediately, and 
luckily he was right; because from Perfect View to the London Road, it is down, 
down, giddily and unforgivingly down.

Hence the view; the terrace of pale stone and pastel-painted Georgian cottages 
forms one of the finest parts of the rim which encircles the beautiful bowl of 
Bath. You reach it from Camden Road up a slanting lane opposite the excellent 
Coffee@Camden caff, the verge afoam with cow parsley in late spring.

One whole swag of lacy flower heads hid the Perfect View street sign when 
cameraman Chris Thomond and I arrived. Beyond, a few last bluebells were still 
in bloom and orange tip butterflies floated serenely about. From here, the road 
is private and narrow, so don't go by car. It is much more enjoyable, anyway, 
to walk.

The lane ducks beneath trees at the foot of the even steeper slope leading up 
to Richmond Heights, and a classic Bath medley of modest, domestic 
architecture, mostly Georgian but with one or two fancy Victorian additions, 
skirts the pavement on the left. Between chimney pots, washing lines and 
slumbering cats, there are glimpses of the beautiful, orderly streets of the 
city centre and parkland around the Holburne museum and Kennet and Avon canal.

The road stops at the terrace for cars, but a grassy walkers and cyclists' 
track winds on to Camden Crescent through one of those wedges of half-town, 
half-countryside which are glories of Bath. The view is to the left but the eye 
is caught first by the terrace to the right. Perfect View was built to have a 
perfect view; but it is also close to perfection itself.

Although the grand set-pieces of the city tend to dominate promotional 
leaflets and photographs – the Royal and Landowne crescents, the Circus, Milsom 
Street – it is cottages like these which get closer to the golden mean. Often 
built by the grand houses' masons for their own home, they have a simplicity of 
proportions and form which most eyes find exactly right.

The terrace is a matey place too, very evidently designed for living. A 
resident's notion of placing a bench beside their door has led to a line of 
others. Wisteria and other climbers are shared, making their way along the 
lintels and over the doors. Tea is speedily on offer.

Nowhere is really perfect, of course, and the houses lack much in the way of 
gardens; a great green wall of shrubs and trees rises almost vertically behind 
the terrace. Sadly, too, a serpent has entered this paradise and is gradually 
diminishing the claim made by Perfect View's name. Scraggy trees and an 
unlovely tangle of woody, uninteresting plants are infesting the apron of land 
which was once the foreground to the stunning vista.

Rancour has surrounded this patch for some 10 years, since a developer tried 
to get permission for housing and lost, after vigorous protests from the View, 
and many others. Since then, the steep half-moon has seen a combination of 
neglect and inappropriate planting. It has now passed into the hands of the 
houses fronting Camden Road below, but relations are poor and the slow closing 
of the view's curtains goes on.

Bath suffers from this more widely, and it will be interesting to see whether 
terrace or trees win the day in the city in the end. Even such magnificent 
viewpoints as Camden and Lansdowne crescents are now interrupted by dense 
greenery growing up from below. Residents will be able to enjoy the panorama 
from their upstairs rooms for some years; but eventually, like Sleeping 
Beauty's castle, they too will be shaded in.

"We could once see from Twerton all the way to Bathford and 
Sally-in-the-Wood," one of Perfect View's senior residents told Chris and me 
sadly, going back over 30 years in her cottage. The view is still perfect, with 
the added magic which can come from glimpses through the greenery, as opposed 
to a sudden, complete set-piece. But it would be as well to go and see it 
reasonably soon.
 