
Just when you think you’ve hit peak Trump, Buzzfeed comes out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/12/buzzfeed-editor-ben-smith-defends-decision-to-publish-trump-dossier>
 with a story that gives a whole new meaning to “leaks”.

As our grace period between Trump’s election and his assumption of power draws 
to a close, people on the right are frequently as bewildered as the rest of us. 
But some of them offer insights and correctives that we can profit from.

Burst your bubble: five conservative reads for this week – and a resolution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/burst-your-bubble-conservative-articles>
This week, some conservatives are in an elegiac mood, contemplating the crisis 
of the Christian right and the end of US political and economic hegemony. 
Others have Russia on their minds, whether as a competing global power which we 
must deal with, or as the source of a shower of unsavoury information about the 
president-elect. Others are trying to parse the Donald’s campaign blatherings 
for a sense of how he will treat the different branches of the armed services.

The Trump ‘Kompromat’ Story Is Disturbing – Every Bit of It 
<http://www.nationalreview.com/corner/443752/trump-kompromat-story-its-all-disturbing>

Publication: National Review

Author: You may remember David French as the man proffered by fellow 
#NeverTrump 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/05/31/bill-kristol-thinks-a-nobody-named-david-french-can-take-down-donald-trump.html>
 desperado Bill Kristol as an ideal independent presidential candidate to 
counter Trump’s rise. (The campaignnever happened 
<http://www.npr.org/2016/10/26/499440089/harassed-on-twitter-people-need-to-know-the-reality-of-what-its-like-out-there>
, but French was nevertheless subjected to a Trumpist harassment campaign.)

Notwithstanding his opposition to Trump, and his highbrow affectations, French 
is anobsessive 
<http://www.nationalreview.com/article/428962/christmas-americas-crisis-faith> 
with the usual checklist ofniche grievances 
<http://www.nationalreview.com/article/427962/lefts-assault-thoughts-and-prayers-revealed-its-anti-christian-bigotry-and-rank>
. But today, it’s his turn to be the stopped clock that can’t help being right 
occasionally.

Why you should read it: French clearly spells out the implications of the 
leaking of information on Trump, and it’s hard to disagree. If intelligence 
officials are willing to risk leaking this kind of information on the man who 
will soon command them, they either hate him to the point of unreason, or are 
overwhelmed with fear because of what they know about him.

Either way, it’s clear that someone is trying to delegitimise him before he 
takes office. The prospect of a president being at such odds with the US deep 
state is just one more piece of weirdness we have to deal with in coming months.

Extract: “This is all disturbing. From the leaks, to the Buzzfeed document 
dump, to the substance of the allegations themselves. Are there ‘officials’ who 
hate Trump so much that they’re willing to leak information that they know will 
lead to widespread public fear that the president-elect is compromised by a 
hostile foreign power? If so, that’s extraordinary. Or, just as extraordinary, 
are there officials who are so concerned by Trump’s potential ties to Russia 
that they’re willing to risk a public firestorm to jump-start an investigation?”


Can the Christian right be saved?  
<https://www.firstthings.com/article/2017/01/can-the-religious-right-be-saved>

Publication: First Things

Author: Russell D Moore is a prominent evangelical leader and was, during the 
election, a rare and consistent critic of Trump within that movement.

Why you should read it: Moore’s article is the text of his Erasmus lecture (an 
annual event featuring prominent Christian conservatives). In the lecture, 
delivered last October, Moore points to the Christian right’s support of Trump 
as a sign of a broader moral and theological crisis within the movement. 
Trump’s personal morality and his politics are so out of keeping with Christian 
values that supporting him has deeply compromised evangelicals.

Extract: “Some – mostly Evangelical – political leaders have waved away 
misogyny and sexually predatory language as ‘locker-room talk’ or ‘macho’ 
behavior. Some have suggested that their candidate has never claimed to be ‘a 
choirboy’ – thereby defining deviancy down to such a degree that respect for 
women, protection of the vulnerable, and a defense of sexual morality are 
recast as naive and unrealistic. One said that his support for his candidate 
was never about shared values anyway.

“Others suggested that we need a strongman (implying a strongman unencumbered 
by too many moral convictions) in order to fight the system and save Christians 
from a hostile culture. Some prominent Christian political activists said that 
those who could not in good conscience stand with either of the major party 
candidates last year were guilty of ‘moral preening’ and of putting our 
consciences before the country, sometimes even putting the words ‘conscience’ 
and ‘witness’ in scare quotes, a rhetorical gesture worthy of an Obama 
administration solicitor general.”


2017 Forecast: What Does Trump Want The Army To Do? ISIS, Russia, Or China? 
<http://breakingdefense.com/2017/01/2017-forecast-what-does-trump-want-the-army-to-do-isis-russia-or-china>

Publication: Breaking Defense

Author: Sydney J Freedberg Jr is deputy editor of Breaking Defense, a kind of 
trade magazine for soldiers, veterans and the defence industry.

Why you should read it: Progressives don’t often listen when soldiers talk to 
each other, or when the military-industrial complex talks to itself. Just one 
of the reasons is that people in such circles are mostly reliable 
conservatives. But Breaking Defense has been running a series on what different 
branches of the armed services might expect from the incoming administration, 
of which this article is just one part. In sum, their reporting adds up to a 
more complex and nuanced picture than is offered in reporting framed by a 
simplistic “hawk or isolationist” dichotomy. This piece suggests that any 
rapprochement with Russia may leave the army without a clear role.

Extract: “Enter Trump. He has repeatedly praised Russian president Vladimir 
Putin: ‘I always knew he was very smart,’ Trump tweeted most recently. That 
tweet came after Putin decided not to retaliate against Obama’s latest 
sanctions, which in turn aimed to punish Russian intelligence agencies for 
their meddling in the 2016 elections – something that Trump publicly doubts 
ever happened. Trump has also slammed US allies in general, and NATO in 
particular, for not paying their fair share for the common defense. He even 
suggested at one point that, despite our treaty obligations, the US would not 
come to the defense of the Baltic States if they were attacked by Russia. Such 
a Baltic crisis is the primary mission for which the US Army in Europe is 
preparing.”


After the End of History: The Age of Great Expectations and the Great Void 
<http://www.theamericanconservative.com/articles/after-the-end-of-history/>

Publication: The American Conservative

Author: In a 2005 book, Andrew J Bacevich wrote, “Today, I still situate 
myself culturally on the right. And I continue to view the remedies proffered 
by mainstream liberalism with skepticism. But my disenchantment with what 
passes for mainstream conservatism, embodied in the present Bush administration 
and its groupies, is just about absolute.”

It’s difficult to offer a better summary of his dissident conservatism, and an 
anti-militarism which is grounded in his military experience.

Why you should read it: Here Bacevich offers a pessimistic, widescreen 
assessment of the entire post-cold war history of the US, which he calls “The 
Age of Great Expectations”.

Pitilessly, he shows how events have decimated political fantasies harboured 
since the 1990s – of economic globalisation, unchallenged American hegemony and 
the triumph of expressive individualism. Trump, he suggests, is a symptom of 
the collapse of these dreams, but he has no real answers to the grievances that 
saw him elected. These are hard truths of a kind that few other writers can 
offer.

Extract: “In all likelihood, [Trump’s] presidency will prove less 
transformative than transitional. As a result, concerns about what he may do, 
however worrisome, matter less than the larger question of where we go from 
here. The principles that enjoyed favor following the Cold War have been found 
wanting. What should replace them?”


Russia isn’t the bad guy you’ve been led to believe it is 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/russia-isnt-the-bad-guy-youve-been-lead-to-believe-it-is-20170106-gtmzvc.html>

Publication: The Sydney Morning Herald

Author: Tom Switzer is an Australian conservative with US ties. In most ways 
he conforms to type. He helped make over Australia’s (Murdoch-owned) national 
daily into an organ for rightwing agitprop. He is willing to engage in the 
culture wars. But relative to his milieu, he stands out for being (a) 
reasonably well-informed and (b) his foreign policy “realism” and consequent 
opposition to the neoconservative “common sense” of the contemporary right.

Why you should read it: Switzer does his best to deflate the current panic 
about Russian interference in US elections. Putin is a thug, but most of its 
behaviour is explicable as Russia being Russia. It’s still a great power, 
acting to protect its interests and projecting force overseas in limited ways 
to achieve those goals. Switzer’s realist framework leads him to be far too 
breezy about Russian crimes, but he makes good points about the US’s own 
interference in the internal politics of other countries, and argues for a 
pragmatic attitude to Russia and its leader.

Extract: “My point is that there is nothing peculiar or pathological in 
Russia’s behaviour: it is protecting legitimate security interests in the 
Baltics and the Middle East and its objectives are limited. Any Western 
politician or propagandist who claims otherwise is either ignorant or suffering 
from Russiaphobia.”
 