
Northern Ireland’s embattled first minister, Arlene Foster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/arlene-foster>, has claimed calls for her 
to stand down over a renewable energy “cash for ash” financial scandal are 
motivated by sexism.

The leader of the Democratic Unionists (DUP) – the largest party in the 
Stormont assembly – said demands that she step aside as first minister while a 
public inquiry takes place were “misogynistic”.

She is un 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/19/northern-ireland-first-minister-arlene-foster-urged-resign-fuel-subsidy-scheme>
der attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/19/northern-ireland-first-minister-arlene-foster-urged-resign-fuel-subsidy-scheme>
 over the renewable heating incentive (RHI), a scheme set up in November 2012 
to encourage the consumption of heat from renewable sources.

It offered huge and, its critics say, inflated financial incentives to farms, 
businesses and other non-domestic consumers to use biomass boilers that mostly 
burned wood pellets, as well as solar thermal and heat pumps.

Last February, a whistleblower alleged the scheme was being abused and that at 
least one farmer would make £1m over 20 years from heating an empty shed. There 
are fears the scheme championed by the DUP could cost the taxpayer up to £400m.

In an interview with Sky News on Wednesday, Foster claimed some of the demands 
that she step aside were personal and based on her gender.

“There’s a lot of it personal. There’s a lot of it, sadly, misogynistic as 
well, because I’m a female, the first female leader ofNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>,” she said.

“I’m here because the electorate put me into this position. I take the 
responsibility very, very seriously and I intend to see it through.”

But her critics on the opposition benches of the assembly dismissed her 
allegations that misogyny and sexism are driving the demands that she stand 
down.

Jenny Palmer, an assembly member for the rival Ulster Unionist party, 
criticised Foster for claiming sexism was a motive in the debate.

Palmer said: “This is just the latest ham-fisted attempt by the first minister 
to reshape the debate and pivot away from the valid questions being asked of 
her. The party may come first for the DUP, but the people of Northern Ireland 
deserve answers. The integrity of the institutions should take precedence over 
clinging on to power.”

Palmer said Foster’s Sky interview was an attempt “to deflect from the biggest 
financial scandal in Northern Ireland’s history. It is a mark of their 
arrogance that they seem totally indignant that anyone would question their 
role in the waste of over £400m of public money”.

The leader of the cross-community Alliance party, Naomi Long, said the sexism 
claims were a “diversionary tactic” being deployed by the first minister and 
the DUP.

“This is not about misogyny, it is simply about accountability,” she added. 
Fostersurvived a vote of no confidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/19/northern-ireland-arlene-foster-survives-no-confidence-vote-green-energy-scandal-sinn-fein>
 in the assembly before Christmas.

However, questions continue to be raised over what she knew about the scheme, 
which has been described as a “fiasco” and “the worst scandal since devolution 
was restored”.

With the DUP rallying around Foster and insisting there is no need for her to 
even temporarily stand down, other parties in the regional parliament are 
warning of a collapse of the assembly and a fresh election.

Sinn Féin’s national chairman, Declan Kearney, raised the prospect of an 
election in an interview with Irish broadcaster RTE on Monday, warning that 
Foster staying in power would be “entirely untenable”.

It is Sinn Féin’s position that will prove decisive given that the republican 
party is the DUP’s only partner in the regional government.

 