
I’ll admit it: going wild camping in January in Scotland does sound rather 
like the sort of trip that only wannabe Bear Grylls types would attempt. It 
conjures visions of a blizzard-stricken landscape besmirched by a lonely tent, 
inside which wretched campers practise Captain Oates impersonations and josh 
about cutting off toes with a blunt penknife.

However, it can be much more enjoyable than this as my friend, Carl, and I 
found as we lay snugly in our tents beside picturesque Whiteadder reservoir in 
East Lothian’s Lammermuir Hills. We’ve gone wild camping nearly every January 
for the last decade and the weather is often pretty wild (a -13ºC night on a 
heath in Suffolk will live long in the memory), so we were pleased to find a 
sheltered spot just as the last light was fading. Pleasantly tired after an 
afternoon’s tramping over moorland, we were lulled to sleep by the wind 
whistling over our protective little spinney and the honk of greylag geese 
flapping across the water. It was an experience we enjoyed alone. Edinburgh is 
less than 25 miles off but the only people we saw were a couple of farmhands on 
quad bikes.

Great country walks: Hadrian’s Wall, Northumberland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jan/28/great-country-walks-hadrians-wall-northumberland>
We were taking on the little-known Herring Road, a 28-mile footpath that has 
existed since the 17th century. Each winter, when food inland was scarce, 
locals would carry salted herrings from Dunbar harbour across the hills to the 
village of Lauder. We had given ourselves a day and a half to do it, after an 
early ride train from London. There’s no accommodation along the way sowild 
camping – which is legal in Scotland, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/jul/10/wild-camping-uk-wales-holiday> 
with a few caveats – is the only feasible method of doing it.

We’d been tempted to take a taxi the four miles from the coast to the hamlet 
of Halls, where the tarmac stops, but opted in the end for the full Herring 
Road experience. We were glad we did because, as we climbed slowly through 
pastureland, we were treated to expansive views of the conical volcanic plug of 
North Berwick Law, its seabound twin Bass Rock, and across the Firth of Forth 
to the Isle of May.
 Watch Law, on the Herring Road, looking out to the Firth of Forth. 
Photograph: Dixe Wills 
No one would claim that the Lammermuir Hills are Scotland at its most 
spectacular, and anyone who dislikes wind turbines would see their blood 
pressure shoot up here. However, the area is sparsely populated, all but 
roadless, and has a satisfyingly away-from-it-all feel. We spotted deer, red 
and black grouse and, on two occasions, mountain hares, their coats almost 
completely white in readiness for the snow. And although here and there we saw 
the v-shaped gouges made long ago by pack horses, the waymarked path was 
sufficiently vague in places for us to stray off it a couple of times by 
mistake.

One of the mantras of wild camping is “pitch late, leave early”. However, with 
the sun setting around 4pm, it meant that by 5pm we had already popped our 
tents up and were gazing up at Cassiopeia and Ursa Major while a good, thick 
soup bubbled on the stove. The forecast was for a low of 2C – chilly enough, 
but warmer than Scotland’s loftier regions that night and our sleeping bags 
were reassuringly stout.

Top 10 winter camping and glamping breaks in the UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/nov/26/top-10-winter-camping-glamping-breaks-uk>
The next day we spent in solitude, even when our path piggybacked the normally 
popular Southern Upland Way. We enjoyed the views until, buffeted by a gale, we 
took refuge in one of the huge cairns on Twin Law. Here we found an anonymous 
donor had left an emergency pack – fizzy drink, chocolate and, naturally, a 
bottle of whisky – but were glad we had no need to dip into it.

By evening, we had become so used to the wilderness that when we finally got 
to Lauder, the village looked like a sprawling metropolis. We camped on the 
fringes of a nearby wood and ambled in. The next morning we would take the bus 
from here to Edinburgh but, tonight, we treated ourselves to dinner and a pint 
at theBlack Bull <http://www.blackbull-lauder.com>. The village was clearly 
prospering: herring, we noted, was not on the menu.

• Train tickets were provided by East Coast <http://www.eastcoast.co.uk> 
(London to Edinburgh single from £24); andScotRail  <http://scotrail.co.uk>
(Edinburgh to Dunbar single from £7.80).Bus from Lauder to Edinburgh 
<http://coach.nationalexpress.com/nxbooking/journey-list> £6.50 single 
 