
Route information

Length 7.5 miles

Duration 2-3 hours

 Start The Westgate, Canterbury

Finish Whitstable Bay

Classification Easy-moderate

Terrain Some hills, on-road

 Map OS map 150 Canterbury and East Kent

The Crab and Winkle Way

Ancient woodland, undulating hills and a snapshot of Britain's railway 
heritage reward cyclists who venture along north Kent's aptly namedCrab and 
Winkle Way <http://www.sustrans.org.uk/ncn/map/route/crab-winkle-way>, a homage 
to Whitstable's famous seafood.

The seven-mile route, which runs from Kent's historical heart at Canterbury to 
Whitstable and the north Kent coast, is short enough to cover in an afternoon 
and quiet enough for the kids with plenty to offer nature and history lovers 
along the way.

A short ride from the station, Canterbury's ancient Westgate provides a 
dramatic send-off, its twin grey cylindrical towers topped with crenellated 
turrets and speckled with arrow holes, dominating St Dunstan's Street.

You'll pass to one side of this medieval city gate, which was built in 1380, 
the largest of its kind in England, replacing a Roman gate that stood on the 
same site: the entrance is so narrow traffic routes round it in one direction, 
and only those heading back towards the station get to squeeze their vehicles 
(or bikes) through. One can almost imagine stern men in chainmail scowling out 
from under their helmets or a warning arrow whistling through your wheels as 
you pass by.

From the city walls, St Dunstan's Street offers an eclectic mix of the old and 
new as weavers-style cottages, Tudor-beams and leaded windows, Victorian 
terraces and Georgian townhouses intersperse with payday loan shops and the odd 
boarded up frontage. These waymarkers of the ages guide you out of the city, 
and along the old pilgrimage route toward St Dunstan's church.

In July 1174 King Henry II stopped at this small church to do public penance 
for the murder of Thomas Becket. Donning penitential garments and removing his 
shoes he walked barefoot to Canterbury Cathedral to confess his sins and be 
scourged by monks.

The Crab and Winkle Way 
<http://www.sustrans.org.uk/ncn/map/route/crab-winkle-way> leads riders in the 
other direction, fully shod, to climb 200-feet out of Canterbury, starting as a 
gentle incline but building steadily. This mild penance is not without reward, 
however, affording a stunning view of the cathedral from the top of Neal's 
Place Road.

From here, you can also take a short detour to the Blean Woods 
<http://www.theblean.co.uk> , the largest ancient broad-leaved woodland in 
southern England with a choice of nature trails, up to 10 miles long, for 
walkers or cyclists.

Wildlife haven
As well as being an RSPB reserve, the woods are one of the few areas in 
England to support the heath fritillary butterfly. Look out for their yellow 
and brown forms flitting through open glades where the Blean's trees are 
coppiced to enable their breeding - in a good June there are thousands of them. 
Guided walks (adults £3, children £2) during June include an early evening 
saunter, where you can listen for nightjars and bats, and learn about the wood's
bird and mammal life <http://www.rspb.org.uk>.

From natural to industrial history: leaving the roads through rolling 
countryside brings you to Clowes Wood, where the old Canterbury and Whitstable 
railway line used to run. Built in 1830, it was the first-ever regular 
passenger line: taking excited Victorian daytrippers from Canterbury to 
Whitstable. A history of the railway and plans to restore the line can be found 
on theCrab & Winkle Line Trust website  <http://www.crabandwinkle.org>.

Though long disused, nuggets from the railway's past can still be glimpsed 
today. The Winding Pond, once used as a reservoir for thirsty steam engines, 
now makes for a quiet lunch stop, made all the more perfect for full tummies 
because it's mostly downhill from here to Whitstable Harbour, with a brief 
final section through the town.

Pubs are few and far between along the route but, perched on the edge of 
Whitstable beach, the Old Neptune – where a picture of Peter O'Toole 
commemorates the day he bought the whole pub a pint after a day's filming in 
2007 – is a welcoming retreat. NearbyWheelers Oyster Bar 
<http://www.wheelersoysterbar.com/>'s Moroccan-style monkfish is particularly 
tasty and the oysters are a must. Head chef Mark Stubbs also runs a cooking 
school every Wednesday.

Other options

Viking Coastal Trail
The Viking Coastal Trail is a triumph of traffic-free cycling, hugging the 
glistening coast for miles along the ancient isle of Thanet before ducking 
inland for a brief on-road section. This 27-mile, flat circular trail is a 
peaceful jaunt of wide seafront paths beside low cliffs, beach huts and 
bathers, harking back to the original staycationers, the Victorians. There are 
links to one of their most famous chroniclers, Charles Dickens, who wrote and 
found inspiration for some of his novels in Broadstairs.

Beyond that, Romans, early Christian missionaries and, of course, the Vikings 
all claimed pieces of what was once an island formed by a now-extinct river.

On a sunny day there's little better than following their lead by bicycle, 
and for littler legs there's a shorter, nine-mile traffic-free, stretch from 
Margate to Reculver. The formidable Reculver Towers, the remains of the 
12th-century Abbey, are the route's traditional starting point. Margate and the 
Turner Contemporary gallery appear before Broadstairs at 12 miles, where 
Morelli's 1950's-themed ice-cream parlour is well worth a visit. There's also a 
replica Viking ship at Pegwell Bay.

Isle of Harty Trail
The eight-mile circular Isle of Harty Trail is a flat, mostly traffic-free 
ride on another of Kent's former islands, perfect for a short jaunt with 
the family.

In the pioneering days of flight, the Isle was visited by the Wright Brothers 
and was home to six Wright Fliers, but today marsh harriers, golden plover, 
curlew, pintail and teal dominate the skies. The 900-year-old Harty Church is 
worth a peek for its 14th-century Flemish chest, engraved with two jousting 
knights.visitkent.co.uk <http://visitkent.co.uk>

Kent by numbers

4,273 miles of public rights of way in the county, ideal for cycling and 
walking holidays

80 country parks, picnic sites and nature reserves

20 farmers' markets call the Garden of England home

Useful information

How to get there
Canterbury West is served by Southeastern's high-speed rail link out of 
St Pancras. Trains from London Victoria go direct to Whitstable and Canterbury 
East.

Where to eat and drink
Wheelers Oyster Bar <http://wheelersoysterbar.com> in Whitstable, the oldest 
restaurant in town, also offers takeaway snacks. The Hare and Hounds (01227 
450266, 4 Blean Hill, Blean, Canterbury, no website) near Blean offers a range 
of pub food and traditional ales.

Where to stay
For places in Whitstable look no further than the quaint fishermen's huts 
<http://hotelcontinental.co.uk>. A pebble's throw from the sea, they suit close 
families and couples looking to cosy up after a long day. At the old fire 
station on London Road in Canterbury, the quirky and funArthouse B&B 
<http://arthousebandb.com> is suitable for couples and families and is right on 
the cycle route. Neals Place Farm <http://bit.ly/1i0rtXV> (Tents from £10 per 
night, motorhomes from £20 plus £2.50 per person, ), near Canterbury, is a 
working farm with a farm shop, as well as showers and toilets.

Other places of interest
Canterbury Cathedral, Canterbury Historic River Tours 
<http://www.canterburyrivertours.co.uk/>, Whitstable Castle and Gardens, 
Reculver Towers, St Augustine's Abbey.

Bike Hire
Kent Cycles <http://kentcyclehire.com>, near Canterbury West station, 
pre-booking essential.

For more information on holidays in England, go to VisitEngland.com 
<http://www.visitengland.com/>
 