
Former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/carly-fiorina> dropped out of the race for 
the Republican nomination on Wednesday, over a disappointing finish in the New 
Hampshire primaries and her ineligibility to participate in upcoming 
presidential debates.

“This campaign was always about citizenship,” Fiorina wrote in a Facebook post 
<https://www.facebook.com/CarlyFiorina/posts/10157165012225206> on her official 
campaign account. “I’ve said throughout this campaign that I will not sit down 
and be quiet. I’m not going to start now. While I suspend my candidacy today, I 
will continue to travel this country and fight for those Americans who refuse 
to settle for the way things are and a status quo that no longer works for 
them.”

Issued by the sole female candidate in the Republican field, Fiorina’s 
statement singled out women who looked up to her as someone who could go 
toe-to-toe with the male-dominated political establishment, urging them not to 
be bound to ideology because of their gender.

Chris Christie suspends presidential campaign after New Hampshire result
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/10/chris-christie-suspends-2016-campaign-new-hampshire-primary>
“Do not let others define you,” Fiorina wrote, addressing women and girls. “Do 
not listen to anyone who says you have to vote a certain way or for a certain 
candidate because you’re a woman. That is not feminism. Feminism doesn’t shut 
down conversations or threaten women. It is not about ideology. It is not a 
weapon to wield against your political opponent. A feminist is a woman who 
lives the life she chooses and uses all her God-given gifts.”

Fiorina, 61, was one of a trio of Republican presidential candidates who had 
never before held elected office. Her 2010 run for one of California’s seats in 
the US Senate collapsed, despite Fiorina’s willingness to spend millions of 
dollars of her personal fortune to fund her campaign.

The candidate had hoped to market her candidacy on her success as a business 
leader who had cracked the glass ceiling of the C-suite, but she was dogged by 
her record as CEO of HP. The computer giant’s $25bn acquisition of Compaq was 
roundly considered a bust, and Fiorina was ousted by the company’s board in 
2005 with a $21m golden parachute.

A surprisingly adept undercard debate performance briefly launched Fiorina 
into the upper tier of candidates, but questions about the veracity of claims 
she made regarding Planned Parenthood in subsequent debates overshadowed her 
poised performances, and her poll numbers never recovered. Fiorina finished the 
Iowa caucuses with 2% of the vote, placing her above only Ben Carson, another 
political arriviste, in Tuesday’s New Hampshire primaries.

Questions about Fiorina’s knowledge of foreign policy were an additional 
hurdle. Although she said inan interview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/09/carly-fiorina-foreign-policy-republican-interview>
 that she knew “more world leaders on the stage” than any of her competitors 
for the 2016 nomination, her foreign policy worldview revolved more around 
criticism of the Obama administration than any overarching philosophy. After 
terrorist attacks in Paris and San Bernardino, California, put national 
security at the forefront of voters’ minds, Fiorina was relegated to a lower 
tier.

“As I have said to the many wonderful Americans I have met throughout this 
campaign, a leader is a servant whose highest calling is to unlock potential in 
others,” Fiorina said in the conclusion of her statement. “I will continue to 
serve in order to restore citizen government to this great nation so that 
together we may fulfill our potential.”
 