
Early on in Catch-22 we see the novel’s hero Yossarian in hospital, where he 
has been “forced” to censor letters. Like most of the other things the army 
makes him do in this novel, the job is essentially pointless – and tedious. So 
he takes to inventing games to break the monotony. First, he declares “death to 
modifiers” and sets to work blacking them out: “Out of every letter that passed 
through his hands went every adjective and adverb.” The next day, we learn, “he 
made war on articles”.

Reading group: Catch-22 by Joseph Heller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/09/reading-group-catch-22-by-joseph-heller>
A reader still innocent of Catch-22’s wiles and charms could be forgiven for 
assuming that this scene is essentially throwaway. Especially as Heller begins 
to heap absurdity on absurdity. Yossarian blacks out entire letters, then 
leaves entire letters untouched. He messes around with the envelopes and signs 
the letters he has censored with the name Washington Irving.

That last touch seems pleasantly inconsequential. But then again, maybe it 
isn’t entirely chance that Washington Irving’s should be the chosen name. Would 
any writer suffer more from Yossarian’s interdictions on modifiers than the 
author of The Legend of Sleepy Hollow? Here, mainly for the fun of it, is its 
first sentence:

In the bosom of one of those spacious coves which indent the eastern shore of 
the Hudson, at that broad expansion of the river denominated by the ancient 
Dutch navigators the Tappan Zee, and where they always prudently shortened sail 
and implored the protection of St Nicholas when they crossed, there lies a 
small market town or rural port, which by some is called Greensburgh, but which 
is more generally and properly known by the name of Tarry Town.

Yossarian’s black pen would be mighty busy there. But, to answer my own 
question, there is a writer who would suffer more: the very one, who within a 
few lines of Yossarian’s declaration about adjectives and adverbs, is setting 
down sentences such as:

Censoring the envelopes had serious repercussions, produced a ripple of 
anxiety on some ethereal military echelon that floated a CID man back into the 
ward posing as a patient.

And:

In the bed on Yossarian’s right, still lying amorously on his belly, was the 
startled captain with malaria in his blood and a mosquito bite on his ass.

Catch-22 would give Yossarian endless work as a censor. Again, early on, it 
would be easy to think that this is a casual, forgettable joke. Irony for the 
sake of irony - or maybe a knowing message to potential critics. It would be 
easy to complain that Catch-22 is wordy, after all. Except, if you were to do 
so, you would be allying yourself with ex-Private First Class Wintergreen, the 
mail clerk at the 27th Air Force headquarters who throws all communications 
from one General Peckem into the wastebasket precisely because he finds them 
“too prolix”.

Peckem is, in Wintergreen’s eyes, a “prick” who writes enhanced when he means 
increased and probably deserves to be so punished. Yet one of the steadiest 
laws in Heller’s determinedly unruly book is that anyone who accuses anyone 
else of being a “prick” is also probably a prick. So do you want to be on 
Wintergreen’s side? And is there even a side to be on? Later we learn that 
Wintergreen has tipped off a colonel under Peckem that his prose is style too 
prolix, as if it wasn’t actually him making the decision that the 
communications shouldn’t get through. And even though Peckem’s team have tried 
to change their style, Wintergreen says it’s still “too prolix”. There’s no way 
to win with him.

And once more, all of that could probably just be read as a casual set of 
jokes. Maybe the comments on prolixity aren’t meant to be taken as hints about 
novel in which they appear? Maybe the thought just begins and ends on the page 
on which it appears? Yet it’s hard not to feel that even his apparently minor 
moment has been woven into the larger book with careful craft.

Catch-22 can seem wacky and even rather random at first. Sentences fly up at 
you like so much flak. The ideas seem as scattershot and silly as the various 
directives and decisions that keep Yossarian on active service and obliged to 
fly more and more missions. It’s farcical. Characters are hyperactive and 
ridiculously named (to the extent that even poor old Major Major Major Major 
doesn’t seem too unusual). The prose is effusive and packed with adjectives, 
all combining to create an impression of unplanned chaos. This impression 
reflects the madness of the war and the frustration of those who are made to 
fight it.

Yet it’s also deceptive. Because the more you read, the more you realise that 
Heller is setting his characters and readers alike looping round a series of 
intricate and interwoven conundrums. Catch-22 is actually a book in which 
everything connects with everything else, where hardly anything is wasted and 
communications are discarded at peril. It soon starts to feel as if it isn’t 
just people who want to kill Yossarian. His struggle to “live forever or die in 
the attempt” becomes a fight against the very texture and power of words. After 
all, the Catch-22 that gives the novel its name is a linguistic trick, as much 
as anything else. And Yossarian lives in a world where “something is terribly 
wrong if everything is all right”. He is stuck in a book whose author tortures 
and torments him with word after word after word. Where the more words there 
are, the harder it gets.

In that light, the superabundance of adjectives and adverbs seems more than 
just a coincidence of style, and that early scene of Yossarian blacking out 
modifiers takes on dark and poignant significance.
 