
When Catch-22 came out of the hat earlier on this month, I thought it was 
quite a strange choice for abook to give us hope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/09/reading-group-catch-22-by-joseph-heller>
. This was partly because, while I’d remembered the anger and the horror from 
the last time I’d read the novel, I’d forgotten the uplifting brilliance of the 
final chapters and about Yossarian’s refusal to give in to bullying or despair. 
It was also because I hadn’t reckoned on the excellence of the discussion here 
on the Reading Group. As happens every month, I’ve been surprised, delighted, 
amused, touched and enlightened by a great many of the comments. It’s made me 
feel that bit better about human nature.

Since I’m feeling so uplifted I thought it would be a nice thing to revisit a 
few of those comments and sneak in an extra Catch-22 article before posting 
about next month’s choice. Above the line, I feel I’ve barely touched the 
surface of this wonderful book. I’d happily continue have gone on for another 
month about its fascinating ideas and many demonstrations of Heller’s unique 
talent. Below the line, however, the comments have been more comprehensive, 
covering many topics I’ve missed; like the impact of the Vietnam war on the 
novel’s popularity, the fact that it was partly written as a response to Korea 
and the superb way it eviscerates consumer capitalism - and provides an eerie 
prophecy of the excesses of neo-liberalism. AsBeatonTheDonis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/23/catch-22s-10m-copies-how-a-bitter-satire-became-a-bestseller#comment-81751428>
 said: “There probably has never been a better satirical exposition of the 
logical conclusion of liberal capitalism than that of Milo Minderbinder 
accepting payment from the Germans to bomb his own airbase.”


Some of the comments this month have also been stand alone essays in and of 
themselves. Look at this beauty fromTOOmanyWilsons 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15591536> :


What can you say about Catch-22?

Let’s stick with one. What Catch-22 does with and to the concept of The Joke.

Jokes are a model of narrative economy. There can be no adipose tissue, no 
flab, no digression. You have to set it up fast, rush through the middle and 
pay off BIG at the end. Imagine a joke with a postscript. Or a sequel. Jokes 
have tyrannical sub-editors and exigent consumers. It’s astounding how easily 
you can fuck up a good joke with duff punctuation, an under-employed adjective 
or the crucial instinct for when to stop. A haiku is a slurred drunken 3am rant 
compared with the chilled discipline and self-mastery of the joke.

It’s surpassing strange how fully and painstakingly Heller breaks all those 
rules. He’s all over the place. Given that it took him so long to write, you’d 
have thought he could have mastered his indiscipline, tendentiousness and 
sloppy fertility. But no, not Joe. The world’s worst copy-editor could tidy 
this creaking baggage up to the tune of a hundred pages or more while losing 
very little. It was a book he clearly did not know how to write. So, how did it 
end up such a masterpiece?

At some point, he clearly worried about how funny it was and clearly decided 
not funny enough. So then he wondered what to do with all his jokes (and it’s 
mostly jokes, Catch-22, as well as one singular unified joke – the longest ever 
told). And what he did, whether in despair or mere clumsiness was to tinker 
with the actual mechanics of The Joke. What he did was tounjoke all his jokes.

He repeats most of them ad nauseam. A serious comedy misdemeanour. Some of the 
main jokes become litanies or tropes. Like an eight-year-old boy’s idea of 
comedy. If I repeat this often enough, it will cease to be funny, begin 
provoking irritation but if I then keep repeating it, it will, through a kind 
of comedy Stockholm Syndrome, suddenly become hilarious all over again. Never 
forget that eight-year-old boy’s jokes often have a punitive quality, designed 
to annoy and exasperate (eight-year-old boys possessing the fine understanding 
that many jokes and their tellings operate solely on the principle of how much 
they amuse the teller).

Heller does this with dozens of them. For example, in the exchange between 
Yossarian and (I think*) Clevinger where Clevinger is upset that people are 
trying to kill him and Yossarian reasonably counters that they’re trying to 
kill everyone, the back and forward goes on several beats too long. Heller 
kills the joke by not stopping in time. By criminal over-milking. He extends it 
to where it is no longer funny. And then extends it some more. Until it returns 
funnier and weirder than ever. And deeper and truer too. It forces you hard up 
against the realisation of: fair enough, that is a thing – they are trying to 
kill him – and that is bound to take the edge off your day. He does giant work 
here. Showing his oddly undated crew of slacker, GenX or millennial characters 
smacking hard against the unfriendly wall of history’s maddest and most 
carnivorous war. He renders grotesque the grotesque. Which is actually 
immensely difficult.

Similarly, Milo Minderbinder. Milo is the ultimate trap for a novelist. He’s a 
great comic idea. Great ideas are death to good fiction (and you always feel he 
is less fleshed-out and fully realised than Heller’s other losers and dunces). 
Milo’s trajectory, his set-pieces were almost certainly a delight to scribble 
down on the back of a cigarette pack. Must have felt like real work. He’s gonna 
end up trying to feed chocolate-covered cotton to the men? That’s brilliant. 
Can’t fail. But then you have to write the bloody thing. So what did he do with 
the collection of brilliant little jokes he had dreamed up for this weird 
anti-comic comedy? He murdered them. He packed Milo with absurdity, 
tonelessness and an unfunny form of actual logic. Milo threatens to become 
something other than a comic character (if he ever really is). And Heller puts 
most of his actual Milo writing into the moment when he tells the 20th 
century’s second-best joke – when he arranges the franchised-out bombing of his 
own airfield. The crucial thing about this passage is that it is not a joke, is 
not told as one, and is not actually funny. Which, of course, makes it 
absolutely hilarious. And makes it many, many other things.


The laws of physics in the 22verse are comic ones. But not as we had ever 
known them before. He stretched the boundaries of the world’s oldest and most 
popular narrative form – the joke. And nothing could have been better designed 
to treat that particular American contribution to that particular war. It’s a 
masterpiece. The definitive American 20th century text. There are other 
contenders, of course, but they can quite evidently go take a flying fuck at a 
rolling doughnut.


I think that’s the longest and sweariest direct quotation I’ve ever put up on 
the Reading Group. But like one of Heller’s slowly unwinding and rewinding 
jokes, it’s impossible to paraphrase.


TOOmanyWilsons even later apologised for its length. But as Catch-22 readers 
know, we should always be wary of anyone complaining about anything being 
“prolix”. And, as the always brilliant NatashaFatale pointed out when 
TOOmanyWilsons had his moment of doubt and shame: “How could you have explored 
the idea that some books work by going on too long without going on too long?”


Since I’ve posted such a huge comment, I don’t think I can indulge another of 
similar length. I do, however urge you to click through to this series of real 
life Catch-22 stories from the abovementioned NatashaFatale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/16/catch-22s-crazy-style-reflects-the-madness-of-war#comment-81345284>
. A sample:


A guy I worked for over the summer called Henry. Joined the Army Air Corps 
with ambitions to become a pilot, aced every test, highest rating in his class 
at flight school. Was a few days away from leaving for Europe when he 
accidentally spent some time talking to a veteran pilot who had come to deliver 
a pep talk to the class while pretending to tell them “what it was really 
like.” He kind of did tell them, but by accident: his hands shook so much his 
coffee slopped everywhere and sometimes the facial tics got so bad he had to 
pause. Henry had a moment of clarity. On his final training flight he buzzed 
the tower in his B-17 and washed out: he’d taken an insane risk with a valuable 
aircraft! He was a disgrace and unfit to lead men into combat! He was punished 
by serving out the war as a mechanic. Twenty-some years later he still enjoyed 
reliving his deep and abiding shame.

Elsewhere, I’ve really enjoyed all the posts of favourite zingers from the 
novel. If I started posting those here, this article would go even further over 
length. But feel free to post your own favourites below the line here, along 
with any more ideas and theories about this glorious novel. Before we get 
there, one more reader’s commentfrom max867 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/09/reading-group-catch-22-by-joseph-heller#comment-81021923>
, which sums up the joy of Heller’s achievement:


I went to see Heller in 1980. Well, I was a university student, and I expected 
him to give an intellectual analysis of the book, or life, or something. What 
he actually did was read several extracts from Catch-22, laughing happily at 
his own jokes. I left feeling disappointed. Now I look back and think, if I’d 
written something as good as Catch-22, I’d spend my time enjoying it, too.

So would I. 

 