
There’s no magic to it. I rise at dawn to answer the correspondence of my 
grateful fans, then it’s 1,000 words long-hand daily, including Christmas and 
birthdays, a trek with the dogs over the Downs, a simple three-course dinner 
brought to my study door while I edit, then to bed, exhausted by my sheer 
creativity. With my old platinumGraf von Faber-Castell 
<http://www.graf-von-faber-castell.co.uk/> and a ream of cream archival, I can 
work anywhere: the green room at Hay, poolside at the Colombe d’Or. One has to 
in this business. It’s a vagabond life.

If this were true I’d hate me too. Pinning down one of my real-life writing 
days is trickier. Ignore the 20 weeks a year taken up with clashing school 
holidays; imagine that the endless hiccups of family life, the ceaseless 
mending, buying, exchanging, meeting, delivering and, most outrageously of all, 
feeding, that one’s dependents require, have been dealt with by employees of 
the Society of Authors, at night. And let’s exclude all the other work: 
teaching creative writing, or privately mentoring new novelists; writing 
introductions or articles; events. Say we’re face to face with that miracle: a 
clear day.

I long for writing time, pine without it, and now I have it: until three 
o’clock.

And so the self-sabotage begins.

Salad days: how author Charlotte Mendelson transformed her patio into a garden 
larder
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/17/charlotte-mendelson-edible-garden>
It’s ridiculous. Obstetricians don’t pause, mid-breech, to check their Twitter 
notifications; bricklayers can’t demolish their wall-in-progress and start 
again. For 20 years I had a real job I was good at: fixing other people’s 
novels. Now, however, that I work alone, making up stories, I am locked in a 
battle between self-doubt and self-discipline, and the former usually wins. I 
have the concentration of... oh, I like your shoes. It is so much easier to 
plummet down the sinkhole of Twitter, or clean the front door with baby wipes, 
or update one’s log of Terrible Comments Made At Readings, or potter in the 
garden during the busy season (Feb-Oct), than to sit at one’s desk in front of 
Draft 18/b, trying to scale the wall of self-loathing, certain that this novel 
is doomed.

The solution is to get out.

Some writers like cafes: the loving waiters included in their 
acknowledgements; the flapjacks. But I always sit by the loud idiot. Besides, 
my back is, even by writer standards, bad, and unsuited to distressed metal 
furniture. Where else is there? My criteria are modest: excellent 
people-watching; good seating; quiet without privacy. The answer, thank the 
sweet Lord, is theBritish Library 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/british-library>.

The BL is an idyll for chatty introverts: enough familiar faces to keep one 
from utter loneliness, yet absolute solitude for as long as one can stay at 
one’s desk. And I can stay there, because they let me use an office chair, and 
I stretch regularly, left, right, left. There are always coughers and sniffers, 
odd regulars – Stompy Woman, Man Who Coughs Like a Sea Lion – but the 
prevailing atmosphere is of industrious near-quiet, and one is too visible to 
sleep or weep or pick one’s split ends for long.

Because I own a neolithic Nokia, and have downloaded Freedom 
<https://freedom.to/> on my sexy MacBook, internet access is tricky. The 
diversions are finite: friendly security guards, tiny paper cones to fill with 
drinking water, experiments with overcaffeination, a range of routes to one’s 
locker for squares of extremely dark chocolate, or, my own peculiar fetish, 
wooden coffee-stirrers which I chew for concentration, carefully gathering the 
soggy splinters from my desk before leaving.

And then, in the brief intervals, when I’ve remembered my characters’ crises, 
and the sheer cliff face before me feels attackable, I consult my weird 
hand-drawn maps and timetables and, secure in the certainty that I won’t be 
interrupted, I can, occasionally, briefly, float into the novel and, Hosanna, 
write.

How much? Oh, who cares? The point, the bit I live for, is the rare moment of 
satisfaction when a smell or a quality of sadness comes into perfect verbal 
focus. That’s how my family know the day has gone well: I have a lightness 
which comes from the absence of panic, the knowledge that, for once, I did what 
I’m best at doing. I wrote.

• Charlotte Mendelson's Rhapsody in Green is published by Kyle. To order for 
£12.99 (RRP £16.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/rhapsody-in-green.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 