
The federal government should move to make books cheaper in the next year and 
save Australians about $25m annually, the Productivity Commission believes, but 
the move is fiercely resisted by authors and some publishers who say it will 
mean fewer Australian titles will be available.

The recommendation to repeal parallel import restrictions – made for the 
eighth time – is part of its latest report to government on intellectual 
property arrangements, made public on Tuesday.

Australian booksellers cannot buy stock from lower-priced suppliers overseas, 
which means they are at a competitive disadvantage.

Australians who cannot buy books online also end up paying higher prices, the 
commission says.

Be under no illusion: Malcolm Turnbull wants to destroy Australian literature 
| Richard Flanagan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/19/be-under-no-illusion-malcolm-turnbull-wants-to-destroy-australian-literature-election-richard-flanagan>
“No fewer than eight past reviews, including by the commission, and most 
recently by the Harper competition policy review, have recommended that 
prohibitions on parallel imports be repealed,” it said.

Responding to what the commission described as “false claims”, it compared 
more than 1,000 like-for-like titles sold in the UK and Australia, as well as 
400 sold in Australia and the US.

“Over three-quarters of the books in the sample were more expensive in 
Australia than the UK, with Australian prices around 20% higher,” it found.

“Under reasonable assumptions regarding discounting and freight costs, the 
commission estimates the benefits to Australians from repealing the 
restrictions could be around $25m per year.”

The commission rejected arguments from the publishing industry that changes 
would result in the demise of local publishing and harm authors, describing 
them as unconvincing.

“No new evidence was presented in this inquiry that overturns the existing 
case for removing the restrictions,” it said.

The federal government supports the repeal of the restrictions on the back of 
the previous Harper review, but Labor plans to oppose the changes to the 
Copyright Act.

The Australian author Richard Flanagan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/richard-flanagan> described the report as 
predictable, and as a 1980s ideology in search of a victim.

Flooding Australia with imported books would be an assault on our literary 
culture | Michael Heyward
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/10/flooding-australia-with-imported-books-would-be-an-assault-on-our-literary-culture>
“The Productivity Commission is like a deranged hairdresser insisting their 
client wears a mullet wig,” he said.

“At this time of economic difficulty I hope the government rejects the report 
and seeks to help the book industry, its 20,000 strong workforce, and the 
creators who bring Australia global goodwill, pay taxes, and effectively 
receive no direct taxpayer subsidy.”

His view was shared by the author Thomas Keneally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/thomas-keneally>, who urged his “old friend” 
the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, to make it a bipartisan matter.

“Comparison with New Zealand, which has done away with [parallel import 
restrictions], shows the book prices there are no cheaper,” he said. “But the 
range, oh the range! It is gone.”

President of the Australian Publishers Association, Louise Adler, accused the 
commission of ignoring more than 400 expert submissions in response to its 
draft report.

“These proposals risk Australia’s ability to publish great Australian stories 
by the next generation of talent,” she said.

“Imagine an Australian childhood without books like Diary of a Wombat, Possum 
Magic, the Treehouse series, or great Australian writing like Cloudstreet and 
True History of the Kelly Gang.”
 