
Chelsea Manning <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chelsea-manning> has 
formally appealed against her conviction and 35-year prison sentence for 
leaking a huge cache of government documents, arguing that her punishment was 
“grossly unfair and unprecedented”.


Describing the sentence as “perhaps the most unjust sentence in the history of 
the military justice system”, attorneys for Manning complained that she had 
been portrayed as a traitor to the US when “nothing could be further from the 
truth”.

“No whistleblower in American history has been sentenced this harshly,” states 
the appeal 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/documentcloud/index.html?docid=2840044-Manning-Filed-Brief>
, which also alleges that Manning was excessively charged and illegally held 
while awaiting trial in conditions amounting to solitary confinement. It 
suggests that her sentence be reduced to 10 years.

Chelsea Manning appeal 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/documentcloud/index.html?docid=2840044-Manning-Filed-Brief>
The appeal sharply contrasts the government’s punishment of Manning with the 
two years probation given to David Petraeus, the retired military commander and 
CIA director, whoadmitted giving classified information to his biographer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/03/david-petraeus-pleads-guilty-classified-information-paula-broadwell>
, with whom he was having an extramarital affair. While Manning was a 
whistleblower, Petraeus “apparently disclosed the materials for sex”, say 
Manning’s attorneys.

Manning, a 28-year-old former US army private, was convicted in 2013 of 
multiple crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/21/bradley-manning-35-years-prison-wikileaks-sentence>
 for passing an estimated 700,000 documents to WikiLeaks, the anti-secrecy 
group. The cache included diplomatic cables and reports on the wars in Iraq and 
Afghanistan.


Attorneys for Manning filed the appeal documents on Wednesday to the US army 
court of criminal appeals at Fort Belvoir, Virginia. The documents were made 
public on Thursday after being reviewed by officials for possible redaction of 
classified material. Manning, a transgender woman previously known as Bradley, 
is serving her sentence at the Fort Leavenworth military base in Kansas.


“Manning disclosed the materials because under the circumstances she thought 
it was the right thing to do,” said the appeal brief. “She believed the public 
had a right to know about the toll of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, the 
loss of life, and the extent to which the government sought to hide 
embarrassing information of its wrongdoing.”

Manning’s appeal said her sentence was unfairly inflated by the military 
judge’s misreading of relevant laws and by “overzealous” prosecutors deciding 
to charge her with more severe crimes than the mishandling of classified 
information, to which she admitted.

She was initially charged with “stealing or converting databases”, despite the 
original records remaining intact. “But stealing or converting photocopies of 
documents within a filing cabinet is not the same as stealing the filing 
cabinet itself,” Manning’s attorneys argued. The government later amended these 
charges but only after each side had presented its case.

The appeal also claimed the sentence also did not take into account the time 
she served in “deplorable and inhumane conditions” of confinement before her 
trial, which are described as unconstitutional and sufficient grounds for 
dismissing the charges altogether.

Manning’s attorneys requested that she be credited 10 days of time served for 
every day she spent in these “outrageous and completely unjustified” pretrial 
conditions, which would effectively wipe out seven years of the total sentence.

The appeal urged authorities to consider the context of Manning suffering from 
mental health problems and stress, which it blames on her inability to live 
openly as a transgender woman in theUS military 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military>. “The government’s litigation 
strategy was to ignore all of this, and to instead make an example of her,” it 
said.

When will the US government stop persecuting whistleblowers? | Chelsea Manning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/18/government-persecuting-whistleblowers-insider-threat-chelsea-manning>
In a simultaneously filed brief supporting Manning’s appeal, the American 
Civil Liberties Union said the Espionage Act used to convict Manning was 
“unconstitutionally vague” because it “allows the government to subject 
speakers and messages it dislikes to discriminatory prosecution”.


The ACLU said Manning’s prosecution was separately unconstitutional because 
the military judge overseeing the trial barred Manning from asserting any 
defense on the basis that the information she disclosed was in the public 
interest.


“A war against whistleblowers is being waged in this country and this case 
represents how this country treats anyone who reveals even a single page of 
classified information,” Nancy Hollander, one of Manning’s attorneys, said in a 
statement. “We need brave individuals to hold the government accountable for 
its actions at home and abroad and we call upon this court to overturn the 
dangerous precedent of Chelsea Manning’s excessive sentencing.”

In another brief backing Manning, the Open Society Justice Initiative (OSJI) 
said her “overall motive was to advance the public interest” and “the public 
interest value of some of the disclosures justifies mitigation of the sentence”.


In support of this argument, the brief quoted the Guardian’s former 
investigations editor David Leigh and John Kerry, now the US secretary of 
state, who as chairman of the Senate foreign relations committee said that 
disclosures within the Afghan war logs leaked by Manning “raise serious 
questions about the reality of America’s policy toward Pakistan and 
Afghanistan”.


The OSJI brief also argued that Manning’s sentence was “far higher than the 
penalties that our closest allies would consider proportionate”. The brief 
featured a survey of 30 such countries that pointed to a maximum 14-year 
sentence in Canada as the next stiffest penalty for a comparable conviction.

 