
Archaeologists have found the remains of an ancient imperial palace near the 
tomb of emperor Qin Shi Huang, home of the famous terracotta army, China's 
state media reported on Sunday.

The palace is the largest complex 
<http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/747660.shtml> discovered so far in the 
emperor's sprawling 22 square-mile (56 square-km) second-century BC mausoleum, 
which lies on the outskirts of Xi'an, an ancient capital city in central China, 
an associate researcher at the Shaanxi provincial institute of archaeology told 
China's official news wire Xinhua.

It is an estimated 690 metres long and 250 metres wide 
<http://usa.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2012-12/02/content_15977653.htm> – about a 
quarter of the size of the Forbidden City in Beijing – and includes 18 
courtyard-style houses with one main building at the centre, according to the 
researcher, Sun Weigang.

Sun called the palace a clear predecessor to the Forbidden City, which was 
occupied by emperors during the later Ming and Qing dynasties. Both were built 
on north-south axes in keeping with traditional Chinese cosmology.

Despite wars soon after Qin Shi Huang's death – and more than 2,000 years of 
exposure – the foundations are well preserved. Archaeologists have found walls, 
gates, stone roads, pottery sherds and some brickwork, according to Xinhua.

They have been excavating the foundations since 2010. Qin's tomb is guarded by 
an estimated 6,000 life-sized terracotta warriors, including remarkably 
well-preserved cavalrymen, chariots and horses, each one unique. They were 
first discovered in 1974 by workers digging a well. About 2,000 have been 
excavated; 110 of them were unearthed this summer.

The United Nations educational, scientific and cultural organisation (Unesco) 
declared the army a world heritage site in 1987.

Qin began designing the palace for his afterlife shortly after he became king 
of the Qin state, aged 13. The complex took 700,000 workers about 40 years to 
build and was completed two years after his death.

According to writings by the Han dynasty scholar Sima Qian, Qin Shi Huang's 
tomb <http://www.china.org.cn/english/culture/229549.htm> is 120 metres high, 
sealed off by a vermilion stone wall, surrounded by rivers of mercury and 
protected by booby traps. It has not been excavated for fear of damaging the 
potentially priceless artefacts inside.

Chinese historians portray Qin as a great unifier, who conquered six states 
and established an expansive feudal kingdom with a united currency and writing 
system. He is also known as a ruthless leader who burned books, buried 
opponents alive and castrated prisoners of war.
 