
Despite clocking up more than 1,000 flights during his time as president, 
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> still lopes up 
Air Force One’s steps with his trademark bounce, exchanging banter in the back 
of the plane with a handful of accompanying journalists and working the 
ropeline of well-wishers with the casual charm that helped first get him 
elected.

A rare chance to spend 24 hours reporting from inside the presidential bubble 
as he criss-crossed New England on the campaign trail last week also reveals a 
politician who is at times a shadow of the messianic figure that electrified US 
voters in 2008. With just three days to go until midterm elections that could 
cost his party control of the Senate, the commander-in-chief has been exiled to 
places where his plummeting approval ratings can do no harm.

Rather than risk damaging the chances of moderate Democrats in key swing 
states, this increasingly polarising president is instead on the stump in less 
high-profile places, such as Portland, Maine, and Providence, Rhode Island, 
where the runways are too short for the full-size presidential plane and 
require Obama to fly on the scaled down version.

On board the “baby AF1”, Obama’s aides deny rumours that he is frustrated to 
be campaigning almost exclusively for state governors rather than the US 
senators whose fate will determine the course of his last two years in 
Washington. “The view that is shared I think by everybody at the White House is 
that we want to do everything that we can to support candidates up and down the 
ballot,” press secretary Josh Earnest tells me when I ask if the president 
misses being in the thick of things. “There are a variety of ways in which the 
president himself and his broader campaign team, including those outside the 
White House, can assist other candidates,” he explains.

Obama’s own behaviour during the two-day trip makes it hard to avoid the 
suspicion that his heart is not entirely in it any more. On the return leg from 
Providence to Washington, the president strolls to the back of the plane to 
chat with reporters, not about the election or his recent speeches, but to ask 
for a favour. Despite there being just four crucial days before the election to 
hone his political message in the national news media, Obama wants to know if 
the reporters will let his press secretary skip their scheduled daily briefing, 
saying it is Halloween and Earnest “deserves a rest”.

I joke that the press secretary should instead be made to come back in fancy 
dress in that case, but Obama laughs it off and offers reporters chocolate 
cake, handshakes and chat in lieu of the promised “gaggle”.

To his admirers, such incidents confirm the relaxed, “no drama” Obama who 
perhaps realises the futility of another soundbite at this late stage in an 
ailing campaign, but for many disillusioned Democrats they also suggest a 
politician less than willing to go the extra mile any more.

On stage, there is a similar weariness on display even in the stump speech. 
“I’m not on the ballot this time and this is the last election cycle in which 
I’m involved as president,” Obama tells a rally of 3,000 party supporters in 
Portland. “Look, it makes you a little wistful, because I do like campaigning; 
it’s fun.”

The contrast between the reality of a president fast heading for lame-duck 
status and his lingering trappings of power is particularly stark on the road, 
where even a scaled down Air Force One comes with an entourage unmatched by 
most heads of state.

Twenty-two separate vehicles form the motorcade that ferries Obama between the 
various campaign stops in Maine and Rhode Island. Even in these relatively 
sparsely populated communities, hundreds of local residents line the closed-off 
roads, holding their smartphones aloft in mute salute to the passing president. 
Such scenes cause a stir in downtown Washington, but among the quiet wooded 
lanes of Maine, this snaking convoy has the feel of an alien invasion.

Nevertheless, there is nothing like the logistical resources of the world’s 
remaining superpower for giving politicians an efficient means to traverse a 
big country. From his Oval Office desk, via the helicopter that whisks him from 
the south lawn of the White House to Andrews air force base, Obama can be 
airborne on Air Force One within a matter of minutes. Wherever he lands, one of 
several eight-ton armoured cars, each known as The Beast, will have been flown 
in separately by cargo plane to speed him to his final destination.

With the town of Providence at a standstill, the presidential motorcade easily 
slices though the prearranged schedule for an impromptu drop-in at a well-known 
local diner, so Obama can personally buy lunch and some of the chocolate cake 
that later gets used to bribe the press pool.

His staff like to refer to such moments as the “bear going on the loose”, 
revelling in the photo-opportunities that surprise encounters with members of 
the public can throw up, but the reality is these choreographed episodes are 
highly stylised, rarely straying outside a few brief exchanges of pleasantries 
with the other customers.

Less visible are the fundraising opportunities that have been such a major 
feature of Obama’s 2014 campaign schedule. On this trip, the president hosts a 
reception at the beautiful woodland home of Bob Monks, the wealthy son of a 
former Republican Senate candidate of the same name.

Tickets for the 25 invited donors start at $16,200, but the press is kept 
firmly at bay, waiting in a neighbour’s living room while the Secret Service 
guards prowl the perimeter of the large estate in Cape Elizabeth, Maine.

According to CBS reporter and informal White House statistician Mark Knoller, 
Obama’s 1,070 flights on Air Force One, many to events such as this as well as 
other more formal business, are fast catching up with George W Bush’s total of 
1,675.

These secretive fundraisers, typically held in some of the most stunning 
residential properties in America, have become a mainstay of the president’s 
campaign efforts this year – his way of offering something to help the 
vulnerable Senate candidates who cannot afford to be seen alongside him at 
rallies but are in desperate need of cash for television advertising.

Yet hints of the old Obama remain. During his gubernatorial rally in Maine, 
Mike Michaud – a former mill-worker who would become America’s first openly gay 
elected governor, if successful on Tuesday – the president’s speechwriters 
drift toward the catchphrases of his own election campaign: hope, change, 
progress.

“Hope is a better choice,” Obama tells the audience. “Hope is what gives those 
soldiers in world war two the courage to storm a beach. Hope is what allows 
young people to march on behalf of women’s rights, and workers’ rights, and 
civil rights, and voting rights, and gay rights, and immigration rights.”

And there are grounds for hope. Last year’s bugbears – Obamacare, the 
lacklustre economy – appear increasingly tamed. This year’s challenges – Ebola, 
Islamic State – may ultimately show the president’s soundness of judgment. 
There is a chance that the Democrats may not lose as heavily as the polls 
suggest this week.

Obama continues on the theme, sounding almost as if he may be speaking partly 
to himself: “Don’t buy into that cynicism. Cynicism didn’t put a man on the 
moon. Cynicism has never ended a war, or cured disease, or built a business, or 
taught a young mind. Cynicism is a choice that you make. And it’s being fed to 
you all the time. Don’t accept it.”

UP FOR GRABS

The US midterm elections matter: at stake is control of Congress, the body 
that writes legislation and holds the budget of the global superpower. While 
the Republicans are predicted to hold on to their majority in the House of 
Representatives, the upper house, the Senate, is very much up for grabs. The 
Democrats have a 55-45 majority in the Senate, but all pollsters agree that 
they will lose seats. Most expect the Republicans to gain a narrow majority. To 
secure a majority the Republicans need to pick up six seats: 33 Senate seats 
are up for election in the normal way. Seats that polls predict Democrats will 
lose include Montana, West Virginia, South Dakota, Arkansas and Louisiana.

In addition, the elections will see 36 of 50 state governorships and thousands 
of local offices contested.
 