
I Love Dick is an account of lived events that occurred between 3 December 
1994 and 19 September 1995. Everything that happens in it happened first in 
life, but that doesn’t mean that it’s a memoir. I didn’t set out to write a 
book, but when I realised that the hundreds of single-spaced pages addressed to 
Dick ___ during those months might actually be research material, I conceived 
the novel as aconte <http://www.britannica.com/art/conte>, a narrative, a 
cautionary tale or fable.

I Love Dick: the book about relationships everyone should read
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/02/i-love-dick-sex-chris-kraus-men-women-book>
The novel opens at the onset of an irrational obsession that will become its 
story, when “Chris Kraus, a 39-year-old experimental film-maker and Sylvère 
Lotringer, a 56-year-old college professor from New York, have dinner with Dick 
___, a friendly acquaintance of Sylvère’s, at a sushi bar in Pasadena.” After a 
drunken and flirtatious evening, the pair, who are conjoined more by 
intellectual companionship than by traditional bonds of marriage, parse every 
detail of the brief encounter. Chris thinks Dick was flirting with her. The 
dean of a cultural studies program at a California art school, Dick, an expat 
Brit, has the demeanour of the “mean horse-faced junkies” she dated in her 20s. 
Sylvère contends she’s really flirting with rejection. An orgy of 
interpretation reanimates their marriage and Dick becomes their silent partner. 
To amuse themselves, they write letters to him that they don’t intend to send. 
In the ensuing weeks, they pack up their temporary sabbatical home in 
Crestline, California, Sylvère leaves for Europe for the holidays, and Chris 
drives across the US alone with their belongings. Throughout this time, they 
continue writing letters. During the next six weeks, they compose 180 pages 
that they hesitantly present to Dick over breakfast at an Antelope Valley 
diner. Dick says: “I’m gobstruck.”

By the end of the book, Chris will sleep with Dick once or twice and he’ll 
reject her. She’ll leave Sylvère to spend the winter in the southern 
Adirondacks writing letters to Dick __ that now take the form of essays. Having 
spent the first two decades of her adult life as a minimally participant 
observer in the art world, she finds she has a lot to talk about. Using the 
ever-silent Dick as her addressee and ‘perfect reader,’ she finally has someone 
besides Sylvère who’ll listen. She writes to Dick about entropic rural poverty, 
the Guatemalan civil wars, dead friends, her childhood in New Zealand and the 
unspoken rules that regulate success and failure in the art world. She writes 
to Dick about her girlhood heroes, outsider and female artists who were either 
marginalised or silenced.

I wrote the book in 1997. Sylvère and I were then, and remain, co-editors at 
the independent press Semiotexte. When we decided to publish I Love Dick in our 
Native Agents fiction series, we received a Cease and Desist letter from Dick 
__’s lawyer. I found this very strange. Beyond his first name, Dick __ was not 
identified within the narrative. I’d changed the titles of his books, his 
physical appearance and personal history, and did not refer to any facts about 
his life that weren’t already published. I called Dick up and asked if he’d 
like to write an introduction. Nothing in the book was aimed against him: it 
could be presented as a joke that we’d cooked up together. He declined. When an 
ex-student of Sylvère’s wrote a New York magazine piece about the publication, 
Dick ___ identified himself to comment. He described the book – or, as I called 
it then, the “project” – as a “beneath contempt … a despicable enterprise”, and 
drew an analogy between himself and Princess Diana.

When I Love Dick appeared in November 1997, it was received mostly with 
derision: “A book not so much written as secreted,” as the reviewer for 
Artforum noted. Others defended it. I failed to see what people found so 
controversial. As the late Kathy Acker remarked about a 1975 performance with 
the elderly cabaret artist Lil Picard that entailed audience members spitting 
liquids into her vagina: “Really, there are worse atrocities.”

When Hedi El Kholti decided to re-release the book with Semiotexte in 2006, it 
enjoyed a much more welcoming reception. The world had changed.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>, by then, had utterly rejected 
the unspoken rule of feminine discretion. In a milieu of female blogs and 
third-wave feminism, I Love Dick was seen as prescient.

Almost invariably, reviewers praise the book for its embrace of “feminine 
abjection”, although I see it more as comedy. The years that I spent living and 
then writing I Love Dick were exhilarating. They laid the groundwork for all my 
future writing.

Extract


December 3, 1994

Chris Kraus, a 39-year-old experimental filmmaker and Sylvère Lotringer, a 
56-year- old college professor from New York, have dinner with Dick ___, a 
friendly acquaintance of Sylvère’s, at a sushi bar in Pasadena. Dick is an 
English cultural critic who’s recently relocated from Melbourne to Los Angeles. 
Chris and Sylvère have spent Sylvère’s sabbatical at a cabin in Crestline, a 
small town in the San Bernardino Mountains some 90 minutes from Los Angeles. 
Since Sylvère begins teaching again in January, they will soon be returning to 
New York. Over dinner the two men discuss recent trends in postmodern critical 
theory and Chris, who is no intellectual, notices Dick making continual eye 
contact with her. Dick’s attention makes her feel powerful, and when the check 
comes she takes out her Diners Club card. “Please,” she says. “Let me pay.” The 
radio predicts snow on the San Bernardino highway. Dick generously invites them 
both to spend the night at his home in the Antelope Valley desert, some 30 
miles away.

Chris wants to separate herself from her coupleness, so she sells Sylvère on 
the thrill of riding in Dick’s magnificent vintage Thunderbird convertible. 
Sylvère, who doesn’t know a T-bird from a hummingbird and doesn’t care, agrees, 
bemused. Done. Dick gives her copious, concerned directions. “Don’t worry,” she 
interrupts, flashing hair and smiles, “I’ll tail you”. And she does. Slightly 
buzzed and keeping the accelerator of her pickup truck steady, she’s reminded 
of a performance she did called Car Chase at the St Mark’s Poetry Project in 
New York when she was 23. She and her friend Liza Martin had tailed the 
steelily good-looking driver of a Porsche all the way through Connecticut on 
Highway 95. Finally he’d pulled over to a rest stop, but when Liza and Chris 
got out he drove off. The performance ended with Liza accidentally-but-really 
stabbing Chris’s hand onstage with a kitchen knife. Blood flowed, and everyone 
found Liza dazzlingly sexy and dangerous and beautiful. Liza, belly popping out 
of a fuzzy midriff top, fishnet legs tearing up against her green vinyl 
miniskirt as she rocked back to show her crotch, looked like the cheapest kind 
of whore. A star is born. No one at the show that night had found Chris’s pale 
anemic looks and piercing gaze remotely endearing. Could anyone? It was a 
question that’d temporarily been shelved. But now it was a whole new world. The 
request line on 92.3 The Beat was thumping, Post-Riot Los Angeles, a city 
strung on fiber-optic nerves. Dick’s Thunderbird was always somewhere in her 
line of sight, the two vehicles strung invisibly together across the concrete 
riverbed of highway, like John Donne’s eyeballs. And this time Chris was alone.

More about I Love Dick

I Love Dick is a joyful riposte to all those stories in which clever women 
fall victim to the pressures of convention – fromThe Yellow Wallpaper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jan/18/yellow-wallpaper-charlotte-perkins-gilman>
 to The Bell Jar and beyond – and also to the countless books by men in which 
women are crushed by romantic encounters: from Madame Bovary to Anna Karenina 
to Laclos’s epistolatory Les Liaisons Dangereuses and André Breton’s 
autofiction,Nadja 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/273219/>. Equally 
earnest and flip, ILD balances its narrator’s yearning with the surprising 
empowerment the performance of her abjection brings. By giving the tragic 
heroine an absurd edge, Kraus is able to tackle some serious stuff. –Joanna 
Walsh
Read the full review. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/11/i-love-dick-chris-kraus-review>


Buy the book

I Love Dick is published by Serpent’s Tail for £7.99 and is available from the 
Guardian Bookshop for £6.39 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/400571/>.
 