
There is no doubt master blaster Chris Lynn can play Twenty20 cricket.

But Brisbane Heat coach Dan Vettori says Lynn should be considered for all 
formats including Tests and not pigeonholed as a simple slogger.

Lynn appears set to play in Australia’s three-game T20 series against Sri 
Lanka in February after moreBig Bash League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/big-bash-league> heroics for Brisbane.

Nic Maddinson dropped as Australia recall Agar and O'Keefe for SCG Test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/30/nic-maddinson-dropped-as-australia-recall-agar-and-okeefe-for-scg-test>
Lynn thrashed 84 not out to help the undefeated ladder leaders seal a 
seven-wicket win over Hobart with 22 balls to spare at a sold out Gabba on 
Friday night.

Lynn’s 50-ball knock featured four fours and seven sixes, including a 121m 
wonder-strike that sailed out of the Gabba.

Perhaps the only one not gobsmacked by Lynn’s towering six was Vettori.

The former Kiwi captain was more interested in Lynn’s less obvious attributes 
that he believed put his charge in the national frame across all formats.

“You become immune to it because you see his quality of striking all the 
time,” Vettori said of the mighty six off Shaun Tait’s first ball.

“Where he has excelled over the last couple of years is that he has a really 
strong gameplan.

“I don’t think people give him enough credit .

“His understanding and intelligence about the game is the reason he is doing 
so well.”

Vettori said it would be selling Lynn short to label him a T20 specialist.

“His record speaks for itself in all formats,” he said.

“He is an aggressive player but he is also highly skilful and a very 
thoughtful player.

“That’s the combination of things you want in any format.”

Lynn has 2,708 first class runs at 44.39 for Queensland.

But he hasn’t played a Sheffield Shield game this season since returning from 
a third shoulder injury in as many years.

Not that Lynn had to be reminded.

“I haven’t played a Shield game,” Lynn said.

“Obviously the (Test) ambition is there but it is hard to put a name in front 
of selectors when I haven’t hit a red ball for close to 12 months now.

“I’d like to get a full season out the way, get the shoulder right and then we 
will see what happens.”

Lynn is now averaging 198 at a strike rate of 167.80 after back to back 
match-winning BBL knocks.

On Wednesday night, Lynn struck an unbeaten 85 to steer Brisbane to a dramatic 
three wicket win over hosts Sydney Thunder.

On Friday night, Lynn - who was dropped on four - ensured Brisbane reeled in 
Hobart’s 9-173 by the 17th over with a whirlwind second wicket stand with 
captain Brendon McCullum (72 off 35 balls).

The pair belted 109 runs off 53 balls.

Lynn completed the run chase with two straight sixes but the talking point was 
that maximum off an unsuspecting Tait.

“When blokes like Taity are bowling that quick it’s either ’I have to get them 
or they get me’ - that’s my theory,” Lynn said.



 