
Chris Lynn has been handed a licence to thrill by Australian skipper Steve 
Smith as the BBL sensation aims to transfer his sizzling domestic form to the 
international stage.


Lynn and Billy Stanlake have been named to make their ODI debuts in Friday’s 
series-opening clash against Pakistan at the Gabba.


Related: Digital illusion: the mystery of Josh Hazlewood's missing finger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2017/jan/11/digital-illusion-the-mystery-of-josh-hazlewoods-missing-finger>

Lynn, who has smashed 309 runs in five games for the Brisbane Heat this 
summer, has overcame a bulging disc in his neck to take his place in the team 
and will bat at number four.


Smith admitted the 26-year-old was a bit “stiff and sore” but ready to go, and 
has been told not to change his game.


“He’s got a licence to play the way he wants to play,” Smith said. “Fifty 
overs is a long time, you’ve got to be smart in the way you play. But he’s got 
some freedom to go out and play nice and positively.

“He’s a big, strong fella and he hits the ball a long way. If it’s in his 
wheelhouse he might as well hit it for six. He does it pretty well here at the 
Gabba.”

Smith said Lynn needed an injection last week to deal with his neck injury but 
had responded well to treatment.


Smith himself is also battling a minor side strain which he suffered when he 
took a hit from Mitchell Starc in the nets in the lead-up to the Gabba Test. He 
said it wasn’t a concern.

Usman Khawaja and Adam Zampa were left out of the squad, but allrounder Glenn 
Maxwell is back for his first ODI since mid-last year.


Maxwell was fined last month by Australian team leaders and criticised by 
Smith as “very disrespectful” for he comments made about Matthew Wade’s 
decision to bat head of him for Victoria in the Sheffield Shield.


However, the 28-year-old now finds himself with a golden opportunity to 
impress selectors ahead of next month’s Test tour of India.


Smith said it was a tough call to leave out Khawaja, with Travis Head to open 
the batting alongside David Warner.


Stanlake will become the tallest cricketer at 204cm to play for Australia, 
forming an imposing pace battery with Starc and Pat Cummins.


Australia: David Warner, Travis Head, Steve Smith (c), Chris Lynn, Mitchell 
Marsh, Glenn Maxwell, Matthew Wade, James Faulkner, Pat Cummins, Mitchell 
Starc, Billy Stanlake.
 