
I’ve published nine books and all nine experiences have been unique. Yet there 
are two questions you get asked every single time, over and over again (by 
journalists, but also by normal people).


 The first question is always: “How did you come up with this idea?” My most 
honest answer would be to admit that I don’t know, or that I can’t remember, or 
that I do remember but I don’t want to say. But because this (totally 
reasonable) question is asked so persistently, I inevitably manufacture a 
semi-cogent response that feels halfway plausible, and I repeat that response 
until it feels like the true answer. I suppose it’s possible that this rote 
reply is the true answer, and that I simply needed to work through the inquiry 
25 times before realising this was the case. For example: whenever people ask 
me how I came up with the idea behind But What If We’re Wrong? I almost always 
mention watching a specific TV series (Cosmos) while simultaneously reading 
about the life of a specific author (Herman Melville).

Now, those two synchronised events did occur, and they seem like a plausible 
genesis for a workable idea. But part of me suspects I’d actually been thinking 
about the concept of collective wrongness unconsciously for 30 years, and that 
this serendipitous moment was just the first time I decided to write a book 
about it. Maybe what I classify as the inception of the idea is actually the 
conclusion to that idea. Either way, it doesn’t matter. I don’t think most 
people who pose this question are particularly interested in the answer. It 
just seems like the proper thing to ask someone who’s written a book.

 The second question is (to me) more fascinating, even though it seems far 
simpler: “How long did it take you to write this?” It’s a query that raises a 
lot of ancillary questions about the entire process. Am I writing if I’m just 
thinking about writing, or is writing only the mechanical typing? Does 
stoically staring at a blank computer screen for two hours while drinking 
Mountain Dew count as creativity? If I come up with the vague idea for a novel 
in 1996 but don’t write a word until autumn 2016, did the novel take 20 years 
or six months?

 I never know when the writing starts.

 This is further complicated by the fact that it often feels like my books are 
still being written even after they’ve been released into the public and can no 
longer be altered. I recognise this makes no sense. When a book is physically 
assembled and made available in bookstores, it should be finished. The text is 
trapped under ice. Everything should be over. But in my experience, that is 
never the case. Once I’ve published a book, I’m asked an avalanche of questions 
about what certain passages suggest, or what my motives were, or if my work is 
autobiographical or metaphorical or was composed while on drugs. This is 
amplified by other people who write about my books and assert what they believe 
to be true about what I’ve published, and then I’m asked to respond to those 
arbitrary assertions. Obviously, these post-publication thoughts don’t change 
what is typeset on the page. But to people who read these auxiliary sentiments 
before they read the book itself – and even to those readers who don’t 
encounter these sentiments until after they’ve finished – the book is 
contextually changed. Not a lot, but a little. Even if they disagree with 
what’s being alleged, they can’t un-know that this intellectual position 
exists. So it always feel like I’m writing all my books in perpetuity, every 
time someone asks me a question about anything I’ve written in the past. If I 
were smarter, I’d live as a recluse. But I can’t do it.

 I once saw a Black Sabbath promotional poster from the 1970s that declared: 
“More good reviews than most. More bad reviews than all.” I relate to this. I’m 
shocked by how often my books are reviewed, which (I know) I’m supposed to be 
happy about, regardless of what the reviewers claim. But it will never stop 
seeming weird, despite the fact that I’ve spent most of my life reviewing the 
works of others. It’s a zero-sum game. Unless you’re totally unknown, the 
content of a review has almost no influence on book sales; a great high-profile 
review will cause sales to negligibly spike upward for a week or two, but a 
really bad high-profile review paradoxically generates an almost identical 
commercial impact. My best-reviewed books have sold the fewest copies.

LS Hilton: 'Everyone hated my erotic thriller'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/06/lisa-ls-hilton-maestra-erotic-bestseller-fiction-film>
Still, there’s always an intangible sense that the response to a book somehow 
shapes what it actually is, and the more attention a book gets, the more it 
seems to drift away from whatever you originally imagined. This is 
disappointing. Of course, the goal of any good publisher is to get as much 
attention for a book as possible, which means a book only becomes successful 
when the author completely loses control over what that book means and what it 
signifies. The central contradiction between writing and publishing is that the 
former is a way to construct a reality, and the latter is a process of losing 
control over reality. But you can’t complain about this, because this is how it 
goes: the disappointment is what they pay you for.

Extract

Melville publishes Moby-Dick in 1851, basing his narrative on the real-life 
1839 account of a murderous sperm whale nicknamed “Mocha Dick”. The initial 
British edition is around 900 pages. Melville, a moderately successful author 
at the time of the novel’s release, assumes this book will immediately be seen 
as his masterwork. But the reviews are mixed, and some are contemptuous (“It 
repels the reader” is the key takeaway from one of the very first reviews in 
the London Spectator). It sells poorly – at the time of Melville’s death, total 
sales hover below 5,000 copies. The failure ruins Melville’s life: he becomes 
an alcoholic and a poet and eventually a customs inspector. When he dies 
destitute in 1891, one has to assume his perspective on Moby-Dick is something 
along the lines of: ‘Well I guess that didn’t work. Maybe I should have spent 
fewer pages explaining how to tie complicated knots.’ For the next 30 years, 
nothing about the reception of this book changes. But then [the first world 
war] happens and – somehow and for reasons that can’t be totally explained – 
modernists living in postwar America start to view literature through a 
different lens. There is a Melville revival. The concept of what a novel is 
suppose to accomplish shifts in his direction and amplifies with each passing 
generation, eventually prompting people (like the 2005 director of Columbia 
University’s American studies programme) to classify Moby-Dick as ‘the most 
ambitious book ever conceived by an American writer’. Pundits and cranks can 
disagree with that assertion, but no one cares if they do.

Now, there’s certainly a difference between collective, objective wrongness 
(eg: misunderstanding gravity for centuries) and collective, subjective 
wrongness (eg: not caring about Moby-Dick for 75 years). The machinations of 
the transitions are completely different. Yet both scenarios hint at a 
practical reality and a modern problem. The practical reality is that any 
present-tense version of the world is unstable. What we currently consider to 
be true – both objectively and subjectively – is habitually provisional. But 
the modern problem is that re-evaluating what we consider ‘true’ is becoming 
increasingly difficult.

Buy the book

But What If We’re Wrong? by Chuck Klosterman is published by Amberley Books at 
£14.99.It is available from the Guardian bookshop for £12.29 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/but-what-if-we-re-wrong.html>.
 