
A prominent civil rights leader in Kentucky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/kentucky> who became the state’s first 
woman and African American elected to the state’s senate has died. Georgia 
Davis Powers was 92.

Raoul Cunningham, Kentucky NAACP president and longtime friend, says Powers 
died at about 3.40am at her brother’s house in Louisville.

Her career in the Kentucky senate spanned from 1968 to 1989. 

The Louisville Democrat gained national attention after she said in her 
autobiography she had a yearlong affair with DrMartin Luther King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/martin-luther-king> Jr and was with him at 
the Lorraine Motel in Memphis, Tennessee, the night before he was killed.

In her memoir, I Shared the Dream, Powers said the affair started about three 
years after she first met King at a march in Frankfort in 1964 in support of a 
desegregation bill. She joined King and other civil rights activists in a 
meeting with Kentucky’s governor at the time, and two years later the state 
became the first in the south to ban jobs discrimination and segregation in 
public places. Powers and King continued until his assassination in 1968.

“The relationship between Martin Luther King Jr and I began with mutual 
admiration,” she wrote in the book. “Gradually, our attachment grew stronger 
until it passed beyond camaraderie into intimacy.”

As a state senator, Davis Powers worked on the labor and industry committee 
and fought for fair housing, higher wages and the removal of race from drivers’ 
licenses. She won dozens of awards for her work for civil rights, and four 
Kentucky universities gave her honorary degrees.

“Our city, our state and our country mourn the passing of Senator Powers, 
whose legacy and leadership helped build a greater Louisville and a stronger 
Commonwealth,” Louisville’s mayor Greg Fischer said in a statement issued 
Saturday morning.

“Her compassion and dedication to ensuring a level playing for all people – 
and her willingness to always stand up for what was right - inspired me and 
generations of people.”
 