
The second presidential debate is in the can. Here’s a summary of what 
happened:

 * It was a nasty affair without perhaps being quite as sordid or raw as might 
have been expected, given Donald Trump’s signal beforehand that he would attack 
Hillary Clinton as an enabler of her husband’s infidelities in the 1980s and 
90s. 
 * Challenged to defend his recently uncovered hot mic remarks about grabbing 
women “by the pussy”, Trump said they amounted to “locker room talk”, and that 
he was embarrassed and apologetic. But he denied he had assaulted women, 
whereas, he said, Bill Clinton had been “so abusive to women”. 
 * Clinton did not respond to Trump’s catalog of her husband’s alleged 
assaults, apart to say it was inaccurate. “When they go low, you go high,” she 
said. 
 * Clinton placed Trump’s hot mic remarks in context with others – she listed 
his attack on the family of Humayan Khan, a US soldier killed in the Iraq war, 
his “birther” attack on Barack Obama, his attack on a disabled reporter and his 
attack on an American federal judge of Mexican descent – to paint Trump as an 
unreformed bully. She said Trump “owes the country an apology”. 
 * Trump projected intense hostility for Clinton. He repeatedly called her a 
liar, leered at her, scoffed, said she had accomplished nothing in her career. 
Physically, he loomed behind her as she spoke with audience members. He also 
told her if he were president, “you’d be in jail”. He pointed at her, andsaid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/oct/09/debate-live-fact-check-trump-tape-presidential-election-republican-critics?page=with:block-57fafaa2e4b0e4aaeaa8db62#block-57fafaa2e4b0e4aaeaa8db62>
, “she has tremendous hate in her heart”. 
 * “I know you’re into big diversion tonight,” Clinton told Trump. “Anything 
to avoid talking about your campaign and its explosion and how Republicans are 
leaving it.” At least 36 elected Republicans had either rescinded endorsements 
of Trump or explicitly stated rejections of him in the wake of the 2005 video. 
 * More than one snap analyst – for what that’s worth – thought Trump had 
“shored up his base” of supporters by attacking Clinton over deleted emails, 
the 2012 Benghazi attack that killed four Americans, and other issues. Few 
asserted that he had broadened his appeal. 
 * Twice Clinton said that Russia was seeking to influence the election, and 
not on her behalf, citing US intelligence officials who accused the Kremlin of 
attacks on Friday. 
 * Trump said he disagreed with running mate Mike Pence’s assertion that the 
US should consider military force to oppose Russian aggression in Syria. Pence 
tweeted congratulations after the debate.

 * Trump also said there’s no Muslim ban plan any more, despite his call for 
one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/07/donald-trump-ban-all-muslims-entering-us-san-bernardino-shooting>
 in December 2015. “The Muslim ban is something that in some form has morphed 
into extreme vetting.” 
 * A few times, Trump seemed to shock Clinton. He said that Capt Humayun Khan 
would still be alive if he, Trump, were president at the time – when George W 
Bush, a Republican, was commander-in-chief. 
 * Trump admitted unapologetically that he had applied almost $1bn in personal 
losses to not pay federal income tax. “Of course I do.” 
 * Trump staged a media event before the debate with three women who have 
accused Bill Clinton of sexual assault or rape and one woman, raped as a child, 
whose assailant Hillary Clinton defended, as ordered by a judge, as a 
27-year-old lawyer. 
 * Clinton was asked about a line from a WikiLeaks version of a purported paid 
speech in which she describe a president’s need to have separate public and 
private faces. She said she was talking about Abraham Lincoln. 
 * The candidates did not shake hands when they arrived at the town hall. 
Trump had the sniffles. And he complained a lot about the moderators letting 
Clinton talk more than him. A time clock count afterwards showed the time was 
split almost evenly.  