
The evening of Wednesday 6 May 2015. Nick Clegg has just completed his hugely 
successful election campaign tour. I went to bed reassured the country was 
going to recognise the huge achievements of theLiberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> in government and would 
sweep us to power the following day.

It was the morning of Thursday 7 May 2015 and I woke up feeling not quite so 
confident as the night before and wrote a memo outlining a contingency plan for 
a second coalition.

It was the morning of Friday 8 May 2015 and virtually every Lib Dem MP had 
lost their seat and Nick Clegg had made the most moving resignation speech in 
the history of global politics. I wrote in my diary that it had all been a bit 
of a shock.


It was the day after the general election in 2010. To my surprise, Cleggmania 
had not swept the Lib Dems to a landslide victory, but a hung parliament meant 
our party could help form the first coalition government in 65 years. I phoned 
Nick Clegg from a layby in Wiltshire. “These are momentous and grave times for 
the nation,” I said. To his credit, Nick agreed with me. “You are absolutely 
right as usual, David,” he said. “We owe it to the country to do the right 
thing. I would like you to be in charge of the coalition negotiations.”

We’d make the Tories look less nasty – and in return, we’d get to ride about 
in ministerial cars

It was the day after the day after the general election and I was chatting to 
Oliver Letwin. “Do you think we can do a deal, old boy?” I asked as we sipped 
ice-cold chablis. “Of course we can,” he replied. “You don’t want to be in a 
coalition with Labour. They’re all so terribly common.”

It took time, but over the course of a few more dinners we came to an 
agreement. We would promise to make the Tories look a bit less nasty than they 
really were and let them take the credit for everything that went right – and 
in return we would get to ride in ministerial cars for five years. “You do 
promise you won’t be beastly to us, don’t you?” I asked of George Osborne. “Of 
course,” he said.

It was two weeks after the general election and I had already been forced to 
resign over an expenses claim. It was a big shock and I really had no idea I 
had broken the code – even though it was fairly obvious to everyone else – 
because all I had wanted to do was make sure nobody knew I was in a homosexual 
relationship.

“You must, must stay in government,” pleaded Nick Clegg and Danny Alexander. 
“You are the most brilliant politician we have and we can’t afford to lose 
you.” I was resolute. I needed to do the right thing after doing the wrong 
thing. On reflection maybe I shouldn’t have claimed a few thousand quid when I 
was one of the richest men in Westminster and didn’t need the cash, but these 
were heady times.

It was December 2010. The government had just voted to raise tuition fees to 
£9,000 and the popularity of the Lib Dems was at an all-time low. This was 
terribly unfair as, although we had done a U-turn on our election manifesto 
promise, the new deal was actually going to be a lot better and fairer for 
students. Unfortunately, the rest of the world didn’t see it that way, but 
that’s how it is in politics sometimes.

It was every day between 2010 and 2015. Throughout the coalition, Nick Clegg 
was absolutely tremendous. Without him the country would be in a far more 
parlous state. I remember him pointing out to David Cameron that he had 
forgotten to allocate any money for the NHS. “Don’t disturb me,” David had 
said. “I’m within touching distance of my best ever score at Candy Crush. By 
the way, don’t worry about Govey in education. He’s just a mad Maoist.” How we 
all laughed. The coalition was bringing a new insight and maturity to British 
politics.

It was another day between 2010 and 2015 and the Liberal Democrats had just 
been humiliated over their failure to secure electoral and Lords reform. “Cheer 
up,” said George Osborne. “Come the next election, the voters will probably 
have been forgotten. Talking of which, do you want to do a deal for 2015 where 
we won’t stand in your marginal seats if you don’t stand in ours?” I was 
outraged. “Our members would never forgive us if we didn’t allow ourselves to 
be totally wiped out in 2015.”

It was yet another day between 2010 and 2015 and yet again the Liberal 
Democrats had failed to get the credit for saving the country from another 
Conservative austerity measure. “We’re doing this for the country, not 
ourselves,” said Saint Nick of Sheffield.

It is now a day in March 2016 and the Liberal Democrats are all but forgotten. 
Except by me. And St Nick. And Grumpy Vince. How great we were, how great.

Digested read, digested: The Lib Dems – My Part in Their Downfall.

 