
Colin Powell <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/colin-powell> told Hillary 
Clinton, his successor as secretary of state, that he used a personal computer 
to email foreign leaders “without going through State Department servers”, a 
seven-year-old email exchange reveals.


Powell dismissed some of the official security restrictions on him as 
“nonsense” and questioned why his personal digital assistant (PDA) was any more 
vulnerable to spies than a TV remote control or “something embedded in my shoe 
heel”.

The email correspondence was released on Wednesday by Representative Elijah 
Cummings, the top Democrat on the House oversight committee, intending to show 
that Clinton’s handling of data washardly less meticulous than previous 
secretaries of state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/04/colin-powell-condoleezza-rice-private-email-accounts-classified-hillary-clinton>
. She was the only one to set up a private email server in her home, however, 
and has admitted this was a mistake.

Clinton says she may have 'short-circuited' statements about emails
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/05/hillary-clinton-short-circuited-statements-classified-emails>
The emails also offer a rare glimpse of relations between America’s top 
diplomats across party lines, evolving technology in an era when the BlackBerry 
was still king and the daily frustrations of a security detail.

Clinton and Powell were on first name terms. At 7.37am on Friday 23 January 
2009, two days after she was sworn into office, she wrote flatteringly:

Dear Colin, I hope to catch up soon w you, but I have one pressing question 
which only you can answer!

What were the restrictions on your use of your blackberry? Did you use it in 
your personal office? I’ve been told that the DSS [Diplomatic Security Service] 
personnel knew you had one and used it but no one fesses up to knowing how you 
used it!

Barack Obama was the first president to own a BlackBerry at a time when 
celebrities such as Angelina Jolie, Lindsay Lohan and Britney Spears made the 
hand-held device fashionable. He gave it up for a smartphone only this year,
although his phone cannot text or play music 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aMcKi1TS2Zs> for security reasons.

Clinton wrote to Powell: “President Obama has struck a blow for berry addicts 
like us. I just have to figure out how to bring along the State Dept. Any and 
all advice is welcome. All the best to you and Alma, Hillary.”

Skipping formalities, Powell replied that he did not have a BlackBerry but 
explained how he circumvented official channels:

What I did do was have a personal computer that was hooked up to a private 
phone line (sounds ancient.) So I could communicate with a wide range of 
friends directly without it going through the State Department servers. I even 
used it to do business with some foreign leaders and some of the senior folks 
in the Department on their personal email accounts. I did the same thing on the 
road in hotels.

Powell has previously admitted using a laptop on a private line and sending 
notes to ambassadors and foreign ministers via personal email, according to a 
report by the state department’s inspector general.


In the message to Clinton, Powell said the main issue for him was PDAs – 
once-popular devices that included Palm Pilots – that the DSS would not allow 
into secure spaces.

When I asked why not they gave me all kinds of nonsense about how they gave 
out signals and could be read by spies, etc. Same reason they tried to keep 
mobile phones out of the suite. I had numerous meetings with them.

We even opened one up for them to try to explain to me why it was more 
dangerous than say, a remote control for one of the many tvs in the suite. Or 
something embedded in my shoe heel. They never satisfied me and NSA/CIA 
wouldn’t back off. So, we just went about our business and stopped asking. I 
had an ancient version of a PDA and used it. In general, the suite was so 
sealed that it is hard to get signals in or out wirelessly.

Powell went on to offer Clinton a friendly warning first reported last week 
when theFBI released notes of its now closed investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/02/hillary-clinton-emails-laptop-thumb-drive-archive-missing>
 into her handling of sensitive information. “However, there is a real danger. 
If it is public that you have a BlackBerry and it it [sic] government and you 
are using it, government or not, to do business, it may become an official 
record and subject to the law … Be very careful. I got around it all by not 
saying much and not using systems that captured the data.”

Giving an insight into the routine frustrations of balancing security with 
convenience, Powell, who was secretary of state under George W Bush, added: 
“You will find DS driving you crazy if you let them. They had Maddy [possibly a 
reference to former secretary Madeleine Albright] tied up in knots. I refused 
to let them live in my house or build a place on my property. They found an 
empty garage half a block away.

“On weekends, I drove my beloved cars around town without them following me. I 
promised I would have a phone and not be gone more than an hour or two at 
Tysons or the hardware store. They hated it and asked me to sign a letter 
relieving them of responsibility if I got whacked while doing that. I gladly 
did.

“Spontaneity was my security. They wanted to have two to three guys follow me 
around the building all the time. I said if they were doing their job guarding 
the place, they didn’t need to follow me. I relented and let one guy follow me 
one full corridor behind just so they knew where I was if I was needed 
immediately. Their job is to keep you hermetically sealed up. Love, Colin.”

The email saga has continued to haunt Clinton’s presidential campaign even 
after the FBI concluded in July that she should not face criminal charges. She 
was quizzed about it closely during a“commander-in-chief” forum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/08/clinton-vows-no-more-troops-in-iraq-as-trump-slams-dumbest-foreign-policy>
 with military veterans on NBC News on Wednesday night.

Cummings said the 2009 exchange showed that Republicans were unfairly critical 
of Clinton and argued that Powell “advised Secretary Clinton with a detailed 
blueprint on how to skirt security rules and bypass requirements to preserve 
federal records, although Secretary Clinton has made clear that she did not 
rely on this advice”.

It “also illustrates the longstanding problem that no secretary of state ever 
used an official unclassified email account until the current secretary of 
state”, Cummings said.

The date of the Clinton-Powell email exchange raises questions over Powell’s 
recent denial of responsibility for providing her advice. “The truth is she was 
using it for a year before I sent her a memo telling her what I did,”he told 
the New York Post 
<http://pagesix.com/2016/08/21/colin-powell-sets-record-straight-on-involvement-in-email-scandal/>
. “Her people have been trying to pin it on me.”
 