
Congress has addressed the Zika funding crisis and finalized a deal to fund 
the government just days ahead of a shutdown deadline.

The legislation passed on Wednesday night extends existing spending levels a 
mere 10 weeks, past election day, whilefinally addressing the Zika crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/07/congress-deadlocked-zika-bill-planned-parenthood-measures-republicans-senate-democrats>
 with $1.1bn and providinglong-sought help for the residents of Flint, Michigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/17/flint-water-crisis-hearings-congress-failure-of-us-government>
, as well asflood victims in Louisiana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/11/louisiana-governor-requests-bailout-flood-damage-costs>
. After a last-minute burst of deal-making, the legislation passed the Senate 
on a 72-26 vote Wednesday and was backed by the House 342-85 in a late-night 
vote.

It was a conclusion in sight and within reach since lawmakers returned from 
their summer recess just after Labor Day. But with the Capitol awash in 
election-year politics and shadowed by the contentious presidential race and 
engulfed in a fierce battle for control of the Senate, the simplest task became 
a nearly impossible heavy lift impeded by needless delays and bitter 
finger-pointing.

Republicans, defending a fragile Senate majority and eager to get a handful of 
vulnerable incumbents back home to campaign for re-election, accused the 
minority leader, Harry Reid, of holding up a deal to keep GOP lawmakers off the 
campaign trail.

“The Democrats are determined to keep us here as long as they can,” said one 
at-risk Republican senator, Pat Toomey of Pennsylvania.

Democrats denied it but lobbed their own allegations, all but accusing 
Republicans of racism for holding up money for people affected by lead-tainted 
water in predominantly black Flint, the final sticking point in the talks.

“All they’d have to do is put Flint in and we’d be out of here in a minute. We 
want to get out of here. They’re the ones holding it up,” said Democratic 
senator Chuck Schumer of New York.

Compromise on a $170m Flint aid package ultimately gave Democrats a partial 
victory while the GOP-dominated Louisiana delegation won a down payment on 
Barack Obama’s $2.6bn request for their state. The Zika deal was the resolution 
of a long and vexing dispute on that issue after Obamamade his initial request 
for federal money in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/08/obama-zika-virus-congress-research-funding-vaccine>
.

Flint's tainted water may have led to rashes and hair loss, investigation finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/23/flint-lead-tainted-water-crisis-skin-rashes-hair-loss-michigan>
The situation produced frustration all around as lawmakers of both parties 
lamented their inability to get their basic work done, even as each party 
insisted the other was to blame. The gridlock that haskept Congress’s approval 
ratings 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/189848/no-improvement-congress-approval.aspx> below 
20% for years was on vivid display at a moment when the electorate has made 
crystal clear that it wants an end to Washington’s dysfunction and inability to 
address the many real problems confronting the nation.

Yet even as they stumbled to a messy solution at close to the last possible 
moment – the deadline was midnight on Friday – some lawmakers were already 
looking ahead to next year, when much weightier tasks await the next Congress 
and a new president in what may be an even more fraught era of divided 
government.

A two-year budget deal agreed to a year ago under the former House speaker, 
Republican John Boehner, pushed a number of major issues into next year, in 
particular the next fight over raising the government’s borrowing limit. The 
debt limit will need to be raised by around mid-summer of next year, something 
that has provoked major knock-down, drag-out battles among the Capitol’s 
warring factions and the administration in recent years.

Lawmakers will need to revisit major programs that are ripe for battles 
including the Children’s Health Insurance Program underMedicaid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/medicaid>, payments to hospitals and 
community health centers, expiring tax credits for a range of industries, a 
reauthorization of the Federal Aviation Administration, the annual defense 
policy bill, as well as the annual budgeting process. And there is a vacancy to 
fill on the supreme court.

This year, even though getting the appropriations process on track was a top 
goal for the House speaker, Paul Ryan, and Senate majority leader, Mitch 
McConnell, Congress deadlocked and could not get a budget done while passing 
just one of the 12 annual spending bills that fund government agencies. The 
rest of them will need to be lumped together in what’s sure to be another messy 
struggle in the lame-duck session after the election.

Regardless of whether the next president is Hillary Clinton or Donald Trump, 
the White House will confront numerous tricky cross-currents on Capitol Hill 
next year. Whichever party controls the Senate, the majority is likely to be 
razor-thin and senators will probably be focused immediately on the 2018 
midterms, when Democrats will be defending tough seats in red states. In the 
GOP-led House, the number of moderate-minded House Republicans is likely to be 
reduced, potentially giving more power to the House Freedom Caucus, which 
frequently opposes routine legislation and impedes deal-making by leadership.

Ryan himself is widely seen as having presidential ambitions in 2020, which 
may complicate his willingness to cut deals with Clinton or Trump.

Yet with the outcome of the election uncertain, many lawmakers said it 
remained to be seen whether a new Congress might provide an opening for more 
productive relations in Washington, or more of the same.

“It depends on what kind of message the voters send,” said Democratic senator 
Brian Schatz of Hawaii. “If they express enough frustration I think you’ll have 
members understanding that they have a responsibility to govern. But the voters 
have to hold us accountable and it remains to be seen whether or not they will.”
 