
Barack Obama suffered a unique political blow on Wednesday, when the US 
Congress overturnedhis veto of a bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/23/obama-veto-bill-911-families-sue-saudi-arabia>
 that would allow families of the victims of the September 11 terrorist attacks
to sue Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/09/911-saudi-arabia-bill-congress-vote>
.


The overwhelming bipartisan vote in both the Senate and House inflicted the 
first veto override of Obama’s presidency, less than four months before he 
leaves office. The White House issued an unusually scathing response.

“I would venture to say that this is the single most embarrassing thing that 
the United States Senate has done, possibly, since 1983,” press secretary Josh 
Earnest told reporters. “Ultimately these senators are going to have to answer 
their own conscience and their constituents as they account for their actions 
today.”

Senator Chris Murphy: US support for Saudi Arabia 'can't be unconditional'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/22/senator-chris-murphy-saudi-arabia-arms-sale-connecticut>
Obama expressed disappointment. “The concern that I’ve had has nothing to do 
withSaudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> per se or my 
sympathy for 9/11 families, it has to do with me not wanting a situation in 
which we’re suddenly exposed to liabilities for all the work that we’re doing 
all around the world, and suddenly finding ourselves subject to the private 
lawsuits in courts where we don’t even know exactly whether they’re on the up 
and up, in some cases,” he told CNN.

“So this is a dangerous precedent and it’s an example of why sometimes you 
have to do what’s hard. And, frankly, I wish Congress here had done what’s 
hard. I didn’t expect it, because if you’re perceived as voting against 9/11 
families right before an election, not surprisingly, that’s a hard vote for 
people to take. But it would have been the right thing to do.”

The legislation will permit courts to waive a claim of foreign sovereign 
immunity when an act of terrorism occurs inside US borders, according to the 
terms of the bill.Saudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> 
has objected strongly to the legislation and has categorically denied any role 
in the 9/11 attacks. Fifteen of the 19 plane hijackers were Saudi nationals.

The measure passed the Senate and House unanimously in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/17/september-11-saudi-arabia-senate-victim-lawsuit>
 and September, but Obamavetoed it last Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/23/obama-veto-bill-911-families-sue-saudi-arabia>
, claiming it would make the US vulnerable to retaliatory litigation in foreign 
courts that could put American troops in legal jeopardy. Proponents of the 
Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act (JASTA) insist that it is narrowly 
tailored and applies only to acts of terrorism that occur on US soil.

Many senators and representatives are also reluctant to oppose an emotive, 
popular measure and be seen as soft on terrorism with elections just weeks away.

The Senate voted 97-1, with the Democratic minority leader, Harry Reid of 
Nevada, alone in supporting the veto. The House followed suit a short time 
later, voting 348-77 to override and putting Congress directly at odds with the 
White House and national security establishment.

9/11 report's classified '28 pages' about potential Saudi Arabia ties released
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/15/911-report-saudi-arabia-28-pages-released>
Chuck Grassley, chairman of the Senate judiciary committee, said the families 
of 9/11 victims favoured the measure and accused Obama of bowing to Saudi 
pressure. “All they want is the opportunity to present their case in a court of 
law,” he said on the Senate floor. “And that’s what this legislation would give 
them.


“The legislation has run into opposition because it is opposed by Saudi 
Arabia, who has been making threats against the United States about what it 
might do if Congress stands with the American people and 9/11 victims and their 
families, instead of the Saudis.

“And now, according to press reports, the Saudis have gone out and hired an 
army of lobbyists to work furiously in a last-minute attempt to derail it.”

Bipartisan agreement has been scarce during the Obama years. Texas senator 
John Cornyn noted: “This is pretty much close to a miraculous occurrence 
because Democrats and Republicans, senators [and] House members have all agreed 
the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act, which gives the victims of a 
terrorist attack on our own soil an opportunity to seek the justice they 
deserve.”

The Republican pushed back against Obama’s objections. “He cites concerns that 
the bill would ‘create complications’, he says, with some of our close 
partners, but the truth is JASTA only targets foreign governments who sponsor 
terrorist attacks on American soil, plain and simple.”

The bill was revived last year by Cornyn and New York Democratic senator Chuck 
Schumer, who said on Wednesday: “This is a decision I do not take lightly. This 
bill is near and dear to my heart as a New Yorker, because it would allow the 
victims of 9/11 to pursue some small measure of justice, finally giving them a 
legal avenue to pursue foreign sponsors of the terrorist attack that took from 
them the lives of their loved ones.”

Later, Schumer was quoted by the Associated Press as saying: “The White House 
and the executive branch [are] far more interested in diplomatic 
considerations. We’re more interested in the families and in justice.”

But during the Senate debate, Bob Corker of Tennessee, chairman of the Senate 
foreign relations committee, acknowledged the president’s concerns over 
sovereign immunity procedures and admitted he had difficulty supporting the 
bill, which “has problems”.

He concluded: “With tremendous reservations and concerns about where this 
legislation is going to lead us, with tremendous empathy towards the victims 
that have lived through so much, have seen loved ones gone, that has affected 
their lives and will affect their lives for the long term, I’m going to support 
passage of this legislation today, but I do so understanding that there could 
be in fact unintended consequences that work against our national interest and 
with a determination, should that occur, to work with others in this body to 
try to overcome that.”

Hillary Clinton’s running mate, Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia, and her primary 
opponent, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, were both campaigning on her 
behalf and were not present for the vote. Former New York City mayor Rudy 
Giuliani, who was in office on 9/11 and is now an adviser for Republican 
presidential nominee Donald Trump, called it a failure for Kaine and said that 
he was “obviously afraid to show up to work today and stand with these 
Americans, is a disgrace. It demonstrates his basic inadequacy as a leader.”

John Brennan, the director of the CIA, warned that the legislation would have 
“grave implications” for US national security. Speaking at a forum in 
Washington, he said: “The most damaging consequence would be for those US 
government officials who dutifully work overseas on behalf of our country. The 
principle of sovereign immunity protects US officials every day, and is rooted 
in reciprocity. If we fail to uphold this standard for other countries, we 
place our own nation’s officials in danger.”

The vote deals a late blow to Obama on an issue he feels keenly about at a 
time when his personal popularity is riding high. During his nearly two full 
terms in office, Obama has never had a veto overridden by Congress. The last 
time an administration got through eight years without Congress overriding a 
veto was the Kennedy-Johnson administration in the 1960s.

On Tuesday, Earnest said: “The president has strong views about this 
legislation and the impact that it would have not just on the US relationship 
with Saudi Arabia, but with countries around the world. It would increase the 
risk that is facing our service members and our diplomats and our intelligence 
professionals. And that is a view that president has stated on a number of 
occasions.”

In a letter sent to Reid this week, Obama warned the bill would erode 
sovereign immunity principles that prevent foreign litigants “from 
second-guessing our counter-terrorism operations and other actions that we take 
every day”.
 