
At the centre of the storm that engulfed Barack Obama's presidential campaign 
this week is the Rev Jeremiah Wright, the controversial former pastor of the 
Trinity United Church of Christ in Chicago's south side. Wright officiated at 
Obama's wedding and baptised his daughters, and was the Illinois senator's 
spiritual guide for decades.

The charismatic preacher, who has spoken out on topics as varied as urban 
poverty, apartheid and the sub-prime mortgage crisis - and regularly invited 
white church groups to his Sunday services - has been a source of anxiety to 
the Obama campaign, as videos have surfaced on the internet and television of 
some of his fiery sermons.

Wright's incendiary comments include:

• "The government gives them [African Americans] the drugs, builds bigger 
prisons, passes a three-strike law and then wants us to sing 'God Bless 
America.' No, no, no, God damn America, that's in the Bible for killing 
innocent people. God damn America for treating our citizens as less than human. 
God damn America for as long as she acts like she is God and she is supreme."

• After September 11, 2001, he said: "We have supported state terrorism 
against the Palestinians and black South Africans and now we are indignant 
because the stuff we have done overseas is now brought right back into our own 
front yards. America's chickens are coming home to roost."

• "It just came to me within the past few weeks, y'all, why so many folks are 
hating onBarack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>. He 
doesn't fit the model. He ain't white, he ain't rich, and he ain't privileged. 
Hillary fits the mold. Europeans fit the mold, Giuliani fits the mold. Rich 
white men fit the mold. Hillary never had a cab whiz past her and not pick her 
up because her skin was the wrong colour. Hillary never had to worry about 
being pulled over in her car as a black man driving in the wrong… I am sick of 
Negroes who just do not get it. Hillary was not a black boy raised in a single 
parent home, Barack was. Barack knows what it means to be a black man living in 
a country and a culture that is controlled by rich white people. Hillary can 
never know that. Hillary ain't never been called a nigger. Hillary has never 
had her people defined as non-persons."

• Bill Clinton "did the same thing to us that he did to Monica Lewinsky."
 