
The cost of policing a 24/7 Ulster loyalist protest in north Belfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> will exceed £21m, the region’s chief 
constable has said.

As the loyalist marching season reaches its climax in Northern Ireland over 
the next few days, the head of the Police Service ofNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, George Hamilton, has also 
said the cost of security at the Twaddell protest camp, where the loyalist 
Greater Shankill area meets the republican Ardoyne district in Belfast, will 
continue to rise.

The body that rules on controversial loyalist marches – the Parades Commission 
– has banned the Orange Order and its supporters from parading past the Ardoyne 
district on 12 July, the most sacred day in the Ulster loyalist calendar. The 
area is the scene of annual clashes between loyalists, republicans and police.

Hamilton, the chief constable, said: “It is reasonable to expect the estimated 
total cost will be in excess of £21m. The PSNI has a responsibility to police 
the Parades Commission’s determinations and also ensure that the resources 
deployed take account of the prevailing threat at the time of the deployment.”

Talks were held recently between Ardoyne residents and loyalists that almost 
led to a solution to the annual standoff. The deal centred on allowing 
Orangemen and their followers to march back from Belfast city centre on 1 July 
as part of a mass demonstration to commemorate the 100th anniversary of the 
Battle of the Somme.

However, the agreement failed following objections from one of two rival 
republican community groups.

The Twaddell protest camp consists of one caravan, a portable building and 
portable toilets. Because it is close to the Ardoyne district it has to be 
policed around the clock to prevent sectarian disorder. Meanwhile, nationalists 
and loyalists have condemned xenophobic slogans painted on wooden pallets at a 
bonfire in east Belfast.


“Foreigners Out” was daubed on the pallets at a bonfire which will be lit on 
11 July by young east Belfast loyalists. Anti-racist and ethnic rights 
organisations have reported an upsurge in racist insults and threats online 
across Northern Ireland since the Brexit vote two weeks ago.
 