
When Adele Downey was officially named the new chief executive of the 
Disclosure and Barring Service 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/disclosure-and-barring-service> 
(DBS) in June 2016, she already had a clear vision of how she wanted to improve 
the organisation’s ability to provide a quality service for employers 
requesting background checks.

“I would like to be able to respond to whatever the government needs are and 
make sure that we have the depth of skills, and the flexibility, to be able to 
make a broader contribution to safeguarding,” she says. “Our entire workforce 
feel very passionate about our mission to keep people safe.”


She had been in central government service all her career and has risen up the 
ranks to hold the top job at the DBS. She has what she describes as a “strong 
public sector ethos combined with a private sector approach to running a 
business”. It’s a balance that Downey believes will help her lead the service 
onwards and upwards.


The DBS issues more than 4m disclosures every year, providing information to 
employers and other organisations so that they can prevent unsuitable people 
from being employed into roles working with children or vulnerable adults. It 
also makes complex decisions about whether to bar somebody from getting jobs in 
certain sectors and there are currently over 60,000 people who are not allowed 
to work with children or vulnerable adults.


The government body is still very young – it replaced the Criminal Record 
Bureau and Independent Safeguarding Authority in 2012 – so Downey’s plan is to 
create a new management structure that would provide long-term support for the 
service.


“I am increasing the size of my senior management team because at the moment I 
don’t think we have the capacity and resilience in the team to take the 
organisation on to its next level of maturity,” she explains.


Downey has created four new roles within this new management tier to help the 
organisation achieve these goals.


Chief operating officer

This is a strategic position with oversight of the whole service. Downey 
explains that she wants this person to be driving productivity and quality.


“I want them to have a look at the end to end business model to see where the 
efficiencies can come in across the whole of the organisation,” she explains. 
“It’s going to be a board level position so they will have the opportunity to 
influence the strategic direction of the DBS and that will leave the functional 
directors to really be making sure that their delivery is the best it possibly 
can be.”


The ideal candidate will have worked in a high productivity, case working 
environment, she adds. While they don’t have to have a public sector 
background, they need to have worked in an operational environment and highly 
experienced in service delivery. The operations directorate has more than 500 
staff, so they will also need to have worked in a sizeable organisation 
previously.


She adds: “I want someone who has really got evidence of how they keep the 
customer in mind when they are thinking about improvements to the service. I 
don’t want it to just be about saving money, I want the person thinking about 
the user experience.”


Finance director


The finance director needs to be an experienced accountant from either the 
public or private sector and needs to be able to understand government 
accounting, which is different to the way a private business runs. What Downey 
really wants from this role is somebody who can drive the service’s performance 
and planning approach.


She says: “We really need to be looking at our performance framework and how 
we use our management information to influence strategic decisions. So I want 
somebody who can evidence how they have made the link between performance and 
planning, and the strategy.”

They are going to be involved in fee setting, so need to understand pricing 
products, how to get the best out of a product and what that strategy should 
be. They will also be working with external stakeholders such as the Treasury, 
the National Audit Office and the Home Office.


Chief people officer


The chief people officer will have a big challenge to develop the depth of 
capability that is needed in the organisation. Downey explains that although 
they have increased the skills of their team members over the last few years, 
she now wants to make sure the organisation has resilience from top to bottom. 
This role will involve looking at succession planning, using learning 
techniques to develop people and how we best utilise their skills.


“This person will have lots of demonstrable tools and techniques for 
developing an organisation’s skills to fit whatever the strategic priorities 
are,” she reveals. “I want my organisation to be responsive and not say to 
government ministers that they have to wait another couple of years before [we] 
can deliver their ideas.”


Director for safeguarding, strategy and quality


Downey considers this to be a very important role in the organisation and 
wants this person to be “externally focused”. That means they will be working 
with the DBS’s senior stakeholders, not just within government but also within 
organisations that they have regular close contact such as the NHS.


“I’d ideally like somebody to be a safeguarding practitioner who will come and 
be able to demonstrate that they have worked in the field and will have 
insight, experience and knowledge that they can bring to the organisation that 
we don’t have ourselves,” she explains. “I want to make sure that we make 
robust decisions and changes as necessary to our strategy that actually are 
going to make a difference to safeguarding.”

The position will also be in charge of customer service and quality assurance. 
So they need to have some experience of working in those two areas.


Downey believes strongly that the DBS plays a pivotal role in keeping the 
public safe, but thinks they can do more in terms of potentially offering more 
services to people, as well as understanding the data and what it actually 
means for the future of safeguarding and public protection.


She adds: “We can do more in developing our staff so that they are accredited 
to a higher standard and use expertise and knowledge to inform and influence 
policy agenda, as well as making very accurate decisions.


“So I want a very strong team that can drive that vision forward with energy 
and commitment and bring all the staff with them. It’s a very exciting future 
for us over the next few years and I want this strength behind me so we can 
provide the absolute best service that we can.”

Content on this page is paid for and produced to a brief agreed by the 
Disclosure and Barring Service
 