
Ball one: Bresnan, Brooks and back-ups break Nottinghamshire

With leaders Middlesex having a week off, the counties bunched behind them had 
the opportunity to jostle for position as the run-in begins in earnest – easier 
said than done of course. At 11.00am on Tuesday, Yorkshire would have felt 
ideally placed to launch their endgame seeking the Division One hat-trick – 
North Marine Road: as well appointed as ever, their opponents: rock-bottom 
Nottinghamshire, the crowd: partisan. Within a couple of hours, the home side 
were 51-6 and cricket, again, showed that it was not in the mood to be taken 
for granted. But you don’t win consecutive pennants without knowing how to turn 
matches round and back-up keeper Andy Hodd and back-up spinner Azeem Rafiq 
counter-attacked effectively, posting 132 for the seventh wicket. That foothold 
became a platform when the seamers ran through Notts for 94 and they were at it 
again in the fourth innings, cleaning up the visitors for 146. Tim Bresnan had 
match figures of 8-51 (and 45 runs for once out) and Jack Brooks wasn’t far 
behind with 7-76 (and 48 runs for once out), the two old heads cool under 
pressure. When the leaves start to fall, “finding a way” becomes the most 
important skill in cricket – and few find a way as often as Jason Gillespie’s
Yorkshire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/yorkshire>.

Ball two: Surrey’s lefties deliver with an eye on England

Sport picture of the day: Groenewald gives it a whirl
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2016/aug/29/sport-picture-of-the-day-groenewald-gives-it-a-whirl>
County cricket’s form side met county cricket’s out-of-form side at the Oval – 
and the expected result duly arrived, as London sweltered. While all the 
pre-match talk centred on Haseeb Hameed, Lancashire’s teenage opener, his two 
wasted starts turned the spotlight on the home side’s two left arm seamers: 
Mark Footitt and Sam Curran. Since his selection for England’s touring party 
last winter, Footitt seems to have either been injured or easing his way back 
from injury, but his second innings 7-62 not only sent Surrey third in the 
table, but also provided a springboard for a late season run to possible 
selection again, though that seems unlikely given the pitches likely to be 
encountered in Bangladesh and India. It’s probably too soon for the cherubic 
Curran Jr, but his hard-hit 96 and four first-innings wickets lifted his season 
averages to 40 and 28 respectively – at 18 years of age, in Division One. It’s 
not “if” for England, it’s “when” for the super-talented manchild.

Ball three: Hampshire are closer to their objective than Somerset

Despite Roelof Van der Merwe’s match figures of 63–13–143–5 with the ball and 
an undefeated century with the bat backed up by Craig Overton’s pyrotechnics in 
his 138* at better than a run a ball from No9, Somerset ran out of time at 
Taunton, as Sean Ervine and Jimmy Adams made sureHampshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hampshire> secured the draw that lifted them 
21 points clear of relegation with three games to play. The home side aren’t 
completely out of the race for the pennant – 22 points off Middlesex with four 
matches to play – but Somerset have been more handily placed than that over the 
years and have yet to win a Championship. That said, wouldn’t Marcus 
Trescothick be a popular winner if the dream does come true?

Ball four: the only win is Essex at Grace Road

Essex’s second consecutive win lifted them 24 points clear at the top of 
Division Two with three matches to play. They were still 170 behind with half 
of their first-innings wickets gone and Leicestershire no doubt felt well 
placed just before lunch on day two; 140 overs later, the match was over. Dan 
Lawrence (another impressive English teenager) registered his fourth County 
Championship century, his 154 at No6 backed up by half-centuries from Ryan ten 
Doeschate at No7 and James Foster at No8 (with Will Rhodes and Graham Napier at 
No9 and No10!) Jamie Porter bagged a second clutch of four wickets and the 
visitors travelled south to enjoy a day off and the prospect of Division One 
cricket in 2017.

Ball Five – DI Stevens solves the case of the missing runs

Kent’s win at Bristol is about the only thing ensuring that the Chelmsford 
champagne stays on ice, a full 24 points haul keeping them in touch as August 
turns to September.Kent <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kent> enjoy a 
phalanx of all-rounders in the middle order and two came good in a stand of 258 
for the fifth wicket. Keeper-batsman Sam Billings has already played white ball 
cricket for England and scores like 171 won’t do his international cause any 
harm, despite England’s glut of gung-ho glovemen. Even he was outscored by the 
old trouper Darren Stevens, who at 40 years of old, opened the bowling in both 
innings, took five wickets in his 39 overs and biffed 140 off 161 balls, for a 
first century of the season. Methinks that the old warhorse isn’t for the 
knackers yard yet – so give him another contract!

Celebrating Garry Sobers' 26th and final Test century, a thing of unalloyed 
beauty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/the-nightwatchman/2016/aug/11/garry-sobers-80-century-west-indies-england-lords>
Ball six: Danny Briggs gets Sussex out of jail with vital win

Sussex won their second consecutive match in a low scoring thriller at 
Cardiff. After three innings had been concluded between 252 and 283, the 
visitors needed 233 to gain the 16 points reward for a win they needed to have 
any chance of an instant return to the top flight. That target looked a long 
way off when the seventh wicket fell still 77 runs short and the very sharp 
Timm van der Gugten having already won two LBW decisions and hit the stumps 
twice, fancied more. In came Danny Briggs, still only 25, but with plenty of 
experience, some for England, but very much a late order batsman and not even a 
bowler who bats. The tall spinner got the scoreboard moving, making 36, but 
leaving the crease with 22 still required. As keeper, Ben Brown, anchored one 
end, teenager George Garton calmly stroked 18 to get the away side over the 
line, eight down.Sussex <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sussexccc> will 
probably need to win at least three of their four remaining matches to gain 
promotion, but, as Worcestershire showed in chasing 401 to win after conceding 
an Adelaidesque 551 runs in the first innings of the match, when the win is all 
that matters, strange things can happen.

• This article appeared first on The 99.4 Cricket Blog 
<http://nestaquin.wordpress.com/>
• Follow Gary Naylor <https://twitter.com/garynaylor999> on Twitter
 