
Ball One: Jack Leach leaves Durham’s late order in a bloody mess

Yet another draw at Lord’s kept Middlesex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/middlesex> in Division One’s top slot, but 
wins for Somerset and, especially, defending champions Yorkshire, means that 
the title race will remain as fascinating in August as it has been since April 
– it really is a wonderful format and it’s so disappointing that it will change 
for 2017. Somerset leapfrogged opponents Durham, coming out on top in a 
low-scoring thriller at Taunton, the match decided in a blaze of wickets early 
on Day Three, which started nicely poised with Durham needing 46 runs and 
Somerset five wickets. In less than 20 minutes, spinners Jack Leach and Roelof 
van der Merwe gobbled up the necessary scalps and sent Durham on the long 
journey home licking their wounds. The spin twins shared 17 wickets in the 
match and contributed to Somerset’s late-order batting rallies which saw the 
last five wickets in the first innings score 103 of 184 and in the second 159 
of 180. Durham drop to fourth, their only consolation is that they were 
involved in another tremendous game of cricket.

Ball Two: Yorkshire’s defence of the pennant is back on the road

After a couple of months without a win, Yorkshire had their big wheels back in 
the side and Jason Gillespie’s juggernaut was soon on the move again, beating a 
spirited Warwickshire in another low-scoring thriller. After putting together a 
handy last wicket stand of 53, grizzled old pros Steve Patterson and Ryan 
Sidebottom got amongst the Warwickshire batsmen to help establish a crucial 
first innings lead of 78. Alex Lees came within one wicket of carrying his bat 
second time round, but got scant support for his four hour 70 andWarwickshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warwickshireccc> fancied their chances with 
229 to get for the win. With one of the most dangerous lower orders in the 
county game, Ian Bell’s men were still in with a shout when Rikki Clarke fell 
with 88 to get and four wickets in hand. But for the second time in the match, 
Adil Rashid ran through the bowlers who bat and Yorkshire found themselves 
third, 14 points off the leaders, with a game in hand.

Ball Three: Cricket fails to bloom at the Rose Bowl

In sharp contrast to the low-scoring heart-thumpers elsewhere in the Division, 
the Rose Bowl played host to a dull run-fest as Hampshire drew with Lancashire, 
a result that helped neither the home team’s relegation scrap nor the visitor’s 
fast-fading Championship hopes. Captain Will Smith batted for nine and a half 
hours for 210, refusing to declare until into the sixth session of the match, a 
good innings, but dubious tactic. The visitors then had the task of batting 25 
overs and two days without losing 20 wickets and did so comfortably, finishing 
three down following-on. That might have been torture for the spectators and 
the Hampshire bowlers but it was heaven for Lancashire’s teenage opener, Haseeb 
Hameed, who would bat all day every day given the chance. He spent 505 minutes 
at the crease accumulating 142 runs for once out and furthering the thought 
that Geoffrey Boycott may have returned, this time on the west side of the 
Pennines. As with fellow teen, Sam Curran, the question is not whether he will 
play Test cricket for England but when. I’ll be disappointed if I’m still 
asking that question this time next year.

The life of Alfred Mynn, cricket’s first colossus and a master of single-wicket
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket-the-old-batsman-blog/2016/aug/08/the-meaning-of-cricket-jon-hotten-book>
Ball Four: Lord’s pitches are too ‘good’ to produce good cricket

I love Lord’s, its history, its low hum of anticipation on a Test match 
morning and its unique sloping greensward. But I’m beginning to hate the square 
that commands our attention when we’re there. As mentioned above, the London 
derby finished in a draw, but what did you expect? It’s the fifth in five 
Championship matches this season at HQ and the innings scores make damning 
reading for those who believe that pitches should balance what they offer to 
bat and ball: 452 & 304-6 v 468; 354 v 203-3; 376 & 202-7 v 423; 513 v 419-5; 
and 415 & 266-7 v 293 & 278-6.

Ball Five: Kent harvest useful points in August

It’s even tighter in Division Two, where Kent’s win left them one point in 
front of long-time leadersEssex <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essex> after 
their crushing victory over Worcestershire. It was good to see Will Gidman, 
whose career was drifting at Notts, make a crucial 75* and chip in with three 
wickets, to justify his decision to move south on loan. He’s in good company at 
Canterbury as Kent fielded no less than six players who can claim to be at 
least bowlers who bat or batsmen who bowl (Gidman himself, Joe Denly, Darren 
Stevens, James Tredwell, Matt Coles and Mitchell Claydon). Moving into that 
part of the season when finding a way to win matters a lot more than how you 
actually do it, that’s a handy set of players to call upon.

Ball Six: Graham Napier lights up a match yet again

Essex slipped to second, but that was hardly the fault of one of their oldest 
stagers and one of this column’s favourite cricketers. I could write about 
Chris Jordan’s excellent match with seven wickets and a knock of 131, but I’m 
going to highlight Graham Napier, who took 5-114 in Sussex’s innings and then 
made 124 off 155 balls when defeat wasn’t quite out of the question. He’s 36 
now, but he’s enjoying an Indian summer with 43 wickets at 26 and 251 runs at 
28. What a servant to Essex, and the game, he has been and how he’ll be missed 
when he’s gone.

• This article appeared first on The 99.4 Cricket Blog 
<http://nestaquin.wordpress.com/>
• Follow Gary Naylor <https://twitter.com/garynaylor999> on Twitter
 