
David Willey’s intention on moving from Northamptonshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonshire> to Yorkshire – for a fee 
hefty by county standards – this season was to further his oft-espoused 
ambitions to play Test cricket. No English left-arm seamer has ever taken 100 
Test wickets and Willey has designs on being the first; to do so he felt it 
necessary to step up to Division One. It has, however, been a quiet start to 
life with the champions. He picked up an abdominal injury before joining up 
with England, where his reputation for swinging the white ball was enhanced 
against Sri Lanka.

Across two rain-ravaged days at The Oval, however, he has shone with the red 
ball, too. After trapping Rory Burns in front on Monday, he bowled a fine spell 
of swing bowling on the second day, which would make it no further than 12.20 
as rain intervened.

David Willey, the white-ball wonder, driven by England Test dream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/21/david-willey-england-test-dream-yorkshire-world-twenty20-cricket>
Willey dismissed Zafar Ansari with a fearsome, late-swinging yorker that sent 
his leg and middle stumps cartwheeling, then Jason Roy caught behind without 
scoring. In the over between, Aaron Finch had carelessly driven Steve Patterson 
straight to short cover shortly after bringing up a fine half-century. Willey 
had shaken the game up and, from a position of comfort, Surrey were stuck on 
121 for 20 deliveries, losing the third, fourth and fifth wickets in the 
process.

After the brief carnage Steven Davies – who is out of contract at season’s end 
and piquing interest across the shires – and Ben Foakes came together to share 
a sprightly and elegant 43, characterised by attractive straight drives and 
neat late cuts.

While rain scuppered bottom-of-the-table Hampshire’s hopes of pushing for a 
victory againstWarwickshire at Edgbaston, a fascinating final day awaits on an 
increasingly flat surface at Taunton. Marcus Trescothick’s century, his 48th for
Somerset in first-class cricket, taking him clear of Viv Richards and only one 
behind the county’s record-holder Harold Gimblett, enabled his side to regain 
control of a seesawing match againstMiddlesex.

County cricket: Surrey v Yorkshire and more – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/12/county-cricket-surrey-yorkshire-live-blog>
James Fuller and James Harris’s record ninth-wicket stand was eventually ended 
on 162 as the pair fell in consecutive Tim Groenewald overs – both caught at 
slip, to giveMiddlesex <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/middlesex> a first 
innings lead of 145. Somerset’s woes worsened as they lost three wickets before 
lunch, with Harry Podmore dismissing Johann Myburgh, who left a straight one, 
and Chris Rogers, fending to point, before James Hildreth was brilliantly 
caught at slip off Ollie Rayner.

Trescothick stood firm, though, sharing a stand of 67 with Jim Allenby, who 
eventually skied Podmore to mid-on, then – having come together withSomerset 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/somerset> still 19 in arrears – 181 with 
Peter Trego, who ended the day 115 not out. Trescothick was typically severe on 
anything overpitched and he twice slog-swept Rayner for legside sixes; 
eventually, however, he was caught behind off James Harris, with Craig Overton 
succumbing to the same fate shortly afterwards. By hitting the final ball of 
the day for four Trego extended Somerset’s lead beyond 200 with four wickets in 
hand.

In Division Two Worcestershire moved one point behind the table-toppers Essex, 
who play Gloucestershire at Cheltenham from Wednesday, by trouncing
Northamptonshire at Wantage Road. Some sprightly batting from Ross Whiteley, 
who crashed three enormous sixes on his way to 45 from 36 balls, set up a 
declaration.

Northamptonshire’s notional task of chasing 454 immediately met choppy waters 
as they lost their first four wickets for 37, then found themselves 81 for 
seven. With Matt Henry taking five for 36, the tail wagged its way to 142, when 
Monty Panesar was run out, providing a farcical end to a poor performance.
 