
Too many vulnerable children face “clear and present risk of harm” because of 
serious failings in council child protection departments,Ofsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> has said.

More than a quarter of councils were judged “inadequate” by inspectors, with 
three-quarters in total rated as less than “good”, according to the latest 
annualOfsted <https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> social care report.

The head of Ofsted, Sir Michael Wilshaw, described the findings as 
unacceptable. The child protection system was permeated by “widespread levels 
of mediocre provision”, he said. “Too many children are not receiving the 
services they deserve.”

However, the Association of Directors of Children’s Services 
<http://adcs.org.uk/> criticised Wilshaw’s comments as “a partial and 
excessively negative story that destabilises the very services it seeks to 
improve”.


Wilshaw said the poorest-performing councils often failed to deliver adequate 
protection for at-risk youngsters living in chaotic family circumstances. He 
singled out what he called “systematic failure on a shocking scale” in 
Sunderland, whosechildren’s services have been taken over 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/15/outsourcing-future-childrens-services>
 by a government intervention team after receiving an “inadequate” rating last 
year.

Labour fears potential privatisation of child protection services
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/13/labour-fears-potential-privatisation-of-child-protection-services>
In poor-performing authorities, social workers were overwhelmed by high 
caseloads. In some councils, an individual social worker might be responsible 
for as many as 35 children, compared with just seven in others. The worst 
council children’s departments were characterised by poor management and a lack 
of commitment from local political leaders, he said.

Other common features of poor practice in local authorities judged as 
inadequate included high turnover of social workers, assessments of children 
that either took too long or were not carried out, failure to see children 
alone on visits, and failure of managers to challenge poor social work practice.

Although in recent years councils have had to cope with massively reduced 
budgets and rising numbers of children coming into care, Wilshaw said there was 
no correlation between inadequate services and funding cuts or high levels of 
social deprivation.

Dave Hill, president of the ADCS, said: “That a quarter of the local 
authorities inspected so far are deemed to be inadequate is concerning, but 
this highlights the challenging times we are in: funds are reducing, 
particularly in terms of early help services, demand for help and support is 
increasing as is public scrutiny.”


Roy Perry, chairman of the Local Government Association’s children and young 
people board, said the Ofsted report demonstrated the majority of councils were 
rated as “requires improvement” or better, despite “significant strain” on 
budgets. “There can be no doubt that local government has the commitment and 
expertise required to turn around struggling services, without the need for 
externally imposed structures or operating models,” said Perry.

Asked at a press conference whether the directors of failing social services 
should be “named and shamed”, Wilshaw said he was tempted to do so. “We do see 
underperforming managers moving around the system,” he said.

Asked later for examples of senior managers of failed children’s services who 
had subsequently moved into similar jobs in other councils, a spokesperson for 
Ofsted said it had only “anecdotal evidence” and that it “did not want to name 
any names”.

Despite widespread failures, there was was “much to be optimistic about” in 
children’s services, Wilshaw said. Ofsted had identified improving care in 
children’s homes, where four out of five were now rated good or better.
 