
An appeal judgment will be delivered in a Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> court on Monday morning over a 
Belfast bakery that was fined for refusing to make a gay-themed cake.

Ashers Bakery is appealing against a Belfast county court ruling in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/may/19/northern-ireland-ashers-baking-company-guilty-discrimination-gay-marriage-cake>
 that found it guilty of discriminating against a customer on the grounds of 
sexual orientation.

The firm was ordered to pay £500 compensation to the local gay rights activist 
Gareth Lee, whose legal action was backed by the Equality Commission of 
Northern Ireland.

Lee had tried to buy a cake depicting the Sesame Street characters Bert and 
Ernie below the motto “Support Gay Marriage” for an event to mark the 
International Day Against Homophobia. When the company refused to bake the 
cake, Lee sued.

At the original court case in 2015 Lee said Ashers Bakery’s refusal to take 
his order made him “feel I’m not worthy, a lesser person and to me that was 
wrong”.

Lee, a volunteer member of the LGBT advocacy group Queer Space, had ordered 
the cake for a private function in Bangor, County Down, in May 2014.

His order came shortly after the Democratic Unionist party used its power of 
veto in the Northern Ireland assembly to block moves to make gay marriage legal 
in the province. The region is the only part of the UK where gay marriage is 
still not recognised in law.

The DUP has a strong base in the province’s Evangelical Christian community 
and was founded out of the late Dr Ian Paisley’s Free Presbyterian Church. The 
party has consistently blocked proposals in the assembly from other parties 
including their main partners in government, Sinn Féin, to legalise gay 
marriage.

During a four-day hearing at the court of appeal in Belfast in May, lawyers 
for the McArthur family, who own Ashers, said they had challenged the finding 
because in their eyes it would have been sinful for them to complete the order.

In their legal battle to overturn the ruling the McArthur family have won the 
support of Northern Ireland’s attorney general, John Larkin QC.

During the hearing Larkin argued in court that the McArthur family was 
entitled to constitutional protection for turning down a customer’s order based 
on their personal religious beliefs. He claimed the case against the bakery was 
one of “coerced expression”.

He told the court: “The wrong occurs, and can amount to cruelty, to make 
someone say something fundamentally at variance with their political opinion or 
religious views.”

The three appeal judges for Monday’s judgment will include Northern Ireland’s 
lord chief justice, Sir Declan Morgan, and Lord Justices Weatherup and Weir.

Daniel McArthur, the general manager of Ashers Baking Company, and his wife 
Amy will be present outside the court shortly after 9am on Monday as they 
attend to hear the judgment delivered.

Ashers, which employ 80 staff across nine branches in Northern Ireland, has 
had its legal fees paid by the Christian Institute.

At a previous hearing Daniel McArthur explained why his family-run firm turned 
down Lee’s request for the cake.

“We happily serve everyone but we cannot promote a cause that goes against 
what the Bible says about marriage. We have tried to be guided in our actions 
by our Christian beliefs,” he said.
 