
In April of last year, at 10pm on a Wednesday, French network TV5Monde 
suddenly began to broadcast Islamic State logos and slogans in French, Arabic 
and English. Simultaneously the broadcaster’s Facebook page began to post 
inflammatory messages. “Soldiers of France, stay away from the Islamic State!” 
read one. “You have the chance to save your families, take advantage of it.”

“Je suIS IS,” read another 
<http://www.dw.com/en/french-tv-broadcaster-hit-by-hackers-claiming-is-ties/a-18372779>
.

But the second message was a lie.

According to security researchers, the culprit was a Russian hacking team long 
believed by cybersecurity analysts in and outside the US government to be 
working for the country’s largest intelligence agency, GRU. Fascinated 
researchers have given it a variety of names: APT 28, Strontium, the Sofacy 
Group, and Fancy Bear.

Last week, WikiLeaks distributed 20,000 emails from the Democratic National 
Committee (DNC) obtained after Fancy Bear and another hacking team believed to 
be tied to a competing Russian intelligence service, known as Cozy Bear, 
breached the DNC’s internal network. Cozy Bear is believed to have entered the 
network a year before and waited quietly, gathering information and cataloging 
emails. Fancy Bear came later. WikiLeaks’ consistent position is not to discuss 
its source and to push back against suggestions that it gained the data from 
either Bear.

The Bears have three important things in common: expensive digital tools, 
suggesting state sponsorship; an interest in pursuing sensitive, embarrassing 
or strategically significant information, rather than financially beneficial 
data; and a choice of targets that align with Russian political objectives. 
Both Bears infiltrated the DNC: Cozy beginning in summer 2015, Fancy in April 
this year.

The Guardian view on the leaked DNC emails: beware of hackers | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/25/the-guardian-view-on-the-leaked-dnc-emails-beware-of-hackers>
Fancy Bear has been known to researchers for seven years, notably in 
disinformation campaigns in the Caucasian nation of Georgia. Cozy Bear came to 
prominence last year, when researchers at Kaspersky Lab pinned devastating 
hacks of the unclassified state department and White House networks on the 
group.

Senior US government sources are not primarily concerned with WikiLeaks’ role 
in the affair. Their alarm, shared by cybersecurity researchers, is that a 
Russian hacking operation they consider tied to the Russian government has 
taken a step toward attacking an element of the US political apparatus.

Previously the Bears stalked eastern European countries and multinational 
organizations implicated in Russian national objectives. Now, although 
attributing responsibility for online breaches is an inferential affair, many 
in the US government and cybersecurity circles see the Bears in their 
backyards. And not only are they grabbing data, they are taking the highly 
unusual step of spreading it, where it can be published to the embarrassment of 
prominent US politicians.

“Targeting a political campaign, trying to find out everything you can about 
the next leader of the free world, is fair game for intelligence services, as 
much as we hate it. That’s a valid intelligence target,” said Toni Gidwani, a 
former Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) analyst who is now chief researcher 
for the cybersecurity firm ThreatConnect.

“Dumping this much information and [leaving] very much the sense that there’s 
more to come, we have to ask different questions about what the Russian 
objectives are and what they think is going to happen.”

Neither the DIA nor the FBI, which has an investigation open into the DNC 
hack, would address whether it assesses Fancy Bear to be an instrument of the 
Russian intelligence apparatus. Some administration officials are unsure 
whether the US would make a public accusation against the Russians. But, one 
said, the administration is coming to the conclusion that Moscow is responsible 
for the hack, despite foreign minister Sergey Lavrov’s protestations.

The blurred distinction between espionage and attack online has outpaced 
thinking about deterrence and reprisal, meaning both an intrusion and an 
accusation carries the risk of escalating beyond tolerable levels. One senior 
official notes that the executive branch tends to be “highly circumspect” about 
pointing a finger atRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>.

That escalation risk is heightened because of the mystery surrounding the DNC 
hack. If it is the Russians, the change represented by making stolen data 
public raises questions on questions: did something go wrong? Or did Russia 
mean to push the envelope with its principal geopolitical rival? Or could 
cybersecurity analysts be wrong, and the ties between the Bears and Russian 
government objectives be less substantial than they believe?

“The implications of those assessments have some pretty stark recommendations 
for our leadership, so it is only appropriate to go back and double-check,” 
said Gidwani. “But by the same token, if everything else looks completely 
implausible, what’s left is probably what’s happening.”

Patterns of infiltration

Cozy Bear has a sense of humor. 

According to Kaspersky, one of its most effective methods of intrusion 
involved hiding a virus inside a email message that played aCareer Builder ad 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VRrMu7B1L2I> from Super Bowl XL. The ad showed 
a human office worker trying to tell his colleagues, who are all chimpanzees, 
to stop wrecking the office.

“These videos are quickly passed around offices with delight while systems are 
infected in the background silently,”wrote 
<https://securelist.com/blog/research/69731/the-cozyduke-apt/> despondent 
Kaspersky researchers.

A key characteristic of Bear attacks – and high-quality attacks from many 
seasoned intruders – appears to be its adroit disguise of malicious files. In 
another operation, a group Kaspersky believes to be Cozy Bear sent “highly 
relevant and well-crafted content” – such as PDFs about Ukraine possibly 
joining Nato – to people who would open them and find them interesting without 
becoming suspicious. Sophisticated users who would spot a “YovTube.com” address 
or an amateurish website inviting them to type in a login might eagerly open an 
official-seeming white paper.

Fancy Bear has its own signatures: its identifiable suite of tools has, since 
2007 or perhaps even 2004, been updated with the frequency of a software 
company, according to security firm FireEye. FireEye gave all the tools names – 
Sourface, Chopstick and Eviltoss, among others – and described them as 
demonstrating “formal coding practices indicative of methodical, diligent 
programmers”.

Rather than send its malware broadly, a pattern used by hackers who hope a 
fraction of their recipients will click on a dubious link, Fancy Bear sends 
them to specific users, in a pattern Gidwani said indicates reconnaissance on 
its targets. Microsoft reported that Fancy Bear finds unsuspecting users both 
by sifting through social media and other online data for associations with its 
target – say, a LinkedIn page that lists the DNC as an employer – and also by 
meticulously cataloging the data it has stolen in previous hacks.

“They customize their attack to thrive in that environment,” said Gidwani. 
“Somebody who could do that has resources, has time and a test environment to 
try all the stuff out to make sure they’ve got the right package they’re going 
to deploy. Those are hallmarks of nation-state operations. Criminals are going 
to hit a million people in the hope that they get a hundred.”

Fancy Bear also favors infected files, in which it usually hides Sourface, the 
program that creeps on to a target computer and downloads malware allowing that 
computer to be controlled remotely. A list of “lure” emails compiled by FireEye 
includes a file named “military cooperation.doc”, a Georgian-language IT 
document for the ministry of internal affairs, and an offer of work to a 
journalist from the editor of a fictitious division at Reason magazine.

Cooper Quintin, a security researcher for digital rights activists the 
Electronic Frontier Foundation, said that when his organization was spoofed by 
Fancy Bear last year, it was part of an attack on a different target. “Some 
friends at Google” tipped him off that someone was squatting on
electronicfrontierfoundation.org <http://electronicfrontierfoundation.org/>, a 
domain the company didn’t own then, though now it links to Quintin’s post on 
the event.

Curious, Quintin used the fake version of his company’s site to peer into the 
hack. “We pulled down a couple of files and noticed some similarities to an 
attack that was going on calledOperation Pawn Storm 
<http://www.trendmicro.com/vinfo/us/security/news/cyber-attacks/operation-pawn-storm-fast-facts>
.”

Quintin notes that Fancy Bear benefits greatly from general ignorance about 
digital security: high-quality spearphishing works often, and zero-days are 
pricey. “Why run [a zero-day] when people still open email attachments?” 
Quintin asked. “It’s usually associated with criminals but it works for 
nation-states, too.”

Attribution is tricky, Quintin said – often, patterns only become clear after 
a team has been completely exposed. But there are ways to make educated guesses.


Even if a user doesn’t fall for the login page trap, Fancy Bear can glean 
information from the click: the user’s IP address and location, his or her 
browser type and version, and the target computer’s operating system.

Metadata associated with the malicious code used by Fancy Bear suggests a 
point of origin. Its language settings are Russian, and the malware FireEye 
found was overwhelmingly built during the workday in Moscow and St Petersburg.

Information worth more than money 

Once either group acquires the credentials it needs for its current operation, 
it uses flaws in popular software to secretly send data back to its own 
networks without its targets’ knowledge. These flaws, known as zero-day 
exploits, are critical tools of any hacking organization, from thieves to spy 
agencies – by definition, they’re difficult for administrators to defend 
against. The NSA isfond of them 
<https://www.wired.com/2014/05/alexander-defends-use-of-zero-days/>. 

Zero-day exploits are not for novice hackers. They are difficult to design and 
keep stable. Purchasing them on the black market is very expensive. Misused, 
they can collapse forever when an exploited company notices them and fixes the 
weakness in its software.

Used effectively, zero-day exploits can be used to steal huge amounts of 
money. That objective has been a hallmark of other sophisticated 
state-sponsored hackers. China’s famous Unit 61398 tends to steal intellectual 
property and information beneficial toeconomic activity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/19/us-chinese-military-officials-cyber-espionage>
.

But Fancy Bear and Cozy Bear don’t do that. 

FireEye notes that Fancy Bear wants to exfiltrate sensitive data by camping 
out on a network undetected for long periods of time – a network controlled or 
associated with a political, military, diplomatic, activist or journalistic 
entity. The team acquires “intelligence that would only be useful to a 
government”, the firm said. The targets chosen by the Bears suggest the 
government who would primarily find that intelligence useful is Russia.

Famously, when the Russian military attacked Georgia in 2008, its ground 
assault was presaged by overloading the servers used by the president, the 
foreign ministry and the parliament. “Georgia in a lot of ways was one of the 
real opening shots in how we see Russia using cyber as an instrument of 
national power, fully integrated with their national objectives,” Gidwani said.

In 2013, employees at the Georgian ministry of internal affairs began 
receiving “a weaponized Excel file that presented a decoy document containing a 
list of Georgian drivers’ license numbers”, FireEye researchers wrote. A second 
example used the name of an actual system administrator as the author of the 
lure document. A third attack targeted a partnership between the Georgian 
military and a US defense contractor. Fancy Bear hid Sourface in a list of 
group members’ birthdays.

Other targets show Bear attacks moving westward – much as Russia’s 
intervention in Syria, its first beyond its historical frontiers in a 
generation, followed years of unanswered military boldness against its 
neighbors.

Also in 2013, Kaspersky noticed a group it called MiniDuke – now believed to 
be Cozy Bear, as well – sneaking into targets in Hungary, Luxembourg and 
Belgium. Other targets include prime Russian multilateral adversaries like Nato 
and the Office of Security Cooperation in Europe. And in July 2015, an 
infiltration into an email system used by the US military’s joint chiefs of 
staff led military officials tosuspect Russian culpability 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/08/05/politics/joint-staff-email-hack-vulnerability/>; 
CrowdStrike points a finger at Cozy Bear. Around the same time, Cozy Bear made 
its way into the DNC’s network.

Doubt as an objective

While the FBI investigates the DNC hack, politics has taken the place of 
digital forensics.

Democrats have already begun to seize upon the hack to imply, as yet without 
evidence, that the Russians executed the attack to benefit GOP nominee Donald 
Trump, whohas openly praised 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2015/12/trump-vladimir-putin-praise-216892> the 
Russian president, Vladimir Putin, something that sets him apart from any other 
major Republican figure in recent memory.

Cozy Bear infiltrated the DNC months before Trump surprised the political 
world by winning the nomination; nevertheless, the senior Democrats on the 
congressional intelligence committees on Wednesday called for anextraordinary 
declassification 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/27/donald-trump-russia-hacking-dangerous>
 of intelligence assessments about the hack. The White House said it would 
“carefully review” the request, but the National Security Council spokesman, 
Ned Price, said that the just-launched FBI inquiry into the hack “will 
necessarily limit what we will be able to say”.

A major question at issue in the inquiry is whether the Russians, should they 
be culpable, intended the DNC infiltration and subsequent publication to 
influence the outcome of the 2016 election. ThreatConnect’s Gidwani suspects 
that Russia may not have had so sophisticated a plan.

“Part of me feels like that might be a more aggressive reading of what’s 
happening. If their objective is primarily to be a distraction, to sow 
confusion, to sow doubt, that doesn’t require the creation of this airtight 
persona,” she said, referencing the hacker persona Guccifer2.0, who claims to 
have passed the documents to WikiLeaks and whose authenticity has come under
serious doubt 
<http://motherboard.vice.com/read/all-signs-point-to-russia-being-behind-the-dnc-hack>
.

Gidwani continued: “It allows you a lot more wiggle room and ability to fudge 
around the edges to create that type of effect. It’s an incredibly important 
question, whether Russia is trying to push the outcome of the election one way 
or the other. But I think we may not be sufficiently considering that that 
might not be the primary outcome they’re seeking.

“And that shouldn’t necessarily be cause for relief. Trying to sow this much 
doubt and discord is also very troubling. These types of actions, what we’ve 
seen thus far, they had been limited to eastern Europe, Georgia, Ukraine in the 
2014 election. Moscow no longer sees the same line, if you will, between that 
near-abroad and the US.”
 