
Cricketer Phillip Hughes <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/phil-hughes> has 
died in hospital after he was struck on the head by a short delivery during a 
Sheffield Shield match at the Sydney Cricket Ground on Tuesday.

The 25-year-old from Macksville, on the north coast of New South Wales, was 
playing for South Australia against NSW when he collapsed after he was hit on 
the lower back of the neck by a bouncer. He was taken to hospital in a critical 
condition and died on Thursday.

Hughes had remained in an induced coma at St Vincent’s hospital after having 
emergency surgery to relieve pressure on his brain.

But he never regained consciousness, according to a statement from the 
Australian team doctor, Peter Brukner on Thursday afternoon.

“It is my sad duty to inform you that a short time ago Phillip Hughes passed 
away,” the statement read.

“He was not in pain before he passed and was surrounded by his family and 
close friends. As a cricket community we mourn his loss and extend our deepest 
sympathies to Phillip’s family and friends at this incredibly sad time.Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia kindly asks that the 
privacy of the Hughes family, players and staff be respected.”

All Sheffield Shield matches were cancelled after Hughes suffered the injury. 
Cricket Australia faces a big decision on whether to go ahead with the opening 
Test of the summer against India next week.

Hughes, who was days away from his 26th birthday, played Test and one-day 
cricket for Australia, Sheffield Shield cricket for South Australia and county 
cricket for Worcestershire.

He made his Test debut against South Africa in 2009, making centuries in both 
innings of his second Test.

Hughes originally played for his home state before moving to South Australia. 

Tributes began pouring in soon after the news, and flags flew at half mast at 
the SCG, New South Wales’s home ground.

Hughes’s former team, the South Australian Redbacks, said they had lost their 
mate “Hughesy.”

“Our deepest condolences to all his family and friends. He will be with us 
always.”

The prime minister, Tony Abbott, said Hughes’s death was “a very sad day for 
cricket and a heartbreaking day for his family.”

“What happened has touched millions of Australians,” Abbott said in a 
statement.

“For a young life to be cut short playing our national game seems a shocking 
aberration. He was loved, admired and respected by his teammates and by legions 
of cricket fans. Australians’ thoughts and prayers are with the Hughes family.”
 