
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> South Africa has admitted 
that it is powerless to prevent players joining English counties on Kolpak 
deals, as recent Test cricketers continue to turn their backs on international 
careers. The loss of high-quality cricketers in the country has fuelled fears 
of a player drain, similar to that which the Springboks rugby union side has 
faced.

At least five players who have played Tests since November 2015 have joined or 
are set to join English counties as they flee quotas, seek better pay and look 
to move before Brexit could nullify the EU ruling that allows South Africans to 
play in England as non-overseas players.

The Guardian understands that the off‑spinner Dane Piedt, who played against 
England this year, and at least one squad member for the recent tour of 
Australia (although not one who played in the Test series, which the Proteas 
won 2-1) are seeking to move to English cricket. Kolpak players can play 
domestic cricket in South Africa in the English winter, but forfeit their 
international careers while under contract in England.

Faf du Plessis becomes South Africa Test captain after AB de Villiers resigns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/ab-de-villiers-south-africa-test-captain-faf-du-plessis>
Already, the spinner Simon Harmer has joined Essex, Stiaan van Zyl has moved 
to Sussex and Derbyshire have signed Hardus Viljoen to spearhead their pace 
attack; all three players are in their 20s. In October, the former under-19 
international Colin Ackermann joined Leicestershire, too.

Kolpak players in county cricket have long been a contentious issue in that 
they dilute opportunities for England‑qualified players even though they raise 
the quality. In a 2008 game between Northamptonshire and Leicestershire, 12 of 
the 22 players were on Kolpak deals. As eligibility regulations have tightened, 
the number of players registered as Kolpaks has reduced in recent years, with 
the number between 3% and 4% during the 2016 season.

Piedt, who is 26 and played the most recent of his seven Tests in August, 
believes he is unlikely to be signed by a county as an overseas player and is 
therefore happy to play as a Kolpak. The paucity of high-quality spin in the 
County Championship means that, like Harmer, he is well placed to earn a deal, 
although he has not yet formally spoken to any counties.

The arrangement provides players with greater job security, but also greater 
remuneration; with the Rand weak, Van Zyl – who played 12 Tests before being 
dropped in August – has a contract with Sussex that is understood to be worth 
roughly three times as much as his deal with the Cobras in Cape Town.

“We cannot restrain individuals from plying their trade,” Haroon Lorgat, the 
chief executive of Cricket South Africa, said. “Over and above our regular 
reviews of the domestic playing rules and regulations to ensure it is fit for 
purpose, we will continue to rather focus on making sure that we have the best 
systems to produce the best cricketers in numbers.

“We have realised a long time back that the world is a global village with 
people very mobile. Like in every other country and across every other 
profession, South African citizens will venture abroad to take advantage of 
stronger currencies and employment opportunities.

“This mobility affects all professions and is not limited to cricketers who 
ply their trade in English counties.”

The motivation to leave at this time is heightened by uncertainty over the 
perceived impact of Brexit. Players who have already signed Kolpak deals – Van 
Zyl and Viljoen are both contracted until 2019 – believe they will be 
unaffected, but that things could change in 2017.

“I have been told that players are choosing Kolpak deals now for fear of 
losing this opportunity once Brexit is implemented,” Lorgat said, but the ECB 
told the Guardian it was too early to know the impact of the referendum vote.

“Regarding the wider impact of Brexit,” said an ECB spokesperson, “it is too 
early to predict the outcome in this area. We await more information on the 
legal situation post-Brexit and will then need to hold further detailed 
discussions with our stakeholders, the government and other sporting bodies 
before we can comment further on the potential implications for cricket.”

Lorgat was less forgiving of those citing paths blocked by quotas and 
transformation targets for their departure. CSA this year introduced a system 
requiring national teams to contain an average (across a year) of six players 
of colour, two of whom would be black African. Piedt would be the first 
non-white player to sign a Kolpak deal since the new targets were brought in.

“Any player citing transformation or targets is looking for a soft excuse as 
he or she might not be prepared to work hard enough to fight for a place in our 
representative teams,” Lorgat said.

“We only select the best as was evident in our recent successes against 
Australia. You don’t whitewash Australia or beat them seven times in a row 
without choosing your best.”
 