
Seawards from bungalows, villas and the Camelot hotel, the northerly outlook 
is dominated by cliffs and a succession of headlands towards Boscastle and far 
off Cambeak. Out on exposed Barras Nose, pennyworts grow in slatey crevices. No 
wind stirs the yellow gorse and faded heather, and the cries of gulls sound 
loud above the unusually quiet swish of the sea.

Below this vantage point, in Tintagel Haven, green water sucks into caves and 
laps the sheer rocks of the peninsula (known as Tintagel island) bearing the 
ruins. On the flat summit of that ancient site, Mr Dangar’sSoay sheep 
<http://soaysheep.org/soay.html> appear as distant silhouettes as they graze 
and help maintain the sward around the historic foundations.

For now, the castle is closed to visitors, and no one crosses the bridge from 
the mainland to climb the steep paths and ponder the myth of King Arthur.

Archaeological excavations there and in the nearby churchyard of St Materiana 
date this fortification back to the 5th and 6th centuries. Maybe it was linked 
to an earlier veneration of the constellation that points to the pole star, the 
Great Bear or Arth Fawr (Arthur), as it was known in the old British language.

The coastal path back to Bossiney Haven is bounded by walls of rough slate 
laid herringbone fashion, all encrusted with bristly lichens. Come summer, the 
wind-blasted cushions of dormant thrift and bladder campion will burst into 
flower, as will foxgloves seeded out beside the muddy path.

Sunbeams glide across the hinterland of pastures and shut holiday chalets. 
Dunnocks jangle their song from bramble coverts, and blackbirds prospect mole 
hills for worms. Ahead, the low sun picks out the curves of mediaevallynchets 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lynchet>. Beneath the blue sky, the sea shimmers 
turquoise, azure and cobalt.

High above Gullastem and protected by vertical cliffs is Willapark, an iron 
age cliff castle, a refuge for the local tribe 2,000 years ago. A defensive 
bank has been renovated and scrub cut back. At the northern end a flock of 
little black sheep rest in this sun-gilded space.

Twitter: @gdncountrydiary <https://twitter.com/gdncountrydiary>
 