
Some cases kept Frederic Reamer up at night.

During his 24 years on the Rhode Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rhode-island> parole board, Reamer met 
murderers who had repented and killers who had begged for forgiveness. Reamer’s 
job was to decide whether they had done enough to be freed.

After studying case files and prison reports, on the day of the parole hearing 
Reamer would meet the victims in the morning and the criminals in the 
afternoon. Reamer called these days gut-wrenching.

The hardest cases, by far, were always those where the victim was adamant 
about not paroling this inmate because of the horror.


I spent 28 years on death row
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/21/28-years-on-death-row> 
“And then on the other side of the coin an inmate demonstrates genuine, 
profound, impressive insight, they’ve worked very hard at their issues,” Reamer 
said. “When you try to boil down justice, what’s the right thing to do in those 
instances?”

Reamer’s new book, On The Parole Board: Reflections on Crime, Punishment and 
Redemption and Justice 
<https://cup.columbia.edu/book/on-the-parole-board/9780231177337>, which is out 
next month on Columbia University Press, goes through dozens of cases where 
this tension plays out. His aim is to “lift back the curtain” on the parole 
process, which allows a group of unelected officials to have enormous influence 
on the criminal justice system.

According to the Pew Charitable Trusts, one in 31 adults, or 7.3 million 
people, are in prison or on parole in the US. All but three state parole boards 
have some degree of control over prisoners’ release – but almost half of all 
states keep parole files secret, meaning there is little accountability.

Reamer, who has spent his life in academia and is currently a professor of 
social work at Rhode Island College, said he took his responsibilities 
seriously.

He said deciding on parole is “not just an intellectual exercise” and is 
something that affected him deeply: “For me, much of this work requires deep 
looks at the personal, the very emotional quality of these cases. This is not 
mental gymnastics, trying to put all of this data into in an equation and 
reaching a decision. There’s a lot of pathos, there’s a lot of emotion and a 
lot of tears.”

Among the cases in the book is Robert Blane, who set fire to an apartment 
block where he worked as a maintenance man, severely burning a five-year-old 
boy and his father.

The father, Alexis Ronaldo, told the board: “Every day I stare down at my legs 
I am reminded of the fire.” He said he cannot work, he can barely walk and 
watching his son experience the same agony makes him sometimes wish he died in 
the blaze.

During his parole hearing Blane, a model prisoner, was told about this and 
started crying. He said: “I feel awful. Just awful. I can’t wrap my mind around 
the fact that I did that to another human being. No one deserves that. I hate 
myself for what I did. Mr Ronaldo and his son have every right to hate me and 
to want me to stay in prison. How can I blame them for that?”

At that hearing, Blane had only served a third of his sentence and his parole 
was denied.

The case that stuck with Reamer the most was Dave Sempsrott, who became his 
pen pal for 30 years after they met at a support group in prison.

Over dozens of letters, some of which Reamer shared with the Guardian, 
Sempsrott opened up about why in 1977, whilst high on PCP, he stabbed to death 
his best friend Don, Don’s wife and their four-year-old daughter.

His explanation is blunt and chilling: “I cannot give you any reason as to why 
I committed these murders. I do not know and I don’t think I ever will. I 
remember no argument at all; I was not mad at Don. He was my best friend. What 
can I say?”

On the other hand Reamer came to respect Sempsrott, who died in prison in 
2013, for the letters in which he accepted what he did. “I think he felt so 
horrible about what he had done there was a part of him that wanted the world 
to know how badly he felt because that didn’t come out at the trial. His 
defence attorneys don’t want you talking about that stuff. I think this was his 
opportunity to say to the world, I know I messed up”.

Reamer, 63, who worked as a parole board officer from 1992 until January this 
year, said he has a “pretty good radar” for when prisoners are lying.

He cites one inmate who would take his crucifix out of his shirt so the board 
could see it during the interview, as if to show off his faith. “There will 
always be a certain type of inmate who is so manipulative, so cunning I would 
never vote to parole, but that’s not the norm. Most people admit their guilt 
and want to work on their issues,” Reamer said.

Sometimes, however, Reamer was fooled or he simply made the wrong call, and a 
prisoner would reoffend after being released. During his 24 years on the job, 
he decided on around 25,000 cases and whilst he did not let anyone out to kill 
again, some criminals committed offenses like domestic violence and assault. 
Reamer calls such eventualities one of “inherent risks of this kind of work” 
and a risk we should accept.

“The only way to prevent that happening is to never release anybody,” he said. 
“It is a fact of life, I’m not happy about it, that some of these are not going 
to have good endings but on balance a system where people earn their way out of 
prison ... I truly believe in the long run enhances public safety”.

Reamer says that from his experience, Rhode Island parole board officers were 
diligent, but across the US the parole system has faced criticism.

A months long investigation by the Marshall Project 
<https://www.themarshallproject.org/2015/07/10/life-without-parole#.zcbZNura1> 
found that most boards are secretive, unaccountable and overly cautious. A 
recent update of the Model Penal Code, which is written by respected legal 
scholars, said that parole boards were “failed institutions”.

Reamer says that he did not think it was fair to make such a sweeping 
statement because there is a lot of variation within parole boards across the 
US.

Unlike many other states Rhode Island publishes its parole board minutes and 
providesdata 
<http://www.doc.ri.gov/administration/planning/statistics_reports.php> on how 
many prisoners are being set free each month. But Reamer admits that in his 24 
years on the job nobody was fired by the Rhode Island governor, who was 
technically their supervisor.

“Is there a great deal of room for improvement? Yes. Are some boards too 
conservative? Yes. Are some risk averse? I’m willing to believe that.”

Another criticism of parole boards is that they are stuffed with friends of 
the state governors or a reward to big donors.

On this Reamer is his most outspoken. “These are not positions that should be 
left to the governor’s friends or those who contributed to the campaign. 
There’s just too much at stake here. It’s unconscionable to appoint people who 
do not have the expertise, it’s absolutely unconscionable and does it happen? I 
imagine it does.”
 