
Since 2002 we have been organising the Bonn University physics students to put 
on extensivephysics shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2010/sep/21/1> for kids 
aged 9 to 99. The shows consist of many live experiments, often embedded in a 
story line. Besides being an entertaining form of outreach, for me as a 
professor, it is an education project, aimed at our physics students. I also 
get to play with all the experiments!

25 years ago, outreach was minimally funded, if at all. However, in 2012, as 
part of a large research grant funded by the German government (DFG, CRC 110 
<http://crc110.hiskp.uni-bonn.de/>), we received substantial funding for 
outreach in elementary particle physics. The grant is based in Bonn but 
includes the FZ-Jülich, the TU Munich, as well as the Chinese Academy of 
Sciences and Peking University. With this money we developed a new show on 
elementary particle physics, which we have taken toOxford and London, UK (2014) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2014/mar/13/slam-pow-bang-on-tour-in-england-with-the-bonn-physics-show>
, Padua and Trieste, Italy (2015), and Copenhagen and Odense, Denmark (2016).

Killing a Physical Theory softly – Roulette Style
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2015/dec/14/killing-a-physical-theory-softly-roulette-style>
Originally, the intention was to take this show also to China. However the 
obstacles to transporting (and importing!) all our equipment proved 
prohibitive. Instead we decided to bring the general idea of our shows and our 
expertise, but using local experiments, with the intention of introducing the 
Chinese students to Bonn show physics. Just a few days before departure we 
learned that through a communication error Dr Zhuang Ci, our local contact, had 
organised for our group to perform a public show for Chinese high-school 
students on our last day in Beijing. Thus we weren’t just going to host a 
workshop, we actually had to teach the Chinese students how to perform a show 
in under a week.....and the show was to be in Chinese! Unfortunately, nobody in 
the Bonn group speaks any Chinese.

Thus in March 2016, with some trepidation, we got on a plane in Frankfurt 
headed for Beijing: Seven Bonn students, Michael Kortmann, the Bonn lab 
technician, and myself. With the help of Prof. Liangzhu Mu (Peking University) 
we went through their demonstration experiment collection. The next day we 
assembled with 15 Chinese students, who had volunteered: 11 from the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences and four from Peking University (PKU). They spent the next 
five days, all day understanding the experiments, learning how to operate them 
and – most of all – how to perform them in a show. In between the PKU students 
organised lunch partners for all of us, so we could eat at the local canteen. 
Slowly we grew into a team. We split the Chinese students into three groups, 
each headed by two German students. It was fun to watch them work closely 
together and to see German humour (much better than its reputation!) easily 
mesh with Chinese humour.

The day before the show we had the first rehearsal in Chinese. I had asked 
Prof. Shilin Zhu, a local Chinese physics professor, to attend, to make sure 
all the physics explanations were correct. It was wonderful to see how much 
more relaxed the Chinese students were performing, when speaking Chinese; some 
of them were obviously very comfortable on stage. I was also surprised to see 
that we could still give significant input. There are important aspects of 
(physics) presentations: order, angle of the experiment to the camera, facing 
the audience, etc... which seem universal. In the end the Chinese professor 
made extensive comments. The Chinese students were very quiet and respectful 
and I was afraid he was really laying into them. In the end he summarised in 
English what he had said. He had given the students some basic constructive 
guidelines on performing. In English they almost sound as if from Confucius: 
“speaking loudly gives the audience confidence (and makes them receptive for 
the show)”; “time (i.e. speaking slowly, with pauses) is strength”. He clearly 
had some theatre experience and his input was very helpful. The next day the 
show was a great success, possibly the first physics show ever in China! About 
120 high school students filled the auditorium. There was much laughter and as 
far as we could tell the Chinese students performed brilliantly.

In the end it was a godsend, that we could finish with a show. It gave us a 
goal and clearly focussed our activities. Working with Prof. Mu and the Chinese 
students was very relaxed and great fun. We laughed a lot together while 
playing with the experiments, and I think everyone learned a lot as well. For 
the German students it was tremendous, to teach their expertise in a far-away 
land, certainly a unique experience. For me personally, it was wonderful to 
interact with such an inspiring group of young Chinese students; we certainly 
bridged the cultural gap!

Supersymmetry - the end of the line | Jon Butterworth and Herbi Dreiner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2010/aug/31/supersymmetry-meeting>
Our grant was recently extended for another 4 years and we look forward to 
returning!

Herbi Dreiner is professor of physics at Bonn University, and occasional 
contributor to this blog.
 