
Republican presidential candidate Ted Cruz’s rally against the Iran nuclear 
deal on Wednesday – whose guest star will be his rival Donald Trump – is the 
tip of an iceberg of campaigning and fundraising to thwart the deal by 
non-profits funded partly by casino billionaireSheldon Adelson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/sheldon-adelson>, conservative groups and 
other GOP candidates such as Marco Rubio.

These drives to block the nuclear accord on Capitol Hill are going strong, 
even though the White House has locked up enough Democratic Senate supporters 
to ensure it has the votes to sustain a veto from Barack Obama of any 
resolution of disapproval that anti-deal congresspeople do manage to pass. And 
some of these groups are readying drives for more sanctions against Tehran to 
replace ones set to expire as part of the nuclear deal.

Over the summer, Texas senator Cruz helped forge a coalition of staunchly 
pro-Israel and conservative groups which has worked aggressively to build 
backing for congressional resolutions opposing the nuclear deal, a topObama 
administration <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> 
priority. And a non-profit group set up by allies of Senator Rubio of Florida 
has spent about $4.5m on an ad blitz in which Rubio blasts the nuclear deal, 
and may spend more, a spokesman for the group said.

The high-stakes fight could also yield political dividends for GOP 
presidential candidates, say Republican operatives and other conservatives.

“Aggressively fighting the Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> deal 
benefits you with activists, and has a not-so-small side benefit of pleasing 
one of the GOP’s most generous donors,” one veteran GOP operative said, 
referring to mega-donor Adelson, a staunch opponent of the deal.

Mort Klein, president of the Zionist Organization of America (ZOA), a group 
which historically has been heavily funded by Adelson and is co-sponsoring 
Wednesday’s rally, praised Cruz as a “man who tells the truth” about the Iran 
nuclear deal, and said that “inadvertently this could benefit his appeal to 
some donors”.

The lobbying battle royale has pitted Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans>, conservative groups and some 
Democrats, who argue the nuclear agreement is not strong enough and poses a 
serious threat to the security of Israel and the United States, against the 
administration and a growing number of Democratic allies who insist it will 
significantly diminish the Iranian nuclear threat for at least a decade.

Rubio and Cruz are among several candidates vying intensely for Adelson’s 
financial backing. A close ally of the Israeli prime minister, Binyamin 
Netanyahu, and an implacable foe of the Iran deal, Adelson has poured millions 
of dollars into a few of the big ad efforts under way by outside groups, 
according to three conservatives with ties to the Las Vegas mogul. Adelson,who 
in 2013 suggested dropping a nuclear bomb in the Iranian desert as a warning to 
Tehran against building nuclear weapons 
<http://www.jpost.com/Diplomacy-and-Politics/Adelson-US-should-drop-atomic-bomb-on-Iran-329641>
, has also made personal calls to some Democratic senators to urge them to 
oppose the deal, sources say.

Both Rubio and Cruz have had multiple meetings in the last year with Adelson, 
a sometimes mercurial donor, who gave close to $150m in 2012 to numerous Super 
Pacs and “dark money” non-profits in an attempt to oust Obama and help 
congressional Republicans. Boasting strong pro-Israel and hawkish credentials, 
Rubio and Cruz are said to be near the top of the list of those candidates 
Adelson is considering backing with his big checkbook, a decision that will 
probably turn on the candidates’ ideological bona fides coupled with an 
assessment of their electability.

The topic of Wednesday’s Cruz-orchestrated rally was broached in a late July 
meeting in the senator’s office that drew a couple of dozen conservative 
groups. The three event co-sponsors – the Tea Party Patriots, the Center for 
Security Policy and the ZOA – were in attendance.

Klein, of the ZOA, lauded Cruz for inviting Trump because “his participation 
substantially increases the publicity and visibility of the Iran nuclear deal, 
which is a catastrophe”.

This Thursday, as Congress is poised to vote on the deal, Klein will lead a 
lobbying blitz with some 70 of his board members and donors targeting at least 
50 members of Congress, including those who appear undecided and some backers 
of the accord. (Klein added that his group would keep pressing Capitol Hill for 
a resolution that would back Israel and other countries “in taking any steps 
they deem necessary to protect themselves against Tehran” and other measures.)

Meanwhile, the Conservative Solutions Project, a non-profit group run by 
allies of Rubio, has featured the Florida senator’s words and image in its 
$4.5m anti-nuclear deal ad blitz which has run on cable, radio and the 
internet. Jeff Sadosky, a spokesman for the group, said in an email: “We’re 
prepped to continue advertising throughout the time that Congress is 
considering the President’s dangerous Iran treaty.”

Adelson has given – or pledged – a seven-figure check to the pro-Rubio group, 
say three sources familiar with the casino mogul’s donations. The Rubio-allied 
group, which reported raising almost $16m in the first half of 2015, isn’t 
required to publicly disclose its donors under IRS rules. Sadosky declined to 
comment on whether Adelson has donated to the project.

Rubio recently said: “There’s nothing about this [Iran agreement] that’s 
binding on the next administration.”

The non-profit American Security Initiative, which was founded earlier this 
year by former senator Norm Coleman of Minnesota, an Adelson ally, and three 
other ex-senators, including onetime Democrat Joe Lieberman, has also spent big 
money fighting the deal. The group says it has spent almost $10m running 
hard-hitting ads against the deal – including a late August blitz aimed at six 
Democratic senators. Conservative sources say that the Coleman group has 
received seven-figure support from Adelson.

Coleman declined comment on its donors, but said in a phone interview that the 
goal “has been to alert both Members and the American public” about what the 
group deems the deal’s risks.

(Coleman and Adelson are also board members of the Republican Jewish 
Coalition, a conservative pro-Israel group that receives hefty funding from 
Adelson and has mounted a lobbying and ad effort against the nuclear accord.)

An Adelson spokesman declined to respond to questions for this piece.
 