
Little Sister, a story set in Amsterdam and the nearby seaside resort of 
Volendam, grew out of some very old memories, rather too close to the place 
that was once my home.

 Forty-six years ago, I abandoned school at the age of 17 to take up a 
five-pound-a-week cub reporter’s job on the smallest evening newspaper in 
Britain. It was in the seaside town of Scarborough, then in its heyday as a 
brassy English bucket-and-spade resort.

 This was just before the masses decamped to Torremolinos. Scarborough was 
fashionable. The Beatles had played the Futurist theatre six years before – I 
got taken to see them as a treat for passing my 11-plus. The massive Victorian 
hulk of the Grand Hotel, once the biggest in Europe, loomed from the cliffs 
over the seafront, as much of a draw as it had been in Edwardian times when 
Scarborough touted itself as a Yorkshire version of Nice. In the busy theatres, 
the biggest TV acts in the country played summer shows alongside the Black and 
White Minstrels – a production few people remember these days, though back then 
Welshmen in blackface singing “negro spirituals” was primetime TV.

 And the place was rotten, top to toe. In a spacious flat just across the Spa 
Bridge from the Grand lived Jimmy Savile with his mother, “the Duchess”. Down 
below on the seafront, the “ice cream king” Peter Jaconelli, a prominent local 
businessman newly elevated to town mayor, was a big mate of Savile’s, someone 
with the same taste for sexual abuse.

Jimmy Savile: timeline of his sexual abuse and its uncovering
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jun/26/jimmy-savile-sexual-abuse-timeline>
 The squalid details of Savile and Jaconelli’s predatory habits are now public 
knowledge. In 2014, North Yorkshire policepublicly apologised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/dec/18/jimmy-savile-victims-apology-police-north-yorkshire>
 to 35 victims of the pair, after admitting both men should have been liable to 
prosecution over charges of indecent assault, inciting a child to engage in 
sexual activity, gross indecency and rape.

I read that story while I was in Amsterdam thinking about the background to 
the book I was about to write. That moment I had it. Because to pretty much 
anyone living in Scarborough back in the 1970s, the police’s belated apology 
was old hat. I’d met Jaconelli and Savile many times as a local reporter and 
heard all the rumours and the warnings to steer clear of any invitations they 
offered. We knew exactly what they were already. We just did nothing about it.

 The police were aware of what was going on from the very outset. Intelligence 
files that have come to light since Savile’s death,mostly through the efforts 
of a brave campaigning website 
<http://nyenquirer.uk/savile-jaconelli-they-knew-in-72/>, reveal that in 1972 
Jaconelli was accused of indecent assault, only for the case to be dropped. All 
in secret of course.

Savile appeared a complex and frightening individual, charmless and vaguely 
threatening beneath the perma-smile

 But it’s not enough to lay the blame at the door of the police alone. It was 
an open secret in the town at the time that Jaconelli assaulted boys in his 
ice-cream parlour when he had the opportunity, and that Savile, sometimes with 
Jaconelli alongside, liked to cruise around in his Rolls-Royce looking to pick 
up any gullible kids willing to ride with them. If they got awkward they were 
threatened or paid off. Scarborough, like most seaside resorts, had a ready 
underclass of youth looking for money. Most of the jobs were seasonal and tied 
to the holiday trade. Winter was long and cash was always scarce. They had 
plenty of places to hunt.

 Jaconelli, it seemed to me, was little more than a devious opportunist 
determined to work a system that gave him free rein to pursue his victims. 
Savile appeared an altogether more complex and frightening individual, 
charmless and vaguely threatening beneath the perma-smile, gold jewellery and 
stinking cigar. He was oddly obsessed with his mother, and a Catholic too, 
given a papal knighthood in 1990, even attending daily mass later in life. One 
can only wonder what the confessions were like. Did Savile see his devotion to 
his mother and his work for charity – which was very real – as ways of 
offsetting the evil? Or did he do good as a way to find new victims? We’ll 
never know, and I wonder if the man understood himself.

 The crime in crime fiction is often banal and uninteresting – squalid, tawdry 
acts by squalid, tawdry people. “Why?” is often a more intriguing question in 
fiction than “what?” The question that arose when I started writing Little 
Sister was the one that had puzzled me whenever I thought back to Scarborough: 
why did decent people stand back and do nothing?

 On one level we had no choice. I was 17, working for a newspaper that was 
part of the collective blindness. The title was then under private ownership, 
run by a terrifying individual who, among other things, chaired the local 
magistrates’ court. I learned early on that, whatever its skills at reporting 
flower shows and those unfortunate enough to come before our owner in the 
courts, Watergate would never have been broken by the Scarborough Evening News.

'Jimmy Savile was supremely controlling – of people and his myth'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/20/jimmy-savile-controlling-people-and-his-myth-dan-davies-biography>


 That was Scarborough back then. Today, the Futurist is a miserable closed 
wreck and the Grand Hotel, which once wouldn’t let you through the door if you 
were wearing jeans, is a rather shabby £29-a-night stop for budget coach 
parties. Like seaside resorts everywhere, Scarborough is struggling to survive 
in changed times, though it’s still blessed with a gorgeous physical location, 
a handful of decent hotels, andone of the best Italian restaurants in the land 
<http://lanterna-ristorante.co.uk/>.

I love going back even if there are dark memories in those streets. We turned 
a blind eye, all of us. Out of fear, out of acceptance of our place, and 
probably out of some misguided belief that, however awful the gossip about this 
unsavoury pair might have been, surely it couldn’t have been that bad. In truth 
it was all much worse than any of us might have imagined.





 There are victims of Savile and Jaconelli still alive too, still angry, still 
in pain. Still, in some cases, blaming themselves, because victims of crimes 
like these are so often convinced that they brought their trauma on themselves. 
It’s a cruel fact that shame and guilt haunt the innocent much more than they 
dog the guilty. All that talk about “closure” is just that: talk. Damage and 
hurt last a lifetime and can, on occasion, mutate into evil itself.

 These were the ideas I wanted to explore in Little Sister, the story of two 
young sisters who might be victims or perpetrators, perhaps even both, and are 
unsure of which themselves.

 It’s all fiction, though it happens in another brassy seaside town, just 13 
miles outside Amsterdam. But its roots lie on the Yorkshire coast 40 years ago 
and still resonate there to this day.

Extract

People on the island village understood there was some kind of psychiatric 
institution on their doorstep. Only the few who worked there knew it housed a 
handful of the most disturbed female juvenile criminals in the Netherlands. The 
positioning was deliberate. On one side was the Gouwzee lake stretching west to 
Waterland and the main road to Amsterdam. On the other the larger Markermeer, 
part of a vast expanse of inland water that ran all the way out to the North 
Sea.

 Nothing but a grassy dyke joined Marken to the outside world, a narrow lane 
above it. Any inmate who escaped would have to make their way along that. None 
had tried in the 18 years of its existence. Nor did many visitors come the 
other way. Certainly not for Mia and Kim Timmers, two orphaned sisters 
forgotten for the most part, out of convenience and an unspoken sense of 
communal guilt.

 They’d been there since they were 11 years old and detained for killing a 
man. That was a decade before. Since being committed they’d never set foot out 
of the place.

More about Little Sister

I cannot say with certainty that the places where David Hewson sets his novels 
are exactly as he describes them, but his depictions of Italy, Denmark, and 
here the Netherlands, do seem remarkably lifelike, as though he has lived in 
each of them for years … There is a lot of repetition in contemporary crime 
fiction, and it is rare to find an author whose books seem entirely original. 
Hewson’s do.
- Jessica Mann, Literary Review

Buy the book

David Hewson’s Little Sister is published by Pan Macmillan for £7.99 and is 
available at the Guardian bookshop for £6.55 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/431434/>
 