
Rembrandt’s A Child Being Taught to Walk, c1656

David Hockney: The moment you put down two or three marks on a piece of paper, 
you get relationships. They’ll start to look like something. If you draw two 
little lines they might look like two figures or two trees. One was made first, 
one second. We read all kinds of things into marks. You can suggest landscape, 
people and faces with extremely little. It all depends on the human ability to 
see a mark as a depiction.

Martin Gayford: The whole of picture-making is based on our capacity to see 
one thing as another. We can find such images in the sky, or, asLeonardo da 
Vinci <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/davinci> suggested, on “walls 
spotted with various stains, or with a mixture of different kinds of stones”. 
In such random marks, Leonardo, who surely had a powerful imagination, could 
make out “landscapes adorned with mountains, rivers, rocks, trees, plains, wide 
valleys, and various groups of hills”.

DH: We obviously want to see pictures, don’t we? We are geared to seeing 
images on a flat surface. If we put down four marks, everybody knows it could 
be a face.

MG: That’s part of the alchemy of art, how an artist can transform one thing 
into another.
 Rembrandt’s A Child Being Taught to Walk (c1656). Photograph: The Trustees of 
the British Museum 
DH: The Chinese regarded not acknowledging the brush and the marks it makes as 
a bit crude; to them, that was trying to cover something up, so not such a high 
form of art. European art historians don’t look at China very much. But I 
suspectRembrandt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/rembrandt> must have 
known Chinese drawings, and had probably seen a few. Amsterdam was a port, and 
the Dutch were trading a great deal in the far east. For example, a Chinese 
master looking at Rembrandt’s drawing of a family, now in theBritish Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/british-museum>, would recognise it as a 
masterwork.

The child is being held by her mother and older sister. The mother grips the 
child firmly, the sister more hesitantly, and Rembrandt observes her looking at 
the child’s face to see how anxious she is. The lines of her shoulders 
beautifully indicate this; Rembrandt even turned his pen round and scratched 
through the ink to emphasise it. It makes me see the child’s face, a hint of 
worry in it, indicated only by one or two faint marks. One then begins to look 
at ink, not mothers and sisters, and marks made by a hand, speedily.

The trace of Rembrandt’s hand is still alive. Your eye can go back and forth 
between brown ink: sister; fast mark: mother. How rewarding this is, to move 
from the physical surface of the paper to its disappearance when you read the 
“subject”, and then back again. How many marvellous layers does this drawing 
have?

The mother has a double profile, Picasso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/pablo-picasso>esque. Was it an 
accident with the pen that he then used as a master would? Both profiles are 
fascinating about her character. Her skirt is a bit ragged, without any real 
detail; one seems to know this, and then marvels at how these few lines suggest 
it. Then, there’s a passing milkmaid, perhaps glancing at a very common scene, 
and we know the milk pail is full. You can sense the weight. Rembrandt 
perfectly and economically indicates this with – what? Six marks, the ones 
indicating her outstretched arm. Very few people could get near this. It is a 
perfect drawing.

Caravaggio’s Judith Beheading Holofernes (1598–99)

DH: I have always noticed shadows simply because there weren’t many in 
Bradford.
 A detail from Caravaggio’s Judith Beheading Holofernes (1599). Photograph: 
Krause, Johansen/Thames & Hudson 
MG: The shadow is a negative phenomenon: it is an area behind an opaque object 
that is shielded from the source of light. If the illumination comes from a 
single point then the shadow is sharp-edged. In effect, it is a projected 
negative image: an area of darkness surrounded by an outline.

DH: The shadow is just the absence of light. But do we necessarily always see 
shadows? You don’t have to see them consciously. The fact that people can take 
a photograph with their own shadow in it without noticing suggests that they 
are not aware of them. You can ignore shadows when you are drawing, as the 
ancient Greeks did, for example. I can, if I draw with just a line; you can 
choose not to put them in.

MG: In film noir, strong lighting and its deep shadows create the dramatic 
atmosphere. Without the shadows, this idiom would be far less effective.

DH: It is a kind of joke, but I really mean it when I say Caravaggio invented 
Hollywood lighting. It is an invention, in that he quickly worked out how to 
light things dramatically. I’ve always used shadows a bit, because that’s what 
you need below a figure to ground it, but mine are more likeGiotto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2004/dec/04/art>’s than Caravaggio’s. 
I use shadows that you see in ordinary lighting conditions; you don’t find ones 
like Caravaggio’s in nature.

But there are other varieties of Hollywood lighting. The Mona Lisa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/mona-lisa> is one of the first 
portraits with very blended shadows. That face is marvellously lit, the shadow 
under the nose, and that smile. The soft transition from the cheekbone down to 
underneath the jaw is extraordinary. The way that you move from the light to 
the dark flesh is achieved with incredibly subtle, graded paint that would have 
taken a long time to put on. I’ve no idea how he did it. You don’t quite see it 
in nature, but you certainly do in optical projections. Those unbelievably soft 
gradations look photographic. That’s what makes it remarkable, and why she has 
that enigmatic smile. It is a haunting face.

Monet’s Sunset on the Seine in Winter (1880)

DH: We see with memory, so if I know someone well, I see them differently from 
the way I might if I’ve just met them. And my memory is different from yours; 
even if we are both standing in the same place, we’re not quite seeing the same 
thing. Other elements are playing a part; whether you have been in a place 
before will affect you, and how well you know it.

MG: Time affects pictures in a variety of ways. One important factor is how 
long it takes to make a painting, which may be a matter of minutes, hours, 
days, months or years. Certain subjects come with their own time constraints: 
one of the problems of landscape painting and drawing is that crucial aspects 
of the scene are extremely transient.
 Monet’s Sunset on the Seine in Winter (1880). Photograph: Krause, 
Johansen/Thames & Hudson 
DH: There are some wonderfully free Monet paintings of the ice melting on the 
Seine at Vétheuil, done in January 1880. They were so free because it was rare 
for there to be ice on the Seine, so Monet would have had to have gone down to 
the river then and there to paint it. That would have made him work very fast. 
The ice might not have lasted even a night once the thaw had begun.

When the sun is setting you know that you’ve only got one hour before the 
light goes so you work faster. He must have been doing very intense looking, my 
God. Obviously, not everybody is capable of it. Pictures can make us see things 
that we might not notice without them. Monet made us see the world a bit more 
clearly.

You have to be in a place for a little while to know exactly when you need to 
be there for the best light, what the best angle is, which way to move, things 
like that. If the sun is in your eyes, everything will be a silhouette.Painting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/painting> is an art of time and 
space, or so it seems to me. A big thing in drawing is being able to put a 
figure in space. And you make space through time.

MG: All pictures are, in one way or another, time machines. That is, they 
condense the appearance of something – a person, a scene, a sequence – and 
preserve it. It takes a certain amount of time to make them. And it also takes 
time to look at them, varying from a second to a lifetime.

DH: The eye is always moving; if it isn’t moving you are dead. The perspective 
alters according to the way I’m looking, so it’s constantly changing. In real 
life when you are looking at six people there are a thousand perspectives. I’ve 
included those multiple angles of vision in paintings of friends in my studio. 
If a figure is standing near to me, I look across at his head but downwards at 
his feet. A still picture can have movement in it because the eye moves.
 Breakup of the Ice by Monet (1880). Photograph: Thames & Hudson 
When a human being is looking at a scene the questions are: What do I see 
first? What do I see second? What do I see third? A photograph sees it all at 
once – in one click of the lens from a single point of view – but we don’t. And 
it’s the fact that it takes us time to see it that makes the space.

Renaissance European perspective has a vanishing point, but it does not exist 
in Japanese and Chinese painting. And a view from sitting still, from a 
stationary point, is not the way you usually see landscape; you are always 
moving through it. If you put a vanishing point anywhere, it means you’ve 
stopped. In a way, you’re hardly there.

St Peter Healing the Sick with His Shadow by Masaccio (1426-7) and The 
Arnolfini Portrait by Jan van Eyck (1434)

DH: In Giotto’s Ognissanti Madonna, painted around 1310, there’s dark at the 
side of her nose and the Christ child’s and under their brows and chins. Their 
features aren’t in realchiaroscuro but there are enough shadows on them for you 
to feel the mass and the volumes. But the light and shade he used on faces seem 
a bit crude to us because they aren’t quite optical; that is, they don’t appear 
the way they would if seen in an image projected by a lens or in a mirror.

Also, in Giotto the people do not look as if they were studied from living 
models. Their noses are always a bit the same, although the mouths vary. The 
eyes are different but they are consistently painted in a slightly flat way. 
Even so, his figures have vivid expressions and personality.
 St Peter Healing the Sick with His Shadow by Masaccio (1426-7). Photograph: 
Alamy Stock Photo 
Now look at Masaccio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/artblog/2008/jul/07/masacciothegreatestrenaissa>
’s painting of the elderly beggar inSt Peter Healing the Sick with His Shadow, 
from his frescoes in the Brancacci chapel, Florence, which date from the 
mid-1420s – more than a century after the Giotto. Note the way the light from 
above is hitting his cheekbone: it is dark underneath there and in the hollow 
of his cheek. The shadows under the forearms, below the jaw and at the top of 
the ear are very dark. Masaccio’s figure has shadows in absolutely the right 
places, subtly painted. This is a much more accurate depiction of shadow than 
Giotto’s: it’s what we would describe as more naturalistic. Indeed, these are 
the first shadows in Italian art that look like a photograph of a shadow.

MG: Obviously, there has been a revolutionary development in the history of 
pictures between these two paintings: Giotto’s from the early 14th century and 
Masaccio’s fresco around 1426. This transformation involved the use of 
naturalistic shadow, real models and what we call linear or Renaissance 
perspective. These elements appear altogether as a package in Masaccio’s 
pictures.

DH: Before he painted the older beggar Masaccio must have looked hard at a 
real man, a model. This is a depiction of an individual. And the shadows on his 
face are placed as they would be seen in a camera. There are no faces in 
Italian or Flemish art before 1420 that look like this, and that implies that 
the reason for the change was technological. It must have been. I think 
Masaccio had a mirror or a lens and used it to project images. An optical 
projection needed shadows; you cannot make one without them. The first optical 
projection I made in my studio in California was with a concave mirror; when I 
saw it I realised the light causes the shadows. A photograph requires the same 
conditions.

MG: Nonetheless, there is a staggering leap in verisimilitude in the works of 
Masaccio, and also – even more evidently – in those of his Flemish contemporary,
Jan van Eyck <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jan-van-eyck>. It is 
perhaps the most extraordinary development in the history of pictures, and one 
for which art historians have had no adequate explanation.
 A detail from The Arnolfini Portrait (1434) by Jan van Eyck. Photograph: 
Thames & Hudson 
DH: The extraordinary thing about Van Eyck is how he comes out of nowhere, and 
has somehow worked out how to translate into paint the different kinds of sheen 
on brocade cloth, glass, wood, different kinds of metal, stone, glass, wax, 
flesh, and all sorts of diverse shine and reflections, all absolutely 
perfectly. It’s almost unbelievable, isn’t it, the more you think about it?

Some historians seem to imagine that Van Eyck’s studio would have been like 
Cézanne’s: the artist’s lonely vigil. It wouldn’t have been like that at all: 
it would have been more like MGM. There would have been costumes, wigs, armour, 
chandeliers, models, all kinds of props. You just have to look at the paintings 
to see that. It isn’t possible to paint like that from imagination. So his 
workshop must have been close to a Hollywood movie: costumes, lighting, camera, 
let’s go!

Vermeer’s The Art of Painting (1666‑1668)

DH: Vermeer and other artists using a camera obscura weren’t really looking at 
the world, they were looking at a flat projection of it and sometimes you see 
more that way, especially such things as textures on brickwork or in cloth, and 
patterns in fabrics. When painting the lovely map on the back wall ofThe Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> of Painting, Vermeer picks up 
every little crease, every little fold. The sharpest things in the painting are 
the map and the chandelier, and they are the furthest away. The human eye would 
not see those so clearly at that distance, but they are the kind of thing 
exaggerated by a camera. That map would be a perfect subject for optical 
projections because it is flat, but not quite flat – and that’s why we are 
interested in looking at it. I don’t think Vermeer could have painted the map 
freehand with such precision and detail.

MG: Vermeer was an artist visibly enthralled by optical devices. His pictures 
reveal how he loved the heightened detail and texture he could see with the aid 
of a lens. But he clearly also appreciated the strange transformations, 
glitches and distortions it produced. In this respect, Vermeer resembles a 
contemporary artist such asGerhard Richter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gerhard-richter> (an avowed admirer 
of his work). Therefore, to deny the Dutch painter used a lens is to 
misunderstand his achievement, which lay, precisely, in finding the poetry in 
this new way of seeing the world.
 Vermeer’s The Art of Painting (c1666–68). Photograph: Krause, 
Johansen/Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna 
DH: Understanding a tool doesn’t explain the magic of creation. Nothing can. 
People say leave some mystery, but actually it’s impossible to take it away. 
Optical devices don’t make marks; they don’t make the painting. No lens could 
see the whole of Vermeer’sThe Art of Painting with everything in focus. No lens 
could today, no lens ever could; therefore, he had to refocus and put things 
where he wanted. He had to construct the scene. It’s a fantastic painting. 
Also, I like the title:The Art of Painting. It’s not called The Craft of 
Painting – I know it was once called The Artist’s Studio as well – but it is 
also immensely about the craft.

 What is so amazing is the way the figures fit in space. Your eye looks from 
the girl’s hand on the trumpet to the knob of the map, and there is space 
there. It’s done through control and modulation of tones and edges, with 
unbelievable skill. Finding those equivalents in paint is tremendously hard. 
The softness between the painter’s hair and the map is fantastic.

MG: Vermeer’s people are reticent and withdrawn, with Rembrandt’s you have the 
impression that you can read their thoughts.Louis Armstrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/louis-armstrong> was once asked who was the 
better of two trumpeters called Billy and Bobby. He considered the matter, and 
pronounced, “Bobby, because he’s got more ingredients.”

DH: In a way, Vermeer and Rembrandt are opposites. But Rembrandt is the 
greater artist, I think, because he’s got more ingredients than Vermeer. 
Rembrandt put more in the face than anyone else ever has, before or since, 
because he saw more. And that was not a matter of using a camera. That was to 
do with his heart. The Chinese say you need three things for paintings: the 
hand, the eye and the heart. I think that remark is very, very good. Two won’t 
do. A good eye and heart is not enough, neither is a good hand and eye. It 
applies to every drawing and painting Rembrandt ever made. His work is a great 
example of the hand, the eye – and the heart. There is incredible empathy in it.

• This is an edited extract from A History of Pictures: From the Cave to the 
Computer Screenby David Hockney and Martin Gayford, published by Thames & 
Hudson at £29.95. To order a copy for £24.56, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/> or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, 
online orders only. Phone orders min. p&p of £1.99.
 