
David Warner <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/david-warner> destroyed New 
Zealand and led Australia to a morale-boosting series sweep of their one-day 
cricket series.

After rescuing the Australian innings in Friday’s dead rubber at the MCG, 
Warner came within one ball of becoming only the 11th batsman to carry his bat 
through a one-day international.

Australia beat New Zealand to complete ODI series whitewash – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/dec/09/australia-v-new-zealand-third-odi-live>
He hit 156 from 128 balls, including 13 fours and four sixes, as Australia 
rallied from 73-4 to reach 264-8.

It was a gettable target but, after a comfortable 44-0 start, the Black Caps 
folded. They were blasted out for 147 off 36.1 overs, with the 117-run win 
giving Australia the 3-0 series sweep. It meant Warner had outscored the New 
Zealanders by nine runs.

Captain Steve Smith ended the match with a stunning catch at second slip to 
dismiss Trent Boult off the bowling of Pat Cummins for one.

While the scheduling of the one-dayers in between the South Africa and 
Pakistan Test series has attracted scrutiny – and Friday’s poor crowd of 20,591 
will fuel the criticism – Australia’s domination is timely.

The home team had lost five Tests in a row before winning their last match of 
the South African series in Adelaide.

Dominating the one-dayers means a further confidence boost for the recast side 
ahead of the first Test from 15 December against Pakistan – a day-night 
pink-ball encounter at the Gabba.

A direct hit from bowler Trent Boult ran out Warner on the last ball of the 
innings, denying the in-form opener a piece of cricket history. Damien Martyn 
is the only Australian among the 10 players to carry their bats through an ODI 
innings.

Warner’s second ton in succession, also his fourth-highest ODI score, meant he 
equalled India’s Sourav Ganguly with seven one-day centuries in a calendar 
year. They are joint-second behind Indian legend Sachin Tendulkar, who holds 
the record with nine.

Warner was dropped on 18, when Henry Nicholls lunged for a diving catch at 
deep mid-wicket off the bowling of Lockie Ferguson. Nicholls could only get his 
fingertips to the difficult chance. Had he taken the catch, Australia would 
have been 46-3 and in massive trouble.

As it was, Australia needed a Warner special when their first four wickets 
went cheaply. Travis Head (37), Matthew Wade (14) and James Faulkner (13) had 
important cameos, holding up the other end as Warner continued his rampage.

While Warner was the obvious man of the match, Head also took two wickets and 
a great outfield catch. Head claimed the key wicket of Martin Guptill, who 
top-scored with 34. George Bailey took a sharp catch at cover to remove the 
opener.

Paceman Mitchell Starc bowled superbly, snaring 3-34 from 10 overs.

Australia retained the line-up who belted New Zealand three days ago in 
Canberra to secure the series win. That meant Victorian allrounder Glenn 
Maxwell again missed out on the XI.

Maxwell received a team fine last week after he made comments about batting 
below Wade in the Victorian Sheffield Shield team. On Thursday, Australian 
coach Darren Lehmann praised Maxwell for how he had handled the fallout from 
the controversy.
 