
David Petraeus <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/david-petraeus>, the 
retired US army general and former CIA director responsible for the development 
of the hugely influential “counter-insurgency” strategy used in Iraq and 
Afghanistan, was sentenced on Thursday to two years’ probation and ordered to 
pay a fine of $100,000 for sharing highly classified information with his lover 
and biographer, Paula Broadwell.


The fine was $60,000 more than had been expected under the terms of a plea 
deal; the two years’ probation was as expected.

Outside the courthouse following his sentencing, Petraeus gave a short 
statement to the press in which he apologised “to those closest to me, and many 
others, including those with whom I was privileged to serve with in the 
military”.

He also thanked those who have supported him since the scandal broke in 2012. 
“In particular my family,” he said, “[and] former military colleagues, veterans 
… and those who I have worked with in the private sector.”

Having avoided jail time, he said he was looking forward to moving on with the 
next phase of his life, “and continuing to serve our great nation as a private 
citizen”.

Petraeus pleaded guilty in March in a federal court in Charlotte, North 
Carolina <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/northcarolina>, to a misdemeanor 
charge of mishandling classified information. Under the terms of his plea deal, 
he escaped possible jail time and an embarrassing public trial.


He was easily the most influential US military 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> figure of the post-9/11 era. 
While serving as commanding general of Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, and the US 
combined arms training center there, Petraeus masterminded an update the army’s 
field manual on counterinsurgency strategy – usually shortened to COIN.

In doing so, he introduced a host of revolutionary ideas into US military 
operational doctrine – a collection of principles which later became known 
simply as the “Petraeus doctrine”.

Petraeus leaks: Obama's leniency reveals 'profound double standard', lawyer 
says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/16/obama-double-standard-petraeus-leaks>
Later, in Iraq, Petraeus was able to put his ideas into practice in the field, 
when he was placed in command of multinational forces during the 2007 surge – 
which he was key in helping to orchestrate.

Petraeus also served as commander of US central command, and then commander of 
the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan before retiring from 
the army.

He retired a four-star general – the highest nominal rank in the US army – and 
was unanimously confirmed asCIA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> 
director in October 2011.

But in 2012, personal affairs overtook his career when it emerged that he had 
been involved in a long-running affair with Paula Broadwell, a married academic 
and army reserve officer who had been writing a biography of Petraeus, titled 
All In: The Education of General David Petraeus.

The affair was discovered after Jill Kelley, a Florida socialite, was sent 
threatening messages from an anonymous email account 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/22/jill-kelley-petraeus-living-nightmare>
 in May. She notified a friend who worked at the FBI, who traced the emails to 
Broadwell.

The affair did not become public until after the presidential election in 
November, when Petraeus tendered his resignation to the White House. Obama 
later accepted his offer of resignation.

But the saga wasn’t over. After Petraeus resigned, it emerged that Broadwell 
had been given a set of eight notebooks which contained classified information 
– including codewords and military strategy – by the general.

Initially Petraeus lied to investigators, saying that following his 
resignation from the CIA he had no classified documents in his possession. 
However, an FBI search of the general’s house in April 2013 found the notebooks 
in an unlocked drawer in his study.

Petraeus, who currently works for New York investment firm Kohlberg Kravis 
Roberts & Co as a consultant, pleaded guilty in March to the misdemeanour 
charge of mishandling classified materials.

Other leaks of classified information have led to heavy sentences. Chelsea 
Manning, who leaked a trove of classified documents to WikiLeaks, was sentenced 
to 35 years by a military court in August 2013. Stephen Kim, a former State 
Department official, was sentenced to 13 months in prison the same year after 
pleading guilty to discussing a classified report with a Fox News reporter in 
2009.

Manning, Kim and Petraeus were all prosecuted under the same act – Title 18 of 
the US code, known as the Espionage Act.

Lawyers representing Petraeus did not respond to a request for comment.
 