
Everyone has their rituals and I have to start the day with a roll-up and a 
cup of coffee. It gets my brain fizzing – it loosens the connections – and if 
I’m interrupted, I’m lost. If someone even says “I’ll phone you some time in 
the morning” it threatens my concentration, which is a feeble organ at the best 
of times. With screenplays it’s not so bad because it’s a more public process 
anyway – so many other people are involved – but if I’m writing a novel, I need 
to shut myself off into my private world. I don’t mind people in the house, as 
long as they’re not quarrelling and they don’t come in, but I can’t bear music.

After that I chew gum for the rest of the morning, trying to ignore the 
infuriating Adobe upgrades that ping on to my laptop, and my daily missive from 
the ever-faithfulSarah Raven <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sarahraven>, 
with her tempting flower-seed offers. I try not to look at other emails, 
especially if they’re about property porn, but the flesh is weak.

The weird thing is that unexpected interruptions can jolt me when I’m stuck 
and can actually help, like a computer being switched off and on. But I mustn’t 
expect them. And if there are too many, the morning is flushed away; I can 
almost hear it hissing into oblivion, like an airline toilet.

When that happens, it is a day’s work gone, because I can only write in the 
mornings. A lot of writers I know are the same. In the afternoons I become a 
normal person doing normal things – shopping, cooking, talking to people. If a 
novel is going well, however, I perform these tasks in a dream. It’s a 
wonderful feeling, this, but it doesn’t happen very often. When it does, I find 
that everything feeds into what I’m writing. The swing of somebody’s hair, the 
odd remark on the bus – they absorb themselves into the bloodstream of the 
story in a mysterious way, so my day is pulled into the subterranean flow of 
the novel.

I’ve never kept a diary, because I’d then be tempted to shove some long-ago 
observation in, just because it’s interesting. It doesn’t work, because it 
diverts the story. The only diversions should come from the characters who, 
with any luck, are growing organically. I know when characters are becoming 
real when they start to create their own complexities and contradictions. There 
will be plenty of diversions, but on their own terms. What I’m trying to do is 
create people who are recognisable, so they have a shape and we can get a grip 
on them, but who then behave in the contradictory and messy way we all behave. 
It’s like drawing an outline and then smudging it.

How on earth could you put someone you know into a novel? It’s like looking 
closely at newsprint: it turns into dots

For that reason I can’t use people I know well – they’re too deeply confusing, 
they have no outline at all. It’s like looking closely at newsprint and it all 
disintegrates into little dots.

So if I use anybody in my books they’re either mere acquaintances or entirely 
fictitious.VS Pritchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/feb/22/vspritchett> said 
there’s no such thing as plot, there are only characters. They create the plot. 
To help them come alive I ask myself questions: what would they do if they saw 
somebody shoplifting? Were they bullied at school? Long before the novel 
begins, I should know the answers. But sometimes I only get to know them when 
I’m writing. Just tapping out the words helps to create a character – the way 
the words bounce together, that mysterious alchemy. Who said that “writing is 
typing”? There’s truth in that. I only started writing when I got an Adler 
typewriter and thrilled to the tap-tap of the keys.

At 6.30pm I’ll go back to my desk, have a glass of wine and another roll-up, 
and work for an hour. That’s the best time of all, and utterly essential. After 
that I watch TV.

 * Something to Hide 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/373163//?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 by Deborah Moggach is out now in paperback (Vintage, £7.99).
 