
Some years ago, when my marriage was on the rocks, we sold the family house 
and I ended up living in a small flat. I wrote wherever I could and became 
accustomed to whatElena Ferrante 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/elena-ferrante> has described as being happy 
and unhappy at the same time. Except, in my case, it was more like being happy 
and extremely miserable at the same time. This was a strange emotional climate 
to live in – like blazing sunshine with an icy wind. Perhaps it resembled 
living in Scandinavia, but without the delicious herrings and crispbreads.

So then my friend, Celia, who is in her early 80s – she’s an actor and 
book-seller – came to the rescue. “You need a study,” she said. I had to admit 
she was right. She pointed towards the shed at the back of her garden. It was 
where her husband, the late, great, beloved poet Adrian Mitchell sometimes 
wrote, and it was built under an apple tree. I have rented it from her ever 
since. It’s freezing in winter and sweltering in summer, but I have grown to 
love my writing shed in every season.

Most days I cycle to the shed at 8am after I have seen my daughter off to 
school.

To avoid starting work, I sometimes stop for coffee at a nearby cafe. I am 
very fond of the morose Italian waiter, and always ask him: “How are you 
today?” He stops to think about this, and always replies: “I don’t know.” As 
far as I’m concerned, his answer is an example of magnificent writing. It sets 
me up for the day.

When I begin writing a novel, I usually know where I want to get to, I just 
don’t know how to get there. I plan a route and follow my directions. Sometimes 
this works well. Yet, it’s when I detour from the map and get lost that the 
writing starts to open its eyes. In case you think I like getting lost, I 
should tell you that I resist it with all my will. This is always a futile 
battle. Eventually I surrender to the unknown route, write for a few hours and 
take a look at the new view.

My current writing mantra is a quote by EM Forster: “We must be willing to let 
go of the life we have planned, so as to have the life that is waiting for us.” 
This applies to the life of a novel as well as any other kind of life. Come to 
think of it, the life that is waiting for us might be worse than the life we 
have planned.

This is such a terrifying thought that I’m going to nip across the garden and 
make tea in Celia’s kitchen. If I can find the sweet, shy house cat, I will try 
and persuade her to sit on my lap in the shed. This cat knows that I adore her, 
so she takes advantage of my love and begs for snacks. Yes, procrastination is 
part of the writing day and I do enjoy browsing Celia’s vast collection of 
books.

Now I’m back in the shed (one mug of tea, no cat) and I’m looking at some of 
my journals, written years ago. To my surprise, I find that I have scribbled 
down ideas and thoughts on some of the themes I am writing about now. As far as 
I’m concerned, the writing life is mostly about stamina and the desire to give 
my complete attention to language. And I don’t just mean literary language. I 
am never indifferent to the way someone might say “goodbye” or “oh my God” or 
“I don’t know”. To get to the finishing line requires the writing to become 
more interesting than everyday life. This is not as easy as it sounds, because 
I have never found everyday life boring.

At the end of the day, I read through whatever I have written and figure out 
the various problems I will need to solve in the morning. After I’ve locked up 
the shed, I cycle home to tell my children all about the way Celia’s cat grooms 
her paws.

Deborah Levy is the author of Hot Milk, shortlisted for this year’s Man Booker 
Prize and published by Penguin Random House. She will be on a panel discussion 
at thePower of Power weekend as part of Southbank Centre’s London Literature 
Festival on 8 October.
 