
Dentists <https://www.theguardian.com/society/dentists> have devised a 
treatment to regenerate rotten teeth that could substantially reduce the need 
for fillings in the future.

The therapy works by enhancing the natural ability of teeth to repair 
themselves through the activation ofstem cells 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/stem-cells> in the soft pulp at the centre.

Normally, this mechanism is limited to repairing small cracks and holes in 
dentine, the solid bulk of the tooth beneath the surface enamel. Now scientists 
have shown that the natural process can be enhanced using an Alzheimer’s drug, 
allowing the tooth’s own cells to rebuild cavities extending from the surface 
to the root.

No more fillings as dentists reveal new tooth decay treatment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jun/16/fillings-dentists-tooth-decay-treatment>
Prof Paul Sharpe, who led the work at King’s College London, said: “Almost 
everyone on the planet has tooth decay at some time – it’s a massive volume of 
people being treated. We’ve deliberately tried to make something really simple, 
really quick and really cheap.”

In the trial, in mice, the team showed that when defects were filled with a 
biodegradable sponge soaked in the drug, the tooth was gradually able to 
rebuild itself.

Restoring the tooth’s original dentine structure is preferable because dental 
cements used in conventional fillings weaken the tooth, leave it prone to 
future infections – and inevitably erode or detach.

In the case of large cavities, the tooth may eventually need to be extracted 
after undergoing multiple treatments. The new method, which would encourage 
natural tooth repair, has the potential to eliminate these issues, according to 
the scientists.

“The tooth is not just a lump of mineral, it’s got its own physiology. You’re 
replacing a living tissue with an inert cement,” said Sharpe. “Fillings work 
fine, but if the tooth can repair itself, surely [that’s] the best way. You’re 
restoring all the vitality of the tooth.”

The new treatment would not eliminate the need for the dentist’s drill, 
however, since decaying sections of the tooth would still need to be removed. 
“Sorry, you’re still going to have the drill, you can’t get away from that, I’m 
afraid,” said Sharpe.


The therapy relies on a drug called tideglusib, which has been assessed as a 
potentialAlzheimer’s <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alzheimers> 
treatment, and which is known to be safe for clinical use.

Previous work by the team has shown that the drug stimulates stem cells in the 
centre of the tooth, triggering them to develop into odontoblasts (specialised 
tooth cells) and boosting the production of dentine, allowing larger defects to 
be reversed. “We get more of the cells, much quicker and they are more active,” 
said Sharpe.

In the study, published in Scientific Reports 
<http://www.nature.com/articles/srep39654>, the scientists drilled holes into 
the teeth of mice, inserted a biodegradable collagen sponge soaked in the drug 
and sealed the tooth with a dental adhesive.

A quarter of five-year-olds in England have tooth decay, data shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/10/a-quarter-of-five-year-olds-in-england-have-tooth-decay-data-shows>
When the teeth were examined several weeks later, the sponge had degraded and 
been replaced with new dentine. Collagen sponges are commercially available and 
clinically-approved. The dental preparation of the tooth would be almost 
identical to that required for conventional fillings, according to the 
scientists.

A remaining question is whether the method will scale up successfully to human 
teeth, in which cavities can be significantly larger. The team are currently 
testing the technique in rats, whose teeth are about four times larger than 
those of mice, and if this is successful plan to apply later this year to carry 
out the first clinical trials in patients.

Ben Scheven, an oral cell biologist at the University of Birmingham, said that 
preserving the live tooth tissue was increasingly viewed as a priority. 
“Dentistry is not only about filling and drilling but also about keeping the 
teeth healthy,” he said. “Especially since it’s an accessible and cheap 
treatment I can imagine this being used in the clinic.”

Winnie Wong, a dentist based in Hertfordshire, said: “Clinically speaking, the 
best material is always natural tooth structure, so I’m sure this method will 
be encouraged by most dentists.”

Wong added that the therapy could “cut down on trauma caused by dentists who 
are slightly overzealous in their caries removal”. “I think it would be 
welcomed amongst patients, as no one likes going to the dentist to have 
fillings and injections, no matter how nice we are!” she said.
 