
The surprise announcement over the Guildford Four 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/guildford-four> was welcomed by their families 
and campaigners on both sides of the Irish Sea yesterday. But their delight was 
tinged with regret and anger that it had not been made much earlier.

The mother of one of the five bomb victims, Mrs Elizabeth Forsyth, aged 64, 
said she was shattered. 'I've believed from the very beginning that they were 
guilty and nothing will ever convince me otherwise.' Her son, Billy, aged 18, 
was killed with his friend, John Hunter, aged 17.

Last night Mr Paul Hill was moved from Belfast to Brixton prison, and the 
families of the three men convicted also flew to London.

Mr Michael Fisher, Mr Hill's lawyer, said Mr Hill was not told why he was 
being moved. 'It was only when he got to Brixton jail that a prisoner ran up to 
him and said: 'Well boy, you are a free man'.'

Cardinal Basil Hume, who helped to persuade the Home Secretary, Mr Douglas 
Hurd, to reopen the case two years ago, said he was 'immensely grateful'. 
Speaking from Lourdes, he said: 'I am very, very pleased.'

Lord Scarman, who has also played a key role, said it represented 'more than a 
pardon' for the four. 'These people will now be innocent. You only pardon 
people for whom you can't organise a second appraisal of the conviction.'

Mrs Lily Hill, mother of Mr Hill, said: 'At first I thought it was a hoax 
call. The past 15 years have been for me absolute torment.'

The family of Mr Gerard Conlon, whose father Guissepe died in jail after he 
was convicted of making bombs, reacted with bitterness. Mr Conlon was arrested 
when he went to see his son after his arrest. He died in jail in 1980. Mr Joe 
McKernan, Gerard's brother-in-law, said: 'It is 15 years too late. Of course we 
are bitter but we are also glad that it's finally come to an end.'

Mr Conlon's solicitor, Ms Gareth Pierce, said: 'I am very angry that it has 
taken so long. The DPP should have come to this decision 15 years ago.'

The case is certain to have two important political ramifications. It will 
cast doubt on the integrity of the police and will put further strain on 
Anglo-Irish relations by fuelling allegations that there is no safety in 
British justice.

The Anglo-Irish conference meets in Belfast today for the third time in five 
weeks to discuss the Ulster Defence Regiment. The Irish government said 
yesterday it had consistently conveyed its concern about the Guildford case and 
other decisions from the 1970s. 'The government shares what they know will be a 
general feeling of satisfaction at this outcome.'

Mr Seamus Mallon, deputy leader of the Social Democratic and Labour Party, 
said he hoped it would open the door for others wrongly detained in British 
jails.

Mr Hurd is withholding comment until a Commons statement after the Court of 
Appeal decision.

The Guildford Four

Gerard Conlon described his teenage lifestyle in Belfast as 'money, drink, 
gambling and girls'. He was thrown out of the Fianna (the IRA's youth wing) for 
indiscipline. He was an inveterate thief. In 1974 he met up with his 
schoolfriend Paul Hill in Southampton and they both moved to London. On a bad 
LSD trip, he borrowed some money from a priest and returned to Belfast six 
weeks before his arrest.

Carole Richardson was a 17-year-old drifter in 1974, living in squats in north 
west London, taking drugs and running with a band of petty thieves. She never 
knew her father. A truant at school, she was unable to hold down jobs for more 
than a few weeks at a time. Once she applied to join the WRAC but was rejected 
as unsuitable. At the time of her arrest she was living in a squat with Patrick 
Armstrong.

Patrick Armstrong was born in Belfast in 1950, one of four children. His 
father was a scaffolder. The family lived in the Divis flats in the Lower 
Falls. After leaving school, he took several manual jobs before leaving for 
London in 1972 'to get away from the Troubles'. There he frequented the pubs 
and betting shops of Kilburn between spells as a casual labourer. He knew 
Conlon and Hill casually from Belfast.

Paul Hill, aged 20 in 1974, was the eldest of five Catholic children brought 
up in West Belfast. As a teenager, he admits he was caught up in Republican 
activities, but the IRA say he was never a member. He was convicted of murder 
in Belfast after confessing to involvement in the kidnapping of a former 
British soldier in 1974 who was later killed by the IRA. Last year in prison he 
married his American penfriend.

 