
Barack Obama is the first president-elect in 32 years to receive a Congress 
under the firm control of his party, a powerful political gift that bodes well 
for the enactment of an expansive Democratic agenda.

But the Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> fell short 
of the ambitious election gains they had hoped for and their rivals had feared. 
Because Obama's party lacks the 60 Senate votes needed to defuse legislative 
obstructions, Republicans have their backs to the wall but can still make canny 
manoeuvres.

Given the reality of lasting Republican opposition - and Obama's vow to end 
the bitter partisanship of the Bush years - Democratic leaders were reluctant 
to claim unilateral power over the nation's future. "This is a mandate to get 
along, to get something done ... this is not a mandate for a political party or 
an ideology," the Senate Democratic leader, Harry Reid, said on election night.

Democrats picked up at least six Senate seats and 18 in the House of 
Representatives <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/house-of-representatives>, 
where their hold was already strong. With four intense races remaining too 
close to call, their 56-vote Senate majority stands to grow in the coming days.

In Minnesota, the comedian Al Franken was trailing by fewer than 350 votes in 
his bid to unseat Republican senator Norm Coleman. An automatic recount there, 
as well as a likely run-off battle in the Georgia Senate race, could leave the 
final balance of Congress unclear until next month.

That uncertainty creates opportunities for both parties to shake up their 
ranks in anticipation of the new administration. The number three House 
Republican leader stepped down on Tuesday, and House Democratic leader Rahm 
Emanuel may leave a vacuum in his party by becoming Obama's chief of staff.

Even if the Democratic hierarchy shifts by next year, Reid and Nancy Pelosi, 
the House leader, are well positioned to begin coordinating with Obama on a 
variety of new legislation.

Norm Ornstein, a congressional scholar at the Brookings thinktank in 
Washington, said Obama would benefit from the massive voter turnout he 
generated that helped push junior Democrats to victory.

"It's not like many of these members [of Congress] who won were simply elected 
because of Obama - there was a backlash against Republicans more generally," 
Ornstein observed. "But Obama helped ... so you're going to have some members 
willing to listen to him."

Yet sweeping victory has a downside for congressional Democrats. The defeat of 
moderate Republicans, such as Chris Shays of Connecticut, leaves the majority 
party with fewer allies to court in case conservative Democrats break ranks on 
the controversial issues of taxes and Iraq.

Ultimately, Congress runs on personal ties, a lesson Reagan learned by 
cultivating friendships with senior Democrats. Signing up Emanuel and other 
White House advisers with a connection to Congress, then, can help Obama build 
credibility with politicians seeking to run roughshod over the young 
president-elect.
 