
While Republican lawmakers were colluding with the vice-president elect, Mike 
Pence, about how best to repeal – and probably not replace –the Affordable Care 
Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/mike-pence-repeal-obama-healthcare-law-first>
 (ACA) on Wednesday, Barack Obama held a meeting of his own. Unlike many 
previous meetings of his, Republicans were not invited. He did not “reach 
across the aisle”.


Instead, the outgoing president laid out a strategy to oppose Republican 
efforts to repeal his signature healthcare legislation, a move that could kick 
up to 30 million Americans off health insurance. That strategy involves pushing 
the phrase “Make America Sick Again”, refusing to “rescue” Republicans by 
helping them pass bound-to-be-Randian replacement measures and referring to the 
resulting disaster as “Trumpcare”, as in: “I would have gotten my leg set by a 
doctor, but thanks to Trumpcare, I’m using Scotch tape.” The political fallout, 
he said, must solely hurt the Republicans. (Sounds like someone is finally 
jumping on theBernie “time to admit you lied” Sanders 
<http://www.deathandtaxesmag.com/314212/bernie-sanders-who-would-have-won-reads-trumps-statements-on-healthcare-on-senate-floor/>
 train.)

Contrast this with remarks made back in April in which Obama warned his party 
against becoming too much like the Tea Party. Speaking to a group of law 
students in Chicago, he worried thatDemocrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> would “stake out positions so 
extreme, they alienate the broad public”. He’s hardly become Eugene Debs, but 
it seems he’s come around to a more confrontational strategy. (Funny how your 
priorities change when you go from quelling a left-insurrection to trying to 
quell a right one.)

The Democratic party lost its soul. It's time to win it back | Robert Reich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/democratic-party-dnc-leadership-trump-clinton-sanders>
In instructing his party to openly vie for power and engage in the muck of 
actual politics rather than genteel tinkering, the president became the latest 
and most high-profile advocate of an idea that’s finally picking up steam in 
mainstream Democratic circles: copying the Tea Party, a faction which, for 
better or for worse, was and remains devastatingly effective at carrying out 
its program.

Beginning immediately after Obama’s 2008 election, a vocal, ideologically 
driven minority of “activists” began storming town hall meetings, pressuring 
Republican representatives to resist Obama no matter what he tried to do and 
purging their party of anyone deemed insufficiently reactionary. Eight years 
later, they enjoy a unified rightwing government and the undisputed dominance 
of the Republican party. Gone are the days when congressional Republicans would 
let themselves be cucked by compromise. It’s high time the Democrats sunk to 
their level.

A 23-page Google document titled Indivisible: A Practical Guide for Resisting 
the Trump Agenda has been spreading around Washington faster than John 
Podesta’s risotto recipe. Written by a group of Congressional staffers who 
witnessed the rise of the Tea Party first-hand, it lays out a number of 
practical ways progressive activists and lawmakers can defend the incremental 
gains of the Obama era using Tea Party tactics, minus the physical intimidation 
and rabid racism.

Operating on a local level, acting defensively and waging constituent phone 
call campaigns are all ideas that can easily be appropriated. Considering the 
razor-thin margins by which Republicans won in many states, it should not be 
hard to frighten Republican representatives with the prospect of getting voted 
out.


Don't be fooled. Populism won't help Democrats win again | Al From
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/why-populism-wont-help-democrats-win-again>
Activists can also empower (or pressure, as the case may be) Democratic 
lawmakers to stand up for progressive principles, and this means tugging the 
political spectrum back to the left. Republicans have long known it’s foolish 
to start negotiations in the middle. They stake out extreme positions – a 
six-week abortion ban, a complete gutting of the Office of Congressional Ethics 
– so they can bargain down to what they actually want – a 20-week abortion ban, 
a “bipartisan” gutting of the OCE.

In contrast, Democrats said they were open to replacing Obamacare before 
Congress was even in session, voted to authorize the Iraq War and competed 
throughout the 1990s to show they could put black people in prison and 
dismantle the welfare state with the best of them. They let the ACA’s public 
option fall to the threat of a filibuster from Joe Lieberman, which they could 
have easily withstood if they had wanted to. Even now, they deride the Tea 
Party’s tactics as childish and crass, when the truly crass thing is that 45 
million people are living in poverty in the richest country in the world.

The Clintons turned the Democratic party over to donors. Can it recover? | 
Jill Abramson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/21/clintons-democratic-party-donors-recover>
Of course, what the Google doc and the president fail to mention is that this 
only works if the Democrats are progressive in the first place; there can be no 
left-Tea Party without an organizing ideology. Which brings me to another Tea 
Party tactic: the purge.

While some Democrats ( Elizabeth Warren and the logical left-Tea Party choice 
for DNC chair, Keith Ellison) are already reasonably progressive and more can 
potentially be dragged left by political expediency, many are simply too 
committed to neoliberal ideology and/or beholden to monied interests to be 
rehabilitated. Which means some pink-slipping and primary-challenging is in 
order.

Time travellers from the New Deal era would be confused to learn the leftmost 
major party’s 2016 nominee for president ran her primary campaign against the 
$15-an-hour minimum wage, tuition-free college and single-payer healthcare, 
deriding these commonsense reforms as pie-in-the-sky fantasies on the level of 
Trump’s wall, and only begrudgingly adopting certain elements of them once it 
became clear the left wing of her party might revolt.

In the general election, Trump exploited establishment Democrats’ longstanding 
support of labor-opposed trade deals to stake out a leftward position that 
threw the Clinton campaign for a loop. Despite the benefit of hindsight, many 
in the party’s leadership still refuse to recognize the role these failures 
played in their 2016 defeat.

For all the New Democrats’ talk of pragmatism over ideology, it seems the 
truly practical thing would be to grow some sort of ideological backbone. Those 
who refuse to do so must be left in the woods.

The good news is that once this happens, progressive activists and lawmakers 
will be able to use Tea Party’s tactics better than the Tea Party itself, 
because the left has actual grassroots movements.

Black Lives Matter, Fight For $15 and Bernie Sanders’ remarkable campaign are 
all examples of regular people coming together to effect change that put the 
Tea Party’s “grassroots” theatrics to shame.

If these movements have already achieved some modest victories on their own, 
imagine what they’ll be able to do with the legislative and monetary powers of 
a newly invigorated Democratic party at their disposal. What the party may lose 
in large donations, it will gain in small ones, votes and the ability to fix 
this mess.

And that’s worth spilling some tea along the way. 
 