 Bernadette McAliskey, the former MP, Bernadette Devlin, was reported "very 
seriously ill" last night by police in Belfast after being shot several times 
at her home early yesterday morning.
Police said there had been a sudden deterioration in her condition after 
earlier reports that her life was not in danger.

Three men were arrested after the attempted assassination of Mrs McAliskey and 
her husband Michael. They are being questioned about the murders of a number of 
prominent Republicans during the last year.

Crimes they are being questioned about are believed to include the 
assassination last October of Mr Ronnie Bunting, reputed leader of the Irish 
National Liberation Army which is believed to have been responsible for the 
killing of the Tory Shadow Minister, Mr Airey Neave, at the House of Commons in 
1979.

The attack on one of Ireland's most well-known politicians came on a day of 
renewed violence in the province during which a part-time soldier was shot dead 
on the border and a restaurant blown up in Belfast.

The McAliskeys were shot at their home in the country near the town of 
Coalisland at about 8.15a.m.

The gunmen, who drove up to the house in a car, are believed to have smashed 
down the front door with sledgehammers and fired on Mrs McAliskey with hand 
guns, hitting her in the chest, arm, and thigh. They shot her husband in the 
kitchen. Their three small children were not harmed.

The army has been keeping a watch on the McAliskey home recently because of 
her prominence in the H-Block prisoner campaign. A patrol of the third 
battalion of the Parachute Regiment, which was in the area yesterday, heard the 
shots and rushed to the house. Shortly afterwards, three men were arrested.

The attackers had torn out the McAliskeys' telephone and while the wounded 
couple were being given first aid by the troops, a soldier ran to a neighbour's 
house, commandeered a car, and drove to the home of a councillor to telephone 
for help.

The McAliskeys were flown by helicopter to hospital in the nearby town of 
Dungannon for emergency treatment and then to the Musgrave Park hospital in 
Belfast, where intensive care facilities are available.

Mrs McAliskey rose to prominence when, as the 21-year old Bernadette Devlin, 
she captured the Mid-Ulster seat at Westminster in 1969. She stood as an 
Independent, and retained the seat in 1970 but lost in a four-sided contest in 
February 1974.

The Red Hand commando, suspected of responsibility for the attack on the 
McAliskeys, was formed in 1972 and outlawed in 1973. In 1974 it threatened a 
campaign of sectarian violence but has had little prominence in recent years.

It is a shadowy group which in the past is believed to have overlapped with 
the outlawed Ulster Volunteer Force and to have had links with the Ulster 
Defence Association, Northern Ireland's largest protestant paramilitary group.

The apparent professionalism with which yesterday's attack was carried out - 
including the use of sledgehammers to break down the door, a favourite commando 
technique - is reminiscent of the attack on Ronnie Bunting in October. Mr 
Bunting, a Protestant Republican, was an acknowledged leader of the Irish 
Republican Socialist Party (IRSP) but it has also been claimed that he was 
leader of the related INLA.

Other crimes for which the men arrested yesterday are expected to be 
questioned include the murder of a founder of the IRSP, Mrs Miriam Daly, and 
the assassination of another well known protestant Republican, Mr John Turnley, 
shortly before. Mrs Daly, like Mrs McAliskey, was prominent in the H-Block 
campaign.

The soldier shot yesterday was a part-time member of the Ulster Defence 
Regiment. Ivan Tombs, aged 42, the father of four young children.

He was killed while working as a Customs officer at Warren Point, South Down. 
Two young gunmen walked into the Customs post, lined up the staff , asked for 
Mr Tombs by name, and shot him several times before escaping on a motorcycle.

My Tombs had been seriously wounded in a similar attack four years ago. The 
IRA claimed responsibility for the killing.

No one was hurt in the bomb attacks on the Gables Restaurant in Botanic 
Avenue, Belfast yesterday. Armed men planted three devices before fleeing in a 
car. The premises were wrecked.
 