
A referendum being held alongside the US presidental election could result in 
the District of Columbia becoming the country’s 51st state.

 Invoking the colonial-era demand of “no taxation without representation”, 
supporters saybecoming a state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/12/washington-dc-statehood-51st-state-bernie-sanders>
 would end Washingtonians’ status as second-class citizens because they lack 
representation in Congress. But opponents dismiss the referendum as a “fool’s 
errand” destined to fail because of partisan political hurdles and the need to 
amend the US constitution, a procedure accomplished only 17 times since 1789.

 The District of Columbia was created to serve as the US capital, but is not a 
state. Its 672,000 residents pay federal taxes but have no voting 
representative in the Senate or House of Representatives although they pay 
federal taxes, though they do have a delegate in the House.

The gentrification of Washington DC: how my city changed its colours
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/12/gentrification-washington-dc-how-my-city-changed-colours>
 A yes vote on Tuesday could help pressure the new Congress and president – 
either Democrat Hillary Clinton or Republican Donald Trump – to admit the 
District of Columbia as a state, though even advocates admit that is unlikely 
anytime soon. A yes vote would simply be an expression of public support for 
statehood, a non-binding measure without any legal force.

 “Statehood is the only way that we can have the same rights and 
responsibilities as all the other citizens of the United States,” the District 
of Columbia council chairman, Phil Mendelson, said.

 The overwhelmingly Democratic capital city was, he said, fed up with 
Republican lawmakers espousing the rights of states and cities to 
self-governance and then interfering with local issues, such as abortion and 
marijuana legalisation. “That’s so antithetical to democratic principles, but 
that doesn’t seem to bother some of these folks.”

 The referendum, the first to be held on the issue, seeks to upend the 
constitution’s provision giving Congress legislative control over the District 
of Columbia. Voters will cast a single yes or no vote on the referendum’s four 
parts: admission as a state, its boundaries, approval of a constitution and 
guarantees of a representative form of government.

 The new state would embrace the current 68 sq mile (176 sq km) district 
except for a core of federal property around the White House, Capitol and 
monument-rich National Mall.

 The district council approved the referendum unanimously, and a Washington 
Post poll in November 2015 showed 67% of residents backed statehood. The 
Democratic party’s national platform also supports the idea.

 “If you’re not part of a state, large parts of the constitution don’t apply 
to you,” said statehood advocate Ann Loikow.

The mayor, Muriel Bowser, and other statehood supporters took the vote’s 
design from the successful bid in the 1790s by Tennessee, then a federal 
territory, to become a state through a referendum and petition to Congress.

 Supporters and sceptics alike have said that even if the referendum passed it 
would face a dead end in Congress, where Republicans would oppose statehood 
since it would add Democratic senators and a representative to Congress.

Roger Pilon, of the libertarian Cato Institute, called the statehood quest a 
“fool’s errand” because of constitutional obstacles.

 For the district to become a state, Congress would have to propose an 
amendment to the constitution, which would then have to win a two-thirds 
majority vote in both the Senate and the House. Even if an amendment could win 
approval in both houses of Congress, it would face another big hurdle: approval 
by the legislatures of at least three-quarters of the 50 states.

 Washingtonians have tried to achieve statehood before, but never by a 
referendum. Congress ignored a statehood petition that included a constitution 
voters ratified in the 1980s. The House of Representatives rejected a statehood 
bill in 1993, and it failed to reach a Senate vote. A constitutional amendment 
for voting rights in Congress fizzled in the 1980s.
 