
It was “the can-do crowd”, according to the NHS England chief executive, Simon 
Stevens. Those who gathered at theHealth and Care Innovation Expo 2016 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/expo/> in Manchester were certainly hungry for the 
latest cutting-edge practice and the hottest technology on show.


But Brexit uncertainty, funding anxieties and the unresolved junior doctors’ 
dispute added a sharp edge to debate on how the health and care system can be 
transformed into one fit for 21st century purpose. And scarcely a session 
passed without warnings from patients’ and service-users’ representatives that 
people were feeling left out of the loop on plans for change.


Paul Baumann, NHS England’s chief financial officer and, as he said, “chief 
devolutionist” responsible for regional autonomy on health and care spending, 
set the tone for the reformers when he warned that the latest drugs and 
technologies would be unaffordable for theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> unless it did “everything else 
differently”. This would require “bold innovation and bold leadership”.


But David Cartwright, a patients’ representative from Oldham, summed up the 
frustration of the opposing camp when he asked Baumann and leaders of the 
Greater Manchester devolution project: “When are you going to tell our 
communities what we are going to get and what we are not going to get?”


Public consultation on STPs assured

Stevens picked up on the mood and used his keynote speech to try to offer 
reassurance, particularly with respect to the 44sustainability and 
transformation plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/07/stps-local-modernisation-plans-nhs-four-years>
 (STPs) being developed by local care leaders to transform systems across the 
whole of England.


A lethal combination of secrecy and jargon has overshadowed NHS plans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/sep/09/lethal-combination-secrecy-jargon-overshadowed-nhs-plans>
He said he would be issuing a notice stressing the need for formal public 
consultation on the changes proposed by the STPs, which may include closure of 
hospital services. But he added: “I hope that people will give NHS and local 
government leaders the respect that what they are trying to do is incredibly 
difficult, but incredibly important.”


Matthew Swindells, NHS England’s national director for commissioning, said the 
aim was to get all plans for STPs “assured” by the end of December so that they 
could be aligned with operational plans effective from April 2017. Challenged 
on the tightness of the timescale, he said: “We don’t have time to take longer. 
Every day we decide to have another committee meeting rather than getting on 
with making hard decisions, we are not making optimal use of health and social 
care from the money available.”


Technology is the key

The health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, announced plans to create an “ivy league” 
of global exemplar hospitals to fast-track digital excellence.

Naming the initial 12 trusts each to receive up to £10m in funding, Hunt said 
the idea would be to “buddy up” each one with a leading US hospital such as the 
Cleveland or Mayo clinics to bring them up to the standard of the best in the 
world. Less tech-ready trusts would be prepared in subsequent waves. Hunt also 
promised “instant access” to personal online health records. He said: “This 
puts power back into the hands of the patients.”


These announcements came on the back of publication at Expo of the final 
report of the Wachter review of NHS digital readiness, highlighting the need 
for clinical input in achieving digital transformation.


The review’s author and professor at the University of California, Dr Robert 
Wachter, stressed the need to “reimagine tasks” rather then superimpose 
technology on old working methods. He said: “That is why we need to involve 
young people in this process. They need to look at workstreams and question why 
we do it that way, with fresh eyes.”


The digital revolution is, however, raising concerns about appropriate use of 
personal information. Dame Fiona Caldicott, the national data guardian, 
speaking about her review of public trust in the use of health and social care 
data, warned: “People no longer accept things being done to them without their 
knowledge.” Her review sets out 10 standards for data use, informing 
individuals and conditions for opting out.


Innovation needs to be implemented faster

There is no shortage of medical and health innovations to transform what NHS 
England’s medical director, Sir Bruce Keogh, described as the “biggest 
semi-integrated health system in the world”. But he pointed out that “ideas are 
only as good as their uptake”.


Discussing the challenge of achieving innovation at scale, Keogh outlined the 
NHS innovation accelerator programme (NIA) – the brain child of a junior 
doctor, Dr Mahiben Maruthappu. In its first year, the NIA funded 17 fellows 
whose ideas and processes were accessed by 3 million patients in six months, 
Maruthappu said, with a further cohort of fellows due to be announced in 
October, focusing on disease prevention, early identification and long-term 
conditions.


Devolution

Devolution plans are now being developed in areas covering some 55% of 
England, following Greater Manchester’s lead in setting up the NHS’s first 
devolved health and social care partnership, which came into being in April.


How Manchester plans to be the best place for people with dementia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/aug/31/how-manchester-plans-best-place-people-dementia>
Jon Rouse, chief officer of the partnership, making his first speech after 
just 20 days in post, said no one should be under the illusion that devolution 
was “magic dust”. Although there was already satisfaction in the development of 
dementia-friendly pharmacies and Pride in Practice, a new standard of 
excellence in healthcare for gay, lesbian and bisexual patients, the biggest 
achievement so far was the bringing together of a strategic partnership of 37 
NHS, local government and social organisations.


Rouse said: “Judge us later down the line by how we make progress on patient 
experience and clinical experience. Devolution is complex, it’s dynamic and 
difficult, but it’s worthwhile.”


People come first

Jane Cummings, chief nursing officer for NHS England, issued a call to arms to 
recognise and promote the diversity of the workforce. It was, she said, 
“frankly appalling” that there were so few black and minority ethnic directors 
of nursing. Making special mention of health workers from the rest of Europe, 
worried by Brexit, Cummings said: “Diversity makes us a better service.”


Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 