
America’s political map is a sea of Republican red. To change that Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> need to do better among the 
forgotten middle class – those hardworking Americans who play by the rules, pay 
their taxes, and yet feel they’re falling further behind. But how best to do 
that?

Conventional wisdom among many pundits and Democratic strategists is that to 
win over more of them, we need to offer a populist agenda – associated with 
senators Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren – that rails against the wealthy. 
This thinking would also relegate the growth-orientedNew Democrat-Third Way 
agenda <https://www.amazon.com/The-New-Democrats-Return-Power/dp/1137278641>
associated with President Bill Clinton and Tony Blair, which I played an active 
part in promoting, to the scrapheap of history.


I disagree. In fact, I believe the opposite is true. 


The populism of the 2016 cycle was built on a message of anger against the one 
percent. That anger is valid, but anger alone doesn’t engender hope or help the 
forgotten middle-class. Nor do promises of government help. Too many in the 
forgotten middle-class have already lost faith in government’s ability to help 
them.


Rather, Democrats should rededicate ourselves to the core New Democrat 
principles – opportunity, responsibility, community – the first principles of 
the Democratic party. Our party was built on Andrew Jackson’s credo of equal 
opportunity for all, special privilege for none; Thomas Jefferson’s belief in 
individual liberty and the capacity for self-government; John F Kennedy’s ethic 
of civic responsibility; Harry Truman’s tough-minded internationalism; Franklin 
Roosevelt’s thirst for innovation and Lyndon Johnson’s quest for social justice.

The Democratic party lost its soul. It's time to win it back | Robert Reich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/democratic-party-dnc-leadership-trump-clinton-sanders>
This doesn’t mean a return to the 1990s. Times have changed, as has our 
country. The last 20 years has brought demographic, social and technological 
changes. A new country faces new challenges, and we must meet them with new and 
different policies. Our policies change, but our core values are enduring.


Our first priority must be the revival of the American dream by fostering 
broad-based economic growth. At its best, the Democratic party is the party of 
upward mobility, and growing the economy is the prerequisite for expanding 
opportunity.


Restoring upward mobility and reducing inequality should be central to the 
Democratic agenda. But a populist approach is not the way to achieve that. 
Senator Paul Tsongas once said to me: “The problem with the Democratic party is 
that we spend so much time worrying about passing out the golden eggs that we 
forget to worry about the health of the goose.”


Simply put, redistribution doesn’t work if there is nothing to redistribute. 
This economic growth can only be generated by a robust private sector, 
generating high-skill, high-wage jobs and programs that equip every American 
with the opportunities and skills that he or she needs to get ahead.


The Clintons turned the Democratic party over to donors. Can it recover? | 
Jill Abramson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/21/clintons-democratic-party-donors-recover>
Creating opportunity should be the cornerstone of the next generation of 
Democratic policies, but we can’t stop there. We can’t forget that opportunity 
and responsibility go hand in hand. We need to complement our plans for 
economic growth with robust programs for reducing poverty and inequality. 
During the Clinton administration, that meant programs such as expanding the 
earned income tax credit and a “new markets” initiative to help communities 
that lagged behind the general prosperity. Our party needs to come up with new 
programs that fit today’s economic and social realities.


We also need to offer ideas that promote civic responsibility and build 
community. Youth service programs like Americorps strengthen our country’s 
social fabric and develop a new generation of leaders with a commitment to 
bettering our nation. Millennials are a uniquely service-oriented generation, 
looking for ways to make an impact; let’s give them programs that put that 
energy towards serving their community and their country.


The New Democrats believe that government can equip people with the tools they 
need to get ahead. As reactionary populism continues to tap into the 
frustration of many voters, anger won’t improve our nation. A constructive way 
forward for the Democratic party and the country is achievable if we can 
remember our first principles of opportunity, responsibility and community, and 
further them with bold ideas and modern means.

 