
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has been forced 
to postpone his plan to create the "world's greatest" golf resort in Scotland, 
complete with five-star hotel and luxury villas, because of the global 
financial crisis.

The billionaire property developer flew into Aberdeen on Monday on his latest 
luxury jet, a Boeing 757-200 fitted out with a master bedroom and five 
kitchens, to announce that his championship standard 18-hole golf course 
overlooking the North Sea would open for play in July next year.

Before touring the first completed holes, Trump said he had spent £50m to £60m 
of his own money carving the "amazing" course from the vast dunes, and would 
start taking advance bookings in 10 days. He hoped that SirSean Connery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/seanconnery>, one of the earliest backers of 
the resort, would open it for him.

"We have been inundated from New York and Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> from people who want to come and play 
the course," he said. "Thousands of people have been calling: 'how can we play 
it?'"

But the tycoon said that the full scheme, a £750m complex featuring a luxury 
hotel, Trump Boulevard, a golf academy, a second course and timeshare 
apartments, had been bunkered by the recession.

Trump said "the world has crashed" since he first bought the Menie estate and 
dunes in 2005, provoking a long-running battle with local residents, 
councillors and environmental groups about his proposals, which has involved 
heavily altering the legally protected rare dunes.

 As Trump flew in, it emerged that a cinema in Aberdeen, the Belmont, had 
decided to give a new, highly-critical documentary investigating the tycoon's 
conflicts with local residents, called You've Been Trumped, an extended run 
this weekend. This was due to "an amazing response" to a screening last Friday.

Trump has denounced the film as "a fraud".

He also brushed aside continuing conflicts with his neighbours, particularly 
David and Moira Milne, owners of a former coastguard station overlooking the 
new course, and Michael Forbes, the salmon fisherman whose land Trump once 
described as "disgusting".

Milne has been sent warning letters from Trump's lawyers threatening legal 
action in a dispute over boundary fences and demands to demolish a garage which 
Trump believes intrudes on his land.

Trump's local manager, Sarah Malone, claimed David Milne "has chosen to take 
an aggressive stance and if he moves his fence, there won't be an issue. And if 
he doesn't, we're looking at all the options available to us".

Andy Wightman, a land rights expert who has investigated the conflict between 
the Milnes and Trump, said the Milnes had proper title to land complete with a 
Ordnance Survey map record, which was legally registered with the Keeper of the 
Registers of Scotland.

"If Trump has a problem with boundaries, it should be taken up with the 
Keeper," Wightman said. "It is totally out of order for them to issue threats 
of legal action to demolish other people's property. I am dismayed that a 
Scottish law firm has been persuaded to follow through and issue such threats 
to people who simply wish to live in peace."
 