
After a year of seismic shocks comes the protest and fightback. At least that 
is what activists plan with the first major demonstration of the year – the 
women’s march – planned for 30 cities around the world on 21 January, the day 
after Donald Trump’s inauguration as president of the US.

The women’s march on Washington has been given permission by state authorities 
to go ahead. Tens of thousands of women (and men, who are also welcome to join 
it) have already pledged to take part and plans for asister rally in London 
<https://www.womensmarchlondon.com/> are gaining support from writers, 
musicians and politicians.

Organisers say the US election proved a “catalyst for a grassroots movement of 
women to assert the positive values that the politics of fear denies”.

In the UK the Women’s Equality party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/13/womens-equality-party-says-quotas-could-achieve-balanced-commons-in-10-years>
 has thrown its weight behind the march. “I am a dual national and voted for 
Hillary Clinton in Wisconsin,” said the party co-founder, Catherine Mayer.

“I will march with my father, a US citizen, who during his time as a conscript 
in the US army came under investigation by Senator Joseph McCarthy for supposed 
un-American activities. In fact he was and remains a US patriot who will march 
to promote the values essential to the US: democracy and the human rights of 
the whole population,” she said.

“For me the march is also important because it recognises how interconnected 
our world is. What happens in America impacts all of us. The rights of women 
and of minority populations and vulnerable and low-income people are under 
threat and we must do everything we can to protect these rights and fight for 
true equality.”

Musician Pixie Geldof, writer Stella Duffy, activist Jack Monroe and US rock 
musician Thurston Moore are supporting the London march, while in the US 
organisers claim that many of the musicians who have refused to play at Trump’s 
inauguration will join them.

“I’m supporting this march because I don’t want to be a bystander to the 
politics of fear, division and aggression that defined crucial votes in the UK 
and the US in 2016,” said Geldof.

She added: “I believe that kindness, love and unity are stronger than hate. I 
believe that we are stronger together. Together we can show that no matter who 
you are, you have a voice, and it’s a voice worth being heard.”
 