
Militias in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo killed at least 34 civilians 
over the weekend, the army and local activists said, the mounting violence 
stoking concerns over political instability.


 Attacks have surged across the country in the past week alongside violent 
protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/congo-leaders-growing-pressure-death-toll-mounts-president-kabila>
 over president Joseph Kabila’s failure to step down at the end of his 
constitutional mandate on Tuesday.

Has Africa had its fill of ‘strongmen’?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/11/africa-strongmen-angola-dos-santos-zimbabwe-mugabe-uganda-sudan>
 While it is not clear that all the violence is related, analysts fear 
political instability over Kabila’s tenure is stoking localised conflicts by 
creating security vacuums.

 An ethnic Nande militia killed at least 13 Hutu civilians on Sunday in the 
eastern town of Nyanzale with guns and machetes in an apparent revenge attack 
for the deaths of Nande civilians last week, local activist Innocent Gasigwa 
said.

 “This must be the response for last time,” Gasigwa said, referring to an 
attack on Thursday by Nyatura, an ethnic Hutu militia, that killed at least 17 
civilians in a nearby village. He said two militiamen were killed as well.

 On Saturday, 21 civilians and four militiamen were killed in attacks near the 
city of Beni, 300km (185 miles) north of Nyanzale, local army spokesman captain 
Mak Hazukay told Reuters.

 Hundreds of civilians have died in raids near Beni since October 2014. The 
government blames the ADF, a Ugandan Islamist group, though analysts say 
others, including Congolese soldiers, are involved.

 At least 40 people died last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/drc-protests-grow-as-kabila-clings-to-power-despite-his-term-ending>
 in protests against Kabila’s refusal to step down at the end of his 
constitutional mandate last Tuesday. The government says he will remain in 
office until an election can be organised in 2018.

 Local mediators from the Catholic church hope talks between Kabila’s ruling 
coalition and the main opposition bloc will produce a deal by Friday for Kabila 
to step down after an election in late 2017.

 Catholic priests across DRC on Sunday read out a message from the church’s 
national head, cardinal Laurent Monsengwo, saying: “The time is over when one 
tried to hold onto power with arms by killing one’s people, these young people 
who only seek out their right to live with a little more dignity.“

 African and Western powers fear the violence could spark another conflict in 
a country where millions died between 1996 and 2003 in regional wars. The 
central African country has not achieved a peaceful transfer of power since 
independence in 1960.
 