
South African captain Faf du Plessis says his sweetest century has been soured 
by a hostile crowd reception, but the South African captain admits that he took 
advantage of an overheard conversation between David Warner and the umpires 
before declaring the South African innings to prevent the batsmen opening in 
Australia’s reply.

Du Plessis’ character-laden 118 not out against Australia on Thursday came two 
days after being found guilty of ball tampering. The Proteas skipper, who 
maintains his innocence, expected to be booed when he strode onto Adelaide Oval 
and was proven emphatically correct, though even he was surprised at the levels 
of discontent.

Honours even as Australia and Warner caught short by Du Plessis declaration
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/24/honours-even-as-australia-and-warner-caught-short-by-du-plessis-declaration>
“I was expecting a little bit of hostility but not to that extent,” du Plessis 
told reporters. “When I came out, I was obviously quite aware of it. As the 
innings went on, it disappeared a bit. But to be really honest with you guys, 
when I got to 100 I wasn’t expecting to still get booed. So that was pretty 
disappointing.”

Du Plessis said the bitterness from the crowd further steeled him. “I was 
really motivated before today,” he said. “I felt it was a character test and 
the only way I could do it was by scoring runs ... I suppose it did help a 
little bit, maybe five per cent.”

“But every ball today, I have never been that switched on every ball, to say 
to myself that it’s not enough, I want to get a big one here. It was a big day 
for me to stand up as a captain and make sure I led from the front. So to get 
through all of that and this week in the manner that I did today makes me 
really proud.”

Du Plessis is yet to decide whether to appeal Tuesday’s guilty verdict which 
came after television footage caught him shining a ball while having a mint in 
his mouth. The 32-year-old said the tactic of using sweet-enhanced saliva to 
shine a ball was used by every cricket team.

Australian captain Steve Smith admitted on Wednesday his side also used the 
ploy. “I was actually really impressed with Steven Smith’s press conference 
yesterday,” du Plessis said. “I sent him a message to say that he gained a lot 
of respect from us as a team, because to say that he does exactly what I have 
been accused of doing takes a lot.”

The South African captain said outsmarting Australia and David Warner with his 
sudden declaration was down to luck. Du Plessis’ shrewd move prevented Warner 
from opening the batting in Australia’s innings late on Thursday’s opening day 
of the third Test in Adelaide.

The Proteas were 9-259-9 when du Plessis chanced upon a conversation between 
umpires and Warner. The Australian batsman had just returned to the field after 
a stint off for a period of time getting treatment on an injured shoulder.

Under cricket’s rules, a player must be on the field for the same time they 
spent off it before being able to bowl or bat again – in Warner’s case, he was 
caught short. “I listened to the conversation he had with the umpires – one ear 
talking to the batter, one ear listening to him,” du Plessis told reporters. 
“And then I heard he had six minutes left before he could bat again so I 
thought ‘let’s have a crack’.”

Du Plessis said it was a “bit of luck” that he heard the conversation – he 
then promptly declared, leaving Warner stranded. Usman Khawaja was shuffled 
into the opening slot with Test debutant Matt Renshaw and the pair survived 
until stumps.

Warner would take responsibility for the blunder and apologise to his 
teammates, Australian paceman Josh Hazlewood said. “He was off for obviously 
too long, so they messed the timings up,” Hazlewood told reporters. “The guys 
were a little bit annoyed, especially Smithy (captain Steve Smith) and Usi who 
had to go out and bat. It’s just one of those things. It rarely happens but it 
happened today.”

Hazlewood said it was up to the player himself to judge time spent off the 
field and any potential repercussions. “You know the rules and he was just off 
the field for too long so he will hold himself accountable, that is how Davey 
goes,” he said. “He will know he did the wrong thing and apologise to the 
group.”
 