
It is a novel lauded in the Netherlands as a modern classic, while its author 
is a literary titan. But British readers are unlikely to have heard ofThe 
Eveningsor Gerard Reve <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gerard_Reve>.

Nearly 70 years after the novel’s publication and 10 years after Reve’s death, 
it has finally been translated into English. Set in Holland just after the 
second world war, it is a powerful story of an alienated young office worker 
who is cynical about his loving, middle-class parents and friends.

The novel went on to find such appreciation that it has never been out of 
print and was ranked by the Society of Dutch Literature as the country’s best 
novel of all time.

Daniel Seton, a commissioning editor at Pushkin Press, which is publishing it 
in the UK on 3 November, said: “It’s taught in schools over there. It’s a kind 
of cultural touchstone … It’s highly acclaimed critically and very popular – 
quite a rare combination.”

The Pushkin edition’s jacket bears a comment from Herman Koch, the Dutch 
bestselling author ofThe Dinner, who draws parallels between The Evenings and 
classics by the Americans Jack Kerouac and JD Salinger: “IfThe Evenings had 
appeared in English in the 1950s, it would have become every bit as much a 
classic asOn the Road and The Catcher in the Rye.”

Victor Schiferli edited Reve’s books when he worked at the Dutch publisher De 
Bezige Bij. He said ofThe Evenings: “Maybe you can compare it to The Catcher in 
the Rye in terms of familiarity among readers. It’s [about] an adolescent 
contemplating how to live so, especially for late teenagers, it’s a book that 
they will read and always remember. Also when you’re older, it’s a very 
beautiful book to read.

“There’s a cafe in Amsterdam called the Evenings. [The novel] is something we 
all know. The specific humour we refer to as ‘evenings humour’. It’s a very 
sardonic humour the main character has, a mean way of describing his friends 
and his family.”

Seton was astonished to discover that the book had not been translated into 
English. He likens introducing it to British readers to bringing them a new 
novel by a writer such as Albert Camus.

He said: “It’s brilliantly written… strange, funny and sinister, with an 
unexpectedly beautiful ending… It has a very original use of language, a really 
innovative mixing of registers… sometimes very emotionally powerful, often very 
funny.”

When The Evenings was published, in 1947, the nihilism of its protagonist 
sparked a furore in theNetherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands>, prompting Reve to defend 
himself: “I wroteThe Evenings because I was convinced I had to write it. That 
seems to me a good enough reason. I hoped that 10 of my friends would accept a 
free copy and that 20 people would buy the book out of pity and 10 others by 
mistake. Things turned out differently. It’s not my fault it caused such an 
uproar.”

Reve himself was a controversial character. Born into a communist family in 
1923, he rejected his parents’ ideology, becoming a devout, if unorthodox, 
Catholic – openly homosexual, and combining eroticism and religion in his 
writings. In 1966, he was prosecuted for blasphemy, after he published writings 
in which the narrator has sex with God, incarnated as a donkey.

The Evenings (Pushkin Press, £14.99. Click here to order a copy for £12.29 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/evenings.html>
 