
Bob Dylan <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan> walked in to a hero's 
welcome at the Isle of Wight music festival tonight. The voice of the crowd, 
restless after their three-day vigil, rose for the slender figure. "It's great 
to be here" he told them as the tension broke.

Since last Monday supporters had been arriving at Wootton – 150,000 people who 
sit around, 14 hours at a stretch, tuned in to music from a long string of 
groups varying in super-amplified (1,500 watts) quality. Outside they queued – 
patiently, silently, and up to 300 deep – for food and lavatories. Inside they 
continued to sit, seemingly oblivious to anything but the blanket of sound 
which made conversation impossible, and – for those up front – headaches 
inevitable. Mingling with the anonymous plethora of hairy heads, unisex 
leather, and denim and beads were wealthy "hippies" like Jane Fonda and her 
husband Roger Vadim.

It was impossible not to be moved, however slightly, by this happening. The 
tension and atmosphere had been electric and increased as the afternoon dragged 
slowly towards 9 pm, when Dylan was to appear.

Bill Foulk, one of the three brothers responsible for the festival, stood at 
the entrance to the press enclosure checking passes. He was pale and seemed 
nervous. "If I sat down and thought this crowd was my responsibility, I might 
go mad."

He talked about the plan which had lured Dylan to the island. "We telephoned 
him and his managers countless times, and finally got a request from Bob to 
send information. This is how it started – you know the rest."

There was one angry man, the owner of three acres leased for the stage. 
Yesterday afternoon he returned to his bungalow to find his wife hysterical. 
She had been abused, he said, by a young man she had caught using their fence 
as a lavatory.

"The mark on her shin shows where she was kicked," Mr Thaeman said. "I went 
into the house to get my shotgun. I fired one shot into the air. It seemed the 
only way to keep them off the doorstep."

A girl of 19 who gave her name as Vivian and said she came from "nowhere" took 
part in the happening which attracted a large audience in the refreshments area 
just after midday. She and a young man, both naked, made love on a bed of foam. 
At times the foam covered them completely. The girl, when asked why she had 
done it, replied: "Why not? It's a beautiful thing." A spokesman for the 
organisers commented: "We cannot control the morals of 100,000 people."
 