
Donald Trump has nominated former labor secretary Elaine Chao to be his 
transportation secretary, the campaign announced on Tuesday.

Chao became the first Asian American woman to hold a position in the cabinet 
when she served as labor secretary under George W Bush from 2001 to 2009.

“Secretary Chao’s extensive record of strong leadership and her expertise are 
invaluable assets in our mission to rebuild our infrastructure in a fiscally 
responsible manner,” said President-elect Trump. “She has an amazing life story 
and has helped countless Americans in her public service career.”


The Trump transition team statement emphasized Chao’s personal history as an 
immigrant from Taiwan.

“An immigrant who arrived in America at the age of eight speaking not a word 
of English, Chao received her US citizenship when she was 19 years old,” the 
statement said. “Secretary Chao’s experience transitioning to a new country has 
motivated her to devote most of her professional life to ensuring that everyone 
has the opportunity to build better lives.”

Chao, who was born in Taiwan and is the wife of the Senate majority leader, 
Mitch McConnell, also served as deputy secretary of transportation and director 
of the Peace Corps in the administration of George HW Bush.

What kind of president will Trump be? His erratic transition keeps us guessing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/25/donald-trump-transition-cabinet-president>
She met with the president-elect on 21 November at Trump Tower. According to a 
readout provided by the transition team, the two “conversed about labor and 
transportation issues with a particular focus on America’s long-term 
infrastructure needs, and reducing or eliminating burdensome regulations”.

Trump has long pushed for an increase in infrastructure spending and has 
pledged to push for a trillion-dollar increase over the next decade in office. 
The president-elect’s plan relies heavily on public-private partnerships and 
tax credits rather than direct investment by the federal government.

If confirmed, Chao will become the second person to be labor secretary, 
transportation secretary and the spouse of the Senate majority leader, 
following inthe footsteps of Elizabeth Dole 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1983/01/27/us/mrs-dole-is-warmly-received-at-hearing-on-transport-post-by-ernest-holsendolph.html>
.
 