
The Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> 
secretary, James Brokenshire, is expected to face calls to name the date for 
the second Stormont election in eight months.

With Sinn Fein refusing to nominate a deputy first minister to replace Martin 
McGuinness, a snap election in late February or early March is on the cards – 
just as the government is preparing to trigger Brexit.

McGuinness’s move was precipitated by the Renewable Heat Incentive (RHI) 
scandal – a botched eco-scheme set to cost Stormont £490m – but the row has 
also reignited a range of other disputes dividing the DUP/Sinn Fein-led 
coalition.

The reappointment process is one of a number of elements of the political 
crisis due to be raised in the assembly chamber on Monday.

Emergency proposals aimed at reducing the RHI overspend will be tabled by DUP 
economy minister Simon Hamilton while Sinn Fein will also table motion of no 
confidence in DUP Speaker Robin Newton.

Newton has been under political pressure over his handling of a recalled 
assembly session to debate RHI before Christmas.

He has also been forced to defend himself against conflict of interest 
accusations in regard to his handling of assembly exchanges on a controversial 
charity in his east Belfast constituency.

The devolution meltdown has cast a shadow of uncertainty over a series of big 
ticket Stormont executive plans.

One of those is a payment scheme for households losing out under the UK 
government’s so-called “bedroom tax” and, also on Monday, DUP Communities 
minister Paul Givan will bypass the executive to ask for direct assembly 
approval for the support measure.

McGuinness’s resignation automatically removed DUP leader Arlene Foster from 
her position as first minister – as executive structures dictate one cannot 
govern without the other.

If the DUP and Sinn Fein are returned as the largest parties after an 
election, the likelihood of an immediate return to powersharing is slim.

But Brokenshire said no alternatives to powersharing were being contemplated, 
including direct rule or joint authority between London and Dublin.

Sinn Fein has accused the DUP of “arrogance and disrespect” in office and 
insisted republicans will only enter another executive if its long-term 
coalition partners give way on a series of “equality issues”, such as the Irish 
language and gay rights.

The DUP, for its part, has made clear it will not deliver a “republican 
agenda” and said the very structures of mandatory coalition powersharing need 
to be reviewed before another executive is formed.
 