
Email <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/email> is both a miracle and a 
curse. At no other time in human history and we been able to exchange messages 
instantly globally; but at the same time, our ancestors didn't spend hours each 
day sifting through memos, missives and newsletters we probably should just 
unsubscribe from.

It doesn't have to be this way – here are 19 tips, tricks and add-ons that 
will make email a breeze.

GMAIL

Canned responses
 Canned.png Photograph: Observer 

Much of our time using email is wasted crafting pitch-perfect responses to 
emails that could otherwise be dismissed with a cheerful "thanks, but I'm going 
to have to pass on this!"

Canned Responses, a Gmail <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gmail> Labs 
feature found in Settings -> Labs -> Canned Responses, allows you to save 
standard responses that can be inserted into emails at the click of a button.

Undo send 
 Undo Gmail 

In an ideal world, we would never send anything we didn't mean to. In the real 
world, features such as undo send exist. It can be found in Settings -> Labs -> 
Undo Send and in effect delays sending your email for up to 30 seconds so that 
you have the chance to bring it back.

Boomerang
 Boomerang Gmail 
A powerful app for Gmail that acts as your personal email valet, Boomerang 
allows you to schedule emails to be sent in the future and can give you a tap 
on the shoulder when someone fails to reply to your email. It can be found by 
Googling Boomerang for Gmail. A version forMicrosoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> Outlook also exists.

Multiple email addresses 
 multiple gmail 
Web services generally allow you only to create one account per email address, 
which can be a pain if you want to run two Twitter accounts, for example. 
Instead of having to manage multiple email accounts – one is hard enough – 
Gmail allows you to tweak your email address with dots and plus signs.

For example, firstname.surname@gmail.com, firstnamesurname@gmail.com and 
firstnamesurname+test@gmail.com are in Gmail's eyes the same account. Messages 
sent to either of them end up in the same inbox. If I wanted to, I could create 
three Twitter accounts with one Gmail account.

A word of warning, while multiple dots can appear anywhere in the address, a 
single plus symbol must come after your standard account name, as above.

Combine accounts
 Combine accounts Gmail 
It's possible that you already run multiple email accounts – instead of having 
to manage each individually, you can in effect turn them all into one email 
account under the Gmail umbrella using email forwarding. By going to Settings 
-> Accounts and Import -> Check email from other accounts, you can link your 
other email accounts to Gmail. Once you've done this, you can set up filters to 
treat incoming mail from different accounts differently if you wish.

Labels and filters
 Labels and Filters Gmail 
This is less of a tip or a trick and more of an exhortation to use your mail 
more efficiently. Spend some time adding filters, which can be created by doing 
a search and then clicking "Create filter with this search", so that emails are 
sorted even before they hit your inbox. And add labels to conversations. This 
can be done automatically using filters so that they can be more easily 
retrieved via search at a later stage.

Archive everything

As a general rule, we tend to be hoarders of digital information. Desperately 
holding on to every last message, photo and file in case we might need it in 
future. This makes sense with important emails, but remember that Gmail's 
archive function doesn't make your emails difficult to access – they're still 
searchable, retrievable and, most important, no longer clogging up your inbox.

Send & archive
 Send & archive Gmail 

This nifty little feature, which can be activated by going to Settings -> 
General -> Send & Archive, is the Gmail equivalent of filing away your messages 
once you've replied to them.

Instead of remaining in your inbox after you have dealt with an issue, the 
email is automatically archived when you click send, clearing up your in-tray 
and letting you focus on the next email.

Mute conversations
 Mute Conversations Gmail 

One of the worst aspects of modern email behaviour is our tendency to cc every 
last person in email threads, no matter how tangentially relevant to or 
responsible for the topic of discussion.

If you are the subject of this relentless ccing, you can mute a conversation 
by clicking More –> Mute from within an email, which means messages from that 
email thread will no longer appear in your inbox. You will still be able to 
find it via the search bar.

Is this email really for you?
 Is this email really for you_.png Photograph: Observer 

You can see at a glance if an email has been sent to you personally by turning 
on Gmail's personal level indicators. This feature, found in Settings -> 
General, displays a single arrow beside emails that have been sent to your 
email address specifically, ie not to a mailing list, and a double arrow if an 
email has been sent to you alone. This feature isn't entirely foolproof, 
however.

The power of search
 The power of search Gmail 

Google's existence is built on its ability to search information well (and to 
sell ads as a result of that search, of course). So, as you might expect, the 
search function in Gmail is incredibly powerful once you begin to get to grips 
with it. I won't list all of the search operators here –Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> "list of gmail search 
operators" – but here's some advice for anyone with thousands of messages 
clogging up their inbox.

Search "older_than:14d" and select all the emails that appear by clicking the 
checkbox on the top left. Then "Select all conversations that match this 
search", which will be every last email you've ever received up until two weeks 
ago. Finally, archive them all. They're all still there if you need to find 
them, but now they're not hanging over your head anymore.

Keyboard shortcuts

As with any software, learning some basic keyboards shortcuts will allow you 
to streamline your workflow by reducing the need to involve your mouse. With 
Gmail, you'll need to activate keyboard shortcuts by going to Settings -> 
General -> Keyboard Shortcuts. To find the full list of shortcuts, Google 
"Gmail keyboard shortcuts" but some basic ones include C for composing a new 
message, E for archiving a message and R to reply to a message.

You can customise your keyboard shortcuts by going to Settings -> Labs -> 
Custom keyboard shortcuts.

Gmail Offline 
 Gmail Offline 2.png Photograph: Observer 

In future it will be child's play to remain connected to the internet at all 
times, but until then Gmail Offline is useful for working when you can't get 
online.

It can be found by going to Settings -> Gmail Offline and when used in 
conjunction with the Gmail Offline Sync Optimizer, automatically saves emails 
from up to a month ago on your computer. Any changes you make or emails you 
compose are automatically synced when you are reconnected to the internet.

Authenticated senders
 Authenticated Gmail 
One way scammers attempt to steal your personal details is with emails that 
pretend to be from companies such as eBay. Gmail has a function that puts a 
little key icon beside emails that are from verified senders, giving you 
another piece of information to help you detect what is legitimate mail and 
what is an attempt to trick your information out of you. This feature can be 
activated by going to Settings -> Labs -> Authentication icon for verified 
senders.

OUTLOOK

Create aliases
 Alias Outlook 
While Gmail allows you to alter your email address with dots and plus signs, 
Outlook takes a slightly different approach, which is the creation of aliases 
associated with your core account. An alias is a separate email address 
connected to your main address, using, for example, the same inbox and 
password. To create an alias, click the cog -> Options -> Create an Outlook.com 
alias.

Sweep
 Sweep Outlook 
Outlook makes it easy to clear masses of emails with the Sweep function. Just 
by clicking on one email from a specific newsletter, for example, Sweep gives 
you the option of deleting all instances of that newsletter at the click of a 
button.

Keyboard shortcuts

Like Gmail, Outlook offers the ability to use keyboard shortcuts to streamline 
your email use. But unlike Gmail, Outlook offers you the opportunity to switch 
them to Yahoo or Gmail style shortcuts. It's slightly less powerful than 
Gmail's fully customisable add-on, but perhaps more straightforward for a 
casual user. To create a new email you push N, but a full list can be foundhere 
<http://windows.microsoft.com/en-GB/windows/outlook/keyboard-shortcuts>.

YAHOO

Create aliases
 Alias Yahoo 
As with Outlook, Yahoo Mail allows you to create an alias that lets you 
disguise your email address when using Yahoo Messenger or Yahoo's message 
boards. To create an alias, click the cog -> Account Info -> Manage your Yahoo 
aliases.

Alternative and disposable email addresses
 Alternative and disposable email addresses Yahoo 

In Yahoo's case, aliases are different to alternative email addresses, which 
function like Outlook's aliases, and disposable email addresses, which is 
closer to Gmail's dot and plus sign functionality. You can have only one 
alternative email address, which is basically another linked account, while you 
can have many disposable email addresses, which act as receiving addresses 
only. To create an alternative email address, click the cog -> Settings -> 
Accounts - > Create an extra email address and to create a disposable email 
address, click the cog -> Settings -> Security -> Disposable Addresses.

Delay "mark as read"
 Delay "mark as read" Yahoo 
If you're the kind of person who sometimes opens an email briefly without 
reading it or responding to it, Yahoo has a nifty little feature that will mark 
an email as "read" only if it has been opened for more than five seconds. If 
that's not long enough, you can set it to "never", so that you have to mark 
them as read manually. To enable this feature, click the cog -> Settings -> 
Viewing email -> Mark as read

iCloud

Create aliases
 Create Aliases iCloud 
As with the other email services, iCloud also has email aliases. Functioning 
as additional email accounts that feed into your central account, the aliases 
help you conceal your real email address. However, you can have only three 
active aliases at a time. To create an alias, click the cog -> Preferences -> 
Accounts -> Add an alias.

Archive instead of deleting
 Archive instead of deleting iCloud 
In case you want to retain your emails by default, you can replace the delete 
button with an archive button. A word of warning – this will become frustrating 
if spam makes up a significant proportion of your incoming email, denying you 
the satisfaction of hitting delete on unwanted mail. To swap delete for 
archive, click the cog -> Preferences -> Show Archive icon in the toolbar.

Create rules
 Create rules iCloud 
Like other email services, iCloud allows you to set up rules for incoming 
mail, helping to keep your main inbox clear. You can either choose to 
automatically forward the mail, move it to a specific folder, or if you want in 
effect to block someone, send it straight to trash. To set up rules, click the 
cog -> Rules -> Add a Rule.
 