
Of all the men who loved Emma Hamilton, the artist George Romney is the one 
whose passion has endured. Her husband, the vulcanologist, classicist and art 
collector Sir William Hamilton, found himself spurned when she fell madly in 
love withHoratio Nelson <https://www.theguardian.com/world/horatio-nelson>. And 
her heroic lover never grew old with her as he hoped. Nelson died on HMS 
Victory after winning the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805. His grey pigtail, which 
he asked his friends to send her as he lay dying, is in this exhibition.
 Emma, as the Spinstress, circa 1782-85, by George Romney. Photograph: 
Jonathan Bailey/Historic England Archive 
That left Romney to pick up the pieces. The relationship between this 
Lancashire-born painter and the woman who – as this vivid and fascinating 
exhibition reveals through a rich mix of images, objects and documents – made 
it out of the brothels of 18th-century London to become an iconic beauty of 
Europe, was not physical. At least, not in a conventional sense. Romney 
expressed his passion for Hamilton through art, painting her again and again in 
multitudinous poses and costumes. She acts out a dazzling variety of roles in a 
gallery of his paintings that sets this show alight. She gazes with sultry eyes 
and half-open red lips as the enchantress Circe from Homer’s Odyssey, sits with 
her hands artfully posed by a spinning wheel and her body veiled in white in 
Emma as The Spinstress, and dreams with eyes full of wonder as Miranda in The 
Tempest.

Romney’s paintings of Hamilton are the masterpieces of a troubled, lonely man 
who was plainly obsessed with the young woman who gleefully tried on costumes 
and gestures in his studio. In his unfinished self-portrait, he sits in grey, 
depressive reverie. In his paintings of Emma, he is fired up by her energy and 
boldness.

She lives forever in his art. But Romney’s portraits are, this exhibition 
convincingly shows, a collaborative creation that owes as much to her artful 
posing as his delighted brushing. It is possible that the future Lady Hamilton 
developed the talent for striking poses as an erotic dancer at a Georgian venue 
called the Temple of Health. Her aristocratic lover Charles Greville later 
introduced her to Romney, in whose paintings she demonstrates her range of 
theatrical mannerisms, from lamentation to triumph.

This was the neoclassical age when actors on stage struck grand rhetorical 
postures, and painters such as Jacques-Louis David in France andJoshua Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/mar/09/joshua-reynolds-wallace-collection-exhibition>
 in Britain illustrated serious moments from Greco-Roman myth and history. 
Romney’s portraits of Hamilton playing life’s many parts were turned into 
prints and became hugely popular.
 Emma Hamilton as Bacchante, by Élisabeth Louise Vigée le Brun. Photograph: 
David Westwood 
When Greville married, he sent his young mistress to stay with his widowed 
uncle, William Hamilton, British envoy at the court of Naples. Emma was being 
given to the older man as a mistress – exchanged between aristocrats like a 
luxury object.

William Hamilton, after all, was one of Europe’s leading connoisseurs of art. 
His palace in Naples was a veritable museum. He collected Greek and Roman vases 
(the Portland Vase and many other classical treasures passed through his 
hands), excavated at Pompeii and Paestum, explored the mysteries of Vesuvius, 
and wrote a book about the geology of the Bay of Naples. He also admired Emma, 
and – to society’s shock – married her. A triple portrait he commissioned shows 
her as scholar, musician and actress. Lady Hamilton, learning about the 
classical world in detail from her husband’s books and collections – the 
frontispiece of an archaeology book published in 1791 shows her elegantly 
supervising a dig at Paestum – refined the poses she’d done for Romney into a 
sequence of neoclassical tableaux she called her “Attitudes”.

The curators describe Emma Hamilton as a performance artist, and her Attitudes 
are re-created in a video in which classical women like Medea and Agrippina 
enact eloquent silent gestures. In classical art, a gesture can speak without 
words. It’s a strange, powerful journey into the aesthetics of another age. The 
Attitudes entertained courts and opera houses and made her a European icon. 
Élisabeth Louise Vigée le Brun painted her as a “reclining bacchante” in a 
sensual portrait that enflames this exhibition. Thomas Rowlandson was ruder. In 
his soft-porn caricature print she poses nude, naturally, before a squinting 
William Hamilton. The seriously jaundiced James Gillray goes further – in his 
cruel caricature, Hamilton’s fine figure becomes orotund, her poses clumsy.
 James Gillray’s caricature Dido in Despair, 1801. Photograph: Tina 
Warner/National Maritime Museum 
Satirists got lots more opportunities to laugh at Hamilton and her husband 
when the gossip spread that she was having an affair with none other than 
Admiral Nelson, the naval hero of the Battle of the Nile. A macabre trophy from 
this victory, the fragment of a topmast found in the water after the French 
flagship exploded, had pride of place in the house they shared. It can be seen 
here along with a portrait of Nelson nursing his wounds after this spectacular 
victory. Gillray portrayed a plump Hamilton lamenting the fleet going to sea. 
In fact, as the exhibition explores in detail, it was politics and war that 
brought them together in a Naples ravaged by revolution. Hamilton was the first 
woman to win the Maltese Cross, for helping to save the island from starvation. 
She was friends not only with the Queen of Naples, but also the Queen’s doomed 
relative Marie Antoinette.

Nelson worried that she was also getting too friendly with the Prince Regent. 
One of his love letters admits his jealousy after she got a royal visit when he 
was away at sea. Yet Emma was true and so was he. The most moving and upsetting 
thing here is Nelson’s handwritten codicil to his will, scribbled just before 
he went into battle at Trafalgar. It asks that if he should die, the nation 
will give a generous pension to Hamilton.
 A detail of Emma as La Penserosa, 1791-92, by Sir Thomas Lawrence. 
Photograph: Bryan F Rutledge BA/Duke of Abercorn 
Related: Emma Hamilton portrait bought by her lover Lord Nelson to go on 
display 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/23/portrait-emma-hamilton-lord-nelson-on-display-national-maritime-museum>

This last request of a national hero was ignored. Nelson’s mistress was 
excluded from his funeral and denied her inheritance. She was left to raise 
their secret daughter, Horatia, as best she could. The last thing in the 
exhibition is the uniform Nelson wore at Trafalgar. He left it to Hamilton but 
she was so desperate for money she gave it to a benefactor.

Britain’s betrayal of Hamilton was nothing short of a national disgrace. The 
National Maritime Museum at last makes amends with an exhibition that is a case 
study in bringing history to life and restoring women to centre stage. No one 
in her time could resist Emma Hamilton, and nor will you.


•Emma Hamilton: Seduction and Celebrity 
<http://www.rmg.co.uk/plan-your-visit/ticket-types/special-exhibition-emma-hamilton>
 is at the National Maritime Museum, London, until 17 April 2017. Box office: 
020-8312 6608.
 