
Ireland’s taoiseach, Enda Kenny <https://www.theguardian.com/world/enda-kenny>
, has declared he will resign after a deeply split parliament could not agree 
on a new prime minister.


His outgoing Fine Gael-Labour coalition government will remain in a caretaker 
capacity as political parties remain deadlocked about the way forward after the 
most divisive general election in recent times.

On the first day of the new Dáil, or lower house of parliament, Kenny and 
three other nominees to lead the country failed to secure enough support to be 
elected as the next taoiseach.

The other defeated candidates were Fianna Fáil’s Micheál Martin, Sinn Féin’s 
Gerry Adams <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gerryadams> and Richard Boyd 
Barrett of the Anti-Austerity Alliance-People Before Profit grouping.

After the votes, Kenny travelled to Áras an Uachtaráin, the official residence 
of the Irish president, Michael D Higgins, to officially tender his resignation.

“Let me assure the Irish people that a government remains in place,” he said. 
“I and my cabinet colleagues will continue to work hard in the best interests 
of the country and all the people.”

Amid the uncertainty about a future administration, Kenny will continue with 
official duties representing the country at a meeting with the US president, 
Barack Obama, in Washington on St Patrick’s Day and at the European council 
meeting in Brussels next week.

Earlier in the day, Fianna Fáil’s Seán Ó Fearghaíl was elected as ceann 
comhairle – or speaker – after a secret ballot of members of the Dáil (TDs).

However, the fractured parliament remains intensely divided on the make-up of 
a new government, if one can be formed at all.


No party has a majority after voters forced a seismic shift in the republic’s 
political landscape at the polls this month.

Outgoing ministers have already conceded it will be weeks, possibly months, 
before a minority government or a power-sharing alliance could be agreed. 
Arch-enemies Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil, traditionally the two largest parties 
which swapped power for generations, are coming under intense pressure to set 
aside their age-old rivalry to form a “grand coalition”.

Despite little difference between their centre-right outlooks, a power-sharing 
deal would be fraught with difficulties as many within their rank-and-file hold 
fast to their distrust of each other, dating back to Ireland’s civil war more 
than 90 years ago.

Sinn Féin <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein>, the third largest 
party, has said it will not prop up either of the two.

Kenny called on elected representatives to intensify efforts to forge a 
“lasting and durable government”. He said: “As taoiseach, and leader of the 
largest party in the house, I am fully committed to working over the coming 
weeks to ensure that the people get the government that they need and that they 
deserve and that they have given their verdict on.”

Kenny said a substantial number of elected representatives had no interest in 
taking power, but claimed options remained on the table for forming a new 
government.

But Martin appeared to resist pressure to enter coalition talks with Kenny. 
“The people didn’t vote for Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael; I think we must 
acknowledge that,” he said.


“It is our job to work in terms of interpreting and reflecting that vote now 
and we’re doing that in the context of our negotiations with Independents and 
smaller groupings.”


The Fianna Fáil leader added: “We certainly didn’t get a mandate to put Fine 
Gael back into government.”


Martin suggested voters had asked for a “different kind of Dáil” and repeated 
his calls for parliamentary reforms to be agreed before attempts are made at 
forming a new government.


A number of TDs spoke of the need for Dáil reform during the day. But Sinn 
Féin’s Pearse Doherty, Labour’s Brendan Howlin and the Independent Alliance’s 
Shane Ross all said the electorate was more concerned with health, housing and 
other issues.
 