
England’s cricketers will discover shortly whether their winter tour to 
Bangladesh is to go ahead andEoin Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eoin-morgan>, the limited-overs captain, has 
pre-empted the announcement by saying there will be no pressure on players 
should the tour receive the green light from the team’s security director, Reg 
Dickason.

Morgan’s one-day side, who begin a home series with Pakistan in Southampton on 
Wednesday, are due to fly toBangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> on 30 September for the 
month-long trip that features three 50-over internationals and two Test 
matches, and will be briefed on the situation in the country on Thursday 
evening.

Ian Bell under consideration for England tours of Bangladesh and India
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/22/ian-bell-under-consideration-england-test-recall-bangladesh-india-trevor-bayliss>
The tour has been in doubt since 1 July when five Islamic militants attacked a 
cafe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/01/dhaka-bangladesh-restaurant-attack-hostages>
in the Gulshan district of the capital, Dhaka, in a bloody siege that ended 
with the deaths of 20 hostages – of whom 18 were foreign nationals – and two 
policemen, before the gunmen were killed.

Dickason, the England and Wales Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board’s long-serving security 
expert, has now returned from a two-week assessment of Bangladesh and India – 
the second tour of the winter – along with the ECB’s head of cricket 
operations, John Carr, and David Leatherdale, the chief executive of the 
Professional Cricketers Association, with the trio now set to share their 
findings with the squad and the Test captain, Alastair Cook.

Morgan, the limited overs captain who has previously admitted to the tour 
being “a big concern”, has welcomed the news that a decision is imminent while 
stressing the need for the team’s conversations that follow this security 
briefing to be open and honest.

He said: “I’m looking forward to the meeting because it’s a decision you’d 
prefer to get out of the way sooner rather than later or it becomes a 
distraction. They’ll debrief us on exactly what the findings are from both 
tours and we’ll get together as a side and chat about it. It has to be quite 
open.”

Asked whether there is scope for players to withdraw from the tour should it 
go ahead, as occurred in 2001 when Andy Caddick and Robert Croft missed a trip 
to India following the September 11 terrorist attacks on New York and 
Washington, Morgan replied: “There’s always room for a personal decision. You 
never put anyone under pressure to go on a tour.

“You also have to understand guys are in different situations and might have 
different priorities. But until we hear what it’s like … well, the media 
perception can be completely different from what is actually happening.”

Australia have withdrawn both their senior and Under-19 sides from trips to 
the country in the past 12 months due to security concerns but the Bangladesh 
Cricket Board, which has already ruled out the tour being played at a neutral 
venue, remains confident England’s security team were satisfied with 
arrangements.

Dickason’s assessment was not based solely on team safety, however, with the 
security of both the travelling media and supporters also to be factored into 
the decision. One concern understood to have been raised already relates to 
security on the roads. The current advice from the Foreign Office for those 
travelling to Bangladesh reads: “There is a heightened threat of further 
terrorist attacks and foreigners, in particular westerners, may be directly 
targeted; crowded areas where westerners are known to gather may be at higher 
risk of attack; you should minimise your exposure to these areas.”
 