
In peculiar times, it is mildly reassuring to escape the abnormality for a 
while and take refuge in a one-day international series, which will culminate 
in Cardiff on Saturday.

We are at last witnessing something familiar in an English summer as England 
and Sri Lanka prepare to contest yet another one-day match: there has been 
quite a lot of rain to disrupt proceedings. Against Asian opponents in damp, 
cold conditions England have prevailed, though this time they have not only won 
the series but also the Super Series. And there is the usual glum realisation 
that within a month most of us will be hard-pressed to remember the outcome of 
this clash (although the ICC, meeting in Edinburgh, is currently seeking 
greater “context” for our international cricket).

Here at least is a reversion to the cosy old days when no one knew that 
Iceland had the same population as Leicester and politics was sufficiently dull 
that references to Brutus and Lady Macbeth were seldom justified. Yet between 
the showers there has been some startling cricket and most of it has been 
played by England. And at Cardiff on Saturday there is the prospect of some 
sunshine and an enjoyable, forgettable finale to the 50-over series.

Jason Roy’s knock of 162 seals ODI series win for England against Sri Lanka
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/29/jason-roy-162-england-sri-lanka-odi-series-win>
So far the most heartening game from an English perspective was the one in 
which they played the worst. Toconjure a tie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/21/liam-plunkett-england-sri-lanka-tie-first-odi>
, when chasing 287 for victory from the depths of 82 for six at Trent Bridge, 
hints at the potential of this team.At Edgbaston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/24/england-sri-lanka-jason-roy-alex-hales>
 they delivered an almost perfect game, which removed all tension from the 
contest;at The Oval 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/29/jason-roy-162-england-sri-lanka-odi-series-win>
, even when required to score 308 from 42 overs, there was no surprise when 
they knocked the runs off with 11 balls to spare. In white-ball cricket 
England, under Eoin Morgan, do not know when they are beaten.

Morgan has, however, inherited a problem that has plagued his predecessors as 
captain: a sudden dearth of runs. He has not passed 50 for a dozen games. Yet 
it would be foolish to fret too much about that. Morgan, as captain, has 
instigated the new freedom which has coincided with greater success. One of 
Trevor Bayliss’s several virtues is that he is eager to let his captain hold 
sway.

After the vote of confidence from Andrew Strauss more than a year ago, Morgan 
more than anyone else triggered the upheaval. A key principle to his regime is 
the freedom to fail and this now should be applied generously to Morgan himself.

The stats suggest that his problem recently has been primarily against spin 
bowlers, which seemed to be one of his strengths earlier in his career. He 
should be able to solve that.

Jason Roy is clearly a beneficiary of the fresh outlook. His second century of 
the series was a breathtaking affair. He relishes playing in this environment. 
After his Oval innings, he said: “Credit to the boys; they allow me to go out 
there and enjoy myself and play the way I play. I’ve got no worries about 
getting out in the first over because I know the guys are backing me. It’s an 
incredible dressing room to be part of at the moment.” And he is batting 
incredibly well.

His partner during much of that innings at The Oval was Joe Root, now a senior 
citizen despite his age and he was mightily impressed. “There was real thought 
and clarity in the way he went about his business, which previously you might 
not have associated with Jason,” the Yorkshireman said on Friday. “That shows 
how he’s developed during his time in an England shirt and where he wants to 
take his game.”

Inevitably, after a second hundred the question arises of whether Roy might 
benefit England’s Test team. After all, Alex Hales has just about made the 
transition. Roy has a special ability to hit a cricket ball, akin to Jos 
Buttler, and that is a handy starting point whatever form of the game you are 
about to play. A Test career should not be ruled out for Roy but it is not 
imminent.

This season Roy has been batting at five or six for Surrey and he is averaging 
30. At some point quite soon he might try to persuade his county to send him in 
earlier because he needs more runs against a red ball to advance his cause. 
However, at the moment England are making a virtue of having specialist 
personnel for different forms of the game. So there is no rush.

Currently a majority of the England team can be regarded as one-day 
specialists. Hence they turn up at Cardiff with a spring in their step and 
eager to strut their stuff. They appear to be enjoying themselves too much to 
go through the motions. Sri Lanka, meanwhile, hampered by a growing list of 
injuries, are starting to fray and they are still pursuing their first victory 
in the moribund Super Series. The bookies have England as strong favourites in 
Cardiff. And in a summer of upsets, they are bound to get something right soon.
 