
Ben Stokes has long had a reputation for being able to “make something happen” 
but on the second day in Mohali, when still smarting fromthe official reprimand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/ben-stokes-reprimanded-icc-virat-kohli-england-india-third-test>
 that followed an industrial exchange with Virat Kohli 24 hours earlier, this 
often combustible all-rounder for once made damn sure it did not.

Woakes and Buttler raise England hopes in third Test against India
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/england-india-day-two-third-test-match-report>
Stokes has become a lightning rod for flashpoints during his career but after 
the key wicket of Kohli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/27/india-v-england-third-test-day-two-live>
 in the evening session – the Indian captain caught behind on 62 and the 
dismissal continuing what was something of a post-tea resurrection from England 
– he instead opted to exert some control, simply turning away from the 
departing batsman and placing his hand over his mouth.

While it may have still been playing up to the cameras a touch, his response 
could easily have gone another way. Stokes has been privately seething since 
the first day when, upon being stumped for 29 in the afternoon, he heard what 
he believed to be a crude sendoff from the India captain. His response then was 
to convey some choice words back, only to find himself, but not Kohli, in front 
of the match referee after stumps.

However, this time around, having teased the edge of Kohli’s bat with a ball 
that nipped away a touch for what could yet prove a pivotal moment in this 
intriguing Test match, Stokes made the smart choice. England may not want their 
all-rounder to lose his fiery side but neither do they want to lose him to 
suspension.

As Sunil Gavaskar, the former Indian opener, said on BBC’s Test Match Special 
when discussing Kohli’s behaviour the day before: “You have got the batsman 
out, why do you need to give him a sendoff? He’s upset as it is. Then what, rub 
salt into the wounds? It’s the one part of cricket I do not approve of at all.”

Restraint is not a word previously associated with Stokes but on this tour it 
has been a welcome feature of his cricket. Before his tame first-innings 
dismissal and the potty-mouthed retort that followed, this has chiefly come 
with the bat in hand but on the second day in Mohali, the second string to his 
bow came to the fore as Englanddesperately tried to undo the damage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/england-india-day-two-third-test-match-report>
 of their self-immolated first innings.

The 25-year-old prefers to play his cricket on the front foot and yet here, 
having earlier made the initial breakthrough in his first over as the opener 
Murali Vijay made the rare and chivalrous decision to walk following a faint 
nick behind, he became Alastair Cook’s holding seamer during the afternoon 
session.

Pounding away outside off stump to defensive fields in an unfamiliar role, 
Stokes offered his captain some much-needed control as Kohli and Cheteshwar 
Pujara began slowly asserting themselves on the tourists in what is becoming an 
all too familiar sight for England’s bowlers in this series.

It did not come naturally at first, with Kohli striking back-to-back 
boundaries in the opening over of his new spell to raise the temperature 
between the two further and suggest that, of the tattooed combatants, he may be 
the one to get the upper hand on this occasion.

However, slowly Stokes grew into it, nearly forcing the breakthrough when a 
tough chance off Pujara down the leg side was spilled by Jonny Bairstow. In a 
response in keeping with his day as a whole, Stokes kept his cool at the drop, 
however, preferring instead to applaud his wicketkeeper’s efforts generously 
rather than display any frustration.

The rewards for the shift he put in for his captain would instead come later 
in the day when Kohli, in a brief lapse of concentration and only one run short 
of 400 already in this series, feathered a catch behind. However, while 
England’s fielders ran to all corners in elation, the man who makes things 
happen held it all in for once.
 