
By the narrowest margin ever in the short history of the Prudential Cup, 
England prevailed in their semi-final with New Zealand at Old Trafford 
yesterday. They won by nine runs after another absorbing and fluctuating 
one-day game, having just sufficient runs for their purpose and bowling and 
fielding good enough to keep New Zealand under a pressure from which they never 
quite escaped.

The last overs were so tense as to keep a packed crowd wondering and waiting. 
New Zealand over the latter part of their innings found it difficult to 
maintain a demanding scoring rate. But first Lees and then Cairns, who gave a 
breathless display of big hitting on this ground last year, threatened to 
snatch victory from England's grasp.

The 55th over arrived with New Zealand still requiring 43 runs with the game 
slipping inexorably away from them. Desperate remedies were required, and Lees 
was clearly in the mood to provide them. He struck Hendrick's first ball with 
clean power but straight to Boycott on the long on boundary. In taking a good 
catch, however, Boycott stepped outside the boundary rope. That six was just 
the impetus that New Zealand needed.

Hadlee was soon to depart but then Cairns promptly lifted Botham effortlessly 
over midwicket for another six and it was clear that England could not afford 
to leave Lees and Cairns in partnership for too long. A few overs of these two 
in such violent mood could have been disastrous for England.

Neither, however, stayed long enough to inflict irreparable damage. Cairns 
struck another fierce boundary - Botham unwisely put a foot to the ball and 
spent the next few minutes hopping agonisingly on one leg - but then perished 
when Brearley, at short midwicket, took a catch that he made look deceptively 
easy. Lees scrambled a few more runs but then was out attempting the 
impossible, trying to cut a yorker from Hendrick. Six runs came from the 59th 
over but 14 runs off the final over proved beyond the capabilities of McKechnie 
and Troup.

New Zealand , then, lost a match that at one time they appeared to be winning 
in comfort. Edgar and Wright gave them a firm start; and although Howarth 
departed quickly, Wright, helped first by Coney then Turner, guided his country 
sensibly, with complete assurance, and no little style. While Wright was in 
occupation New Zealand's confidence justifiably remained high. His departure, 
as sad as it was unnecessary, was the turning point of the game.

Wright gained a poor reputation for running between the wickets when he first 
joined Derbyshire and there was echoes of those days in his dismissal. In 
partnership with Turner he turned for a second run that did not exist; he tried 
to make his crease but was too late to beat Randall's blistering throw from the 
deep.

The signs of stress creeping into the innings appeared again when Turner and 
Burgess found themselves in the same crease and another needless run out had 
cost a vital wicket. Turner now tried to infuse the innings with the confidence 
that Wright had given it but although he played a valuable part and scored 30 
good runs this was not the omnipotent Turner, and by the time he departed leg 
before in Willis's last over New Zealand's task was verging on the impossible.

On a good wicket, if a little slow, England fell perhaps some 30 runs short of 
their ambitions. Every credit, however, must go to the New Zealand captain, 
Burgess, whose field placings throughout the innings were masterful, and dogged 
if scarcely spectacular bowling and much good out-cricket.

There were, however, some good innings. Brearley will not quickly forget the 
reception he received from the Old Trafford crowd after scoring 53 runs that 
owed so much to commonsense and good placement.

The best batting of all though came again from Gooch. His 71, which though it 
contained only three fours and a six, was the innings of a man in prime form. 
If New Zealand had won Wright would probably have received the man of the match 
award. As it was, it could have gone to no one but Gooch.

Willis is the one English doubt for Saturday's final against the West Indies 
at Lord's. Willis left the field before the end of the match with a possible 
recurrence of a long-standing knee injury. He will call in at his home ground 
at Edgbaston on the way down to London today for treatment.
 