
Army of eights

If there is something that characterises this England side, it is the bowling 
pin nature of their batting contributions: little up top, a lot lower down. The 
numbers show as much: this year, England’s sixth-wicket average is their 
highest (over 80), with the seventh, averaging over 50, their next best. Not 
for the first time, they were bailed out again by weighty contributions down 
the order, asChris Woakes and Adil Rashid put on 99 for the ninth wicket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/england-bangladesh-second-test-match-report>
 – the highest English partnership for that wicket in Asia. Instead of a tail, 
England had Zafar Ansari at number eight – who has opened the batting for 
Surrey – followed by Woakes (nine first-class hundreds) and Rashid (10). As 
cricket writer Dave Tickner pointed out, given the value of having a strong 
batsman at number eight, “it must surely count as cheating of some sort for 
England to have three of them”. While their army of eights haven’t quite sorted 
the spin department, it has given England the level of insurance with the bat 
that no other Test side can match.VE

Ben Stokes and Zafar Ansari help England hang on against Bangladesh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/england-bangladesh-second-test-match-report>
Second of Mehedi

Long before Mehedi Hasan was a Test cricketer, he outlined his ambitions to 
“lead Bangladesh from the front” in a 15-year career that, he hopes, will 
culminate with him becoming the best all-rounder in the world. If those 
declarations raised a smirk then, they certainly don’t jar as much now. After 
marking his debut in Chittagong with a five-wicket haul, he became the first 
Bangladeshi to follow that with another five-for in his second Test. Conditions 
have been in his favour, but he has bowled with the control and nous of a 
spinner older than his 19 years. Fittingly, it was Mehedi who would break the 
ninth-wicket partnership, removing Woakes with his fourth delivery with the new 
ball.VE

DRS has eroded faith in umpires

Back in the early days of DRS the standard line was that it was there to 
eliminate “the howler”, aka the kind of decision from the umpires that Nasser 
Hussain might have got in the late 90s. Back then, no one foresaw that it might 
invent a new kind of howler: the one seen in the 25th over of England’s 
innings. Joe Root propped forward and pushed Shakib Al-Hasan’s delivery back to 
the bowler off the middle of the lower half of his bat and the fervent appeal 
from Mushfiqur Rahman behind the stumps frankly seemed bizarre. Still, the man 
behind the stumps, who couldn’t see the shot, opted for the review despite 
Shakib’s curbed enthusiasm. With a record number of decisions having been 
overturned in the first Test, this showed how far the players’ faith in the 
umpires has fallen.DL

England need to work out their batting order

It was a surprise, when Johnny Bairstow was dismissed, to see Zafar Ansari 
walking out at No8 ahead of Chris Woakes, never mind that Bairstow is far too 
low in the order at seven. Ansari is a competent enough county batsman, with 
three hundreds to his name and a respectable average – for an all-rounder – of 
31. He is, however, a young man, on Test debut, sent out with his team 114 for 
six and in danger of collapsing against the lowest-ranked Test team (Zimbabwe 
don’t count). It is strange that England placed so little faith in Chris Woakes 
– Test average 33 and arguably England’s most in-form player – that he was 
stuffed down at No9 … where, almost inevitably, he played exactly the innings 
needed to grind England out of a hole and towards Bangladesh’s 220.DL

Bangladesh v England: second Test, day two – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/29/bangladesh-england-second-test-day-two-live>
Steven Finn remains a problem for England

That eyebrows were raised when Alastair Cook opened the bowling with Steven 
Finn <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/steven-finn> in Bangladesh’s second 
innings says enough. The Middlesex bowler is, clearly, an enormously talented 
cricketer and has performed well for England in the past. But with that talent 
and that height, England fans still cling to the hope that he can be their 
terrifying 90mph-plus totem. However performances such as in this match, which 
can be kindly described as anodyne, are far too common from Finn and he has 
never performed consistently in international cricket. Finn is 27 and should be 
at the peak of his powers; instead he looks increasingly like a wasted talent.DL
 