
The challenge is familiar for England’s tourists. In Visakhapatnam the India 
spinners eventually suffocated their opponents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/21/india-england-second-test-day-five-match-report>
, just as they have New Zealand and South Africa in the last year. The old 
order was restored as Ravi Ashwin and Ravindra Jadeja, with a little help from 
the newcomer, Jayant Yadav, patiently undermined batsmen, some of whom have 
never experienced the peculiar torment of being trapped and then exposed in the 
final innings of an Indian Test match. They were surrounded by vulturine 
fieldsmen yet seldom have they felt more lonely.

There is, however, something new and imposing about this India Test side. They 
may be more athletic in the field than any of their predecessors. The catching 
has been far from flawless, especially in Rajkot, but the ground fielding is 
hitting fresh heights, especially if the comparison is with the “golden” days 
of Bedi, Chandrasekhar, Prasanna, Vishwanath and Gavaskar, when, in common with 
most other international teams, they tended to meander around the outfield at a 
more leisurely, comfortable pace. In those days a dive was nothing other than a 
disreputable nightclub.

England will guarantee thrills and spills with gamble on recalling Jos Buttler 
| Vic Marks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/22/england-india-2016-tour-third-test>
The captain, Virat Kohli <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/virat-kohli>, sets 
the pattern with astonishing energy. Even his immediate predecessor, MS Dhoni, 
occasionally lamented with a healthy dose of resignation that his side was not 
great in the field. But the impression is that this regime would not settle for 
that.

Kohli is on constant red alert in the field, often dashing left and right in 
the ring, swooping and then fizzing throws back to his keeper, who will be 
Parthiv Patel rather than Wriddhiman Saha in Mohali, issuing constant 
deterrents to any batsman who has the impudence to try to steal a run. Saha has 
a strain in his left thigh, but his absence may not reduce India greatly since 
he has scored only 49 runs in the series without keeping impeccably. Patel, now 
31, made his debut against England back in 2002; his last Test was eight years 
ago.

Opposite Kohli in the field there is usually Jadeja, who is similarly 
fleet-footed and alert. Jayant Yadav, is quick too. Indeed it was his 
intervention at square leg that started England’s slide at Visakhapatnam. He 
gathered the ball far more quickly than Joe Root anticipated in the first 
innings and as a consequence Haseeb Hameed was run out. In this series there 
are no easy singles – or twos – out there for England.

Ajinkya Rahane is also a livewire but even those not renowned for their 
fielding prowess seem to have improved. There is barely a weak link visible and 
it may be that Kohli has mastered the art of hiding his more vulnerable 
fieldsmen adroitly. The advent and evolution of the IPL surely means that all 
10 in the field must now reach a certain level of competence that was beyond 
one or two of those playing for India in the 20th century.

The contrast extends to pace bowling. So far in the series the two fastest 
bowlers have been Indian, which has seldom been the case in contests past. 
Mohammed Shami and Umesh Yadav steam in for short spells often breaking the 
90mph mark. Meanwhile the Englishmen, in the shape of Jimmy Anderson and Stuart 
Broad, seek to use their guile and changes of pace, which was traditionally the 
Indian way. In Mohali, starting on Saturday, that could change a bit since the 
canny Bhuvneshwar Kumar has been added to India’s squad while England’s current 
fastest, Chris Woakes, will be back in the XI.

Chris Woakes likely to replace injured Stuart Broad in third Test against India
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/22/chris-woakes-stuart-broad-injury-england-india-third-test>
There remain chinks in the Indian batting lineup. Rahane has yet to deliver; 
nor has the other opener alongside Murali Vijay; nor has the wicketkeeper. But 
England have not been able to exploit those weaknesses because of the 
excellence of Cheteshwar Pujara and Kohli. Especially Kohli.

Pujara has been hit on the head as frequently as he has been dismissed in this 
series. He looks imperious against the spinners and more vulnerable against the 
pacemen, but that vulnerability has not prevented him from scoringa century in 
each Test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/11/india-england-cheteshwar-pujara-local-hero-century>
. Against him England will be more inclined to stick with their fast bowlers 
and that might drive them to opt for four pacemen and two spinners in Mohali.

But the major problem is Kohli. He is setting the pattern with the bat as well 
as in the field. Already he has corrected a ropey record against England and 
Anderson in particular. He looks razor sharp at the crease and fiercely driven. 
There are no glaring weaknesses – twice he has been caught at slip driving 
against the spinners but on both occasions he had already gleaned many runs 
from that stroke. Occasionally he has top-edged a bouncer but for the most part 
he has scored runs more easily than anyone else in an intimidatingly measured 
way.

For England, taming Kohli is probably more important than finding a No4 in 
their own side – and just as tricky.
 