
England are still a collection of richly talented individuals: exhilarating 
and deadly on their day but prone to batting collapses and missed 
opportunities. They did a lot of good things during the series against India 
and deserve enormous admiration for not allowing their spirit to break in the 
face of a sadistic itinerary and an unavoidable hammering. Despite a 4-0 
defeat, they need only minor surgery.

The good news for their weary players is that they do not return to the 
subcontinent until a trip to Sri Lanka in 2018-19. They had a bespoke team 
structure for this winter but can now concentrate on a more traditional lineup 
before next winter’s Ashes. It is not hyperopia to focus on Australia because 
the main event of next summer’s Test programme, against South Africa, will be a 
very similar challenge. The number of all-rounders complicates matters, as 
selection decisions become interlinked in a way that is not usually the case. 
Having so many all-rounders may be a weakness disguised as a strength, as it 
discourages specialisation, particularly in batting and spin bowling. Those are 
two of five basic areas that England will consider over the next few months.

Captaincy


Alastair Cook to consider future of England captaincy after India rout
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/alastair-cook-refuses-discuss-future-england-captain-fifth-test-india>
In 2014, when he was subjected to vicious abuse from most angles, Alastair 
Cook looked shocked and hurt but also defiant and stubborn. In Chennai on 
Tuesday he just looked tired, and even the therapy of his family and his farm 
may not be enough to persuade him to go again as captain. Whatever Cook and 
Andrew Strauss discuss, the most important thing is that they are decisive: if
Joe Root is to captain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/alastair-cook-england-captaincy-joe-root-india-series-defeat>
 in the Ashes, he needs all seven Tests next summer to adjust. There are 
concerns that captaincy may affect Root’s run-scoring but there is a quid pro 
quo to consider: it would be a surprise if Cook does not rediscover his old 
ruthlessness with the bat as he enjoys his golden years back in the ranks.

Spinners


England will need only one slow bowler for the foreseeable future, and it is 
surely right to select Moeen Ali as a top-seven batsman or not at all. There is 
so much to admire about Moeen as a cricketer and a man but his record is 
inadequate for a principal spin bowler. He has 98 wickets; of those with 100 
Test wickets only Carl Hooper and Nicky Boje have a bigger average than Moeen’s 
42.22. And it is getting worse: in 2016 he averaged 53 with the ball. Moeen as 
first-choice spinner was a short-term solution that has gone on for two and a 
half years.Adil Rashid had a triumphant series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/england-adil-rashid-promise-india-virat-kohli>
, even if he tired towards the end, and when it comes to spin bowling in 
Australia, the wrist trumps the finger every time. If England do invest in 
Rashid, the first thing they should do is offer Saqlain Mushtaq a permanent 
contract as spin-bowling coach.

Batting


England’s batting has been less than the sum of its parts for too long. Not 
only have they often been at sixes and sevens, they have had too many No6s and 
No7s – players whose natural role is as a lower-middle-order counterattacker, 
and who are less comfortable up the order. The arrival of Keaton Jennings and 
particularly the astonishingHaseeb Hameed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/20/england-haseeb-hameed-test-natural-india>
 gives legitimate hope of a more solid lineup, though the top three could be a 
little one-paced if Root drops to No4. Cook, Hameed, Root, Jonny Bairstow and
Ben Stokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/10/england-india-2016-tour-ben-stokes-first-test>
 are certainties, which means there are two top-seven places between Jennings, 
Moeen Ali and Jos Buttler. Moeen’s fragility against the short ball and his 
friskiness outside off stump inspire little confidence that he will get 
significant runs in Australia. He could play as a No7 batsman and back-up 
spinner, though Buttler showed signs of cracking red-ball batting in India. And 
England may need him in another role.

England end series on sorry note as fifth Test collapse gives India 4-0 win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/england-india-cricket-test-series-defeat>
Wicketkeeping


Bairstow is a better batsman and Buttler a better keeper, so the division of 
labour seems obvious: Bairstow bats at No5, Buttler keeps at No7. The problem 
is that Bairstow has just shattered all kinds of wicketkeeping records and 
bristles at suggestions he might play as a batsman. England need to give 
Bairstow a persuasive sales pitch about the merits – for the team, and his own 
chances of achieving greatness – of giving up the gloves and batting at No5. It 
is certainly unlikely they will continue with a specialist batsman at No7; in 
the last two Tests, Jos Buttler was left on six not out.

Fast bowling


The days of a fast-bowling attack are over. Modern itineraries and injuries 
mean you need a fast-bowling squadron to rotate as necessary. Next summer, 
England will play seven Tests in nine and a half weeks, coincidentally the name 
of a film that also included elements of sadism. Such itineraries are now the 
norm: the five Ashes Tests next winter will be played in fewer than seven 
weeks. It is almost impossible to see Jimmy Anderson and Mark Wood playing all 
of those. England have a strong pool of fast bowlers, though there are slight 
concerns over Chris Woakes’s ability to take wickets overseas – he has eight in 
seven Tests – and major worries that Steven Finn, who bowled thrillingly in 
South Africa only a year ago but was unselected in India, will never deliver on 
his huge potential. The presence of Ben Stokes gives England greater freedom to 
pick one wildcard. With his sizzling pace and imaginary horse, Wood is both 
wild and a card, and he would give the team another dimension. England will 
surely use him when injuries allow. Woakes and Jake Ball represent solid 
back-up for Anderson and Broad, at the very least, but England could do with at 
least one more to add to their squadron. Middlesex’s Toby Roland-Jones and the 
immensely exciting Curran brothers – Tom and Sam – at Surrey are among those on 
next year’s Lions tour. The present may be miserable, but England remain a 
squad with thrilling potential.

Possible team for the first Test against South Africa, starting at Lord’s on 6 
July 2017 Cook, Hameed, Jennings, Root (c), Bairstow, Stokes, Buttler (wk), 
Rashid, Wood, Broad, Anderson.
 