
Haseeb Hameed, England’s 19-year-old opener, has seen his tour of India ended 
by the broken finger sustained during the eight-wicketdefeat in the third Test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/29/india-england-third-test-day-four-match-report-cricket>
 but will fly home with his team-mates in awe and the praise of his captain, 
his coach and his idol ringing in his ears following an innings of remarkable 
courage and skill.

As the right-hander was repelling India’s bowlers for just shy of three hours 
from No8 with an unbeaten 59 on the fourth day of the match – one that ended 
with Alastair Cook’s going 2-0 down in the series with two Tests to play – the 
results of an overnight scan were returned to the medical staff. They showed 
the blow inflicted by the fast bowler Umesh Yadav on the first morning had 
broken his little finger in two.

Hameed requires a metal plate in the digit and will be replaced by a batsman 
from outside the squad for the fourth Test in Mumbai from 8 December with the 
openers Nick Gubbins and Keaton Jennings, and the middle-order batsman Sam 
Billings, who are in Dubai with the Lions, among the candidates.

India beat England by eight wickets in third Test to take 2-0 lead in series
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/29/india-england-third-test-day-four-match-report-cricket>
Trevor Bayliss <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/trevor-bayliss> said after 
the defeat, in which India knocked off 104 to win in 20.2 overs after England’s 
236 all out, that Hameed had pleaded with him to remain on tour to finish the 
series. While that request was denied, the England coach spoke in glowing terms 
of the Lancashire opener for both the way he batted, with only two paracetamol 
tablets numbing the pain, and the skill in changing his technique to make sure 
his little finger did not remain on the bat handle.

“He has obviously got a high pain threshold,” said Bayliss, who claimed the 
origin of the break may have been a similar blow suffered during the second 
Test. “If you’d have seen him in the changing room though, you wouldn’t have 
thought there was anything wrong. It’s a great sign and the sort of attitude 
you want. He wants to stay and play the last two Tests. He wouldn’t take no for 
an answer and even his old man said: ‘Just tape it up, he’ll be all right.’

“[While England were fielding on the third day] he went over to net three 
times and the first two times weren’t too successful. He was working out a way 
with his little finger off the bat and once he did, he was quite comfortable. 
It’s a hell of a skill to have, to change the way you play to combat that.

“There’s plenty of other guys who have got hit and make a big song and dance 
about it. I think there’s a lot of guys in the team in awe of what he’s been 
through. The lack of showing any pain and the guts and determination is a good 
sign. We’ll make sure he gets back and gets it done so he’s right to go early 
next season.”

Cook, who will have another new opening partner in Mumbai, described Hameed’s 
rearguard as a “very special knock” and one that deserves the respect of the 
team. His opposite number, Virat Kolhi, was Hameed’s hero growing up as a young 
cricketer at home in Bolton and went out of his way to shake the teenager’s 
hand at the end of the innings in a Test that otherwise featured plenty of 
animosity between the sides.

“I wish him a speedy recovery,” said Kolhi, the only batsman on either side to 
face more deliveries than Hameed’s 640 during the series. “He put his hand up 
when his team wanted him to do it. You can sense it as a captain, this guy is 
intelligent. I think he’s a great prospect for England and he’s definitely 
going to be a star in all forms if he keeps persisting with his skill. That’s 
why I patted him on the back: it was an innings of character and something you 
need to applaud.”

Hameed’s breakthrough tour, one that saw him selected following a county 
summer that brought 1,189 County Championship runs, was not isolated to the 156 
balls of defiance during England’s second innings in Mohali, with his average 
of 43.8 inking him in to resume his Test career against South Africa in July.

Beyond the numbers was the temperament shown batting at the highest level, 
displaying diligent judgment of line and length as well as different gears 
depending on the situation.

India beat England by eight wickets: third Test, day four – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/29/india-v-england-third-test-day-four-live>
In Rajkot this manifested itself with 82 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/india-draw-england-first-test-cricket>
 in the second innings which saw him strike the spinner Ravi Jadeja for six in 
a situation in which the pressure could easily have got to other debutants.

In the second Test in Visakhapatnam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/21/india-england-second-test-day-five-match-report>
 his second innings rearguard of 25 over 144 balls was ended only by a shooting 
delivery from Ravi Ashwin into the base of his pads that trapped him lbw. In 
Mohali he marshalled the tail to at least give England’s attack something to 
bowl at. Having waited for 110 balls before striking his first boundary, the 
pick of the shots came when the seamer Mohammed Shami was hooked behind square 
off the front foot.

The six mown off Ashwin to bring up his half-century saw him become England’s 
first teenager to score two half-centuries in Test cricket and with it his 
international future, once the small matter of having a metal plate put in his 
finger, looks incredibly bright.
 