
Not since the golden age of cricket have England won a Test to compare with 
the one they won by 18 runs against Australia at Headingley yesterday.

Not since A.E. Stoddard led his side to victory by 10 runs in Sydney in 1894 
the only previous instance for a Test side following on and winning the game 
has an English cricket public been given quite so much cause for celebration.

This third Cornhill Test will be remembered for many things - chiefly for the 
soaring performances of Ian Botham, and the marvellous bowling yesterday of Bob 
Willis - but perhaps the thing that will give it an imperishable place in 
cricket history alongside the tied Test of Brisbane 1960 was the utter 
improbability of the victory.

England, it will be remembered, scored 174 to Australia's first innings 401 
for nine declared: and at one stage on Monday they were still 92 runs short of 
making Australia bat again with only three second innings wicket standing.

To be a Headingley yesterday was to be a part of a drama as gripping as 
anything the fertile mind of Wilkie Collins could have dreamed of. It was 
impossible to take the eye away from a single delivery: every run that edged 
Australia towards their target of 130 heightened the anxiety of the absorbed 
crowd; every wicket England captured added another heartbeat of tension until 
by the time that Willis uprooted Bright's middle stump to end the game most 
nerves could have stood no more.

Only Test cricket could have produced such a fascinating plot as this; no 
other game could have allowed such an unlikely and outrageous swing of fortune 
as England experienced. Only a drama that is allowed to unfold over five days 
could permit such a twist in the plot so wild as to be almost unthinkable.

After three and half days of largely dull preamble England were finished; 
ready it seemed to subside to an innings defeat: ready, humiliatingly to go 2-0 
down in a series only three matches old. Kim Hughes already had visions of 
himself as the latest proud owner of the Ashes. With three matches still to go 
his dream is now a long way from realisation.

The man who did most to fling logic the full length of the Kirkstall Lane was 
Ian Botham, with an innings that was the modern embodiment of Jessop. That 
blistering sustained attack on the Australian bowling turned the game upside 
down on Monday afternoon, but in spite of its magnificence it seemed at best a 
heroic gesture. If England were to have the slightest hope of winning, another 
50 or 60 runs would be needed yesterday and with only Willis left to support 
Botham that seemed unlikely.

Botham struck another four, his 27th of an unforgettable innings of 149, but 
Willis was not able to keep him company for much longer yesterday. A push 
forward at Alderman, an outside edge, a catch to second slip and Willis' 
resistance had ended, leaving Australia to score a modest 130 to win: a target 
to be treated with respect but not one to perturb unduly pragmatic Australians.

The Headingley crowd had seen the rebirth of Botham. They now saw Bob Willis 
peel away the years and give a display of pace bowling culled from his youth, 
before the days of suspect, creaking knees. No one has tried harder for his 
country over the years.

His performance surpassed anything that he has produced in Test cricket 
previously. Throughout his spell he found movement, bounce, life and pace: too 
much pace for eight Australians. No Englishman has ever returned a more 
impressive set of figures at Headingley, - eight for 43, an analysis to give 
Willis a glow of pride when he is old and grey, and nodding by the fire.

Willis is a laconic chap, except, it seems, when he is asked on the television 
to give his views on the English press. He weighs questions carefully, delays 
the answer until you think he is not going to answer at all, and then usually 
gives a telling or humorous comment.

Did he think he would ever play cricket again when he left the West Indies for 
repair to a troublesome knee? "I never thought I'd play cricket again, let 
alone Test cricket", he replied. What motivates him? "I want to keep playing 
for England. That sound phoney I know but it's the truth." Who could doubt that 
yesterday".

The Warwickshire captain is used to reading his obituary notice in the columns 
of the national newspapers. If England had lost this game he might have 
expected to see it there again. But his desire to keep playing for England will 
now be fulfilled for a few more tests yet. As Brearley said, " I didn't think 
Willis could still bowl like that. He surpassed himself."

Ron Allsop tried and failed to produce a wicket at Trent Bridge that was fair 
to both batsmen and bowlers but would produce exciting cricket. Keith Boyce 
adopted a similar policy at Headingley and he too failed.

Everyone was agreed. Willis even that the wicket was loaded in favour of the 
bowlers. "If you hit the cracks the ball either squatted or went vertical". But 
although here was a track that no batsman could trust, there were surely, as 
Dyson, Hughes and Yallop, Botham and Dilley had proved, surely 130 runs in it.

There was really no one else to whom Brearley could have given the new ball. 
It had to be Botham. His rich vein had to be tapped as soon as possible and 
sure enough Botham raised English spirits by having Wood, who struck the first 
two balls from the Somerset all-rounder for four, caught at the wicket in the 
third over.

There followed a similar phase of cricket to the Australian first innings when 
Dyson, again looking technically sound and temperamentally assured, and 
Chappell, carefully, stoically gave the innings its spine.

But no sooner had had a backbone been established than it was snapped by a 
furious spell of bowling that brought Willis three wickets in 11 balls without 
a ball scored off him. England for the first time could entertain the audacious 
thought of a win while Australia must have suffered their first serious 
misgivings.

An awkward, lifting delivery to the outside edge of Chappell's bat gave Taylor 
the second of four catches which brought him the world record number of 
dismissals. Hughes, never comfortable, could not keep down a rising delivery 
that caught the throat of his bat and brought Botham a fine, tumbling catch at 
third slip.

Yallop, also unable to angle his bat enough over another ball of chest height 
was caught alertly by Gatting at short leg. At 58 for four Australia must have 
felt for the first time like unwilling victims in a plot that they had no power 
to resist.

Border, getting an inside edge from a delivery from Old that uprooted his leg 
stump became the third Australian batsman successively to collect a duck and 
when the obdurate Dyson, after two hour solid resistance, fell trying to hook 
Willis, Australia were 68 for 6 and sliding fast. With Willis pounding in from 
the Kirkstall end with a bounce in his step and bent on destruction, there was 
no respite either.

Marsh might easily have done for Australia what Botham on a much grander scale 
had done for England. He is a batsman who could have put the game back into 
Australian hands with a few powerful swings of his woodcutters arms.

Swing he did but only as high down to fine leg, where Dilley, glancing down 
swiftly to make sure his feet were firmly inside the boundary line, judged a 
difficult catch to perfection.

Lawson, a promising batsman but still young, had neither the nerve nor the 
experience for the occasion and plodded fatally at Willis. Only two wickets 
remained and now 55 runs were needed and England, it seemed, astonishingly, 
would win with something to spare.

The margin in the end however was a mere 18 runs and English followers could 
have stood nothing closer. Bright is a sound hat, Lillee is experienced and 
between them - Lillee by unorthodox but perfectly justifiable methods, Bright 
by more legitimate means - whittled away the deficit until Lillee tried to hook 
Willis to the midwicket area. Bu t succeeded only in looping the ball up to 
mid-on where Gatting took his second outstanding catch of the innings. Botham 
was twice brought back and watched Old drop Alderman twice in an over before 
Willis, fittingly Willis, ripped out Bright's middle stump.
 