
From his career in New York real estate to his extraordinary campaign for the 
White House, the court ofDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has operated much like that 
of Louis XIV of France: everything revolves around the imperious, bouffanted 
Sun King.


“He is a total narcissist, and what you see here is the way he’s always been,” 
said a source intimately familiar with Trump’s way of working, who declined to 
be identified criticising a potential president. “This, between you and me, 
will be the destruction of the United States.”


The band of loyalists surrounding the property developer and television host 
have frequently shown themselves to be uncouth, combative and ignorant about 
the mechanics of American politics – rather like the unorthodox candidate they 
call their boss.


But as Trump inches closer toward the Republican party’s presidential 
nomination, the prospect is growing that those in his orbit could soon have 
their hands on the levers controlling the world’s richest economy and a 
military of unparalleled might.


Trump, who turns 70 in June, promises to single-handedly revolutionize 
American relations with Russia, China and Iran using the principles set out in 
his 1987 bestseller The Art of the Deal. However, with a wall along the 
country’s southern border to build, a healthcare system to overhaul, and a 
nationwide ban on Muslims to implement as well, even the most capable leader 
will need aides to brief him for the negotiating table.
 Michael Cohen 
At Trump’s right hand before the presidential campaign took over his life was 
Michael Cohen, a hard-charging attorney and executive vice-president of the 
Trump Organization, the Death Star of the candidate’s business empire. Cohen, 
who this week confirmed he was still a registered Democrat, has been minding 
the shop at Trump Tower in Manhattan as Donald jets around primary states.

The 49-year-old may still be nursing burns from his first steps into the 
campaign’s harsh spotlight last summer, when he warned a Daily Beast reporter 
asking about allegations made during Trump’s first divorce to“tread very 
fucking lightly” 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2015/07/27/ex-wife-donald-trump-made-feel-violated-during-sex.html>
 and threatened to “mess your life up”.


“If you do something wrong, I’m going to come at you, grab you by the neck and 
I’m not going to let you go until I’m finished,” Cohen oncetold ABC News 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/donald-trumps-political-pit-bull-meet-michael-cohen/story?id=13386747>
. But like his fellow courtiers, Cohen takes his cues from the throne. Trump is 
known to take direct responsibility for the content of his train-of-thought 
press releases, his political strategy and, to use one of his favorite words, 
the “tone” of his quixotic pursuit of the presidency.

 Corey Lewandowski 
He has also hand-picked the unusually small group of aides helping to run it. 
Campaign managerCorey Lewandowski, who has just learned he will not face charges
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/14/trump-campaign-manager-corey-lewandowski-battery-charges>
 for the manhandling of a female reporter at a campaign victory event in 
Florida, rose to his central role by enabling Trump’s whims. Longtime political 
confidants of the billionaire such as the veteran conservative consultant Roger 
Stone and Sam Nunberg, a Stone associate, were pushed out of the way as 
Lewandowski wrested control of the campaign last summer.


Lewandowski’s slogan “Let Trump To Be Trump”, borrowed from The West Wing, is 
viewed by someone familiar with the campaign as his way of turning being a 
“yes” man into a strategic imperative. Lewandowski, a 42-year-old former police 
officer, had not managed a political campaign since 2002 before he joined 
Trump’s team. Those who knew him in his early days say he is unrecognisable in 
his role as Trump’s pitbull. “I’ve known him for 30 years,” said Thomas Golden, 
who beat Lewandowski in an election for the Massachusetts state legislature in 
1994. “He was very likable, very affable. It’s just not the person I know.”


Lewandowski did, however, show flashes of fury while working at Americans for 
Prosperity (AFP), the linchpin of the Koch brothers’ network of conservative 
campaign groups, where hereportedly used extreme profanity 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/03/donald-trump-corey-lewandowski-220742> 
to lambast colleagues whose work did not satisfy him.

 Hope Hicks 
Others in the Trump inner circle include Hope Hicks, a 27-year-old former 
model, who previously worked in public relations for Trump’s daughter Ivanka. 
Hicks is the campaign spokesperson, and is solely responsible for responding to 
a deluge of press inquiries each day as well as taking dictation for many of 
Trump’s provocative tweets. There is also Dan Scavino, the campaign’s director 
of social media, who got his entree as a caddy at a Trump golf club. He since 
worked his way up into the Trump inner circle. He and Lewandowski were seen by 
one insider exchanging chest bumps at a recent election night celebration.


As the campaign has dragged on, the circle has expanded – slightly. Trump has 
hired several more experienced operatives such as Michael Glassner, a longtime 
aide to 1996 Republican presidential nominee Bob Dole, as well as former AFP 
operatives Alan Cobb and Stuart Jolly to senior roles.


When the politically inexperienced Trump team realized it needed to get 
serious about winning over delegates, not just primary state voters, they 
imported much of the top-tier staff on Ben Carson’s presidential campaign. 
Shortly after Carson’s campaign manager Barry Bennett left that campaign, 
around the turn of the year, he was hired by Trump. Since Carson’s official 
exit from the presidential race, he has also been joined by a number of other 
top Carson operatives, who are taking leading roles in the fight for delegates.

But the biggest change has been the recent hire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/08/donald-trump-delegate-count-open-convention-paul-manafort>
 as convention manager of Paul Manafort, a veteran Republican operative and 
lobbyist who oversaw Gerald Ford’s successful efforts at the 1976 Republican 
convention. Manafort, a longtime friend and former lobbying partner of Stone, 
showed the same knack for headline-making last weekend when he accused the Ted 
Cruz campaign of “Gestapo tactics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/10/donald-trump-ted-cruz-gestapo-tactics-colorado-delegates>
” in its hunt for party delegates.


“There’s only a handful of people, I really mean that, that can honestly say 
they know how a national convention works. He’s one of them,” Vin Weber, a 
former Republican congressman,said when Manafort was appointed 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2016/04/07/from-ukraine-to-trump-tower-paul-manafort-unafraid-to-take-on-controversial-jobs/>
.


There have been immediate murmurs about Manafort and Lewandowski waging a 
power struggle inside the campaign, as a continuation of the conflicts between 
Stone and Lewandowski. Trump, the campaign said, was “consolidating the 
functions related to the nomination process” and assigning them to Manafort. 
But the newcomer would, Trump stressed, be “working closely” with Lewandowski, 
who remains nominally in charge.


Trump’s apparent aversion to hiring other established Republican operatives 
with a track record of winning elections came as little surprise to the source 
with decades’ worth of familiarity with Trump’s refusal to recruit the best. 
“Because he doesn’t listen to them, and then they leave,” said the source. “And 
if anybody is ever credited with doing anything good, he gets rid of them 
because he hates when anybody else gets credit.”


The relatively few television advertisements that Trump has deemed it 
necessary to broadcast – cable news channels having provided him with an 
estimated $1.9bn in free advertising through blanket coverage – have been 
entrusted to Rick Reed, a veteran conservative ad-man hailed as “the smartest 
political consultant I know” by Tucker Carlson, the rightwing broadcaster and 
publisher.


Reed was the brains behind the brutal Swiftboat Veterans for Truth smear 
campaign against John Kerry, then the Democratic presidential nominee, in 2004. 
Reed’s media firm has been paid almost $11m by the Trump campaign, according to 
federal filings.

 Ann Coulter 
But Trump’s most effective media cheerleaders do their work for free. Ann 
Coulter, the author and pundit who last year surprised fellow conservatives by 
asking on Twitter how many “f---ing Jews”Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> thought there were in America 
in light of their pro-Israel statements, has been a consistent backer.


Sean Hannity, the conservative broadcaster, continued to perform soft 
interviews of Trump for his Fox News show even as the channel fumed at Trump 
for his attacks on Megyn Kelly, their marquee female host.

Breitbart News, the deep-red conservative online news outlet whose reporter 
Matthew Boyle wasallegedly overheard bragging that he would be Trump’s White 
House press secretary, 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/03/01/how-breitbart-unleashes-hate-mobs-to-threaten-dox-and-troll-trump-critics.html>
 has pressed ahead with its pro-Trump agenda after siding with the candidate 
over their reporter Michelle Fields, who accused Lewandowski of battery after 
he yanked her arm at an event. Authorities in Florida on Thursday said 
Lewandowski would not be prosecuted for the incident after Fields complained to 
police.


The campaign’s policy efforts have been lacking. For much of the campaign, Sam 
Clovis, an Iowa Republican activist, held a key policy role. Clovis, a 
professor at Morningside College in Sioux City and occasional talk-radio host, 
has since been supplemented with a ragtag group of foreign policy advisers 
recently announced by the campaign, as well as by Stephen Miller, a longtime 
aide to Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama, who at campaign rallies has accused 
Cruz of wanting to start a war with Russia.

 Carl Icahn 
Trump has repeatedly touted his friend and fellow tycoon Carl Icahn, a 
conservative billionaire financier, as a possible Treasury secretary, though 
Icahn has dismissed the idea. At the other end of the scale, Tana Goertz, a 
former losing contestant on The Apprentice from Iowa, is a senior adviser to 
Trump and his emissary to the fellow working mothers he needs to win over. 
Goertz has cited Trump’s lifelong teetotalism as securing her vote. “That’s 
what I want in my president,” she added.


Escapism: that’s what friends are for

Throughout the whistlestop campaign, Trump has found time to maintain a 
correspondence with several of his most loyal former business executives. They 
say, however, that he uses their calls more as an opportunity to escape talk of 
his exhausting presidential run.

 Blanche Sprague 
Blanche Sprague, who worked as an executive vice-president for Trump 
throughout the 1980s, said Trump called her every few weeks to discuss 
“whatever’s on his mind”. Louise Sunshine, a former Trump Organization 
executive vice-president throughout the 1970s, also said the billionaire called 
sporadically. He discusses “all kinds of things – but not important things”, 
she said in an interview.


The future of Trump’s relationship with Stone, who is perhaps the ally who 
most closely shares the candidate’s sense of opportunism, remains unclear. The 
pair go back decades, Stone claiming to have first met Trump and his father, 
Fred, on Ronald Reagan’s presidential campaign in 1979. The Trump Organization 
was one of Stone’s first clients in DC, where he worked as a lobbyist 
throughout the early 80s.


Like many confidants of Trump past and present, however, he declined to give 
any details of his political work for the billionaire last year, citing a 
confidentiality agreement that he and others have signed. Trump has threatened 
to have federal employees sign a similar contract once he is in the Oval 
Office. Stone maintained that he and Trump were still “very good friends” and 
will no doubt be hoping to heal the rift in the months ahead.
 Ivanka Trump 
Trump has been unabashed in thrusting his family to the forefront of his 
campaign. He pushed glamorous photographs of his retired model wife, Melania – 
his third, after Ivana and Marla Maples – on Twitter, crudely comparing them to 
unflattering shots of Ted Cruz’s wife, Heidi. His daughterIvanka and his older 
two sons, Eric and Donald Jr, are credited with discreetly delivering political 
advice behind the scenes.


In court filings earlier this month it emerged that Ivanka and Donald Jr had 
also been left to pick up the pieces after their father suggested at his 
presidential launch event last June that Mexican immigrants were rapists and 
criminals. A restaurant firm slated to open an outlet in Trump’s new Washington 
DC hotel complained that the remarks were damaging to them. “Yea I was waiting 
for that one,” Donald Jr said in emails first reported byNew York magazine 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/04/inside-the-donald-trump-presidential-campaign.html>
. Referring to the restaurant company’s distressed chief executive, Ivanka 
wrote: “Let’s discuss in the am. I spoke to her. Will update you tomorrow.”
 Donald Trump Jr 
As the 69-year-old tries to style himself as a convert to rightwing 
Republicanism, the Trump brothers’ insights could be valuable. Both sons were 
registered Republican voters before their father, according to public records. 
Donald Jr, 38, has been a Republican since 2003 at least, while Eric identified 
as a Republican voter before appearing to become non-affiliated in recent 
years. Donald Sr, meanwhile, was a registered Democrat as recently as 2008. 
Both 34-year-old Ivanka, who has no record of Republicanism, and Eric, 32, fell 
foul of New York’s primary rules blocking late party registrations, meaning 
they cannot vote for their father on Tuesday.


Following their gilded upbringings in Manhattan, Donald Jr and Eric became 
keen outdoorsmen. They have held licenses for hunting in Alaska, Oregon and 
Virginia. At a January photo call in Iowa in which they shot at pheasants, the 
brothers seemed keen to reassure rural conservatives that their family were no 
enemies of the second amendment to the US constitution.


The potential No 2

Speculation has swirled over Trump’s choice of running mate. Shortly after 
announcing his bid for the nomination, Trump resurrected a decade-long desire 
to have Oprah Winfrey be his potential vice-president, an idea he had first 
mooted in 1999. “I think we’d win easily,” he said in June last year. Winfrey 
rejected the idea first time around, and given her support of Barack Obama in 
2008 (the first presidential endorsement the chat show doyenne has ever made) 
it seems more than likely Trump will fail to change her mind.


In a rare nod to the establishment he claims to abhor, Trump has since 
conceded he needs “somebody that’s political”, because “I want to get lots of 
great legislation we all want passed”. He already has a long list of egos he 
might choose from his list of endorsements.

 Jeff Sessions 
Jeff Sessions, the fiscally ultra-conservative junior senator for Alabama, 
born Jefferson Beauregard Sessions III, has quietly become one of Trump’s most 
trusted policy advisers. New Jersey governor Chris Christie waits cap-in-hand 
in the wings following his widely lampooned vacant sideline gaze during a Trump 
victory speech. Christie has claimed he has a “hard time believing” he’ll get 
the nod, while appearing to yearn for it.


Former Arizona governor Jan Brewer could add some south-western weight to 
Trump’s Yankee-heavy campaign. Former senator Scott Brown of Massachusetts and 
Governor Paul LePage of Maine, favorites of the blue-collar north-east, are 
likely to be angling for jobs in a Trump White House, but a heartbeat away from 
the presidency. Nonetheless, some Tea Party diehards will be hoping former 
Alaska governor Sarah Palin, the first big-name conservative to join the Trump 
train back in January, might be lured back on to the vice-presidential platform 
eight years after her unforgettable national debut.


If Trump reverses course and selects a fellow outsider, Ben Carson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ben-carson>, the ordinarily equanimous 
retired pediatric brain surgeon whose bursts of temper Trump once compared to 
an incurable “pathological disease”, may have a look in. Trump has predicted 
Carson has a “big, big part” in a future administration following his 
endorsement in March and despite his eccentric outings as a campaign surrogate. 
Last month, Carson reassured nervous voters that “even if Donald Trump turns 
out not to be such a great president” the American public is “only looking at 
four years” of misery.


A star-studded cast
 Russell Simmons 
In his three decades in the public eye, Trump has also collected a motley crew 
of celebrity friends and backers, some of whose allegiances have been tested by 
his Hollywood-unfriendly conversion to populist rightwinger. The most dramatic 
falling-out so far has been withRussell Simmons, the impresario behind Def Jam 
records.


Simmons said he once considered Trump a friend and enjoyed rides on his 
private jet, on which Michael Jackson was also once photographed. But Simmons 
told Trump in a scathing open letter that other friends of his were now 
likening Trump’s nativist stances to those of Adolf Hitler. “I cannot disagree 
with them, Donald,” he said.


Peyton Manning, the recently retired Denver Broncos quarterback, confirmed he 
had golfed with Trump, while Tom Brady, his erstwhile rival at the New England 
Patriots, said“it would be great” if Trump were elected president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/16/tom-brady-endorses-donald-trump-for-president>
. Neither man, however, has gone so far as to officially endorse Trump’s 
campaign for president.

 Aaron Carter 
The same cannot be said for Aaron Carter, the former child pop star who 
bravely gave a full-throated endorsement of Trump’s White House bid in February 
before withdrawing it shortly after amid a torrent of online abuse. A sorrowful 
Carter told a fan he had been “bullied so badly because of it I don’t even want 
to vote now”.


Other show business endorsements have trickled in including Hulk Hogan, the 
retired WWE wrestler. Hogan, who was recently awarded $140m by a Florida jury 
from a website that published a video clip of him having sex with his friend’s 
wife, last year expressed a desire to be Trump’s running mate himself. His 
fellow sports showman Dennis Rodman jumped in as well, declaring last July that 
Trump had been a “great friend” for many years. “We don’t need another 
politician, we need a businessman like Mr Trump,” said Rodman, who in 2008 
pleaded no contest to charges of domestic assault after hitting a woman in a 
hotel room.


Ted Nugent, the ultra-conservative rock musician, is also voting for Trump. 
Between board meetings of the National Rifle Association, Nugent has posted 
anti-Semitic material to Facebook and called for Barack Obama’s execution. “At 
least he’ll be a liar of a different color,” Nugent said of Trump, declaring 
that “the road to hell is paved with political correctness”. Kid Rock, the 
conservative rap-rock musician with multiple assault and battery convictions of 
his own, said earlier this year he was “digging” Trump, having previously 
backed Carson.

 Mike Tyson 
Despite being a convert to Islam at a time when Trump is threatening to ban 
Muslims from the US,Mike Tyson, the former world heavyweight champion boxer 
notorious for biting off a chunk of an opponent’s ear, has also promised his 
vote.


Tyson has been a firm friend since Trump assisted him through his trial, 
conviction and jailing in 1992 for the rape of a teenage beauty pageant 
contestant. Trump had hosted Tyson’s fights at his casinos and was seeking a 
closer business partnership. “We’re the same guy,”Tyson explained earlier this 
year 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/01/21/mike-tyson-why-i-m-a-muslim-for-donald-trump.html>
.


“A thrust for power, a drive for power. Whatever field we’re in, we need power 
in that field. That’s just who we are.”

 