
What a mess. For those who tune into English cricket only when it lurches into 
crisis mode, grab the popcorn. After two of the country’s leading players took 
up what they believed to be the option not to tour Bangladesh this winter, they 
now find themselves in the eye of a storm.

How big a security risk is it for England to go to Bangladesh and why?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/12/security-risk-bangladesh-england-cricket-tour>
Eoin Morgan, the one-day captain, and Alex Hales are the two dissenters in 
question 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/andrew-strauss-disappointed-eoin-morgan-alex-hales-bangladesh>
. They have gone against the assurances presented to them by England’s security 
expert, Reg Dickason, and made themselves unavailable for selection due to a 
personal preference to not play their cricket within a ring of steel and in a 
country where, according to government advice, “foreigners, in particular 
westerners, may be directly targeted” by terrorism.

The mistake, perhaps, was in offering a choice in the first place. Offer it 
England did and on Sunday evening their director of cricket, Andrew Strauss, 
said the England and WalesCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> 
Board was disappointed. What this truly means is yet to be fully established. 
Simple disappointment is fine in itself and shared by most who follow the team 
but anything deeper than this, having told players they could make a personal 
choice without prejudice, would be a trifle vindictive.

Strauss stated last week on the eve of decision time that “we are not trying 
to coerce people” into touring and that an understanding would follow whatever 
call was made. It is a sentiment that should be remembered just as much as his 
other warning that, from a cricketing perspective,the absent players risk 
losing a place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/andrew-strauss-england-players-miss-bangladesh-tour-risk-place-team>
 to a hungry understudy.

Morgan and Hales have now become cricket’s answer to Rosencrantz and 
Guildenstern, pondering what they thought to be their free will as events now 
hurtle along beyond their control and their futures are now shaped by others. 
Morgan’s long-term captaincy is being questioned despite 18 months of dramatic, 
thrilling improvement by the one-day side under his leadership. Will his 
authority really be diminished? Or are those suggesting it labouring under the 
mentality of a past era, as opposed to the more touchy-feely mind-set of the 
current generation of millennial cricketers?

Jos Buttler: criticism of Eoin Morgan unfair, he’s still our captain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/12/jos-buttler-eoin-morgan-bangladesh-odi-captain>
This England team – specifically the one-day side – is a talented collection 
of young cricketers high on confidence but is one that so far appears largely 
ego-free. For all the personal drive that fires their performances, the main 
pillars beneath Morgan – Ben Stokes, Joe Root and Jos Buttler – are not 
currently the types to make internal capital from the situation.

Where those three go the rest tend to follow and it was Stokes – the very 
heartbeat of the side, irrespective of Buttler being handed the stripes 
temporarily – who was quick to react on Twitter shortly after Morgan and Hales 
officially withdrew. He cited the need for their decisions to be respected and 
reasserted his support for the captain in particular. If the talisman is going 
out of his way to say this, as opposed to trotting it out at a press 
conference, you fancy it is probably on trend behind the scenes.

As Stokes pointed out, neither player will have taken the decision lightly. 
Morgan scarcely appears to care how he is perceived by the public, but he will 
know he has exposed his place to the burgeoning talents of Sam Billings and Ben 
Duckett, not to mention the glowing form of the previously squeezed out Jonny 
Bairstow. Runs flowing for one of these thrusters in Dhaka and Chittagong would 
lead to awkward questions if Morgan’s return to lead the side in India came at 
their expense.

While Hales should be more assured of his one-day place as the second-highest 
run-scorer in the format since the last World Cup, his career is heading for 
white-ball specialism. He perhaps beat the Test selectors to the punch in this 
regard but even so he has still theoretically shouldered arms to a format where 
he craves success. Given Nottinghamshire’s relegation to Division Two, he faces 
a long road back.

This situation is certainly a first major bump in the road for a 50-over side 
that, under Morgan, has risen from the ashes of the harrowing 2015 World Cup 
but none of the above is to rule out the team dynamic being affected as a 
result. All one can hope for is that when the question of his return for India 
in January arises, the decision is reached from a cricketing perspective, 
rather than any grudge held or feeling that his leadership has been diminished 
as a result.

Morgan is known to have shared with his team-mates his intention not to travel 
early in the recent series with Pakistan and England still crushed their 
opponents 4-1, hitting a world record 444 for three at Trent Bridge on the way, 
suggesting his leadership was not a problem then.

Morgan and Hales may well regret their decision in years to come. They may 
not. But ultimately they were granted the option by the England management in 
the first place and so, unlike the locked-in fate of Tom Stoppard’s two 
confused courtiers, none of the outcomes from this tangled affair should 
already have been written.
 