
Departing Sydney Thunder star Eoin Morgan hopes the dramatic BBL win he 
secured at the Sydney Showgrounds will prove to be the turning point in the 
team’s rocky title defence.

Morgan thrashed an unbeaten 71 off 50 balls and sealed Wednesday’s six-wicket 
win over Melbourne Stars at Spotless Stadium with a perfectly timed last ball 
six which he described as “unbelievable”.

“It’s quite an extraordinary feeling when you get one as cleanly out of the 
middle as that,” he said.


Maddinson puts Test axing behind as Sixers chase down Heat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/04/maddinson-test-axing-sixers-down-heat>
“It’s a bit like standing on the (golf) tee box and smashing one straight down 
the middle. When you hit it, you’re the only person who knows how well you’ve 
hit it.”

There could be no sweeter leaving present from Morgan, who will head to India, 
where he’ll lead England in three-match T20 and ODI series.

In addition to Morgan’s exit, Thunder could also lose fellow import Andre 
Russell, after he suffered a hamstring injury on Wednesday.

The win was Thunder’s first in five matches and just about keeps alive their 
slim finals hopes, despite remaining in last spot on the ladder.

Chasing the Melbourne Stars’ score of 8-166 Thunder needed 16 from the last 
over.

They still needed 14 off the last four balls and five off the final delivery 
from Ben Hilfenhaus, which left hander Morgan smoked for six.


Nothing seemed to be going right for Thunder earlier in the evening.


Out of form allrounder Andre Russell was taken off the ground in a medicab 
after suffering a hamstring injury nine overs into the Stars’ innings.


Russell hobbling out of the game and possibly the tournament seemed to sum up 
the sad state of a title defence that has never gained any momentum.


The Stars built a solid total with Kevin Pietersen (60 from 37) smashing seven 
fours and two sixes in a typically belligerent exhibition of strokeplay.


A groin strain then prevented him from taking the field at the start of 
Thunder’s innings.


The Stars had got off to a rollicking start, thrashing 62 off the first six 
overs, with Glenn Maxwell smashing 34 off 22 balls and Luke Wright 25 off 12.


The innings, which finished in steady rain, fell away after Pietersen’s 
dismissal, with the Stars losing 5-16 inside the last five overs as Thunder 
captain Shane Watson impressed with 3-23.


Thunder’s openers then dashed to 38 after four overs but the fizz among the 
sellout crowd quickly evaporated as they then lost 3-5 before Morgan rebuilt 
the innings and raised the hopes of the 20,076-strong crowd.


Morgan put on 42 with Ben Roherer (20 off 19) and then added 83 in 7.1 overs 
with Pat Cummins (22 not out off 20) to steer them to the vital win.

“Two of four games, we could have got over the line, it hasn’t been our 
tournament so far,” Morgan said.

“But you know what? You need to time your run in these tournaments.

“I’m hoping that this is going to be the turning point in the competition for 
us.”

Morgan’s place at the Thunder will be taken by James Vince, who last year 
represented England in all three forms of the game.

“He’s a very classy player, he’s a bit more orthodox than me,” Morgan said.

“In his England experience in the white ball form, he’s been brilliant.”

When asked what went wrong for the Stars, who now have a 1-2 record, fellow 
Englishman Pietersen said: “The last four or five overs of the batting wasn’t 
special and we didn’t start the bowling as well as we could have and then Eoin 
Morgan played really well.


“We tried real hard to lose that game and we did.”
 