
It is unusual to put a museum at the end of a runway, still more if it also 
straddles a chain of ornamental lakes, but then the Estonian National Museum is 
not a usual sort of institution. Its past is wrapped up with that of the 
country itself. Now it somehow has to represent the complex and precarious 
history ofEstonia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/estonia>, in a fraught 
present, with a combination of pride and sensitivity.

For a European country to build a national museum at this moment, when 
nationalism is taking new and unpredictable forms, is perilous. If Russia were 
to invent such a thing now, it would look like another form of aggressive 
aggrandisement; if Britain, an episode of querulous post-Brexit blue-passport 
patriotism; if Germany, it would raise issues too agonising for a single museum 
to handle. Estonia, a country of 1.3 million, whose two periods of independence 
– between the wars and since 1991 – add up to less than 50 years, and which 
still has grounds to be nervous of its neighbour Russia, has reason to define 
and assert itself with a museum, but it also has to tread cautiously.

The building is glassy, geometric, hard-surfaced, straight-lined. The contents 
tend to be handmade, everyday, rough-hewn

The idea of a national museum has been linked to the idea of Estonian 
independence for more than a century, ever since a group of nationalist-minded 
intellectuals decided to create such a thing. Since then the fluctuating 
fortunes of independence, war and occupation have caused the collections to be 
housed in different places, to be dispersed and reassembled. Under postwar 
Soviet occupation the contents and concept of the museum were threatened. In 
the late 80s the call to reinstate the museum was part of a new campaign for 
freedom. The new €70m building is the fulfilment of this desire, after many 
years of debate and interruptions since Estonia won back independence in 1991.

Its location, according to the usual logic of maximising visitor numbers, is 
near-suicidal. It is not in the capital Tallinn but 190km away in the second 
city, Tartu (population 100,000), and not precisely there either but a 2km 
journey through sometimes brutal weather from the centre. But what the site 
lacks in accessibility it makes up for in significance: it includes the remains 
of a manor house, wrecked in 1944, in which the collections were housed between 
the wars. It also includes an airstrip, with associated earthworks for 
protecting warplanes, used by the Soviet military. With the aircraft roaring 
over the ancient university town of Tartu, it was a symbol of the hatefulness 
of occupation.

The design of the building is the result of a competition held in 2005 and won 
by a multinational trio of young architects, the Italian-Israeli Dan Dorell, 
the French-Lebanese Lina Ghotmeh and the Japanese Tsuyoshi Tane, who were 
working in the London offices of David Adjaye and Norman Foster and sacrificing 
sleep and leisure to work on their entry in their spare time. Entrants could 
choose a site somewhere in the grounds of the old manor house. DGT (as the 
three called themselves once they became an architectural practice) selected a 
location at the end of the old runway. For the architects it was important not 
to erase the past – that as Dorell says, the museum could be “mature enough to 
get over the trauma”.
 An aerial view of the museum’s site. Photograph: Tiit Sild 
The building, 355m long, projects the straight lines of the runway back 
towards the city. Its glass sides, imprinted with a white pattern, are designed 
to reflect surrounding trees and snow. Its roof gradually slopes upwards until 
it forms a grand portico at the main entrance. At one point the building 
bridges a lake, one of a sequence that originated in the manor house’s 
landscape garden. Courtyards puncture the block, introducing fragments of 
nature. The interior is spacious and airy, with views to the outside seen 
through layers of glass.

It was a controversial choice, to draw attention to the most negative part of 
the site’s history. There were also strong lobbies for placing the museum 
somewhere else entirely, in the centre of Tartu or in Tallinn. The European 
Union, not liking the remote location, refused to contribute to its cost. There 
were objections to the appointment of foreign architects for this national 
emblem. The 2008 crash slowed things down.

For all these reasons it took more than a decade for the designs to be 
realised, during which time DGT set up their office and based themselves in 
Paris, all the time battling to realise what would be a spectacular first 
project for any practice, working unpaid when necessary – “we were ready for 
anything to make this happen”. They credit the “miracle” of its realisation to 
its former director Krista Aru – “to the strength of that woman” – and to “our 
belief”.

The outcome is a contrasting combination of national and international, 
folkloric and modern, charged and cool. The building is glassy, geometric, 
hard-surfaced, straight-lined. The contents tend to be handmade, everyday, 
sometimes rough-hewn, often in the country’s most abundant material, which is 
wood. The aim of the museum is not to record grand historical events so much as 
the lives that ordinary people lived through them. Nor is it just about 
exhibits – music and drama are held there, such that the museum becomes in 
effect a very large village hall.

The origins of the collection are in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, 
when 1,400 volunteers toured the towns and villages of the not-yet-recognised 
country to gather texts and artefacts of popular folklore. To these have been 
added mementoes of lives since then, through the turbulence of the 20th 
century. There are for example the charms, pagan in origin, that peasants used 
to bring luck to their fields centuries after the country was supposedly 
Christianised. There are 2,600 ornamental wooden beer tankards, large and 
individually personalised. There are medals won by pilots, an art deco radio, 
rusted military material from the airfield, early photographs of cautiously 
squinting country people.

Struggles against foreign rule – the country has at different times been run 
by Swedes, Germans and Russians – are there, but mostly discreetly. There is a 
video of the Baltic Way of 1989, in which 2 million people joined hands across 
the three Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. There is a bookcase 
that reconstructs the way in which, under the Soviets, cohesion came from 
oppression: restricted in many ways, Estonians turned to discussions of 
literature, in turn limited by the small range of titles available, which were 
mostly translations of classics such as Dickens. There is a lawnmower from a 
time when it was impossible to buy such a machine, a little monument of 
persistence and ingenuity, handmade out of a pushchair, a washing machine motor 
and a bucket.
 The entrance is at the highest point of the building, which is wedge-shaped. 
Photograph: Takuji Shimmura 
The patriotism is a little more overt in a reverential room in which the first 
Estonian flag, made by students in the late 19th century and banned in Soviet 
times, is displayed. There are also large basement galleries dedicated to the 
peoples deep in Russia who speak languages in the same Finno-Ugric group as 
Estonian, a partly conjectural display of festivals and reconstructed cabins. 
This is tricky stuff, not least for the large Russian minority within Estonia, 
but it is mostly negotiated with tact.

The museum could be both triumphalist and sentimental, but it is neither. At 
their best the displays are touching and revealing rather than heroic. The 
architecture plays its part by combining the drama of its setting and a 
striking overall form with a deadpan delivery. Views are offered of the ruin 
and of the landscape, downward to water and upward to sky, and long 
perspectives to the runway, but without exclamation marks. The temptation to 
invent a style somehow Baltic-looking has been avoided.

If these are good instincts they also mean that the building, contents and 
setting will take some getting used to each other. It is a long way from the 
contemporary sharpness of the glass to a wooden beer tankard, a distance that 
the designers of the exhibition installations have tried too hard and 
intrusively to close. The surrounding landscape, much of which had to be dug up 
to remove contamination left by the airbase, is still raw.

The museum is a project unlikely as the lawnmower, or indeed Estonia itself, 
which relies on passion for the theme to override disadvantages of location. So 
far it seems to be working, with about 60,000 visitors in each of its first two 
months. It is also a work in progress, not least because the museum is still 
inviting Estonians to contribute their personal objects. This is as it should 
be, as identity is something that never stands still.
 