
 The former chief executive of a troubled mental health trust has been given a 
£190,000 payoff after she left her latest role.

Katrina Percy faced repeated calls to resign over Southern Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> NHS foundation trust’s failure to 
investigate more than 1,000 unexpected deaths of patients with mental health 
problems and learning disabilities.

 In August Percy resigned as chief executive but was moved to a role created 
for her by the trust with the same £240,000 salary and benefits package. She 
has now left that role after criticism from the public, patients and the 
families of those who died. It was confirmed on Friday she will receive a 
£190,000 settlement, the equivalent of one year’s salary.

Percy was under pressure to resign as chief executive following a series of 
damning reports on the trust’s failure to investigate deaths because of 
shortcomings on the board and by senior executives. But she was moved to a new 
role specially created for her.


 Dr Sara Ryan, mother of 18-year-old Connor Sparrowhawk, who drowned in a bath 
after an epileptic seizure at Slade House in Oxfordshire in July 2013, was one 
of those who criticised the creation of a role for Percy.

 On Friday the trust said: “Following the recent announcement that Katrina 
Percy will take on a regional strategic advisory role, we have received 
correspondence from the public, patients and families expressing their 
concerns. We have listened to all of this feedback and reflected.

“Both the trust and NHS Improvement believe it is no longer possible for 
Katrina to continue in her new advisory role. Katrina shares this view and we 
have worked withNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> Improvement to 
come to a settlement where she will leave Southern Health with immediate 
effect, to pursue other opportunities.

“We thank Katrina for her significant contribution to the NHS and we wish her 
well for the future.”

Last month the interim chair of the trust, Tim Smart, quit the organisation. 
He had been criticised over how the trust had continued to employ Percy.

 A spokesman for NHS Improvement said there had been no legal grounds on which 
to dismiss Percy as chief executive and defended the payout.

“Tim Smart, as the then interim chair of the trust, received advice that there 
were no legal grounds upon which to dismiss her, and that doing so would open 
the trust and the wider NHS up to potential litigation and the very real 
possibility of significant costs to the taxpayer,” the spokesman said.

“He worked with Ms Percy to explore a way of her leaving her role as chief 
executive, but continuing to contribute to the future of patient services in 
Hampshire and the Isle of Wight in a very meaningful, but non-patient facing, 
way.

“As an adviser, Ms Percy’s strategic skills would be put to good use for a 
period of 12 months… we supported this. It has been clear in the weeks 
following the announcement – that this agreement cannot now be delivered.

“We have, therefore, worked with the trust to renegotiate for her to leave its 
employment immediately. Her contract with Southern Health entitles her to six 
months’ pay in lieu of notice. She will also be entitled to a further six 
months’ pay as part of the settlement. She will need to repay both of these 
payments if she gets a role in the NHS within the next 12 months.”

The spokesman added: “We know that this won’t please some who think she ought 
to have received no payment at all, and in situations like this, a perfect deal 
is not possible.”

Deborah Coles, director of Inquest, which has supported Sparrowhawk’s family, 
said: “The resignation of Katrina Percy should mark the end of Southern 
Health’s denial of responsibility for systemic failings and the start of vital 
work to protect the lives of the people in its care.”
 