
A Democratic Unionist MP who for two years in a row has claimed the most 
expenses in theHouse of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> is being investigated by 
a parliamentary watchdog.

Jim Shannon, the MP for Strangford in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, was paid a total of £205,798 
in taxpayer-funded expenses last year, excluding travel.

The rare formal investigation by the Independent Parliamentary Standards 
Authority’s compliance officer, Peter Davis, concerns a claim made by Shannon 
in relation to travel and subsistence. Davis said no further details of the 
alleged wrongdoing would be published until the investigation had been 
concluded.

Shannon was first elected to the Strangford constituency in 2010, replacing 
the former DUP MP Iris Robinson, who retired from politics after the exposure 
of her affair with a 19-year-old man. At last year’s general election, Shannon 
was returned to parliament with a 9,000 majority.

Shannon has previously defended his expenses bill, pointing out that he is one 
of the busiest parliamentarians in the House of Commons. “I would say that I 
have one of the best attendance records and workloads in Westminster,” he said. 
“Last year I was on committees and there for votes, and the flight is the only 
way to get there.”

Davis has been criticised for settling almost all his cases without any 
publicity, despite promising to disclose the outcome of all investigations. He 
failed to announce that claims by three MPs had been referred to police last 
year.

The officer, who operates separately from Ipsa, was previously forced to back 
down when he proposed carrying out investigations in secret to prevent 
“reputational damage” to MPs.

Details of his casework suggest he has been avoiding disclosure by staging 
in-depth “assessments” of complaints, during which politicians can hand back 
money or resolve issues without facing formal investigations.

About 40 assessments were undertaken in 2014-15, of which just one – relating 
to the Tory MP Bob Blackman’s mileage claims – became a formal investigation 
and so was made public.
 