
Are these the final few days of the Scottish wildcat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jun/02/lynx-scotland-wild-kevin-mckenna>
, currently numbering perhaps as few as 35 scattered beasts? That is the fear 
of some supporters of Scotland's most vivid species, and it is leading to an 
almighty row over a creature that has graced the Highlands for around 10,000 
years. The argument relates to a deceptively simple question: when is a wildcat 
not a wildcat?

The wildcat's imminent extinction may have been camouflaged from our 
consciousness by the existence of a counterfeit cat – a feline facsimile that 
looks like a wildcat but whose genealogy is far from pure. Staring implacably 
from the midst of rock and heather it will do for the postcards and tea-towels. 
And if it looks like a wildcat, then why should the rest of us worry about its 
lineage?

Last week the Scottish government and its leading environmental agency, 
Scottish Natural Heritage, in response to insistent calls for action to be 
taken to protect this endangered species, announced a £2m, six-year strategic 
plan to reverse the decline in numbers by reducing cross-breeding with domestic 
and feral cats and curbing exposure to feline diseases.

No stone, it seems, will be left unturned in seeking to preserve this beastie 
and all the usual key words were present and correct: "targeted", "outcomes" 
and "viable". "A conservation breeding programme will be set up to reinforce 
wild populations in the future," SNH insisted, "and scientists will also carry 
out further research to improve understanding of wildcat ecology and genetics." 
But it's the presence also of phrases such as "distinct groups" and "relaxed 
definitions" that fuel the suspicion that saving the pure, un-hybridised 
Scottish wildcat may not be on the government agenda.

The government masterplan is as fake as the DNA of the hybrids masquerading as 
pure-bloods, said Steve Piper, founder of theScottish Wildcat Association 
<http://www.scottishwildcats.co.uk> and the country's foremost authority on the 
preservation of the species.

In short, anything that looks roughly two-thirds wildcat will be classified as 
a wildcat, so in the time it takes to say "re-contextualised" the population 
has ballooned from 35 individuals to thousands; quite a few pet cat owners 
worldwide will be waking up tomorrow morning to find they have a 
government-approved Scottish wildcat purring at the end of the bed.

According to Piper, the government and Scottish Natural Heritage studiously 
avoided almost all mention of the pure wildcat. So is the government and its 
main species conservation body signalling, by stealth, the extinction of the 
unalloyed, pure Scottish wildcat?

"I don't think that's overstating it," said Piper. "They are certainly looking 
in all the wrong places. If it diverted just a few hundred thousand of its £2m 
or so to efforts currently being made in the Ardnamurchan peninsula, where the 
Scottish Wildcat Association has been working to breed the last cats in 
isolation, the final few dozen might yet have a future. It seems, though, that 
they are simply not prepared to take the risk of spending that money without 
the guarantee of success."

In effect, the government stands accused of lowering the bar so that it can 
include an ornamental wildcat which will remain capable of bewitching the 
tourists.

The uncertain fate of an emblematic creature is in stark contrast to the 
upturn in fortunes of some of Europe's other famous animals. Important research 
conducted by a conservation group that includes the Zoological Society of 
London points to startling increases in numbers of species such as bears, 
wolves, lynx, eagles and vultures. Targeted protection against hunting and 
poaching, along with rural depopulation, have been critical in this process.

Scottish Natural Heritage  <http://www.snh.gov.uk>is unflinching in the face 
of the criticism. A spokesman said simply: "Steve Piper's opinion is not one 
that we share. And we've no idea where he gets his figures from."

This ought to matter a great deal to Scotland and its sense of itself. While 
the Highlands sustains several famous animals, almost all of them can also be 
found in other countries. The Scottish wildcat is unique toScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>. It cannot stand to be around humans 
or their habitats, and thrives on its own, hunting rabbits, birds and rodents. 
The hybridised wildcat, though, will exhibit few such solitary tendencies.

As the last few Scottish wildcats run free and un-intruded upon in one of the 
world's wildest neighbourhoods, a few hundred miles away two of another 
threatened species, the giant panda, are reducedto a grotesque circus act  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/15/panda-edinburgh-tian-pregnancy>
eating bamboo and playing hide and seek with a million rubbernecks.

The Edinburgh Zoological Society committed £8m of public money (it's a 
charity) to hire a Chinese circus act. The same amount of money might give a 
unique Scottish species a sporting chance of survival. But if it is to 
disappear, better that it does so running free in a bleak wilderness and not 
before a wretched human audience in a glass menagerie.
 