 The Lord Chief Justice seemed to sniff something nasty in the air. Peering out 
over half-moon spectacles, Lord Lane's weary face was the mask of Justice 
embarrassed.
Above him, relatives of the Guildford Four packed the public gallery, emotions 
pent up after by 15 years of campaigning, waiting, and hoping.

'The case against the defendants depended entirely upon the confessions to the 
police,' Mr Roy Amlot, QC, Treasury counsel, declared. 'There was no other 
evidence .. The officers seriously misled the courts.' He decribed his 
statement as an 'onerous duty.' In court two of the Old Bailey the proceedings 
were being conducted in an atmosphere of grim solemnity.

For a little under two hours Mr Amlot, more accustomed to prosecuting, 
outlined in a measured, matter-of-fact tone details of police malpractice, 
falsified notes, and breaches of the Judge's Rules. Christopher Mullin, the 
Labour MP who has campaigned for the release of the Birmingham Six, permitted 
himself a broad smile. Further along the bench was the Irish Ambassador.

Gerard Conlon, Paul Hill, Patrick Armstrong, and Carole Richardson, sat 
silently in the dock surrounded by six prison officers. It was the same 
wood-panelled courtroom in which they had been sentenced for the Guildford and 
Woolwich pub bombings in 1975.

Hill, who was 20 when arrested, gave a clenched fist salute to the gallery as 
he was led up from the cells. He still wore his hair long, over the collar of a 
grey suit, and a pink carnation was pinned to a lapel.

Conlon, in a burgundy-coloured sweat shirt, seemed especially alert, gazing 
keenly at the judge.

Armstrong was pale and seemed unwell and Richardson, his girlfriend who was 17 
when arrested, began to cry and Lord Lane suspended the sitting for 10 minutes. 
On the steps beneath the dock Conlon put his arm around her.

For Conlon, Mr Tony Scrivener, QC, articulated the defendants' outrage and 
relief. 'Thank God, we haven't had capital punishment,' he reminded the Court 
of Apeal. The gallery erupted for the first time with loud clapping, only to 
earn a tetchy rebuke from an usher.

But when Lord Lane, in a low semi-hoarse voice, refused to free Hill because 
his other conviction was in the jurisdiction ofNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, there were calls of 'shame, 
shame.'

The Lord Chief Justice described the long sequence of false confessions and 
police deceits: 'If they were prepared to tell these sort of lies, then the 
whole of their evidence must be suspect.'

He added: 'The perspicacious efforts of the Avon and Somerset Police have 
salvaged something from this unhappy matter.'

But his final pronouncement was lost beneath an uproar of jubilant shouting 
and sobbing.

There were more tears in Richardson's face. Hill tossed his carnation into the 
melee of reporters at the back of the courtroom. In the gallery the families 
were hugging each other. Outside, a crowd of several hundred had gathered and 
workers on a building site opposite stopped worked and applauded as Gerard 
Conlon walked free from the Central Criminal Court.

Holding his sisters' arms aloft in triumph, he shouted: 'I've been in prison 
for 15 years for something I didn't do. I watched father (Giuseppe Conlon) die 
in prison for something he didn't do. I'm totally innocent. The Maguire Seven 
is innocent, the Birmingham Six are totally innocent. Everyone's innocent.'

From the back of the cheering crowd came: 'Fifteen years for a crime he didn't 
do. Sack all the judges.'
 