
Grasmere Sports, Cumbria

If the prospect of roller coasters or new-fangled activities (canyoning, 
anyone?) leaves you cold, introduce the family to some more traditional fun. 
Among the events on offer at the 161-year-old Grasmere games are wrestling, 
sheep dog displays and a family tug of war. Proper, wholesome fun! There's also 
a beer tent, so dads can drink a manly pint of ale while watching the terrier 
dog show.
• Adult £8.50, child 5-14 £2.50. The Showfield, Stock Lane, Grasmere, 
grasmeresportsandshow.co.uk <http://grasmeresportsandshow.co.u>, 26 August, 
10am-5pm

Time Travellers Go … Gruesome, Salisbury

Disease, hideous punishments, nasty surgery – a good dose of ghoulishness 
awaits visitors to Old Wardour Castle in Wiltshire, a 14th-century luxury 
country pad. Once you've had enough of gruesome medieval practices you can 
wander the peaceful grounds or, if you have the stomach for it, picnic by the 
lake.
• Adult £4, children £2.40, English Heritage members free, 01747 870487, 
english-heritage.org.uk <http://www.english-heritage.org.uk>, 23 August, 
11am-5pm

The Island Steam Show, Isle of Wight 

 Photograph: Alamy 
There's more old-fashioned fun to be had at this steam railway festival – the 
37th, no less. As well as traction engines (woo hoo!) and working steam 
demonstrations (yay!) there will be sheepdog shows, fairground rides and Mr 
Alexander's Travelling Show, featuring juggling, balancing, uni-cycling and 
lots more silly skills. What's not to like? As with most traditional days out, 
there will be real ale, and of course plenty of snacks for kids.
• Adult £14, child 5-15 £7, family £35. Havenstreet Station, 
iwsteamrailway.co.uk <http://www.iwsteamrailway.co.uk>, 26-29 August, 10am-6pm 

Canterbury Tales, Holkham Hall, Norfolk

This may sound a little too educational for anyone under 16, but threatre 
group Pantaloons promises its version of the Cantebury tales – an ambitious 
performance of all 23 Canterbury Tales with six actors playing more than 70 
characters – will be fun, fun, fun. Expect puppetry, masks, music, farce, 
horror – even a bit of Shakespeare in the lovely setting of Holkham Hall's 
courtyard.
• Adult £11.50, child £8, book through Holkham ticket office, 01328 713111, 
Holkham Hall, near Wells-next-the-Sea,thepantaloons.co.uk/shows/tct2011.asp,  
<http://thepantaloons.co.uk/shows/tct2011.asp>24 August, 6.15pm

Herne Bay Festival, Kent 
 Herne Bay Festival Kent 
Running over nine days, this community knees-up is packed with live music, 
street theatre, dancing, workshops, parades and lots of free fun. Take part in 
Herne Bay's Got Talent, go roller-skating, test your sandcastle-building skills 
or have a go at ballroom dancing.
• Free, hernebayfestival.com <http://www.hernebayfestival.com>, 20-28 August, 
see website for times

Graffiti workshop, London

 Graffiti workshop in London 
Got a budding Banksy in your family? Let them loose on Leake Street, a passage 
running under Waterloo Station, where they can spray to their heart's content 
at an organised workshop. It's part of a whole day of spray-painting with 
graffiti artists, creating works that will be judged by the folk at paint 
supply specialists Chrome & Black.
• Free, aerosolplanet.com <http://www.aerosolplanet.com/>, youth workshop open 
to under-12s, 20 August, 1-5pm, come early to avoid disappointment

Paddling Llandysul, Carmarthenshire 

 Photograph: Alamy 
If your brood need to burn off some energy pack them off on a play day with 
Llandysul Paddlers. Until the end of August the club is offering all sorts of 
water-based activities from kayaking, river swims and canoe slalom coaching. 
There are also plenty of land-based activities including mountain biking and 
rock climbing for those who don't want to get wet. Though if this week's 
downpours are anything to go by, they will get a good soaking even if they are 
on dry land.
• 10 a day. The Wilkes Head Square, Pont Tyweli, 01559 363209, 
llandysul-paddlers.org.uk <http://www.llandysul-paddlers.org.uk>, 10am-4pm, 
call to book a place

Outdoor cinema, Manchester

This one really does depend on good weather. If the sun's shining you might 
want to hotfoot it down to Manchester's Spinningfields Centre for free family 
screenings of Chitty Chitty Bang Bang (20 August) and Wall E (27 August)
• Free, Hardman Square, Spinningfields, screenfields.eventbrite.com 
<http://screenfields.eventbrite.com/>, both films screened at 11am

Labyrinth show, Eden Project, Cornwall 
 Eden Circus 
Running until the end of the month, you can still catch the spectacular circus 
show, Labyrinth, by No Fit State. Aerial acrobatics, live music, dance against 
the backdrop of Eden's alien-like biodomes. Performances take place in three 
different locations so you can "walk" through the show – pick your route and 
watch beautiful displays of swinging trapeze, flying trapeze, cradle, strops, 
hula hoops, tightwire and Chinese pole.
• Adult £30, child £17.50, 01726 811972, 
edenproject.com/labyrinth-circus-cornwall 
<http://www.edenproject.com/labyrinth-circus-cornwall>, Until 29 August, 
Friday-Monday 6pm, Tuesday-Thursday 6pm

Young farmers, Chatsworth House, Derbyshire

Muck in on the Chatsworth House farm, helping the team care for the animals. 
Young Farmers day gives kids the chance to join handlers as they go about some 
of their daily duties, while Young Farmers Plus has added extras such as 
grooming, milking, taking animals out to the field and collecting eggs. These 
are one-off, and rather pricey, events but there are animal handling sessions 
every day, plus an adventure playground, water play and slides.
• chatsworth.org/whats-on/events/chatsworth-young-farmers 
<http://www.chatsworth.org/whats-on/events/chatsworth-young-farmers>, Young 
Farmers: 10.30-2.30pm, 30 August, child £21, adult £11. Young Farmers Plus 
1-5.30pm, 25 August, £30 a head
 