
There is one fabulous corner of England that is packed like a hamper with all 
the elements of a perfect family holiday. Along the Suffolk seaboard there are 
fine breezy beaches, and some lovely market towns where, according to my 
daughter, "every sausage roll you have is better than the last". Venture 
inland, and you find empty bikeable countryside, and more than a millennium's 
worth of visible history waiting to be explored. The spectacular ship burial at
Sutton Hoo <http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/sutton-hoo/> – with its tale of 
kingship, mystery and buried treasure – is almost guaranteed to appeal to 
children.

Actually all of Suffolk feels a little bit lost in the past. It is our 
favourite spot for a family break, the place the kids always want to come back 
to again and again.

"Suffolk is not an obvious county," someone said to me while I was there. 
"Unlike Devon or the Cotswolds, it's not on the road to anywhere. Nearly all 
the tourists head for the sea, and don't explore west of the A12."

This is certainly true and it's also a bit of a shame. That long curving 
coastline, like the tail-end of a comma, is, however, the place to start. We 
four – me, my partner Kim, and our daughters Eliza, nine, and Naomi, seven – 
did our best to ignore the drizzling wind on the day we went toSouthwold. The 
air was wet and saline, and to stand on the pier was like being licked on the 
face by a monkfish. The sea was the colour of cold tea.

Despite the weather, we found plenty to do, and began by admiring the beach 
huts in their jelly-bean colours. When we reached the old town, with its almost 
comically tiny cottages, the girls zeroed in on a determinedly pre-warSouthwold 
Sweet Shop <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Southwold-Sweets/313061872066178> (1 
St James' Green), where liquorice and gobstoppers are sold by the 
quarter-pound. I got an analogous kick from theAdnams Cellar and Kitchen 
<http://cellarandkitchen.adnams.co.uk/> where, as well as the fine ale brewed 
in the town, you can buy beer chutney, oak-aged Suffolk vodka, and all kinds of 
bibulous souvenirs, such as jugs and mugs and bar-towels.
 Southwold seafront. Photograph: Rob Francis/Corbis 
From the southernmost end of Southwold beach you can catch the "foot ferry" – 
a manned rowing boat – to somnolentWalberswick, on the far side of the Blyth 
river. On the green in that perfect village there is a bench dedicated to the 
lateClement Freud <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/clement-freud>. An 
inscription says that he lived here for most of his 84 years and loved it. 
"Especially the crabs." All of Walberswick loves a crab, or at least a bit of 
crabbing. Practically every child you see is armed with a net on a pole.

It was sunnier when we got to the shingle beach at Aldeburgh, a little way 
down the coast. "It's quite like Brighton," said Eliza, "but the stones are 
more interesting."

As seagulls circled overhead – loitering while we finished our fish and chips 
– Kim remarked on the mysterious black line that we could see on the horizon. 
"It looks as if a child had drawn it with a felt-tip pen," she said, "then 
coloured in the sea." If you brave the queue at theAldeburgh Fish and Chip Shop 
<http://www.aldeburghfishandchips.co.uk/restaurants/> on High Street, you are 
welcome to take your meal to theWhite Hart next door, so long as you buy a 
drink at the bar.

Later, we walked the length of the prom, up to the fishermen's shacks and the 
wondrous timber-framedMoot Hall <http://www.aldeburghmuseumonline.co.uk/> . The 
building is nearly 600 years old, and still serves as the office of the town 
clerk. We stopped for a while at the boating lake, where children were testing 
out little sailing ships and remote-control yachts. Like the sweetshop in 
Southwold, it was a wilfully old-fashioned endeavour. Apart from the American 
Apparel T-shirts, the entire scene could have been taking place in 1954.

Both the places we stayed were charmingly old-fashioned, too – and we had to 
head west of the A12 to get to them.Wilderness Reserve 
<http://www.wildernessreserve.com/>, a mile or two over the A12 near Yoxford, 
is a vast estate dotted with self-catering places to stay, where the children 
can wander far and freely, like characters from a Famous Five adventure. The 
reserve is full of birds, and you can go for a birdsong tour led by an 
ornithologist (£25pp), or take an early-morning walk to see barnacle geese, 
lapwings, mistle thrushes (known as stormcocks in Suffolk, because they sing in 
all weathers) and chaffinches (called "spinks" here, for the curt blip of their 
call).
 Sailing boats by Aldeburgh Moot Hall. Photograph: Alamy 
If you were to write the kids out of the picture, you might choose to stay at 
Hex Cottage, a rather magical and romantic woodman's bothy. It is immensely 
cosy despite the absence of electricity: you cook on the toasty Aga, light 
candles at night, and sit back as your iPhone fades away along with your cares. 
At theGate Lodges, at the entrance to the Heveningham estate, a few miles 
north, a light-filled subterranean living space has been ingeniously scooped 
out from beneath the elegant salt-and-pepperpot structures that guard the 
approach to the road to the hall. And the children's twin-bed room is accessed 
– thrillingly – via a spiral staircase that leads up through a trapdoor.

Lantern & Larks, near Sweffling, further south (close to Saxmundham), is a 
different kind of comfortable. Here, the accommodation takes the form of 
well-appointed tents – canvas cabins, really – equipped with decking floors, a 
functioning kitchen and bathroom, a woodburning stove and proper beds. It is 
not so much glamping as snug camping – what you might call "snumping".

The site is owned by Andrew and Laura Parsons-Mann, who will happily teach 
your kids how to plant flowers, make elderflower cordial, or cook orange 
muffins in a firepit. Andrew told us that the tents come from "across the 
border", by which he meant Norfolk. There is a gas hob, but we chose to cook 
kebabs on the wok-like barbecue outside, while the girls toasted marshmallows, 
bought from the site's honesty shop, over the embers. When the sun went down, 
the fairy lights on the veranda came alight as if by magic.
 The sitting room of Hex Cottage, Wilderness Reserve. Photograph: Will Pryce 
Further inland, Framlingham Castle, a great curtain-walled fortress, was once 
the seat of the Howard clan, the Kardashians of the early-Tudor period: rich, 
showy, monumentally ambitious. Eliza and Naomi were fascinated to hear how two 
cousins from this powerful family – Anne Boleyn and then Catherine Howard – 
married a king, only to lose everything.

Naomi was outraged on their behalf: "The thing about Henry VIII is, if he 
didn't like someone and if they didn't have sons for babies, he chopped their 
heads off." She shook a fist at the battlements. "What a horrible person."

Her indignation was short-lived, because she had spotted an ice-cream parlour 
across the road. "That's enough castles," she said, "I think it's time for some 
mint choc-chip.'

• Accommodation was provided by Lantern and Larks (01638 563478, 
lanternandlarks.co.uk <http://www.lanternandlarks.co.uk/>) which has 
tents sleeping six from £350 for three nights, and Wilderness Reserve (020-7484 
5700,wildernessreserve.com <http://www.wildernessreserve.com/>), which has 
cottages for four from £200 a night
 