
When a famous person snaps up a local business the expected response might, at 
best, be a shrug and, at worst, outright hostility. But not so for Norman Cook 
akaFatboy Slim <http://fatboyslim.net/>, who in June opened the Big Beach Cafe 
<http://www.bigbeachcafe.com/> at Hove Lagoon, an easy 20-minute cycle from the 
centre of Brighton along the seafront.

Tucked just below the beachfront, it sits in the shadow of a new skate park 
and kids' playground with paddling pool. Cook can practically see his house 
from the cafe. "I've lived on the beach for 15 years and brought both my 
children up in this park," he says. "I've had some very happy years here. It 
sounds a bit cheesy to say I want to give something back but I want to cement 
my relationship with the community and get really into the heart of it."

The gist of local response seems to be: "great news, good luck to him". This 
may be because the cafe was previously owned byHeather Mills 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heather_Mills>, who perhaps doesn't have the 
biggest fan base in the world. It was also vegan and some customers resented 
not being able to get a regular milky coffee or non-soya ice-cream for miles 
around. But more likely it's because Cook is a popular guy in Brighton and 
Hove. He went to college here, has a stake in the local football team and, with 
his Big Beach Boutique concerts, has hosted some of the biggest parties the 
area has ever seen.

This is not his first foray into food. A decade ago a friend warned him that 
"the music business was getting a bit stale" and that he should open a 
restaurant. He now has "interests" in three other restaurants. Two are in New 
York and includeThe Spotted Pig <http://thespottedpig.com/>, a Michelin-starred 
gastro pub which is also backed by Jay-Z and Bono.Oki-Nami 
<http://www.okinami.com/> is his Japanese restaurant in Brighton. "It's a 
sideline that I've gotten into as I get older and wiser and calm down a bit; it 
made sense to carry on doing it ever closer to home," he says.

I ask why he wasn't tempted to set up something more swanky? "There's never 
really been a high-end restaurant that's succeeded in Brighton, the kind of 
people who want high-end food go up to London for it. Brighton is much more 
about cafe society."
 Interior of Big Beach Cafe. Photograph: Paul Marshall 
Aside from the cool signs painted by local graffiti artist Aroe, it looks 
conventional from the outside and a little weather-battered, as seaside cafes 
tend to be. Inside it's light and airy, with an open kitchen and stylish curved 
wooden counter. The art is lifted from Cook and his wife Zoe Ball's collection. 
He says: "Zoe's is the film stuff and mine is the surfy stuff with a slight 
tie-in to the Big Beach parties. I didn't want to over-egg that side of things 
though. We're not going to do a Rockafella burger or Santa Cruz fries or 
anything like that."

They're presently serving a mix of classics, such as burgers and ice-cream, 
alongside scotch eggs, veggie tarts, pies and cake, using local, independent 
suppliers where possible. The coffee is fromSmall Batch 
<http://smallbatchcoffee.co.uk/>, a nearby roastery, and the burgers made with 
baps from a local baker. Gourmet burgers? I suggest to Danny Stockland, the 
head chef. "Semi gourmet," he says. "You'd pay £13 for a gourmet burger in 
Brighton but we're serving them for £4.50," he says. "Having it reasonably 
priced is very important to us. I'm a father with two kids, if I was being 
priced out the market I'd just turn up here with a picnic."

I had the spinach, feta and tomato quiche, my son had a sausage roll and a 
smiley face cookie, while my partner went for the full-on fry-up. They also do 
super-tasty cakes that shouldn't work but do, like courgette and lime cake, and 
beetroot and chocolate.

The cafe-bar is now open 10am-6pm; they recently hosted Norman's 50th. They 
have a rainproof marquee space outside and the plan is to open in the evening 
soon, serving steak-frites and fresh-off-the-boat fish. I ask Cook about the 
music. "I'll be providing it and it'll be 100%Fatboy Slim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/fatboy-slim> free!"

The cafe's picnic tables face Hove Lagoon <http://www.lagoon.co.uk/hove-lagoon>
, which isn't the tropical body of water its name suggests but a fun 
watersports hub nonetheless. A path across its middle can give the pleasing 
illusion you're watching skateboarders glide on water, and the cranes and 
chimney at Shoreham harbour add a post-industrial backdrop. Traditionally a 
windsurfing and sailing spot, it's now just as popular for SUP (stand-up 
paddling), as it's quick to pick up, and wakeboarding. It's also sheltered, so 
especially good for kids and beginners.

It's not hard to see why Cook loves it here: "If you're in a big city you feel 
hemmed in by the noise and nonsense and pressures going on all around you. But 
here, whatever shit goes on, you can always escape and look at the sea."

• Big Beach Cafe, Hove Lagoon, 01273 911080, bigbeachcafe.com 
<http://www.bigbeachcafe.com/>
 