
The top Democrat on the House intelligence committee said on Tuesday that the 
FBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> had been “deeply damaged” by its 
conduct during the presidential election and would find it hard to repair its 
credibility under a Trump administration.

Adam Schiff said that FBI leaks about the investigation into Hillary Clinton’s 
email server – and the announcement by the FBI director, James Comey, 11 days 
before the vote,that new emails had been found 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/28/fbi-reopens-hillary-clinton-emails-investigation>
 – “were highly problematic, to put it in the most diplomatic of terms”.

“I think that the bureau, which I have great respect for ... has been deeply 
damaged by their conduct over the last year, by the violation of the DoJ 
policies about talking about pending or closed cases and additionally by the 
nonstop leaks of information,” Schiff, a Democratic congressman from 
California, told reporters.

However, he did not support the call made by the outgoing Democratic leader in 
the Senate, Harry Reid, for the FBI to balance its disclosure on the Clinton 
emails, which were ultimately deemed not to warrant further investigation, with 
details of investigations into what he called “explosive information” about 
“close ties and coordination” between Trump and Moscow.

Senators call for declassification of files on Russia's role in US election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/senators-hint-russian-interference-us-presidential-election>
“I don’t think the remedy for that is leaking more information. And I don’t 
think I or the bureau should be talking about investigations, no matter who 
they are about,” Schiff said. Even without further leaks, he suggested it would 
be hard to undo the damage done by the perceived politicisation of the FBI’s 
work.

“So going forward there is a lot of damage to be repaired, and frankly I don’t 
see how that happens because if there is reason to investigate anything going 
on with the new administration, how much confidence will the public have in the 
conduct of that investigation?” he asked. “How much confidence will the public 
have that it’s objective, that it’s based on the facts, that it’s adhering to 
the highest standards? You can see how half the country might believe one 
thing, the other is going to believe another, and ultimately no one will 
believe the legitimacy of the process.”


During the campaign, Trump welcomed the leaking of Clinton’s emails, which US 
intelligence agencies said were hacked from the Democratic National Committee 
by Russia to the WikiLeaks organisation. Schiff warned that the same tactics 
could be used by Moscow to apply pressure on Trump when he is president.

“Should the president-elect cross the Russians – as inevitably he will have to 
because their interests are not our interests – he can expect that if the 
Russians are in possession of any embarrassing emails about his team, they will 
be dumped,” Schiff said. “And if they are not in possession of them they will 
hack and do their best to get in possession of them.”

The seven Democrats and one independent on the Senate intelligence committee 
havecalled for the declassification 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/senators-hint-russian-interference-us-presidential-election>
 of intelligence on Russian intervention in the US presidential election.
 