
FBI director James Comey angrily defended his impartiality before lawmakers on 
Thursday after explaining why he chose not to prosecute an “unsophisticated”
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>.

During nearly five hours of nonstop grilling by the oversight committee of the 
House of Representatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/house-of-representatives>, Comey insisted 
that recommending charges in the case would have been “celebrity hunting” 
because normally prosecutors require evidence of intent in such cases, despite 
what was possibly unlawful handling of classified emails.

Under the 1917 Espionage Act there is a provision for bringing charges for 
gross negligence without evidence of an intentional breach of the law, he said, 
but only one much more serious case has ever been brought using it.

“You know what would be a double standard? If she were prosecuted for gross 
negligence,” said Comey. “No reasonable prosecutor would bring the second case 
in 100 years based on gross negligence.”

“That’s just not fair,” he added. “It would be fair to have a robust 
disciplinary proceeding. It’s not fair to prosecute someone on these facts.”

The FBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> director also dealt with the 
question of whether Clinton had knowingly exposed classified information while 
secretary of state, something he said would have been extremely hard to prove 
beyond a reasonable doubt.

Despite Clinton’s claims to the contrary during earlier testimony to Congress, 
three of the emails found by the FBI had contained classification markings – 
signified by a [C] symbol – but Comey said it could not be assumed that she 
should have recognised this.

“One of the things I have learned in this case is that the secretary may not 
have been as sophisticated as people would assume,” said Comey. “She did not 
even have a computer in her office, for example.

“I see evidence of great carelessness, but I do not see evidence that 
secretary Clinton … knew she was doing something against the law,” he added.

The sometimes breathtakingly candid testimony shed new light on the reasons 
behind the FBI’s decision not to recommend charges to the Department of 
Justice, a choice that led to thecase being formally dropped by attorney 
general Loretta Lynch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/06/hillary-clinton-email-investigation-no-charges-loretta-lynch>
 on Wednesday night.

But Republican lawmakers were scathing about what they argued was an overly 
charitable interpretation of the law.

“What does it take for someone to misuse classified information and get in 
trouble for it?” asked Representative William Hurd of Texas.

“What are we going to have to enact to get you guys to prosecute somebody for 
gross negligence?” added his Texan colleague Blake Farenthold.

Comey, a former registered Republican with a reputation for political 
impartiality, largely kept his calm during the exchanges but appeared to lose 
his temper when pressed on whether the announcement of his decision had been 
coordinated with the Obama administration.

“Look me in eye and listen to what I am about to say,” he said, after accusing 
Florida Republican John Mica of insinuating political orchestration. “I did not 
coordinate that with anyone: the White House, the Department of Justice – 
nobody outside the FBI family had any idea what I was about to say. I say that 
under oath ... I don’t want to get strong, but I want to be definitive about 
that.”

“The recommendation was made by people who didn’t give a hoot about politics,” 
added Comey.

Hillary for America national press secretary Brian Fallon said Thursday that 
Comey’s testimony further vindicated Clinton. “Director Comey’s testimony 
clearly knocked down a number of false Republican talking points and reconciled 
apparent contradictions between his previous remarks and Hillary Clinton’s 
public statements,” Fallon said in a statement. “While Republicans may try to 
keep this issue alive, this hearing proved those efforts will only backfire.”

Nonetheless, the hearing raised further uncomfortable political questions for 
Clinton, who has previously denied sending or receiving classified information 
on her private server or deleting any work-related emails.

Trey Gowdy, whose Benghazi committee had uncovered the existence of the 
private server, forced Comey to acknowledge that these and other claims had 
proved to be false.

“We have no basis to conclude she lied to the FBI,” said Comey when pushed on 
the mounting inconsistencies.

House oversight committee chairman Jason Chaffetz suggested that Congress 
could call on the FBI to investigate possible perjury. “Do you need a 
referral?” he asked. “Sure do,” replied Comey. “You’ll have one in the next few 
hours,” said Chaffetz.

 suggested that Congress could call on the FBI to investigate possibly 
perjury. “Do you need a referral?” he asked. “Sure do,” replied Comey. “You’ll 
have one in the next few hours,” said Jordan.

Comey also said the server, which was kept in the family basement and set up 
by former president Bill Clinton, was less secure than commercially available 
services such as Gmail, and should probably have led to disciplinary 
proceedings if discovered while the secretary was still in office.

“An average employee still in government service would be subject to a 
disciplinary sanction,” said the FBI director when asked about double 
standards. “If they left they would still be in the same boat [as Clinton].”

But the explanations made little headway with Republicans on the committee, 
who seem determined to keep the issue alive despite the DoJ and FBI decision.

“If the average American had done what you had laid out, they would be in 
handcuffs on their way to jail and they probably should,” said Chaffetz. “It 
seems like there is a double standard: if your name is not Clinton and you’re 
not part of the elite, Lady Justice will act differently.”

 * This article was amended on 8 July 2016 to correct a quote that was 
mistakenly attributed to US Rep Jim Jordan. The quote was spoken by House 
oversight committee chairman Jason Chaffetz.  