
Ireland’s largest opposition party, Fianna Fáil, will respect a “political 
ceasefire” to allow Fine Gael’sEnda Kenny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/enda-kenny> to continue as taoiseach, 
sources inside the party said on Sunday night after most of the votes had been 
counted in the most indecisive Irish general election for decades.

Fianna Fáil will not enter a coalition with its rival but will avoid bringing 
down a minority Fine Gael-led administration in the short to medium term, the 
Guardian has learned, after an election that has produced no possibility of any 
coalition holding a majority.

This would allow Kenny to remain as prime minister for the centenary 
commemorations of the 1916 Easter Rising and for Fine Gael to govern for at 
least a year, thus avoiding another election in the new few weeks or months.

Irish election results show Fine Gael misread public mood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/28/irish-election-results-show-fine-gael-misread-public-mood>
The Dáil will meet on 10 March to elect a new taoiseach but no new government, 
not even an minority one, is expected to be formed until the end of the month.

In return Fianna Fáil would reform the Irish parliament, allocating more 
powers for members of the Dáil, or TDs, to scrutinise government legislation 
and crucially allowing the opposition to have some input into the shape of this 
year’s budget.

“There are two things in Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> 
that bring any government down: a vote of no confidence and a government’s 
inability to set a budget. If conditions are met to allow for real Dáil reform 
and the opposition is allowed to scrutinise and have input in relation to the 
budget then there will be no votes of no confidence,” one veteran Fianna Fáil 
source said.

Fianna Fáil expects to re-enter Dáil on 10 March with about 42 to 44 seats, 
while Fine Gael will still be the largest party with about 51 to 52 seats, the 
source said.
Ireland election results 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/ireland_election_results/giv-27167PgAeOAqjOp14/>
There has been pressure for Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael, mainly from Dublin 
media commentators, to form a “grand coalition” along the lines of the 
Christian Democrat-Social Democrat government in Germany, and in turn bury the 
bitter divisions between them that are rooted in the Irish civil war.

Instead, there is likely to be a political truce that will last for at least a 
year if Fianna Fáil’s conditions are met. But the party would not take up any 
ministerial positions or sit in a cabinet with Fine Gael having the final say 
in decisions.

“Fianna Fáil would still be on the opposition benches and still holding a 
minority Fine Gael government to account,” the source said.

Another source saidit would be “utter madness” for Fianna Fáil to link up 
officially with Fine Gael in government and hand over the leadership of the 
opposition toSinn Féin <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein>.

The leader of Fianna Fáil, Micheál Martin, who is widely regarded to have had 
the best campaign of the four main party chiefs, as well as former Fianna Fáil 
ministers such as Willie O’Dea and a number of newly elected TDs, have come 
forward over the weekend to dismiss speculation of formally joining Fine Gael 
in government.

By early evening Sunday, the breakdown in terms of seats for the parties was 
projected as: 51 for Fine Gael, 44 for Fianna Fáil and Sinn Féin on 24, Others, 
ranging from left-wing parties to independents, are expected to win 34 seats 
and Labour five.

For Kenny and Fine Gael this has been a disastrous election, given that they 
and their Labour coalition partners took power five years ago with the largest 
majority in post-independence history. Fine Gael had 73 seats and will lose at 
least 20, while Labour has crashed from a historic high of 33 in 2011 to under 
10, possibly even as low as six seats.

One of the biggest casualties of the backlash against Fine Gael in particular 
was the loss of a seat for Dr James Reilly, who was minister for health between 
2011 and 2014. He lost Dublin Fingal to Sinn Féin and acknowledged that this 
was mainly due to the austerity cuts the coalition imposed to plug the hole in 
the national finances.

“My time in health would not have been exactly helpful. But the country had no 
money and hard decisions had to be made,” Reilly said.

He avoided questions at the Fingal count about the future of Kenny’s 
leadership and conduct during the campaign. The electorally bruised taoiseach, 
portrayed in one newspaper today with his head superimposed on a picture of a 
badly injured Irish rugby player, performed poorly in all three live television 
debates in the three-week battle.

Sinn Féin has been a big beneficiary of Labour’s catastrophic drop in support, 
with Gerry Adams’s party up to 14% of the vote and about 24 seats. But other 
leftwing parties such as the Anti-Austerity Alliance, People Before Profit and 
the Social Democrats saw their share of the vote and seats rise. However, Sinn 
Féin’s aim of supplanting Fianna Fáil as the leading opposition force at the 
ballot box in the year of the Easter Rising centenary has not been realised.

The deputy leader of Sinn Féin, Mary Lou McDonald, challenged the two major 
parties to coalesce in a new government while emphasising that her party had no 
interest in entering any administration with either of them.

“We will not be the facilitators or enablers of Fianna Fáil or Fine Gael to 
run rampant across an unequal society – in other words we are very different 
from Labour in that respect,” the Sinn Féin TD said.

Meanwhile, a former media adviser to Fine Gael and PR campaign director for 
President Mary Robinson in the early 1990s has criticised the party’s decision 
to hire consultants from the British Conservative party for the election.

Eoghan Harris, who helped run Robinson’s successful election to the Irish 
presidency in 1991, said: “The coalition brought in Tory advisers. But 
political advice is seldom a ‘one-size-fits-all’ affair and I doubt they 
understood Irish political culture … The very fact that Fine Gael thought Tory 
advisers could help showed how totally out of touch with Irish people they are.

“Possibly influenced by Tory consultants, Fine Gael ran a low-tax campaign 
that presumed a selfish electorate. In contrast, Micheál Martin, leader of 
Fianna Fáil, took a huge risk and prioritised public services over tax cuts. 
Recent polls confirmed that Martin read the public mood right as a big majority 
put improved health and social services well above tax cuts.”

Some of the counts across the 40 constituencies of the republic are expected 
to continue until Monday due to Ireland’s single transferrable vote system. One 
illustration of the marathon nature of the counts can be seen in Dublin 
Central, where the last seat was won by the independent candidate Maureen 
O’Sullivan, who had to wait until the 11th count in the early hours of Sunday 
morning before it was confirmed that she was going back to the Dáil.
 