
On 15 October 1966 Huey P Newton and Bobby Seale founded the Black Panther 
Party for Self-Defense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/03/black-panthers-vanguard-revolution-film>
 in Oakland, California. The Panthers quickly became one of the most important 
and well-known black radical organisations, inspiring chapters across the US 
and around the world. Fifty years on, the legacy of the Panthers is 
particularly important given the resurgence of black political action and the 
rise ofBlack Lives Matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement> on both sides 
of the Atlantic. The Panthers are largely remembered for their gun-toting 
public displays and revolutionary rhetoric; but the true legacy of the party is 
the grassroots community activism that defined them.

The image of the Panthers marching into the state capitol building in 
California armed with shotguns, in 1967, shocked America to the same degree it 
inspired black communities. The Panthers believed in armed self-defence and 
“patrolled” the police, observing them during stops in black communities. This, 
unsurprisingly, led to confrontations, shootouts and arrests, as well as 
high-profile trials against Panthers including Newton. The campaigns to free 
the Panthers and raise money for legal defence are the basis of the collective 
memory of the party. However, the reality of their work was not these direct 
and sometimes symbolic confrontations.

One of the first successes of the Panthers was to get a traffic light put up 
where children had been knocked down

The main work of the Panthers was in coordinating “survival programmes” that 
offered support to poor African-Americans that the state would not. The “free 
breakfast for schools” programme was feeding 20,000 children a day at its peak; 
the free health clinics treated tens of thousands of people; and they also 
started their own “liberation schools” to counter racist schooling. It was this 
community organising that embedded the Panthers in the community, not the guns 
and shootouts. One of the first successes of the Panthers was campaigning to 
get a traffic light put up on a busy intersection in Oakland, where children 
had been knocked down. The main lessons for organisations as they develop in 
Britain is that activism is not judged by big showpieces that gain media 
attention; but the mundane organising that organically links movements to the 
communities they are trying to serve.

In Britain there is a rich historical legacy to draw upon, which has largely 
been forgotten. The British Black Panthers started in 1968 and included people 
like Dr Althea Jones-Lecointe, Olive Morris andphotographer-in-chief Neil 
Kenlock 
<http://www.vice.com/en_uk/read/neil-kenlocks-photos-give-the-british-black-panthers-the-legacy-they-deserve>
. The British Panthers did not condone gun use and focused on community 
education and anti-racist campaigns. They are part of a lost legacy of black 
radical activism that has strong roots in Britain. As new movements develop it 
is important to make connections and draw lessons from what has gone before.

Contrary to popular mythology, the Panthers in America were 60% female and 
featured prominent roles for women. This was particularly true in the British 
movement, which had strong female leadership and groups that sprang out of it 
such as the Black Women’s Group in 1973. Black women have been erased from the 
narrative of black activism and it is important we rediscover that history.

The revolutionary art of Emory Douglas, Black Panther
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2008/oct/28/emory-douglas-black-panther>
The Panthers have also helped sustain today’s movements. Their first creative 
fundraising activity was to sell copies of Mao’s Little Red Book to college 
students, and they published the Black Panther newspaper, which sold for 10 
cents per copy with a peak circulation of 250,000 a week. The Panthers also 
raised funds from white allies and the state, but they understood that a 
movement cannot be independent unless it can raise its own funds. Whoever 
finances a group owns the organisation and this will be key as movements 
progress in Britain.

The newspaper was important in disseminating the political messages of the 
party. Mass circulation meant they had reach beyond their membership in black 
communities. Emory Douglas’s artwork was the perfect vehicle for spreading the 
ideas of the Panthers, for instance his iconic depiction ofthe police as pigs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2008/oct/28/emory-douglas-black-panther>
. Black Lives Matter has harnessed the power of social media, but this cannot 
replace the physical paper, which reaches the places the internet cannot. The 
presence of the Panthers selling the paper and engaging with the community was 
also important to embedding the movement at the grassroots. The revolution will 
not be retweeted, it will be led from the ground up by the communities who need 
it most.

The overt confrontations with police led to the Panthers being financially 
drained by legal fees and brutally assaulted by the state. This unfortunately 
led to the downfall of the movement and detracted from the grassroots activism 
the Panthers were leading. Today’s movements should remember that high-profile 
confrontations do not sustain an organisation, the first goal must be to root 
the struggle in the daily lives of black communities.
 