
The defence lawyers are right to describe the decision to quash the 
convictions of theGuildford Four <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/guildford-four>
, after 15 years in prison, as 'historic.' This will be the first IRA terrorist 
case in England where a conviction has been reversed. One of the four, Paul 
Hill, was told that he should expect to remain in prison for life. The case 
entered the Guinness Book of Records for the longest sentences ever handed down 
in an English court of law. But over those 15 years the investigation and 
prosecution of the horrendous bombing, which killed five and injured 55, have 
repeatedly and disquietingly raised doubts about each level of our criminal 
justice system: police, prosecution and the appeal system.

The precise reasons why the Director of Public Prosecutions has now decided it 
would be 'wrong for the Crown to seek to sustain the convictions' will not be 
revealed until tomorrow's formal Old Bailey hearing. They are clearly 
fundamental, though, because all four are to be released not just the two 
defendants mentioned by the Home Secretary in January when he referred the case 
to the Court of Appeal because of fresh evidence. What is known is that Avon 
and Somerset police have been investigating the original police and prosecution 
handling of the case, and have recently reported to the DPP. There are grounds, 
as we report today, for suspecting that important evidence was withheld from 
the court by the prosecution. Something major has obviously emerged since Mr 
Hurd referred the case to the Court of Appeal, because that court no longer 
needs to carry out its review.

Reaction to the DPP's decision yesterday was divided. There were some, like 
Lord Scarman, who believed it would benefit the reputation of British justice. 
To his credit, Lord Scarman supported the campaign led by Cardinal Hume, the 
Archbishop of Westminster, which called on the Home Office to investigate the 
more dubious aspects of the case. He was joined in this campaign by Lord 
Devlin, another former Law Lord, two former Home Secretaries, Lord Jenkins and 
Merlyn Rees, and the Archbishop of Canterbury. There were obvious institutional 
pressures on the Home Secretary not to reopen the case because of the defects 
it could expose and the degree to which those would undermine faith in the 
criminal justice system. Credit, then, for Mr Hurd.

There are others, however, who believe the faults in the Guildford case only 
confirm criticism of the system. These criticisms are not just made by the 
Irish. A study on miscarriages of justice by a committee of 13 distinguished 
lawyers, published by the legal reform group Justice three months ago, 
contained a long list of present defects. False confessions and police 
misconduct were two of the five most common causes. The Guildford convictions 
were secured purely on confessions which the defendants subsequently withdrew, 
alleging they had been forced to make them by threats and violence. The most 
important recommendation made in the Justice report is for a new independent 
body to look at serious cases of suspect miscarriages of justice. This is only 
the most recent of a series of reports which have shown that the Court of 
Appeal takes a too restrictive view of its role. Thursday would be a good day 
for the Home Secretary to take a look at this report.

Fifteen years in prison is far too long to wait for a correction to a 
miscarriage of justice.
 