
The first thing most critics talk about in relation to Chuck Palahniuk’s Fight 
Club is politics. The second thing they talk about is politics too. Third and 
fourth come questions of male identity and violence (which are also, arguably, 
political questions.) After that, there might be discussions about father gods, 
Nietzsche, terrorism, therapy-culture, transgression and all the other ideas 
Palahniuk puts over so forcefully and provocatively.

The one thing they don’t talk about often is the writing itself.

I’ve seen dozens of articles about real life Fight Clubs 
<http://www.usatoday.com/tech/news/2006-05-29-fight-club_x.htm>, about 
“constructs of masculinity”,patriarchal power 
<http://www.henryagiroux.com/online_articles/fight_club.htm>, and similar. I’ve 
also seen lots of political opinion purportedly built from the book, on the 
likes of thewebsites that mentioned in last week’s Reading Group article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/dec/13/fight-clubs-dark-fantasies-reality-chuck-palahniuk>
.

What I haven’t seen is much discussion of the book as a work of art. This is 
partly thanks to the fact that it came out in 1996, just before the internet 
started preserving book reviews for posterity. It’s also possibly because there 
weren’t that many critical reviews in the first place. It took a while for 
Fight Club to go big: when it came out, it was the debut novel from an unknown 
writer with an initial print run of 10,000 copies (which took years to sell).

The ideas and politics in Fight Club are so overwhelming, it is hard to focus 
on it simply as a piece of writing. The ideas in the book are all so 
fist-in-your-face, I didn’t pause to think about whether I should open the 
discussion on the Reading Group last week by asking about Fight Club’s politics 
- it just felt right.

But now, I’d like to redress the balance. After all, it’s the skill in the 
writing that gives all those concepts and ideas such impact. Tylor Durden may 
cause endless controversy, but there’s no arguing about how forcefully he 
expresses himself:

“This is your life and its ending one moment at a time.”

“I don’t want to die without scars.”

“The things you used to own, now they own you. It’s only after you lose 
everything that you’re free to do anything.”

“I wanted to destroy everything beautiful I’d never have.” 

You don’t need me to tell you that this book is endlessly quotable - the 
chances are that you’ve heard all these lines repeated many times before. Fight 
Club is worth preserving for its aphorisms alone.

In an Observer interview with Palahniuk in 2005, Sean O’Hagan wrote: “If I 
were to hazard a guess as to whyChuck Palahniuk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/chuckpalahniuk> has so much money, and such 
a devoted global fan base, I would say that it is mainly because he writes 
novels for the kind of people who don’t normally read novels.” Dan Brown is 
also said to appeal to people who don’t normally read much - and the assumption 
I always take from that is that his prose is so bad, those poor people will 
never open another book. I have no such worries with Palahniuk.

“I like to cut to the chase,” the author told O’Hagan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/may/08/fiction.chuckpalahniuk>. “I try 
to tell a story the way someone would tell you a story in a bar, with the same 
kind of timing and pacing... I want that immediacy when I read a novel. I don’t 
want all that other extraneous stuff, all those abstract, chicken-shit 
descriptions.”

The result in Fight Club is sparse, fast-paced and direct. It isn’t just that 
there isn’t anyhooptedoodle 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2001/07/16/arts/writers-writing-easy-adverbs-exclamation-points-especially-hooptedoodle.html>
 – there aren’t even many adjectives. But thereare lots of prominent verbs: 
people are always doing things, the action is always moving forward. There is 
energy. The sentences are bold and percussive:

“I held the face of mister angel like a baby or a football in the crook of my 
arm and bashed him with my knuckles, bashed him until his teeth broke and 
through his lips. Bashed him with my elbow after that until he fell through my 
arms into a heap at my feet. Until the skin was pounded thin across his 
cheekbones and turned black.”

To write like that takes talent and Palahniuk demonstrates just as much craft 
in this book. It’s full of tricks and clever turns, but – and this is the real 
skill – not so often that you’d notice it. Nothing gets in the way of the vivid 
story. It even feels natural when he flips from first to second person, 
cleverly making you the reader feel complicit and suggesting the woozy 
confusion of the narrator:

“Am I sleeping? Have I slept at all? This is the insomnia.

Try to relax a little more with every breath out, but your heart’s still 
racing and your thoughts tornado in your head.”

This slipping and sliding narrative voice also paves the way for the big 
reveal that Tyler Durden and the narrator share more than their address and 
propensity for fighting. Cleverer still is the fact that Palahniuk hides this 
secret in plain sight, right from the first paragraph:

“Tyler gets me a job as waiter, after that Tyler’s pushing a gun in my mouth 
and saying, the very first step to eternal life is you have to die. For a long 
time though, Tyler and I were best friends. People are always asking, did I 
know about Tyler Durden...”

When I re-read the book, I noticed how heavy these hints were. Palahniuk has 
great fun spelling out what’s happening, while also keeping the first-time 
reader sufficiently distracted that the surprise is never spoiled. And I did 
say ‘re-read’: Fight Club rewards extra attention, which is precisely why 
people will still be talking about it, long after all our current politics is 
nothing more than a bad memory.
 