
A first edition of Sir Isaac Newton’s Principia Mathematica could become the 
most expensive print sold of the revolutionary text when it goes under the 
hammer with a guide price of at least $1m (£790,000) this month.

The extremely rare continental copy being sold by auction house Christie’s 
<http://www.christies.com/lotfinder/lot/newton-sir-isaac-philosophiae-na-6052542-details.aspx?from=salesummery&intObjectID=6052542&sid=ff3586fe-d613-4386-a1b6-e519a8c529f0>
 in New York is one of a handful of texts thought to have been destined for 
Europe and has minor differences from those distributed in England by Newton 
and the book’s editor, Edmond Halley.

The list price of between $1m and $1.5m is thought to be a record for the 
book. An English version also bound in red morocco leather, which was said to 
have been presented to King James II, sold for more than $2.5m in 2013. Its 
list price was $600,000.

About 400 copies of Principia’s first edition were printed, of which the 
continental versions accounted for about 20%. Halley, the astronomer best known 
for the comet named after him, encouraged Newton to organise his theories into 
a text and paid for the printing because the Royal Society of which he and 
Newton were members had run out of funds.

The society retains two copies of the book, including the original manuscript 
on which the first print run in 1687 was based, which is described as its 
“greatest treasure”.

Written in Latin, the book’s full title is Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia 
Mathematica (Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy). It laid out 
Newton’s groundbreaking theories in areas such as gravity and the forces of 
motion, and introduced a more rigorous mathematical method to physical science.

Keith Moore, the head of the Royal Society library, described it as a 
“benchmark in human thought”.

“It’s not just the history and development of science; it’s one of the 
greatest books ever published,” he said. “It was hugely influential in terms of 
applying mathematics to basic physical problems.”

Moore said the large sum set to be attracted by the book could be in part due 
to the growing influence of science within culture, as well as the huge 
earnings of some technology entrepreneurs.

“People who have big books these days maybe are the kinds of people who have 
made their money on the internet or the web ... If you have a few million quid 
to spend, why wouldn’t you buy a copy of Principia Mathematica?

“If you’ve made your money from a really cool algorithm, you will probably 
appreciate Newtonian physics.”

Despite its wide-ranging impact, and the book’s use as a foundational physics 
text being unsurpassed until Einstein’s general theory of relativity, Principia 
did not make a list last year of the top 20 most important academic books of 
all time. The list was topped by Charles Darwin’s On the Origin of Species.

But because it was published almost two centuries earlier, first editions of 
Principia are rarer and likely to continue selling for far larger amounts. One 
of the highest prices paid for a first edition of Darwin’s book laying out the 
theory of evolution was £103,000 in 2009, and subsequent sales have been lower.

While the prices differ, the impact of the two texts was comparable, Moore 
said. “What Newton does in the 1680s is revolutionise the physical sciences. 
The fundamental laws of physics.

“Darwin’s great work published in 1859 revolutionised the biological sciences 
in the same way. They are similar books in the impact they had.”

 * The picture caption on this article was amended on 5 December 2016 to 
clarify that the copy of Principia Mathematica up for sale is not the one held 
by Cambridge University.
 