
For reaching a human milestone, I am given five credit card gift certificates, 
imprinted with numbers, each containing a different amount of money. Sensing 
improved finances, my bookshelf surrenders against the weight it’s been 
expected to carry, sending books tizzying across the floor. I ask everyone, 
where should I buy a new one? Shelf Barn, everyone says.

 I find a good looking model on Shelf Barn’s website and add it to my virtual 
shopping cart. I check out. The credit card gift certificates are stacked by my 
elbow: five festively plumed birds. When it’s time to employ, however, the 
payment field will only allow one.

 I call Shelf Barn and reach Alex, a customer service rep whose voice contains 
a pleasant sizzle. She says she wants to help and I believe her. Alex, can you 
input the five cards from your official desk on what I imagine is a giant shelf 
that perches above another shelf where another service rep sits, over another, 
and so on, down a never-ending barn wall, poised above a main floor where 
shelves on dollies zoom gaily by?

 No dice. The payment field will only accept one card, Alex says. It’s a 
one-card kind of field, monogamous.

 Where do you find that kind of loyalty these days? I say.

 Alex doesn’t know but has an idea! She instructs me to buy five separate 
Shelf Barn gift cards using the five credit card gift certificates, then apply 
them to the bookshelf. The gift card field has a more progressive idea of 
commitment and accepts multiple entries.

 It’s a brilliant work around. Even Alex seems stunned by it. I imagine a sun 
beam bursting through the barn ceiling and lighting her at her desk.

 The line breaks. Marie-Helene? She says.

 I’m here, I say.

 Alex wants to know if there’s anything else I need. I say no, and she wishes 
me a good day. I wish her the same. She thanks me, I thank her. A few more go 
arounds of gratitude and we hang up, feeling incredible.

 I return to Shelf Barn’s website and purchase five Shelf Barn gift cards 
using the five credit card gift certificates in five separate transactions in 
my name.

 Within minutes, email acknowledgements begin. This is to notify you that the 
gift card you bought yourself is being created. Congratulations, you! You’ve 
received a gift from yourself! The gift cards arrive—five much touted courtiers 
in a parade of pomp and virtual circumstance. Containing five replications of 
letters sliding out of five replications of envelopes addressed from me to 
myself. I open one and immediately receive a new email.Dear you, you are 
currently viewing your gift. I buy the bookshelf using the enlightened gift 
card field. Emails collect like flotsam in a shallow inlet. My vision swims. 
Alex and her simple fixes seem very far away. A new email:Everything is in 
process! I hurl a stone into a lake I’ve walked to without realizing. My image 
fractures into an endless array of shelves, I mean, selves. Paused halfway down 
a tree a squirrel meets and holds my gaze for 3 to 5 business minutes. 
Marie-Helene? it says, multi-voiced. Are you there? I return home to an email 
from my shelf:I am on my way. But am I giver or receiver? On the transitional 
firmament post-purchase but pre-delivery I build a home with two souls. I stare 
into the vast expanse. Hours pass. Sleepless, I fear I’ll miss my shelf and be 
forced to leave a note for every failed attempt at delivery:Sorry I missed me. 
Sorry I missed me. Sorry I missed me. Who do I think I am? Business days pass 
into business weeks. I keep waiting by the door for myself to arrive but if I 
do, how can I ever accept?

 * Marie-Helene Bertino is the author of the novel 2 A.M. At The Cat’s Pajamas 
and Safe as Houses. She teaches at NYU and in the low-residency MFA program at 
IAIA (Institute of American Indian Arts). For more information, please visit
www.mariehelenebertino.com <http://www.mariehelenebertino.com/>.
 