
The diabetic alcoholic across the street had lost all limbs by now. He only 
came out anymore for Medi-Van transport to dialysis. It took two strong men to 
hoist him and his wheelchair down the splintered wooden front stairs. He lived 
alone with his aging mother, who never came out to wave goodbye. That mother? 
I’d guess she was about a hundred and fourteen by now.


She was on a reverse mortgage, hidden away. 

The diabetic had gone to dialysis. It was a blasting hot spring day. I was 
staring out the window, enjoying the calm. A Cutlass pulled up in a rush of 
shaking bass blasting from rattling speakers. A girl ran out of the diabetic’s 
tiny, old house toward the street. She ran like an escapee, and moved like a 
track star, fast and smooth. The sun flashed against a long silver blade in her 
hand, making her gleam like a goddess. She clutched a butcher knife. She 
slammed against the Cutlass and yelled, “Get out of here or I will kill you.” 
Every word carried the force of her full conviction.

He said “I love you! I’ve always loved you. I will love you forever.” Those 
words traveled like the worst kind of threat

A flood of people poured out of the house behind her. So maybe the diabetic 
didn’t live alone with his mother? Except, who were all the rest of those 
people, and when had they ever gone in the house? I had never seen any of them 
arrive. I’d never seen them knock, or leave, or hang out on the porch. It was 
like they were born inside the house and never emerged until now, as far as I 
could tell. Some were barefoot. They were all in lounge wear, pajamas and 
slips. One kid, maybe ten years old, came out still holding a box of Fruit 
Loops, spilling as he trailed behind.

They yelled, “Don’t do it!” The voice of reason came as a chorus. They yelled, 
“You’re only wrecking your own life.”

A man pushed his way ahead of the pack and caught the raging girl by her 
elbows. He pulled her backward. She stabbed the knife in the air toward the 
car, but she let herself be dragged. In his arms, she walked backward down the 
sidewalk, over the yard, up the stairs, into the house. The car peeled out 
backward. Everything had gone into rewind.

When the street was quiet the Medi-Van brought the diabetic home, back to home 
sweet home, to recover.

Late that night, I was still up when the doorbell rang. It was a drunk who 
climbed onto our porch, who rang the bell just after midnight. Our front door 
was open to bring in the cool night air, the security door we call a screen 
door there to hold the world out.


He said, “I love you! I’ve always loved you. I will love you forever.” Those 
words traveled like the worst kind of threat, the wrong kind of love, a rusted 
razor of high hopes.

I offered back, “You have the wrong house.” Wrong person, wrong time, wrong 
season, wrong promise.

He said, “I love you! Only you!” 

It was too late to close the door without moving close to this man, where his 
fingers were laced through the grating. From my dark corner, I said, “Good 
night.”

He said, “But I love you.” His voice cracked with his truth. 

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
I didn’t call for help and he didn’t make any threats except eternal love, a 
non-threat that seemed able to sustain itself forever.

I said, “I don’t know you.” 

He said, “Only you.” I was alone and he was alone and we had nothing in common 
short of being human at night. The moon loomed over his shoulder, white and 
bald.

“You have to go,” I said, Juliet to his Romeo. 

Finally, he turned around. He wobbled down the stairs. He tipped to the right 
toward the roses, then he tipped to the left, and held the old metal railing to 
keep steady. “Goodbye,” I whispered, just loud enough that he might hear.

He turned back to me then. He said, “I never loved you. Not at all. I never 
did.” He took his cloud of sweat and love and left me only the moon, alone.

 * Monica Drake is the author of The Folly of Loving Life 
<https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/29064365-the-folly-of-loving-life?rating=1&utm_medium=api&utm_source=blog_book>
,Clown Girl <http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/22286.Clown_Girl>, and The Stud 
Book <http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/15798595-the-stud-book>. She holds an 
MFA from the University of Arizona and designed and launched the BFA in Writing 
at the Pacific Northwest College of Art where she currently is faculty. Her 
short stories and essays have appeared in the The New York Times, Paris Review 
Daily, The Sun, Oregon Humanities Magazine, Northwest Review and other 
publications.  