
Grandma calls her sex robot Sony. We tell her that’s just the company who 
makes it.

“Well,” she says, “he looks like a Sony. Doesn’t he?”

We tell her he doesn’t. We tell her ‘he’ looks like an automaton with silver 
skin and copper eyelashes, which is exactly what he is, one of many mass 
produced for the pleasure of the lonely. We point to the round brass orb at the 
fulcrum of his legs. Do you know, we ask Grandma, what happens when that opens? 
Do you know what’s inside?

“Of course,” Grandma says. “A smart dildo. So?”

So. So nothing. We just ask her not to name him Sony. 

To which she replies, “Well, what else am I supposed to call him?”

We tell her she shouldn’t call him anything. We tell her it is unseemly, 
having it in her house. We point to the needlework on her walls, the antique 
picture frames on her shelves, the holographic displays of great­ and 
great-­great­-grandchildren. Then we point at the sex robot, naked save for the 
round brass orb, stunning sculpted muscles in plastic relief, modeled, in fact, 
after Michelangelo’s David, though individual models are, of course, 
customizable.

Grandma’s, for instance, had the chest widened. Grandma is a sucker for a big 
chest.

“All sorts of people have these things,” Grandma says. “Why shouldn’t I?”

We tell her, people have them, they just have the decency to hide them. Their 
sex robots are in their closets, the corners of their basements. Their sex 
robots are tucked under their beds—all sex robots, of course, fold into the 
fetal position for easy storage. We tell her, you can have it, just keep it out 
of sight.

“Well,” Grandma says, “I’m just honest, I guess.”

 No, we say, you’re insane. It’s too much, we tell her, too much. The sex 
robot is always with her. When we come to visit, it opens the door. When we 
call, she tells the sex robot what we’re saying to her. At Christmas, when we 
gather at Grandma’s house, the sex robot is there. Grandma puts presents for it 
under the tree. She knits a stocking with its name and hangs it over the 
chimney. At Christmas dinner, it carves the turkey. It sits next to her; it 
spoons sweet potato casserole into her mouth. And when she is finished with her 
meal, it massages her calloused feet. We tell her to stop. We tell her there 
are children present. Not physically, maybe, but digitally, watching 
open-mouthed through their screens.

“If you want to take him,” Grandma says, “you can. Just be careful stepping 
over my dead body, I want to look good for my funeral.”

We give up. The sex robot stays with her for seven years. Then, one night, 
Grandma’s heart monitor fails. The sex robot alerts local paramedics. No one 
knew it had that feature. We didn’t know it could open the door for the EMTs, 
or call and alert us after. We didn’t know it could stay by the door, opening 
it for us when we returned to figure out what could be sold and what could be 
shared.

The sex robot continues as if Grandma is there. At night, it sleeps on the 
left side of her bed, until we have her bed removed; then it sleeps on the 
floor where the left side of the bed used to be. Early in the morning, it wakes 
and makes coffee, until the coffee machine is gone. It picks out a grapefruit 
from the refrigerator, until there is no more grapefruit, no more refrigerator. 
The worse is when it sits at the table, when it cuts the grapefruit into 
perfect wedges, when it raises them and places them gently where Grandma’s lips 
used to be. When the sex robot lets go of the grapefruit, it falls on the chair 
with a wet plop. Until there is no more chair.

None of us has the heart to shut it down. It is powered wirelessly; if we do 
nothing, it will go on endlessly. Yet day by day, as we remove every last trace 
of Grandma, the sex robot remains. Until at last, it is the only thing that 
remains. In an empty house, it continues its precise pantomime of their lives. 
We decide together enough is enough. We must shut it down. Tomorrow.

Except, when that tomorrow comes, the sex robot is not there. We look 
everywhere. We know they can fold themselves into more compact units. We told 
Grandma so many times. We look in every corner, every closet. We’re all 
worried, but we don’t admit it. We just keep looking.

Someone suggests looking for the sex robot at the mausoleum. We laugh. We make 
fun. It doesn’t sound sincere when we do. Really, we were all thinking it. We 
were all picturing the robot, leaving the house at night, walking the streets, 
guiding itself to Grandma’s remains. We picture it there, looking on the brass 
plaque hiding her ashes.

But none of us admits to this, and none of us go to check to see if we’re 
right. We’re too afraid we might be wrong. Instead we go home. We perform our 
accustomed routines. We eat, we bathe, we climb into our beds. And from our 
closets, our basements, from under our beds, our sex robots unfurl themselves 
and join us, programmed to hold us until we fall asleep.

 * William Hawkins is currently a student in the MFA Program in Fiction at UC 
Irvine. He lives in Los Angeles.  