
First-born, a girl, but anyway his first-born so he brought me to watch when 
he touched the other woman.


 He started his fingers at her lips. And the woman bracing her hips off the 
car seat, wanting him lower, where she was swollen.

 She interrupted herself with clipped breaths. “How—how old are you?”

 At home I was old enough to take turns holding my new sister. The baby 
grasping, leaving spittle. While at the window my mother burned holes through 
the screen with her cigarette.

 But here in the parking lot? In the back seat? I looked down.

 “Twelve.”

 Father, hand lower, said, “Old enough to be responsible.” 

 Between my legs were four sets of noodles in ballooned bags, the broth hot on 
my thighs. I squeezed and released my knees, timed my breathing with the 
woman’s.

 When she left the car he called me into the front: “First-born, it’s your 
responsibility to know. She’s pregnant. You’ll have a brother finally.”

 “Half-brother,” I said.

 “That,” he said, “is why I put you in charge.” 

 I told him that responsibility is knowing when you’re too drunk to drive. I 
cranked down the window. “I can wake you in thirty-minutes.”

 So he fell asleep with his hand twined through the steering wheel. I turned 
on the cabin light to look at him. His skin was red. The alcohol seemed to burn 
from its surface. I took the whisky bottle and dipped my finger into it, ran 
the hot liquor down the middle of my tongue. I dipped again. By the dashboard 
clock I counted thirty and gouged the leather seat for every time Father had 
called her his ‘girl.’

At home I kicked the sisters awake as Father laid out bowls.

 “Number one,” he said, hands coming gently down on my shoulders. He touched 
his daughters only at the round table, assigning seats.

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
 “Number two, what will it be?” My sisters nodding, sleeping still. Father 
worked the revolving table. “Pork broth? Fish? Three sit here. All the way from 
Khlong Toey,” he gloated. “I want you to eat while it’s fresh.”

 And my noosed mother didn’t ask was why Khlong Toey, why nighttime. She 
looked at me with drawn eyes and handed over the baby.

 “Can you keep a secret?” I whispered. I slipped my whisky finger into her 
mouth, scratched her tongue with it. The burn reached her cheeks and she began 
to cry.

 “Brother. Boy. First-born,” I said. “First-born boy. Now you know.” And I 
pushed my finger deep into her throat.

 * Mai Nardone was raised in Bangkok, Thailand, by an American father and a 
Thai mother. He has received scholarships from the Tin House Writer’s Workshop 
and the Bread Loaf Writers’ Conference, and a fellowship from the MacDowell 
Colony. His recent fiction has appeared in American Short Fiction, The Iowa 
Review, Kenyon Review Online, and Slice. He lives in Bangkok, andon Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/MaiNardone>. 
 