
She was late to the Mass dedicated to her boyfriend’s late mother, who died 
just two months before her father. Stepping into St. Monica’s, making sure her 
heels didn’t click too loudly, she saw him — Matt the Agnostic — in the very 
back pew.


She slid in next to him. “You told me it was on East 81st,” she hissed. “It’s 
actually on E. 79th.” Her own mother would rather turn around and go home than 
enter church late.

“I’m sorry,” he whispered. “I don’t know. I don’t know why I said that if I 
did.”

“Think about it,” she said. “Think about it” was a code in their relationship. 
It meant, in psychoanalytical terms, to think about both the latent and 
manifest meaning behind what you meant by what your actions. Like, keeping 
basic Freud in mind, did he unconsciously tell her the wrong address on 
purpose? Maybe he didn’t want her to come. Or... had she considered the real 
reason behind why she was late? If there even was one.

“What?” he said. Thank God, he hadn’t heard the “Think about it.”

“Nothing,” she said. 

“No, what?” 

She figured she needed to have an answer. 

“I have to pee,” she said. “Like, for real.”

“Oh.” He conferred with his sister. “It’s on the right, downstairs.”

“I’m not going during service!”

“OK,” he said. A small sigh.

When Mass was over, he told her she could light a candle for her dad. They 
went over to the candles, which lit up electronically with the push of a 
button. He gave her a dollar, and she dropped it into the slot, then pushed a 
button for her candle. Nothing lit up. She pushed another. Nothing. She pushed 
one button after the other, and not one of them worked. She looked at him in a 
panic.

Matt started stabbing at the buttons like it was a video game. She could tell 
he felt responsible, since he was the one who told her to do this in the first 
place. She wasn’t even really Catholic. Her father was Catholic. Her mother was 
Baptist. She hadn’t been baptized in either church. Was it maybe time to take 
care of that? After all, Matt’s step-father was a deacon. He was sort of a big 
deal at St. Monica’s, actually. And her ties to St. Monica’s was that when 
Elaine’s was still
open, she would occasionally drink with Father Pete, who until recently was 
the pastor there. So at least she was well-connected; that was important.

Matt pushed random buttons over and over until finally, finally, a candlelit 
up. She crossed herself and kissed her fingers. It was sort of the way she 
picked up since she sort-of decided to be a Catholic. It was the most 
ostentatious way and everyone knew she appreciated that.

Matt then directed her over to a place to kneel and pray and she asked, “Is 
that how it works? It seemed like there were a lot of steps.”

“I don’t know, he said. It’s just what I’ve seen people do.” 

About three weeks before his death, her father had turned to her and said, 
“You have deplorable taste in men.” This was unfair, pretty much completely. If 
he was upset about the drug thing, well, that was in Matt’s past. To dwell on 
it was just so middle-class.

And yet, his words stuck in her head. To her left was a statue of two saints. 
People were touching the saints, rubbing them, touching their fingers in holy 
water and touching the statues again, crossing themselves, then kissing their 
fingers. Oh, how her mother would laugh. Perhaps — think about it — her budding 
Catholicism was a rebellion against her mother and a way to posthumously ally 
with her father.

Worth thinking about it, to be sure, but not too much.

She went downstairs to the bathroom. It was completely dark. 

She reached for the light switch, but then stood for a moment in the dark.

Flash Friday: Women be Wise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/flash-fridays-by-tin-house-magazine/2016/may/20/flash-friday-women-be-wise>
She thought about what she and Matt had both lost and, with that in mind,if 
they were enough for each other. If this was why people got married—partially 
out of love, part out of fear—well, then, now she could see how that could 
happen. Of course this was why people grasped onto traditions—traditions 
previously empty to her, but now, well, maybe they meant something. Or maybe 
they didn’t. But there was a purpose to all of it. At the very least, something 
to pass the time.

• Sheila McClear <http://www.sheilamcclear.com/> is a Brooklyn-based reporter 
who has worked at the New York Daily News, New York Post, and Gawker.com. Her 
memoir is called The Last of the Live Nude Girls.
 