
Once a year the Ancient Ham crawls out of the sewer to sit on a curb and 
answer questions. People line up down the block. Before the Ancient Ham will 
answer, they have to poke it: they bring offerings – small sewing needles 
decorated with beads or feathers or floss. When the Ancient Ham reaches needle 
capacity, it rolls back into the sewer, sweating and shimmering.


Most questions are about health, wealth, or love. They must be yes or no 
questions. The Ancient Ham answers by bobbing left or right. Left is no, right 
is yes. When the Ancient Ham answers, people scream. They faint. They squeeze 
their eyes shut. They piss their pants. They dip their fingers into the ham 
juice that collects on the pavement, then suck their fingers and retch. Some 
people throw up. The air around the Ancient Ham swells with sweet breath. This 
makes the Ancient Ham teeter with delight. Get it real delighted, it will 
vibrate. Women clutch their hips, men flex their thighs.

 This year, the line is extra long. The Ancient Ham answers then spins quickly 
to deter extra needles, extra questions. One question per person. The Ancient 
Ham predicts that a young woman will get a job promotion and she falls to the 
ground and grinds her butt into the juices. The next man in line kicks her 
lightly with his loafer. She gets up and hurries away, throwing up into her 
hands. The man asks the Ancient Ham if he should move to Australia like he has 
always dreamed. The Ancient Ham answers no. The man runs his hand down the 
front of his face, folding his nose onto his top lip. A small girl holding her 
mother’s hand slides a twinkling needle into the cold, wet meat, then asks the 
Ancient Ham if it is stupid and hateful. The Ancient Ham answers yes and then 
no. The girl looks up at her mother, confused. “Stupid,” the mother says, “but 
not hateful.” The girl squats down on the ground and dips her pinky into the 
juices. “Just like me,” the girl says. She rubs the juices onto her lips. “Just 
like you,” the mother says. The girl looks up, lips glistening. “Aren’t you 
beautiful,” the mother says. The Ancient Ham goes against its own rules and 
bobs right, right, right.

 * Meredith Alling is a writer living in Los Angeles. Her debut collection of 
short stories, SING THE SONG, will be out November 2016 on Future Tense Books. 
Her website ismeredithalling.com <http://meredithalling.com/>.
 