
You and I had not seen each other for decades when we decided to meet, with 
our husbands (acquired in the meantime), at an old hotel built during the gold 
rush. Of the two of us, you had changed least, looking much the same as the 
pretty girl I remembered from Maine, an only child, always at the top of our 
class. Unless I am mistaken, it was late September and slightly cool when we 
met again, but we opted to have dinner outside anyway, the only guests who did, 
and at some point during the evening a slight, blond woman in a summery dress 
came out to have a cigarette. Green and deep red ivy covered the back of the 
brick building, which she leaned against, smoking, below the string lights 
crisscrossing the patio. Our husbands had hit it off right away, both of them 
charming and talkative, generous with the wine and bourbon, probably relieved 
that what might have been an awkward evening was going smoothly. The sounds of 
live music, some sort of wedding party, drifted out of the hotel whenever the 
blond opened the door to lean in and listen for a few seconds, before she let 
it close again and lit another smoke. The truth is, I don’t remember much about 
her because you were telling me about a ghost from your childhood, that of a 
woman who had once lived in your centuries-old house and been raped repeatedly 
by men in the area because she was disabled and unable to fend them off, and 
you’d had had filmy visions of these doings as a child without understanding 
what they meant. One doesn’t hear a compelling ghost story very often, and you 
had such a rapt audience for your tale that neither of us cared that the blond, 
bored with smoking and a bit tipsy, it seemed, had come over to talk to our 
husbands. Kristen – I will call her that; she looked like a Kristen – told them 
her ex was inside and she didn’t feel welcome there, also that she was a 
hairdresser; she ran her fingers through my husband’s afro to indicate, I 
suppose, that she knew how to work with black people’s hair. Now you were at 
the crux of your story, though, and I paid them scant attention. Often women 
try to engage my husband because he has a kind face and expressive eyes. Will 
you believe me when I say that I didn’t even mind when she sat or fell down in 
his lap? He must have resisted a little then because suddenly she rose, came to 
our side of the table, and took our hands as if she were a priestess, saying 
how special it must be for us to see each other after so long. Only then did I 
notice how young and drunk she was, how hard she was trying to stay upright, 
and I didn’t care, I only wanted her to leave so you could finish your story. 
Which has long since laid itself within this one, causing me when I am not 
paying attention to mix up Kristen with the woman in your story, and vice versa.


Flash Friday: O. Vulgaris, or the coming of age of an octopus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/flash-fridays-by-tin-house-magazine/2016/may/13/flash-friday-o-vulgaris-zehra-nabi>
 * Beth Spencer edits poetry and short fiction for Bear Star Press 
<http://www.bearstarpress.com/>. “Women Be Wise” is from her unpublished 
chapbook of acrostic micro-fiction, Bebop Galactic. Her poems and stories have 
been published in a variety of print and online journals and blogs. She lives 
in rural Northern California with her husband and dog.
 