
1.

She thought that the moment was probably supposed to be poignant – when she 
discovered the origins of her name – but since she was sitting on the toilet 
when she read the letter it lacked elevation. Henceforth, when she imagined her 
name, she saw it written out in her father’s slanty cursive beneath a harsh 
yellow light and behind it, her thighs.

When she finally brought herself to listen to the song – the beat-up 1967 
record was among the possessions he’d left her, part of a hoard of cultural 
memorabilia she figured was meant for her “education” – it was, in fact, 
patterned with words that a daughter might like to hear (“my little darling,” 
“angel,” “pretty one,” etc), and carried a message appropriate to a father 
who’d abandoned his child under dubious pretenses, and she could have been 
singing along by the end of minute two. But only marginally deeper, it revealed 
itself to be another case of the Conniving Poet, a song about a desperate girl 
(the eponymous Marianne) and a powerfully disinterested boy, something she 
could imagine her father listening to while he was wantonly fucking women in 
1970s Berlin, a name chosen during an afternoon he’d assigned himself the task 
of selecting it, casting his eyes around his studio on Potsdamer Strasse and 
scanning for relevant influences, falling on the record, his hand idly down the 
front of his pants. Visible through the window of the apartment, across the 
street, there were colonnades, a Jürgensburg horse, but there were no good 
songs about them.


She felt increasingly like her name had been the first move in a game set up 
for her by someone else

2.

He told Nikki when she was fifteen, in the first of what was to be their 
monthly phone calls – a smirk she could somehow feel through the phone – and 
she knew instantly that she hated her father. He hadn’t told her mother where 
the name came from those years ago, just left it with her with its appealing 
diminutive and atypical double-consonant and promptly fucked off forever, this 
stupid little mystery in his wake.

Nikki hadn’t known the song or the movie, but as she heard the controversial 
lyrics for the first time and realized how callous her father had been in 
telling her now, how plainly vindictive, she felt increasingly like her name 
had been the first move in a game set up for her by someone else, planted like 
a goalpost, and she was only working up to it. She didn’t like the idea that 
her $145 Hieronymus Bosch shoes and torn tights were somehow genetically 
predetermined. She wanted them – needed them – to be singular, and in the 
aftermath of the call, scuffing along the side of the most populated road in 
her neighborhood, which was mainly a place people came to transfer trains, she 
imagined the parallel moments, when her father looked down at his newborn 
daughter and decided that she should be named for the most famous sex fiend in 
all of popular music, and later, when he felt the stippled holes of the phone’s 
speaker on the corner of his mouth, pictured the body connected to a voice he 
was hearing for the first time and which, if he played his cards right, he 
might one day be fortunate enough to meet, and decided that he was ready to 
relieve this burden.


Flash Friday: St Monica’s
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/flash-fridays-by-tin-house-magazine/2016/may/27/flash-friday-st-monicas-sheila-mcclear>
3.

It happened that we were driving through Ramallah late at night searching for 
the grave of the poet Mahmoud Darwish. The location of the site was well-known 
to the locals, but not to us, and our driver kept pulling over to ask for 
directions from passersby on the sidewalk, at traffic lights, on bicycles. He 
began asking in Arabic, “Where is the grave of Mahmoud Darwish?” but over time, 
as the night grew later and it became clear that we weren’t making any real 
progress towards our destination, his entreaties became more and more 
abbreviated and clipped, until we’d reached a point where he would careen 
towards the sidewalk whenever he spotted a pedestrian, roll down the window and 
shout, “Wen Darwish?” – Where is Darwish? – until the poet became one with his 
resting place, existed in singular form somewhere between life and death, 
totemic, connoting all in one a time, a place, and a name.

 * Simon Jacobs is the author of SATURN, a collection of David Bowie stories 
available from Spork Press. He may be found atsimonajacobs.blogspot.com 
<http://simonajacobs.blogspot.com/>.
 