
There’s a map bred in the bones of the bird. Before you ingest the chicken 
wing, you must know the vertices of its hinge, that place where tendons and 
gristle connect and shake hands. It’s all very scientific.


Welcome to the Guardian books network
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/oct/21/welcome-guardian-books-network-literary-content>
 Step One: The Origin

Find a likely tray of sacrifices at the church picnic. You’re in the fourth 
grade and according to your mother, you don’t know how to wear a dress without 
showing everyone your underwear. Chicken bones collect between your knees as 
you sit crossed legged on the ground beneath the lawn’s sole tree. Rub the mess 
from your hands on the smocked pink gingham of your skirt because you don’t 
believe in napkins. There’s already enough barbeque sauce coating your cheeks 
and chin to simulate war paint. Let the girls from your Sunday school class 
hover over you like a swarm of horseflies. Their wings will unfurl to note the 
red stain at your crotch and the matching stain at your lips. They’ll christen 
you menstrual bloodsucker; unholy dyke vampire. Optional: when you’re done 
crying, bury the chicken bones in the anthill you’ve been sitting on. Fashion a 
cross out of two Popsicle sticks.


 Step Two: X and Y Axis

 When you go to dinner with your parents on your first weekend home from 
college, let them know you’ve given up chicken wings. Your father will 
immediately drive the whole family to an all-you-can-eat barbeque restaurant. 
Straddle a bench at a long wooden table while sauce is ladled over slabs of 
pork and beef and crinkle cut fries. Eat a dry baked potato while your father 
points a wing at your face and saysno daughter of mine. Let your mother squeeze 
your arm and whisper that you’d probably like chicken wings if you gave them 
half a chance. Wouldn’t your life be easier if you ate chicken wings? Your 
mother says she doesn’t particularly like them, either, but chicken wings have 
afforded her a stable lifestyle. How can you have children without chicken 
wings? Your father will pile some on your plate despite your protests, orange 
grease mingling with the mayonnaise from your coleslaw. Best-case scenario, 
your mother will eat the wings while your father’s in the bathroom. Worst-case 
scenario, you’ll feel guilty enough to keep eating chicken wings for the next 
three years.

 Step Three: Fixed perpendicular lines

 A friend of a friend will meet you at this New Year’s party. Overhead the 
fireworks will pop and spray like champagne and everyone will laugh at your 
jokes, even though you’ve never been very funny. Next to the buffet stands the 
only kid at the party; a one-year-old someone’s left to fend for himself. He’ll 
grip a chicken wing in each hand. When his chubby fist pushes a wing past his 
lips, he’ll gum around the flesh because he only has a few baby teeth. Pay 
attention: you’ll be the only one who notices when he chokes. Lie him down on 
the ground, surrounded by dirty napkins and plastic cups and the dregs of 
spilled beer. Root in his wet, red mouth with a single digit. The throat is a 
slippery cavern that chicken wings don’t ever want to leave, so you’ll have to 
do this more than once. More than twice. On the third try, you’ll shout the 
name “Christ,” though you haven’t spoken to him in years. Hook your finger and 
angle it toward the vee of bones, snagging upward and reeling. When the wing 
pops free, let it lie exposed between your legs. Let it die there in the grass 
while the boy sucks oxygen and his mother leans over him like a smothering 
blanket. If you’re lucky, the friend of a friend will help you up and dust the 
mud off the back of your pants. Sit together on the back deck as the numbers 
count down to midnight and watch her eat chicken wings. She’ll give you the 
meatiest parts, closest to the bone. Eat every bite. When you finally kiss, 
mouths sliding together, covered in barbeque sauce, you’ll fall in love with 
chicken wings all over again.

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
 * Kristen Arnett is a fiction and essay writer who has held fellowships at 
Tin House, Kenyon Review, and Lambda Literary Foundation. She was awarded Ninth 
Letter’s 2015 Literary Award in Fiction and was named an honorable mention for 
Glimmer Train’s Short Story Award for New Writers. Her work has either appeared 
or is upcoming at North American Review, The Normal School, Ninth Letter, 
Superstition Review, Blunderbuss Magazine, Joyland, Grist Journal, Pithead 
Chapel, The Rumpus, The Toast, and elsewhere. You can find her on twitter here:
@Kristen_Arnett <https://twitter.com/Kristen_Arnett>.
 