
My Great Uncle Adolphus had a pet duck named Patrick. Patrick was insecure, 
needy, foul-tempered, and brilliant.Not just brilliant for a duck either, my 
Great Uncle would say.Patrick possesses a keen mind. He has a deep curiosity 
about everything under the sun and a bracing skepticism! Patrick would hiss at 
us whenever we went to visit. He would laugh nastily when we mispronounced 
words or displayed lazy, unoriginal thinking. When we left there was always 
duck poop in our shoes.The price of genius, Great Uncle Adolphus would say, 
smiling proudly.

“He is an unpleasant creature. But he is ours. He’ll have your room now. You 
will sleep on the couch from now on.”

 After my Great Uncle Adolphus’s death Patrick came to live with us. We were 
not Great Uncle Adolphus’s closest relatives and I have never been sure why he 
selected us to look after Patrick. I was six, maybe seven. Patrick was 
delivered in a gold cage big enough for a medium-sized elephant. It was just 
Mother and I at home so it must have been a week day. I was eating cottage 
cheese when the delivery men knocked at the door. I preferred cottage cheese 
served in a shiny blue aluminum bowl and it was best with a sprig of parsley on 
top. Patrick sat in his cage with his bill tucked tightly to one side of his 
breast, completely still. Mother and I watched him closely. He was breathing 
heavily, a deep, shaky inward breath then a long, whistling exhale that stopped 
and started partway through. It was the saddest noise I had ever heard. “He is 
an unpleasant creature,” said Mother. “But he is ours. He’ll have your room 
now. You will sleep on the couch from now on.”

 Patrick never recovered from the heartbreak of Great Uncle Adolphus’s death. 
We tried to cheer him up. We remembered how he had loved to mock us because of 
our lack of intellectual rigor. So we put on shows in front of his cage acting 
as stupid as we could. I would recite the multiplication tables but make 
serious, ridiculous errors. I would sing the alphabet song but get the letters 
mixed up and give up in a show of frustration. I would list the countries and 
capitals but I would say crazy things like the capital of Tanzania is Baltimore 
and the capitol of Iceland is Madrid. Father and Mother would discuss 
philosophy but instead of saying Aristotle and Heidegger they would say Donald 
and Goofy. Nothing worked. Patrick remained unmoved.

 Then one day the sound of Patrick’s labored breathing stopped. We made 
arrangements for Patrick’s body to be laid to rest beside Great Uncle 
Adolphus’s. I got my room back and I felt joyful about that, which in turn made 
me feel guilty. I told Father that I hadn’t loved Patrick, not really. Neither 
did I, said Father. But your Great Uncle Adolphus did.

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
 Years later I found out that Great Uncle Adolphus died of heartbreak. Patrick 
had started seeing a dull mallard named Mathilda, and Adolphus found out about 
the affair in an embarrassing manner. It was a tragedy for all concerned. Or, 
since I don’t know what became of Mathilda, I can’t say it was a tragedy for 
her. Perhaps it was merely a minor embarrassment in Mathilda’s world.

 It’s funny how memory works. Years after Patrick’s death I still think about 
the price of genius. And I still find myself checking my shoes before I thrust 
my feet in, on the lookout for the foul stench of that brilliant duck.

 * Mark Hoadley‘s recent work has appeared in Word Riot and KYSO Flash. He is 
co-editor of the online poetry journal The Maynard. Mark lives in Vancouver, BC 
where he writes memoir, poetry and fabulist fictions, sometimes all at once.
 