
A friend of mine died last month. We weren’t particularly close, but I liked 
her a lot – we’d have coffee near Union Square every so often and she’d talk 
about her budding music career and I’d talk about my long-gestating novel. I 
tend not to enjoy unifying conversations about art that include me. I admire 
the obvious external talents of actors and singers and basketball players more 
than the writer’s drudging isolation and, karaoke daydreams aside, I don’t 
crave the immediacy of reaction that performers chase. But my friend’s genuine 
enthusiasm for what she called “our craft” was infectious and I always got a 
creative jolt out of seeing her. She was too earnest, too well-liked, too 
attractive, to have ever generated evident self-consciousness.


A year ago, my friend found out that she had a really dire, painful kind of 
cancer. She spent the rest of her life enduring a sequence of atrocities—bone 
marrow transplants, hotel stays near the Mayo Clinic, experimental treatments 
that gave her a false sense of hope, multiple resuscitations. Hers was the kind 
of suffering that eventually pushes you into a null state somewhere beyond 
empathy. Gradually, I got used to the idea that she would soon disappear. Each 
text was a bit more valedictory; I was more relieved with every one of her 
email replies.

When we know someone is going to die, hope dwindles as a matter of course. 
Reality steadily evaporates the well-spring of optimism. We can and do 
pre-mourn for people who are still alive, and the pain manifests as a single 
scoop of a sine wave: very difficult at first, even worse at the end. If it was 
tough for me, a mid-level friend at best, I can’t imagine how her boyfriend 
dealt with her decline. They hadn’t even dated that long before she got sick. 
He’d only had a smattering of weeks with the beautiful, talented person I’d 
known for a decade. But he stuck by her, quitting his job, suspending his life.

My friend and I were talking on the phone a couple of months ago (I never saw 
her in person again after the diagnosis) and I asked about her relationship, 
expecting to hear the usual cancer boyfriend platitudes. Honestly, I was 
looking forward to them. There’s a reason clichés become clichés. But instead, 
she said that she was seriously bored of him and was considering breaking it 
off. She even laughed about it. I was shocked. It wasn’t just the scars and the 
baldness and the imposed isolation. My friend was 99.9% sure going to die – how 
could she not wait it out for what would be, best case scenario, half a year, 
so her boyfriend, who had been so good, wouldn’t have to live on knowing that 
the woman he’d most loved had dumped him while she was terminal?

But then: who’s a deathbed really for? So many of life’s passages, the 
graduations and the weddings, are really meant for other people to bear witness 
to our change. But the body shutting down, the last connections to reality 
severed – should that be a private experience for the patient or a public 
transition for her loved ones? Now me, I’m someone who believes in nothing. You 
end and the universe that’s yours ends with you. So I understand why my friend 
didn’t want to spend her last days with someone she’d lost interest in. Why 
waste time on him when she could share a little more love with her loved ones?

My friend died before she could go through with the break-up. After all of 
that slow suffering, it happened fast. Her boyfriend couldn’t make it to the 
hospital in time to say goodbye. Of course, I’m glad she didn’t end up dumping 
him. And I’m changing enough details that I hope he’ll never find this. But I 
don’t know – as always with her, I was compelled to write something after we 
talked. I laugh whenever I think about the ballsiness of it, of her. I most 
appreciate the way she told me. It was as casual as sitting on a Union Square 
bench with iced coffees in the summer watching skateboarders whirl round: “I 
don’t quite think it’s working, but I’m not sure why.” And it’s a retroactive 
revelation of why I was so drawn to her; she never did have time for false 
narratives.

 * Adam Dalva is a recent graduate of NYU’s MFA Program, where he was a 
Veterans Writing Workshop Fellow. He was an Associate Fellow at the Atlantic 
Center for the Arts and a resident at the Vermont Studio Center. His work has 
been published in The Millions, Public Books, Lumina, and elsewhere. He is also 
a dealer of French antiques.
 