
It was the final night of the Eagleburger retreat, held at a cluster of 
chalets owned by an alum’s shell corporation. The mountains were too close to 
see. Snow hissed into the jacuzzi. The Dean, the Department Head and the 
Adjunct stewed in the frothing glow. The Adjunct wore boxers. He had forgotten 
to pack swim trunks.

The Eagleburger Society, an influential and secretive body within the Board of 
Regents, required each academic department to nominate one student per year. 
Nominees received a travel voucher to the retreat, where they were invited to 
present their most intriguing ideas, predictions and theories. While the 
English Department invariably, even enthusiastically, attended, they were 
historically ignored by Eagleburger heavies, who sought synergy, seamless 
product placement, disruptive models, early access to advances.

But this year the Eagleburgers were oddly attentive. The Adjunct, the 
Department Head and their nominee had been wined and dined, soaked and 
swaddled. Another dubious benefit: the lingering presence of the Dean deep into 
après hour, awkwardly accounting for earlier indifference.

“Due to student protest, negative press attention and a corresponding drop in 
donations, we recently divested from some less-than-progressive but 
fantastically profitable industries,” said the Dean. “In many ways it’s an 
exciting time. Like so many other fields and industries we’re being reimagined 
every day. Whole new horizons and vulnerabilities.”

[He lived] the predictably threadbare existence of a freelance Fellow and 
intermittent McCafé Writer-in-Residence

The Adjunct needed another job. The predictably threadbare existence of a 
freelance Fellow and intermittent McCafé Writer-in-Residence: applying for 
application fee-waivers, trading porno passwords for prescription drugs, 
burning bridges for warmth. He spent the summer scrubbing pots at a lobster 
shack and slinging self-published chapbooks to respectable citizens as they 
strolled from the park’s amphitheater to the bistro’s wine patio.

“We’re exploring strategic partnerships,” said the Dean. “Tech overlords, 
government agencies, various industrial complexes, needy philanthropists. We’re 
weighing farming initiatives – opiates, hydroponics – a low-res MBA, clones, 
drones.”


Increasingly the Adjunct felt like an extra in the movie of his life. The role 
of protagonist had been ceded to his students: lock jawed legacies, tattooed 
scions, earbudded athletes, third-year sophomores in pajamas texting under the 
table. Make-a-Wish kids that never died.

Back at home dinner was store-brand seltzer, hummus on a hot dog roll.

“We’ve sold mining rights, drilling rights, naming rights, our email list. 
We’ve established an online for-profit arm, free-market dogma with a Biblical 
bent. There’s a rendition site under the planetarium, a missile silo under the 
squash courts.”

“Didn’t the Bin Ladens go here?” asked the Adjunct.

“Just the secular ones,” said the Dean.

It pained him to see anything short of a full assault on their suite’s 
reliably refreshed mini-bar

The Adjunct was of the opinion that his company drank too slowly. The 
Department Head was steady (Ivy diplomas, famous fellowships, perfunctory 
novels, early emeritus): A successful person who happened to be a writer. His 
goblet was shallow, largely ceremonial. The Dean spent a lot of time chewing 
the Clementine wedge floating in his Hefeweizen. But the Adjunct was a 
borderline freegan, so it pained him to see anything short of a full assault on 
their suite’s reliably refreshed mini-bar.

“We get a cut of coach’s hair gel sales,” said the Dean. “We launder booster 
dollars for a fee. We’ve sexualized our mascot and instigated multiple 
rivalries.”

“What about the civil trial?” asked the Adjunct.

Criminal charges had been dismissed.

“We’re cooperating with the authorities where appropriate.”

“What about the confidence vote?” asked the Department Head.

“We’re confident it will be overturned.”

“The internal leaks?” asked the Adjunct.

“New policy has all custodians signing non-disclosure agreements.”

“New tactics on retention?”

“The first person to release their search history will get famous as fuck,” 
he’d said. “But it won’t be me.”

A few of the Department Head’s favorite gamines had recently transferred. His 
beard, flecked with snow, made his face appear especially forlorn, like an 
overgrown tennis court.

“We’ve lengthened the driveway so desirables feel more at home,” said the 
Dean. “The zoo is interactive. The foosball is life-size, the croquet court 
glow-in-the-dark.”

The Adjunct’s rental tuxedo was in a pile by the door. He didn’t like to think 
about its previous tenants. His was the only jacket with visible sweat rings 
under the arms.

“My daughter’s roommate is a nightmare,” said the Department Head. She was a 
freshman at a lavish competitor. “Sleep eating, vocal fry, DJ equipment 
everywhere.”

“Our assignment algorithm is proprietary,” said the Dean. “Everyone gets a 
former child star or a friendly, hygienic doormat.”

Over the course of the weekend it was revealed that the Eagleburgers had 
discovered a potentially profitable kernel within the English Department 
nominee’s dystopian novella. The hero of “The Suction” was a bohemian coder who 
accidentally reconfigured a privacy program, granting him endless blackmail 
opportunities.

The Adjunct remembered discussing an early draft of “The Suction” in workshop. 
“The first person to release their search history will get famous as fuck,” 
he’d said. “But it won’t be me.”

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
High among the Adjunct’s embarrassing searches was Rye Lilly, the author of 
“The Suction,” and the usual spiral of related results: profiles, political 
contributions, real estate records, class notes, club memberships, wedding 
announcements, obits.

“There are comfort dogs on call,” continued the Dean. “We cut the ribbon on 
the IMAX theater and broke ground on the vapor lounge.”

Rye possessed, among other persuasive qualities, a pied-à-terre at the Pierre. 

“But lately we’ve been wondering,” said the Dean. “How to monetize our wait 
list?”

The Adjunct puked off the balcony. Mountains emerged in the dawn like rogue 
waves. Checkout was noon. They had to take a chopper to the jetport. Rye 
returned to the suite well after breakfast, dilated, rambling jargon, gripping 
a liter of bourbon by the neck. Still, he wielded the power to swell hearts and 
zipper the howling void. The Adjunct stretched in the warmth of his student’s 
shadow and the room tilted with a contagious sense of possibility: a rope 
bridge stretched across a ravine, a danger disguised as a hit of hope.

 * Michael McGrath is a writer living in Maine. Visit him there, or at 
mikeymcgrath.com <http://mikeymcgrath.com/>
 