
I was born in Trinidad, the second of six children. The first eight years of 
my childhood were perfect. My dad (Dardie) opened our minds to the world. He 
worked as a policeman and was a philosopher, bookworm and politician who stood 
up for justice and human rights. He made sure we saw beyond the shores of 
Trinidad. My mum (Marmie) gave us inner strength and confidence.

My father was also a musician and I gave my first performance with him when I 
was 15 months old. While he was playing his saxophone, I got up on stage and 
said to all the people, "You're not dancing right – this is how you dance."

When I was eight, things started to go wrong when my father wanted to go to 
England to play jazz. My parents argued. My mother didn't want to leave us 
children. In the end my father went to England alone. Then, a year later, she 
said she was going to England and taking the youngest two. We were sent to 
"Aunties" – not real Aunties, foster parents: my brothers to one place, my 
sister and me to another.

The foster parents were horrible people. We wrote to my mum but our letters 
were censored. My older sister Sandra and I became very close. We still are. 
After 15 months my mother sent for us to come to England. We would be a family 
again. But it was so cold and hostile here. People stared at me from the time I 
arrived and we lived in one room all eight of us. I realised I wasn't a person 
in England – I was a colour.

My mother explained that some people would hate us because of the colour of 
our skin but to remember, "It is their problem, not yours." It took me four 
years to understand what Marmie meant. I used to fight every day. If anyone 
called me a name, I'd fight them. At 14 I realised you can't fight the world 
with your fist. You have to fight with integrity, morality, intelligence and 
self-confidence. I learned to smile and to know I was not going to be a victim.

While my father was playing jazz, Marmie had three jobs: laundry, cleaning and 
babyminding. She supervised the laundry at Dulwich College. Now there is a 
plaque at the school saying, "This wing of Dulwich College was opened by 
Floella Benjamin OBE."

My husband and I have two children and we have devoted our lives to them. When 
our son was 10, he was bullied because I was on television regularly so I 
backed off doing things onscreen. I turned down lots of work abroad because I 
always put my kids first. Our son is now 30 and a lawyer; our daughter, who is 
23, has just graduated.

My son went to Dulwich College and then to Exeter University. He was quite 
cheesed off when I was given an honorary degree and then made chancellor of the 
university. He said: "I worked three long years to get my degree and you just 
waltz in and become chancellor!"

Sea of Tears 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781847800589>
 by Floella Benjamin (for children aged 11+) is out on 6 October
 