
“Gracious alive, Cal, what’s all this?” He was staring at his breakfast plate. 

Calpurnia said, “Tom Robinson’s daddy sent you along this chicken this 
morning. I fixed it.”

“You tell him I’m proud to get it — bet they don’t have chicken for breakfast 
at the White House. What are these?”

“Rolls,” said Calpurnia. “Estelle down at the hotel sent ‘em.”

To Kill a Mockingbird <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/To_Kill_a_Mockingbird>, 
Harper Lee

---

For the last two years, I have posted a recipe from To Kill a Mockingbird 
during this first week of July. It has long been my favourite American book – a 
life-changing account (for me, at least) of one summer in Alabama, through the 
eyes of young Scout Finch. I first read it one hot, unforgiving January in 
Queensland, Australia, just before I started secondary school. Like innumerable 
other fans, I am sure, it sent me on an Atticus Finch-inspired exploration into 
law as a career; a few years later I would spend my work experience week 
sitting in on trials in Brisbane’s courts, dressed in a 15-year-old’s 
approximation of business attire.

A cook's books: a food blogger's recipes inspired by literature – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/gallery/2015/jul/09/cook-books-food-bloggers-recipes-inspired-by-books-in-pictures>
Though I was fascinated by the trials I saw, I eventually decided that my 
future lay in drama teaching (and have since decided to be a little more 
relaxed about restricting myself to just one career). Despite my abandoning 
these early dreams, the book continued to provide my benchmark for properly 
decent human beings: I’m not sure they come much better than Atticus Finch*. 
His joy at receiving this breakfast, ‘fixed’ for him by Calpurnia, from 
ingredients sent by his neighbours in thanks, is one of my favourite moments.

Though I suggest below that you do as Atticus does, and eat this for 
breakfast, the recipe that follows is about as far from ‘everyday breakfast’ as 
it is possible to be. Not only is it too time consuming to tackle before work, 
it’s the kind of meal you pretty much need a lie down afterwards to recover 
from. I’m sharing it not because I think you’ll eat it regularly, but because 
it’s just too delicious not to encourage you to try at least once. Take your 
time making it on a rainy Saturday you want to spend indoors, and then plan for 
a long afternoon spent dozing under a book.

* Can we all please agree that the Atticus of Go Set a Watchman was a first 
draft only?

Fried Chicken and Rolls

Serves 4 for breakfast (you’ll have leftover rolls)

Ingredients 
4 chicken thighs (bones in, but without their skin) 
250ml buttermilk
 100g flour
 Pinch sea salt
 Pinch ground black peppercorns
 Pinch sweet paprika 
500ml vegetable oil 
Rolls
 1tbsp fast action yeast
 125ml tepid water
 125ml milk
 1 egg 
2tbsp vegetable oil
 1tsp sugar 
Large pinch salt 
425g plain flour
 1tbsp butter

Equipment 
Two mixing bowls 
Jug 
Whisk
 Roasting tray
 Greaseproof paper 
Pastry brush 
Tongs
 Wide saucepan or frying pan, with a lid (I used a paella pan)
 Shallow dish 
Cooling rack 
Kitchen towel

1. The night before you plan on eating this, place the salt, chicken and 
buttermilk in a bowl, squelching it around to ensure the chicken is covered. 
Cover and leave overnight in the fridge.

2. To make the rolls, combine the water and yeast in a jug, and whisk to 
combine. In a bowl, whisk together the milk, egg, oil, sugar and salt. Add the 
yeast mix, then the flour, and mix with your hand to combine. Tip the dough 
you’ve created onto the bench and knead until smooth and elastic - around 10 
minutes. Lightly oil a bowl, place the dough back in and cover it, then allow 
the dough to double in size. This will take around an hour, depending on how 
warm your kitchen is.

3. Tip the dough out onto your bench and split into twelve evenly sized balls. 
I found that weighing the dough and dividing by twelve allowed me to divide the 
dough evenly, but you don’t need to be this pedantic. Shape into balls and then 
place a centimetre or two apart in a roasting tray lined with greaseproof 
paper. Leave for forty minutes to prove again. During this time, heat your oven 
to 180C.

4. Once risen again (it’s fine that the sides of the rolls are now touching - 
that’s what you want), melt the butter and paint it over the tops. Bake for 15 
minutes, until risen and golden. Remove from the oven and leave on a cooling 
rack while you finish with the chicken.

5. While the rolls are baking, you can fry the chicken. Heat 2cm of vegetable 
oil in wide frying pan/saucepan (with a lid). Mix the flour, paprika and pepper 
together in a shallow dish. Remove the chicken from the fridge and take the 
pieces out of the buttermilk, wiping them against the side of the bowl as you 
do, to remove any excess. Turn them in the flour until covered.

6. Once the oil is at 170C (or is hot enough to brown a small piece of bread 
in a few seconds) lower the chicken thighs into the oil, ensuring that you 
leave enough room between each one to turn them. Put the lid on the pan, turn 
the heat down and cook for seven minutes. Turn the chicken over and cook for 
five minutes on the other side. If the coating doesn’t look golden brown by 
this point, turn the heat up for a minute or two at the end. Remove the chicken 
from the pan and allow to cool slightly on some kitchen paper.

Serve with tomato or crisp lettuce - something fresh and cool. Leftover rolls 
should be eaten within a day or two, or frozen until needed.
 