
A moment later the desserts appeared. Blocks of ice cream in every flavour you 
can think of, apple pies, treacle tarts, chocolate eclairs and jam doughnuts, 
trifle, strawberries, jelly, rice pudding... As Harry helped himself to a 
treacle tart, the talk turned to their families.

Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harry_Potter_and_the_Philosopher%27s_Stone>, JK 
Rowling

 ---

 It all started with a treacle tart. A treacle tart, served with sour cream, 
to round out a not terribly cohesive dinner party of ravioli and roasted lamb. 
A treacle tart that I made because I was feeling horribly homesick, and I 
thought that if I were eating Harry Potter’s favourite dessert, somehow 
everything would be OK. Ten thousand miles from home, I wanted pure comfort, 
and this was it.

Food in books: sausage rolls from Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/little-library-cafe/2016/jan/14/food-in-books-sausage-rolls-from-harry-potter-and-the-goblet-of-fire>
 A week after serving the tart, I decided to put it up online and include the 
quote from Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone to show my inspiration. 
It’s been more than two years since then. Two years and 128 recipes from 108 
books. I’ve blogged every week since March 2014, through rubbish weeks at work, 
while travelling in foreign lands, in the middle of catering a wedding for 200 
people and once (the Atonement cocktail 
<http://thelittlelibrarycafe.com/blog/2015/01/02/chocolate-cocktail-atonement>
), so drunk from recipe testing that I could barely take a photo of the 
finished product.

 As regular readers of this blog will know, I am currently writing my first 
cookbook. I have had a terrific first few months of it, putting together my 
dream list of food, and books, spending time testing and re-testing the recipes 
I will include. It’s led to a rediscovery of the back catalogue on the blog, 
those recipes I still use regularly but which those of you who came to this 
blog more recently may not have discovered.

 So, for the coming months, at least until the book is due, my new recipes are 
going to be coming fortnightly. And every other week, on the Guardian only, 
I’ll be re-releasing one from the archives, introducing you to some of my early 
favourites.

 First up is that treacle tart: the one that started it all.

Treacle tart: the recipe

 Serves 10

Ingredients 
Pastry
 200g plain flour
 2tbsp icing sugar 
 Zest of one lemon
 Pinch of salt
 140g butter, chilled and cubed 
 1 egg yolk 

Filling
 600ml golden syrup
 A pinch of ground ginger
 150g fresh fine breadcrumbs 
 Zest and juice of one lemon 
 1 egg

Equipment 
 Mixing bowl
 23cm fluted tart tin (or similar) 
 Cling film 
 Rolling pin
 Fork 
 Baking sheet/tray 
 Baking paper and baking beans (or rice/uncooked beans) 
 Saucepan 
 Wooden spoon
 Knife
 Pastry brush (optional) 
 Cooling rack

 1 To make the pastry, combine the flour, icing sugar, lemon zest and salt in 
a bowl. Rub in the cold butter until the mixture resembles breadcrumbs. Add the 
egg yolk and 1-2tbsp of very cold water and combine with your hands in the bowl 
until the mixture comes together into a dough. Turn onto a lightly floured 
bench and bring into a ball. You shouldn’t work it too much, as the pastry 
won’t be crisp if you do.

 2 Wrap the pastry in cling film and pop in the fridge for half an hour. Don’t 
be tempted to skip the chilling, as the pastry may shrink in the oven.

 3 Roll out the dough on a lightly floured bench. If the pastry is sticking - 
as it is wont to do in a warm kitchen - roll it between two pieces of 
greaseproof paper rather than straight onto the bench. Stop rolling when you 
have a 30cm circle that is around the thickness of a pound coin.

 4 Drape your pastry over your rolling pin, or keep it on the sheet of 
greaseproof paper, and lay it across the fluted tart tin. Use a small ball of 
spare dough (rather than your fingers - your nails may cut the pastry) to push 
it into place, making sure it goes right into the edges. If there are any tears 
in the pastry, patch them up with extra dough. Lightly prick the base with a 
fork and return to the fridge to chill for a further 30 minutes. Preheat your 
oven to 190C and insert the baking sheet in the middle of the oven to heat up.

Food in books: fruitcake from The Ruby in the Smoke by Philip Pullman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/little-library-cafe/2016/apr/27/food-in-books-fruitcake-from-the-ruby-in-the-smoke-by-philip-pullman>
 5 Line the chilled pastry case with baking paper and fill with the baking 
beans or uncooked beans. Place in the oven on the baking sheet for fifteen 
minutes, then remove the baking paper and beans and bake for a further five 
minutes, until golden.

 6 To prepare the filling, heat the golden syrup and ground ginger in a 
saucepan over a low heat until hot, but not boiling. Stir in the breadcrumbs, 
lemon zest and juice and one beaten egg until just combined, and pour into the 
pastry case.

7 Return to the oven and bake the tart for 30-35 minutes until the filling is 
set and the pastry golden. Cool on a wire rack for fifteen minutes before 
removing from the tin and serving warm with crème fraîche, sour cream or 
ice-cream. Leftovers (should there be any) should be reheated a little in the 
oven before eating, or you risk losing a tooth!
 