
Even Michelangelo was guilty of forgery. As the story goes, the young artist 
buried a sleeping Cupid he carved from marble so that it would pass as a 
Greco-Roman antiquity. Upon learning of its true maker, the buyer, Cardinal 
Raffaello Riario, returned the piece to his dealer for a full refund. The 
unfortunate Cardinal, though a few hundred ducats wealthier, will forever be 
remembered in the annals of art history as aesthetically clueless, unable to 
recognize Michelangelo as the first modern sculptor to surpass the celebrated 
ancients he was trying to imitate.


Forgeries expose some of the art world’s most psychologically complex figures: 
the collector and the counterfeiter. What compels the prototypical collector to 
accumulate objects of beauty is usually a peculiar devotion to the power of 
singularity. The collector worships art’s power to move us, a power we imagine 
emanates from unique objects. Meanwhile, what motivates the counterfeiter is an 
undue confidence in the possibilities of replication. To deceive a viewer with 
a copy is to affirm that copy’s interchangeability with the original.

Art market shrugs off forgery case but finders of fakes still flourish
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/19/fale-art-market-authentication>
The emotional liaisons between people with these clashing viewpoints on art is 
the subject of two recent forgery novels, Dominic Smith’sThe Last Painting of 
Sara de Vos <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/last-painting-of-sara-de-vos.html>
and Martin Suter’sThe Last Weynfeldt 
<https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-reviews/martin-suter/the-last-weynfeldt/>. 
These books join a growing list of contemporary fiction that uses great works 
of art to propel plots of mystery and intrigue, including Michael Frayn’s
Headlong <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/headlong-2.html> (1999) and Donna 
Tartt’sThe Goldfinch <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/goldfinch-2.html> (2013).
For the Swiss-born Suter and the Australian American Smith, both veteran 
creators of rarified cultural worlds, forgeries prove more interesting than 
originals.

The title character of Suter’s novel, Adrian Weynfeldt, is a collector and 
auctioneer embroiled in a forgery scheme. A billionaire bachelor in his mid-50s 
and the last surviving member of an elite Swiss family, he works as a 
specialist of 19th- and 20th-century art at a major auction house out of 
passion rather than necessity. Adrian is the kind of person whose judgment is 
reserved for the beautiful things that fill his workplace and museum-like home 
rather than for the people around him. His social world consists of a handful 
of aging, blue-blooded friends of the family and a circle of younger, 
charismatic types whose unfruitful creative pursuits he alone seems to support. 
In their midst, he carries out quiet philanthropic gestures so as to avoid 
seeming showy or condescending. If Adrian has a worldview (and he would surely 
be too self-conscious to voice any such thing), it might be that money is ugly 
but art depends on it.

Ever since Aestheticism’s mantra of art for art’s sake, capital-A Art has kept 
its distance from the taint of money, even though they have always been 
attached by what the critic Clement Greenberg once called “an umbilical cord of 
gold.” The canonization of an artistic masterpiece often goes hand in hand with 
its removal as a commodity from the market. In the hallowed halls of a national 
museum, artworks become sacred and exceptional. We want to believe that 
something as universally appreciated as a Michelangelo or as privately 
meaningful as a family heirloom is “priceless,” but the market is as blind to 
aesthetics as it is to sentimental value.

Adrian’s own neat compartmentalization of art and money is undone by the 
entrance of two seductive women into his life. The first is the penniless and 
emotionally damaged Lorena, sometime model and seasoned shoplifter, whom we 
encounter in the opening pages trying to fling herself from Adrian’s grand 
balcony the morning after their almost-consummated tryst. The other is a 
voluptuous nude painted in 1900 by the Swiss-French artist Félix Vallotton, 
owned by Adrian’s enterprising friend Klaus Baier (one of the aging, 
blue-blooded set), who asks him to sell it on his auction block. It is hardly a 
spoiler to say that the painting gets counterfeited for all the predictable 
reasons: Klaus can’t bear to part with the work, but he desperately needs the 
money. The scheme is simple: auction off the forgery and squirrel the original 
away in the upscale lakeside retirement villa funded by the sale. Yet the 
painting is not the book’s only double. The beguiling ginger-haired Lorena so 
closely resembles Adrian’s first love—theoriginal redhead he cannot forgive 
himself for tragically losing—that the faces of the two women initially “fused 
… in his mind.”

We first encounter the Valloton nude, a picture with a price tag, as if it 
were a person: “It is more the woman than the painting which had accompanied 
Klaus Baier his entire life.”She was the subject of Klaus’s adolescent “sexual 
fantasies” and her singular physique propelled his choice of spouse in each of 
his three marriages. Meanwhile, Lorena, the flesh and blood woman, is more 
often considered a mere commodity. In one scene, she scrutinizes her own image 
as the unnamed motorcycle babe in a magazine, the day after she gets fired for 
refusing to offer sexual favors to her boss. Adrian, meanwhile, treats her so 
often to couture dresses and Louis Roederer Cristal that it becomes clear to 
everyone but himself that he’s playing sugar daddy (a term, by the way, that 
dates back to Valloton’s lifetime).

The impeccable forgery amounts to the art world’s version of the high-class 
escort. The forged Valloton, Klaus Baier insists, is just “an identical 
execution of the same idea using the same technique in the same format.” The 
line neatly foreshadows how the ever-conciliatory Adrian awakens to the 
challenge of distinguishing harmless copy from malicious fraud, in paint as in 
flesh. With a combination of satire and sensationalism, Suter manages to 
cleverly intertwine the public world of art with the private world of love, 
though, in the end, it is hard to say whether women emerge as heroines or 
sacrificial victims.

The same could not be said of the women in Dominic Smith’s The Last Painting 
of Sara de Vos.Smith’s novel centers on a “forgery hanging in plain sight”—that 
is, over the unhappy marital bed of Marty de Groot, a middle-aged patent lawyer 
with a sizable inherited fortune. The picture in question is a melancholic 
winter landscape entitledOn the Edge of a Wood, the only surviving work of Sara 
de Vos, the fictional first woman to enter the painter’s guild of St. Luke in 
the Dutch Golden Age. After three centuries in the de Groot family collection, 
it had gained “a small but cultish position” in the art world. The novel opens 
with an account of a charity dinner at the de Groots’ penthouse apartment in 
1957, the night the original was furtively stolen. For some six months, a 
counterfeit, painstakingly painted by Ellie Shipley, an antisocial graduate 
student who moonlights as a restorer, hung undiscovered in its place.

Smith’s novel chronicles the lives of Marty and Ellie, who are brought 
together by the forgery, alongside that of de Vos herself, in alternating 
chapters that toggle between centuries and move across the globe, tracking the 
circulation of de Vos’s painting from its creation to the present day. The most 
riveting of these intersecting plot lines takes place in 1950s New York, the 
scene of the crime. After a private investigator discovers Ellie’s role in the 
caper, Marty decides to confront her by making himself into something of a 
counterfeit. As “Jake Alpert,” a patrician of Dutch ancestry like himself, only 
widowed rather than still married, he engages Ellie as an art consultant to 
help build his family collection. While Marty’s stated intention is to “flush 
her out,” his vengefulness is muddied from the start by his admiration for 
Ellie’s “meticulous fake.”

By the year 2000, we find Ellie, now a renowned art historian, curating an 
exhibition on women painters of the Dutch Golden Age, in her native Sydney. Her 
long- and hard-won reputation is at stake as she anxiously awaits the arrival 
of twoOn the Edge of a Wood paintings, the original and her fake. To make 
matters worse, an aged (and now actually widowed) Marty de Groot, the only 
person who can still criminalize her, is to hand-deliver one of the pictures, 
who knows which. Just as uncertain is whether Marty has traveled across the 
globe to settle old scores, or to express nagging regrets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fforgery-fiction-literatures-fascination-with-fake-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb513fc18e243fd99c106b6c108970f16d9fdf179%2F0_0_896_1024%2F896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forgery%20fiction%3A%20literature's%20fascination%20with%20fake%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fforgery-fiction-literatures-fascination-with-fake-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forgery%20fiction%3A%20literature%27s%20fascination%20with%20fake%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fforgery-fiction-literatures-fascination-with-fake-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb513fc18e243fd99c106b6c108970f16d9fdf179%2F0_0_896_1024%2F896.jpg>
 Self-Portrait by Judith Leyster (c. 1630). Leyster’s entire oeuvre was 
attributed to Frans Hals until 1893. Photograph: National Gallery of Art, 
Washington DC 
Holland in the 1630s rounds out the book’s trio of settings. In moody chapters 
that recall the light effects of Johannes Vermeer and Jacob von Ruisdeal, we 
read of de Vos (their imagined contemporary) struggling to maintain a 
livelihood under the dictates of the male-dominated guild system. Though Sara 
is far less complex a character than her modern double, Ellie, the Holland 
scenes do signal Smith’s ambition, in this latest of his art-world historical 
fictions, to write a feminist novel. As we learn in an author’s note, de Vos is 
a composite of several actual Dutch female masters whose paintings were 
forgotten over time or even falsely attributed to their more famous male 
colleagues. In rapid leaps across centuries, Smith manages to connect the 
plight of these female painters to that of feminist art historians who, like 
the fictional Ellie, trudged through the old boys’ clubs of the 
mid-20th-century ivory tower to play a major role in resuscitating the careers 
of women artists.

Smith’s social agenda saves the book’s many uncanny doublings, like the twin 
charity events taking place in both 1637 and 1957, from reading as gimmicky. It 
also allows class and gender to color the ethics of forgery in complex ways. 
Ellie, an Australian transplant with working-class roots, serves as a pawn in a 
larger criminal scheme, so readers are liable to see Marty’s deceptive acts as 
far more nefarious on account of his privileged position. The Ellie and Marty 
of the 1950s inhabit the gendered roles assumed by de Vos and her male patrons 
centuries earlier. So when Marty compares Ellie’s “electric green eyes” to 
embezzled diamonds “smuggled into the colonies,” he seems to be channeling his 
ancestor’s financial stake in the Dutch maritime empire, which just so happened 
to directly fund the acquisition ofOn the Edge of a Wood.

Smith and Suter seem to mourn the passing of the collector type whose neurotic 
worship of art granted it emotional power

It is fitting that this novel about the monetary conditions of art should 
center on the Dutch Golden Age, when for the first time in Western history 
artists were beholden more to the open market than to individual patrons. 
Seventeenth-century Netherlanders across the social spectrum invested in 
pictures with an enthusiasm rivaled only by their love for tulips. For the 
Dutch, art was a currency. Rembrandt, for instance, was known to repay his 
monetary debts with written promises to deliver artworks in progress, and these 
promissory notes were in turn traded and speculated upon by eager speculators 
in his art. Fittingly, Smith fills his Holland chapters with plenty of 
references to credits, debts, and business negotiations around pictures.


Money falls into the background in the 20th-century chapters of the book. 
These modern scenes allude to expensive things—a sleek Citroën and lavish 
vacations—but they seem inserted merely to create a contrast between Marty’s 
daily extravagances on the Upper East Side and Ellie’s make-do existence in the 
seedy part of Brooklyn. In fact, monetary gain motivates neither Ellie nor 
Marty. For Ellie, the forgery, which gives her unparalleled access to an 
important artwork, is an opportunity to breathe life into her stalled graduate 
research. She even refuses to spend her “restorer’s fee.” It also becomes clear 
that Marty’s pursuit of Ellie has nothing to do with getting back the original 
painting. In fact, the superstitious Marty is pretty sure that the heist lifted 
a family curse, since every one of the painting’s previous owners had succumbed 
to early deaths. What made the crime so “personal,” he reflects, was “sleeping 
under the fake for months.” The “something priceless” that Ellie stole from him 
might not be the painting after all, but his own dignity. And restoring that, 
it turns out, would prove far more agonizing than recovering a stolen picture.

In both The Last Weynfeldt and The Last Painting of Sara de Vos, forgery—an 
act done in recognition of a painting’s monetary value—evokes its opposite: the 
intimate, almost magical role that works of art play in people’s emotional and 
erotic lives. Novels about psychically and sexually burdened paintings have a 
rich literary pedigree;The Picture of Dorian Gray, with its portrait come to 
life, is only the most familiar. The emphasis on forgery pushes these two 
recent novels away from Wilde’s occultism to the more contemporary realm of 
global capitalism, allowing their authors to indulge in suspenseful play 
between psychosexual drama and market materialism. Both novels are about aging, 
childless men whose preference for tailored suits and antique cars make them 
decidedly old-fashioned. In crafting such characters as the end of their 
respective familial lines, Smith and Suter also seem to mourn the passing of 
the collector type whose often neurotic worship of art granted it emotional 
power.

Was the National Gallery scammed with a fake Old Master painting?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/04/national-gallery-fake-old-master-orazio-gentileschi>
As the prices of art have skyrocketed in recent history, collecting has become 
an increasingly investment-driven undertaking. Billions of dollars’ worth of 
artworks sold today are not destined for display in private homes or galleries, 
but for storage in high-tech warehouses where they await tax-exempt resale 
(four such warehouses are in Suter’s home country of Switzerland.) These 
so-called “freeports” were originally created to house commodities in transit, 
but increasingly they have been exploited by a new brand of collector who 
desires no physical or psychological connection to the artworks he or she owns. 
Our present may be the age of forgery, Smith and Suter seem to suggest, not 
because art crime is on the rise, but because the collector’s and the 
counterfeiter’s philosophies of art have never been so aligned.

 * Maggie Cao is an assistant professor of art history at the University of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill. She studies the intersections of art with 
histories of science and economics in the 18th and 19th centuries. She is 
writing a book on the end of the American landscape tradition.
 