
I’m sitting at a window in the administration block of a category B prison in 
west London. I’m waiting for the week’s discharges to start filing out, heading 
towards freedom, having paid their debt to society.


I’m there to meet one of them. His name is Frank* and I’ve been seeing him for 
the past four months as part of a “through the gates” mentoring initiative.
Inside Out <http://www.insideoutmentor.org/>, the charity behind the scheme, 
has been matching volunteer mentors from the community with prisoners awaiting 
release. We volunteers have provided both emotional and practical support to 
try to minimise the risks of reoffending.

I help bring music to patients in intensive care
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/aug/30/i-help-bring-music-to-patients-in-intensive-care>
A vital part of this has involved meeting our mentees at the gate, on their 
day of release, and shepherding them through a myriad of appointments and 
layers of bureaucracy to try to give them some semblance of permanence at what 
is a time of enormous change and anxiety.


When I meet Frank outside, he smiles. But it’s short-lived as he seems 
determined to get on with things. He knows the score. It’s not the first time 
he’s done this.

We immediately head to the nearest convenience store down the road from the 
prison. Frank has a list of names and prison numbers and doesn’t hesitate to 
spend most of his release money (a paltry sum of approximately £30 which every 
prisoner is given on release), on newspapers and magazines to be delivered to 
his friends on the inside. They’d do the same for him, he assures me.

With that done, we begin the real work of the day, starting with a meeting at 
the local probation office, scheduled weeks in advance. Yet Frank’s probation 
officer isn’t working that day, we discover, so we swiftly carry on to the 
Jobcentre Plus office. They aren’t expecting him either and the staff instruct 
him to complete an online application for jobseeker’s allowance.


We sit at a computer and Frank looks lost, his index fingers hovering above 
the keyboard, occasionally pecking at the keys which seem unfamiliar to him. I 
offer to take over and together we eventually fill in the form. Frank thanks 
me, saying he wouldn’t have had the patience on his own.


Afterwards we head to the civic centre where Frank has an appointment to 
arrange his housing benefit, again arranged well in advance. We arrive early 
and sign in, then sit in the waiting area and wait our turn. One hour becomes 
two hours and two become three. We drain multiple cups of coffee. More than 
once, Frank gets up, clearly irate, and starts to walk out. I have to run after 
him to convince him he’s throwing away more than he thinks. Eventually we are 
seen and Frank is granted access to a temporary hostel until his benefits come 
through.

Fred hadn't eaten at home since his wife died. Then he took my cookery class
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/jun/23/wife-died-cookery-class-bereaved-elderly>
We walk to the hostel and up to his room. Frank looks visibly relieved to drop 
his bags. It’s not much, but for the next few weeks it’s his: somewhere he can 
call home and where he – not a prison officer – can lock and unlock the door as 
he pleases.

It’s only then, when the security of his lodgings is assured, that Frank 
starts to think about food. I ask what he’d like for his first meal on the 
outside. He insists on a Big Mac.

By this time it’s heading into evening and our day together is drawing to a 
close. We swap phone numbers and agree to keep in touch. Frank gives me a hug, 
a surprising show of warmth. Before we part, he tells me he couldn’t think of 
anyone else who would stick by him for a whole day, going through what we have 
been through. Frank tells me I’ve done more for him than any probation officer 
or key worker has ever done. He turns and heads off towards, I hope, a brighter 
future.

* Frank is a pseudonym.

Aris Tsontzos is a trustee of Inside Out. The charity is closing later this 
month owing to financial problems. Responsibility for mentoring has been passed 
to the chaplaincy of the prison described.

The day I made a difference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/series/the-day-i-made-a-difference>
 is theGuardian Voluntary Sector Network’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> series that showcases 
the work of people involved with charities. If you have a story you want to 
share emailvoluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:voluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com> with a short summary of your 
experience.


For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community - it’s free! <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>
 