 Mr Heath last night presented his Government's decision to impose direct rule 
in Northern Ireland as an opportunity for a fresh start in the intractable 
problem of John Bull's other island, and appealed on television to the people 
of Ulster to put the past behind them and devote themselves to building a 
peaceful and prosperous future.
It was perhaps the most momentous broadcast to the British people by any 
British Prime Minister since Mr Churchill's wartime radio addresses. Behind it 
lies a complex series of disputes and disagreements within Mr Heath's Cabinet 
resolved only early this week when the Prime Minister finally obtained the 
unanimous consent of his colleagues for the course he proposed to take.

The decision to suspend the Stormont Parliament for at least a year, and to 
impose direct Westminster rule through the appointment of Mr William Whitelaw 
as Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, staggered Ulster Unionist MPs and 
many of their Right wing Conservative colleagues. It was immediately clear that 
this watershed in Westminster's relations withNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> had created a critical new 
situation for the Government in the Commons, with the balance of power in doubt 
over the whole field of Government legislation, from the Common Market 
downwards.

Mr Whitelaw, who does not formally assume the office of Secretary of State 
until the Bill becomes law, will make his first official visit to his new and 
turbulent parish today. He will meet the Governor, Lord Grey, who now ceases to 
have any powers whatever, and also the Stormont civil servants whose allegiance 
is to be transferred to him. He will have talks also with the General Officer 
Commanding Northern Ireland, General Tuzo, and senior officers of the Royal 
Ulster Constabulary, who now come under Mr Whitelaw's direction. No one, least 
of all Mr Whitelaw, is in any doubt about the hazards, political and physical, 
which face him.

But in spite of the dangers, there was some hope at Westminster last night 
that the impact of Mr Heath's announcement would bring about at the very least 
a pause in the violence in Northern Ireland, with both sides taking time out to 
consider the new situation. Mr Whitelaw, it is felt, has both the charm and the 
stature to make the best of even a brief honeymoon.

Many Conservative and Unionist backbenchers were unable to believe that the 
Cabinet was ready to take such radical action until they heard yesterday's 
statement by Mr Heath in the Commons. The small group of Ulster Unionist MPs 
immediately decided that they would oppose the second reading next Tuesday of 
the Government's short but sweeping Bill to transfer the powers of Stormont to 
the new Secretary of State, and there is every sign that a number of 
Conservatives may back them in this revolt.

There is no danger that this move, by a relatively modest minority on the Tory 
benches, will threaten the Government's majority for the Bill, since Mr Wilson 
made it clear in the Commons yesterday that the Opposition would give its full 
support to the Government in carrying through its Northern Ireland proposals. 
But the creation of a new group of deeply disaffected MPs in the Conservative 
Party clearly poses new and highly unwelcome problems for a Government whose 
overall majority in the Commons is only 27.

For Mr Heath, the decision represents a calculated risk, in the belief that 
the transfer of responsibility for law and order and the phasing out of 
internment by measured stages will provide the opportunity for the non-violent 
representatives of the vast majority of Roman Catholics in Northern Ireland to 
come forward at last, and take part in the all-party talks on the future of 
Ulster which Ministers have been vainly offering to them since last summer. The 
immediate response was a solemn promise from Mr Gerry Fitt, Social Democratic 
and Labour Party MP for West Belfast, that his party would examine the 
proposals "not with the aim of any political gain but in the interests of the 
whole community in Northern Ireland."

Mr Fitt is now in a position to tell his SDLP colleagues at home in Northern 
Ireland that the Government's new proposals meet almost all of their demands, 
and represent virtually total victory for their stand. The signs are that they 
will indeed respond to the appeal to join in talks, or face the inevitable 
accusation of total irresponsibility.

The package which Mr Heath put before the Commons yesterday covered three main 
points. The first two were straightforward proposals for:

1. The release of some hundreds of internees in the next few weeks, as the 
first step in phasing out internment altogether; and, 2. The creation of new 
procedures to conduct regular plebiscites in Northern Ireland as the ultimate 
test of opinion on Ulster's continued status as part of the United Kingdom. Mr 
Heath was emphatic that there could be no change in this status without the 
consent of a majority of the people in Northern Ireland, or without the 
eventual consent of a revived Northern Ireland Parliament.

But the key passage in Mr Heath's package was:

3. The proposal to transfer the entire responsibility for security, and law 
and order, from Stormont to Westminster. It was this which was flatly rejected 
by Mr Faulkner earlier in the week, backed by the unanimous decision of his 
Cabinet to resign en bloc if Mr Heath persisted in his demand.

In his broadcast last night, the Prime Minister held out the prospect of a 
fourth - and potentially even more important - item in his package, once the 
violence has come to an end: the offer of massive economic aid to put Northern 
Ireland on its feet again. "This Government," he said, "is ready to give the 
help that will be needed to repair the destruction of recent months, to attract 
new industries, and to provide more jobs. I say to the people of Northern 
Ireland: now is your chance - a chance for fairness, a chance for prosperity, 
and above all a chance for peace."

Mr Heath told the Commons yesterday that he and his colleagues in the 
Westminster Cabinet held to the view that the transfer of responsibility for 
security was "an indispensable condition for progress in finding a political 
solution in Northern Ireland." It was this determination which led to the 
submission of the Stormont Government's mass resignation, which in turn 
determined Mr Heath's decision to go ahead with the appointment of a new 
Secretary of State for the province, charged with the responsibility for all 
the governmental functions formerly carried out by Stormont.

There is no doubt that Mr Heath has taken fully into account the possibility 
of dissent on the Conservative back benches. The Prime Minister has already 
heard most of the arguments around the table in his own Cabinet room, and 
succeeded in defeating his ministerial opponents with the aid of Mr Faulkner's 
intransigence.

If the initiative was a calculated risk, one of the risks which had been 
carefully calculated and discounted was a Tory revolt.

However, at least one Conservative MP came out against the Government's 
initiative last night.

Mr Tom Trafford told his constituents at The Wrekin, Shropshire: "I believe 
the initiative taken by the Government is wrong. We have surrendered to 
terrorism."

He said he now found it impossible to vote for the legislation bringing it 
into effect on Tuesday.

Labour anti-Marketeers were last night estimating a steady decline in the 
Government's already narrow majorities on the European Communities Bill if the 
Unionists and their friends choose to use their votes as a weapon against the 
Government. Labour pro-Marketeers, on the other hand, were gloomily considering 
the possibility that more of them may have to defy the party whip in order to 
assure a Government majority for entry into the EEC.
 