
It was an unpromising start to the new dawn of British naturism. Those who 
voted last August for a nude beach in Brighton can scarcely have pictured the 
suited figure or 61 year-old Arthur Albrow looming out of the mist on a bitter 
April morning.

The grandfather from Kemp Town made naturist history on the way to his work as 
a plumbing instructor shortly after 7.30 a.m. yesterday while council workmen 
put up notices which made what he was about to do legal.

The wind-kissed 200-yard stretch of beach was cold, stony and wet, as Arthur — 
his back to the assembled cameramen — coyly slipped off his longjohns and look 
the icy plunge. The cameras clicked. Arthur gasped, and the council workmen 
shrugged. It was, said a fully-clothed Councillor Eileen Jakes, a significant 
blow for British democracy.

A little further down the beach, Miss Brighton, the shapely Miss Susan 
Bessant, pranced around in nothing but a pair of wellies for the benefit of the 
photographers who had hired her — but not for those who had not.
There followed a forlorn trickle of bathers on the beach which in sunnier 
times acts — at least until this year — as a holiday meeting point for Baptist 
ministers and their wives.

But there was little that even the most fervent Baptist minister could have 
objected to yesterday. Only one woman apart from Miss Brighton stripped off and 
the average age of the five bathers was 50.

A former Miss Brighton and Sun page three girl, Jane Warner, even declined to 
remove her bikini for the benefit of a BBC TV crew. "Nudity is very beautiful," 
she purred, "but only in the right place."

But all was not lost for the hordes of cameramen, including a French TV crew, 
who outnumbered the nature freaks by about five to one.
First, they had the eccentric sight of Frederick Allen, a 57-year-old Brighton 
dentist, who keeps a blue denim hat on when he swims, whatever else he sheds. 
"It's to keep my head warm" he explained. "I'm bald, you see and I don't mind 
what else freezes so long as it's not my head."
Then the photographers had the windfall of an enterprising afternoon 
demonstration by the Brighton and Hove Squatters' Union, who stripped and stood 
side by side to reveal a squatting rights slogan printed on their goose-pimpled 
buttocks.

But the architect of it all, Councillor Jakes, steadfastly refused to disrobe 
for the press, choosing to celebrate instead by cracking a bottle of champagne 
in the torrential rain.
"Why should I be ashamed of nudity? I came into the world with nothing on and 
I will go out with nothing on. It's the freedom to choose that I want to see.
There are 2000 naturists in Sussex and millions of other people fly to the 
South of France each year to strip off. I would like to see them come here 
instead."

Her most forthright opponent on the council, Councillor John Blackman, 
commented tersely: "This isn't the South of France. It's a little stony bit of 
beach in Brighton and I don't think a true naturist would be seen within miles 
of the place."

Yesterday's opening makes the "R" beach at Brighton the first nude beach to be 
opened on the front at a major resort.
It remains to be seen what will happen to the price of third floor rooms at 
the overlooking Nevill House Hotel.
 