
Britain is coming out of the closet to chase the pink dollar. The 
Government-funded British Tourist Authority will formally announce moves to tap 
into the lucrative international gay market next month by luring American 
homosexuals to take their holidays in Britain.


The established gay scenes in London, Manchester and Brighton will feature in 
publicity, but Britain is also to be promoted as home for the historic Queens 
of England from Elizabeth to Noel Coward, as well as modern icons like Elton 
John, Boy George, Rupert Everett and Sir Ian McKellen.

The authority, appropriately responsible to a gay minister, the Culture 
Secretary Chris Smith, presents the initiative in straightforward commercial 
terms.

But gays and lesbians see the move as an important change.

‘Official bodies are beginning to understand the public is more tolerant than 
they are,’ said Sue Nichols, organiser of Brighton Pride, the annual gay 
festival on the south coast.

‘They tend to err on the side of caution. This introduces an air of normality. 
We are the same as anyone else.’

What has sparked the tourist authorities’ interest is the size of the market 
in the US, where there are an estimated 18 million gays - roughly 7 per cent of 
the population - with household income 70 per cent above the national average. 
The Wall Street Journal estimated US homosexuals spent about $10 billion ( 
£6.25 billion) a year in travel-related expenditure - a potential gold mine for 
Britain, which earns nearly £13 billion from 25 million overseas visitors each 
year.

It is believed that more than 10 per cent of the £8.3 billion a year spent by 
tourists in London comes from the gay community.

Tourism leaders have taken the plunge after more than a year wooing gay and 
lesbian travel operators and the mainstream tourist industry, where the idea of 
adults of the same sex sharing a bed would once have sent shivers down 
hoteliers’ spines.

Glossy promotions show gay men and lesbian women with their arms around each 
other or sharing tea and ice-creams. ‘You don’t know the half of it’ may be the 
slogan, but the location of gay beaches or graphic details of the ‘scene’ are 
absent. Instead, cultural links with figures such as Oscar Wilde, the 
Bloomsbury set and W. H. Auden as well as shopping, dining, and traditional 
arts entertainment are promoted.

Sophie Edwards, BTA head of campaigns, said: ‘Research has shown that the UK’s 
appeal for gay visitors is the same as mainstream visitors . . . We believe we 
can build upon and even increase this area of the market simply by providing 
better information for visitors.’

The executive director of the US-based International Gay and Lesbian Travel 
Association, Augustin Merlot, said mainstream companies had gradually joined 
his trade grouping, after initially fearing a backlash from straight customers: 
‘The gay and lesbian dollar is as valuable as anyone else’s.’

However Daryl Bennett, of gay tour operator D Tours, said mainstream hotels 
still did seem to have an underlying concern over groups of gay men ‘in Lycra’ 
or lesbian women ‘in dungarees frightening the blue-rinse brigade’.

In Brighton, where the gay community may account for as much as a fifth of the 
population, there is praise for the BTA’s boldness. Graham Cherry, partner in 
gays-only Hudsons guest house, said Brighton’s relaxed outlook attracted many 
foreign customers.

Tony Chapman, owner of Brighton’s gay Revenge club, New Europe Hotel and 
Legends bar, says the town’s gay-friendly atmosphere entices visitors. ‘It 
makes people who normally come here undercover feel good about themselves. They 
know they are going to get a good reception.’

The mainstream tourist industry in the town is endorsing the gay drive. Sue 
Addis, part-owner of Donatello’s restaurant, said gays and lesbians were ‘a 
pleasure to serve, polite and tend not to overdrink’.

At the five-star Grand Hotel, Richard Baker, general manager and president of 
the local hotels’ association, said: ‘People always assume gays and lesbians 
are people between the ages of 20 and 30. We get people who are 
respectable-looking gentlemen, they have been coming here for 30 years . . . 
The dress sense is above average, the men especially are a lot smarter. Their 
manners are above average too.’

Camp sites

Blackpool - Hugely popular with Northern gays. Gay impresario Basil Newby has 
helped create the ‘gay Riviera’ tag with the mighty Flamingo club and the drag 
cabaret bar Funny Girls. Lots of cheap and cheerful gay bed and breakfasts. 
Lots of camp, lots of prize bingo.

Brighton - ‘London by the sea’ or ‘gay capital of the south’. Fashionable, 
elegant, cosmopolitan, hedonistic nightlife. August is Brighton Pride - big gay 
pride festival.

Bournemouth - Popular with older gays and lesbians. Literary links, 
particularly the Shelleys, 2,000 acres of public parks and gardens, clean 
beaches.

Bristol - Bristol sound music scene with elements of rap, reggae and soul. 
Events - June - Pride West Arts Festival including Gay and Lesbian Film 
Festival.

London - Likes to think of itself as ‘Gay capital of Europe.’ Teeming with 
bars, clubs, shops and cafes based around Old Compton street in Soho. London 
Lesbian and Gay Film Festival, Summer Rights music festival, Pride festival 
(cancelled last year but a gay Mardi Gras planned for this year).

Manchester - Gay village based around Canal Street, one of the busiest in 
Europe. Channel 4’s Queer as Folk set in Manchester. Events - August Bank 
Holiday - Mardi Gras.

Leeds - Part of the ‘Trendy North’, fashion and shopping paradise, including 
Vivienne Westwood, Reiss Menswear, Harvey Nichols.

Edinburgh - Cultured and cosmopolitan, historic and trendy, Edinburgh Festival 
and fringes, major art galleries, historic houses, excellent shopping. 
Festivals - Pride Scotland on June 19.
 