
Telegrams received in Paris from Petrograd allege that the notorious Monk 
Rasputin, whose body has just been recovered from the Neva, was murdered by the 
younger Prince Yussupoff, a nephew by marriage of the Tsar.

According to this morning's newspapers the tragedy appears to have been 
enacted on Saturday morning at the Yussupoff Palace, on the Moika. It was early 
on Saturday morning that a mysterious motor-car is reported to have been seen 
on the Petrovsky Island. The police thereupon yesterday examined the river near 
the Petrovsky Bridge and discovered a newly cut ice-hole, whence stretched 
human footprints in various directions in the snow. Near the bank was found a 
man's golosh stained with suspicious marks. Divers were requisitioned to 
examine the bottom of the river, with the result that the body of Rasputin was 
discovered.

According to today's accounts, the police found traces of blood in the snow in 
the Palace garden. On demanding an explanation from the servants the police 
were informed that a mad dog had just been shot. In corroboration of this 
statement the dead body of a dog was produced. The animal's body and a lump of 
bloodstained snow were removed for examination.

The young Prince Yussupoff, who after the events of this weekend has left 
Petrograd for his Crimean estates, has returned to the capital.

Editorial: Rasputin

The monk Rasputin, like another notorious character the Moroccan chieftain 
Raisuli, had many lives. He had been reported dead, perhaps only because it was 
known that he had many enemies and might be attacked at any moment; and just 
before the war broke out he was stabbed by a woman and only just escaped with 
his life.

There seems to be reason to believe now that he has been murdered, though it 
is curious how little information has yet been allowed to come through about 
the end of the most notorious man inRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>. Possibly the censorship which at 
one time forbade the discussion of him in the Russian press is anxious not to 
have the full glare of publicity cast on the manner of his death.

He was in his way a remarkable man, for no one could gain and keep the 
position of influence which he held without certain qualities of audacity and 
determination. But we need not exaggerate his powers because of the strange 
heights to which he climbed. He was one of those domineering men who with an 
affectation of religious devotion and mystic piety acquire an extraordinary 
power over the weak-willed and the superstitious.

Some of the accounts speak of magnetism and hypnotic power as among his 
attributes. The explanation is not necessary. What happened was that whereas 
the influence of other such men is usually exercised in humbler spheres he 
established himself in the highest quarters in the land. But as soon as he was 
there he had many helpers to assure his position, for all the place-hunters, 
male and female, flocked to the doors of one who was so close to the ear of the 
most powerful.

Of the strength of his position there was no doubt, and probably the 
suggestion of hypnotism and the rest was made to explain the persistence with 
which he held his ground despite his notoriously evil life, his gross 
interferences in the government of the Church, and the public attacks made on 
him in the Duma and elsewhere.

Few men so well known have had so little good said of them, and if a fraction 
of what has been said against him should be true Russia will be a better place 
without him.
 