
“Generally regarded as the largest and best-equipped gardens in the world,” 
says the encyclopedia of Kew. Certainly it is the centre of at least the 
Commonwealth’s entire botanical research.

Encroaching industry and London’s smoke (even though those menacing gasworks 
have now been closed) have made the cultivation of delicate plants and trees 
increasingly difficult at Kew however, and in 1964, when the National Trust 
offered the lease of Wakehurst Place in Sussex, Kew’s Director, Sir George 
Taylor, and the Ministry of Agriculture jumped at the chance.

Unique plants
Here were gardens begun centuries ago but brought to perfection in this 
century by the Loder family - the walled kitchen garden an almost readymade 
nursery for what, in the seventies or the eighties at least, will beEngland’s 
new Kew-in-the-country 
<http://www.kew.org/visit-wakehurst/whats-on/50-years-kew-wakehurst-photography-exhibition>
.

Here, too, were woodlands half as big again in acreage as Kew itself: a tract 
of the old St Leonard’s Forest harbouring unique English plants and, elsewhere, 
trees gathered from the earth’s four corners - the giant California redwood, 
the handkerchief tree that flutters its white flags in high summer, the 
eucryphia now, in August, smothered white as a camelia, the magnificent 
magnolia Campbellii that in spring is rose-pink, with blooms 10 inches across.

Wakehurst offers more exciting possibilities of landscaping than Kew. The 
woods plunge down steep hillsides to lakes and the Ardingly brook. The 
leaf-mould lies deep, and the kindly sandstone, bare only on the steeps, holds 
the abundant rainfall against the dry spells that come even to upland Sussex. A 
pleasant change for Kew gardeners, who for 200 years have had to feed and water 
greedy Thames-side grave!

A half-dozen men from Kew have already joined the Wakehurst men who carried on 
from the days of the late Sir Henry Price (who bequeathed the estate to the 
National Trust). Kew scientists are moving steadily through the woods marking 
every tree, noting their new prizes and making sure that encroaching 
undergrowth or unwanted competitors are removed. “We try to give every tree its 
full landscape value,” explained Mr R. W. King, secretary of the Royal Botanic
Gardens <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardens>.

Swans moved
Two of Kew’s famous black swans have already been moved to join the ornamental 
ducks on the great lake at Wakehurst.

The Wakehurst gardens are still firmly closed to the public and they cannot 
for any predictable time yet become a place of public and holiday resort such 
as Kew.

How long will the transformation take? We should be straight in 10 or 20 
years, said Mr King, though with a twinkle in his eye. And when will we, the 
general public, have a chance to see the transformed Wakehurst-Kew? That, I 
gathered, depends, like so much else, on our austere Treasury, on tiresome 
things like exports and so ultimately, I suppose, on us.
 