
For more than a century, thousands of children learned to swim alfresco in the 
grand surroundings ofCleveland Pools <http://www.clevelandpools.org.uk> in Bath 
until funds dried up and the complex fell into disrepair.

But a fundraising appeal has been launched to try to restore the site, billed 
as the only surviving Georgian open air swimming baths in the country, to give 
future generations the chance to bathe with the elements.

It will cost an estimated £3m to restore the centre, which includes a main 
pool with half moon-shaped section that echoes Bath's familiar and much-loved 
crescents.

The Cleveland Pools Trust aims to raise 10% of the cost to demonstrate to 
possible funders, such as theHeritage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/heritage> Lottery Fund, that the project 
is viable and worthwhile.

The trust, made up of local volunteers, is working with the heritage 
regeneration specialists, the Prince'sRegeneration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/regeneration> Trust (PRT), to try to save, 
restore and reopen the pools to the public in time to celebrate their 
bicentenary in 2015.

Former Olympic swimmer Sharron Davies <http://www.sharrondavies.com>, who is 
backing the project, said: "There is absolutely nowhere in Bath where you can 
do a proper swim outdoors – except for the river.

"Let's reopen Cleveland Pools then families will have somewhere to go in the 
holidays, schools will have an inviting public facility for swimming lessons, 
and local swimming clubs will have a vital resource.

"Imagine if Cleveland Pools had been open these past few weeks, how popular 
and what a safe place they would have been for everyone to enjoy a swim and the 
hot weather."

The pools closed in 1984 when public money was channelled into indoor pools 
and multi-sports centres. They are derelict and on English Heritage's building 
at risk register.

Plans now include bringing back into use the 25m-long main pool and restoring 
the Georgian changing rooms and a cottage where the supervisor used to live. 
The pools would have naturally treated and heated water and there would also be 
a cafe and a landing stage to allow access to the pools from the nearby river 
Avon.

Financed by public subscription, the first Cleveland Pools opened in 1815 as 
public pleasure baths. Later additions included a "ladies' pool" and a shallow 
one for children.

Ros Kerslake, chief executive of the PRT, said: "The Cleveland Pools were a 
very essential public amenity before falling out of fashion and into disrepair.

"It is vitally important that a building such as this, which has served 
generations before and is a part of Bath's history, should not be allowed to 
fall further into disrepair and non-use but should be restored and be used and 
enjoyed by future generations."
 