
Scientists are finalising plans to use gene therapy to treat one of the 
world’s most widespread inherited diseases – sickle cell anaemia. The technique 
could begin trials next year, say researchers.

About 300,000 babies are born globally with sickle cell disease. The condition 
causes red blood cells to deform, triggering anaemia, pain, organ failure, 
tissue damage, strokes and heart attacks. In the west, patients now live to 
their 40s thanks to the availability of blood transfusions and other 
treatments. But in Africa most still die in childhood.

“We have known exactly what is the cause of sickle cell anaemia for 60 years, 
but it has been enormously difficult to turn that information into a 
treatment,” said Prof Stuart Orkin of Harvard Medical School. “There are a 
million steps between the lab bench and the clinic, it turns out. However, I 
think we are closer.”

Sickle cell anaemia is triggered by a genetic fault that changes one of the 
dozens of amino acids that make up haemoglobin, the key constituent of the red 
blood cells that carry oxygen around our bodies. The mutated haemoglobin 
undergoes a change in shape and blocks veins.

The condition is carried by symptomless parents and is thought to have arisen 
in Africa, the Caribbean and other areas as a protection against malaria. 
However, when two carriers have children there is a one-in-four risk a child 
will inherit two sickle cell genes, one from each parent, and develop the 
disease. In Britain a screening service is offered to parents. Nevertheless 
more than 300 affected children are born every year.

Crucially, not every person with sickle cell disease succumbs to the 
condition, scientists have found. Some appear to be protected against its 
ravages. “We have two types of haemoglobin,” explained Orkin. “There is foetal 
haemoglobin whose production is normally switched off when we are born. Then 
the standard adult version takes over.”

But in some individuals foetal haemoglobin production is not turned off at 
birth. “Those individuals are supplied with foetal haemoglobin throughout their 
lives and for those who also inherit sickle cell anaemia this protects them 
against the disease by making a substance that can carry oxygen round the 
bodies,” he said. “We have calculated that you only need to make a small amount 
of foetal haemoglobin to halt sickle’s symptoms.”

The prospect of boosted foetal haemoglobin levels in patients was helped when 
it was found that a gene called BCL11A acts as a suppressor of foetal 
haemoglobin production. “Essentially, it switches off foetal haemoglobin’s 
manufacture after birth,” said Orkin. “What we aim to do is to stop it doing 
this. We want to suppress the suppressor and allow foetal haemoglobin to 
continue to be made in the body.” And crucial to this task was the discovery by 
Orkin and colleagues that a small piece of the BCL11A gene, called the 
enhancer, controls foetal haemoglobin expression.

“We can now use gene-editing technologies to cut out that little enhancer so 
that the BCL11A gene stops shutting down foetal haemoglobin production and 
allow children with sickle cell disease to start making it in their blood,” 
added Orkin. “Essentially, we will take bone marrow – where blood cells are 
made – from a patient, gene-edit it so that those cells produce enhanced levels 
of foetal haemoglobin, and return them to that patient.”

Orkin said the science had now been worked out. “We hope to begin trials in 
the near future.” He added that several other centres in the US were gearing up 
to start gene therapy trials for sickle cell using similar approaches.

David Williams, of the Boston Children’s Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, is 
using a slightly different technique to boost foetal haemoglobin but also hopes 
to begin trials next year. “When you knock BCL11A down, you simultaneously 
increase foetal haemoglobin and repress sickling haemoglobin, which is why we 
think this is the best approach,” said Williams.

Such treatments were only like to help patients in the west, Orkin 
acknowledged. “What we need is a pill that will boost foetal haemoglobin in 
patients, one that is simple to administer,” he said. “That is our ultimate 
goal, and the lessons we learn from our gene therapy work will help us get 
there. Once we do that we can then say we have conquered sickle cell.”
 