
Hopping into George Best's bed was once the preserve of models and Miss 
Worlds. Now any admirer of one of the world's greatest footballers can order 
B&B – Bed and Best – courtesy of aBelfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> community group. The little house 
where Best grew up and from where his body was taken on its final journey to be 
buried with his mother has opened up as a holiday home.

Fans of the Manchester United and Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> soccer legend can stay in the 
room where Best slept as a boy, eat at the dining table where he sat with his 
family, and watch DVDs of his glory years in the downstairs room where his body 
lay before his burial.

All the profits from the George Best 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/george-best> B&B are being channelled 
back into the community. The self-catering accommodation, at 16 Burren Way on 
the loyalist Cregagh estate, comprises a brownstone post-war terraced house 
with three bedrooms, a small kitchen and tiny dining area adjoined to the 
living room. For a fee on a sliding scale of £125 to £60 a night – the price 
gets cheaper if you stay longer – you can share the experience of living in the 
Best family home.

Sarah Douglas who lives on the estate and runs the venture for the housing 
co-operative East Belfast Partnership, which bought the house 18 months ago, 
said the local community was happy with having the tourist attraction on its 
doorstep. "Every time I come in here there are cars passing down the street to 
stop and look at the place where George Best used to live. They [the locals] 
have had to deal with that through the years so the people say to themselves 
that we might as well benefit from it as the money goes back into urban 
regeneration for east Belfast. They have been in overwhelming favour of the B&B 
idea."

Before you are left alone amid the many photographs, including family 
portraits and images from Best's glory years in the 60s that cover the walls, 
Douglas takes you on a brief tour. Visitors can read from original letters Best 
wrote to his parents from his digs in Manchester during his early days at the 
Old Trafford club and peek at the future star's primary and grammar school 
reports.

Upstairs in the back bedroom the co-operative has created a late 1950s time 
capsule with period wallpaper, the original wardrobe where Best hung his 
clothes, a copy of the 1959 Tiger annual for boys, a transistor radio and a 
replica of the 50s Wolverhampton Wanderers old gold and black kit. Before his 
longstanding love affair with Man Utd, Best's boyhood team was Wolves.

Daniel Lowry from Mullingar in the Irish Republic has been one of the first 
tourists to sleep in the old Best home. He found it a moving experience.

"I had seen the Cregagh estate and Burren Road feature heavily in the media 
over the years, particularly, at the time of George's funeral, so I was 
determined to visit the area. It was personally very important and moving to 
me. I got an overriding feeling of these humble walls being where it all began, 
the triumph and the tragedy, as Bestie's story is tinged with tragedy, his 
early demise, and that of his mother, who was unable to cope with the worldwide 
media glare."

At the time of his visit the streets were festooned with loyalist Red Hand of 
Ulster flags and union flags but the southern Irishman felt no hostility 
towards him or his Spanish wife, Teresa. "I had a very positive impression of 
the area, a welcoming and unobtrusive friendliness shone through from the 
locals whom my wife, Teresa, and I felt wanted to portray their area in the 
best possible light," Lowry said.

Best's family are fully behind the B&B project, pointing out that some of the 
profits will also be channelled into thecharitable foundation 
<http://www.georgebest.com/> named after Best, who died in 2005 aged 59 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2005/nov/25/sport.obituaries2> after a long 
battle with illnesses linked to alcoholism.

Norman McNarry, who is married to Best's sister, Barbara, said he and his wife 
believed it was appropriate that "the people's player's old home is now open to 
the people".

McNarry added: "Whenever Dickie Best [George's father, who lived in the house 
until his death in 2008] was alive he had lots of people from all over the 
world rapping on his door. In the past, Barbara and I have taken small groups 
of people to the house and the big field where George played outside the house. 
They have come from Japan, America, Nigeria, Russia.

"Now the house gives them a focus and somewhere they can stay in. But 
ultimately it will generate money for his community and the people. We are 
relieved that a community co-operative rather than a private individual has 
taken over the family home."

During the worst years of the Troubles George Best was one of Northern 
Ireland's few unifying figures. His funeral, when he was buried beside his 
mother, Ann, at Roselawn Cemetery, was a public display of unity for the 
world's cameras. And it seems that even in death Best still has the power to 
unite rival football factions.

As she made her way through the upstairs rooms of the George Best House, 
Douglas appeared slightly ill at ease when asked if she supported Man Utd. 
"Erm, no, it's Manchester City actually who I support but that doesn't stop us 
from loving and admiring one of our own," she said.
 