 British military bases throughout Germany were on full alert last night after 
the bomb which injured 31 people - 27 Germans and four Britons - at an 
officers' mess at BAOR headquarters at Reindahlen on Monday night. The IRA 
claimed responsibility for the attack.
The Reindahlen base was already on alert on Monday before the explosion 
happened, probably because of Nato concern following the shooting in Rome of 
General Licio Giorgieri.

Mr John Stanley, armed forces minister, said in the Commons that the higher 
than usual state of alert had probably saved injuries. There were 'self-evident 
security difficulties' at the headquarters because the base was sprawling and 
crossed by several public roads.

Yesterday claims of responsibility for the attack were made in Dublin by the 
Provisional IRA and in Germany by a previously unheard of group, the National 
Democratic Front for the Liberation of WestGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> .

The German claim was being given little credence by the security forces in 
Britain and Germany , which accepted that the IRA almost certainly planted the 
bomb. It exploded only hours after Mrs Thatcher returned to Britain after 
meeting the German Chancellor Dr Khol.

The IRA, which has mounted several previous attacks on British bases in 
Europe, has well known connections with European terrorist groups, and could 
well have been operating with the German Red Army faction.

The West German chief public prosecutor's office in Karlsruhe, which is 
investigating the attack said there were still no firm clues. A spokesman said 
of the claim from the National Democratic Front, supposed to be a right-wing 
organisation: 'We have considerable doubt that this is genuine. '

The IRA claim said that the British forces could consider themselves lucky. 
The active service unit's brief was to inflict a devastating blow but to avoid 
civilian casualties. 'Because of the presence of a large number of civilians, 
including many women, in the immediate area a warning was given. '

The German bomb exploded outside a mess where a party was being held by West 
German officers and their wives. Only the mess staff, waiters and cooks, were 
British. Three of the injured were still in hospital last night, being treated 
for minor injuries caused by flying glass.

Yesterday German police with dogs were combing the sealed-off area around the 
mess where the explosion left a large crater. Parked cars were smashed and 
windows and doors were blown out of the building.

Mr Stanley said in the Commons that a warning call to the West German Press 
Association before the attack was not passed on because of language 
difficulties. The call was in English and spoke of a bomb at Monechengladbach, 
near the base. Another telephone warning, in German, had been received at 
Reindahlen a few minutes after the explosion.

The minister said that an internal security investigation would take place. In 
answer to questions from Labour MPs about the wisdom of employing civilian 
German staff, who might pass on information to terrorists, Mr Stanley said he 
had full confidence in the local personnel. West German security and police 
authorities were cooperating in international efforts against terrorism.

The SDP spokesman, Mr John Cartwright, had asked if there was enough 
international cooperation against terrorist groups attacking Nato, in the light 
of the Italian shooting.
 