
Gerry Adams <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gerryadams>, who was refused 
entry into the White House to celebrate St Patrick’s Day, has described the 
incident as an “unacceptable development”.

The Sinn Féin <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> leader turned 
up for the annual Irish reception hosted by the US president, Barack Obama, on 
Tuesday evening only to be stopped over a “security” issue.

It is understood he left after being forced to wait for an hour and a half to 
get clearance. In a statement confirming the incident, he said Sinn Féin “will 
not sit at the back of the bus for anyone”.

“After two decades of travelling back and forth to the USA and countless 
meetings in the White House with successive US presidents, this is an 
unacceptable development,” he said.

Trump attended fundraiser for Sinn Féin before London terror attack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/09/donald-trump-ireland-sinn-fein-terrorism>
“It is obvious that there remain some within the US administration who seek to 
treat Sinn Féin differently.”

While Adams was declined entry to the get-together, his party deputy leader, 
Mary Lou McDonald, and Sinn Féin’s Northern Ireland deputy first minister, 
Martin McGuinness, were both admitted.

“I had received my usual invitation to attend the St Patrick’s Day 
celebrations in the White House and was pleased to accept,” said Adams. “When I 
arrived the staff at the White House informed me that there was an issue of 
‘security’.”

Adams and other Sinn Féin representatives have to regularly go through 
additional searches and scrutiny when travelling to and from the US.

“This morning Martin McGuinness, Mary Lou McDonald and I met with the 
Congressional Friends of Ireland,” said Adams.

“They too shared our grave disappointment at the White House situation and 
expressed their determination to have this issue resolved. Sinn Féin will not 
sit at the back of the bus for anyone. We are elected to represent citizens and 
we will do this.”

The Sinn Féin leader said he was hopeful that controversy around his White 
House invitation would help lead to a resolution.
 