
The Sinn Féin president Gerry Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gerryadams> has said he is considering 
legal action against the BBC for broadcasting claims that he sanctioned the 
killing of a former party colleague who turned out to be a British spy.

The allegations over the death of Denis Donaldson were made by an anonymous 
man, named only as Martin, who claimed he was also a paid state agent in theIRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ira>, to BBC Northern Ireland’s Spotlight 
programme.

Donaldson, 55, a Sinn Féin official and close colleague of Adams, was shot 
dead at an isolated cottage near Glenties in Co Donegal in April 2006 following 
his exposure as a long-term British agent inside both the IRA and Sinn Féin.

“That the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> would broadcast 
unsubstantiated allegations from an anonymous person, a self-confessed agent, 
about me, I think it very, very low journalism indeed,” Adams said.

However, Adams said it would be “very difficult” for the legal action to be 
successful. “They [the BBC] are covered legally because I understand they 
carried my denial,” he told LM-FM, a radio station in his Louth constituency. 
“When I get the chance … I will challenge the comments and allegations.”

Taking the corporation to court could prove to be a risky project for the man 
who has led Sinn Féin since 1983. The BBC, in defending the claim made in the 
Spotlight programme, could call on a host of former IRA members and ex-security 
personnel on both sides of the Irish border to back up allegations about Adams’ 
role in the republican movement.

Donaldson worked as a British agent while operating as a senior Sinn Fein 
official in the Stormont parliament and prior to this as a senior IRA member. 
The informer said that he knew personally that Adams had ordered the Donaldson 
murder.

“I know from my experience in the IRA that murders have to be approved by the 
leadership, the political (and) military leadership of the IRA,” said Martin.

When pressed on who he was referring to, Martin said: “Gerry Adams, he gives 
the final say.”

In a statement released through his solicitor on Tuesday night, Adams’ lawyer 
said his client “had no involvement and had no knowledge whatsoever in Denis 
Donaldson’s killing. He categorically denies he was consulted on what he calls 
an alleged IRA army council decision or that he had any final say in the matter 
being sanctioned.”

Donaldson’s murder was claimed by the Real IRA, but Martin told Spotlight this 
was an opportunistic move by the republican dissidents to claim credit

Spotlight claimed the Provisional IRA’s South Armagh Brigade demanded 
Donaldson be killed in revenge for his treachery.

Donaldson’s betrayal was a devastating blow for the mainstream republican 
movement. Among those the East Belfast republican served time with in the Maze 
prison was the IRA hunger striker Bobby Sands. He was exposed as an informer in 
2005 and confessed publicly to working for RUC Special Branch as well as other 
branches of the security forces for years.

Donaldson’s inquest has been delayed 20 times at the request of the Garda 
Síochána. It is understood the delays are in part due to the force’s concern 
over a detailed journal they found in Donaldson’s cottage which is feared to 
contain information about the running of the republican movement and details 
about his handlers while he was an informer.
 