
Inside the cover of this book is a CD. Please use it carefully, as it contains 
vital techniques of mind control. It is so powerful that I play it to my 
publishers every year – and each time they forget that I have already written 
10 books for them promising to make people thinner, cleverer, richer, thinner, 
cleverer, richer and thinner again.

Welcome! I believe this is the most important book I have ever written. For 
years, I didn’t really give much thought to sugar until I had a half-hour chat 
with my friend Ron, who is a medical nutritionist. What he told me was so 
startling that it made me think that if sugar was discovered today, it would be 
banned.

Sugar <https://www.theguardian.com/society/sugar> is responsible for people 
dying of cancer, heart disease and dementia. FACT: Everyone who has died of 
cancer, heart disease and dementia has eaten too much sugar. My mission, using 
my unique mind control system that should have made you thinner, cleverer and 
richer in my previous books, otherwise you wouldn’t have bothered to buy this 
one, is to allow you to take back control of sugar.

People say that sugar is just a bit naughty. It isn’t. It is the greatest evil 
known to mankind and only I, the Great Paul, have the power to combat it. Let 
me be clear. This book is not about dieting. FACT: Everyone who has ever been 
on a diet is now 10 times fatter than they were before they started dieting. 
That is one of the reasons we are facing an obesity epidemic. The other reason 
is sugar, in case you had forgotten.

OK! Let’s start the change. I want you to begin with my new, unique 37-day 
plan. Why 37 days? Because that was precisely the number of empty pages at the 
end of the book, which you can use to keep a journal of your battle against 
sugar and the changes you have made. Now that you have made a note of the fact 
you have started, I want you to ask yourself if you are really hungry. Check in 
with the feeling in your stomach, and if you are feeling empty then have a 
snack. But if you aren’t feeling that empty, what you are experiencing is a 
craving. Here’s my patented Craving Buster.

1. Imagine yourself eating a food that absolutely revolts you.
2. Now think of mixing it with cat poo.
3. Now think of eating it while watching Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> engaged in kinky sex.
4. Whenever you have a craving to eat some sugar, recall this image.

 Get Control of Sugar Now! by Paul McKenna (Bantam Press, £12.99) 
Here’s the science: for decades there has been a global conspiracy, backed up 
by powerful advertising campaigns, to misinform the public about the dangers of 
sugar. Sugar attacks every organ of the body, rendering it fat and useless. 
Sugar is everywhere. In soft drinks, in fruit juices, in low-fat meals, in 
packs of sugar. Watch out, sugar is about.

Now I want you to programme your mind for a healthy future.

1. Now imagine you are really thin and are dying a gentle, easy death in a 
brightly lit room surrounded by your family.
2. Whenever you have a sugar craving, think about which death you would rather 
have.

It won’t be easy for you to stop eating sugar. Nor do I suggest you cut out 
sugar completely. What I want you to do is to slowly take back control so that 
sugar no longer has any power over you. I know I have said this before, but I 
can’t stress its importance enough. And also because I really haven’t got much 
more to say. But trust me. Sugar may be so cunning that it makes you want to 
eat more of it even though you have already had too much, but it is no match 
for my unique programme of mind control. Now I want you to try my unique method 
of “havening”.

1. Stroke your arms to produce the calming effect of delta waves.
2. Imagine you are watching the best movie ever without stuffing yourself with 
a gallon of fizzy drinks and a bucket of popcorn.
3. Imagine you are the hero in this movie and that you have saved the world.
4. Now dare to imagine you are me.
5. You are now in a safe place.

Here are some names for sugar: white sugar, brown sugar, cane sugar, sugar 
cubes, raw sugar, sugar syrup. They are all equally bad. That’s it. You are now 
ready to start your journal. Day 1. Day 2. Day 3 … Day 36. Day 37.

Digested read, digested: short and sweet.
 