
Last April, two months after Ramona Brant walked free from prison having 
served 21 years of a life sentence for a first-time non-violent drug offense, 
she found herself outside the Busboys and Poets restaurant in Washington as a 
convoy of limousines drew up. A tall black man got out of the central vehicle 
and greeted her with the immortal words: “Hey Ramona, come on, I’m taking you 
to lunch.”

“I was no good, I couldn’t think,” Brant recalls. “This is the person who used 
his executive power to say ‘Enough is enough, you can go home now’. Then he 
invites me to lunch. I couldn’t believe this.”

By the end of lunch, Brant had composed herself sufficiently to make Obama a 
heartfelt promise. She told him that she would not allow his name to be tainted 
by anything she did that would send her back to prison.

“I will honor you with my freedom,” she said. “And that is what I have done.”

Related: Presidents undoing their predecessor's legacy: an American tradition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/trump-obama-president-legacy-history>

Brant is one of 1,324 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2016/12/19/president-obama-grants-153-commutations-and-78-pardons-individuals-deserving-second>
 women and men who will honor Obama with their freedom long after he vacates 
the White House in less than three weeks’ time. Most of them, like her, were 
serving long prison sentences – 395 of them for life – for relatively minor 
drug crimes imposed during the so-called “war on drugs”.

Brant’s case was particularly brutal. She had no history of drug dealing when 
in 1994 she was arrested and charged with conspiracy to distribute cocaine 
valued by the prosecution at $37m. “I have never sold drugs at all in my life. 
Never once.”

Yet through association with her violent and abusive boyfriend, who forced her 
to accompany him when he went on interstate drug runs by beating her and 
threatening to kill members of her family, she was accused of personally 
trafficking large amounts of crack cocaine and powder cocaine – quantities she 
says were entirely fictitious.

“Those amounts never existed, there was nothing there. They were based on what 
my co-defendants traded among themselves, and all of that was lumped together 
and I was held responsible for it.”

Even the trial judge as he sentenced her to remain behind bars for the rest of 
her natural life complained that putting her away forever made no sense. But 
his hands were tied – the sentence was mandatory.

Her former boyfriend remains in prison on a life sentence. 

Related: Obama says repealing healthcare law is 'disservice to American people'
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/barack-obama-republican-healthcare-repeal-vox-interview>

Obama cited Brant’s case in the long article he wrote last week for the 
Harvard Law Review 
<http://harvardlawreview.org/2017/01/the-presidents-role-in-advancing-criminal-justice-reform/>
 looking back on his impact on criminal justice reform. “Ramona’s case is in 
many ways emblematic of the problems with overly harsh mandatory sentences in 
the federal system,” he said.

Brant says that she kept her spirits up over 21 long years in the federal 
prison in Danbury, Connecticut, by placing her trust in God. Her prayers were 
answered last December when she received a letter from Obama saying that he 
believed in her and was giving her a second chance by commuting her sentence.

“To see the letter, and his signature! I just sat there reading it over and 
over, it was surreal.”
 Barack Obama escorts Ramon Brant to the Busboys and Poets restaurant in 
Washington DC on 30 March 2016. Photograph: Nicholas Kamm/AFP/Getty Images 
Multiply that overwhelming joy by 1,324 and you start to get a sense of the 
human scale of Obama’s clemency project. In any future assessment of his 
legacy, his flinging open of the prison gates to so many victims of the drug 
war is certain to loom large.

“What he’s done has been unprecedented,” said Kara Gotsch of the Sentencing 
Project. “These people were the victims of policies that trapped them in the 
criminal justice system for low-level drug offenses – these weren’t the drug 
kingpins.”

One of the strengths of Obama’s clemency drive is its power to act as a model 
for individual states that are responsible for the incarceration of the 
overwhelming majority of prisoners in America. While there are about 190,000 
people held in the federal penal system – almost half of them for drug offenses 
– there are close to 2 million under state lock and key.

“President Obama has tried to set an example on the national stage, and that 
is critically important in shifting the needle on what is fair and 
proportionate. The whole country is looking at this,” Gotsch said.

Obama’s embrace of commutations comes at the end of a singularly frustrating 
period for criminal justice reform.A year ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/19/koch-brothers-liberals-prison-reform>
 there were high hopes that a bipartisan coalition of forces, from the 
rightwing Koch brothers to the ACLU, would effect legislative change that would 
bring freedom to thousands of largely black Americans caught up in the harsh 
mandatory sentencing of the drug war.

When those hopes were dashed on the rock of Republican intransigence in the 
House of Representatives, Obama turned to his presidential power to grant 
clemency without the need for congressional approval. It would be comparatively 
slight compared with the initial ambition to overhaul the entire justice 
system, but it would be something.

“This is his last shout to try and bring relief to as many people as 
possible,” Gotsch said.

It has certainly come late in the day for the Obama presidency. Until he 
announced the clemency project in 2014, Obama displayed scant interest in this 
area – indeed during the whole of his first term he granted pardons or 
commutations to only23 people 
<https://www.justice.gov/pardon/clemency-statistics>.

As recently as last March criminal justice experts were lamenting in the 
Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/obamas-unpardonable-inaction-on-pardons/2016/03/25/dfe670a8-f07a-11e5-a61f-e9c95c06edca_story.html?utm_term=.91db74089663>
 that his record on pardons – where individuals have their legal liabilities 
erased as opposed to commutations where their convictions still stand – was so 
poor that Obama could go down as “one of the most merciless presidents in 
history”. It was only in 2016 that his drive for clemency really picked up 
speed, with 1,171 of the 1,324 lucky recipients gaining their freedom in the 
course of last year alone.

Obama’s sudden burst of activity rocketed him from being a no-show on the 
clemency league table to being a titan among postwar presidents. Many of the
reports 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/barack-obama-weighs-final-requests-for-clemency-1481976025>
 on his late conversion to commuting and pardoning prisoners have noted that he 
has wielded his clemency power more times than the previous 11 presidents 
combined.

That characterization is misleading. Mark Osler, a law professor at the 
University of St Thomas who set up the first clemency legal clinic in the 
country, points out that Obama holds such a distinction only if you discount 
the clemency record of Gerald Ford.

In 1974, the Republican president granted clemency to 14,000 draft dodgers and 
deserters of the Vietnam war. That was a brave move, Osler contends, given that 
at the time “draft dodgers were as popular as crack dealers are today”.

Ford achieved his massive clemency rate by setting up a lean bipartisan 
operation that could push petitions through with minimum bureaucracy. By 
contrast, Osler criticizes the Obama clemency project for operating a system of 
review that is so cumbersome it has gummed up the process.

Related: 'He'll take a chainsaw to it': is Obama's legacy strong enough to 
survive Trump? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/08/barack-obama-legacy-donald-trump-healthcare-climate-change>

The professor lists seven consecutive hurdles, spanning four federal 
buildings, that any prisoner must negotiate to have her or his petition 
granted: “The petition goes from a staff person at the pardon attorney’s office 
to the pardon attorney, then it goes to a staff person at the deputy attorney 
general’s office to the deputy attorney general, then to the staff at the White 
House counsel’s office then to the White House counsel, and finally to the 
president. And people are surprised that the results are so uneven.”

As a lawyer who has represented more than 60 petitioners, Osler is keenly 
aware of the impact of Obama’s efforts. For the 1,324 beneficiaries, he said, 
“this was an incredible act of grace. The restoration to society matters, not 
just to them but to their families and communities.”

But he is also keenly aware that the vast majority of more than 30,000 
prisoners who have petitioned the president have been denied clemency or are 
still waiting for an answer. “The problem is, I feel like the person after the 
shipwreck in the lifeboat seeing all the other people in the water.”

Ramona Brant knows that feeling all too intimately. Many of her fellow 
prisoners – she calls them her “sisters” – are still incarcerated. “There are 
still too many of my sisters left behind,” she says.

Hopes for those people are fading with every day. President-elect Donald 
Trump’s choice for US attorney general, Jeff Sessions, has been scathing of 
Obama’s clemency project, denouncing it as an abuse of executive power. The 
chances of the Trump administration continuing to push for release of low-level 
drug offenders is slim to none.
 Ramona Brant with her two sons, now grown up. Photograph: Brant family 
As a way of doing her bit to keep the flame alive, Brant has spent much of the 
past year since she was released last February traveling the country speaking 
about the dual scourges of domestic violence and mass incarceration. She uses 
the power of her personal story to try to influence change.

“I didn’t just study criminal justice, I lived it. This has been my life and 
that of so many other women. The system is structured to incarcerate people, 
black women like me.”

Brant, who was a mother of two young sons by her co-defendant and former 
boyfriend when she was arrested, thinks back on all the precious moments she 
missed over 21 years in a cell. “I missed an opportunity to be a mother to my 
own children, to watch the first tooth come out, to take them to the first day 
of school; I wasn’t by my father’s side when he died, or there when my mom was 
put to rest; I missed my first two grandchildren being born. No matter how many 
pictures you have on your wall they cannot replace the images in your mind, and 
I have no images.”


She was there four months ago, however, at the birth of her third grandchild. 
She has begun to fill up the void.

She thanks Obama for that. “He has given me an amazing gift, and I wish there 
was a way to express my gratitude. He knows he gave me a second chance, but I 
don’t think he knows the depth of what it really means to be free.”
 