
Capacity: Two rooms, one of 250 the other of 150.
Who plays there: The venue’s booking policy is extremely wide-ranging, with 
fingers right on the pulse, both in terms of alternative rock and 
left-of-centre electronica. Recent visitors have includedAngel Olsen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/mar/30/angel-olsen-learn-someone-elses-songs-bonnie-prince-billy>
, Eska,Hot 8 Brass Band 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2013/apr/03/hot-8-ghost-town-live-performance-video>
, Kid Congo Powers, Ben UFO, Thurston Moore, Fabio,Norman Jay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/norman-jay>, Metz, Girl Band, Peatbog 
Faeries,Simian Mobile Disco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/simian-mobile-disco>, Sean Lennon, Jungle 
Brothers, Jerry Dammers,Jessy Lanza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jul/05/jessy-lanza>, Nightmares on Wax, 
Fatima,Basement Jaxx <https://www.theguardian.com/music/basementjaxx>, Mount 
Kimbie, LTJ Bukem and the Gaslamp Killer.
Cloakroom: No official cloakroom, but when a band or promoter takes over both 
rooms, the venue will set up informal racks in their stables, to the side of 
the pub. This courtyard area is sometimes used as an extra entrance, or even an 
outside bar/food zone.
Admission: Ranges from free to not much more than £20, with most gigs lying 
more around the £10 mark.
Bars: The ground floor is a regular pub, with a large main room, the bar 
snaking into a back room that plays host to regular food evenings. Each of the 
two upstairs venues has its own bar, but with a limited range of drinks served 
in plastic cups. The discerning punter will haul themselves up and down the 
stairs for a more exotic selection, served in glass. The best beer in the house 
is Longhorn IPA, but it’s also the most expensive, at £4.50 per pint. It’s a 
Purity brew, and their regular beers (Pure Gold, Mad Goose, Pure Ubu) are also 
on sale at more reasonable prices, alongside San Miguel, Estrella Damm, Aspall 
Cyder and a host of other tipples. There’s also a pump dedicated to guest ales, 
bottles of Brooklyn lager are available, and there’s a full range of Chase gin 
and vodka.
Food: None on a nightly menu, but the pub hosts regular food evenings 
featuring pop-up restaurants, with outside caterers such as Soul Food Project, 
Clark & Lee, Pop-Up Dosa and Pika Pika taking over their kitchen for the 
evening.
Toilets: Downstairs, which is a touch inconvenient if you’re embroiled in a 
gig. Queues are unlikely, though.

Wheelchair access: No. There’s no lift because of the development restrictions 
imposed by the building’s Grade II listing. On an informal level, attendance is 
possible, which presumably means physically carrying punter and wheelchair up 
the stairs. This has apparently been a regular occurrence over the years.
Sound: Pretty much the best in Birmingham, with both rooms enjoying pristine 
sound: the bass will crump innards, but without any flabbiness, and a 
rock’n’roll band’s guitars will enjoy separate existences in the sonic field. 
Singers will usually rise above all of this action, with nuances still audible 
at high volume. The ceilings above the stages are draped with 
acoustic-softening shrouds, and the old wooden rooms are just the right size to 
sound good in the first place. Some bands bring their own engineers, but many 
use the in-house crew, all of whom seem to be adept at understanding the needs 
of a variety of musics, from dubstep to folk, reggae to rock, or jazz to 
singer-songwriter acoustic softness. The present system was installed three 
years ago, with the mixing desks upgraded even more recently.
Where to sit or stand: The rooms are of such a size that the sound quality is 
great throughout. The main deciding factor in where to stand is how crowded the 
venue is, for sightline reasons. The main room’s stage is fairly high, so a 
good view can be had almost to the rear, near the bar. When jazz acts or seated 
acoustic players perform, the cabaret-style tables come out, and the atmosphere 
becomes particularly concentrated and intimate.
Overall: The Hare & Hounds is in the south Birmingham suburb of Kings Heath, 
which many would say has now taken over from Moseley as the city’s alternative 
music enclave. It’s a Grade II-listed pub, built in 1820, but in its present 
shape since 1907. UB40 played their first gig here in 1979, and the building is 
right next door to the site of the Ritz Ballroom, a prime 1960s venue that 
hosted gigs by the Beatles, the Rolling Stones and Pink Floyd. The Ritz burned 
down in 2013, but thankfully the fire didn’t spread. The H&H has established 
itself during the last decade, and is now Birmingham’s main haunt for 
alternative artists, whether on the guitar or dance front. The owner/promoters 
are Leftfoot, an outfit that had its roots in the old Medicine Bar scene within 
Digbeth’s Custard Factory. Mainly a dance music promoter, their outlook since 
forming in 2000 could most closely be described as being aligned to the 
universe of DJ Gilles Peterson, concentrating on soul, jazz, dubstep, funk, hip 
hop, reggae, drum’n’bass and Afro-Latin sounds. Since shifting to the H&H (and 
the Bull’s Head in Moseley), they also work in tandem with a range of other 
promoters, each with their specialist concerns. One of the most imaginative of 
these is This Is Tmrw, who have an equal obsession with out-there electronica 
and distorto-guitar mayhem.
Address: 106 High Street, Kings Heath, Birmingham, B14 7JZ
Telephone: 0844 870 0000
Website: hareandhoundskingsheath.co.uk 
<http://www.hareandhoundskingsheath.co.uk>
Public transport: The 50 and 35 buses from Birmingham city centre stop very 
close by, and the 11 circular route is only a five-minute walk away. Kings 
Heath High Street is nowhere near an active train line, though.
 