
Australia beat England by four wickets in a tense, sternly contested 
Prudential Cup semi-final at Headingley yesterday. It was a match completely 
out of normal over-limit character in which, except during the last half hour, 
bowlers held the whip hand to such an extent that only 187 runs were scored 
from 65 overs. England first collapsed before the bowling of Gilmour; then 
partly recovered; retaliated; threatened to win; but at the last were beaten by 
the highest stand of the match between Walters and, once more, Gilmour.

The pitch was hard, slightly two-paced, but generally true. The help for the 
bowlers lay in the heavy cloud canopy under which the ball would swing sharply 
and late. In proof of that fact, the easy periods for batsmen coincided with 
the spells of sunshine.

The morning tests and decisions resulted in the two main spin bowlers being 
left out, Underwood from the English team, Mallett from the Australian. Those 
decisions seemed to foreshadow a monotony of seam bowling which might have 
lasted until Thursday. In the event the selections were confirmed; the swing 
bowlers had a splendid day.

When Ian Chappell won the toss, he put England in and opened his bowling with 
Lillee and, in preference to Thomson, Gilmour. Gilmour had not played in any of 
the previous Prudential Cup matches, nor ever in a first-class fixture in 
England. He is a powerfully built, fast-medium left-arm bowlers from New South 
Wales who, in the manner of Alan Davidson, goes over the wicket, swings the 
ball across the right-handed batsman to the slips, or for variety, makes it 
bite back.

He bowled magnificently in conditions more helpful than he often finds in 
Australia, yet he seemed flattered by the reactions of the early England 
batsmen who never assumed the stature of their county selves. Indeed, at times 
the innings looked like a rerun of some of those films that came from Australia 
last winter. Batsman after batsman pushed or fenced, bat far away from body, at 
the ball outside the off stump; and if only one of them was out to such a 
stroke, that was because the others did not contrive a touch.

Most of them were out to the ball that came back. Amiss went first, shuffling 
across his stumps and lbw; almost immediately Wood was bowled by a similar ball 
which perhaps kept a little low. Greig, sent in ahead of his time to cope with 
the peril, played far outside the off stump - only one of his length could have 
reached the ball - and Marsh, throwing himself far to his right, made the catch 
in front of second slip. Fletcher after almost an hour of uncertainty; Hayes, 
who hit a defiant four; and Knott, who barely registered, were all lbw.

England were then 36 for six in the eighteenth over and Gilmour had taken all 
six for 10 runs. In the next over Old nervously nudged Walker to second slip 
and England, 37 for seven, were at the bottom of the pit and as a macabre gloss 
to the story Thomson had not turned his arm. Snow and Denness, though 
technically no more impressive than their predecessors, put on a bold face. 
Snow sliced over the slips; Denness could not resist groping outside the off 
stump, but they mustered 15 before them before Snow was caught down the leg 
side. After Denness, substantially the highest scorer of the innings without 
ever looking convincing, was bowled by Walker's inswinger Arnold and Lever 
scavenged another 20 runs to a partly face-saving total of 93.

Headingley sank into dejection as Turner and McCosker, weathering their early 
troubles, reached 17 by the ninth over. Then Arnold, who occasionally made the 
ball move disconcertingly, had Turner lbw. At the other end Snow bowled with 
cold, controlled and accurate hostility. In his seventh and eighth overs the 
Chappell brothers were lbw to his late inswing. Then, in two overs, Old, 
relieving Arnold, bowled McCosker, Edwards and Marsh with sharp break backs. 
Australia were 39 for six needing 55 more to win.

The large Headingley crowd sensed England's chance to win and howled for 
wickets. Walters, who has so often proved vulnerable to swing bowling in such 
English conditions, and Gilmour, completely fresh to them, were together. The 
sun came through and the ball ceased to move so violently. Denness took the 
radically wise decision to give Snow his 12 overs straight. It must be a long 
time since he undertook such a spell but he shouldered it capably and 
unwaveringly. Old, however, seemed to be trying to bowl too fast, and gave 
Gilmour scoring chances he was quick to take.

Walters, putting a thousand bad English moments out of his mind, batted 
shrewdly. The pair took quick singles and gradually they drew up to their 
objective. At the last, the English bowlers had too little room for manoeuvre, 
or Denness for attacking field placings. At 78 for six, Gilmour slashed at 
Lever and Greig at second slip could not hold a stinging catch. The remaining 
runs were staunchly contested by Arnold and Lever but they came steadily and 
the game was over before tea - half a playing day before it would have ended in 
the full 120 overs had been sent down at the prevailing over rate. Australia 
will now meet West Indies in the final at Lord's on Saturday. For England, 
their bowlers brought them some honour in defeat.
 