
Some of my best and worst biking memories involve my children. When I'm 
cycling along the seafront with them singing in the trailer, or witnessing the 
grin on the eldest's face as he coasts downhill on his balance bike, the joy it 
brings can floor you. After all, beyond getting from A to B while subliminally 
exercising, isn't the key sell of cycling that it makes you feel like a kid 
again? Watching your children experience that is truly special.

Then there are those days when your toddler refuses to wear their helmet and 
screams, loud enough for your whole postcode to hear, they "hate going on the 
back of Mummy's bike", while you apologetically tell strangers: "He likes it 
when we get going…"

Or when you're 10 paces out of the house and the bike's already lying on the 
pavement, with the choice of lugging it around for an hour or admitting defeat. 
Go for the latter. They'll get it when they want to and you need to make the 
journey as easy and pleasurable as possible.

Here's my 10 tips for cycling with kids:

1 Take snacks. Kids hate everything when they're hungry and you want them to 
like their bike – and ideally you – for the ride, at least.

2 Make sure they're warm and comfortable, especially if they're in a seat or 
trailer, and not working to keep warm.

3 Take snacks.

4 Keep it short. Better to return home on a high than drag it out and risk 
sullying the whole experience.

5Parent according to personality type. One child may take to cycling right 
away while another requires constant coaxing. Adapt your methods, and use 
bribery where necessary.

6 Employ older children or relatives who like bikes to peer-pressurise your 
kids into liking it. Again, bribes work too.

7 Make sure they have the right bike. Lightness and size are the most 
important criteria. Visit a bike shop for a proper fitting.

8 Don't seem like you want it too much. Children can smell desperation and may 
even dislike cycling just to play you.

9 Make it fun. Start off on sunny days, sing songs, play games and make it as 
easy as possible for them.

10 Did I mention snacks?
 