
When I was 18, I took a gap year before starting university in Glasgow. I 
spent most of it at a high school in Wisconsin. One day in English class, we 
were briefly covering synonyms when the teacher asked me what words the Scots 
have for being drunk. "More than the Inuit have for snow," I said before 
starting a list: blootered, pished, steamin', reekin', mingin', gassed, jaiked, 
fu', bevvied …"

It's possible to be all of those things and more when completing Glasgow's 
(in)famous sub-crawl, a mightily booze-sodden tour of the city via its subway. 
Participants buy an all-day Discovery ticket (£3.80) for the world's 
third-oldest underground system (London is oldest, then Budapest) and get off 
for a drink at the nearest pub to all 15 stations on the six-and-a-half-mile 
circuit. By anyone's standards, it is a stern test of constitution, and often 
used as a coming-of-age ceremony for graduating students.

As these days the very idea of 15 pints makes me nauseous, and because some of 
the stops simply aren't worth visiting, I recently opted for a truncated 
version of this Glasgow institution.

It's wise to approach these things as a team, so I recruited prodigious 
drinker and fellow writer Graeme Virtue. Getting on the train at Kelvinbridge, 
we decided to skip St George's Cross and start in earnest at Cowcaddens with 
the newly openedJackson's Bar (95-97 Cambridge Street). It may be a little out 
of the way for people in the city centre, but it's just round the corner from 
the Cowcaddens station and so was perfect for our needs. Jackson's is large, 
new and, with sports screens and American-sized bar meals, an altogether 
modern, somewhat characterless place.

Things could hardly be more different at the Pot Still (154 Hope Street, 
thepotstill.co.uk <http://thepotstill.co.uk/>) the best choice of dozens of 
options close to Buchanan Street station. This little whisky specialist isn't 
aimed at tourists, but I imagine this is what the average visitor demands of a 
Scottish pub: a tartan carpet, an old whisky barrel for a centrepiece, and a 
collection of the vital spirit so vast, bar staff occasionally use a creaky 
ladder, like demented librarians in a golden library.
 Going underground … Glasgow’s 15-station subway system 
Our next stop, St Enoch, also offered a wide choice of bars and pubs, but 
though it's not right outside the station, we opted for trendy bar/cafeStereo 
(22-28 Renfield Lane,stereocafebar.com <http://www.stereocafebar.com/>). Hidden 
down the kind of alley in which Batman thwarts muggers, Stereo made some waves 
when it opened, in 2007, with an all-vegan menu. It's a good place to get food, 
not least because the next stop is south of the Clyde and it's a long time 
before items such as roasted aubergine wedges with marinara sauce and mint soya 
yoghurt will appear again.

I was glad to be a wee bit gassed when stepping out at Bridge Street station, 
the rosy booze haze easing the creeping anxiety of being in what appeared to be 
the wrong side of town.

From the outside, The Laurieston Bar (58 Bridge Street, thelauriestonbar.com 
<http://thelauriestonbar.com/2010/01/11/welcome-to-the-laurieston-bar-glasgow/>
) looks like the kind of place you'd only feel comfortable entering with a 
reputation that long preceded you.

We'd been there just a few minutes when a glass smashed and an ageing barman 
shouted, "Right, jaiket oan – get oot!" I was half way out the door before I 
realised he was kidding. When the culprit (a postgraduate, also on the 
sub-crawl) started to clean up the mess himself, the barman shooed him away. 
"No son, don't worry – relax." This creaking, musty joint may look uninviting, 
but there aren't many friendlier pubs in the city.

Over the next few stops, grim exteriors are matched with fairly drab, 
occasionally sinister interiors. As it was match day (not the best time to be 
at Rangers' Ibrox stadium) we went straight to Govan, the former stomping 
ground of Sir Alex Ferguson, Billy Connolly and Rab C Nesbitt. This was 
Glasgow's industrial heart during the ship-building boom; today, the transport 
museum looks across the Clyde as a memory of that glorious past. The ancient
Brechin Bar (803 Govan Road), handy for Govan station, was worth a look-in 
though, especially as pints of Tennent's were only £2.20.

Next stops Partick and Kelvinhall, two stations just north of the river, less 
than half a mile apart. Bustling though friendly,The Lismore whisky bar (206 
Dumbarton Road) is the best option for the former.The Three Judges (141 
Dumbarton Road,threejudges.co.uk <http://www.threejudges.co.uk>) at Kelvinhall, 
a real ale and cider specialist, attracts pilgrims from far and wide. So great 
was the choice behind the bar, in fact, that we found ourselves tarrying longer 
than intended.

Rapidly ticking off those drunken adjectives, we still took a little time to 
appreciate Alasdair Gray's new mural at the recently refurbished Hillhead 
station, before shambling round to ever-trendy Ashton Lane, near the University 
of Glasgow. There are few more solid recommendations in Glasgow than the
Ubiquitous Chip restaurant (0141-334 5007, ubiquitouschip.co.uk <>). It was 
helpful that I knew that in advance because when I checked my scribbled notes 
the next day I could only decipher: "Posh people, pooches, pints."

By the time we got to our final stop, the brand new Inn Deep (445 Great 
Western Road, inndeep.com <http://www.inndeep.com/>) just across the Kelvin 
river from Kelvinbridge station, our starting point, my ability to write had 
left me altogether. Sometime around then we bumped into someone we knew.

"Youse're looking pretty good if this is your last stop," he said.

"Ha ha! Yes!" we said, omitting to mention the six stops we'd missed out, or 
the fact my brain had turned into a lump of weird spaghetti. "Yes!"
 