
Australian skipper Steve Smith insists Glenn Maxwell remains available for the 
second one-day international against New Zealand and he wasn’t demoted to 
carrying the water because of his loose lips.

Maxwell was controversially looked over for the Chappell-Hadlee series opener 
at the SCG on Sunday, just three days after his public criticism of Matthew 
Wade.

Australia cruise to first ODI win as captain Steve Smith sets more records
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/04/australia-new-zealand-first-cricket-odi-match-report>
There was an awkward moment when Maxwell was made to run out the water to Wade 
during the wicketkeeper’s slashing of 38 off 22, which helped his side to a 
formidable total of 324-8 and a 68-run win on Sunday.

Maxwell was injected into the game as a substitute fielder, and took the catch 
to dismiss century-maker Martin Guptill, but was otherwise forced to look on as 
the Australians broke a five-ODI game losing streak.

After being dropped for this year’s tours of Sri Lanka and South Africa, he 
faces a tough task to break back into the side after Travis Head made a fist of 
his opportunity with a vital half-century.

Smith reiterated the point he made before the game that the saga had not 
affected his chances of selection, adding they simply decided to go with Head.

“It was more about giving Travis another opportunity. I think he played well 
last week. He scored 100 in Shield cricket so he’s in good nick,” Smith said. 
“He played pretty well today so he’s taken that opportunity.”

Maxwell last week caused a stir when he said it was “painful” having to bat 
below Victorian captain Wade during two recent Sheffield Shield matches, and it 
affected his chances of forcing his way into the Test team.

For his comments, Maxwell was fined by the team’s leadership group and 
publicly reprimanded by Smith and coach Darren Lehmann.

Asked if the rift between Maxwell and Wade had been closed, Smith said: “I 
think they’re OK. I made some comments the other day about the comments he made 
were disappointing and disrespectful towards Matty and we’ve moved on from that 
now.

“It’s about focusing on this series and it was great to get a win tonight.”
 