
Purton Green, Suffolk

Most houses are remote simply because they were built somewhere no one has 
thought to build anything. Purton Green, however, has achieved remoteness by 
having everything else around it disappear. The only remaining house of a "lost 
village", beneath its thatched roof lurks its own grand hall dating from 1250. 
The village's ancient thoroughfare is now a mere footpath across fields, with 
the nearest road 400 yards away (a wheelbarrow is provided to ferry your 
luggage), so if you don't feel cut off from civilisation here, there's probably 
no hope for you.
• From £466 a week (sleeps four), 01628 825925, landmarktrust.co.uk 
<http://www.landmarktrust.org.uk/BuildingDetails/Overview/237/Purton_Green>

Skiddaw, Scales Plantation, Cumbria
 Skiddaw, Scales Plantation, Cumbria, England 
Going without a telly, Wi-Fi and mobile is all well and good, but going 
completely off-grid as well adds a certain joyful thrill of disconnectedness to 
your holiday. These three traditional shepherds' huts in their own glades at 
the fringe of a wood mix freedom from utilities with lashings of compensatory 
comforts (and views), including top-notch cosy bedding and a separate 
well-appointed kitchen hut. Best of all though, is the luxury bathroom in a 
forest shelter where you can wallow in perfect peace.
• From £65 a night (sleeps four); 01275 395447, canopyandstars.co.uk 
<http://www.canopyandstars.co.uk>

Blagdon Water House Boats, Holsworthy, Devon
 Blagdon Water House Boats, Holsworthy, Devon 
There's a reason you haven't heard of Blagdon Water – it's a private waterway 
no boat may sail down. Which makes it all the more peaceful for the three 
traditional canal barges moored there in the heart of Ruby Country (the land 
between Exmoor, Dartmoor and Bodmin Moor). A hundred yards apart and each with 
its own little summerhouse or boathouse (and solar-powered electricity), the 
three bob about in the midst of their own 35 acres of rural loveliness where 
kestrels, barn owls and buzzards thrive.
• From £385 a week (sleeps four-six); 01409 255730, blagdonwater.com 
<http://www.blagdonwater.com>

Badrallach, Ross-shire
 Badrallach, Ross-shire, Scotland 
Above Little Loch Broom on the west coast of Scotland's far-flung Scoraig 
peninsula (it's 14 miles by road to the nearest shop), Badrallach offers no 
fewer than five ways to rest your head: an Airstream, a "normal" caravan, a 
gas-lit bothy, a campsite and a cottage whose sole concessions to the 21st 
century have been the installation of two power sockets and two electric 
lights. The owners also hire out bikes, kayaks and small boats in case staying 
in a hamlet with a population of 12 feels a little too urban.
• Cottage from £260 a week, Airstream £450, caravan £200, bothy £6 a night, 
campsite £6.50 a night; 01854 633281,badrallach.com <http://www.badrallach.com>

Rhenigidale Hostel, Harris, Western Isles
 Rhenigidale hamlet. Photograph: Navin Mistry/Alamy 
It wasn't until 1990 that the hamlet of Rhenigidale got its own road. Up until 
then, the inhabitants had to walk over hills or sail around the shore if they 
wanted to reach civilisation. However, the tiny community (no shop, no pub, no 
nothing) still feels like the end of the known world. It's a surprise then to 
find they have their own hostel here, a small white house with just 13 beds 
upstairs, a kitchen and communal lounge downstairs, and wondrous views out over 
the rugged Harris coast.
• Adult £12 a night, under-18s £7 (no booking); gatliff.org.uk 
<http://www.gatliff.org.uk>

Skiary, Loch Hourn, Highlands
 Skiary, Loch Hourn, Highlands, Scotland 
Hosted by a young, friendly and resourceful couple, Skiary lays claim to being 
Britain's most remote guesthouse. With no road access, visitors are ferried 
from the head of Loch Hourn to a world untouched by modernity. Off-grid as well 
as off-comms, evenings are a haze of Tilley lamps, whisky, board games and 
relaxation from a day spent roaming hills and mountains. Meanwhile, dinner ("we 
only serve fish we catch ourselves") is taken in a heated candle-lit greenhouse 
with exquisite views down the loch to the peak of Ladhar Bheinn.
• £89 a night including. breakfast, packed lunch, afternoon tea and dinner; 
01809 511214,skiary.com <http://www.skiary.com>

Old Kilmory Church, Argyll & Bute
 Old Kilmory Church, Argyll & Bute 
With the most westerly point of the British mainland just up the road it's no 
wonder there's no television reception here – and you can throw that useless 
phone into the sea too (the secluded beach just a mile away would be a good 
spot to do it). This former church has been niftily converted into a cosy 
dwelling, complete with log burner and cushioned window seats, so you can 
settle into daydream mode as you gaze out across the silent graveyard to the 
isles of Eigg, Rhum, Muck and Skye.
• From £345 a week (sleeps four); 01972 510262, sawdays.co.uk 
<http://www.sawdays.co.uk/special-places/britain/scotland/argyll-bute/old-kilmory-church>

Rock Villa Bed & Breakfast, Staylittle, Powys
 Rock Villa Bed & Breakfast, Staylittle, Powys 
An unusual L-shaped Methodist chapel built in 1768 to serve local hill 
farmers, Rock Villa still opens its doors to those seeking peace. A thousand 
feet up on an eight-acre smallholding (you can buy produce in season), the 
beautifully turned out rooms sport views of the Cambrian Mountains and the 
Clywedog Valley. Apparently, it is possible to get a single bar of mobile 
reception in one very specific place in the house but, for your own good, it's 
a secret the owners are keeping to themselves.
• Double from £75 (£65 for subsequent nights); 01686 430510, rock-villa.com 
<http://www.rock-villa.com>

Cae Einion, Snowdonia, Gwynedd

Since time immemorial, Snowdonia has served as a safe haven from the world, 
and this newly opened farmhouse is in the happy position of being a remote 
oasis within it. On a 750-acre farm, with the nearest house half a mile away, 
Cae Einion is king of all it surveys, commanding ridiculously spectacular views 
of the Cader Idris mountain range. There's underfloor heating throughout, while 
outside there are footpaths to the Cregennan Lakes and the Mawddach Trail along 
the estuary to the sea at Barmouth.
• From £530 a week (sleeps four); 0844 500 5101, underthethatch.co.uk 
<http://www.underthethatch.co.uk/caee>

Trannish Island Bothy, County Fermanagh
 Trannish Island Bothy, County Fermanagh 
When it's isolation you seek, take a leaf out of the holy book of many a 
hermit and head for a tiny island. Your adventure into the wilds begins before 
you even get to Trannish, since you have to paddle your way there across Upper 
Lough Erne (kayaks and canoes are available for hire). Restored last year, the 
island's bothy has been very smartly fitted out but you'll need your own food, 
bedding and drinking water. And for hermits in training, there's a campsite too.
• £8 a night or £80 for exclusive use (sleeps 12); £2 a night camping; 028 677 
22122,sharevillage.org 
<http://www.sharevillage.org/caravan-and-camp-site/trannish-island-bothy/>
 