
Google’s big bet on the future of virtual reality, Daydream, is finally 
available to buy, but is the Daydream View headset actually worth getting?


Daydream is the new VR platform from Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>. An evolution of what the 
company started with its Cardboard headset, it works on the same principle 
using a modern smartphone as both the screen and powerhouse.

Unlike Cardboard, Daydream has a set of rigorous standards that the smartphone 
must meet in order for it to be able to use the software and resulting headset 
and controller. Currently, only the Google Pixel smartphone is Daydream-ready, 
but more top-end smartphones are expected to be announced in the next year that 
pass muster and can be used with the system.

What is it?
 Pop the phone onto the fold-out flap and the Daydream app will launch 
automatically to guide you through the process. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for 
the Guardian 
Daydream View is Google’s new VR headset into which its Pixel smartphones 
slot. It’s actually two parts: the first is a relatively lightweight holder for 
your smartphone with a set of lenses and an elasticated strap so you can attach 
it to your face. But unlike Cardboard, Daydream View also comes with a small 
wand-like controller.

The Daydream View controller is a motion-controlled, three-button remote with 
a touchpad at the top and volume buttons on the side. It’s like a cross between 
the Siri remote for the Apple TV and a Nintendo Wii remote - it even comes with 
a wrist strap to stop you flinging it across the room.

Using it
 The small Bluetooth remote works well as a pointer, motion and touch 
controller. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
Like Cardboard and Samsung’s Gear VR headset, using the Daydream View is 
really easy. Simply fold down the front flap, put your phone buttons-side and 
screen facing the opening and close the flap. The screen orientates itself, as 
long as you have it roughly centre unlike Cardboard.

The Daydream app will launch, as long as you have it installed (it will prompt 
to install if you do not). Strap the device to your face making sure your 
vision is squarely in the middle of the lenses, then pick up the remote and 
press and hold the home button to orientate it and your headset.

From there you’re transported into the Daydream homescreen, where you can 
navigate to and open compatible apps and games. Here, you can also view the 
Play Store and other bits and pieces. The first time you start up Daydream it 
will walk you through a very good tutorial system and show you what it can do 
with a few short experiences. One involves throwing a stick for a fox to fetch, 
another involves manipulating planets, and there’s one that challenges you to 
fire coconuts into a tropical bay.

Within about five minutes you’ll be used to the basic interactions and how to 
use it.

Comfort
 The elastic latch can accommodate thicker or thinner smartphones, once there 
are more Daydream-ready phones available. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the 
Guardian 
Daydream is the most comfortable mobile VR headset I have used. It’s quite 
light at 220g without the phone, or 338g with a Pixel XL in the slot. It’s 
still weight that juts out from your face, but its single adjustable elastic 
strap keeps it in place when moving about.

Getting it at the right angle so that your eyes are centrally located within 
the lenses is tricky at first, meaning everything looks a bit blurry. Moving 
the band up or down on the back of your head and slowly tightening it by 
pulling the two D-rings apart you’ll get it right. I soon got the hang of it 
and got it comfortably in the right spot.

The headset is comfortable enough to wear for an extended period and easily 
wearable for the full length you’ll actually want to play or watch VR. After a 
solid 90 minutes of wearing it I was tired and wanted a break. It left some 
small marks on my cheeks that dissipated after two minutes. Other headsets have 
left ring marks around my eyes for some time, a bit like ski goggles, so the 
Daydream View is easier on the face.

The controller is simple to use too. The rounded shape is easy to grip, the 
touchpad sensitive enough without being overly so and the buttons are clearly 
delineated. When you look at the remove in the headset you can see it in VR, 
which helps ground it in reality. If you turn the remote in your hand, the 
virtual representation turns as you might expect it to.

Platform
 The Daydream platform is Google’s rival to Facebook’s Oculus, which has a 
similar mobile platform running on Samsung’s smartphones and Gear VR headsets. 
Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
The headset is just one part. Most of the work is actually done by the 
Daydream platform and the smartphone. With a Pixel XL motion was smooth and the 
performance was solid. The Daydream homescreen is particularly well laid out.

The pixel density of even a quad HD smartphone screen such as the Pixel XL 
isn’t high enough for a pin-sharp VR view. You can see individual pixels as you 
look through the viewer, which is reminiscent of smartphones from 2008.

How much the low-pixel density is noticeable depends on how well the content 
you’re viewing is thought out. In some things the experience is engaging and 
you simply don’t notice, but with others all you can see are the pixels, which 
ruins the magic.

There were some pretty good experiences already on offer with many more 
promised by the end of the year from third-party developers including the 
Guardian. Google’s Street View in VR is great, allowing you to explore 
landmarks and places that you might not get the chance to travel to.

YouTube’s VR or 360-degree video offerings are interesting, particularly that 
produced by the Natural History Museum, but the fidelity of the video is not 
very high. Because it’s streamed you need a solid internet connection, but even 
then the video is not as crisp as you’re used to in the non-VR world, which is 
a bit disappointing.

As the capture and streaming technology improves, so too will the picture 
quality of the videos. For now though it often feels like you’re viewing videos 
with the wrong prescription lenses in and can’t quite get it into full focus. 
This is particularly true when you’re trying to look at something that isn’t 
the focus of the video.
 Two lenses allow your eyes to focus on a screen a couple of centimetres in 
front of your face. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
You can also use the headset with 2D videos including Google Play Movies and 
regular YouTube videos. It projects a floating screen in front of you. Swiping 
on the touchpad shrinks or enlarges it, while the virtual interface is 
straightforward and easy to use. The videos are not as crisp as they would be 
on a computer or TV, but it’s a good way to isolate yourself from the world.

Photos taken with Google’s Cardboard camera app can also be viewed with the 
headset using Google Photos along with other bits and pieces, which is novel. 
The Wall Street Journal also has a VR app, showing some compelling 360 videos. 
But it also has text articles displayed in VR, which seems pointless when it’s 
an easier and better experience to simply read them in the real world on a 
computer or phone screen.

Most Daydream apps start in a room with a floating interface wall, which you 
use to select content. The WSJ VR app, for instance, starts in a 
fantastic-looking New York apartment with grand views and even a floating 
bookcase.

A couple of games were available for test: Wonderglade, Mekorama and Hunters 
Gate. All three ran smoothly and used the virtual space well. Wonderglade is a 
theme-park style offering packed with mini-games . You can play mini golf, a 
racing version of a marble maze and other carnival-style games. They all work 
well, but they’re supported by in-app purchases. I can see kids inadvertently 
running up bills if some control over purchasing isn’t employed. A pin can be 
set that you tap out in the virtual space to authenticate purchases, for 
instance.

Mekorama VR is a VR version of an existing game in which you guide a little 
robot through a geometric puzzle landscape, similar to Monument Valley. It 
works surprisingly well in VR using the controller as your pointer and grabber. 
It looks pretty sharp on the phone display.

Hunters Gate is a hack and slash-style game, a bit like the third-person 
isometric games of yesteryear given a virtual reality twist using the 
controller as your aiming wand and its trackpad as a joystick.

Overall, I was impressed by the VR gaming performance. It won’t beat what you 
can do on an HTC Vive, Oculus Rift or PS VR, but you can see why Google set 
rigorous standards for what can and can’t work with Daydream. It’s early days 
for mobile VR gaming, but Daydream as a platform is promising.

Observations
 The fabric pad that touches the face can be removed for hand washing, and is 
held in place by small velcro strips. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
 * Bluetooth audio, as with videos, is slightly behind and there’s no 
adjustments for it so it’s better to use wired headphones 
 * When not in use there’s a small elastic strap to neatly hold the controller 
on the inside of the lid of the headset 
 * The padding that touches the face can be removed and hand washed 
 * The remote is charged via USB-C 
 * There’s no hole for the phone’s camera to poke through so Daydream View is 
solely for VR, not augmented reality 
 * The Pixel XL got very hot when using the Daydream View, but you couldn’t 
feel it until you took the headset off 
 * Some unlucky people will feel sick almost immediately when putting the 
headset on 
 * Videos that move around too much putting the viewer on rails still made me 
feel sick, including one of Google’s Spotlight stories 
 * Extended periods within the headset is really quite tiring, 1.5 hours is 
about as long as I could do without needing a break 
 * Drift, where the display alignment to your head position shifts, happens 
quite a lot but holding the home button on the remote quickly re-centres things 
 * A Pixel XL with a full battery will run for around four hours between 
charges when using it for VR, which is plenty long enough 
Price

The Daydream View headset costs £69, but requires a Daydream-ready smartphone 
to use. The Google Pixel, costing at least £600, is the only device currently 
available.

Samsung’s Gear VR headset costs £99, but is equally restricted to Samsung’s 
Galaxy S6, S7 and Note 5 smartphones.

Verdict

Daydream View is the best mobile VR headset available at the moment. It’s more 
comfortable than competitors, is part of a promising new platform and is 
relatively affordable. But it suffers the same problem as Samsung’s Gear VR: it 
doesn’t have a killer feature that means everyone must have one.

The new headset currently only works with Google’s Pixel phones, which limits 
its appeal. If you own a Pixel phone, have tried Google Cardboard and thought 
it was amazing, you’ll love Daydream View. For those that are unconvinced that 
VR is the future, Daydream View won’t do anything to convince you otherwise.

Pros: no wires, comfortable for longer than you’ll probably want to wear it in 
one go; responsive and has an easy-to-use controller

Cons: drift is common, restricted to the Pixel phones for now, no killer app, 
no full joypad for more intense games, like other VR headsets will make some 
feel sick
 The remote is stored within the headset when not in use. Photograph: Samuel 
Gibbs for the Guardian  