
How much do you want Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> to 
know about you?

On 1 March, the company will institute new "privacy policies" that will add 
substantial detail to the picture Google keeps of each user.

Under the new rules the company will keep track of what you search for and how 
you use products like Google+, Gmail and YouTube. The information will be used, 
Google says, to "do things like suggest search queries – or tailor your search 
results – based on the interests you've expressed".

Not comfortable with the idea of coming face-to-face with your web history 
every time you fire up your browser? (I could have been looking for Hannukah, 
hanging chad or handbrake – why does it assume hangover cure?)

Here are five simple steps for keeping what you do on Google a little more 
private.

1) Don't use Google. There are other search engines out there – and other 
email platforms – and none is so ambitious as Google about figuring out who you 
are, what you like and what you're like. Unfortunately, none are quite as good 
at what Google does either.

2) Don't sign in. Or sign out of your Google account when you're not actively 
using Gmail, Google Calendar or Panoramio. (Let's face it: you've been spending 
way, way too much time on Panoramio). And when you sign back in, uncheck the 
"stay signed in" box.

3) Change your settings. Look at the upper right-hand corner of your browser. 
See your Gmail address? Click it. A drop-down menu appears. Click "account 
settings." Scroll down to "services." Click "Go to web history." It will read: 
"Web history makes searches better." Click "No, thanks." You can also clear 
your web history from this screen. The same trick can be accomplishedhere 
<http://www.google.com/history>.

4) Use Google Chrome's "Incognito Mode," or another private browsing mode. 
Don't be misled by the Incognito Mode icon, though. Simply wearing a 
trenchcoat, shades and a fedora while you browse will not keep your session 
private. Your computer won't collect cookies or record your online travels, but 
your server (or your company's server) will.

5) Don't Google yourself. Difficult advice to follow, we understand, and it's 
more a general online privacy guideline than a step to rein in Google. But 
repeated searches for your name or personal information such as your address 
can create avirtual map that leads right to you 
<https://www.eff.org/wp/six-tips-protect-your-search-privacy>.
 