
Welcome to the Guardian’s global public leaders hub. Over the next few months, 
supported by KPMG, Guardian journalists and freelances will be taking an 
in-depth look at the use of technology by governments around the world.

In a rapidly-changing world, fuelled by tech innovation, governments face a 
number of challenges that will require both more agile, short-term responses 
but also longer term, more strategic thinking, beyond the changing priorities 
of electoral cycles.

As people around the world live longer, public bodies face the challenge of 
providing services for all, usually against a backdrop of reduced public 
budgets. But technology changes in a wide range of our lives, especially 
transport and health, mean governments are playing catch-up on policy.

Now, more than ever, governments need to use technology in the most effective 
ways. The challenge they face isn’t just about investing in the right systems 
or apps; it’s also about cultural barriers and how to bridge the gap between 
the world of hipsters and public servants. Most tech startups are small and 
agile. Most government organisations tend to be more hierarchical and 
risk-averse. How can these two cultures come together to create better systems 
for citizens and businesses? And how can governments compete to hire and retain 
the tech skills they need, when they can’t compete with private sector salaries 
or perks?

From now until the middle of April 2017, we’ll be looking at how public bodies 
can best approach these challenges and highlight case studies from around the 
world.

We’ll be asking our readers to contribute to the series, too, with their own 
thoughts and comments on this vital area. If you want to contribute, drop us a 
line atpublic.leaders@theguardian.com <mailto:public.leaders@theguardian.com>

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 