
Cloud shadows sweep across the green of Treswallock Downs, in Cornwall, and 
the adjoining moorland. Skylarks sing above this expanse of open grazing where 
drifts of flowering grasses, sedges and rushes mix with granite outcrops, 
remains of ancient settlements, and turf sprinkled with tormentil.

From the top of Alex Tor the vista extends as far as Pentire Head on the north 
coast, west to the Cornish alps of St Austell and towards old china clay tips 
at nearby Stannon, now grassed over.

Beyond the moor’s northern edge, sun highlights the cliff of the slate quarry 
atDelabole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/jun/19/delabole-cornwall-slate-quarry-tour>
, the height of turbines on the adjacent wind farm, and the whiteness of the 
cheese factory at Davidstow.

But it is the tors of Brown Willy and Rough Tor that dominate this part of the 
moor, the ridges looming in the distance around the rectangular enclosure of 
King Arthur’s Hall. There, protected by a wire fence, tall granite slabs are 
set within wide earthen banks. Many of these standing stones slump inwards 
towards the boggy floor of cotton grass and sphagnum. It is uncertain whether 
this formation originated as a prehistoric ceremonial space or as an early 
mediaeval pound for livestock.

Today, a herd of Devon cows grazes around this isolated site and, in the 
distance, on Steping Hill, is a group of cream coloured cattle. Cows and their 
calves, sheared sheep and resting gulls populate inbye land bounded from the 
moorland by drystone walls.

The stream through the hamlet of sheltered Candra is bridged by lengths of 
granite and, in the valley bottom, blackberry flowers and foxgloves sway in the 
warm breeze. Upslope, a holiday cottage, is surrounded by pastures of 
pollen-rich grasses, sorrel and yellow vetch, and, on the skyline, horses and 
their foals gallop and buck across the rough, airy, land.

Back in St Breward crowds gather for the annual carnival parade, when drum 
majorettes, floats, carnival queens, a pipe band, morris dancers and fancy 
dress competitors move through the village streets inland, high above the 
distant shimmer of the sea off Polzeath.

Twitter: @GdnCountryDiary <https://twitter.com/gdncountrydiary>
 