
On the banks of Loch Lomond, a battle for cultural supremacy has been joined 
as intense as the Jacobite skirmishes that sanctified this soil 300 years ago. 
The largest inland expanse of water in Great Britain has been at the heart of 
Scottish culture and commerce for thousands of years. At its most northerly it 
announces the Scottish Highlands, while the most southerly point is barely half 
an hour’s drive from Glasgow.

Now, a southerly stretch of its bonnie banks is in ferment once more. A 
corridor of parkland bounded by trees near the village ofBalloch 
<https://www.visitscotland.com/info/towns-villages/balloch-p235111> is at the 
centre of a planning row which has evoked deep feelings about Loch Lomond 
sparked by a million childhood memories.

Flamingo Land <http://www.flamingoland.co.uk>, a leisure company that owns a 
theme park in Yorkshire, has been given preferred bidder status to develop 44 
acres into a holiday complex. The announcement sparked a furious online 
response from all over the world. It seemed unthinkable that a portion of 
Scotland’s history could be given to a firm whose name evokes something from a 
1980s George Michael pop video.

The company’s prospectus mentions the ubiquitous hotel, lodges and “glamping 
pods” as well as retail opportunities and adventure activity. They stress that, 
though they operate a theme park with adventure rides, their plans for Loch 
Lomond will bear no comparison. “It will not be a theme park,” a company 
spokesman said.

To date, more than 30,000 signatures have been gathered 
<https://you.38degrees.org.uk/petitions/say-no-to-the-proposed-changes-to-our-national-parks>
 by 38 Degrees, the petitions website. A cursory glance at the reasons for 
objection offers an indication of what many people instinctively felt when the 
development was announced.

Curiously though, the Scottish Campaign for National Parks 
<http://www.scnp.org.uk> which seeks to protect some of Scotland’s wild and 
open spaces by having national park status conferred upon them is relaxed about 
the development – for the moment.

James Fraser is a director of the SCNP and is also chair of the influential 
Friends of Loch Lomond <http://www.lochlomondtrossachs.org.uk>. Few other 
people know this area as well as he does. “Let’s face it,” he said, “there are 
unfortunate connotations with the name Flamingo Land. If they had been called 
something like ‘Forest Trail’ this wouldn’t have elicited anything like the 
heat. “I completely understand why so many people have been alarmed at what’s 
being proposed. But I think that many people have reacted without being aware 
of the history of this site. It comprises three parcels of land which had 
previously been in industrial use and which had only itself been re-generated 
recently to create a small park and trees beside the water.”

Scottish Enterprise, Scotland’s national economic development agency, which 
named Flamingo Land as the preferred bidders, has been painted as the villain. 
Yet it only stepped in to buy the land after a local campaign had prevented it 
becoming a building site for new houses. The land was always designated for 
economic development so long as it was in keeping with the surrounding 
environment.

The local community has also been broadly supportive. Residents and retailers 
in Balloch recently held a meeting to discuss ways of rejuvenating a beautiful 
but economically fading neighbourhood. The village stands at the end of a 
corridor of water that links it to the larger loch. The village wants to gain 
better access to the loch and, if the Flamingo Land plans are approved, it 
could provide the jobs and attractions that will attract visitors who want to 
stay in the area for more than just a day.

Michael Wright, of Scottish Enterprise, is not duly concerned about what is 
being proposed and feels that it will provide an economic opportunity in an 
area that had been neglected. “This land was always going to be redeveloped. 
The first stage was the development ofLoch Lomond Shores 
<http://www.lochlomondshores.com/> which had formerly been used as a gravel 
pit. This is the second stage and, though it will involve the felling of some 
trees, some of these were felt to have obscured desirable views of the greater 
loch.”

Loch Lomond’s global status does not rest simply on its beauty and the 
grandeur of the peaks that surround it. When Glasgow was at the height of its 
industrial powers, factory workers would arrive here by their trainloads to 
camp, swim and fish. The loch occupies a special place in the affections of 
urban, working-class families who grew up beguiled by sights and smells never 
encountered in their normal lives.

Fraser is adamant that he and the Friends of Loch Lomond would “strenuously 
oppose” any development that was not faithful to the beauty of Loch Lomond or 
to the memories of generations of Lowland Scottish families. “This part of 
Dunbartonshire is an unemployment blackspot and, so long as the development is 
carried out properly and sensitively, there’s no reason why the local community 
shouldn’t want to derive some economic benefits from it.”

There are others, though, who oppose the idea of any development in an area of 
such unspoilt beauty. In recent years, popular feeling prevented a windfarm 
development at Loch Ness and every step of a major housing development in 
Aviemore is currently being disputed

On Thursday morning through driving rain and leaden skies it was still 
possible once more to behold the unique splendour of this place. The site of 
the proposed development is several hundred yards back from the loch itself, 
the views of which are obscured by trees.

In the final analysis, Loch Lomond’s worldwide appeal will probably ensure 
that the development, when it happens, is as pristine, sustainable and 
sympathetic to the surrounding environment as anything containing “glamping 
pods” ever could be.

A free consultation would tell them that the name Flamingo Land must not be 
seen in the vicinity of this place.

DEFENDING THE LAND

A controversial windfarm development above Loch Ness by energy company E.ON 
was scrapped in June, delighting locals at Fort Augustus as well as protesters, 
who claimed the scheme threatened the area’s fragile ecosystem.

In 2015 the Loch Lomond and Trossachs National Park authority was accused of a 
“cover-up” over the resignation of one of its leading members for failing to 
declare shares in a gold mining company. Protesters say the goldmine, near 
Tyndrum, poses a danger to the surrounding flora and fauna.

Plans for quarrying near the New Lanark Unesco world heritage site 30 miles 
south of Glasgow at the famous Falls of Clyde caused an uproar in 2013. The 
proposal was ditched by the Scottish government after a petition signed by 
10,000 people.

 * This article was amended on 5 October 2016. The first paragraph originally 
said Loch Lomond was the largest inland expanse of water in the United Kingdom. 
It is the largest in Great Britain: Loch Neagh in Northern Ireland is the 
largest waterway in the UK.  