
Difficulty: Easy
Distance: 4.5 miles/7km
Typical duration: 2 hours 15 minutes
Start and finish: Park at the roadside near the entrance to Slindon College
Map: OS Explorer 121
Step-by-step details and maps ramblers.org.uk/slindon 
<http://www.ramblers.org.uk/route-detail?routeuid=4153-Slindon-Folly-South-Downs-West-Sussex>

In a nutshell


This walk goes through the spectacular landscape of the South Downs, starting 
from the unspoilt village of Slindon, which nestles in the rolling hills of the 
national park. The area is a magnet for walkers, with its winning mix of 
rolling farmland, lovely woods, great views and proper country pubs. Pretty at 
any time of the year, this route is particularly appealing in spring, when 
you’ll enjoy dazzling display of bluebells in the woods.

Alternatively, if you visit in autumn, you’ll have the chance to see Slindon’s 
quirky annualPumpkin festival <> with colourful displays on show from September 
to November. There are no stiles and only gentle climbs so it’s suitable for 
all the family.

Why it’s special 


Slindon is a charming village of brick and flint houses, with much of the 
landscape and houses in the care of the National Trust. The imposing 
Elizabethan manor house at the top of the village is now a boys’ college and 
the starting point of the walk.

As well as gorgeous Sussex countryside, you’ll also pass lots of interesting 
sights. First you’ll head up to the Folly, built for the Countess of Newburgh, 
to provide local employment after the Napoleonic wars. Then you’re guided 
through woodland leading to Nore Hill, famed for its bluebells and other spring 
flowers such as early purple orchids and wood anemones and a popular spot with 
butterflies in the summer. The woods leading to Nore Hill are actively managed, 
so don’t stray from the path. Keep to the footpaths and bridleways and obey the 
notices relating to on-going forestry operations.

The route winds through Slindon Park wood, which used to be full of beech 
trees, a few of which weathered the great storm of 1987 and can still be seen. 
In the woods, check out the area known as Slindon Bottom, a Palaeolithic beach, 
formed when the sea used to come all the way up here. As you head back to 
Slindon, take a short detour to look at the village’s early 19th-century 
lock-up, where criminals were held before being marched off to Arundel castle.

Before you arrive back at the start point you’ll head past a thatched railway 
carriage, complete with the guard’s compartment, built around 1874 and moved to 
this spot in 1906.

Reward yourself 


Head to Slindon Forge <http://www.slindonforge.co.uk/> café for a slice of 
cake or a light lunch. It’s a deli and farm shop too, should you want to stock 
up before you begin the walk.

Get there


The nearest stations are Arundel and Barnham, with direct services from London 
Victoria. Slindon is on the A29, just north of the junction with the A27.
 