
Category Moderate
Distance 8.4 miles/14km
Typical duration 4 hours 30 minutes
Start and finish The Old Dungeon Ghyll Hotel, Great Langdale
Map OS Landranger 90
Step-by-step details and maps ramblers.org.uk/greatlangdale 
<http://www.ramblers.org.uk/go-walking/find-a-walk-or-route/about-ramblers-routes/route-detail.aspx?routeUID=1930>

In a nutshell


This circular route through the Langdale valley in the Lake District National 
Park offers glorious mountain views, and all without too much serious exertion. 
Sticking to low levels, you meander along tracks, paths and across pretty 
bridges while admiring the peaks and scattering of mountain lakes, known as 
tarns. The final stretch is particularly spectacular, along the Cumbria Way’s 
much-loved route in the shadow of some of England’s finest mountain scenery.

Why it’s special


The route starts and ends at The Old Dungeon Ghyll Hotel, in a stunning spot 
in the valley, and home to the Hikers Bar, which has long been a popular 
watering-hole for ramblers. You can spend hours here soaking up the views and 
watching climbers scrambling up the crags behind the hotel, so it’s best saved 
until the end of your walk.

In many ways this is a perfect walk, taking in some of the UK’s most stunning 
and most photographed scenery. Heading east from the hotel past a campsite you 
pass the woodland-fringed Blea Tarn, which has a magnificent view from the far 
end across the tarn towards the Langdales. The route leads past Bleamoss Beck, 
then winds its way through the bracken landscape before crossing a grassy 
hollow to the foot of Wrynose Pass.

You’ll pass remote farms and cottages and cross ancient bridges, with the 
ever-changing views of the peaks upping the wow factor. Continuing through 
Elterwater quarry and over Great Langdale Beck, you eventually return to your 
starting point where a welcome pint awaits. Langdale and Elterwater were 
centres of the Lakeland slate industry and Elterwater is still a working 
quarry. Though the route is relatively easy it can be very boggy beyond Blea 
Tarn, so wear appropriate footwear.

Reward yourself


The Old Dungeon Ghyll Hotel <http:> has welcomed walkers and climbers for 300 
years. Originally a farm and inn, many famous climbers have stayed here and 
it’s the perfect place to swap stories and tips for hiking. The bar serves 
lunch and dinner and the garden’s a beautiful spot when the weather’s good. You 
could base yourself at the hotel and explore at your leisure.

Get there


Windermere train station is eight miles from Great Langdale. By road from 
Ambleside, follow signs for Coniston on the A593 to Clappersgate, and then 
signs to the B5343 to Langdale. Continue through Elterwater and Chapel Stile 
and on to the hotel.
 