
Distance 2.7 miles/4.4 km
Typical duration 2 hours
Start and finish Scottish parliament building
Start postcode EH99 1SP
Step-by-step details and maps ramblers.org.uk/arthur 
<http://www.ramblers.org.uk/route-detail?routeuid=2292-Arthurs-Seat-Salisbury-Crags-Edinburgh>

We set off at a clear and crisp 11am, ahead of what turns out to be the 
coldest Edinburgh night of the winter so far. Our route, expected to take two 
hours, has two ups and two downs: the Salisbury Crags and Arthur’s Seat.

Given the angle of the Crags, jutting out like a giant diagonal skimming stone 
stuck in the land, walkers are offered to the winds no matter which direction 
they face. So layer up. But with the most rewarding panoramic views of 
Edinburgh ahead of you, lean in and face the wind. This walk is almost 
immediately satisfying, so worth the bracing chill.

Beginning between Holyrood Palace and the Scottish parliament, we follow the 
route over the zebra crossing and on to the grassy hill. We’re confronted with 
a long, straight 20-minute climb and it doesn’t take long to realise this 
narrow launch ramp is like an escalator into a postcard.

Every 10 steps brings new perspectives in every direction. Below to your 
immediate right (north), is the formerScotsman building, now the HQ of Rockstar 
Games, the firm behindGrand Theft Auto. Beyond that, the stadiums of Easter 
Road and Meadowbank. Further beyond are Leith’s tenements and industrial docks, 
the river Forth and the wind turbines of Fife. Within five minutes you have a 
fascinating and rare aerial view of a city. Ahead is Edinburgh’s Old Town, 
south are the Pentland Hills and east you can see East Lothian and North 
Berwick.

You can’t stop too long though. No matter what time of year, the route is 
always chased by nippy winds. Our particular swooping trail is half exposed, 
half sheltered. In the sheltered sections you find complete calm, and we would 
have found complete silence too were it not for the lone bagpipe player 
practising in the middle of Holyrood Park below. Sometimes Edinburgh feels like 
a tourist trap, but at other times it just can’t help itself from being 
brilliantly and stereotypically Scotland.

Arthur’s Seat lies entirely within Holyrood Park, for years protected by the 
Queen’s own ranger service, but more recently directly managed byHistoric 
Scotland <http://www.historic-scotland.gov.uk>. It’s an odd thing to come 
across in the centre of a city, a ranger service. What on earth is there to do 
on such a small patch of 640 acres? The answers are found on information points 
around the hills; bat walks, history tours and educational events, such as the 
popular teddy bears’ picnic.

The rangers are based at the only new building in the park. It was built in 
2002 by local architect Malcolm Fraser, the only man this city trusts with its 
most important cultural new-builds and restorations. It’s a good resource for 
visitors, with toys for children and a public toilet.

After ascending and descending the arc of the Crags, we approach the tougher 
second stage of this circuit: Arthur’s Seat. Having lain dormant for about 350m 
years, the top of this former volcano now spouts out runners, tourists, 
families and dog walkers. The hill also helps cure the hangovers of students 
from Edinburgh University’s Pollock halls of residence; a 30-minute walk up the 
Seat is sure to clear your head.

Sticking to our route, we pass the Radical Road (a runners’ favourite) and 
zigzag up the rock steps of Guttit Haddie, so-called as it resembles a gutted 
haddock. Imagine a mini Ben Nevis with its population concentrated to an even 
tighter path. It can get busy here on weekends. Even on week days you’ll be 
lucky to ever be the only person on the hill, given how close it is to the city.

Again, it takes mere minutes for everything below to become a toy town. The 
Royal Commonwealth Pool, recently refurbished for the 2014 Commonwealth Games, 
lies in the palm of your hand. Marchmont and The Meadows are just a finger-walk 
behind that. And just over your right shoulder is the city’s jewel,Edinburgh 
Castle <http://www.edinburghcastle.gov.uk>, hanging above the cranes and 
building sites of the ever-expanding west end.

Onwards to the summit, 250 metres above sea level. The land to your east forks 
off north and south, opening wide for the dark North Sea beyond. In comparison, 
our next destination of Duddingston Loch seems like a boating pond. In fact, 
it’s a wee nature reserve loved by bird-watchers.

Duddingston village’s real gem is The Sheep Heid Inn <>. It takes just 10 
minutes to get from hilltop to tap. Famously Edinburgh’s oldest pub, built in 
1360, it’s got a roaring fire, local ales on tap and a two-lane skittle ally to 
warm you right up. After a pie and a pint at the Sheep Heid, completing the 
rest of the circuit is a breeze around the back of the Seat.

If you need any further inspiration to climb the Crags and Arthur’s Seat, look 
no further thanYouTube for the 1981 film An Edinburgh Volcano 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kFIREm6M4Og> by the late, great climber and 
broadcaster Tom Weir. He tells how the sharp jutting cliffs inspired the 
founder of modern geology James Hutton. It’s no wonder. Whether you’re a 
visitor or a hungover student, a jaunt up Arthur’s Seat always inspires.

Get there

Edinburgh’s Waverley rail station is a 15-20 minute stroll from the start of 
the route. The Scottish parliament building can also be reached via Lothian Bus 
services 35 and 36, which run through the city centre.
 