
Distance 2.4 miles/3.9 km
Typical duration 45 minutes
Start and finish Charing Cross railway station
Start postcode G2 3HW
Step-by-step details and maps ramblers.org.uk/glasgowcharingcross

In a nutshell

Scotland’s largest city has many sides – and this short walk shows off its 
green spaces and fantastic architecture. Starting from Charing Cross station, 
you stroll through Kelvingrove park, a Victorian oasis, passing fountains and 
ponds, an old bandstand, memorial sculptures and pretty townhouses. The route 
leads you past some of the city’s most impressive buildings while following a 
stretch of the river Kelvin. It’s a great walk for the family. Within 
Kelvingrove park there’s a skate park and play area for youngsters to enjoy – a 
great way to break up the walk.

Why it’s special

Although this is only a short walk, there is so much to see along the way. As 
you head towards Kelvingrove park, you can’t miss the strikingMitchell Library 
<http://www.glasgowlife.org.uk/libraries/the-mitchell-library/pages/home.aspx>. 
Built in the neoclassical style in 1891, it’s one of Europe’s largest public 
libraries and a distinctive landmark, its green dome easily spotted in the 
Glasgow skyline.

In the park you’ll walk past carefully tended flower beds to reach the Stewart 
memorial fountain. Built in honour of Lord Provost Robert Stewart, who set up 
the city’s fresh water supply from Loch Katrine, it’s decorated with images of 
the Trossachs, where the loch is located.

There’s a skate park and a play park, should you (or any little ones) fancy a 
break – and then you head on to the river Kelvin, crossing over it before 
walking along its banks. The Kelvingrove bandstand, dating from 1924 and 
surrounded by an amphitheatre, has been restored, hosting gigs by Belle and 
Sebastian among others throughout last summer’s Commonwealth Games.

While you’re in the park, keep a lookout for the wildlife. Brown trout and 
salmon swim in the river and you may see grey heron, mallards and even 
kingfishers. Also look out for grey squirrels and red foxes, and other bird 
life including chaffinches, blackbirds, redwings and blue tits.

From the park, the final leg of the walk takes you past a stunning terrace of 
Victorian townhouses on Park Circus (one of the most expensive postcodes in 
Glasgow) and the baroque King’s Theatre, before you arrive back at the start.

Reward yourself

The perfect place to stop for refreshments along this route is An Clachan cafe 
<http://www.kelvingroveparkcafe.co.uk>. Located amid the greenery of the park, 
it was built in 1911 for the Scottish Exhibition of Natural History, Art and 
Industry.

Get there

Charing Cross station can be reached within one change from most stations on 
the Glasgow rail network. For further information visitwww.travelinescotland.com
 <>

 * This article was amended on 7 February. It originally incorrectly claimed 
that Glasgow was Scotland’s second-largest city (it is the largest) and the 
Kelvingrove bandstand has fallen into disrepair – when in fact it was restored 
in time for the Commonwealth Games celebrations.


 <>
 