
Difficulty Moderate
Distance 2.5 miles/4km
Typical duration 2 hours
Start and finish Stac Pollaidh car park on the Achiltibuie road
Map OS Landranger 15
Step-by-step details and maps ramblers.org.uk/stac 
<http://www.ramblers.org.uk/go-walking/find-a-walk-or-route/about-ramblers-routes/route-detail.aspx?routeUID=2318>

In a nutshell


Nothing can quite prepare you for the stark beauty of Scotland’s far 
north-west, and climbing Stac Pollaidh shows off this area at its very best, 
treating you to panoramic views over Britain’s great wilderness. Other than a 
very steep climb to the ridge, the rewards far outweigh the effort, with 
relatively straightforward terrain to negotiate.

Be prepared for a short, simple scramble to reach the ridge (easily 
manageable, just take extra care), from which you’ll enjoy the kind of views 
that you’d expect to have to climb for miles to experience – and you might even 
spot a golden eagle or red deer.

Why it’s special


Rising from a maze of small lochs and rocky outcrops, the mountains in this 
region possess a surreal quality that owes as much to the other-worldly 
emptiness of their surroundings as the suddenness with which they rise from 
them.

Stac Pollaidh is a colossal ice-smoothed lump with a distinctive spiky-topped 
ridge. It has been of fascination to geologists for years. Consisting of 
chocolate-red sandstone, it rests on the Precambrian metamorphic bedrock of 
Lewisian Gneiss, formed 1,500 million years ago.

As this is the most visited peak in the north-west Highlands, Stac Pollaidh 
saw a lot of erosion, its surface being worn away by the footsteps of the 
people who flocked here seeking the beautiful views. These days, the mountain 
has a constructed path, making the climb up much easier and helping with 
navigation too.

This route heads up steadily, the final ascent is very steep, well worth the 
effort to reach the ridge. Gaze south and west and you’ll be looking over Loch 
Lugainn to the Summer Isles in the mouth of Loch Broom. Look north and you’ll 
see the staggeringly beautiful Inverpolly Nature Reserve and the peaks of 
Assynt beyond.

Word of warning: the weather can deteriorate rapidly, making the path more 
difficult to follow, so be sure to check the forecast in advance and ensure 
you’ve adequate clothing in case the weather does turn; it has caught out 
many-a walker.

Reward yourself


There’s no pub or cafe in this remote location, but Am Fuaran 
<http://amfuaran.co.uk/> is a gem of a bar, tucked away on the tip of the 
Coigach peninsula in Altandhu. Famed for its freshseafood, it’s worth a short 
drive to enjoy the sunset over a quiet pint and a plate of local poached salmon 
or prawns.

Get there

Scotbus 811 runs from Ullapool to Reiff, passing Stac Pollaidh car park. 
Unfortunately, the gap between the outward and return services doesn’t always 
leave enough time to climb the mountain. Check the timetable at
travelinescotland.com <http://travelinescotland.com/welcome.do>. By road, Stac 
Pollaidh is off the A835 from Ullapool.
 