In February, a consortium of businesses and environmental groups, including 
Kimberly Clark and Canada’s Globe and Mail, won a 16-year fight to restrict 
logging in which rainforest?  Great Bear, British Columbia Good one!  Tongass 
National Forest, Alaska  Hoh Rainforest, Washington  Mount Hood, Oregon 
According to a report from the US Department of Agriculture, nearly 30% of 
which type of pollinator died last winter in the US because of pesticide use 
and habitat loss?  Bumble bees  Butterflies  Honey bees Buzz! You got it.  
Beetles Which company debuted a meat-free burger in New York and California 
restaurants this year that bleeds like beef but is made entirely from plants?  
Modern Meadow  Memphis Meats  Beyond Meat  Impossible Foods Yes! The line to 
eat one of these bad boys at a New York restaurant was over two hours long. 
Which type of renewable energy project has been a target of Trump’s hate tweets 
because of its proximity to one of his golf courses?  Solar  Hydropower  
Offshore windYup. Trump didn't want his view interrupted.  Nuclear This summer, 
Tesla finalized a $2.6bn deal to buy a power company that produces solar 
"shingles" – photovoltaic material that can be fashioned into the shape of a 
roof. What is the name of that company?  First Solar  SolarCity That's right. 
It is now the largest solar energy services provider in the US.  Sun Power  
Trump Solar In September, which US state became the first to introduce overtime 
for its farm workers?  California Yes! The state's 800,000 farm workers will 
now be eligible for time-and-a-half pay after 40 hours of work a week.  Iowa  
Texas  Illinois Which fast food chain received an "A" from the National 
Resources Defence Council for its efforts phase out antibiotics in its meat 
products?  McDonald’s  Chick-Fil-A  Burger King  Chipotle Most of the companies 
that saw improved grades in 2016 did so because of their commitments to end 
antibiotics use in their chicken supply. A tech giant issued $1.5bn in green 
bonds this year to fund renewable energy, energy efficiency and conservation 
efforts. Who was it?  Facebook  Apple Apple's green bond will fund the 
company’s conversion to 100% renewable energy, installation of more energy 
efficient heating and cooling systems and an increase in the company’s use of 
biodegradable materials.  Google  Microsoft According to a study by four 
environmental groups, how much in annual subsidies does the Canadian government 
offer to its oil and gas companies?  Nothing  $5m  $3.3bn You got it!  $1.3bn 
In November, nearly 400 companies and nonprofits signed a letter to Donald 
Trump to express support for the Paris climate agreement. Which of these 
companies didn't sign?  Monsanto  Tiffany & Co  Staples  Cisco Bingo!  You got… 
 Oops! Better read more Guardian Sustainable Business in 2017 if you want to 
impress your friends.  Aced it!  Aced it!  Good job! We can tell you're the 
smart one at dinner parties.  Good job! We can tell you're the smart one at 
dinner parties.  Good job! We can tell you're the smart one at dinner parties.  
Good job! We can tell you're the smart one at dinner parties.  Not bad! Still, 
could be better..  Not bad! Still, could be better..  Oops! Better read more 
Guardian Sustainable Business in 2017 if you want to impress your friends.  
Oops! Better read more Guardian Sustainable Business in 2017 if you want to 
impress your friends.  Challenge your friends Submit answers  