
“Quite often people are in hospital and they’ve got nothing: no food, no 
clothes, no toiletries,” says Kate Gillespie, Derventio Housing Trust’s 
strategic lead for itsHealthy Futures 
<http://www.derventiohousing.com/what_we_do/healthy-futures.html> initiative. 
“We get all that sorted out, so people at least have a bit of dignity when they 
are discharged.”

That’s just the start of the scheme’s work with homeless people due to leave 
hospital. Many have multiple, complex needs, such as mental health problems and 
addictions, and are trapped in a vicious cycle of ongoing health issues and 
repeat admissions.

Over a 12-week period, staff work intensively to find housing for patients, 
settle them into their new homes and help them live independently – while 
making better use of primary care, rather than relying disproportionately on 
acute services.

“Sometimes it’s because they don’t manage their health, so they actually get 
ill enough to need to go in [to hospital] all of those times,” Gillespie says. 
“We’ve also got people who are going in because it’s their social contact. 
They’re so isolated that the only kind of love and nurture they get is a trip 
to A&E, where they get a sandwich and a cup of tea and a ‘there, there’ from 
the nurses. When someone has nothing else they’re going to keep coming back for 
it.

“It’s like they’ve got a dependency on acute care. We transfer that dependency 
to us, and then take the time to wean them off it. If we get someone who’s in 
A&E three times a week, the next step down from that is a walk-in centre. Then 
their GP, then the pharmacy.”

Healthy Futures, which also offers brief interventions to help with the timely 
discharge of inpatients with less complex housing and support needs, has worked 
with more than 330 patients since it began in October 2013. Some 170 patients 
have received ongoing community-based support.

Guardian Public Service Awards 2016 Public Servant of the Year winner: Helen 
Backus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2016/nov/30/guardian-public-service-awards-2016-public-servant-of-the-year-winner-helen-backus>
In the six months before becoming Healthy Futures clients, those patients had 
been admitted to acute beds on 487 occasions, had gone to A&E 616 times, and 
had called 999 and been taken there by an ambulance 364 times.

The project has led to an 88% fall in avoidable admissions of clients, a 90% 
drop in clients’ visits to A&E, and 84% fewer 999 ambulance transfers. Hospital 
stays have also been cut by an average of 16 days. Two thirds of patients felt 
their physical health had improved, and the same proportion reported better 
mental health.

Healthy Futures’ achievements come despite working in a climate of cuts to 
adult social care, at a time when finding housing is harder than ever. Key to 
getting funding has been its use of robust data proving its impact and 
efficiency. Patients give consent for their health records to be accessed, so 
their use of acute care before working with the project can be tracked – and 
commissioners can clearly see the positive effect.

Great staff are also vital, Gillespie says. “They’re just amazingly capable 
and patient and resourceful. I’m immensely proud of them.”
 