
Personal assistants (PAs), employed by people with disabilities to look after 
them in their own home, are being trained by nurses to provide bespoke clinical 
care, thanks to a collaboration between the NHS and a West Sussex charity.

This not only boosts the professional development and status of PAs, but also 
gives their employers confidence that they are receiving an all-round 
individual package of care.

West Sussex-based charity Independent Lives <http://www.independentlives.org/> 
provides support services to people with disabilities living at home. Most are 
in receipt of a direct payment from the local authority or a personal health 
budget from the NHS.

Guardian Public Service Awards 2016 Public Servant of the Year winner: Helen 
Backus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2016/nov/30/guardian-public-service-awards-2016-public-servant-of-the-year-winner-helen-backus>
Many of its clients employ a PA to support them in their daily lives. Despite 
the fact that many of these clients have complex health requirements, PAs 
generally have very little clinical training. And as clinical commissioning 
groups extend the use of personal health budgets, the need for trained PAs is 
increasing.

The charity has responded by developing its own training programme in 
conjunction with NHS England, the local continuing healthcare team and five 
local individuals and families who employ PAs. “We listened to them and what 
their needs were, so we ended up with a really good person-centred service,” 
says Katherine Beard, its integrated services manager.

Since the start of the project, 20 PAs have completed the training, which is 
designed and delivered by qualified nurses. “We have a pool of nurses. When we 
receive a referral, we match it with the nurse who has the clinical competency 
in that area.” The referrals traditionally involve respiratory care, care of 
people with a tracheostomy or enteral nutrition (tube feeding) needs.

One of the nurses, who has a postgraduate teaching qualification, has 
developed accessible, illustrated workbooks to take trainees through the 
theory, as well as infection control and good communication. Two weeks before 
the face-to-face training starts, the PAs study the workbook and relevant 
YouTube clips.

The nurse carries out the training in the employer’s home, so that it can be 
personalised as much as possible. She goes through the workbook with the PAs 
and then demonstrates the practical skills using the employer’s equipment. She 
also sits with each PA to work through an individual competency sign-off form. 
Finally, she will give the PAs a quiz to make sure they have understood 
everything and can be confirmed competent. “The NHS is telling us that it has 
to be quite thorough,” says Beard. “When you’re dealing with tracheostomy care 
it can be life or death, so these are serious areas that you’re providing 
support in.”

Guardian Public Service Awards 2016 overall winner: Sevenoaks district council
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2016/nov/30/guardian-public-service-awards-2016-overall-winner-sevenoaks-district-council>
Feedback from employers has been very positive. One was “over the moon,” says 
Beard: “She said that for over two years she’d been battling to get training 
and support, and she felt so reassured that her PAs were trained as a result of 
the pilot.” PAs also rate the training highly. “These people often work for 
years as PAs but come out at the end of it with no history of CPD (continuing 
professional development). So this helps a lot,” says Beard.

Other social care providers are interested in buying the training and 
Independent Lives will use any profits to improve the service, she says.
 