
Local authorities have long had a duty to increase the energy efficiency of 
people’s homes, says James Sommerville, manager ofWarm Homes Oldham 
<http://www.oldham.gov.uk/warm_homes_oldham> – but tying that into health 
outcomes, rather than simply poverty and climate change, is a completely new 
way of thinking.

In its first three years, Warm Homes Oldham, which was initially set up with 
funding from Oldham council, Oldham clinical commissioning group and local 
housing providers, has helped more than 3,500 people out of fuel poverty; 
hospital visits and demand for mental health services have, in turn, been 
reduced.

Guardian Public Service Awards 2016 Public Servant of the Year winner: Helen 
Backus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2016/nov/30/guardian-public-service-awards-2016-public-servant-of-the-year-winner-helen-backus>
Funded according to the payment by results method, the scheme aims to help 
more than 1,000 residents with health conditions out of fuel poverty each year. 
Interventions include installing insulation and more efficient boilers, giving 
assistance with tariff switching, accessing benefits, using heating systems 
better and clearing debt with energy companies.

Health problems targeted include those traditionally suffered by older people 
and associated with cold weather, such as strokes, and conditions affecting 
children, like asthma. An important third strand is mental health issues, 
linked to social isolation triggered by a reluctance to invite friends and 
family into a cold home.

In an independent evaluation of the scheme after the first year, 60% of 
respondents with a physical health problem said it had had a positive impact on 
their health, while 80% reported a positive impact on their general health and 
wellbeing. Almost all those who self-reported as being at “high risk” of mental 
illness moved to “low risk” and 84% of people helped were spending less on 
heating. And an analysis by Oldham clinical commissioning group of a sample of 
800 residents in the scheme found that emergency hospital admissions had fallen 
by 32%.

With the cost of a mental health intervention put at £942, the potential for 
savings is huge, says Sommerville. “Improving mental health is one of the 
‘hidden’ benefits of warm homes, especially for younger people who are in OK 
physical health,” he explains.

Potential clients – who get in touch after seeing the scheme advertised, or 
are referred by other agencies – are visited by a staff member, who works out 
the kinds of help they need, then gets the relevant partners involved.

“It’s much easier to help face-to-face, especially when they’re elderly or 
vulnerable – rather than trying to do it on the phone or on a website,” 
Sommerville says. He is proud that the scheme not only adopts a “whole house” 
approach – assessing all issues in a home, rather than just dealing with one 
problem and going away – but also a “whole person” approach.

Guardian Public Service Awards 2016 overall winner: Sevenoaks district council
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2016/nov/30/guardian-public-service-awards-2016-overall-winner-sevenoaks-district-council>
Clients speak of being lifted out of depression and periods of feeling 
suicidal, caused by months or even years of having no heating. One woman told 
Sommerville having new insulation had transformed the life of her daughter, who 
suffers from the circulatory condition Raynaud’s disease.

“For someone heating [their home] when they haven’t before, it makes a huge 
difference to their life satisfaction,” Sommerville says. “Making people’s 
homes more energy efficient ticks so many boxes – it’s a no-brainer.”
 