
Deborah Smith
As The Vegetarian was my first translation I had no idea how any aspect of the 
process worked, let alone what I would do day by day. Having spent most of my 
life reading, and making no distinction between work in translation and in 
English, I decided after graduating that I would learn a language and become a 
literary translator. I chose Korean partly for pragmatic reasons, because I 
knew the country had a lively literary scene, but in fact I had read nothing 
from there before, because there were no translations. Rather optimistically, I 
put on my Twitter bio that I was a translator, and eventually I suggestedThe 
Vegetarian to a publisher, who asked me to translate it. When I began I didn’t 
know what the usual author-translator relationship was, whether you were 
supposed to get in touch, or even if Kang spoke English. So I just went ahead 
and translated the whole book, sent it in with a list of questions, and waited.

The Vegetarian by Han Kang review – an extraordinary story of family fallout
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/24/the-vegetarian-by-han-kang-review-family-fallout>
Han Kang
The Vegetarian had already been translated into several languages, none of 
which I could read. When I saw these books it always felt weird to have my name 
and picture on them but not really knowing what was inside. So I was very happy 
when it was translated into English because it is my only other language, and 
reading through Deborah’s translation, and her notes and questions, it was 
fascinating to ponder on the subtleties and possibilities of language. I sent 
back answers to her queries and some questions of my own and we started our 
exchange of emails. Sometimes I’d send a whole page just for a single line, but 
they were mostly short, and very pleasant, exchanges.

DS
The UK working day is almost exactly opposite to that in Korea so you either 
have to get up early or stay up late to have any sort of crossover. As I’m a 
morning person I get up, check any overnight emails, and then start work 
straight away, often before even showering. Until recently I would just work 
all day, only stopping when my mind fell asleep at night. I’ve recently managed 
to slow down a bit, and I even sometimes go outside for a walk. If a passage or 
sentence takes more than a couple of goes of thinking about, I mark the 
document and move on. It is better to translate in big chunks. You get into the 
flow and you don’t want to be snared on something as you can easily lose your 
way. The really nice thing about translation is that you don’t get writer’s 
block. You know that if you sit down at your computer for X number of hours you 
will produce X number of words. It makes you feel very productive and that you 
have earned a gin at 6 o’clock.

Man Booker International prize serves up victory to The Vegetarian
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/16/man-booker-international-prize-serves-up-victory-to-the-vegetarian-han-kang-deborah-smith>
HK
I’m a morning person too, which is when I write my fiction. And I also go for 
walks, although often just in my apartment, pacing up and down, thinking about 
my work because, unlike Deborah, I do get writer’s block! I don’t write in the 
afternoons, so instead I either teach or read or deal with my emails or 
questions of translation. Our long distance system has worked very well, but it 
was very nice to have met Deborah last year in Norwich, we got through so much 
so quickly! And she has also now visited me in Seoul too.

DS
We have developed quite a routine in Seoul. Kang takes me to lunch – somewhere 
vegetarian – and then we will go to a gallery I never would have found for 
myself. Just being in the city makes me think of things related to her work, 
which I then attempt to discuss with her in my rusty Korean. After The 
Vegetarian, Kang and I worked on her next novel, Human Acts, which required far 
more conversation about what aspects of Korean life may or may not be 
intelligible to a UK readership. Yet even though it involved much more contact 
between us, it was completed in a more orthodox way thanThe Vegetarian. Back 
then, since I had no idea how long it took to translate a book, I just did it 
as quickly as I could and ended up sending it in three months ahead of my 
deadline. But at least I learned one thing about the publishing industry from 
the incredulous response of my editor: that it is as rare as hen’s teeth for 
someone to deliver early.

• The Vegetarian 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/357559/s/the-vegetarian/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, published by Portobello, is winner of the Man Booker International prize 2016.
 