
Haringey has worked hard to transform itself. We have a new brand, a new 
identity and an increased determination to demonstrate that outcomes for 
children and families come first. This is why we’re looking for exceptional 
candidates to join our social care teams.

Tell us about Haringey

Haringey is a borough in the north of London. It has great transport hubs, 
comparatively affordable housing, is exceptionally economically diverse, and 
changes fast. Some 190 different languages are spoken in our schools.


 We are home to Alexandra Palace. The iconic building opened in 1873, has 
survived two fires, hosted the first ever television broadcast, and has hosted 
extraordinary events for millions of people over the last 140 years. And let’s 
not forget the world-famous Tottenham Hotspur football team.

 Tomorrow’s leaders, artists and innovators are growing up in our borough, but 
they can only achieve their potential with our whole-hearted and expert 
support. Our vision is to be a place where children and young people thrive, 
and to ensure that every child in Haringey has the best start in life, 
including world-class education.

How has children’s services developed?

Our last Ofsted inspection in 2014 graded our services as “requires 
improvement”, which was balanced by the outstanding achievements in our 
schools. The Ofsted grade has given us a platform to work from and we have 
completely restructured our services, creating new single point of 
access/multi-agency safeguarding hub and assessment teams, as well as a new 
early help service. We are also very proud that we have a stable, permanent 
management team who are committed to making Haringey the place to be.

What does social work look like in Haringey?

 Haringey has adopted the Signs of Safety model – an 
internationally-recognised, strength-based, safety-focused approach. It 
provides workers and families with a common language that immediately 
identifies what works well, which areas are more of a concern, and where our 
social workers can help families achieve the best start in life for their 
children.

 We have manageable caseloads that allow social workers to do the right work 
with the right children at the right time, and gather children’s views through 
direct work by using the Signs of Safety toolkit. We are trying to reduce the 
bureaucracy so that social workers can spend more time with families and will 
get the right management support to achieve the best plans and outcomes.

Are there any opportunities to join the teams in Haringey?

We are always looking for experienced and motivated social workers to join our 
teams. You will become part of a forward-thinking, professional and ambitious 
service. We will help you meet career aspirations by supporting and offering 
you opportunities to grow as a social worker .

 Come and talk to us at our upcoming recruitment evening; meet senior managers 
and your peers and let them tell you what it’s like to work here.

Who is your ideal candidate?

Someone who puts children at the heart of everything they do, and who realises 
that no two cases are the same. We are looking for people who will respect and 
trust each other as professionals, remembering that whatever our discipline, we 
work together for the sake of children and young people.


In short, we want people who are ambitious for themselves as well as the 
community they support, and who will work with us and not just for us.

What can you offer in return?

For our social workers, we offer a salary that has been benchmarked against 
neighbouring boroughs and is one of the highest on offer. In addition, and 
depending on which team you join, we offer up to £3,000 as a recruitment 
payment within the first 12 months. Eligible social workers also enjoy a yearly 
retention payment of up to £3,000. We have a relocation package worth up to 
£7,000 and generous annual leave starting at 30 days.


As we are passionate about career development, we will always recruit from 
within where we can. For those who aren’t quite ready, we provide opportunities 
for staff to enhance their skills and experience to reach the next stage in 
their career pathway.


Ours is a learning environment and we are committed to supervision, support 
and continuing professional development for all our employees. The Signs of 
Safety model has helped bring clarity to our practice approach by focusing on 
the strengths and safety that families are able to make use of. We are also 
preparing for Social Work Accreditation by 2020, which ensures that our 
employees continue to grow as professionals, as well as personally.

How do I find out more or make an application?

 *  Find out more about children’s services in Haringey by visiting our website
 <http://www.haringey.gov.uk/social-care-careers>. 


 * Apply here 
<http://jobs.haringey.gov.uk/JobDetails.aspx/2401/Social_Worker/?snextweeks=-1&Ssimple=hdd/5379&SSectors=-1&SSalary=-1&STerm=-1&Sdepartment_id=-1&SLocations=-1&SSchools=-1&SSubjects=-1&o=>
 *  Contact Sunni Morzaria (interim recruitment consultant for children’s 
services) on 020 8489 5347 orsunni.morzaria@haringey.gov.uk 
<mailto:sunni.morzaria@haringey.gov.uk> 
Content on this page is produced and paid for by Haringey council
 