
Harry Dean Stanton is singing "The Rose of Tralee". His wavering voice echoes 
across the rows of people gathered in theVillage East cinema 
<http://www.villageeastcinema.com/> in New York, where a special screening of a 
new documentary about his life and work,Partly Fiction 
<https://www.facebook.com/HarryDeanStantonPartlyFiction>, has just finished. 
You can tell that the director, Sophie Huber, and the cinematographer, Seamus 
McGarvey, who are sitting beside him, are used to this sort of thing from 
Harry, but the rest of us are by turns delighted and a little bit nervous on 
his behalf. Now that he's 87, Stanton's voice is as unsteady as his gait, but 
he steers the old Irish ballad home in his inimitable manner and the audience 
responds with cheers and applause.

"Singing and acting are actually very similar things," says Stanton when I ask 
him about his other talent, having seen him perform about 15 years ago with his 
Tex-Mex band in the Mint Bar in Los Angeles. "Anyone can sing and anyone can be 
a film actor. All you have to do is learn. I learned to sing when I was 
a child. I had a babysitter named Thelma. She was 18, I was six, and I was in 
love with her. I used to sing her an oldJimmie Rodgers 
<http://www.jimmierodgers.com/> song, 'T for Thelma'." Closing his eyes, he 
breaks into song: "T for Texas, T for Tennessee, T for Thelma, that girl made a 
wreck out of me." He smiles his sad smile. "I was singing the blues when I was 
six. Kind of sad, eh?"

There is indeed a peculiar kind of sadness about Harry Dean Stanton, a mix of 
vulnerability, honesty and seeming guilelessness that has lit up the screen in 
his greatest performances. It's there in his singing cameo in 1967's prison 
movieCool Hand Luke, in his leading role in Alex Cox's underrated cult classic 
Repo Man in 1984 and, most unforgettably, in his almost silent portrayal of 
Travis, a man broken by unrequited love in Wim Wenders's classic,Paris, Texas. 
"After all these years, I finally got the part I wanted to play," Stanton once 
said of that late breakthrough role. "If I never did another film afterParis, 
Texas I'd be happy."

Now, with mortality beckoning, Stanton still gives off the air of someone who, 
as he puts it, "doesn't really give a damn". In his room in a hip hotel on the 
Lower East Side of Manhattan, the aircon is on full blast despite his runny 
nose and troubling cough, and he smokes like a train as if oblivious to the law 
and the health police. He looks scarecrow thin, but dapper, in his western 
suit, embroidered shirt and ornately embossed cowboy boots: a southern dandy 
even in old age. His hearing is not so good, but his voice remains 
unmistakable, that soft trace of his southern upbringing in rural Kentucky 
still detectable. "I've worked with some of the best of them," he says. "Not 
just directors like Sam Peckinpah and David Lynch, but writers like Sam Shepard 
and singers like Bob Dylan, Willie Nelson and Kris Kristofferson. I could have 
made it as a singer, but I went with acting, surrendered to it, in a way."
 Harry Dean Stanton in 1984's Paris, Texas – the film of which he is most 
proud. Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
Before Paris, Texas, Stanton had appeared in around 100 films and since then 
he has acted in more than 50 more, though often as a supporting actor. The lead 
roles did not materialise in the way he expected them to, perhaps because he is 
so singular, both in looks and acting ability. When given the right script and 
a sympathetic director, though, he is as charismatic as anyone, as his role in 
David Lynch'sThe Straight Story showed. Recently he has shone fitfully in 
Martin McDonagh'sSeven Psychopaths, and in the HBO series Big Love as 
a self-proclaimed Mormon prophet. He has also appeared in action pics such as
The Last Stand with Arnie Schwarzenegger and in the Marvel blockbuster Avengers 
Assemble. He appears not to care too much about the kind of fame and huge 
earning power that other actors without an iota of his onscreen presence 
command.

"Harry is a walking contradiction," says Huber, who has known him for 20 
years. "He has this pride in appearing to not have to work hard to be good. He 
definitely does not want to be seen to be trying. It's part of his whole 
Buddhist thing." His worldview is a mixture of various Buddhist and other more 
esoteric eastern philosophies, shaped in the late 60s by the writings of Alan 
Watts, the Beat poet and Zen sage, and adapted over the years to suit Stanton's 
singular, slightly eccentric lifestyle.

Lately, though, at screenings of Huber's documentary, he has reacted angrily 
to Wim Wenders's onscreen observation that Stanton was insecure about playing 
the lead role inParis, Texas. "I asked him: 'Harry, how come you are angry at 
that scene? I thought you didn't have an ego,'" says Huber. "He just nodded and 
said: 'Yeah, I guess I should shut up.' But it had obviously got to him."

Stanton tells me more than once that he has no ego and no regrets, but you 
have to wonder if that is true. He is, asPartly Fiction shows, a kind of lone 
drifter in Hollywood, perhaps the last of that generation of great American 
postwar character actors, and certainly one of the most singular.

Back in the late 60s, he shared a house in Hollywood with Jack Nicholson, and 
they partied hard with theDavid Crosby <http://www.davidcrosby.com/>, Mama Cass 
Elliot <http://www.casselliot.com/> and the burgeoning Laurel Canyon rock 
aristocracy of the time. Now, still an unrepentant bachelor, he speaks fondly 
on camera about the great lost love of his life, the actorRebecca de Mornay 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rebecca_De_Mornay> – "She left me for Tom Cruise."
 Harry Dean Stanton with Sophie Huber, the director of Partly Fiction. 
Photograph: Michael Buckner/Getty Images 
When a wag in the audience asks him what Debbie Harry was like "in the sack", 
he shoots back: "As good as you think!" adding that the Nastassja Kinski was 
pretty good, too.

Stanton spends most evenings, when he is not working in Dan Tana's bar in East 
Hollywood, drinking with a small bunch of regulars and telling anyone who can't 
quite place his face that he is a retired astronaut. "He's an outsider but has 
lots of good friends," says Huber. "He's happy compared to most 87-year-olds. 
He says he doesn't care about dying, but some days, I suspect, he thinks about 
it a lot. You never really know what's going on in his head."

This is exactly how Stanton likes it, of course. In Huber's slow, almost 
meditative film, Stanton looms large while revealing little. TheNew York Times 
reviewer concluded: "You won't learn much, but you'll be strangely happy that 
you didn't." Stanton quotes the line back to me, grinning. "She got it," he 
says approvingly. "That's a very Buddhist thing to say."

Huber describes Partly Fiction as "a portrait of his face" and those 
expressive eyes and weathered features, shot close-up in black and white by 
McGarvey's luminous cinematography, do indeed speak volumes about how Stanton 
has made silence and stillness his most powerful means of onscreen 
communication. There is a great scene where David Lynch, his equal in 
eccentricity, talks about what Stanton does "in between the lines" and how he 
is "always there – whatever 'there' needs to be".

Stanton smiles when I mention it. "I guess he was talking about being still 
and listening. Being attentive even when it's not your line. For me, acting is 
not too different from what we are doing right now. We're acting in a way, but 
we are not putting on an act. That's the crucial difference for me. I just 
surrender to it in much the same way I surrender to life. It's all one big 
phantasmagoria anyway. In the end I've really got nothing to do with it. It 
just happens, and there's no answer to it."
 Harry Dean Stanton with Jack Nicholson. The two actors shared a house in 
Hollywood in the 60s. Photograph: Rex Features 
In all kinds of ways, Stanton has travelled lunar miles from his smalltown 
upbringing in East Irvine, Kentucky. Born in 1926, he is the eldest of three 
sons to Ersel, who worked as a hairdresser, and Sheridan, a tobacco farmer and 
Baptist. Stanton describes his childhood as strict and unhappy. "My father and 
mother were not that compatible. She was the eldest of nine children and she 
just wanted to get out. I don't think they had a good wedding night, and I was 
the product of that. We weren't close. I think she resented me when I was a 
kid. She even told me once how she used to frighten me when I was in the cradle 
with a black sock."

He laughs soundlessly but looks unbearably sad. "I brought all that stuff up 
with her just after I started seeing a psychiatrist. I did group therapy and 
all that and it all came out. So I called her one night and told her I hated 
her." He shakes his head and smiles ruefully. "We made up shortly before she 
died. Got pretty close then, actually. That's how it goes sometimes."

Was acting in some way an attempt to escape that grim childhood?

"Yes, I guess so. You can do stuff onstage that you can't do offstage. You can 
be angry as hell and enraged and get away with it onstage, but not off. I had a 
lot of rage for a time, but I let go of all that stuff a long time ago."

Stanton served in the US Navy during the Second World War, working as a ship's 
cook. "Most actors don't have that kind of life experience now," he says 
matter-of-factly. "I was lucky not to have been blown up or killed. I was there 
when the Japanese suicide planes were coming in. Fortunately they missed our 
boat. Took me a while to readjust after I went back home and went to college in 
Lexington, Kentucky." There he started acting in the college drama group while 
studying journalism. "I acted inPygmalion with a Cockney accent. I knew right 
then what I wanted to do, so I quit college and went to the Pasadena Playhouse 
in 1949."

He landed his first job after answering a "singers wanted" advert in the local 
paper and toured for a while with a 24-piece choral group. "Twenty-four guys on 
a bus playing small towns. When I quit, there were only 12 guys left. The rest 
deserted along the way. We sang on street corners, in department stores and, at 
the end of a week, in a local venue. It's called paying your dues."

The dues-paying continued with myriad supporting roles on television in the 
1950s, including appearances in popular western series such asWagon Train and 
Gunsmoke. In 1967 he had a brief, but resonant, role as a guitar-strumming 
convict inCool Hand Luke, starring Paul Newman. By the early 1970s, he had 
become a cult actor courtesy of two indie classics directed by the mercurial 
Monte Hellman:Two-Lane Blacktop and Cockfigher. In the former he befriended the 
singer James Taylor, who wrote a song, "Hey Mister, That's Me Up On The 
Jukebox", on Harry's favourite guitar. He later befriended Bob Dylan during the 
famously difficult shoot for Sam Peckinpah's elegiac westernPat Garrett and 
Billy the Kid in 1973. "Dylan and I got to be very close. We recorded together 
one time. It was a Mexican song. He offered me a copy of the tape and I said 
no. Shot myself in the foot. It's never seen the light of day. I'd sure love to 
hear it."

In Partly Fiction (which has yet to get a UK release date), Kris 
Kristofferson, who played the lead in that film, recalls Peckinpah throwing a 
knife in anger at Stanton when the actor messed up a crucial scene by running 
through the shot. "As I recall, he pulled a gun on me, too. It was because me 
and Dylan fucked up the shot."

On purpose? "No, we were jogging and we ran right across the background." The 
vision of Dylan and Stanton jogging together seems altogether too absurd, but I 
let it pass. He describes Peckinpah as "a fucking nut, but a very talented 
nut". Likewise the maverickBritish director Alex Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alexcox>, who cast him in Repo Man in 
1984. "He was another nut. Brilliantly talented and a great satirist, but an 
egomaniac."

That same year, Stanton made Paris, Texas, and created his most iconic role. 
"It's my favourite film that I was in. Great directing by Wenders, great 
writing by Sam Shepard, great cinematography by Robby Müller, great music by Ry 
Cooder. That film means a lot to a lot of people. One guy I met said he and his 
brother had been estranged for years and it got them back together."

Does he think he should have had bigger, better roles in the years since? He 
lights up another cigarette and stares into the middle distance, lost in some 
private reverie. "You get older," he says finally. "In the end, you end up 
accepting everything in your life – suffering, horror, love, loss, hate – all 
of it. It's all a movie anyway."

He closes his eyes and recites a few lines from Macbeth, sounding suddenly 
Shakespearean, albeit in his own wavering way. "A tale told by an idiot, full 
of sound and fury, signifying nothing." He opens his eyes again. "Great line, 
eh?" he says, smiling and reaching for a cigarette. "That's life right there."
 