
Courttia Newland has been here before. In 1997, it seemed as if the British 
book industry might finally have recognised it was out of step with the 
multicultural society that surrounded it. Writers of colour including Newland, 
Zadie Smith and Monica Ali were picking up sizable advances as the trade 
promised a step change. No longer would the doors of London publishers be time 
machines, transporting the unwary from one of the world’s most diverse cities 
to a monoculture that was a throwback to the 1950s. The books and the people 
who published them were going to be different.

 Twenty years on, as the industry launches another drive for inclusivity, 
Newland is not holding his breath. “We are really wary because we have seen it 
all before,” he says. “A few people are championed and then people lose 
interest because they think the issue has been addressed. And then it all 
reverts back to the way it was before.”

 The tide of change may have ebbed after initiatives in the 1990s and early 
2000s, but this time something feels different. Perhaps it’s wishful thinking, 
but it seems to me as if the report I put together in 2015 for the writers’ 
development agency Spread the Word has managed to sting the book trade into 
action. Writing the Future found an industry “awash with white, middle-class 
men” wasshoehorning black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) authors into 
cultural stereotypes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/15/report-books-world-ethnic-minorities-london-book-fair>
, confining their work to “authentic” literary fiction.

 One sign that 2016 may mark a sea change in British publishing is the 
appearance of writers of colour such as AA Dhand and Sanjida Kay on commercial 
fiction lists. Transworld is expecting great things from Bradford-born Dhand, 
claiming his northern noir Harry Virdee series is set to do for Bradford what 
The Wire did for Baltimore. Kay’s compelling debut, the psychological thriller 
Bone on Bone, is published by Corvus.

 Another is the level of investment that publishers have brought to bear. When 
the government announced earlier this month that it was pilling the plug on 
Creative Access, which co-funds paid internships for BAME candidates,Pan 
Macmillan stepped in with £50,000 to continue its work within the book trade 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/news/pan-mac-pledges-50k-help-save-creative-access-448346>
.

 Elsewhere, the biggest three publishers have spent heavily on training and 
recruitment they hope will improve their ability to connect with black and 
Asian writers and readerships.Penguin Random House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/18/penguin-ditches-the-need-for-job-seekers-to-have-university-degrees>
 andHarperCollins led the way 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/news/diversity-debates-opens-unconscious-bias-323842>
 with measures to improve recruitment,followed swiftly by Hachette 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/news/hachette-diversity-publishing-431401>. 
Penguin alsolaunched a scheme aiming to find and mentor BAME, LGBTQ, disabled 
and socioeconomically disadvantaged writers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/10/publishing-risks-becoming-irrelevant-warns-penguin-random-house-boss>
. A sign that the scheme is long overdue is that 2,000 writers from 
under-represented communities immediately applied for the 10 one-year 
mentorships. Other publishers began work with writers’ development agency 
Spread the Word and revitalised industry-wide programme Equip, from the 
Publishers Association.

 “Is what publishers doing just window dressing?” asks Profile’s managing 
director Andrew Franklin. “No. I feel it is part of a generational change that 
is taking place in the industry. I think that in 20 years’ time it will be very 
different at the top of publishing.”

 Next year, publishers promise more BAME writers on their lists, as well as 
continued investment in recruitment, to change the face of their workforce from 
white middle class and Oxbridge-educated to one more representative of the 
British population.

 But, despite good intentions, there remains frustration among writers and 
agents. “I had an Indian writer with stories that I thought would carry, but 
the rejections that came back were that it was ‘too Indian’,” agent Gordon Wise 
of Curtis Brown says of one client whose work he regarded as a universal 
rite-of-passage tale.

 Wise does not condemn editors, but sees such decisions as symptomatic of 
outdated expectations. “We are still in a world where we don’t want men writing 
sagas. It is a raw kneejerk interpretation of what is marketable. We need to 
examine a lot of assumptions.”

 But according to publisher Crystal Mahey-Morgan, who started her own company 
Own It! earlier this year, there is no room for excuses. In September, she 
launched Robyn Travis’s debut Mama Can’t Raise No Man, a hard-hitting story of 
prison and masculinity, with a sellout event at London’s Hackney Empire. The 
capacity audience had paid £7.50 a head to hear Travis talk about the novel’s 
roots in gang culture.

 “The audience for Robyn was 100% BAME and working class,” Mahey-Morgan said. 
“A lot of the things that I heard for so long – that the talent was hard to 
find and that the audiences [for writers of colour] were not there - have 
proved to be completely untrue.”

 Speaking to writers and publishers of colour, it seems clear that the clash 
between publishers’ desire for inclusivity and their assumptions about the 
market has made it harder for them to find diverse talent. Years in which black 
and Asian writers had not seen their faces reflected back at them have made 
them choose alternative routes to publication – whether self-publishing through 
Amazon or ethnically diverse independents such as Jacaranda and Saqi Books. And 
traditional publishers have felt the impact of their failure to open up to a 
wider readership.

According to Gillian Redfearn, publishing director of the science fiction and 
fantasy imprint Gollancz, demand for writers of colour is outstripping supply. 
“I’ve spoken to two agents whose mission statement is to represent a diverse 
range of authors, and who have been actively seeking them, who are incredibly 
frustrated not to have found more writers to represent,” Redfearn says, “though 
they have not struggled to place those they do represent.”.

 While the demand for BAME writing is undeniable, authors of colour are still 
struggling to gain the profile needed to sell their books and to establish 
themselves as writers instead of community representatives.

“Too often Zadie [Smith] is the go-to writer and she gets all the coverage and 
that is it,” says Guardian children’s fiction award winner Alex Wheatle: “If 
you scan the magazines you hardly ever see any black British writers, they are 
invisible unless they are Zadie.”

Even when they receive coverage, it remains hard for BAME writers to be taken 
seriously for their work. “I and my publisher constantly battle with the fact 
that people find it easier to see me as an ex -gang member than they do seeing 
me as an author,” Travis says. Despite the signs of a shift in attitudes and 
the commitments publishers have made for 2017, for Travis the transformations 
are all too slow: “Sometimes it feels like very little has changed from when I 
was a young boy.”
 