
“If Test cricket survives and thrives, then here’s a boy who was born to open 
the batting in it. I just hope the game lasts long enough for him to play it.” 
So said Mick Newell, England selector, Nottinghamshire supremo and a man not 
known as a showerer of unearned praise, on 6 July at Trent Bridge afterHaseeb 
Hameed had soaked up 284 balls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/06/nottinghamshire-lancashire-county-championship-match-report>
 across six hours and 26 minutes to save the game for Lancashire against a 
Notts attack containing Stuart Broad and Imran Tahir.

It was the 19-year-old opener’s second first-class century; a month later he 
doubled that tally against Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/haseeb-hameed-lancashire-yorkshire-championship-match-report>
, becoming the first Lancashire batsman to score a ton in each innings of a 
Roses match.

Barring late injury or selectorial changes of heart, it turns out Test cricket 
needed to survive and thrive for only three months to meet Hameed. On Friday, 
again at Trent Bridge, he is expected to be named in the party to tour 
Bangladesh and India and, if he plays, he would become England’s fifth youngest 
ever Test cricketer. It is easy to see why the selectors have been seduced by 
Hameed’s gloriously simple game. He defends plenty and leaves more, with a 
languid grace and springy limbs. In his six first-class innings in 2015 he 
faced 698 balls, and has picked up this season where he left off. In his 31 
Championship innings, there are only three single figure scores, he has faced 
12 balls or fewer three times and more than 90 on 17 occasions. The 
achievements have been spectacular, the method discreet.

Between each of those many balls, Hameed rests his bat on his right shoulder 
and wanders towards square-leg, although he has noticed that “teams are putting 
fielders there, but that doesn’t bother me. I just walk round.” In this spirit 
unfussiness, occupation and accumulation are his watchwords, even if he is 
desperate to break into Lancashire’s white-ball side.

“I was quite a bright kid academically,” Hameed says, “but I didn’t have much 
interest in it; it was just a case of getting it done and concentrating on 
cricket.”

His father, Ismail, who moved from India and settled in Bolton, was “cricket 
mad” and that fed to Hameed and his two older brothers. “Dad used to take my 
brothers to the park opposite my house, just to play and train,” he remembers. 
“After school I’d go and join them, just to help out. Suddenly I was asking Dad 
to throw me balls and then at the age of eight I started playing hard-ball 
cricket and got into the age-groups atLancashire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire>.”

Hameed made it into Lancashire’s under-11 side aged nine as a leggie who 
batted but he soon wormed his way up the order and honed his straight, late 
style. “Because I was physically very small, I had to rely on timing the ball. 
I couldn’t muscle it past fielders and because of that I had to play it late as 
well,” the teenager remembers. “The other thing was the nature of the pitches, 
typical league cricket up north where it rains a lot; it’s slow and low. You’ve 
got to be careful driving on the up and the like. I had to wait for the ball 
and not leave my bubble, be patient. It’s always been that way for me.”

It has, Hameed says, been a “surreal” season. The year started with being left 
out of England’s Under-19 World Cup squad, which he describes as “a low ebb”. 
Lancashire began the season with their batting tipped as a weakness, which 
“motivated me to make a mark and not to take a backward step. I wanted to put 
in performances, put a value on my wicket and I wanted teams to come at me with 
plans, because that tells me I was making life difficult for them. Even midway 
through the season teams were watching footage and coming up with plans and 
that is part of the challenge to enjoy, having to adapt. Surviving that gives 
you the most satisfaction.”

The tons he has scored have been mighty impressive; the first, in the second 
innings against Warwickshire and the best spinner in the land in Jeetan Patel, 
across 295 balls, is one he is particularly proud of. Then came Trent Bridge, 
then his record-breaking Roses match.

Hameed brings up Bangladesh – he has heard his name mentioned. “I had dreams 
of going to Bangladesh in 2016,” he says, pausing, “but that was with the 
under-19s. If I was to fulfil that dream with the main England side having 
suffered that disappointment, it would be incredible. I feel ready and scoring 
runs against these top sides has been particularly pleasing. I know it would be 
another challenge, another step up, but I would relish that.”

What Hameed relishes most, though, is doing right by those close to him. “It’s 
amazing for me, to make people who are close to me and have been a big 
influence on my career, to make them proud,” he says. “It’s my career but it’s 
not just my journey. They have been through a hell of a lot for me, so I’m very 
glad that I can give them some good times as well.”
 