
Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> visitors don’t always get 
good press at the school gates or toddler groups. Among my fellow nursing 
friends, the standing joke is that I spend my day simply weighing babies. I 
guess as a result it’s not hard to see why in some areas the value placed on 
health visiting has fallen so far that the service will be cut completely.

At the moment most councils are reviewing the funding for health visiting amid 
drastic cuts to public health budgets. Cumbria and Staffordshire are planning 
on cutting health visiting posts and a number of other NHS trusts have job 
freezes and have discussed redundancies.NHS Digital <https://digital.nhs.uk/> 
reported this year that the number of health visitors dropped in UK by 433 
posts.

While perhaps there may be some truth in the comments I so often hear, the 
reality of health visiting feels very different.


Walking into a home with drug abuse and domestic violence was terrifying
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/apr/07/health-visitor-home-visit-drug-abuse-domestic-violence-terrifying>
 It’s hard to describe a typical day because the one predictable thing is that 
it is completely unpredictable. I’m never quite sure when I stand at a front 
door what is going to be behind it. I have a bag full of leaflets and a mental 
checklist of the topics I’m expected to discuss. As the door opens, I may be 
greeted with a smile or an offer of a cup of tea, other times by indifference 
and occasionally with suspicion. Then there are the times when I’m not greeted 
at all, when I stand on the doorstep trying to find a pen, my diary and a free 
slot later in the week to return.

 As I take a seat on the sofa, I’m aware of the balance I need to strike 
between raising topics and listening to what families need and want to ask. I 
don’t always get this right; I feel the pressure of sharing key messages about 
safe sleeping, coping with crying and infant brain development resulting at 
times in me talking too much and listening too little.

 Within an hour of taking that seat I’m asking personal questions related to 
health, relationships and parenting. I explain that I ask these questions to 
everyone, issues such as mental illness and domestic violence are common and do 
not discriminate. But I won’t pretend that it doesn’t sometimes feel intrusive. 
I’m hoping that in that brief time I’ve built up enough of a rapport to make 
these questions powerful because when necessary it’s incredible how much 
someone can share with a stranger.

 Sometimes as I look around the room the poverty and health inequality is 
obvious. Young children living in damp, mouldy, overcrowded houses. Sparsely 
decorated front rooms and kitchens lacking basic items many of us take for 
granted. At other times it’s more subtle. I see families struggling to feed 
their children during the school holidays because they have had to pay for 
extra childcare while they work; families having their benefits stopped because 
of an administration error; families where the main source of income is a 
zero-hours contract and if the phone rings at 6.30am, then there’ll be work. If 
it doesn’t there won’t and so today is another day of emergency electricity.

Within an hour of taking a seat I’m asking personal questions. I won’t pretend 
that it doesn’t sometimes feel intrusive

 As I reach into my bag to find the food bank vouchers, the number for 
Citizens Advice or to make notes on the letter I’ll write to support a family’s 
application for being rehoused, I try to block out the thoughts that this isn’t 
enough. As I explain that my letter may not make any difference, that the 
waiting lists for social housing are so long most children will have grown up 
by the time they make it to the top, I try not to feel despondent that there is 
little I can do. As I reassure a mum that none of us are perfect, but she is 
good enough and explain that I can offer a listening ear and opportunity to 
access specialist support, it often feels like all I’m doing is putting a 
sticking plaster on a great gaping wound.

 Before I leave, I explain how families can contact me, no question is too 
small. I’m there until their child goes to school, but unless there’s an extra 
need, I won’t visit again. I explain that I’ll be at a baby clinic at the local 
children’s centre every week. I don’t mention how the staff there are unsure 
about whether they’ll have jobs this time next year, and how the support 
they’re able to offer diminishes each week as cost savings are made to 
“streamline services”.

 And as I close the door on my way out, I hope that I’ve not missed anything. 
I hope that the positive and upbeat mum wasn’t putting on a show because she’s 
scared of what may happen if she tells me how hard she’s finding life. I hope 
that I won’t get a phone call from social care in few weeks’ time about what’s 
happening behind that front door. Then I take a deep breath and get ready for 
the next doorstep.

If you would like to write a blogpost for Views from the NHS frontline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
readour guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/aug/12/highs-lows-nhs-write-guardian>
 and get in touch by emailingsarah.johnson@theguardian.com 
<mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 