
I’d like to pretend that the way I write has reason in it. It’s true that I 
have a routine. For 17 years I’ve walked the mile or so to a studio, which, 
eight floors up, looks out over Bristol to the hills. In winter, sheets of rain 
drive in from the west and make shuddering patterns. In summer the sun moves 
slowly from south to south-west. I am usually too hot or too cold, but am also 
too lazy to put in double glazing or central heating.

I find the view beautiful and absorbing, but not a distraction. Once I watched 
from the balcony asConcorde <https://www.theguardian.com/world/concorde> swam 
low across the city on its final homeward flight. An obsolete, daring 
technological marvel: people stood out on the rooftops as it passed. There is 
traffic noise, human noise, the clang of bells and the judder of a police 
helicopter. I’m removed from the city but I can see it, hear it, smell it. When 
I first started to work here I thought it would be a good place to meet 
interviewers or have research discussions, but that idea quickly evaporated. I 
like it that no one else comes here. There’s a wall of books, and a bed which 
was here when I moved in and which I’ve never got around to shifting. The tiny 
kitchen is pure 1960s. The carpet is worn out but to move it would also mean 
moving all those books and papers, so I put down another rug.

I always have Radio 3 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-3> on, although 
my listening is often low quality. Radio on, computer on, pile of papers pushed 
out of the way. The illusion of going to work is quite a precious one. I don’t 
write a regular amount each day, although it’s good to count the words and it 
gives a sense of achievement even if I change them all tomorrow. If things are 
going well I will write for hours; if not, two or three may be enough and then 
there is always so much litbiz to do.

On the other hand, I work anywhere, late into the night: at home, while 
travelling, on trains or planes. The studio isn’t essential; it’s just a place 
I like, which is by now so full of manuscripts, letters and books that the 
thought of leaving it is too daunting.

Writing isn’t really to do with sitting at the desk at all. In March I was 
lying on an operating table, wrapped like a baby in an inflatable warm blanket. 
The anaesthetist did something to a cannula, his face downturned and full of 
that offhand professionalism which so inspires confidence at these moments. But 
then something else happened. I looked to my left and saw that there was an 
arched doorway in the far corner of the operating theatre. Through it, I could 
see a waterfall. It was no modest water feature, either, but a cascade running 
green over a lip of black rock and then plunging into foam. I had never known 
that there was such a thing in the heart of this workaday city hospital where 
I’d had my children years ago. The staff, though, seemed quite unconcerned by 
the waterfall and were clearly used to it. They walked towards me out of the 
doorway in their gowns, caps and pale gumboots while I watched the cataract 
tumble behind them. I was filled with amazement and joy as the noise of the 
water grew louder, and it was a familiar joy.

I wrote a poem on my phone while I was lying down a couple of days later: or 
rather, the poem wrote itself, unmediated by me, in the same way that the 
waterfall had appeared. The poem is as real, or as unreal, as the waterfall. 
It represents a mood as well as a thing seen and heard, and after some weeks 
I realised it was not only my mood at the time but also that of the novel 
I was then editing.

There is no reason in any of it. Writing won’t happen unless you work and 
build technique, but equally it won’t happen unless you yield to what you don’t 
understand. I write in the hope of surfing again that mysterious joy, that wave 
which topples but never breaks.

• Exposure by Helen Dunmore is out now in paperback (Windmill).
 