What does the HG in HG Wells stand for?  Henry Gordon  Herbert George  Hector 
Glynn  Hamish Gregory In The Sleeper Awakes, Graham falls asleep in 1897 and 
wakes up in what year?  1997  2016  2100  2897 In which English county is The 
Invisible Man set?  Sussex  Oxfordshire  Herefordshire  Devon Which part of 
London did Wells take particular joy in destroying in The War of the Worlds?  
Chelsea  Westminster  South Kensington In a letter he wrote to a friend, Wells 
said: "I'm doing the dearest little serial for Pearson's new magazine, in which 
I completely wreck and sack Woking - killing my neighbours in painful and 
eccentric ways - then proceed via Kingston and Richmond to London, which I 
sack, selecting South Kensington for feats of peculiar atrocity."  Maida Vale 
In The Time Machine, what does the Traveller bring back with him as proof of 
his travels?  Some red rocks  An alien  Two flowers  Nothing In the 1920s, 
Wells stood as a candidate for which political party?  Conservative party  
Labour partyHe ran as the candidate for London University in 1922 and 1923.  
Liberal party  Communist party Hip-hop group House of Pain is named after which 
HG Wells novel?  The Island of Dr Moreau  The Time Machine  The History of Mr 
Polly  The Red Room Which of the following is named after HG Wells?  A dwarf 
planet  A crater on the moon  A volcano on Mars  All of the above As president 
of PEN International, Wells excluded the branch of German PEN in 1934, to their 
anger. Why did he do this?  Because his books were being burnt in Germany.  
Because they began refusing to admit non-Aryan members.His books were burned by 
Nazi youth in 1933, due to his criticism of German politics. The PEN decision 
was unrelated, however. Which of Wells's books is credited as being one of the 
earliest and most accurate depictions of radioactive decay, and contained the 
first use of the term "atomic bomb"?  The War of the Worlds  The World Set Free 
 Tono-Bungay  The War in the Air Which of the following developments is HG 
Wells NOT credited with having inspired or predicted?  Lasers  Genetic 
engineering  Nuclear weapons  Automatic doors  Wireless communication  Wikipedia
 Cosmetic surgery  Sky writing Credit for that goes to Jules Verne. In the 
preface of the 1941 edition of The War in the Air, Wells stated that his 
epitaph should be:  “Unconquered.”  “Steel True Blade Straight”  "Man must 
endure his going hence."  "I told you so. You damned fools." When he died in 
1946, Wells was cremated and had no headstone for an epitaph.  You got…  
Challenge your friends Submit answers 
HG Wells’s prescient visions of the future remain unsurpassed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/13/hg-wells-visions-of-the-future-remain-unsurpassed> 