
It has long been considered a fact of modern life that highly educated women 
have fewer children. Received wisdom has it that women with university degrees 
go on to pursue careers and often end up starting their families later than 
other women. As a result they tend to have fewer children than average.

However, a study to be published in the Economic Journal suggests that this 
view no longer holds true, and that there has been a significant increase in 
the fertility rates of highly educated women in the last three decades.

Research by economists Moshe Hazan and Hosny Zoabi finds that, while fertility 
rates among American women with some form of college education have largely 
stagnated over the last 30 years, among women with advanced degrees they have 
risen by more than 50%.

The pair analysed data and found that American women without any form of 
high-school diploma have a fertility rate of 2.24 children. Among women with a 
high-school diploma the fertility rate falls to 2.09 and for women with some 
form of college education it drops to 1.78.

However, among women with college degrees, the economists found the fertility 
rate rises to 1.88 and among women with advanced degrees to 1.96. In 1980 women 
who had studied for 16 years or more had a fertility rate of just 1.2.

As the economists prosaically explain: “The relationship between fertility and 
women’s education in the US has recently become U-shaped.”

The pair suggest that a yawning inequality gap may help explain why fertility 
rates among highly educated women are rising. They argue that the growing 
divide between rich and poor in American society has created two groups of 
women: those who can afford to buy help to raise their children and run their 
homes and those who are willing to supply such services at affordable prices. 
The earning gap between the two groups has been accelerating.

The study finds that labour costs in the childcare industry relative to the 
wages of American women with college and advanced degrees decreased by 10% and 
16% respectively in the past 30 years.

Hazan said the findings backed up a suspicion he already had. “I looked around 
at friends in Israel and the US and I noticed those who juggle careers, work 
very hard and earn enough money seem to have more kids,” Hazan said. “Then you 
go through the data and you find it is true.”

He said highly educated women were more likely to be able to afford help that 
allowed them to raise larger-than-average families. “You have a nanny, people 
to pick up your laundry and suits, buy you food from the local store for you to 
cook for dinner, and you can leave all the mess to the housekeeper in the 
morning,” he said.

The study’s findings are likely to raise questions about whether a similar 
rise in fertility rates among highly educated women could be occuring in 
Europe. Hazan said that, as UK income inequality was “relatively high compared 
to Europe”, there was a chance the trend was being replicated here.

Siobhan Freegard, co-founder of Netmums, the UK online forum, said many women 
who used its site expressed a desire to have a third child. “But they know 
their lives wouldn’t cope with it,” Freegard said. “It’s the women who have 
good careers, who can afford a cleaner and a nanny who take the stress out of 
their lives, who can have three children.”

Freegard pointed out that, unlike in the US, in the UK the stubbornly high 
cost of childcare meant that for many women larger families were still 
unachievable. “It’s something we hear an awful lot of on the forums,” Freegard 
said. “Many women are saying they have to leave large gaps between having their 
children so that they can get one into school before having another.”

A study in 2008 identified a significant rise in the proportion of three- and 
four-child families among the super-rich. Angela Ahrendts, the former chief 
executive of Burberry, has three children. Helena Morrissey, boss of Newton 
Investment Management, has nine.

But until now the broader links between university education and women’s 
fertility rates – and their consequences – had received little scrutiny. “Given 
the strong correlation between parents’ education and children’s education, an 
increase in the relative representation of children coming from highly educated 
families means that the next generation is going to be relatively more 
educated,” the economists note. “This is good news for growth.”

Hazan and Zoabi suggested the growing income gap theory was likely to account 
only for about a third of the increase in the fertility of highly educated 
women. Another possible factor, they said, could be that partners of highly 
educated women were more inclined to share the burden of raising children, 
compared with partners of less-educated women.

A third explanation was that highly educated women were benefiting from 
advances in “assisted reproductive technology” that enable them to spend more 
years at university without reducing their chances of future parenthood. There 
is already evidence that employers are becoming aware that paying for such 
technology could help them attract employees. Apple and Facebook are offering 
to freeze eggs for female employees in an effort to attract more women on to 
their staff.
 