
Moody, mist-shrouded mountains, snow-caked moorland, rushing burns and steely 
grey lochs: the Scottish Highlands can be forbidding in winter. They can also 
be magical, a Narnia-style wonderland enchanting to explore on foot, skis or 
snowshoes, and peppered with a clutch of new boltholes, gourmet hotels and log 
cabins, where you can defrost in front of a roaring fire with a warming dram.

Inn at John O'Groats, Caithness

 The Inn at John O'Groats has undergone a complete reinvention. 
Take a washed-up hotel on the far-flung north coast, strip it bare and add a 
rainbow-hued clapboard Nordic extension. What Natural Retreats has created with 
its multimillion-pound regeneration of this once-tacky tourist site and 
dilapidated, if iconic, hotel is more reinvention than revamp. The almost 
Disney-esque architectural creation now houses apartments with one, two or four 
bedrooms. Using local materials from Scottish larch to Caithness stone, the 
design features retro-style interiors with a Scandinavian vibe – and a playful 
element. Along with antler chandeliers and funky copper bathtubs, you'll find 
light fixtures created out of lobster pots and rope. As storms lash the 
coastline, snuggle up and watch the waves churn.
• 0844 3843166, naturalretreats.com 
<http://www.naturalretreats.com/uk/john-ogroats/the-inn-at-john-ogroats/>. From 
£348 a week (one bedroom) or £192 for a three-night weekend break

Eagle Brae, near Glen Affric

 Eagle Brae has log cabins within an 8,000-acre Highland estate. Photograph: 
Tim Winterburn 
Let's be clear, if your wooden holiday home is made from flat planks not whole 
trunks, it's a chalet, not a cabin. Eagle Brae, however, which opened at the 
end of the summer, is the real thing. The scattering of seven one- and 
two-bedroom log cabins on an 8,000-acre Highland estate have been hand-built 
with giant trunks of red cedar from British Columbia, using only chainsaws and 
chisels for that proper, rounded rusticity. Green wildflower roofs, a 
micro-hydro scheme and biomass wood-pellet burners for underfloor heating tick 
the sustainability box. Inside, the look is chunkily rustic: logburner, sturdy 
wooden beds, tartan throws and hand-carved panels of highland beasts and Celtic 
knotwork. It's the real Davy Crockett deal.
• 07738 076711, eaglebrae.co.uk <http://www.eaglebrae.co.uk/>. Cabins from 
£867 a week (sleeps two) and £1,075 (sleeps four)



Fonab Castle, Pitlochry

 Fonab Castle was a hospital during the first world war and is now a luxury 
hotel. Photograph: Tristan Poyser 
All turrets and sweeping views, this Scottish baronial retreat in warm 
sandstone was built for the Sandeman sherry and port dynasty in 1892. It was a 
Red Cross hospital during the first world war, and opened as a luxury hotel – 
think parquet floors, wood-panelling and the odd splash of tartan – this 
summer. There are 26 rooms, 13 in the original building (some with alcove 
turrets in which to curl up and gaze at the view) and 13 in a contemporary 
wing, with decking and direct access to Loch Faskally. Inspired by the colours 
of the Highlands, rooms feature Cole & Son wallpapers, White Company bedding 
and Nespresso machines. After a bracing walk, relax in the Malt Whisky Bar in 
front of a roaring fire.
• 01796 470140, fonabcastlehotel.com <http://fonabcastlehotel.com/>. Doubles 
from £140 a night B&B

The Duck's Nest, Nethy Bridge, Cairngorms national park

 The Duck's Nest, Nethy Bridge, in the Cairngorms national park. 
First there was the Lazy Duck Hostel, a snug little barn with bunks sleeping 
eight, then came the Woodman's Hut, a romantic eco-retreat for two, and now 
there's the Duck's Nest. Another hidey-hole on this six-acre family 
smallholding, this little wooden hut on the edge of a pond paddled by 
rare-breed ducks is a waterfowl-watcher's dream. Snuggle under local Knockando 
Woolmill blankets on the terrace in front of the chimenea stove or take a dunk 
in the woodfired timber hot tub. The bush shower is also outside – as is the 
compost loo (for snowy nights, there is a potty). Inside, you'll find a 
whisky-barrel lantern and a king-size box-bed with a skylight for stargazing.
• 01479 821092, lazyduck.co.uk <http://lazyduck.co.uk/ducks-nest-eco-lodge/>. 
Doubles from £70 a night (two-night minimum)

Mhor84 Motel, The Trossachs

 Mhor84: not your average roadside motel. 
The words "roadside motel" conjure a less than cosy image. However, the Lewis 
family (gourmet boutique hotel Monachyle Mhor at the end of the glen, MhorFish 
and MhorBread in nearby Callander) has turned the old Kinghouse Hotel on the 
A84 – hence the name – into a place where you'll want to linger. The seven 
rooms have been given a lick of white paint, the bar and restaurant kitted out 
with a mix of old trestle tables and junk-shop finds. There's vintage china, 
cowskin rugs, a pool table and comfy sofas for curling up in front of the fire.
• 01877 384646, mhor.net <http://mhor.net/mhor84-motel/>. Doubles from £60 a 
night

Leachachan Barn, Loch Duich, Lochalsh


Once a byre for horses, this low-slung stone barn overlooking Loch Duich on 
the west coast has been sensitively converted into a striking, contemporary, 
open-plan holiday home by award-winning architects Rural Design. It's a soaring 
vision of white with vaulted ceilings, antler chandelier, pale-oak parquet 
floors, apple-green sofas and state-of-the-art wood-burner. The ground-floor 
master bedroom is peppered with antiques; a second bedroom is up on a new 
mezzanine level. Picture windows frame views of the Five Sisters of Kintail, 
while Skye and the pretty village of Plockton, with its galleries, pubs and 
palm trees, is within hopping distance.
• 01456 486358, wildernesscottages.co.uk 
<http://www.wildernesscottages.co.uk/property.php?id_cot=290#sthash.p841Smp3.dpbs>
. From £450 a week (sleeps four)

Flagstone Cottage, Castletown, Caithness

Bags of character in a tiny package, this single-storey, quarry-worker's 
terraced cottage was renovated byThe Prince's Regeneration Trust 
<http://www.princes-regeneration.org/> and opened by Prince Charles himself in 
the summer. Once home to two families, today it sleeps just two in an original 
4ft Scottish box bed with traditional kist, or chest, underneath. The colour 
scheme of dark grey and mustard adds to the cosiness as do the tongue and 
groove panels, Caithness stone floors, tasteful tartan throws, sheepskin rugs 
and toasty logburner.
• 01835 822277, unique-cottages.co.uk 
<http://www.unique-cottages.co.uk/cottages/highlands/sutherland/flagstone_cottage>
. From £275 a week

Links House, Dornoch


After a windswept walk on the beach at Royal Dornoch, one of the prettiest 
spots on the north-east coast, sink into a bespoke tweed sofa by the roaring 
fire in the wood-panelled library of this elegant manse with a warming dram. 
Converted into a luxury hotel earlier this year, Links House has just eight 
sumptuous rooms, individually decorated with Italian-marble bathrooms, 
hand-picked antiques and named after famous Scottish salmon rivers: Brora, 
Beauly, Shin, Oykel, Helmsdale, Cassley, Conon and Carron. The hotel is 
scattered with quirky sporting memorabilia, the library is stocked with old 
books, and walls hung with oil paintings reflect the local landscape and 
Scottish field sports. After a gourmet dinner in front of another log fire in 
the dining room beneath a grand antler chandelier, step outside with a cigar 
from the humidor, gaze up at the starlit sky from the terrace – and warm 
yourself by the outdoor fireplace.
• 01862 810279, linkshousedornoch.com <http://www.linkshousedornoch.com/>. 
From £260 a night B&B

The Curved Stone House, Ullapool

 The Curved Stone House, Ullapool - where you can take a bath with a panoramic 
view of the Summer Isles. 
A sleek, pale-wood sauna with a sea view is just one of the highlights of this 
sinewy new build hunkered into the hillside above Ullapool on the wild west 
coast. You can also soak up the picture-window panorama of the Summer Isles 
from the futuristic egg-shaped tub. Gavin and Rachel Anderson's inspiration for 
their eco-friendly, turf-topped, stone and glass house, which sleeps four, came 
while living in east Africa, where the trend for luxury retreats designed to 
blend into the natural environment is well-established. They worked with a 
Hebridean architect and team of local craftsmen and artisans to bring their 
vision to life, adding underfloor heating for barefoot padding, soaring 
ceilings and a woodburning stove.
• 01854 613838, thestonehouses.co.uk 
<http://thestonehouses.co.uk/the-cottages.html>. From £900 a week

Vatersay Cottage, Fort Augustus

 Vatersay Cottage, a restored lock-keepers' house on the Caledonian canal. 
Photograph: Peter Sandground/Scottish Canals 
The Vivat Trust and Scottish Canals launched seven charmingly restored 
lock-keepers' cottages along the Caledonian Canal this year. A feat of 
engineering genius, the canal links a series of lochs from the west coast to 
the east, slicing through the Highlands from Fort William to Inverness. 
Vatersay, which sleeps five, is one of a cluster of three cottages near Fort 
Augustus at the top of Loch Ness. The little whitewashed property has a red 
door and a picket fence. Inside, there's a woodburning stove, pastel-painted 
tongue-and-groove panelling, cream wooden beds, a cheery colour scheme and a 
brightly patterned stag's head on the wall.
• 0141 354 7534, canalsidecottages.co.uk 
<http://www.canalsidecottages.co.uk/cottages/vatersay-cottage/>. From £60 a 
night
 