
Since Trump won the election, the focus on his fringe connections has largely 
receded. Coverage of the new administration has quickly normalized. Washington 
reporters seem relieved to be covering a familiar ritual, the competition for 
top jobs in theTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration>. Stories on Trump’s 
many conflicts of interest and abandoned promises have appeared, but none seem 
to resonate with the public.


Thankfully, some events shake us out of our complacency. At Harvard last week, 
a bitter fight broke out between senior Trump and Clinton aides who appeared at 
aconference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/03/donald-trump-facts-lies-trumpism>
, held after every presidential election. The hundred or so student protesters 
standing outside with signs denouncing Donald Trump and his consigliere, Steve 
Bannon, indicated a different tone for this year’s confab. What set off the 
fireworks were comments praising Bannon, who did not attend, from David Bossie, 
Trump’s deputy campaign manager.

Bossie’s encomium pushed Jennifer Palmieri, Hillary Clinton’s communications 
director, over the edge. She responded: “If providing a platform for white 
supremacists makes me a brilliant tactician, I am glad to have lost.”

Palmieri is not wrong. Breitbart News, a rabidly right-wing news site, was 
described by Bannon as providing a platform for the “alt-right”, a far-right 
movement in the US. Some of the movement’s leaders, like Richard Spencer, have 
publicly used Nazi slogans and are openly white nationalists. It is important 
not to forget that.

Because the news media has been shamed for having all but inaugurated Hillary 
Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, there has now 
been an avalanche of coverage about how Trump pulled off his surprise victory 
and the weaknesses of her campaign.


This means that another important question has been under-covered: who killed 
Hillary Clinton? Kellyanne Conway’s answer at Harvard was simple: Hillary 
Clinton, with her lack of an economic message for the white working class and 
her inability to connect with people, killed herself. This is simply false.

 As in any good Agatha Christie mystery, there are so many suspects that it’s 
hard to find the real killer. But here are some obvious possibilities:

The man who did not find Hillary crooked, FBI Director James Comey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/james-comey>, is a chief suspect. First, 
though it is unusual and arguably unprofessional, Comey decided not to 
prosecute Clinton but publicly denounced her as reckless and careless in the 
treatment of the emails on her private server. In cases where no charges are 
pressed, the usual protocol is simply to announce that an investigation is 
closed.

Then, 11 days before the election, he wrote a letter to Congress saying new 
emails found on her aide’s computer merited more review, completely stalling 
the momentum that seemed to be carrying Clinton to victory. Those who seek to 
minimize the Comey effect should keep in mind that exit polls show that one 
quarter of the electorate made up their minds in the last month before the 
election and went for Trump by eight points, much larger than his less-than-50% 
victory margin of the popular vote.

 The email “scandal” was overblown and disproportionately covered by the news 
media, magnifying the damage Comey did. The news networks dedicated more 
airtime to the emails than to all policy issues combined. Indeed, Comey seemed 
to use the media’s obsession to intervene for his apparently preferred 
candidate, Trump.

 Let’s return to David Bossie, the man who sparked the Harvard “cat-fight.” 
After Bill Clinton won the presidency, Bossie became one of the biggest 
floggers of the pseudo scandals that enveloped Bill and Hillary while they were 
in the White House. In 2008, his anti-Hillary “documentary” sparked the 
Citizens United case in the US supreme court that gutted the country’s campaign 
finance laws. Before joining the Trump campaign as Bannon’s deputy, Bossie was 
head of Citizens United. Ruth Marcus of The Washington Post, who has covered 
Bossie for as long as I have, calls him “The Captain Ahab of Clinton-haters.” 
At long last, he killed the whale.

 Bossie, of course, couldn’t kill alone. He had a band of co-conspirators from 
an anti-Clinton machine that has been fortified by hundreds of millions of 
dollars of dark money over the past generation. As First Lady, Clinton was 
ridiculed and vilified for calling this “a vast right-wing conspiracy,” but she 
was right.

The activists, groups, think tanks and nonprofit “charities” that made hay 
over the petty controversies that dogged her had already succeeded in driving 
up her negative trust and honesty numbers well before the 2016 campaign. The 
garden was already planted; all Donald Trump needed to do is water it with his 
chants of “Crooked Hillary.”

 Clinton actually received the third highest vote total in US election history 
(only Barack Obama won more the two times he was elected), and she won the 
popular vote by 2.5 million, a big margin. Still she lost in the electoral 
college, but if 100,000 votes had gone the other way in Wisconsin, Michigan and 
Pennsylvania, she would have won there, too.

It is too easy to write off Clinton supporters who oppose Trump, like Jennifer 
Palmieri, as sore losers. We all have a right – and a duty – to call out 
misinformation and divisive tactics from Trump and his enablers at places like 
Breitbart. Much is at stake if Trump and his brand of politics is normalized. 
It’s up to all of us to prevent that from happening.
 