
Route information

Length 35 miles

 Duration 3 hours for the fit, 2 days of pleasant cruising 

Start/Finish Colne 

Classification Moderate 

Terrain Road and offroad 

Who's it good for? Families with older kids, a day out with friends or partners

Map OS Landranger 103 Blackburn and Burnley

The tour of Pendle

The Grand Tour of Pendle may sound like a race but it's far from that: the 
35-mile ride around east Lancashire follows quiet roads, cycle paths and canal 
towpaths that really take you through an under-appreciated part of the north, 
and at your own pace.

Beginning and ending in Colne, lush, rolling rural fells and farmland dominate 
the tour's heart, and though not explicitly waymarked, navigational duties are 
fairly light here as a lot of the time you'll follow the blue and white signs 
of national cycle routes.

The Grand Tour is pitched as a two-day route for family or leisure cyclists, 
with shorter family routes plotted out too. Keener cyclists, meanwhile, can do 
the route in a day – which is what I chose to do.

Railway to rollercoaster
Though not a scenic start, Colne Station feels an appropriate place to begin a 
tour of Lancashire, being one of its numerous, once-wealthy milltowns. Quickly, 
you find yourself leaving the townscape behind for the farmlands of the Forest 
of Trawden. This serene opening section over to Laneshaw Bridge, where 
abandoned factories and terraces are replaced with cattle sheds and drystone 
walls, is arguably the finest bit of the whole tour.

After this, the busier Skipton Old Road feels something of a comedown but it 
is just knocking you down to build you up again with an unexpected, fabulous 
rollercoaster of a road that carries you down into Earby. This few miles of 
road will convert almost anyone to the joys of road cycling.

After a towpath section at Barnoldswick, the route's iconic section begins. 
The singletrack roads, such as Brogden Lane and Whytha Road, are pretty much 
deserted, and it's on these miles of where-is-everyone roads that you can 
really relax and de-stress (or attack and adrenalise if you choose).

Whale of a ride
It is not until you reach the hamlet of Twiston that the eponymous star of 
this tour appears. Pendle Hill was typically hulking and atmospheric during my 
ride there, its famous whaleback profile half hidden under dense cloud. The 
hill dominates the landscape for miles around. It's Lancashire's best lump, no 
doubt.

After a thrilling descent into Barley, you expect to pay for it with a hellish 
climb but, as with the rest of this cunningly plotted route, the climbs never 
exceed your gearing range, or leg power.

Nelson and Barrowford hail the return of the "urban" but the riding is 
pleasant all the same, as cycle lanes through well-tended parks and an 
entertainingly bendy canal towpath bring you back to Colne.
 Mountain biking in Gisburn Forest Photograph: Alamy 
Alternative options

Despite its rural and hilly landscape, Lancashire has, perhaps belatedly, 
cottoned on to the joys of mountain biking, with Gisburn Forest and Lee Quarry 
among its new, modern "trail centres".

Gisburn forest is the more typical specimen of the two, based in Forestry 
Commission woodland in an area of outstanding natural beauty and offering the 
typical mix of graded routes: family- to expert-level. Designed in partnership 
with local riders and volunteers, trails have unusual, "rockery" sections with 
twisty, narrow singletrack for descents and plainer wider tracks for ascents.

Gisburn's two main trails are the blue-graded Bottoms Beck (6 miles) and the 
red-graded "the 8" (11 miles), the latter with a number of black-graded 
options. Meanwhile, the Hope Line is a gravity-assisted run featuring table 
tops and some hairier dropoffs of more than four feet.

Lee Quarry is a more unique place and experience, however. In a rather 
forgotten valley, Rossendale, this disused quarry trail centre's unexpected 
popularity has provided an economic boost to the area. This former quarry is no 
pretty little forest in the back of beyond though, it's more a hole on a 
hillside full of rocks. Nonetheless, there are sections of superb flow and 
rhythm, and for younger riders there are a pair of brilliant "pump tracks": a 
tight loop of rises, dips and turns where sheer momentum keeps you hurtling 
around.

Another mountain-biking option close to Gisburn is Wycoller country park 
<http://www.visitpendle.com/what-to-do/wycoller-country-park-p7149>. With the 
option of starting at Colne if you don't mind a climb, the loop features some 
strange rocks formations at Boulsworth Hill. ThePennine Mountain Bike 
Association <http://www.pmba.org.uk/> has information about Lancashire's trail 
centres.

For other on-road options in the west of the county, where a series of bike 
hire stations operate, a 10-mile tarmac saunter from Martin Mere Wetland Centre 
to Rufford takes in nature reserves and Rufford's titular 16th-century Old 
Hall, open to visitors.

For more information, go to visitlancashire.com/cycle 
<http://www.visitlancashire.com/things-to-do/countryside-activities/cycling>

Useful information

How to get there
Colne is on the east Lancashire line (northernrail.org), with trains running 
through Preston and Blackburn, and is at the end of the M65 motorway. If you're 
coming from due east you should get off the A1 on to the A59, then the A56.

Where to stay
For Colne and Gisburn: The Stirk House Hotel 
<http://www.lidun-group.co.uk/stirk/index.html> (doubles from £116 B&B) is 
blessed with great views thanks to its proximity to Pendle Hill (above), the 
Forest of Bowland and Yorkshire dales. Dam Head Farm'sBlacksmith's Cottage 
<http://www.damheadbarn.com/> (doubles from £70) mixes heritage with a dash of 
luxury and has an open garden to enjoy the natural surroundings.

For Martin Mere/Rufford: Martin Lane Farm Holiday Cottages (doubles from £140) 
offers characterful self-catering options five minutes' from Burscough village.

Where to eat
Morgan's Cafe (01282 843500) in Earby, Barnoldswick, and Barley Tea Rooms 
(07866 43269) in Barley, Burnley.

Bike hire
Across west Lancashire hire bikes are available to hire from £1 per hour from 
stations at Ormskirk Park Pool, Edge Hill University, Burscough Leisure Centre, 
Burscough Wharf, The Ship Inn at Lathom and Riverside Holiday Park.
visitseftonandwestlancs.co.uk/cycling 
<http://www.visitseftonandwestlancs.co.uk/cycling/cycle-hire.aspx>

For more information on holidays in England, go to VisitEngland.com 
<http://www.visitengland.com/>
 