
My favoured ingress to Edinburgh <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/edinburgh> is 
bending up past the castle, then slipping dutifully on to the Royal Mile before 
turning into Market Street, just down from the Free Church College. Then on 
past Fleshmarket Close, where Inspector Rebus toiled to solve one of his last 
mysteries and where, if you're not careful, the Jinglin' Geordie pub will 
abduct you at dawn and keep you until after dusk.

On Thursday morning, though, my way on to Market Street was barred by a 
howling ghost train hoisted on painted stilts. Is this how Edinburgh's 
internationally renowned, three-day Hogmanay bacchanal chooses to reveal 
itself? What need has this city of a ghost train when, down below us, the empty 
tracks that rend Princes Street are waiting still for a phantom tram service 
that is years late and squillions over budget?

Later I will encounter a gypsy fairground of waltzers, carousels and candy 
floss perched beneath Sir Walter Scott's moody and magnificent monument. There 
is, of course, a big wheel, for it seems that no open space in any British city 
these days is complete without one.

Up on George IV Bridge a little huddle of Koreans are doing that iPhone thing 
with each other outside the Elephant House, where JK Rowling brought Harry 
Potter to life, and soon Facebook will thrum with images of their happy faces. 
Edinburgh is undergoing its annual transmutation when, for a few days at least, 
it becomes the world's circus and not Scotland's dowager auntie.

Starting Sunday and continuing until Wednesday, more than 100,000 people from 
60 countries will attend the world's biggest, most extravagant celebration of 
the new year's dawn. The centrepiece is a night-long party on Princes Street, 
with a firework show which will be featured on international news bulletins in 
every corner of the globe.

It has been estimated that Edinburgh's Hogmanay is worth around £30m to the 
economy, but the value of the marketing of Scotland that comes with it can only 
be guessed at. If the Scottish National Party could capture the essence of this 
event and what it says about Scotland, then release it slowly into the nation's 
bloodstream throughout the banal months ahead, their dream of independence 
would become a reality.

In the shadow of the castle, the man who made Edinburgh's Hogmanay is sipping 
English breakfast tea and peering back over the 20 years of his creation. Pete 
Irvine MBE (he can't remember what for) has probably made more money for the 
Scottish economy than an avarice of entrepreneurs.

In appearance, the managing director of Unique Events possesses a disposable 
elegance and there is a gentle counter-culture aspect around him. He is 
reminiscing about the early days: "To be honest, I simply wanted to reach the 
millennium and bring it in with some style and afterwards we would take it each 
year at a time. I knew if we were still doing the Hogmanay street party 
celebrations well into the first decade of the millennium, then we would have 
gone a long way to establishing Edinburgh as the world's festival city."

The extent to which Irvine has achieved this target is revealed in the raw 
statistics. More than two-thirds of this year's audience will comprise foreign 
visitors. "They all want to say that, at least once in their lives, they were 
at the true home of Hogmanay," he says.

"Hogmanay in Edinburgh has an authenticity and a historical and cultural 
hinterland that other global locations just don't have. I think now that 
Scotland can be regarded as the home of festivals of every sort. Music 
festivals in the UK all chase the same acts on the same stages and look for the 
same vibe. Here, though, we always strive to introduce something unique each 
year. And it is always,de facto, a celebration of Scottishness and what it 
means to live here. But it will always have an international outlook."

Irvine, who was born in the Scottish Borders and educated at Edinburgh 
University, donned the impresario's waistcoat early. In 1990, rejecting all 
presentiments of doom, he rescued Glasgow's decaying Barrowland Ballroom, which 
had provided the bleak backdrop to the Bible John murders around 20 years 
earlier. Bands such as Simple Minds and U2 had been on the cusp of greatness 
and the Barrowlands became a popular destination.

Simple Minds headlined the Barrowlands resurrection gig and Irvine has never 
forgotten that. They will headline Edinburgh's Hogmanay concert on Monday night.

The security operation to keep revellers safe and delivered safely into their 
beds is now mobilising. Seventy thousand foreigners will arrive suddenly in an 
unfamiliar city and drink alcohol in unfamiliar quantities, while choreographed 
mayhem unfolds around them. Irvine has claimed that the number of police 
incidents throughout this giant party are "fewer than you would encounter on a 
Saturday night in a small Scottish town".

Assistant Chief Constable Graham Sinclair of Lothian and Borders police, who 
will be in charge of policing on the night, agrees: "I never cease to be amazed 
at how few serious incidents we have. Some of this is due to the fact that our 
overseas visitors, let's face it, have a low alcohol threshold. But we also 
learn something new each year. Ten years ago it took almost 800 officers to 
police this event, now we have a team of 300."

Scotland's arts, culture and media establishment has been split in the past 
two weeks by a coruscating essay from Alasdair Gray in which the novelist 
expresses disquiet at the number of senior arts administrator positions now 
filled by "colonist" English people who, he says, know little and care less for 
indigenous artists and their work. Perhaps Gray and the rest of us have 
overlooked the fact that the Borders-born Irvine has been Scotland's greatest 
cultural provider for the past 25 years or so.

Irvine is eager, though, that Edinburgh's Hogmanay is truly international. "I 
have been urged in the past to make the entire event more Scottish," he says. 
"But I have always thought that Scotland looks its best when it opens its doors 
and its arms, and adopts an international outlook. We will always have Scottish 
performers and events, but this is an international festival and it will 
continue to be while I am running it."

In the Scotch Malt Whisky Society's baronial rooms on Queen Street, they are 
promoting their own celebration of Hogmanay. A taster menu of seven courses, 
each chased down by a whisky, costs £139 for non-members (£129 for members). 
For anyone even remotely entertaining the prospect of taking a car and forgoing 
alcohol, there is an uncompromising abjuration: "Sorry, no drivers' tickets 
available."

Journalist and arts critic Alan Taylor is unstinting in his admiration for 
Irvine's contribution to Scottish culture. "He is the single best thing that's 
happened to Scotland in years. He is a man of good taste and no little 
sophistication who knows what Scotland at its best looks like and how it can 
speak to the world. We should cherish him."

A little while later, fortified by the society's signature product, I am 
walking along Princes Street. Glaswegians such as I have a habit of mocking 
Edinburgh's main thoroughfare and the city's general lofty demeanour. How can 
you call yourself a real city when your main street only has shops on one side?

In Edinburgh, the sight of a table and chairs on a pavement signifies a 
delicatessen; in Glasgow, a warrant sale. But when you walk down this street 
from east to west, the castle lit up in blue on your left and Princes Street 
gardens bustling along beside you, it is easy to see why Rudolph Bing chose 
this place to host his inaugural international festival in 1947. It is a pure 
and unspoiled amphitheatre with an operatic sweep that will always seduce 
performers. Drama and romance are ingrained within its stone.

On Monday night, Edinburgh will slip into its pretty black cocktail dress and 
the world will, as always, be allured.
 