
When Larry and Andy Wachowski were pitching The Matrix to their producers, 
they played them a DVD of an 82-minute Japanese cartoon and said: "We wanna do 
that for real." The film was 1995'sGhost in the Shell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ghost-in-the-shell>, which defined a visual 
identity for cyberpunk cinema and counts James Cameron and Steven Spielberg 
among its most high-profile fans.

As it turned out, The Matrix wasn't quite Ghost in the Shell "for real", but 
it is indebted to it. Both films explore the virtual realm with a combination 
of existential questioning and kick-ass violence. The Wachowskis borrowed many 
of Ghost's key details, including the digital "rain" of green numbers that 
signifies cyberspace, and the way humans plug themselves in through holes in 
the backs of their necks.

While he has just rereleased a "2.0" refurbishment of his 15-year-old film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/oct/01/ghost-in-the-shell-review>, 
director Mamoru Oshii is modest about its pioneering qualities. "I did not 
revise it because I was dissatisfied with the original, but to prove how far we 
have progressed since then," he explains. A cheerfully taciturn man with a 
penchant for basset hounds, Oshii doesn't like to talk about the Matrix and any 
similarities to his film. "I've been asked this question hundreds of times. 
Frankly, it gets a bit annoying. I'm sure the Wachowski brothers feel the same. 
It is an entertaining movie, but I prefer their debut, Bound."

Adapted from a comic book written by Masamune Shirow, Ghost in the Shell 
possesses many hallmarks of theanime (Japanese animation) genre: vast 
metropolises, lovingly detailed robots, military hardware, pneumatic women with 
huge eyes. The story is a future-noir thriller along the lines of Bladerunner, 
following a female cyborg detective on the trail of a mysterious hacker. She 
also questions her own identity: does she possess a "ghost" or a soul? Is she 
just a machine?

Surprisingly, the film was co-financed by a British company, Manga Films, an 
offshoot of Island records. Andy Frain, the movie's executive producer, says: 
"I wanted to do a blend of east and west: western storytelling combined with 
Japanese artistry and a great soundtrack – we were talking to Massive Attack at 
one point." But his suggestions were largely ignored, he says. The critics were 
lukewarm, and the film only reached a sizeable audience on video and DVD.

But it did appeal to an influential contingent of film-makers. James Cameron 
has described Ghost in the Shell as "a stunning work of speculative fiction 
. . . the first to reach a level of literary excellence". (His forthcoming movie
Avatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2009/aug/21/avatar-first-trailer-james-cameron-3d>
 envisages a future in which humans can transfer their personalities into the 
bodies of an alien species. Sound familiar?)

Ghost in the Shell's influence on Spielberg, another fan, is clear in AI: 
Artificial Intelligence, which ponders the philosophical implications of the 
human-automaton interface, and in the future-tech visions of Minority Report. 
In April this year, Spielberg's Dreamworks studio acquired the remake rights to 
Ghost in the Shell; he plans to make a 3D live-action version.

In the past year, we've also had Joss Whedon's enjoyable TV series Dollhouse, 
in which secret agents are wiped clean of their memories and personalities, so 
as to be implanted with new, temporary ones. And the sci-fi filmSurrogates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/sep/25/surrogates-film-review>, out last 
month, imagines a future in which people prefer to stay at home and control 
avatars of themselves in the outside world.

But Ghost in the Shell went further than its Hollywood counterparts. Unlike 
the replicants in Blade Runner, the techno-slaves of The Matrix or the robot in 
AI, Ghost's cyborg heroine does not seek to regain her "lost" humanity. Without 
giving away the ending, the film hints at the start of a brave new post-human 
era (or is it a Buddhist parable?) about the surrender of self into a larger 
entity. Quite a burden for an 82-minute cartoon.
 