
For more than a century, the first two weeks in September in the East End of 
London meant one thing: hop picking. At its peak, in about 1880, 200,000 people 
– overwhelmingly women and children – made the journey down to Kent for the hop 
harvest. Many returned to the same farms, generation after generation, until 
the 1960s when the combination of mechanisation and the beginning of a collapse 
in domestic hop farming, as well as greater opportunities for women in London, 
brought the annual working holiday to an abrupt halt.

On Friday morning some of those who had made that hopping pilgrimage as 
children returned to the hop gardens to relive some of their most vivid days – 
and pick some hops. The pickers mustered in the sun outside Dagenham Library at 
9am, with the same kind of excitement as when they set off for the countryside 
as kids. Vi Charlton, sparkle-eyed at 84, recalled how she, her mother, aunts, 
grandmother and many of her 43 cousins would head for Kent every summer in the 
1930s, with "furniture and all sorts" in the back of a truck. "My nan would 
take lace curtains for the windows of the tin shack," she said. "It was hard 
work for our mums but paradise for us kids."

This time, in making their return to that paradise, Vi and the rest of two 
coaches full of expectant hop-pickers were, whether they knew it or not, also a 
living part of an award-winning art project. It's the idea of a German-born 
artistKathrin Böhm <http://andmillionsandmillions.net> who has lived and worked 
in Hackney for 17 years. Curated by the urban arts foundation Create, Böhm's 
project is called "Company: Movement, Deals and Drinks" and is part of a trend 
that seeks to build social capital directly through art. With funding from 
Create's annual £50,000 Bank of America-sponsored art award, and working with 
the co-operation of Barking and Dagenham council, the idea is to establish a 
drinks-making company that is both a generator of creative connections and a 
commercial enterprise. When asked what kind of art she makes, Böhm, who leads 
the hopping coach trip with a cheerful evangelist's spirit, says she is 
concerned with "making the public realm".

The public realm in question is an effort to forge links between several very 
distinct groups of people, in east London in this case: links between 
Shoreditch hipsters and what you might call Dagenham "hopsters". The 
fast-growing craft beer industry in Britain is at its most eclectic in and 
around the artistic hub of Shoreditch and Hoxton; the cultural memory of some 
of the poorest neighbouring boroughs, meanwhile, is still rooted in hopping – 
but the two tribes don't mix at all.

The mission of Create's director Hadrian Garrard is to bring the energies of 
art to unexpected places. He points out: "There are 13,000 artists living and 
working in east London, Europe's largest cultural quarter. But if you live in 
Barking and Dagenham you are less likely to walk into an art gallery than 
anywhere else in the UK. This area has the lowest level of cultural 
participation. Our work is about finding out whether artists can develop 
relationships with communities in different ways."

Also on the trip to Kent are Jen Löwius and Stephanie Poltinger, two 
representatives of the hip Bermondsey-based brewerKernel 
<http://www.thekernelbrewery.com>, who will drive the fresh hops back that 
evening to flavour 3,000 litres of a new green hop ale. To complete the circle, 
the beer will be sold next month at that hipster pilgrimage site, theFrieze art 
fair <http://friezelondon.com>, as part of a range of "Company" drinks that 
will include elderflower cordials and rosehip syrups made from flowers and 
fruit foraged and grown in city farm projects in and around Dagenham – each 
rich with other shared stories and "psycho-geographic" connections.

Once they get off the coaches at the Little Scotney Farm in Lamberhurst, the 
white-haired hopsters don't care about what the curators call "relational 
aesthetics". They just want to get hopping. They file down to the hop gardens 
where the late summer sun is filtered through the rows of hop bines trained on 
their coconut-string frames 20-feet high, and some of the old childhood magic 
returns. Working at times alongside the craft brewers, the hopsters' fingers 
remember the speed at which they used to tackle the long stems in their teens. 
A hessian sack quickly starts to fill with soft green kernels. And while they 
strip the plants, of course, they talk.

George Orwell, who came hopping in 1931 on one of his living-as-a-tramp 
investigations, said that "hop-picking is far from being a holiday, and, as far 
as wages go, no worse employment exists". He spent lot of time complaining 
about cracked skin on his fingers. The returning hop-pickers don't see it that 
way at all. Hopping was opportunity for sunlit freedom away from the harsher 
confines of the city. John Campbell and Terry Bird, East End boys now in their 
70s, recall the excitement of running into school each year with news that the 
letter from the hop farmer had come, inviting them back.

Georgina Coleira who came for a dozen or more summers ending in 1960, when she 
had a child of her own, recalls the teenage rush of freedom away from her 
strict father. Was there holiday romance? "Not half," she says. "That's why 
most of us came. You'd get down here and your mum would make you sort out your 
straw bedding then you would go straight round to see last year's friend or 
last year's boyfriend or whatever." She still likes to use candle-lamps at home 
in London because they remind her of heady hopping evenings.

Little Scotney, which is on National Trust land, is one of only 50 hop farms 
left in Britain; Ian Strang, the farmer, suggests there were probably 50 in 
this parish alone before the war. He grew up on his father's farm over the 
hill, and took the tenancy here in 1990. His oasthouses, in which the hops are 
dried, are still working as they have always done, though they are heated these 
days by "extortionate" diesel burners rather than coal; most others have been 
converted into grand design residences for London commuters.

Strang remembers as a "naive redneck boy" the East End families decamping for 
the harvest. It was, he says with a grin, "one's first initiation into three 
things: swearing, sweets and what I will call human excrement – they tended to 
go in the hop garden…"

Now most of the hop-pickers' work in the gardens is done by tractor and 
machine. Strang employs about 20 seasonal workers for the harvest, generally 
locals. One family, mother and two sons, still comes down from London, as they 
have for 30 years. Tom Barton, the younger son at 28, lives in Abbey Wood in 
southeast London and works as a tree surgeon. At Scotney he labours in a 
hangar-like building feeding hop bines on to a conveyer system from 7am until 
5pm; he still describes this as the "best few weeks of the year".

Most hop farmers use eastern European labour, but Strang believes a nod toward 
the old tradition is important: "The links between Londoners and farming 
disappeared with hop-picking. There is hardly any connection now between 
consumer and producer."

Most of Strang's crop goes to the London brewer Fuller's. He places most of 
his hope, though, in the craft beer revolution of microbreweries such as Kernel 
(hundreds of smaller enterprises have opened in Britain in the last year 
alone). His hops produce a wonderful ale with the Westerham Brewery called 
Scotney, and before we head back to the coaches he opens a crate for the 
hopsters. Their day's work done, and the hops dispatched to the brewery in 
Bermondsey, many of the pickers have now fashioned Pan-like garlands of hops 
for themselves, as was the habit of their childhood, to take back to Dagenham. 
Orwell, never a man wholly in touch with his inner pagan, couldn't understand 
the custom.Vi Charlton had never tasted a drop of beer in her 84 years before 
the Scotney Ale on Friday afternoon, but believed she might get a taste for it. 
Her husband, she said, is in hospital in London. She planned to visit him that 
evening to show him the dark stains of hop juice on her hands.

For further information on the art project go to createlondon.org
 