
As results of the EU referendum unfolded, the areas that had voted to leave 
caught my eye. Not for the numbers returned – but because I’d visited so many 
of them in recent years, notebook in hand, writing about poverty.

Coastal towns, former steel and mining areas, now desolate villages stacked 
with rows of small family homes, almost entirely jobless. The coastal towns in 
particular, including once-popular holiday destinations Blackpool, Torbay and 
Tendring, are now suffering extreme poverty and their own housing crisis, with 
farmore people in private rented accommodation claiming housing benefit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jun/22/housing-benefit-cost-claimants-single-mothers>
 than those in social housing.

In housing terms, two claims jumped out for me during the campaign. The 
argument that house prices would fall if the country exited the EU presumed 
that all voters would consider this a terrible occurrence: not everyone is a 
home-owner, and many people, myself included, believe some correction to the 
market is both necessary and desirable. But the old tabloid adage that because 
of immigration people struggle to find or afford housing, as well as to get a 
GP appointment, seemed to be foremost in many people’s minds.

If there are more people sleeping on the street in your area, that’s because 
of cuts – to the public sector, to housing departments, to homelessness 
shelters and services. If you struggle to get a medical appointment that’s 
because the NHS is stretched to the limit thanks to “restructuring”, not 
because of EU migration.

The areas most likely to benefit from EU structural funding voted 
predominantly to leave: Wales, Cornwall and the post-industrial north have seen 
millions of pounds of investment targeted in the most deprived wards and towns. 
The argument that EU membership costs more than the amount injected into areas 
of high deprivation only rings true if you believe the Conservatives would 
happily spend money on Rotherham rather than a Tory safe seat.

Nigel Farage hasn’t even had time for a post-result nap, yet is already 
disowning the Leave campaign claim, emblazoned on buses and billboards, that 
the purported £350m a week spent on EU membership will be spent instead on the 
NHS. With the poorest councils already suffering disproportionate cuts, and the 
pound collapsing, we may well have driven our economy into a wall – and as in 
2008, the poorest will suffer.

So what happens now? Britain withdraws and becomes more insular in outlook. 
With 12% of those working in construction migrants from the EU and with the 
construction industry already struggling to keep up with demand, any drop in 
skilled migrants will hit Britain’s ability to build.

As the pound tanked to a level not seen since 1985, private developers saw 
their share prices hit: worrying given the focus on private rather than social 
building in recent budgets. Britain is now in freefall, with the prime minister 
having resigned, a shock withdrawal from theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, and nothing certain aside from the fact 
the coming months will yield endless negotiations on the exit, and the 
coronation of a new Tory leader.

Meanwhile, housing will be pushed to one side in terms of political attention. 
Those who voted to “take back control” may find increasingly there’s very 
little to control in their lives. Analysts are already predicting a drop in 
supply of new homes, due to market volatility, predicted slowdown on skilled 
migration flows and share price drops for developers. At this stage, it seems 
unlikely that the government’s target of one million new homes built by 2020 
will materialise, putting further strain on the UK’s housing system – the needs 
of people outside of the south east, where empty homes are a problem, as is 
affording rent, are likely to fall by the wayside in the pursuit of easy profit 
from house-building.

In 1981, Margaret Thatcher was encouraged to evacuate Merseyside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/dec/30/thatcher-government-liverpool-riots-1981>
, believing the area to be beyond saving: EU funding played a huge part in the 
slow regeneration of Liverpool. Visiting the centre now, it is transformed: 
there are still problems in Toxteth and the north of the city, but the 
improvement has been vast.

A Britain that goes it alone, especially under the Conservatives, is far less 
likely to invest in areas where council funding has already been cut and that 
means that when it comes to housing, health and public services, those towns 
voting Brexit may well find the idea to cut areas of high deprivation loose is 
floated again.

Join the Guardian Housing Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/> to read more pieces like 
this. Follow us on Twitter (@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/GuardianHousingNetwork/?ref=hl> to keep up with the 
latest social housing news and views.
 