
You’ve seen an advert for your dream job at the charity or organisation you’ve 
always wanted to work for, but how do you get on the all-important shortlist? A 
good CV is your ticket to the interview. It should be well written, easy to 
follow and individually tailored to each job you apply for. Here’s a guide on 
how to achieve a perfect CV for any voluntary sector position.

Sell yourself and your drive for the cause


Perhaps easier said than done for modest Brits, but selling yourself is 
crucial says, Matthew Page, head of human resources at the mental health 
charity,Mind <http://www.mind.org.uk/>. “It’s good to treat a CV as if it’s an 
advert on you,” he says. “Think about what sells you as a person, it might be a 
particular qualification, or perhaps your personal attributes.”

Showing what your drive for the cause is – whether this is from a personal 
experience or simply a deep interest – is also important. Page says: “Passion, 
drive and leadership are good to highlight. The voluntary sector can’t survive 
without these qualities.”

Get the basics right


“You might be surprised that a lot of people don’t pay attention to the basic 
aspects of a CV. Getting the charity name right [in personal statements or 
covering letters] is a good start,” says Eleonora Orlowska a key worker with 
youth charity,Young Futures <http://www.youngfutures.org.uk/>. Spelling and 
grammar are also important and candidates should ask a friend to look over 
their CV before they press send. Orlowska adds: “Check how readable your CV is 
in terms of layout and structure. Don’t have different fonts or use bold and 
italic too much. You don’t want the person to have to fight to read the 
information you have on there.”

Charity job interview? Six questions to ask your prospective employer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/sep/04/charity-job-interview-questions-ask-prospective-employer>
Focus on impact

“The sector has traditionally overvalued experience and undervalued potential 
which is what we’re trying to address,” says Amy Pettipher, programme manager at
Charityworks <http://www.charity-works.co.uk/>, a graduate programme for the 
not-for-profit sector. “To overcome this when you’re listing out your 
experience – whether that be work or voluntary – you should avoid simply 
listing tasks you did.” Focusing instead on impact and the individual 
contribution that you had. “If you’ve had impact, the tasks you carried out to 
achieve that are implied,” Pettipher adds.

Highlight voluntary work 

Don’t undersell your volunteering experience as it’s often something that HR 
managers look out for. Lai-Har Cheung, HR manager atNational Council of 
Voluntary Organisation <https://www.ncvo.org.uk/> says: “Any knowledge and 
skills you have acquired through volunteering needs to go on your CV. It’s as 
important as paid work as often it can make you stand out. If you’ve learned 
how to manage teams for example by doing some voluntary work, it shows a 
different side of your skills.”

Tailor your CV to the person specification

When writing about your previous experience, bring relevant skills which match 
the person specification to the top of each job description. It may seem 
time-consuming if you’re applying for lots of jobs but in a competitive market, 
it’s crucial to make life easy for recruiters who have to read hundreds of CVs 
for each vacancy. Cheung adds: “[Rearranging your CV] means you’re stopping the 
person having to search to find lines that match the person specification.”


Be specific

Talking about specific key achievements will help recruiters get a picture of 
what you can actually do. It’s particularly important for fundraising roles. 
“Talk about exactly how much money you’ve raised year on year,” says Neil 
Hogan, deputy managing director atCharity People 
<http://www.charitypeople.co.uk/>, a recruitment consultancy for the sector. 
One danger is being too general especially about big numbers as it can look 
like you’re exaggerating. Hogan says:“If you’re very specific about what you’ve 
done then it will be obvious you’re not making it up. It’s more tangible and 
recruiters can ask questions around it.”

Highlight your influence


This is particularly important for campaigning roles. Kamran Naqui, senior HR 
adviser atGreenpeace <http://www.greenpeace.org.uk/> says: “Highlight where 
you’ve influenced and persuaded stakeholders in previous roles. From a 
campaigning point of view this is vital. Drawing attention to previous 
volunteer activism is a good way to show your enthusiasm for the organisation.” 
Something else to highlight is any online campaigning success, Naqui explains: 
“What we might look for is how a candidate has used digital media to get a 
campaign’s message across or get people active in a cause. It’s another edge to 
have.”

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> – it’s free!
 