
Mallaig is far from the prettiest of Highland settlements, even when the 
weather is fine and you can look over the sea to the blue shapes of Skye and 
the Small Isles. Several rows of what could be prewar council houses stretch 
across the hill beyond the harbour; a mishmash of car parks, jetties and 
workaday buildings squats close to the railway terminus. When I last stayed in 
Mallaig, it was known as the biggest herring port in Europe and no public 
transport moved on Sundays. (Carless, I was trapped in the Marine hotel for the 
whole of a rainy weekend with a travelling salesman for Berkel, which he called 
"the Rolls-Royce of bacon slicers".)

Today, the herring have vanished, as well as the Sabbath-keeping, and smoke 
from the kippering sheds no longer smudges the view – and yet Mallaig remains a 
busy place. Ferries come and go and fishing boats land shellfish, which is 
driven away in refrigerated lorries to the markets of France and Spain. None of 
this activity, however, explains the hundreds of people who can be seen roaming 
Mallaig's few streets every afternoon between the beginning of May and the end 
of October, looking for something to do or to buy, or the presence of so many 
restaurants, or menus that include Thai fish curry at a Cornish price of £18 a 
plate. What do explain them are two enthusiasms, one for low fact and the other 
for high fiction, which are kindled in childhood and among many adults never 
entirely disappear.

The railway reached Mallaig from Fort William and the south in 1901; it was 
among the last big lines to be built in Britain, late enough to have its 
viaducts built of concrete by the contractor Robert McAlpine ("Concrete Bob"), 
and it traversed one of Europe's most spectacular and emptiest landscapes – 
lochs, mountains, sea inlets, moorland, with hardly anything large enough to 
be called a village along its 40-mile length. Its construction needed a large – 
and controversial – government subsidy, and its traffic never grew much beyond 
the two or three trains a day that carried fish boxes and a few dozen 
travellers to and from the Hebrides. It made little economic sense. Only 60 
years after the line opened, it began to be threatened with closure. Few people 
would have guessed then that its commercial salvation would eventually be owed 
to a novel and a film, and first of all, to a hobby.

Railways became an amateur pastime as well as a means of transport during the 
last decades of the 19th century. The date is difficult to fix with any 
precision. Steam locomotives had a fascination that might be called nostalgic 
or historical as early as 1857, when Stephenson's 1825 engine, Locomotion, was 
put on a pedestal at Darlington for permanent public display. In the years that 
followed, professional men such as vicars and lawyers began to see the huge 
variety of trains and their continual technical progress as a pursuit offering 
a similar kind of pleasure to local historical research, philately, 
egg-collecting and butterfly-hunting. By the end of the century they had their 
own magazine and their own club, the Railway Club, the world's first society 
for railway enthusiasts, which was founded in London in 1899 and had its own 
premises with a library and leather armchairs. It was from these elite 
beginnings that the 20th century's great cult of trainspotting spread to even 
the roughest school playground, reinforcing a more general fondness for steam 
locomotives that many people had without knowing quite why, so that a sense of 
loss ran through Britain (more than in any other country) when, in the 1960s, 
it became clear that their day was nearly done.

Hundreds of them were saved from the scrapyards and restored to working order; 
dozens of branch lines repaired and reopened so that in the holidays Britain 
could be charmed by how it once was. It's hard to think that anywhere in the 
world has seen a more popular or successful preservation movement, or at least 
one run and largely funded by volunteers and not governments. Among them was a 
Lancashire GP, Peter Beet, who played a vital role in saving no fewer than 23 
mainline locomotives, and set up a centre for their service and repair in 
Carnforth, which was funded and eventually owned by Sir William McAlpine, the 
great-grandson of Concrete Bob. Out of this business grew the West Coast 
Railway Company, which hires out engines, coaches and crew for steam 
excursions, and which since 1995 has run the Jacobite Express, with its two 
return trains a day in the high season between Fort William and Mallaig.

A film producer looking to shoot a fantastical train in a dramatic location 
would naturally turn to such a company, and so in threeHarry Potter films 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/harrypotter>, beginning with the first, the 
train to Hogwarts is seen crossing Concrete Bob's most famous creation, 
Glenfinnan's curved viaduct. The implication that if Hogwarts ever existed it 
would exist in Mallaig is a small implausibility set inside a far grander one. 
Nonetheless,the Jacobite Express 
<http://www.westcoastrailways.co.uk/jacobite/jacobite-steam-train-details.cfm> 
still fills with Potter fans from all parts of the globe and always stops for a 
photo opportunity at Glenfinnan, which is where the real Bonnie Prince Charlie 
really raised his standard at the beginning of the '45 and marked as such by a 
real 60ft-high memorial; all of which reality is cast into shadow by the film 
of a modern fairytale.

What economic plan for this part of Scotland could have conceived 50 years ago 
that a good part of its future prosperity would come from steam engines and 
film locations? Or that private interests and passions – with apologies for 
that overused word – would lie behind the presence of each: the locomotive man 
and the novelist wanting to bring to life the dead and the yet unborn.JK Rowling
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jkrowling> is celebrated everywhere, but 
the locomotive men who devoted every spare hour of their lives to cleaning out 
boiler tubes or greasing axles live and perish more obscurely. Somewhere there 
should be a tomb to the unknown anorak.

Three cheers for the unknown anoraks of this world

The idea that fiction can swell an economy isn't new. I arrived in Mallaig 
last week aboard the fine old steamer Waverley, named after the hero of Walter 
Scott's first historical novel. Our ship was built long after Scott had fallen 
from fashion, but its name perpetuated the policy of its predecessor's owners, 
the North British Railway, which was so mad for Scott as a marketing ploy 
that it called almost everything it owned after his characters, from 
locomotives to steamships to its large station in Edinburgh.

Every May the Waverley sails from the Clyde on a series of voyages that take 
it round the Mull of Kintyre to the Hebrides. It's a handsome ship and the 
views are beautiful and unexpected; there can be no finer sea journey in 
Britain. But, again, the experience exists because of an enthusiasm rather than 
from the intervention of any government. Forty years ago this August, a group 
of Clyde steamer lovers led by a young chocolate salesman, Douglas McGowan, 
bought it for a pound.

We met on the ship last week. Why had he been so rash as to take on such a 
complicated project of expensive restoration and repair? McGowan mentioned 
childhood summers spent in Arran, the paddle steamer there and back – the need 
to keep a part of that time. To him and people like him, the unknown anoraks, 
we owe considerable thanks.
 