
Sitting in a small, computer-lined room trying to remember a succession of 
different-coloured words scrolling past on a screen doesn't sound like the 
cutting edge of scientific research. However, academics at the University of 
East London are using word tests to assess the impact synaesthesia can have on 
memory – and the potential it might have to ward off the decline in cognitive 
function that can affect the elderly.

Synaesthesia, the neurological condition that causes a blending of the senses 
– colours can be connected to letters and numbers, smells and tastes to music 
or touch to vision – has long been linked to creativity: famous synaesthetes 
includeSibelius <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jean-sibelius> and more 
recentlyPharrell Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/music/pharrellwilliams> 
andLady Gaga <https://www.theguardian.com/music/lady-gaga>.

But among the wider population it has remained a mysterious condition, 
although it is known to affect at least 4.4% of adults across its many forms.

For instance, a grapheme-colour synaesthete might "see" the days of the week, 
letters and numbers as particular colours; a lexical-gustatory synaesthete will 
experience a particular taste in their mouth when they hear a given word; and 
an odour-visual/spatial synaesthete will see shapes, movement and colours when 
they detect certain smells.

While scientists have known about synaesthesia for 200 years, only recently 
have researchers – across the fields of psychology, neuroscience and 
psycholinguistics – been able to focus their attentions on what effect the 
condition has on synaesthetes' broader cognitive function and, crucially, what 
synaesthesia may be able to do for the non-synaesthete population.

"There's definitely been a shift in the time I've been a synaesthesia 
researcher," saysDr Julia Simner 
<http://www.ppls.ed.ac.uk/psychology/people/julia-simner>, co-editor of The 
Oxford Handbook of Synesthesia 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/search.do>, who runs the 
synaesthesia and sensory integration laboratory at the University of Edinburgh.

Her team has recently been awarded a €1.3m grant by the European Research 
Council <http://erc.europa.eu/> to develop the first test to identify the 
condition in children.

And, in parallel, Simner and her team are working with researchers at the Max 
Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics 
<http://www.mpi.nl/departments/language-and-genetics/projects/decoding-the-genetics-of-synaesthesia/genetics-of-synaesthesia-1/genetics-of-synaesthesia>
 in Nijmegen in the Netherlands on a study to try to identify the genes 
implicated in synaesthesia, which often runs in families.

"Before when I gave talks about synaesthesia, 96% of the audience would not 
believe it and the others – the synaesthetes – would think it was just obvious. 
Now it's shifted away from the burden of proof and we are free to explore the 
questions scientists really want to ask," Simner says, noting that advances in 
brain imaging had provided better evidence of the existence of synaesthesia.

"One of the streams of the latest research is to look at how synaesthesia 
affects development in a child. How much of your cognitive profile, what you're 
good at and what you're not good at, is affected by synaesthesia? We are 
looking for benefits and deficits as well as whether we can use multisensory 
effects to help learning in the average child," she says.

Dr Michael Banissy <http://www.gold.ac.uk/psychology/staff/banissy/>, senior 
lecturer in psychology at Goldsmiths, University of London, agrees that 
understanding how the condition develops in children will be a focus of future 
research and key to a broader comprehension of synaesthesia. "The focus 
previously has been on the synaesthetic experience alone but now there is 
interest in asking if more is going on beyond the synaesthesia."

Dr Nicolas Rothen <http://www.sussex.ac.uk/sackler/people/list/person/267799>, 
who is carrying out research into synaesthesia and memory at the University of 
Sussex, agrees attitudes towards synaesthesia have changed. "Ten to 15 years 
ago, researchers were mostly concerned with showing that synaesthesia was real 
and not just metaphorical thinking. Now it is basically accepted that 
synaesthetes perceive the world differently and we are asking how it relates to 
other cognitive functions," he says.

That may lead to interesting findings about cognitive function that can be 
applied to the general population. "People are different," says Rothen, "and we 
need to consider those individual differences. Synaesthesia is a neat way to 
study differences in perception and their relation to higher cognitive 
functions such as memory and language processing."

But while scientists are interested in the differences between the brains of 
synaesthetes and non-synaesthetes, research is also being carried out into how 
the two can be brought closer together.

"One thing we have found is that synaesthetes are not a different class of 
people – they simply have more explicit experiences," Simner says. "It's a more 
extreme manifestation of what all of us experience. Asking non-synaesthetes, 
'What colour is A?' is a baffling question, but synaesthetes have a window into 
perception we all share; when pressed for an answer, we all pair more common 
letters with brighter colours or higher pitched notes with lighter colours."
 Synaesthesia has long been linked to creativity, and famous synaesthetes 
include Pharrell Williams (above) and Lady Gaga. Photograph: 
KeystoneUSA-ZUMA/REX 
Studies such as one carried out by Dr Clare Jonas 
<http://www.uel.ac.uk/research/profiles/psychology/clarejonas/> at the 
University of East London aim to take that link between synaesthetes and 
non-synaesthetes one step further, by training non-synaesthetes to have the 
same associations that synaesthetes have – and then assessing the impact their 
newly acquired synaesthesia has on their memory and cognitive function.

That's where the word test comes in. After training a small group of young 
adults to associate certain letters with certain colours, the researchers use 
the test to find out if they remember words more easily if they are coloured to 
match their synaesthetic training.

So far, the results seem to suggest that they do. The researchers assessed 
participants' memory before and after the synaesthesia training, by getting 
them to look at a list of words in which there was an odd one out – either a 
word written in the colour they had been taught to associate with it or a word 
whose meaning did not fit in with the rest of the list.

"Using predictions based on what real synaesthetes do, there seemed to be a 
tendency towards the trained synaesthetes starting to behave like synaesthetes 
– having a better memory for things involved in their synaesthesia; if 
confirmed, that would be a good sign," Jonas says.

Synaesthetes tend to remember the stand-out word more easily if it is in the 
correct colour, while they perform worse on tests in which words stand out 
because of their meaning – a list containing the words colander, whisk, spatula 
and ballet, for example.

Researchers find that interesting in itself because going beyond the surface 
to the meaning of the word is normally the key to improving performance in 
these kinds of memory games.

Although the research is at an early stage, Jonas believes training 
synaesthesia could have implications for helping older people ward off the 
decline in cognitive function that accompanies the early stages ofAlzheimer's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/alzheimers> or even for helping patients 
recover from brain injuries.

"One possibility," says Jonas, "is guarding against cognitive decline in older 
people – using synaesthesia in the creation of mnemonics to remember things 
such as shopping lists. As long as there is sufficient cognitive ability people 
could perhaps start doing the training in their 50s as a way of topping up 
their memory skills."

One obstacle for the moment is the dull and time-consuming memorising of 
letters and their matching colours that the training demands. But researchers 
in the Netherlands may have found a way round that, developing a browser 
plug-in that automatically colours certain letters as part of a wider study 
into whether synaesthesia could be learned.

Rothen, who has been carrying out studies involving training non-synaesthetes 
to behave like synaesthetes, also thinks synaesthesia research could have 
implications for the elderly, a potentially important breakthrough for an 
ageing population.

"People are only just beginning to study synaesthesia over the lifespan. There 
is a theory that it may be protective in the case of age-related cognitive 
decline. There is evidence that grapheme-colour synaesthesia in particular 
leads to enhanced memory functions and we wondered if non-synaesthetes could be 
trained to have the same associations as synaesthetes and if it would lead to 
the same enhancements."

However, while the studies demonstrate that it is possible to train 
non-synaesthetes to make the automatic link experienced by synaesthetes – that 
C is yellow, for example – it is not yet clear whether the phenomenological 
experience, or the way synaesthetes will "see" either in their mind's eye or 
projected on to the page that C is yellow, can be induced.

"We know that synaesthesia comes with benefits and that certain aspects can be 
trained. What we don't know is which aspect of the synaesthesia leads to the 
advantage – the automatic association or the phenomenological experience," 
Rothen says.

But he adds: "We have some hints that synaesthesia leads to performance 
enhancements with regards to memory performance and visual mental imagery."

Banissy's particular area of focus is social neuroscience and he explains that 
research into mirror-touch synaesthesia, in which, for example, just seeing 
someone else's face being touched sparks the sensation in the synaesthete that 
their own face is being touched, could reveal interesting findings about what 
causes synaesthetic reactions, as well as possible ways to harness those for 
non-synaesthetes.

"Using brain imaging, we have shown that mirror-touch synaesthetes recruit 
similar parts of the brain as we all do when we observe others being touched," 
says Banissy. "However, mirror-touch synaesthetes hyper-activate this system to 
the extent that they literally experience what they see. In this regard, 
mirror-touch synaesthesia is interesting because it provides a unique window 
into how we represent other people's experience."

Banissy is interested in the way synaesthesia develops in the brain and in 
particular how so-called hyper-excitability in areas of the brain such as the 
somatosensory cortex could cause synaesthesia.

"In synaesthetes, the balance between excitability and inhibition is unusual. 
So the question is, can we generate synaesthesia in non-synaesthetes by 
manipulating that balance?"

Scientists know that balance can be tipped by hypnosis or drugs: LSD, for 
example, produces a synaesthesia-like experience but more research is needed 
into other ways to change it.

"Using brain imaging, we can identify which areas are related to synaesthesia, 
but we can't tell what is causal. To do this, we need to modulate the relevant 
part of the brain and see what effect this has on generating synaesthetic 
experiences," Banissy says.

While the researchers are coming from different scientific backgrounds and 
investigating the condition from different angles, a common thread is exploring 
how synaesthetic techniques can be applied more broadly.

"Synaesthesia is obviously useful to synaesthetes in some ways," says Jonas. 
"It would be really nice if we could find a way to give the useful bits of 
synaesthesia to people who don't have it."

If you have colours for letters or numbers, and you are interested in taking 
part in the genetic test for synaesthesia, please email the Edinburgh 
synaesthesia lab at synaesthesia.research@ed.ac.uk
 