
Dogs are humanity’s oldest friends, renowned for their loyalty and abilities 
to guard, hunt and chase. But modern humans may owe even more to them than we 
previously realised. We may have to thank them for helping us eradicate our 
caveman rivals, theNeanderthals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neanderthals>.

According to a leading US anthropologist, early dogs, bred from wolves, played 
a critical role in the modern human’s takeover of Europe 40,000 years ago when 
we vanquished the Neanderthal locals.

“At that time, modern humans, Neanderthals and wolves were all top predators 
and competed to kill mammoths and other huge herbivores,” says Professor Pat 
Shipman, of Pennsylvania State University. “But then we formed an alliance with 
the wolf and that would have been the end for the Neanderthal.”

If Shipman is right, she will have solved one of evolution’s most intriguing 
mysteries. Modern humans are known to have evolved in Africa. They began to 
emigrate around 70,000 years ago, reaching Europe 25,000 years later. The 
continent was then dominated by our evolutionary cousins, the Neanderthals, who 
had lived there for more than 200,000 years. However, within a few thousand 
years of our arrival, they disappeared.

The question is: what finished them off? Some scientists blame climate change. 
Most argue that modern humans – armed with superior skills and weapons – were 
responsible. Shipman agrees with the latter scenario, but adds a twist. We had 
an accomplice: the wolf.

Modern humans formed an alliance with wolves soon after we entered Europe, 
argues Shipman. We tamed some and the dogs we bred from them were then used to 
chase prey and to drive off rival carnivores, including lions and leopards, 
that tried to steal the meat.

“Early wolf-dogs would have tracked and harassed animals like elk and bison 
and would have hounded them until they tired,” said Shipman. “Then humans would 
have killed them with spears or bows and arrows.

“This meant the dogs did not need to approach these large cornered animals to 
finish them off – often the most dangerous part of a hunt – while humans didn’t 
have to expend energy in tracking and wearing down prey. Dogs would have done 
that. Then we shared the meat. It was a win-win situation.”

At that time, the European landscape was dominated by mammoths, rhinos, bison 
and several other large herbivores. Both Neanderthals and modern humans hunted 
them with spears and possibly bows and arrows. It would have been a tricky 
business made worse by competition from lions, leopards, hyenas, and other 
carnivores, including wolves.

“Even if you brought down a bison, within minutes other carnivores would have 
been lining up to attack you and steal your prey,” said Shipman. The answer, 
she argues, was the creation of the human-wolf alliance. Previously they 
separately hunted the same creatures, with mixed results. Once they joined 
forces, they dominated the food chain in prehistoric Europe – though this 
success came at a price for other species. First Neanderthals disappeared to be 
followed by lions, mammoths, hyenas and bison over the succeeding millennia. 
Humans and hunting dogs were, and still are, a deadly combination, says Shipman.

The idea is controversial, however, because it pushes back the origins of dog 
domestication so deeply into our past. Most scientists had previously argued 
the domestication of dogs, from tamed wolves, began with the rise of 
agriculture, 10,000 years ago, though other research has suggested it began 
earlier, around 15,000 years ago.

But Shipman places it before the last Ice Age, pointing to recent discoveries 
of 33,000-year-old fossil remains of dogs in Siberia and Belgium. Although they 
look quite like wolves, the fossils also show clear signs of domestication: 
snouts that are shorter, jaws that are wider and teeth that are more crowded 
than those of a wild wolf.

Thus we began to change the wolf’s appearance and over the millennia turned 
them into all the breeds of dog we have today, from corgis to great Danes. 
Intriguingly, they may have changed our appearances as well, says Shipman, 
whose book,The Invaders: How Humans and Their Dogs Drove Neanderthals to 
Extinction <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/285534/>, 
will be published this month. Consider the whites of our eyes, she states. The 
wolf possesses white sclera as doesHomo sapiens though, crucially, it is the 
only primate that has them.

“The main advantage of having white sclera is that it is very easy to work out 
what another person is gazing at,” added Shipman. “It provides a very useful 
form of non-verbal communication and would have been of immense help to early 
hunters. They would been able to communicate silently but very effectively.”

Thus the mutation conferring white sclera could have become increasingly 
common among modern humans 40,000 years ago and would have conferred an 
advantage on those who were hunting with dogs.

By contrast, there is no evidence of any kind that Neanderthals had any 
relationship with dogs and instead they appear to have continued to hunt 
mammoths and elks on their own, a punishing method for acquiring food. Already 
stressed by the arrival of modern humans in Europe, our alliance with wolves 
would have been the final straw for Neanderthals.

Nor does the story stop in Europe, added Shipman. “I would see this as the 
beginning of the humans’ long invasion of the world. We took dogs with us 
wherever we went after our alliance formed in the palaeolithic. We took them to 
America and to the Pacific Islands. They made hunting easy and helped guard our 
food. It has been a very powerful alliance.”

RISE AND FALL OF NEANDERTHALS

250,000 years ago The first Neanderthals appear in Europe.

200,000 years The first modern humans appear in Africa.

70,000 years The first modern humans leave Africa.

50-60,000 years Modern humans and Neanderthals share territory in Middle East.

45,000 years Modern humans enter Europe.

40,000 years Neanderthals disappear.
 