
Conservatives: 330 MPs (working majority of 16)

The party is, for the most part, united behind David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> on the plan to extend 
airstrikes to Syria. The whips are hoping for fewer than the 30 rebels who 
opposed the prime minister in 2013 – when he last tried to get a vote on Syria 
military action through the Commons – although the makeup of the party has 
since changed.

Syria airstrikes: MPs debate action against Isis ahead of crunch vote - live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2015/dec/02/syria-airstrikes-mps-debate-vote-cameron-action-against-isis-live>
Significantly, Crispin Blunt, the influential Conservative chairman of the 
foreign affairs committee and 2013 rebel, said during last week’s Commons 
debate he now supports military action. His committee had earlier this month 
written a highly sceptical report questioning the justification for joining the 
bombing campaign. Another of those who is taking a different position is Sarah 
Wollaston, who described Cameron’s speech as a “compelling case”.

There are thought to be at least 15 who will still not back the government. 
Some have questioned Cameron’s claim that there are 70,000 rebel ground troops 
ready to occupy territory held by Isis. The doubters include former army 
officer John Baron, former shadow home secretary David Davis, Sir Edward Leigh, 
former cabinet minister Peter Lilley, and Julian Lewis, the chairman of the 
Commons defence committee.

Labour: 231 MPs

Labour is split on the issue. The official position is that the party wants a 
peace settlement, but it will not rule out military action if there is a clear 
and unambiguous UN resolution authorising military action. Jeremy Corbyn does 
not believe this test has been met and will open the debate forLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> by saying so. Hilary Benn, the 
shadow foreign secretary, believes it has been met and will speak at the end in 
support of strikes. Because the shadow cabinet has agreed to hold a free vote, 
each MP will be able to vote with their own conscience, without being sacked 
from the frontbench if they choose to support the government.

Dozens of Labour MPs on the front and back benches are leaning towards voting 
with the government, but they are under pressure to reject war fromlocal 
Momentum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/08/activists-to-harness-corbyn-campaign-energy-with-momentum>
 groups, Unite, the party’s biggest donor, and some constituency parties. It is 
extremely difficult to predict how many will end up supporting Cameron, but the 
final number voting for military action could end up being anywhere from about 
30 to half the party. Corbyn told last night’s parliamentary meeting that 43% 
of Labour MPs - which equates to almost 100 - had indicated to the whips that 
they may be prepared to vote with the government. However, other Labour sources 
said they think the final number will be much lower than this as MPs worry 
about the consequences of voting with Cameron.

Chris Leslie, the former shadow chancellor, has been clear he will back the 
government because of the UN resolution calling for action, while Chuka Umunna, 
the former shadow business secretary, has also indicated he is likely to 
support action. Benn, Tom Watson, the deputy leader, Maria Eagle, the shadow 
defence secretary, Michael Dugher, the shadow culture secretary, and Lucy 
Powell, the shadow education secretary, are also thought to be among those 
minded to vote in favour.

Liberal Democrats: eight MPs

The party wanted the government’s proposal to pass five tests before it would 
agree to back the bombing. These include: legality, which it believes is met by 
the UN resolution; creation of a post-Islamic State plan; work towards a 
no-bombing zone for civilians; pressure on Gulf states to get more involved; 
and carrying out a domestic investigation into jihadi funding. Former party 
leader Nick Clegg told Sky News on Tuesday evening that he and his successor, 
Tim Farron, felt that “on balance, it is better to take action rather than 
pursue a course of inaction”.

The SNP: 54 MPs (plus two without the whip)

The SNP is sceptical about the need for UK involvement in the bombing of Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> and likely to vote against, although 
it has expressed willingness to listen to the prime minister’s case. Angus 
Robertson, the SNP’s Westminster leader, said he did not believe Cameron had 
made a good enough argument so far, so all 54 MPs are expected to be whipped to 
vote against.

DUP: eight MPs

The party has signalled it is probably prepared to direct its MPs to back the 
military action. In the Commons, the party’s deputy leader, Nigel Dodds, said: 
“If it protects our people here and abroad, we must act.”

Plaid Cymru: three MPs


All three of the Welsh party’s representatives in Westminster – Jonathan 
Edwards, Liz Saville-Roberts and Hywel Williams – are planning to vote against 
the government.

Greens: one MP

The party’s sole MP, Caroline Lucas, will vote against the airstrikes.
Graph of Syria airstrike voting intentions 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/12/syria_vote_latest/giv-3265002vwECvDsv4z/> 