
This is the third Reading group article about Bulgakov’s The Master and 
Margarita and so far there are two characters who have barely been barely 
mentioned: the Master, and Margarita.


I’ve failed to mention the titular pair in either of my previous pieces – and 
while they have popped up in discussion, most of it has been about Woland and 
his diabolical crew. The first time I noticed the Master and Margarita 
themselves getting prominent mention was inthe following complaint from 
MissBurgundy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/14/sympathy-for-the-master-and-margarita-devil-mikhail-bulgakov#comment-76428627>
: “I felt there was no characterisation at all – Margarita never came to life 
for me, and I’ve even forgotten who the Master was.”

This was a remark by a reader who had not enjoyed the book and read it some 
time ago - but before I reread the novel a few weeks ago, I couldn’t have told 
you much about either him or her. (I had, however, retained clear memories of 
Woland and his oversized cat friend.)

Neither of the eponymous characters appear on the cover of any of the four 
copies of the book I have accumulated: there’s a cat, a pitchfork and a gun on 
my Alma Classics translation; a cat (and a flying pig) on the Vintage Classic; 
a cat and an empty suit on the Penguin; and my treasured Harvill paperback, 
which has the silhouette of a cat and a tall thin figure, apparently horned. 
Google searches bring up more of the same: cats, devils and shady figures 
holding cards seem to be the main selling points. Even Margarita’s extended 
time spent naked and flying around on a broom seems to have attracted onlyone 
<https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/236x/1f/3e/5e/1f3e5e3f3b37f7d71b087a016a48fbe9.jpg>
 ortwo 
<https://ellenleberillustration.wordpress.com/2011/11/01/penguin-covers/the-master-and-margarita-cover2/>
 publishers.

Satan and satire: sympathy for the devil in The Master and Margarita
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/14/sympathy-for-the-master-and-margarita-devil-mikhail-bulgakov>
Margarita takes up little space in the novel, not arriving until several 
chapters in. When she does, she rarely dominates a scene (perhaps the ball or 
that lovely broom-based night flight). The Master’s appearances are even fewer 
and shorter until we reach those final chapters. So why did Bulgakov put these 
two in the title? Why did he focus in on them so much more towards the end of 
the book?

When Bulgakov was writing his first draft in 1929, the original title was The 
Engineer’s Hoof. The hoof is an obvious reference to our cloven-footed friend, 
while the engineer is less obvious: in 1928, engineers were compared to the 
devil in much of the Soviet press after mining engineers were put on trial for 
anti-revolutionary activities. As far as we know – Bulgakov famously burned it 
– that early draft contained no mention of either the Master or Margarita. 
According to Richard Pevear’s informative introduction to the Penguin 
translation, the first time Bulgakov wrote about the Master and his lover seems 
to have been in 1931, in a fragment of narrative. But even then, the mention 
was fleeting. He began to work them into the story in earnest in 1932, after he 
married Elena Sergeevna. Like the Master in the novel, Bulgakov endured a long 
period when he thought he would never see her again, while he waited for her to 
leave her previous husband.

Yet even while these two characters were taking shape, Bulgakov was still 
thinking of naming his book after Satan. Titles he was playing with include: 
The Great Chancellor, Here I Am, Satan, The Black Theologian, The Hoofed 
Consultant, He Has Come. I’m sure you can spot the theme.

Calling the book The Master and Margarita was a late – and unanticipated – 
decision, but an important one: it changes the nature of the book. To give a 
crude example, when the Master first appears, almost casually slipped into a 
busy scene in an asylum, we pay extra attention. I was similarly interested 
when Margarita arrived – and saw special significance in that arrival. By doing 
so, Bulgakov shifts the moral and spiritual centre of the novel. This isn’t 
just a satire of Stalinism and Russian society: it’s also about two characters 
who have found love, in spite of everything. It makes this book a soaring bit 
of wish fulfilment, as well as a catalogue of horrors.

Bulgakov never escaped Stalinism. He died with his novel unfinished and no 
hope of its publication. Yet within these pages, his Master’s dreams were 
realised, his book was completed and he set off into the sunset with his lover. 
“Everything has worked out for you,” as poor old Ivan Bezdomny tells the Master 
towards the end.

There’s ambiguity here. In order to get his release, the Master has to die. 
Yet his soul, and Margarita’s, escape uncorrupted. In naming the book after 
these two characters, Bulgakov pushed a hopeful message. He gave the book 
something that transcended the politics of his sad times and helped ensure that 
his novel has continued to resonate long after Stalin became a bitter memory.

But that’s not to say that this wasn’t also a political decision. Bulgakov 
knew his book would never be published in his lifetime, but it is believed that 
he intended to send it to one important reader: Stalin himself. And what better 
way to raise two fingers to the dictator than by creating a writer whose 
manuscript cannot be burned, looking forward to a future of “eternal peace”?
 