
In the Beginning, before the Word, there was indeed a Writing Day. I even 
called it my Writing Day and left instructions not to be disturbed for the 
duration of it. Not that I did any writing. I didn’t even stare at a blank 
page. For me a Writing Day was an occasion for self-reproach and panic, a time 
to lament the passing of the years, stare out of windows and remember that even 
those famous late startersJoseph Conrad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/josephconrad> and George Eliot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeeliot> had started by the age I was 
now. I would take novels from my shelves, open them anywhere, and decide a) 
that I could not write as well as that, or b) that I could hardly write worse. 
Either way, in this fashion another uncreative year would pass.

But there are fiery properties in consciousness of failure and at last, having 
forced words on to a page, finishing one novel and then starting a second, I 
embraced production. I would rise monk-like at 6am, speak to no one, make tea 
and go immediately to my desk from which I didn’t move until frills appeared 
around the edges of my eyes or I heard the sound of a wine bottle being 
uncorked. It would give the wrong impression to describe these as Writing Days. 
A Writing Day implies a non-Writing Day and there were no non-Writing days. I 
had lost time to make up for, I had a point to prove, I had Conrad and Eliot to 
overhaul (I don’t, of course, mean in quality), but more than that I had the 
wind at my back. I did nothing except hammer away at a red portable Olivetti, 
6am to 6pm, long day after long day of concentration so intense and pleasurable 
I could have burned alive in a house fire and not smelled the smoke. When 
people speak to me of the torment of writing I can think only of what it was 
like before I wrote: once writing meant writing and not thinking about writing, 
I knew nothing of any torment.

This was a mode of work so uncomplicated it didn’t deserve to be called a 
routine. No neurotic rearranging of stationery, no minimum number of words, no 
plan, no mental deadline, no drafts - I just plonked myself down and didn’t 
move. The chief advantage of such immersive immobility is that you lose the 
intrusive self that is the enemy of all art. Longhand, shorthand, notebook, 
typewriter, computer screen – once you disappear into the words you don’t 
notice the medium in which you’re working; there is nothing before or behind 
you but the narrative: a volcanic source of ideas you are embarrassed to call 
your own, so foreign to you do they seem, like the characters who also appear 
as though from an eruption miles away, unknown to you or one another in the 
morning, married at noon, and bitterly divorced by tea time.

Nothing remains true forever. In my experience, every book you write changes 
the conditions in which you write the next. Today I’m Burlington Bertie, I rise 
at 10.30, enjoy long conversations with my wife, welcome the world outside my 
head, and cheerfully go whole days without visiting my desk at all. There are 
fewer imperatives. I have either proved whatever it was I wanted to prove, or I 
accept that now I never will. I used to fear that if I didn’t get to work 
immediately I would forfeit the urgency that had built up the day before. Now I 
know it will all still be waiting for me, and what it loses by inattention it 
might gain by insouciance. I return to it, when the mood is on me, as a painter 
will return to his canvas, adding a dab of colour here or over-painting there 
before popping out again for absinthe. The work continues to absorb me, I am 
never not thinking about it, but I no longer dread losing my absorption through 
exposure to that illusion, the real world. So every day is still a Writing Day 
in the sense that there is no day that isn’t. A bit like old times, without the 
self-reproach and panic.

• Shylock Is My Name is out now in paperback (Vintage). To order a copy for 
£7.37 (RRP £8.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/shylock-is-my-name-419003.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 