
Huawei’s Mate 9 is a phablet that tries to squeeze a monster screen into a 
not-quite-so monster body and mostly succeeds.


Given the demise of the Samsung Galaxy Note 7 owing to exploding batteries the 
top-end of the phablet market is open for the first time in years.

Huawei’s Mate series - its big screened but until recently, niche phablet - 
has been around for a while. The Mate 9 is the latest and greatest, and while 
it doesn’t look much different from the outside than its predecessor the Mate 
8, it’s now more widely available than ever and targeting that vacant spot at 
the top of the phablet tree.

Big slab of metal
 The metal back has two colour-matched plastic windows at the top and bottom 
for the antennas. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
The Mate 9 doesn’t share much in the way of design likeness to Huawei’s 
flagship P9. The front is pretty plain: a screen with tiny bezels either side 
with a top bar containing the earpiece speaker and selfie camera and the bottom 
bar just containing theHuawei <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/huawei> 
logo.

It’s got one of the highest screen-to-body ratios of any smartphone available, 
which is good, because the screen really is ginormous at 5.9in. There have been 
a few devices with larger screens, but not many. For instance, Apple’s iPhone 7 
Plus and Google’s Pixel XL have 5.5in screens, while Samsung’s Note series 
topped out at 5.7in on the diagonal.

The curved aluminium back and chamfered edges make it a lot easier to hold on 
to the Mate 9 than you might expect. I say easier, because it certainly isn’t 
as easy to use as a normal, non-monster smartphone such as the Galaxy S7 or 
Huawei P9.
 Huawei Mate 9 review end Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
At 7.9mm thick, the Mate 9 is relatively thin, and even at 78.9mm wide it’s 
relatively narrow, but one thing it certainly isn’t is light. It weighs 190g, 
is solidly built and with heft.

There’s no getting over this is a bigger-than-big smartphone. For comparison, 
the 5.5in iPhone 7 Plus is 7.3mm thick, 77.9mm wide and weighs 188g, while 
Google’s Pixel XL is 8.5mm thick, 75.7mm wide and 168g.

The 5.9in screen is surprisingly good for a 1080p screen. Most smartphones 
this size have higher resolution screens so that they have higher pixel 
densities - the more pixels the sharper the screen.

You can certainly see the difference; the Mate 9’s screen is just not as 
pin-sharp as the Pixel XL’s screen for instance. But colour reproduction is 
good, so are the viewing angles and brightness.

Specifications

 * Screen: 5.9in 1080p LCD (373ppi) 
 * Processor: octa-core Huawei Kirin 960 
 * RAM: 4GB of RAM 
 * Storage: 64GB + microSD card 
 * Operating system: Android 7.0 with EMUI 5 
 * Camera: 12MP RGB with OIS + 20MP monochrome rear cameras, 8MP front-facing 
camera 
 * Connectivity: LTE, dual-sim, Wi-Fi, NFC, USB-C, Bluetooth 4.2 and GPS 
 * Dimensions: 156.9 x 78.9 x 7.9 mm 
 * Weight: 190g 
Impressive battery life
 The Mate 9 can take two sims at the same time for two numbers and plans 
connected to one smartphone, or the second sim slot can be used with a microSD 
card for adding more storage. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
The Mate 9 has Huawei’s new top of the line processor the Kirin 960 and 4GB of 
RAM, which places right up there with the best of the rest of Android devices 
in raw power.

It’s snappy, particularly in launching apps, which is down in part to Huawei’s 
new system of intelligent resource management that predicts apps you’re likely 
to want to use at any given moment.

My usage is obviously predictable because after about two days it was 
noticeably snappier. Particularly when launching relatively complex apps such 
as Evernote and games. It actually felt faster than any other Android 
smartphone I have used to date, which is an achievement.

Huawei promises that its smart systems will keep it that way over the lifespan 
of the smartphone, but it’s not something we’ll be able to tell for a year or 
so.

The Mate 9’s battery is equally impressive. Without any power saving modes 
active I routinely went over 36 hours between charges, dropping only 3% 
overnight with do not disturb enabled. I used it as my primary device with 
three hours of app usage and browsing, hundreds of emails and push 
notifications, a few photos, 30 minutes of mapping, five hours of music over 
Bluetooth headphones and quite a lot of Dan the Man and Out There Ω during my 
one hour and 20-minute train commute to and from work.

There are some aggressive power saving modes that promise to stretch the 
battery life out further. For most the Huawei Mate 9 will last a good two days 
between charges.

A full charge took just over two hours via the included fast charging USB-C 
power adapter.

Call quality was excellent, and so was its signal retention: the Mate 9 got a 
strong, usable 4G signal in places most other smartphone struggle to get any 
signal, including underground.

Emotion UI 5
 Emotion UI 5 is the most refined and pleasing to use version of Android 
Huawei has produced and is a big step forward for the company. Photograph: 
Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
Huawei customises Android on its smartphones with a different look and changes 
to the underlying control and app permissions systems, which it calls Emotion 
UI (EMUI).

In the past EMUI has been a bit clunky, chintzy and not to my tastes looking a 
bit like an Android clone of Apple’s iOS. The new EMUI 5, which is based on 
Android 7 Nougat, is a giant leap in the right direction.

It’s much more streamlined. Out the box it doesn’t have an app drawer - every 
icon must be on the home screen - but it’s a simple option to enable. The 
colour scheme across the whole interface has been cooled to a much more 
modern-looking white and blue.

The strange notification panes and other changes that made EMUI worse than 
most other Android versions have been removed. A series of quick settings are 
now accessible from the notification shade and even the overview of recently 
used apps now resembles standard Android.

EMUI 5 still has the tight control over app power consumption, and the 
reminders that guide users through the identification and killing of apps that 
are using more than their fair share of power when the screen is off. Some may 
not like them, but they are useful when used properly at prolonging battery 
life without having to change you habits.

Some of Huawei’s apps are actually better than standard Android’s counterparts 
too. The voice recorder app, which is able to use the range of microphones 
positioned about the phone to identify where a person is speaking from an 
isolate their audio, is particularly good for recording roundtable meetings.

The app twin feature is also worth using - it allows you to have two instances 
of apps that only allow one login, such as WhatsApp, Facebook and others. It 
essentially duplicates the app so you can hot swap between them.

Fingerprint scanner
 The fingerprint scanner on the back of the Mate 9 is the best in the 
business, unlocking so fast you blink and you miss it. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs 
for the Guardian 
Huawei’s fingerprint scanners are the best in the business for accuracy and 
speed. The one of the back of the Mate 9 is no exception. Despite being quite 
small compared to rivals, it worked with a near 100% accuracy. The only time it 
didn’t recognise my finger instantly was when I was cooking and it was a bit 
greasy.

Camera
 The monochrome mode using the dedicated black and white 20-megapixel camera 
is great fun to use. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
The Mate 9 has the second generation of Huawei’s dual camera, which like the 
P9 is branded as co-engineered with camera maker Leica.

There is one 12-megapixel colour camera with optical image stabilisation and 
one 20-megapixel monochrome sensor, which is used to collect more light 
information for the colour camera to improve the amount of detail captured in 
the shots.

That’s the theory, in practice the whole experience is pretty transparent. If 
you didn’t know there were two cameras on the back you wouldn’t notice.

Low-light performance is good, but not quite up to the same quality as 
Samsung’s Galaxy S7 Edge or the Pixel XL. It’s relatively easy to get good 
shots in average lighting conditions, and you can produce some detail-rich, 
beautiful shots in good lighting.

There are various camera modes to choose from, including an easy to use “Pro” 
or manual mode and some software-based refocusing tricks. But it is the 
monochrome mode, which just uses the monochrome camera on the back that’s the 
most fun, capturing sharp, black and white photos better than any colour camera 
just turned black and white ever could.

The 8-megapixel selfie camera is good - most will like its balance of detail 
and soft focus for more flattering pictures. It struggled a bit in low-light 
conditions but no more than most others.

Observations

 * There’s a super simple mode should you want to use it without the 
complexity of apps all over a home screen 
 * There are lots and lots of customisation options should you want to change 
the order of the navigation buttons, enable gesture support, themes, the size 
of items on the screen, the colour temperature etc 
 * A blue light filter is there for saving your eyes at night and helping you 
sleep 
 * Various utilities such as a floating dock, a shifting keyboard and a 
mini-screen view are available to help make using the Mate 9 one handed a 
little easier 
Price

The Mate 9 costs €699 (£595) and is expected to be available by the end of 
November in a range of five colours in some markets.

For comparison, Apple’s iPhone 7 Plus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/03/iphone-7-plus-review-apple-newest-smartphone-phablet>
 and Google’s Pixel XL both cost £719 with 32GB of storage,Samsung’s Galaxy S7 
Edge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/11/samsung-galaxy-s7-edge-review-android-smartphone-phablet-marshmallow>
 costs around £520, theHuawei P9 Plus costs £500 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/07/huawei-p9-plus-review-high-class-phablet-sub-par-software>
 and the OnePlus 3T costs £399.

Verdict

The Huawei Mate 9 is a very large smartphone that does a great job of not 
feeling so in use. The curved back, minimal body to screen ratio and solid 
build mean it’s easier to hold onto than you might expect.

But with that 5.9in screen, it’s still a massive phone whichever way you look 
at it, both in use and in your pocket or bag.

After the demise of Samsung’s top-end Note 7 phablet, the Mate 9 is ready to 
fill the void, as long as a stylus isn’t crucial. So if you want a phone with 
the big screen, snappy performance and great battery life, a good camera, 
excellent fingerprint scanner, expandable memory and dual-sim support you can’t 
go far wrong with the Mate 9.

Pros: expandable storage, dual-sim, great battery life, excellent fingerprint 
scanner, good camera, massive screen

Cons: big, heavy, screen only 1080p
 The Mate 9 comes with a screen protector pre-installed, but like any other 
screen protector, it feels nicer to use without one stuck to the screen. 
Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
Other reviews

 * Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge review: this is the smartphone to beat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/27/htc-10-review-up-there-with-samsungs-best>
 * Huawei P9 Plus review: high-class phablet held back by sub-par software 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/07/huawei-p9-plus-review-high-class-phablet-sub-par-software>
 * Google Pixel XL review: very good phablet but with price tag to match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/27/google-pixel-xl-review-phablet-price-smartphone-camera-android-71-nougat>
 * iPhone 7 Plus review: 2014 called – it wants its phablet back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/03/iphone-7-plus-review-apple-newest-smartphone-phablet> 