
It took the Home Secretary, Mr Douglas Hurd, nearly two years before he 
decided that sufficient new evidence existed to refer the case of theGuildford 
Four <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/guildford-four> back to the Court of 
Appeal.

Mr Hurd needed some persuading from two Law Lords, two former Home 
Secretaries, and Cardinal Hume before he took the decision.

His delay reflected the sensitivity of the case. For doubts about the guilt of 
Carole Richardson, Paul Hill, Gerard Conlon, and Patrick Armstrong have existed 
ever since they were arrested and charged with killing seven people at three 
pub bombings in Guildford, Surrey, and Woolwich, south London. At the time, 
with the Birmingham pub bombings as well, police and the prosecuting 
authorities were under great pressure to find and convict the perpetrators.

Public outrage at the 21 deaths in Birmingham had spurred the Prevention of 
Terrorism Act through the House of Commons. When the Birmingham Six were 
arrested, their confessions spilled out in record time to the West Midlands 
serious crime squad.

Suspects had to be found, however unlikely. The three young men from West 
Belfast, two of whom had dabbled on the fringes of the Provisional IRA as 
teenagers, were living a disconnected life of drink, drugs and small-time 
thieving in west London squats.

For Carole Richardson, at 17, the day revolved around pills, dope and rock 
music. Compared with the disciplined members of the Balcombe Street IRA active 
service unit, then causing murder and mayhem across London and beyond, these 
youngsters were unpromising material for bombers.

Yet in the hands of the Surrey CID they all confessed. And that was the start 
of the confusions and inconsistencies.

Hill was picked up first, as a result, it is believed, of a tip-off from the 
Royal Ulster Constabularly. He was suspected of being involved in the 
kidnapping and murder of a former British soldier in Belfast.

Hill claims that he made his confession - about the Belfast case as well as 
the Guildford and Woolwich bombings - in order to protect his girlfriend from 
prosecution. But he named not only his co-defendants but numerous other people, 
including Ann Maguire, Conlon's aunt, as the bombmaker.

Some of the names were fictitious. 'I picked them out of the blue,' he said 
later.

When the others were arrested, they too made statements.

At the end of the day, police had the task of unravelling what must have been 
one of the most chaotic bombing raids in the annals of republicanism: in all, 
12 people, some out of their minds on drugs, were supposedly involved, 
travelling in different cars of different makes, with drivers who could not 
drive.

The four claimed that their confessions had been extracted from them by a 
combination of pressures from police.

By the time the case reached court, Sir Michael Havers, then a prosecuting 
counsel, felt able to say that their stories fitted together like a jigsaw and 
that the conflicts were nothing more than a wicked IRA plot to confuse.

The Maguires, too, were convicted of possessing explosives in a separate 
trial. They have always maintained their innocence. Guiseppe Conlon, Gerard's 
father, who had travelled from Belfast to help his son, was also found guilty. 
He died in prison in 1980.

Hill, meantime, had been convicted of murder in Belfast. Between the trial and 
the appeal in 1977, four IRA men were arrested at the Balcombe Street siege.

Interviewed by the then Detective Superintendent Peter Imbert, of the bomb 
squad - he is now Metropolitan Police Commissioner - two of the four admitted 
the pub bombings.

For reasons never fully explained, the Director of Public Prosecutions decided 
to leave Guildford and Woolwich out of the indictment.

At the trial it emerged that a forensic scientist, Dr Douglas Higgs, who 
connected Guildford and Woolwich to the Balcombe Street men's modus operandi, 
had been told to excise that evidence from his report. Dr Higgs said he had 
instructed to do so by a sergeant on Mr Imbert's bomb squad.

At the Guildford appeal, the judges accommodated this problem by suggesting 
that both the Balcombe Street men and the Guildford Four could have been 
involved in the bombings.

All this convinced several eminent people that the Guildford Four 's 
convictions were unsafe. Robert Kee wrote a book, Error of Judgment. Cardinal 
Hume, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Westminster, was joined by Lord Scarman 
and Lord Devlin in calling for a review.

But it was left to Yorkshire TV to unearth a new alibi witness for Paul Hill 
and a supporting alibi witness for Carole Richardson. Subsequently, Mr Hurd, 
Home Secretary, ordered a new investigation.

Then, from the makers of the TV documentaries - Grant McKee and Ros Franey - 
came a book which claimed that Carole Richardson had been given a pacifying 
drug in police custody which may have impaired her ability to make a rational 
statement.

Although the doctor withdrew this admission when interviewed by Avon and 
Somerset police, Mr Hurd included Richardson's drug-induced state in his 
referral back.

Lawyers for the four were never optimistic that they would win in the Court of 
Appeal, after Lord Lane refused the case of the Birmingham Six last year. After 
years of work, particularly by Mr Alastair Logan, the Guildford solicitor, they 
knew their chances were slight.
 