
The throwing arms of the Adelaide Strikers proved deadly, as they kept their 
cool to beat the Melbourne Renegades by 14 runs in their WBBL T20 cricket match 
at North Sydney Oval.


Chasing the Strikers’ modest 116 on Saturday, the Renegades lost four wickets 
to run-outs in the second half of their innings.


Three of them were to long-distance throws from the outfield with Bridget 
Patterson’s direct hit from deep cover to dismiss Molly Strano a spectacular 
highlight.


'Bradman' of women's cricket ready to light up Women's Big Bash League
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/bradman-womens-cricket-womens-big-bash-league>
“The pressure they created in the field killed us in the end,” Strano said.


It was a reward for Adelaide’s dedication to the fielding art, according to 
player of the match Sophie Devine.


“For us to have a performance like that out in the field justifies all the 
hard work you do in the pre-season and the way the girls have been working at 
training,” New Zealand international Devine said.


Devine top-scored for the Strikers with 43 off 38 balls and rescued their 
innings from a parlous position of 6-44 in the ninth over.


Spinner Strano and medium-pacer Natalie Goodwin smashed through the Strikers 
top and middle orders, respectively, each finishing with three wickets and 
conceding just four an over.


The Strikers applied the pressure from the start of the Renegades’ reply.


Southern Stars quick Megan Schutt removed both openers inside the first three 
overs.


She bowled her full complement of four overs in one hit, conceding just 16 
runs while spinner and recent Southern Stars debutant Amanda-Jade Wellington 
was even more miserly, giving up only 11 runs.


The only batting highlight for the Renegades was a classy unbeaten 37 from 30 
balls from 18-year-old Sophie Molineux, who looks destined for bigger things.


In the early game played at the adjacent North Sydney Oval No2, the Hobart 
Hurricanes beat the Perth Scorchers by five wickets with one over to spare 
after successfully chasing 120.

West Indian teenager Hayley Matthews lead the way, as the 18-year old 
allrounder smashed 48 off 38 balls.

Spinner Matthews earlier made an impact with the ball, opening the bowling and 
claiming the key wicket of Australian batter Elyse Villani in the third over.

The Scorchers’ international top three of Villani, captain and New Zealand 
stalwart Suzie Bates and in-form Australian top order player Nicole Bolton 
failed to fire, with the WA team slumping to 4-52 in the 13th over.

England pace bowler Catherine Brunt added substance to the Scorchers innings 
with 41 off 24 balls as they recovered to post 6-119.

Brunt added 64 in seven overs with Lauren Ebsary, who scored an unbeaten 26 
off 24.

Matthews cracked eight fours and put on 72 off 10.1 overs with Georgia 
Redmayne.

“It was all about picking the right balls for me,” said Mathews, who also 
played in the English women’s T20 competition this year.

The Hurricanes suffered a case of the mid-innings staggers losing 4-25.

“The way we fought back, I thought we bowled a lot better, but we didn’t take 
some crucial chances,” Bates said.
 