
He is one of the most colourful figures in the artworld today, just as likely 
to be giving a talk in Beijing, or publishing a book in Germany as doing his 
day job as co-director of exhibitions at the Serpentine Gallery in London.

Now Hans Ulrich Obrist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/hans-ulrich-obrist>, not so much a 
curator as a human whirlwind, has been anointed as the most powerful figure in 
the international artworld, taking the top spot in ArtReview magazine's annual 
"power 100" list.

It is a first time a curator, rather than an artist or a museum director, has 
topped the ranking and the placing sees a meteoric rise from 35th place last 
year for the Swiss-born Obrist. No 1 in 2008 was Damien Hirst's company, 
Science. But now, reflecting the recession and the drop in the prices of his 
work, Hirst has plunged to 48th.

Mark Rappolt, editor of ArtReview, said: "It's not just Obrist whom we are 
foregrounding, it's his approach. He writes, interviews, is a bit of a critic, 
archives, documents."

When both public institutions and commercial galleries are struggling due to 
the economic downturn, Rappolt said, it is Obrist's role as an enabler, 
connector and networker that gives him power. The Swizz-born curator has the 
reputation of being able to make things happen, even in a recession.

The most powerful British figure in the international artworld, according to 
Rappolt's anonymous panel of 20 experts, is Nicholas Serota, the director of 
Tate. Serota came in at three, after Glenn D Lowry, director of the Museum of 
ModernArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> in New York.

The top artist on the list was the hugely respected American Bruce Nauman, at 
10 – but just above him, at nine, came Iwona Blazwick, director of the 
Whitechapel Art Gallery in London, which recently reopened after a 
refurbishment and extension.

Blazwick – the list's top woman and second Briton – has shot up the ranking 
from last year's 76. "She has taken a regional London museum and made it 
internationally important," said Rappolt. "She also has a clear agenda in that 
she often shows work by mid- to late-career women artists. She is a really 
important figure for the East End arts scene, especially when commercial 
galleries are struggling."

Other themes in the list reflect the recession. Street artist Banksy is off 
the list – the market for his work, fuelled by speculators in the boom, is down 
– while Charles Saatchi has tumbled from 14 to 72. "He is largely associated 
with the art of 10 years ago," said Rappolt. "Before, he set the agenda. Now 
he's buying stuff that people have already seen."

The top British artist, 14 places ahead of Hirst, at number 34, is Liam 
Gillick, who represented Germany at this year's Venice Biennale.

Obrist said of his placing: "I have a daily practice; one continues to work, 
that's my motto. I have always thought curating has a utility for art. I have 
always been interested in making unrealised projects happen, and it's early 
days – there is so much more to do.

"Artists are the most important people in the artworld. What I do is about 
being with the art, about helping people do their work."
 