
I can’t remember who noticed the marks on Sally’s* arm first, but I remember 
the panic. I worked in a school, and I immediately knew what they were. Our 
13-year-old daughter was self-harming.

Sally had an assessment with a consultant psychiatrist one month later who 
suggested we go private because the waiting list was so long. This was our 
first taster of the feeling of inadequacy you can have as the parent of a sick 
child. We didn’t have the money to go private.

Sally saw numerous clinicians in the period between diagnosis and treatment. 
Once in a while we would take her to child and adolescent mental health 
services (Camhs), where she would disappear into a room with yet another 
stranger, and reappear an hour later to be handed back to our care, often 
without a word.

I remember noticing that among the posters and leaflets in the Camhs waiting 
room there was nothing for parents. No support groups. No helplines. The only 
time we ever figured in her care was when a letter dropped on the doormat one 
day saying it was, most probably, our fault. Perhaps it was, but was a letter 
the way to tell us?

What kind of system sends two – albeit kind – police officers to take a 
13-year-old suicidal child to the hospital?

During this time, Sally self-harmed more frequently, at home and at school. 
The cuts became deeper. The visible signs of the desperation she was feeling 
could not be missed, and I could see that she was sinking. We felt helpless. It 
is the most heartbreaking, gut-wrenching feeling to see your child in so much 
pain, and feel so helpless, unable to take it away or make it better.

Six months after that first meeting, there was a knock at the door. It was the 
police. They asked if Sally lived here and we said yes. We knew she was safe, 
in her room doing homework, but panic and confusion took over. We called up and 
Sally came down. The police explained that Sally had been on an online chat 
with Childline and had said she intended to kill herself.

Sally admitted to this – I say “admitted” because that’s what you do with the 
police isn’t it? The officers said she would have to go to A&E and it was best 
she went willingly. Our terrified daughter agreed. The officers said we could 
take her, otherwise she’d have been taken in a police car. Like a criminal. It 
was only later that I discovered the officers would have taken her against her 
will if she had refused to go. I still shudder at that thought.

What kind of system sends two – albeit kind – police officers to take a 
13-year-old suicidal child to the hospital? Perhaps the involvement of the 
police in mental health crises is the legacy of suicide once being a criminal 
offence. If it is, it’s no wonder it’s proving so hard to eradicate the stigma 
of mental health problems.

This was Sally’s first experience of A&E. With little mental health training, 
all the staff could do was admit Sally to wait for the duty Camhs assessor the 
next day. I remember one nurse on the children’s ward saying to me: “Is she 
likely to try anything?” I never left Sally’s side after that. We had many 
nights on the children’s ward, each time for Sally to be discharged “into our 
care” the next day by the duty Camhs worker.

I remember, after one admission, the duty worker told me to take her home and 
keep her safe. Exhausted and frustrated, I almost screamed back at him: “How 
are we supposed to do that? You see her for one hour, maybe once a week, the 
rest of the time it’s just us.” We were told to lock away all our medicines, 
knives, anything sharp, in a box.

Sally attempted suicide twice. Both times we found out in time, and took her 
to A&E, the designated place of safety. To repeat the admit/assess/discharge 
cycle as before.

I fail patients in my job as a psychiatric nurse and leave them feeling worse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2016/aug/22/fail-patients-job-psychiatric-nurse-nhs-lack-mental-health-beds>
I’m always struck by the absence of parents in the Camhs waiting room. My 
husband, who has always been a very hands-on dad, was told that it was almost 
unheard of to have a dad at an appointment. There are so many young people who 
do not have caring supportive adults in their life, but when they do, should we 
be shamed and blamed because the professionals struggle to fit us into their 
treatment plan?

After the first admittance, in crisis, Sally was properly assessed. I feel 
that the consultant psychologist on duty that weekend knew what a close call it 
had been. Sally was in their care and they had let her down. He took her on to 
his caseload, and Sally now had a clinician who took time to understand our 
family demographic, and who worked with us as a family to help her. I truly 
believe his approach has been a major factor in the success of Sally’s recovery.

I am thankful every day to Childline, the police, and the consultant 
psychologist for the parts they played in us still having our beautiful 
daughter alive, on the road to recovery, and thriving. She’s just started 
university.Mental health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/mental-health> illness does not 
have to hold a young person back if they have the right support.

From the disjointed commissioning of services through to the clunky 
when-is-a-17-year-old-actually-an-adult transition to adult mental health care, 
the Camhs system needs urgent attention. Utilising the police and untrained A&E 
staff is unfair on the children, and on those staff left desperately trying to 
make things better in a system that often does not support them to do so.

I know too many parents who are not as lucky as us. How many deaths must there 
be before action is taken?

*Name has been changed

 * In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is1-800-273-8255 <>. In Australia, the 
crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countriescan 
be found here <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>. 

If you would like to write a blogpost for Views from the NHS frontline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
readour guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/aug/12/highs-lows-nhs-write-guardian>
 and get in touch by emailingsarah.johnson@theguardian.com 
<mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 