
I’m the person who assesses whether or not your medical condition is stopping 
you from being able to work – and I have never felt so dejected by a job.

It’s my job to carry out work capability assessments to see if people qualify 
for Employment Support Allowance (ESA). For 18 months, I’ve been working for a 
private company to which the the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) 
outsources this task.

I’m a healthcare professional who joined after being disillusioned with 
working in the NHS. I will be honest: for me, as for many of my colleagues, the 
salary, which is far higher than NHS pay, was a big draw. But like all 
healthcare professionals, we want to do a good job. We go into caring 
professions because we care.

But in this job I just don’t always have the time to be as sympathetic as I’d 
like to be or give people the time they need. We are under constant pressure to 
assess at least six claimants a day, spending 65 minutes on average with each.

I'm a DWP call handler and have no time to care about your disability claim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/aug/20/work-pensions-disability-claim-call-handler-benefits-dwp>
If the company I work for fails to meet its assessment targets it can get 
fined by the DWP. So I often get a knock on the door to ask how much longer I 
will be and when I can pick up another case.

ESA is a contentious type of benefit and the people who walk into my 
assessment room are often anxious, angry, scared, pessimistic or resigned. Many 
have lost faith in the system and feel the government is abandoning them. We 
are often the sounding board for the people who come in. They confide in us 
about the horrific things that have happened to them.

About 80% of the people we see have mental health problems. I have assessed 
clients who were actively psychotic, in a manic bipolar phase, or severely 
depressed to the point where they couldn’t speak and a family member had to do 
the talking for them.

There has been a general improvement in reports since the company I work for 
took over the contract, but there still isn’t always the time to give full 
consideration to the complexity of cases. Some people have as many as 15 
medical conditions and we have to document and obtain a history for every 
single one. When this happens, staff know it will take longer. It can lead to 
us rushing and missing things because we are so concerned about not seeing 
enough people during the day. It is relentless.

Most people I assess understand we are just there to do a job. But some people 
are very volatile and some do resort to verbal abuse, intimidation, and 
occasionally, physical violence. They’re angry at the system – and I can 
understand why.

It takes a special arrogance to say the poverty in I, Daniel Blake is 
unrealistic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/28/arrogance-poverty-social-housing-benefits-ken-loach-i-daniel-blake-unrealistic>
As the face of that system, I am the one who bears the brunt of their ire. We 
all try to placate and soothe the people who come in as best as we can. But 
sometimes we just can’t. I have had to abandon cases and there have been 
countless times where the emergency services have been called. Sometimes I feel 
genuinely scared.

As we don’t make the ultimate decision, we never find out what happens in the 
end. When someone asks how they have done, it can be very difficult. I’m not 
allowed to tell them anything, but I know that if I have scored them little or 
no points, they will most likely lose their benefit and be expected to hunt for 
a job. It makes me feel so dishonest and I imagine their face when they’re hit 
with that letter or phone call, delivering the bad news.

It is most difficult with the ones who are trying their best to get by but 
just aren’t deemed bad enough to qualify for any support. Many claimants are 
older and underskilled, which makes it much harder for them to find work. I 
have cried on two occasions after an assessment because I felt so awful that I 
couldn’t help.

The job is incredibly demoralising and psychologically draining – by the end 
of the day I’m exhausted. I honestly don’t know how much longer I will last.

This series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/series/public-servant-my-letter-to-the-public>
 aims to give a voice to the staff behind the public services that are hit by 
mounting cuts and rising demand, and so often denigrated by the press, 
politicians and public. If you would like to write an article for the series, 
contactkirstie.brewer@theguardian.com <mailto: kirstie.brewer@theguardian.com>

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 