
For the last few months I have been defending fundraising in all its forms. 
Time and again, I have told family, friends and anyone who would listen that 
what really matters is the amazing work charities do, that the ends justify the 
means. Then, for the first time ever, a fundraiser appeared on my doorstep.

As a fundraiser myself, I have always had time for telephone fundraisers and 
even the “dreaded” chuggers. I know they have a hard job and contribute 
valuable funds to the sector. So I was happy to hear this man’s pitch.

My New Year resolution is to help the charity sector fight back
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/jan/06/new-year-resolution-help-the-charity-sector-fight-back>
Next thing I knew, he had invited himself into my house, just so he could “jot 
a couple of details down”. As far as I was aware, all he was doing was signing 
me up to receive some more information, since the word donation hadn’t even 
been mentioned. He then announced that monthly gifts come at three levels, but 
he was going to put me down for the lowest (£10 a month) and told me to go get 
my bank details. Not asked – told. In fact, at no point was “the ask” made. It 
was just assumed from the moment I opened my door that I would be giving.

When I said I felt uncomfortable, he told me he would change it to £8.50 a 
month. When I firmly told him it was a no for now, he expressed great surprise, 
telling me he had signed up 57 of my neighbours that evening with no issues at 
all. He told me that “Dave across the road already gives regularly to eight 
charities but he was happy to give £10 a month”, and “besides, a direct debit 
takes four to six weeks to go through – you could always cancel it before then 
if you change your mind”.

His guilt-tripping and manipulative tactics (I’m not even sure there is a Dave 
on our street) just made me all the more certain this was not something I 
wanted to support on a monthly basis. He proceeded to emphatically write VOID 
across the form I never asked him to fill in and told me I had actually cost 
the charity time and money before leaving without so much as a “thank you for 
your time”.


This is not good practice. This is not how people should be being introduced 
to a charity and their work. This is not putting the donor first.

This experience has made me realise that, as resistant as the sector is to 
criticism, we need to hold our hands up and admit that in some areas, we have 
been getting it wrong. There is a culture within the sector that face-to-face 
forms of fundraising are separate – that these agencies and third parties are 
the problem, not us. But that is not how the public sees it.

I'm proud to be a charity fundraiser and I stand by our methods
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/aug/07/im-proud-to-be-a-charity-fundraiser-and-i-stand-by-our-methods>
Most of the general public don’t know the difference between a door-to-door 
fundraiser, a chugger, a telephone fundraiser and a legacy fundraiser. All they 
see is a person with a charity ID badge pressuring them into something they are 
not comfortable with. Negative experiences like this stick in people’s minds 
and have a detrimental impact not only on that charity, but the sector as a 
whole. If one fundraiser is happy to use underhand tactics to get a quick win, 
why wouldn’t people think we’re all like that.

Unfortunately, that attitude is becoming increasingly pervasive – a recent 
YouGov survey highlighted how people are losing their faith in charities 
<http://www.thirdsector.co.uk/fundraising-preference-service-backed-public-restore-trust-charities/communications/article/1384896>
. If we truly want to win them back, encounters like the one I had are not the 
way to go about it.

Fundraising <https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/fundraising> 
is about building relationships with supporters, and to get the public back on 
side, this should be evident across all of our income streams and all of our 
staff, whether they are directly employed by the charity or not. We need to 
reform fundraising practices. If we don’t, the sector’s reputation will 
continue to suffer and as public pressure and media scrutiny builds, so does 
the likelihood that certain forms of fundraising will be banned all together, 
costing charities millions.


I’m not saying all face-to-face fundraising experiences are comparable with 
mine. But it only takes one, and that’s one more than the sector can afford 
right now.

Confessions of a charity professional is the Guardian Voluntary Sector 
Network’s <https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> series where 
charity workers tell it how it is. To pitch us an idea read our guidelineshere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jan/02/confessions-of-a-charity-professional-we-want-your-blogs>
 and email voluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com.
 