
I’d always wanted to work in a caring profession, but it wasn’t until I became 
a care worker a few years ago that I found the job that allowed me to make a 
difference to people’s lives.

Social work with older people is as important as child protection
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2016/jan/13/social-work-with-older-people-is-as-important-as-child-protection>
Previously, I worked in a different industry, in a job I’d fallen into, rather 
than chosen and was stuck in for 16 years. The money was pretty good, hours 
were regular, but there was something missing. I wasn’t clever enough to be a 
doctor, but I wanted to help people in some way, so after researching new 
career options and finding out about homecare, it really appealed.

For the first time, I discovered what real job satisfaction is. My office is 
now people’s homes, and seeing the difference I make to their day is the 
ultimate reward. But it can be tough, professionally and personally.

The majority of people I visit receive state-funded care. We all know that 
funding for social care is getting tighter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/28/social-care-funding-ridiculous-situation-local-government-association>
 – and I’ve seen what this means to those who rely on our support. I’m 
sometimes the only person they speak to that day, as many social activities, 
like trips to the local park and community clubs, have been cut. Visits feel 
rushed and it’s upsetting to leave people when there is so much more I’d like 
to do or say. I worry about fitting everything in and often feel guilty when 
it’s time to go.

Today, my first call was an hour long. I hoisted the gentleman out of bed, 
assisted with a shower, gave him a shave, emptied his catheter bag, helped with 
medication and breakfast – all in a thoughtful and caring way. The simple 
things, like remembering how crispy he likes his toast, make a huge difference. 
But we don’t have much time to talk – especially when I’m doing tasks in 
another room or spending an unexpected 10 minutes on the phone sorting out a 
problem with his prescriptions.

Being calm in a crisis, a caring companion and very often feeling like a 
MasterChef contestant​,​ is all in a day’s work

That was the start of my 10-hour day and one of 49 home visits this week. 
Visits last between 30 minutes and an hour and a half, and every call is 
different.

One of my busiest is a 45-minute double call for a husband and wife who both 
receive care. It used to be just half an hour and we had to fight for an extra 
15 minutes of funding. A social worker decided how much support was needed, but 
in reality it wasn’t enough, as along with the couple’s personal care and 
domestic tasks they both need my help with medications.

Building a genuine bond and understanding the people I support is a massive 
part of the job too. One gentleman takes great pleasure in telling me his 
wartime stories and it’s a bit like having an extended family. Knowing someone 
well also makes it easier to tell when something’s wrong, like an 
uncharacteristic mood change that could be an early sign there’s a medical 
problem.

Being calm in a crisis, a caring companion and very often feeling like a 
MasterChef contestant is all in a day’s work. When I first visited one lady, 
who has dementia, she had lost interest in eating – so I make her meals more 
appealing by plating food up in a fancy way. Another lunchtime visit is to a 
gentleman who is blind. He loves a traditional roast and within 30-minutes, as 
well as his personal care and checking the house for trip hazards, I prepped 
all the trimmings and served it up.

No matter how pushed for time I am, I always make sure people are comfortable 
and safe. I would never leave anyone stranded and I do what needs to be done. 
I’ve had to go on emergency errands for toilet roll, but also assist in medical 
emergencies. There’s much more to the job than people think, as we really are 
providing frontline care and if I’m the first there in the morning, I don’t 
know what I’ll walk in to find. Someone could have had a bad fall, stroke or 
heart attack. If we didn’t go in they could be there for days and in a 
desperate way. I will always remember the time when I witnessed a man having a 
severe seizure – I braced him to protect him from further injury and called the 
ambulance. It felt like hours before it arrived, it was quite horrific.

Care workers are woefully undervalued – we deserve respect
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2015/dec/30/care-workers-are-woefully-undervalued-we-deserve-respect>
I love my job, but can feel undervalued. I work six days most weeks and 
usually weekends, so I don’t get to spend as much time with my family as I’d 
like. Seeing friends’ posts on Facebook makes me realise some of the things I 
miss out on, like days out with my four kids. When they’re off, I’m usually 
working and my wife says it’s like being a single mum. I do feel like I’m 
letting them down and am worn out by the end of the week.


I’ve thought about leaving many times, but being a care worker is a real 
vocation to me and to be honest I’d still do it if I won the lottery – albeit 
less hours. But sadly, the low pay means many don’t think of it as a career and 
I’ve known many brilliant care workers who’ve reluctantly had to quit to find 
higher paid work.

Our population is getting older, but state-funded care is being squeezed. 
People need more support and we need to be recognised for the vital work we do. 
I’m hoping theSave Our Homecare petition 
<https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/108789> can help change things. 
Surely it shouldn’t be this hard to care.

The Social Life Blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog> is written 
by people who work in or use social care services. If you’d like to write an 
article for the series, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com> with your ideas.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 