

I woke up, flooded with dread. I was going to be sick but tried desperately to 
prolong the inevitable. When I knew I really had to get up to start the working 
day, I rushed to the bathroom, clutching the sink for support, heaving 
repeatedly.

For me, this was one of the regular symptoms of anxiety caused by working in 
frontline child protection for two years, with a team that also covered court 
work and assessments. It was first triggered when I’d been working in frontline 
services for about two months after qualifying – I had not experienced 
frontline as a student and wished I had. At the time, I was worrying about a 
case I thought was high risk, although after discussing with my manager, and 
looking back now with hindsight and experience, I know it was actually low risk.

The overriding trigger was the feeling that I would never be able to finish 
all my work. This was intolerable for me. Despite staying late most evenings 
and working some weekends, I could not be on top of the work.

I was advised to accept that this is the reality of child protection, but it 
was a constant battle. I value quality and detail, tinkering with reports and 
work until they are of a standard I am happy with. This was impossible when 
faced with countless measurable outcomes, such as assessment deadlines and 
timeframes for visits, which often took precedence because of performance 
targets. These felt endless and were unrealistic given the frequently occurring 
crisis situations. The weekly sheets of data with numbers coming up in red and 
the emphasis placed on them only added to the increasing pressure and 
bureaucracy.

I discussed some of these issues with my manager, but I did not feel I could 
be honest about my anxiety. I think there is still a stigma about anxiety, so I 
did not tell of my panic attacks, palpitations, or that I was being sick in the 
mornings. I did not want anyone to think I couldn’t cope, that I wasn’t good 
enough or resilient enough. I didn’t want to be judged incompetent by 
management.

Consequently, I never took a day off sick and just kept pushing my body. I 
used to stay up late into the night, reading for escapism or chatting online to 
friends, just to feel the next day was further away. As soon as I fell asleep, 
the next day would arrive and I wanted more time.

Workload management and prioritising were regular topics for supervision, 
which I thought would help with my anxiety, but clearly, if there is too much 
work to do, firefighting will only get you so far. Writing up less urgent 
meeting records six months late was a reality for me, and many colleagues. 
Knowing others were in the same boat was reassuring, but did not diminish my 
symptoms. Something had to give.

I gained a stone in weight and regularly binged and comfort ate, finding there 
was no time to exercise as I used to. Many members of the team had similar 
experiences. In the end, it all became so overwhelming that I saw a 
psychotherapist for a couple of months prior to resigning. This helped 
crystallise why I was finding it so unbearable: my body was in physical revolt 
against an unrealistic to-do list that I could never catch up on, no matter how 
hard I tried. I have not experienced that anxiety since I left child 
protection. I made a vow not to put my body through that again.

One of the issues I experienced with child protection teams was that there 
were too few experienced workers. The unmanageable workload, along with a 
myriad of other issues, needs addressing.

My passion for social work remains, but my threshold for my health and 
wellbeing has irrevocably changed. I have made an effort to slow my pace of 
life, relax, and do more of what I enjoy. My friends now have a happier 
companion who is not in a preoccupied state of anxiety – oh, and that extra 
“stress stone” has gone.

 * Maria James is a pseudonym

 * Anxiety UK <https://www.anxietyuk.org.uk/> offers support, help and 
information for those with anxiety disorders. Tel 0844 477 5774

The Social Life Blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog> is written 
by people who work in or use social care services. If you’d like to write an 
article for the series, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com> with your ideas.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 