
Working as a visitor experience assistant for Tate – in one of Britain’s most 
famous art galleries – is not a bad job. My colleagues and I are surrounded by 
incredible works of art and we work for a prestigious organisation. First and 
foremost, we are there for you, the visitor: to guide, inform, and assist where 
and when we can, knowing when to offer our expertise and when to let you 
explore freely.

However, there are two strata of staff performing the same role – those 
employed by Tate itself, and agency staff. It is important to understand that 
there isn’t a high turnover of staff; the large group of agency employees have 
been with Tate from anything between four years all the way up to 16 years. 
Many of us are highly educated, with excellent customer service skills, and we 
take our positions at Tate seriously.

Tate is, after all, a charity, so reducing the cost of training new staff from 
scratch is surely worth consideration

But for many of those years we were paid considerably less than our Tate 
counterparts. Paid less to do the same job, expected to do unsociable hours, 
late evenings and events … all with no sick pay or guaranteed holiday. We 
didn’t know from one week to the next what hours we would get, and whether we’d 
earn enough to pay the rent. With budget cuts to make, if money can be saved 
then it is often at our expense.

We all went into this job knowing that it was a zero-hours contract, but we 
gave our loyalty, time, and skills to Tate and hoped that this would be 
acknowledged. Recently we gained equal pay to Tate’s lowest pay band – although 
this was not easily achieved. Alongside the union PCS we fought hard for fair 
pay, and eventually, around April 2015, an agreement was reached between the 
contractor at the time, Wilson James, and Tate.

But the ongoing differences between the treatment of Tate employees and agency 
staff have left many of us feeling undervalued. This was never felt more 
acutely than during Tate’s recent recruitment campaign, in which it hoped to 
fill roughly 20 new full-time visitor assistant roles just in time for the 
opening of the new building – the first large-scale hiring in about eight 
years. To those of us on zero-hours contracts who wished for more stability and 
guaranteed hours, this seemed like the perfect opportunity, especially as we 
already did the role being advertised.

We hoped the Tate might offer the roles to staff already working in the 
gallery on zero-hours contracts. Tate is, after all, a charity, so reducing the 
cost of training new staff from scratch would surely be worth consideration. 
Even if the job had to be advertised externally, perhaps existing employees 
could be offered interviews or a separate application, on the understanding 
that we already perform the role. Instead, we were subjected to the same basic 
psychometric testing as the rest of the 600+ applicants. Many of us who applied 
were not given an interview because we failed this initial test, which is 
slightly perturbing. If applicants who already do the job you’re recruiting for 
can’t pass the application process, something has gone awry.

Zero hours Britain: 'I didn't know week to week what I was going to get'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jul/30/zero-hours-contracts-case-studies>
Keep in mind that these are good solid employees, who have worked for years 
with Tate, giving their all to the role and knowing it inside and out. Working 
tirelessly in the lead up to the grand opening of the Switch building, we were 
made to feel as though we weren’t good enough to interview for our own jobs. We 
are expected to work the shifts no one else wants, but we’re the last to be 
considered for training. There has been no apology, no understanding or empathy 
for our situation, simply a complete disregard for how demotivating this 
process has been.

While Tate are far from the worse company around, agency staff are treated as 
both cheap and expendable. We are constantly told about opportunities for 
development we aren’t entitled to, that the “real” Tate staff should apply for, 
then asked to work an event overnight with no extra pay, as we aren’t entitled 
to overtime.

Why not move on? We have asked ourselves these questions, of course – but why 
should we not stay and fight to change things? It is only by trying to have our 
voices heard that change might occur. Then we can at least say we tried to 
fight for fairness and equality in our workplace.

This series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/series/public-servant-my-letter-to-the-public>
 aims to give a voice to the staff behind the public services that are hit by 
mounting cuts and rising demand, and so often denigrated by the press, 
politicians and public. If you would like to write an article for the series, 
contacttamsin.rutter@theguardian.com <mailto:tamsin.rutter@theguardian.com>.


Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 