
I never imagined myself as a charity worker when I was younger, but that all 
changed when I began to volunteer and saw first hand the positive impact 
volunteering and charities can have on individuals and disadvantaged groups of 
people. I knew I had to use my career to make a difference.

I joined the organisation not to run around for people, but to run around with 
them.

After a few years volunteering in my community I was approached by a 
well-respected local charity. The idea of being headhunted as a volunteer had 
never occurred to me, and I was flattered. The opportunity involved speaking at 
events, recruiting other volunteers, and networking with other charities in the 
area. Then, just five months after signing up, I was asked to become a 
fully-fledged employee.

I was really excited. I loved the charity and being offered a paid job 
confirmed to me the power of volunteering, as it had allowed me to create a new 
career for myself. I accepted the role of volunteer manager and looked forward 
to the chance to develop my career. I considered this a position of huge 
responsibility, trying to inspire a new generation of volunteers.

In my job with a small charity, I was fundraising for my own salary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/feb/24/small-charity-fundraising-own-salary>
But I realised, early on, that I was still being treated like a volunteer, 
rather than an employee. Senior management looked down on me, as if I were at 
the bottom of a hierarchy. I was given all the unwanted jobs such as printing 
off colleagues’ work, and making phone calls for other staff when all they had 
to do was pick up a phone, while good opportunities were left to others. I felt 
used, and my own work suffered.

I was expected to run around for senior colleagues and prioritise their tasks 
ahead of mine. They suggested their workload was already too great, as though 
my schedule were less important to the charity.

When I accepted the job I thought I was joining the team as important piece of 
the puzzle. Instead I’m often left feeling deflated and small, like an ant. I 
joined the organisation not to run around for people, but to run around with 
them, taking a meaningful role in the charity’s work.

There are parts of the job that I love. I work with our amazing volunteers and 
community and I’ve been given the chance to explore new initiatives that could 
benefit both the charity and its volunteers. But because my own work is often 
dismissed, it is difficult to bring these ideas to fruition, and I believe it 
is holding our charity back.

Become a charity trustee – it changed my life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/nov/08/become-a-charity-trustee-it-changed-my-life>
I have raised my concerns, and while nothing has changed, I will continue to 
try to make my voice heard by senior management. If my voice – as volunteer 
manager – isn’t heard, it means our volunteers’ concerns are also being ignored.

I’m hoping the charity’s management will soon wake up to the power of team 
work. If staff are treated equally we can work together to develop the charity 
we all madly love.

Confessions of a charity professional is the Guardian Voluntary Sector 
Network’s <https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> series where 
charity workers tell it how it is. To pitch us an idea read our guidelineshere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jan/02/confessions-of-a-charity-professional-we-want-your-blogs>
 and email voluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com.
 