
Ian Bell has completed a deal to play for Perth Scorchers in the forthcoming 
edition of Australia’sBig Bash League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/big-bash-league>. But while he considers 
himself “all in” with his new Twenty20 team, it is not, he insists, a sign that 
his international ambitions have diminished.

The signing of the Warwickshire captain, as first reported by the Guardian 
last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/22/ian-bell-under-consideration-england-test-recall-bangladesh-india-trevor-bayliss>
, commits him to Perth for the entire tournament and he will fly out to Western 
Australia with family in November in preparation for their opening fixture with 
Adelaide Strikers on 23 December.

Only an England recall for the tours of Bangladesh and India would cause a 
change in this itinerary – the final Test before Christmas finishes on 20 
December – and although the head coach, Trevor Bayliss, sounded Bell out about 
this outside possibility a fortnight ago, it is not something on his radar at 
present.

“It’s an opportunity that when the Perth coach, Justin Langer, rang me about I 
was quite surprised,” Bell said. “But when you watch the Big Bash at home it 
looks fantastic and to be involved is very exciting. I started my journey in 
Perth playing grade cricket for the University of Western Australia too and so 
to go back and play in Perth again is something I am proud of.”

Asked whether his arrangement with Perth contains scope for a late arrival, 
were he to be part of the England Test side touring this winter, Bell replied: 
“We haven’t spoken about any of that stuff yet. I’m all in with Perth Scorchers 
at the minute.

“Every player has ambitions to play for England and until I retire I am no 
different. This season I haven’t thought about it too much – it does you no 
good thinking about things that are out of your control anyway. I’m sure my 
phone won’t be switched off [when the England selectors meet in September]. As 
captain atWarwickshire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warwickshireccc>, it 
never stops ringing anyway.”

Bell has not made an overwhelming case for a Test recall through his numbers 
in county cricket this summer, with an unbeaten 94 in the 50-over semi-final 
win against Somerset at Edgbaston on Monday his highest score since a century 
in the opening week of the County Championship against Hampshire in April.

The England management, however, are understood to have debated whether to 
parachute his 118 caps of experience back into their struggling middle order, 
something that would require a strong end to the season with Warwickshire, 
starting at home against the leaders Middlesex this Wednesday, to make such a 
recall not look unmerited.

Either way, the Perth deal comes after Bell’s best season in Twenty20 cricket 
to date, with the right‑hander having scored five half‑centuries for Birmingham 
Bears in the NatWest T20 Blast and averaged 40, with a strike-rate of 130.

Langer, the Perth head coach, said: “It’s exciting to be able to add a player 
of Ian’s top-level experience and quality to our squad. With 22 Test centuries 
and a one‑day international average close to 40, he’ll bolster our batting 
options.

“He’s played at the international level for more than a decade so brings 
experience and leadership having captained his county side Warwickshire and the 
Birmingham Bears. We’re delighted to have him on board.”
 