
Last week, the European commission, that bete noire of Messrs Gove, Johnson & 
co, resumed its attack on Google. On Wednesday, Eurocratsfiled formal charges 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-16-1484_en.htm> against the company, 
accusing it of abusing its dominance of the Android operating system, which is 
currently the world’s most-used mobile operating system software. This new 
charge comes on top of an earlier case in which the commission accused Google 
of abusing its overwhelming dominance of the web-search market in Europe in 
order to favour its own enterprises over those of competitors.

This could be a big deal. If the commission decides that Google has indeed 
broken European competition law, then it can levy fines of up to 10% of the 
company’s annual global revenue for each of the charges. Given that Google’s 
global sales last year came to nearly $75bn, we’re talking about a possible 
fine of $15bn (£10.5bn). Even byGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> standards, that’s serious 
money. And it’s not exactly an idle threat: in the past, the Eurocrats have 
taken more than a billion dollars off both Microsoft and Intel for 
such violations.

There's nothing anti-American about the EU investigating Google | Nils Pratley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/apr/20/theres-nothing-anti-american-about-eu-investigating-google>
To those of us who follow these things, there’s a whiff of Back to the Future 
here. At any rate, there are distinct echoes of an earlier row (in the late 
1990s) between the commission and Microsoft, which was then as dominant in the 
PC market as Google is now in search and mobile operating systems. PC 
manufacturers had to license the Windows operating system from Microsoft and 
those licences included onerous obligations to have certain Microsoft programs 
(for example the Internet Explorer browser and Microsoft media player software) 
installed by default on every PC sold. In 2003,Microsoft was fined 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2003/aug/07/digitalmedia.microsoft> heavily 
and forced to stop “bundling” its media player with Windows and to provide the 
information to competitors necessary to enable their media player programs to 
interact with the PC operating system.

In essence, the commission is now charging Google with an analogous offence. 
Android <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> is the open source 
mobile operating system that it created. In principle, anyone can use it. But 
mobile phone manufacturers such as Samsung, HTC and others have licensed it to 
power their devices. The commission claims that Google is imposing licensing 
terms on them that favour its services.

To be allowed to pre-install the Google Play Store on a device, for example, a 
manufacturer must also pre-install all 11 of the programs (Gmail, YouTube, 
Google Search etc) in the company’ssuite of apps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/20/google-android-european-commission>
. In the commission’s view, this is tantamount to hindering competition and 
abusing a dominant market share.

Google, needless to say, is not impressed. “Our partner agreements,” writes 
its general counsel, Kent Walker, “are entirely voluntary – anyone can use 
Android without Google. Try it – you can download the entire operating system 
for free, modify it how you want and build a phone. And major companies like 
Amazon do just that.” So Android is free. But the costs of developing it, 
fixing bugs, creating security patches and updating the system are non-trivial. 
Given that, says Kent, “we offset our costs through the revenue we generate on 
our Google apps and services we distribute via Android”. The implication is 
that it’s perfectly reasonable to demand that if phone manufacturers wish to 
use the Google app store then they should be obliged to also install the apps 
from which the company makes money. What’s so anti-competitive about that?

One of the few certainties in life is that whenever organisations possess 
untrammelled power, then they will abuse it

The only certainty about this case is that it will run and run, just like the 
earlier cases with Microsoft and Intel. The seemingly interminable legal 
wrangling that characterises these disputes leads some people to conclude that 
the whole exercise is pointless. After all, by the time the original Microsoft 
suit was finally resolved, the company’s monopoly position had been 
substantially eroded by the eclipse of the desktop PC and the rise of mobile 
and cloud computing.

This kind of fatalistic pessimism has to be resisted. The companies that now 
dominate the networked world are as powerful in their way as any of the 
corporate giants of the past, indeed perhaps more so because they know so much 
more about us than did their predecessors. And one of the few certainties in 
life is that whenever individuals or organisations possess untrammelled power, 
then they will abuse it. So they have to be challenged.

But by whom? Once upon a time, we relied on the state to do this on our behalf 
– to cut monopolies down to size, to keep corporate power in check. The strange 
thing about the digital world is that states now seem unequal to this task. At 
the moment, the EC is the only game in town. Which makes one wonder if the 
Brexit enthusiasts have thought of that.
 