
I’ve been a police controller for 12 years. It’s not a popular role; most 
people don’t join the police service to sit behind a desk with a radio, a 
telephone and a computer, but it needs to be done.

In this era of service cuts, with fewer officers than there were, I spend 
increasing hours of my day ringing people back to explain why we won’t come 
out. Some of the reasons are good – we’ve cut out things we frankly shouldn’t 
have been doing in the first place – and they’re all based on risk and an 
assessment of whether people can sort out their own problems.

You run a home for troubled teens, for instance, and Johnny gets drunk and 
rings you from his mate’s house to fetch him. You have no one to go get him, so 
you report him missing to the police, using us as a very expensive taxi. We’ve 
started saying no.

You run a home alarm service for elderly infirm residents. If a resident 
presses their alarm button and you don’t have any staff to check on them, you 
ring the police, who come out without a key and have to bash the door down. 
Someone has to pay for the door, and we have to wait around for someone to 
repair it. We should say no, but we don’t. Too many agencies rely on us to pick 
up the slack because they don’t have enough staff.

You ring us because your violent ex-boyfriend is outside, drunk and pounding 
on the door. Will we come out? Absolutely. I pass that out for the nearest car, 
and the next nearest, as four officers to one offender will end better for all 
concerned. While they’re on the way, I map the address, look up the previous 
history on that address and what the man looks like in case he walks off and we 
drive past him. I pass on updates from the caller, and map read for officers 
who are driving too fast to see street names, following their GPS on my screen.

These are the kind of jobs I juggle, sometimes three or four at once. Our 
system is colour-coordinated: red for life or limb in danger; yellow for 
priorities, such as a house burglary, road accident or disorder in the street; 
blue for routine matters. On a busy shift my screen looks like the Spanish flag 
and there simply isn’t enough airtime on one channel for it all. Your ex is 
still outside screaming and banging on the door. If the door is solid UPVC, you 
can wait, if it’s an older wooden door, you can’t. We try to find out more. Are 
there kids at the address? Has he ever used weapons before? Last time this 
happened, how badly were you hurt?

I hate it. I have a 21-year-old daughter at university and I dread that she 
may have to make that call to the police herself one day. I can’t bear to think 
about what it must be like, to have to answer these questions when you think 
your life is about to end. I had a house fire two years ago, so I’ve had some 
insight into being on the other end of the phone.

There’s nothing unique in all this: my colleagues have all dealt with similar 
incidents. We’ve spoken to the tearful parents, with kids who’ve left 
threatening suicide notes and have a history of self harm. We’ve spoken to 
children: one 10-year-old rang me screaming when daddy was off his face on 
cocaine and throwing mummy around the house. I remember telling her to grab her 
little brother, lock themselves in the bathroom and stay on the phone, leaving 
daddy to it, as they can’t help mummy and that’s the safest thing for them.

This is not a plea for sympathy, but I want you to know police officers are 
people too
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/nov/28/plea-sympathy-police-officers-public-service-cuts>
I’m not here to invite sympathy or praise. I go home on time, and no one tries 
to hurt me. It certainly beats the risks of working on a building site, or 
walking round southern Afghanistan with a rifle and thinking about landmines 
every waking minute. If I know I’ve done a good job, that’s enough for me.

I’m writing this because I want you to understand that if we don’t get to you 
straight away, it’s not because we can’t be bothered or we think you’re 
unimportant. There’s a queue, and the current risk to your life judges your 
place in that queue. And if your call is nothing to do with us, believe me, 
we’ll tell you quickly.

You were burgled last month, and now there’s a suspicious man hanging around 
in the alleyway opposite and you want us to check him out. Perfectly 
reasonable, but if he’s not breaking someone’s head open, or climbing through a 
window, I can’t always send someone straight away. Your kid’s gone missing. We 
ask questions to clarify the risk, and you wait – the last five times he 
disappeared he was found drunk with his mates, so you’re probably a lower 
priority than the 14-year-old who ends up in cars or hotels with older men when 
she goes missing. But these decisions are not taken lightly.

The things I hear about every shift do upset me: my colleagues and I are not 
heartless. Sometimes, though, with the decisions we have to make, I can’t help 
thinking it would be easier if we were.

This series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/series/public-servant-my-letter-to-the-public>
 aims to give a voice to the staff behind the public services that are hit by 
mounting cuts and rising demand, and so often denigrated by the press, 
politicians and public. If you would like to write an article for the series, 
contacttamsin.rutter@theguardian.com <mailto: tamsin.rutter@theguardian.com>

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 