
When Virat Kohli completed a half-century, he bowed to the crowd, though 
really his gaze was fixed upon one man: Sachin Tendulkar. He had earned the 
right. Combatting a spiteful wicket and a fierce attack with India’s future in 
theWorld Twenty20 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worldtwenty20> imperilled, 
Kohli defied these multifarious obstacles to turn a perilous run chase into a 
cruise.

And he had done it all against Pakistan. The late Mike Marqusee believed 
India-Pakistan cricket matches to be the fiercest rivalry in all sport. No 
witness to the bedlam – raucous cheers, zealous flag-waving and oh-so-much 
noise – in Kolkata would have disagreed.

India beat Pakistan by six wickets: World Twenty20 – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/mar/19/india-v-pakistan-world-twenty20-live>
Kohli is a man for whom the enormity of an occasion is merely an invitation to 
showcase his talent on an even higher stage. Like Joe Root the evening before, 
here was testament to what high-class orthodoxy can achieve inTwenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> cricket.

“Different people look at the same things in different ways,” purred his 
captain, MS Dhoni. “He takes everything as a challenge.

“He wants to contribute, he wants to score runs. He prepares well, he takes 
care of his fitness, he understands how he’s supposed to bat in different 
wickets so he can score runs. And we all know once he gets going he always 
converts it into a big innings.”

Kohli now averages 53.55 in T20 internationals; no other batsman, not even 
Chris Gayle, averages even 40. He has proved that the brevity of T20 is no 
obstacle to consistency.

Here, with India floundering at 23 for three in pursuit of 119, Kohli provided 
a distillation of his qualities. Prowess in defence was needed when 
encountering Mohammad Amir, once more jagging the new ball at high speeds with 
immaculate control. He then accumulated unobtrusively against spin, driving 
exquisitely whenever offered width. And in the 11th over, Kohli located two 
wonderfully precise slog-sweeps in three balls from Shoaib Malik, one over 
square leg for six and the other through midwicket for four, to break 
Pakistan’s resolve.

Only when Dhoni scored the winning run did Kohli – whose 55 not out was more 
than twice as much as anyone else scored – take off his helmet and reveal the 
man behind the mask: someone impervious to all around him when he has a cricket 
bat in hand. A decade ago, Kohli was 40 not out overnight. His father died at 
3am in the morning, but Kohli told his Delhi team-mates “I want to bat”. He 
helped save the follow on and reached 90 before being wrongly adjudged caught 
behind. Then, he went straight to his dad’s funeral.

Largely because of Kohli, the two sides have met 11 times across the 50-over 
World Cup and World T20 and India have won the lot, even though Pakistan have a 
21-win edge in ODIs between the sides.

Politics imbues their encounters with resonance far transcending the cricket 
pitch. On occasion the results have been ugly – in a Test at Eden Gardens 17 
years ago, the entire crowd was expelled for pelting Pakistan players with 
bottles after Tendulkar was controversially run out – but not here. From the 
moment Tendulkar and Imran Khan were felicitated by the chief minister of West 
Bengal in a pre-match homage, the game had an air that was celebratory rather 
than fraught. In the applause that followed Pakistan’s national anthem and many 
of their boundaries, and the sight of the Indian and Pakistani “superfans” 
sitting together waving their national flags, here was affirmation of sport’s 
ability to unite more than divide.

For a long time it had been feared that this match, originally awarded to the 
remote Himalayan city of Dharamsala, would never come – Pakistan refused to 
send a team there on security grounds. Ten days before the game was scheduled, 
it was moved 2,000km to Kolkata after the chief minister of Dharamsala said he 
could not guarantee Pakistan’s safety.

Sport picture of the day: an Indian cricketer with remarkable skills
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2016/mar/01/sport-picture-of-the-day-an-indian-cricketer-with-remarkable-skills>
Even on the day of the game, unseasonal rain hammering down upon Eden Gardens 
endangered the fixture. Yet the ensuing hour-long delay, which reduced the 
match to an 18-over-a-side affair, only added to the sense of theatre. “Are you 
ready to see the pitch?” bellowed the PA as the covers were removed.

Pakistan’s openers, inserted to bat, would not have liked what they saw. Ravi 
Ashwin immediately showed this to be a wicket offering turning prodigiously and 
bouncing with unpredictable venom. So stifled were Pakistan by canny bowling 
and tigerish fielding, including a zestful catch from Hardik Pandya as he 
hurtled in from long-on, that, when Shoaib Malik hit the game’s first six in 
the 14th over, it had all the shock value of the lightning that narrowly 
avoided the ground earlier.

But there was nothing shocking about the author of this match’s decisive 
innings. That is the greatest testament to Kohli.
 