
The story goes that when KL Rahul was coming through the ranks of his Ranji 
Trophy side, Karnataka, he had a curious habit of playing out innings while he 
slept, with room-mates at away games startled in the night as he called for 
quick singles or celebrated centuries while making an almighty racket in the 
process.

Following the third day against England at the MA Chidambaram Stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/18/india-england-fifth-test-day-three>
, when India’s opener became just the ninth batsman in the history of Test 
cricket to fall on 199, you fancy the shot that resulted in his demise will be 
another such moment to be played out in the land of nod.

KL Rahul’s epic knock for India makes victory for England a tall order
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/18/india-england-fifth-test-day-three>
Having swept Adil Rashid for four late in the evening session to get within in 
a single of a maiden double-century, the wide looping leg-break that followed 
was surely his moment. The eyes lit up. He went to swat it through square. He 
connected. The crowd roared. Virat Kohli and his players moved to celebrate in 
the pavilion.

But no. A touch of extra turn from an otherwise innocuous delivery meant the 
shot had actually been duffed. Jos Buttler gobbled up the simplest of catches 
at cover and while it gave England a rare moment of joy on their latest day of 
toil, around them the stadium was stunned into silence. Rahul dropped his bat 
and sunk to his knees with head in hands, before eventually peeling himself 
from the crease for a shoulder-slunk trudge back to the pavilion.

In one of those curious moments that seemingly only cricket can throw up, this 
talented 24-year-old – one who has battled with injury this year – was left 
with a sense of failure where, in theory, only satisfaction should have been 
felt.

After all, this innings was a classic subcontinental epic, having been rock 
steady for 311 balls and seven and a half hours in the middle, where he milked 
the spinners – occasionally thumping them over their heads – and, while he took 
one blow to the ribs off Jake Ball, dealt with everything the seamers had to 
offer with relative ease.

When he appeared to speak after stumps, with India sitting ominously only 86 
runs behind with six wickets in hand, there was still only one thing truly on 
his mind for all the attempts to show his delight at a fourth Test century.

“Well it’s been a good day – until I got out,” Rahul said. “I was looking to 
play positively, everything was going my way, I was hitting the ball in the 
middle and the chances that I took came off. Everything was looking good – but 
the pressure of getting a double hundred got to me.

“It was just … I was just so excited about that one run I forgot to take my 
time. I felt I rushed into the shot. It’s more disappointing to get out to a 
ball like that, it hurts even more.

India v England: fifth Test, day three – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/dec/18/india-v-england-fifth-test-day-three-live>
“I have never been somebody who has chased landmarks but getting a 200 will 
always be a proud moment for a batsman and I’m gutted that I missed out. When I 
got back to the dressing room I was just shut off. I couldn’t hear what was 
being said. There were a lot of boys who came up to me and said something but I 
was just disappointed. I have to be just happy with the way I batted.”

He should be. While Rahul has joined the 199 club, and with it Steve Smith, 
Ian Bell, Younis Khan and Steve Waugh, this was the kind of batting display 
that can break a touring attack and in this particular instance, could now turn 
a Test seemingly destined for a draw into a nervous second innings for the 
visiting batsmen.

Once again in this series, albeit on the flattest pitch to date, England’s 
spinners struggled for any true impact while the seamers, for all their 
willingness, found themselves unable to muster anything resembling lateral 
movement; the SG ball, unlike the Kookaburra used in Bangladesh, has not taken 
for reverse.

The mood was summed up after stumps by their all-rounder Ben Stokes, who when 
asked what they could get out of a chastening day replied: “A bit of sunburn, 
maybe. We tried a lot but sometimes you’ve got to hold your hands up say they 
played really, really well. Maybe we didn’t get the rewards we deserved.”

In that regard, both England and Rahul will feel they have something in common.
 