
India versus Pakistan has always been the most emotionally wrought of contests 
and in the inaugural final it met all expectations. It ended with India victors 
by five runs with three balls remaining and with the man who had threatened to 
overtake them at the last, Misbah-ul-Haq, slumped disconsolately on his 
haunches.

The quality of Pakistan's bowling attack had carried them into the final and 
in front of a screeching capacity crowd here in Johannesburg it was their 
batting which ultimately succumbed to the pressures of the first major final 
between the sides.

How Misbah made India sweat. At 33 he had come out of a three-year retirement, 
the greatest accolade of a moderate international career his Wisden summary as 
"an orthodox batsman of reasonable technique". But he has spent the past 
fortnight launching sixes and there were another four in his 43 yesterday as he 
hit Harbhajan Singh from the attack and had Pakistan 13 short entering the 
final over.

Three balls into it he tried to hit a second successive six, scooping Joginder 
Sharma over short fine leg, only for Sreesanth to run backwards to take the 
catch. As India celebrated, Misbah was consoled by the umpire Mark Benson, who 
like Simon Taufel had an excellent tournament.

India, so suspicious of Twenty20, will now surrender entirely to it. The 
Bollywood star Shahrukh Khan judged it a place to be seen and made a regal 
appearance yesterday. "It will be huge in India," said Mahendra Singh Dhoni, a 
chilled-out captain whose young, disciplined side managed to win without a 
coach. Did they need one? "No comment," smiled Dhoni - first in Hindi and then 
in English.

RP Singh again excelled, Kamran Akmal's promotion to Pakistan's No3 failing as 
he was bowled third ball. The bonus wicket, though, was that of Imran Nazir. He 
flayed 21 from Sreesanth's opening over and had 33 from 14 balls when Younis 
Khan, not the best judge of a single, pressed for one to mid-off; Robin 
Uthappa's direct hit beat him by inches. Younis then departed to a terrible 
mishit to mid-on. Irfan Pathan's three wickets, including Shahid Afridi first 
ball, claimed the man-of-the-match award but Pakistan's captain, Shoaib Malik, 
rightly saw Imran's run-out as "the turning point".

India had batted uneasily. At 40 for two from six overs, further exploits were 
demanded from Yuvraj Singh. But after six sixes in an over against England and 
70 from 30 balls to oust Australia in the semi-final, his timing was awry. He 
changed his bat and his first attempt to go aerial gave Umar Gul a return 
catch. Yuvraj had made 14 from 19 balls and India was in anguish.

Gautam Gambhir's classy 75 from 54 balls allowed India to set a meaningful 
target and identified him as a Test-class opener. His parting shot was a 
ferocious pull against Umar which thudded against the scoreboard, as if in 
rebuke for its failure to move forward at the expected rate.

The dismissal of Dhoni might have been a flashpoint - a beamer from Umar which 
might have killed him, followed by a bouncer which again demanded evasive 
action, and then his stumps efficiently splayed by a full-length ball. Gul 
apologised for the beamer, which bore no malice, but this rogue delivery has 
become too prevalent and action must be taken. It is punished so little in 
Twenty20 that the resulting no-ball does not even come with a free hit 
attached. If the ICC will not consider automatic suspension, or automatic 
removal from the attack, then a heavy run penalty is essential.

Whatever Javed Miandad might have suggested the other day, Twenty20 is not 
baseball. The past fortnight has proved that it is far better than that.
 