
Virat Kohli blasted a brilliant 169 to help India claw back into the third 
Test on Sunday, before taking aim atMitchell Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mitchell-johnson> and his Australia 
team-mates in a lively press conference at the MCG. Having driven India to 462 
for eight at stumps, Kohli raised the stakes again for the rest of the series, 
saying he respected only some of the Australia team.

“They were calling me a spoilt brat,” Kohli told reporters. “I said: ‘Maybe 
that’s the way I am - I know you guys hate me and I like that.’”

He added: “I don’t mind having a chat on the field and it worked in my favour, 
I guess. I like playing against Australia because it’s really hard for them to 
stay calm. I don’t mind an argument on the field. It really excites me and 
brings the best out of me, so they don’t seem to be learning the lesson.”

When Kohli strayed from his crease, Johnson raised the tension by flinging a 
shy at the stumps that struck the batsman in the back. Kohli winced but got 
back to his feet and after smashing Johnson for four, strode up to the 
33-year-old to express his displeasure. Later, after a lofted off-drive for 
four off Johnson, Kohli blew two kisses at the bowler.

“I respect a few of them but if someone doesn’t respect me, I have no reason 
to respect him,” Kohli said, before adding that “I have got a nice friendship 
with a few of [the Australia players] … but someone who is not backing off, 
someone who is saying anything that comes to mouth, I have no reason to respect 
him.”

Referring to Johnson’s attempted run-out, Kohli said “I was really annoyed 
with him hitting me with the ball, and I told him that’s not on. Try and hit 
the stumps next time, not my body. You have got to send the right message 
across.”

Having struggled on tour in England and brought a middling batting average to 
Australia, Kohli has hit form in the Test series Down Under. Not even Sachin 
Tendulkar managed three Test centuries on tour of Australia, as Kohli has done 
in this series; the last India batsman to achieve the feat was Sunil Gavaskar 
in 1977-78.

Despite Kohli’s feats, India currently trail the series 2-0 – but the batsman 
had strong words for Australia’s new captain, Steve Smith, who had suggested in 
recent quotes that India had a habit of crumbling under pressure. “Some words 
coming out of their mouth. They have the right to talk I guess. They are 
two-nil up right now. Would have been interesting if it had been 1-1, and the 
same sort of sentences or words had come through from them.”

“It is funny. When you are on top you can sort of say anything you want. It’s 
when the chips are down that you have got to stand up. Say what you have to say 
and then go out there and prove it. When we played in India there weren’t so 
many words coming back from them. Which was surprising. We are two-nil down, we 
still took them on today, and showed what we can do with the bat, which is the 
character of this Indian team.”

The Australia bowler Ryan Harris, who took four for 69, appeared surprised 
when he heard Kohli’s comments. “There were a few things out there today that 
were said,” Harris said. “I think the thing that fired him up the most was when 
Mitch threw the ball at the stumps and he was in the way.”

“We try not to say too much to him, but sometimes he brings it on himself, I 
guess, when he starts it. It’s never personal, it’s always a bit of fun.

“It’s interesting to hear him say [all] that. It’s probably a good thing. 
Because he’s probably worried about that. If he’s worrying about stuff like 
that, hopefully his batting goes downhill.”
 