
Shikhar Dhawan and Virat Kohli <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/virat-kohli> 
scored twin centuries in Galle as India took full control on day two of the 
first Test against Sri Lanka.

The tourists were already in a handsome position at the start of play, having 
dismissed Sri Lanka for 183 before moving to 128 for two in response with the 
soon-to-be centurions at the crease.

Women's Ashes 2015: England v Australia Test, day three – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/aug/13/womens-ashes-2015-england-australia-test-live>
Dhawan, with his fourth Test ton, and Kohli, with his fourth in as many 
matches since becoming captain, ensured there was no let-up as they steered 
their side to 375, and a lead of 192.

Sri Lanka had four overs to face before stumps and promptly lost both openers 
to slump to five for two.

Had Dhawan (134) and Kohli (104) not put on their 227-run stand, the game 
might well be more finely balanced, with only Wriddhiman Saha’s half-century 
significantly backing up their efforts.

But the morning session belonged to India’s third-wicket pairing, who added 99 
runs without being parted. Dhawan was responsible for 57 of those as he 
completed a 178-ball hundred before the break, his second in as many Test 
innings.

Kohli followed his partner into three figures in the afternoon session, 
bringing up his 11th career century by driving Tharindu Kaushal through the 
covers for four. But the bowler had his revenge five balls later, trapping 
Kohli lbw on the sweep and ending the stand after 64.3 overs.

Kaushal, having gifted too many cheap runs to date, then removed Ajinkya 
Rahane for duck in his next over – the batsman pinned on middle stump.

It took the second new ball to see off Dhawan, who was late on a Nuwan Pradeep 
delivery and diverted it into his stumps via an inside edge.

Ravichandran Ashwin also fell in Pradeep’s new spell, leaving the score 302 
for six but the dogged Saha teased out handy partnerships worth a total of 64 
with tailenders Harbhajan Singh, Amit Mishra and Ishant Sharma.

He was the penultimate man out for 60, with Kaushal finishing with five for 
134 by dismissing the last man Varun Aaron.

India opened with spin from both ends and it proved a smart decision as Dimuth 
Karunaratne and Kaushal Silva fell for ducks at the hands of Ashwin and Mishra.
 