
Virat Kohli is a son of Delhi but, at 3pm on Saturday, as the ball burst 
through the hands of a diving Ben Stokes at cover and the India captain 
scampered through for a single,the Wankhede Stadium in Mumbai erupted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/10/india-england-day-three-fourth-test-match-report-cricket>
 in a way that suggested adoption papers from the city may soon be forthcoming.

Here was Kohli, the bristling embodiment of a confident modern India, notching 
his 15th Test century and celebrating in fitting fashion. The leap in the air, 
the swift removal of the helmet, the circling of the bat to all parts of this 
cricketing colosseum: for a brief moment, as the near-capacity crowd rose, a 
sport that continues to attract angst over its future felt in remarkably rude 
health.

Virat Kohli hits century for India as England unravel in third Test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/10/india-england-day-three-fourth-test-match-report-cricket>
His was an innings touched with genius and one that has likely snuffed out any 
faint hopes England had of squaring the series too, with Kohli sitting 147 not 
out by the close on day three and India 451 for seven, with their lead, on a 
red-soil pitch begging for accurate spin-bowling (not four seamers), 51.

It was laced with personal milestones. When he pulled Stokes through midwicket 
in the 69th over it was 1,000 Test runs for the year, the first Indian batsman
since Rahul Dravid in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/aug/24/the-spin-rahul-dravid>. When he 
whipped Jimmy Anderson for a single in the 75th it was 4,000 for his Test 
career. When Moeen Ali was clipped into the leg side in the 99th, he moved past 
Joe Root’s 2,399 international runs across all formats in 2016.

Not everyone cares for combined statistics, but this latter one feels 
significant in that, like Root, he dominates all three without any discernible 
difference in his methods, doing so through liquid footwork and orthodoxy in 
technique. Only occasionally is it interspersed with sheer brutality, such as 
when he pumped a tired Adil Rashid down the ground late in the piece to take 
his average past 50 for the first time in 52 Tests.

India v England: fourth Test, day three – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/dec/10/india-v-england-fourth-test-day-three-live>
If his aggression is situation-sensitive in the longest form – at one stage he 
went 29 overs between boundaries – then his dominant approach remains a 
constant. Kohli has long learned to cope with expectation, such was the case 
when he strode out to the crease to face the third ball of the morning to loud 
cheers of his name, which made the stunned silence that met Cheteshwar Pujara’s 
ill-judged leave only fleeting.

Just once in his six hours in the middle did Kohli’s crystal-clear vision of 
the Matrix become blurred, as a return catch was offered to Rashid on 68 but 
duly squandered by the leg-spinner. It was a sliding doors moment not just for 
England but the partisan crowd as a whole who, following the injury to Ajinkya 
Rahane find themselves cheering on an India Test side without a Mumbai batsmen 
for the first time.

Kohli’s appeal in India goes beyond local loyalties, having long since moved 
into the space of hallowed, unquestioned admiration as was previously occupied 
by Sachin Tendulkar. Not that the Little Master has departed it, as 
demonstrated by the messages of love from his home supporters that were beamed 
onto the big screen throughout the day on the anniversary of his first-class 
debut here in 1988, aged 15.

They feels worlds apart as Indian icons, however. While Tendulkar was serene 
in disposition, scarcely played at anything approaching controversy outside his 
off stump and was chiefly eye-catching only with bat in hand, Kohli is always 
intense, is obsessive in his fitness, always fields like a man possessed and is 
very often on the wind-up too.

One such example came late in the day when his opposite number, Alastair Cook, 
tried a review only to find both had already been burned. Where Tendulkar would 
likely have remained within his personal bubble, Kohli went the other way, 
mocking Cook with a mimicked gesture and cackle. Cocky? Perhaps. But this 
compelling sporting personality could be what keeps the fire of Test cricket in 
India burning for some time yet.
 