
In a country whose cities are synonymous with chaos Chandigarh is rated an 
exception. Its residents will say unprompted that this is the only planned city 
in India, a monument to local ingenuity built as a patriotic gesture 
post-independence.

A perfect grid running to cardinal points may not be the most original idea 
but most Indian cities are nevertheless not based on one. The local cricket 
crowd was almost as organised.

For India’s final match of the World Twenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worldtwenty20> pool stage the stadium here 
at nearby Mohali looked three-quarters full by the second innings of the 
women’s match against West Indies. The balance of would-be spectators swirled 
in the street between games, surely more than the stadium could fit. But even 
this chaos was ordered, those waiting arraying themselves around the bend of 
the stadium in a very long line.

It must have been the Indian women’s biggest audience and the pressure told as 
they fell three runs short of a modest chase of 111. The men’s team would fare 
differently,Virat Kohli <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/virat-kohli> running 
down over half of Australia’s 160 on his own, defying Shane Watson’s inspired 
display with the ball in what would be the Australia all-rounder’s last 
international game.

Also in fine form was Usman Khawaja at the start of Australia’s innings. The 
crowd screamed for a couple of play-and-misses but his drives were a tap to the 
solar plexus and four balls from a Jasprit Bumrah over went to the fence, two 
from Ashish Nehra. Enter Ravi Ashwin. If Kohli is captain MS Dhoni’s champion, 
Ashwin is his right-hand man.

Aaron Finch knew. He calculated the risk. His eyes narrowed as though he were 
working out the 8.75% state tax on a Chandigarh hotel bill. Two balls in a row 
soared over long-on. Ashwin was rattled. He does not usually get rattled. A 
dart got stuck in his fingers and he bowled five wides. Finch finished the over 
by milking Ashwin rather than attempting to slaughter him for steak. Four overs 
gone, 53 on the board.

Then Nehra drew Khawaja’s edge. “In-di-aaaa, India” rang around the ground. 
Ravindra Jadeja turned the screws. Ashwin drew David Warner out of his ground 
and he was stumped. Yuvraj Singh’s golden arm had Steve Smith caught behind to 
a ball he missed. The seamers hit their yorkers. A Yuvraj free hit was 
thundered into Glenn Maxwell’s pad. That 53 runs from 24 balls was followed by 
107 from 96. Watson ended his final innings at the non-striker’s end, 18 not 
out, watching Peter Nevill swipe four and six from two balls. The score did not 
look enough, not against a man who averaged 52.5 in T20 internationals, 83.6 
batting second and 109.16 in chases that India had won. “He’s got quite 
incredible wrists and he’s able to manipulate where he wants to hit the ball 
which is a great skill, particularly in this format,” said Smith after the 
game. “If you hit the gaps, the outfields are so fast the ball generally goes 
to the boundary.”

Smith did not explain why he chose to offer such a player the run-chase Kohli 
clearly prefers. Shikhar Dhawan fell for 13 but India’s openers are like 
topsoil: dig through them and arrive at rock.

Kohli’s first ball was a defensive stride forward to Josh Hazlewood. His 
second was straighter. Commentators love saying, “He barely seemed to hit 
that.” Kohli makes it true. There was no shot; just a bat placed in the ball’s 
path. It sped through midwicket like a shot on a pool table. The next ball was 
full outside off.

Kohli’s polite interjection directed it behind point for four. Watson summoned 
control, bowling Rohit Sharma in his first over, taking Suresh Raina’s glove 
with a bouncer in his second. Since his Test retirement, his bowling pace is 
back. He showed it in the field too, sprinting from cover to snare the hobbling 
Yuvraj Singh, who had rolled an ankle.

Perhaps Australia should have left him in the middle. Or perhaps Kohli was 
calmly taking the match deep. From 94 for four Dhoni got his eye in. Watson 
tied them down until the 18th over, finishing with two for 23. India needed 39 
from three.

Kohli got them as though there had never been any doubt, in a sequence of 
outrageous drives, as the stadium was lost in delirium. Kohli is used to it: he 
says the centre of the field is the eye of his personal hurricane.

“You can see an innings like that and one guy taking the game away from a 
team, which I don’t think you have the luxury of doing in the longer formats of 
the game,” said Smith with a slightly stunned visage. “It was a pretty serious 
innings from Virat Kohli to take that game away from us tonight.”

So India storm through to the semi-finals and the delirium will go on. Just 
spare a thought for Watson, who gave his best at the final time of asking.

India v Australia: World Twenty20 – as it happened | Daniel Harris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/mar/27/india-v-australia-world-twenty20-live> 