
Australia have added Marcus Stoinis to their ODI cricket squad to replace an 
injured Mitch Marsh, who will miss the remainder of the series against Pakistan.

The West Australian, who has had recurring issues with his right shoulder, 
pulled up sore after bowling during Sunday’s second ODI at the MCG, which 
Australia lost by six wickets.

Related: Pakistan salvage some pride as Australia are cut down to size in 
second ODI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/15/pakistan-salvage-some-pride-as-australia-are-cut-down-to-size-in-second-odi>

Stoinis, who has played a single ODI for Australia, was named on Monday as a 
replacement for Marsh. It is hoped Marsh might still recover in time to join 
the Test squad for next month’s tour of India.

“Mitchell has had an ongoing shoulder injury which we have been managing but 
it is now at a point where he is unable to function at the level required,” 
team physiotherapist David Beakley said.

“He now requires a period of rest and rehabilitation in order to return to 
full fitness.”

There will be at least two changes to the XI for Thursday’s third ODI in 
Perth, with pace spearhead Mitchell Starc to be rested before rejoining the 
camp for the following game in Sydney.

Test batsman Peter Handscomb will join the 14-man squad to replace newcomer 
Chris Lynn, who missed the game in Melbourne after re-aggravating a neck injury.

Lynn will return to Brisbane for scans and sit out the Perth ODI before it is 
decided whether he’ll take further part in the series.

Handscomb’s Melbourne Stars teammate Adam Zampa will be released from the ODI 
squad to play in their Big Bash League clash with Brisbane Heat on Tuesday 
night.

Zampa will fly to Perth on Wednesday to rejoin the ODI squad.

Australia skipper Smith, who top-scored with 60 in Melbourne, has called for a 
more patient display from his batsmen in Perth, describing their performance in 
the first two ODIs as “pretty ordinary”.

“It’s something we need to look at,” he said. “We need to build a few more 
partnerships, not lose so many wickets in clumps and be able to give ourselves 
a chance to have a crack in our last 10-to-15 overs.”

Smith raised eyebrows with his decision to rely almost exclusively on his 
pacemen in Melbourne, with part-time spinner Travis Head only given a second 
over late in the match and Glenn Maxwell not used at all.

“Obviously, Head bowled that one over and they went after him quite a bit,” 
Smith said. “The wicket was pretty two-paced, and a bit up and down, so tonight 
I thought it was the quick bowlers that were going to get the job done.”
 