
Anyone can walk right into Trump Tower.

In the month since Donald Trump was elected president, his namesake tower on 
Fifth Avenue has been fortified. Planes have been diverted from flying 
overhead. Dull-eyed dogs sniff the pavement out front, where large men in black 
helmets stand holding long guns. It looks like a no-go zone, which makes sense, 
because it’salmost the president’s house 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/shortcuts/2016/dec/04/white-house-north-is-trump-tower-the-new-west-wing>
.

Related: Jill Stein demands 'accurate and just' recount outside Trump Tower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/jill-stein-vote-recount-trump-tower>

But as hundreds of tourists and other curiosity-seekers discover every day, 
Trump Tower is no fort, even now. No serious airport in the country is as easy 
to enter. There’s a bag scanner, but no visible metal detector for visitors to 
walk through.

Inside the airy public atrium, it’s the same shopping mall and food court that 
Trump conceded to the people ofNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City in 1983, the year the tower 
was finished. With the same stinky public bathroom in the basement and the same 
concrete-tile patio on floor five, the same brass vitrines at street level, and 
the same waterfall weeping down five stories of orange Breccia pernice marble 
on the atrium’s east wall.

The difference now is, the next president of the United States – who is 
running his presidential transition out of his apartment high above – might 
suddenly pop out of the elevators, like he did on Tuesday morning, to accuse 
the country’s largest aerospace and defense contractor of “doing a little bit 
of a number” on the country. The governor of Iowa might wander by. A 
billionaire tech executive, or the second-richest man in Japan. Laura Ingraham, 
looking just like she does on TV.

The buzz lured Kyra Niklewicz and her husband, Dave, to make a detour to the 
tower on Tuesday before catching the Rockettes on a trip to the city from their 
home in Rochester, New York. Kyra, a medical technologist who works in a 
hospital, said the couple was pleasantly surprised at how accessible the tower 
was.

“We’re excited about Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>,” she said. “I think he 
offers definitely a different perspective. He’s pro-life – that’s very 
important to us. And I think we need to give him a chance.”

The Niklewiczes were enjoying the scene from two of the best seats in the 
house, in the lobby’s floating Starbucks, which is planted on a catwalk that 
boasts views of the Fifth Avenue entrance one way, the waterfall the other way, 
and – best of all for people-watching – the elevators directly below. The area 
is banned to TV cameras, but the angles are sufficiently irresistible that 
cameramen keep appearing there, only to be kicked back downstairs by security 
guards.

The media is technically restricted to a semicircular pen facing the 
elevators, set off by red velour ropes on brass stanchions, which were 
definitely not purchased with this in mind. But reporters without large 
cameras, like anyone else on the scene, are free to wander about, for example 
to the downstairs food court, where Trump’s communications director, Jason 
Miller, spent about half an hour eating a buffet lunch.

“We’re conducting this process daily,” said Miller, ambushed as he finished 
his soda, of the selection of Trump’s cabinet. “The president-elect is talking 
to a lot of qualified people every day.” Then he smiled, said thanks and jumped 
in an elevator.

Eric Trump, the president-elect’s second son, was flushed unexpectedly at 
midday from the Trump Grill, on which the American Academy of Hospitality 
Sciences has conferred its Star Diamond award, according to multiple plaques. 
At the grill, a bloody mary called the You’re Fired costs $15 – about right for 
a tourist destination in midtown Manhattan. Flanked by quick-striding men in 
suits, the scion escaped through a quiet elevator bank one storey below the 
main one, which explained how he had snuck in there unseen.

Now, about those prices. Trump is a luxury brand, but the atrium of his tower 
is an oasis of relative affordability in the middle of one of the most 
obscenely opulent consumer districts on earth. Prada is across the street, 
Bergdorf and Van Cleef are kitty-corner, and Gucci occupies commercial space 
elsewhere in the building.

Tiffany & Co, directly next door to the tower, complained last week 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/maggiemcgrath/2016/11/29/tiffany-co-says-increased-security-around-trump-tower-is-hurting-business-at-its-flagship-store/#394d84ff722a>
 that holiday sales were down because of the bothersome security cordons. The 
jeweler has created an entry corridor, defiantly draped in powder blue, to its 
front door from a security checkpoint at the end of the block.

Tiffany, at its least expensive, sells glass bowls for a couple hundred 
dollars. Inside Trump Tower, Trump-branded glassware starts at $3.50. Golf 
accessories, books and apparel can all be purchased at prices you’d find in a 
campus bookstore. There’s a perfume for less than $20.

Slightly pricier are the items on offer at the basement booth operated by 
Donald J Trump for President, Inc. Here is the official campaign swag familiar 
from the rallies: T-shirts $25, hats $30, sweatshirts $50. But don’t try buying 
this gear if you’re not an American: proceeds count as campaign donations, 
which are not legal for non-citizens to make.

Sales at the Trump swag stand were not brisk. No one inside the tower on 
Tuesday, in fact, was sighted wearing Trump gear. People wore green sweatshirts 
that said North Dakota, and sports team hats and puffy coats. Maybe they had 
Trump T-shirts on underneath.

As of 12.47pm on Tuesday, the Trump swag booth had recorded one solitary sale, 
according to an inventory sheet left carelessly on display. It was a hat.


By far, the best commercial opportunities on the premises are to be found in a 
souvenir shop in the basement’s deepest recess, not counting the bathroom. It’s 
where locals go to buy lottery tickets and cigarettes, and where the visitor 
might pick up a generic Statue of Liberty magnet or an NYPD sweatshirt.

The shop’s proprietor, who did not want to give his name because his office 
sits under 63 stories of pure Trump weight, said that while he would love to, 
he was not allowed to sell Trump-branded gear, because Trump was selling those 
products himself.

“He’s a businessman, man,” said the man. “He’s a very smart guy. And he’s 
going to make money.”

Related: New York City braces for more traffic around Trump Tower until 
inauguration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/24/trump-tower-traffic-new-york-city>

Rising back out of the basement to street level, lifted by an escalator past 
tourists filming their descents on their phones, one has a prime view of a 40ft 
tree installed at the base of the waterfall for the holiday season – no 
competition for Rockefeller center, but not bad.

The tree is the centerpiece of the tower’s Christmas décor that includes 
wreaths, prop golden gift boxes with red bows and Nutcracker soldiers standing 
sentinel on the escalator landings. The background music is Barry Manilow and 
Bing Crosby – Silent Night, White Christmas, Rudolph and the rest.

It’s as pleasant as any mall or airport around Christmastime, but with an 
added air of expectancy. In 44 days, Donald Trump will be inaugurated as the 
45th president of the United States.

Meanwhile, at the foot of his tower, anyone can walk right in. And make a 
purchase.
 