
Self-proclaimed nerd Candice Huber opened Tubby & Coo’s 
<http://tubbyandcoos.com/> on September 1, 2014. It is the only genre-focused 
bookstore in the city of New Orleans and surrounding areas, focusing on science 
fiction, fantasy, and mystery. Candice, who began reading at age two, had 
dreamed of owning a bookstore since she was very young. A sixth generation New 
Orleanian, she always said that if she did open a bookshop, it would be in her 
grandparents’ neighbourhood and named for them. Tubby and Coo were those 
grandparents, and now the store stands just two blocks from the houses they 
grew up in across the street from each other, serving as a family-oriented and 
kid-friendly community centre for nerds, geeks, freaks, and the like!

What’s your favourite section of the store?

Candice: That’s a really tough question, but I think I’d have to go with the 
children’s section. Our children’s book room is painted to look like a kid’s 
room and to make you feel like a toy! We also have a table for drawing, and we 
love to hear the children’s laughter and awe when they first see it!
 Inside the children’s room at Tubby & Coo’s bookstore. Photograph: Literary 
Hub 
If you had infinite space what would you add?

Candice: Ah, the dream! We would definitely expand to have an entire kids’ 
store. We’d also add a lot more board games and maybe even a craft beer bar. 
We’d love to have a giant room with a medieval theme and a large table for 
gaming!

What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Candice: We go all in on our niche, and we cater to nerds better than anyone! 
We are the “nerd mecca” ofNew Orleans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-orleans>. Plus, we’re more than just a 
bookstore – we’re also one of the best local gaming stores. And I think we do 
themed and creative events better than anyone, including events like “Dungeons 
& Dating” – nerdy speed dating – and a retro geek night, where we have a cereal 
bar and watch ‘80s cartoons and movies.

Interview with a Bookstore: Itinerant Literate, a bookstore on wheels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jun/20/interview-with-a-bookstore-itinerant-literate-a-bookstore-on-wheels>
Who’s your favourite regular?

Candice: Oh man, that one is really tough, because we have a lot of regulars 
who we absolutely love. I don’t think I could pick a favourite, although I will 
give a shout-out to a guy name John who absolutely spends the most money in the 
store.

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Candice: Believe it or not, we have crazy situations regularly! I do have a 
favourite story to tell, though. One day, a woman walked into the store and 
looked around as though she was lost. I asked if she needed help, and she asked 
what kind of store this was. I told her this was a bookstore, and she looked 
absolutely amazed. She pointed to books on the shelf and asked, “So these… are 
books?” I answered yes, and I was completely confused and dumbfounded. I kept 
an eye on the woman as she wandered deeper into the store, looking around 
bewildered. She stopped as she approached the counter toward the back of the 
store and pointed to our sign that reads “More Books This Way” with an arrow 
pointing upstairs. She said, “MORE BOOKS?!” and I answered, “Yes, we have 
children’s books and board games upstairs.” She looked at me for a second, then 
yelled, “I CAN’T HANDLE IT!” and ran out of the front door. For a second, I sat 
there, shocked, and then I just burst out laughing. We have a joke among 
employees that she may have been an alien seeing books for the first time!
 More books! Tubby & Coo’s bookstore. Photograph: Literary Hub 
What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Candice: We didn’t have a lot of money when I was a kid, so I mostly hung out 
in the library. Every so often, my mum would take me to a used bookstore, and 
that was always a big treat. I would search for coins and save them up for 
weeks so that I could buy books for a quarter. I would come home with a stack 
of books and be happy for a while! At the time, my favourites were Mary Higgins 
Clark mysteries.

If you weren’t running or working at a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Candice: Just prior to opening the store, I worked in Healthcare IT, so if I 
hadn’t opened the store, I would still be doing that. I loved working with 
health care professionals to install electronic medical records systems, and 
the team I worked with at the local hospital was absolutely fabulous. But I 
have to say, I don’t miss the corporate world.
 Tubby & Coo’s bookstore. Photograph: Literary Hub 
What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

Candice: Before I opened the store, I had zero experience in the book industry 
or in retail, so I had to do tons of research and learn a lot of things on my 
own. I’m still learning something new every single day. I think the biggest 
surprise for me was that I could actually do it! And the level of support I 
received from the neighbourhood and customers almost immediately. I knew 
bookstores weren’t dying like everyone thought, but I also didn’t expect so 
many people to be excited about a new bookstore. We’re the first bookstore to 
open in New Orleans in 15 years, and there wasn’t a bookstore in this 
neighbourhood, so the people were ecstatic!

The staff shelf

What are Tubby & Coo’s booksellers reading?

 * Godel, Escher, Bach by Douglas R. Hofstadter (1979). Bradley Huber (owner) 
recommends: “Godel, Escher, Bach illustrates how many of the principles in art 
and music are at the core of maths, science, and even life itself. As the book 
intertwines themes from seemingly distinct fields, you begin to notice patterns 
throughout all areas of life. This book will challenge the way you think about 
the way you think.” 
 * The Fifth Season by N.K. Jemisin (2015). Candice Huber (owner) recommends: 
“In a world where the Earth itself is wielded as a weapon, three stories 
collide in a mind-bending way, and Jemisin leaves the reader with much to think 
about on the parallels between this fictional society and our own. This book 
will leave you wanting so much more.” 
 * The Fireman by Joe Hill (2016). Shereen Naser (Game Night organiser) 
recommends: “In The Fireman, the world is coming to a very explosive end. 
Harper Grayson has to navigate her own potential spontaneous combustion, as 
well as that of her community. Pair with Octavia Butler’s Parable of the Sower 
for an interesting comparison of post-apocalyptic escape.”  