
Jim Harris had finished all of the work for a PhD in History and was stalled 
on his dissertation. He then started working in a bookstore and realized he 
would like to open one of his own. He got a small inheritance from his 
grandparents and moved back to Iowa City. In May 1978, he opened Prairie Lights.
Iowa <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/iowa> City has continued to be a good 
place for independent book selling!

What’s your favorite section of the store?

Jan Weissmiller (Co-owner): Poetry, of course.

Tim Budd (Bookseller): Fiction, hands down. I love a good story told well.

Kathleen Johnson (Events Coordinator): Fiction—I love to recommend books to 
people based on what they’ve loved.

If you had infinite space, what would you add?

Jan: It would be nice to have a permanent room that was designed and always 
ready for readings given that we have author events nearly every day. It would 
also be nice to have more community space for kids. I would love a place where 
they could do art projects, write and design things!

Terry (Sci-Fi Buyer and Operations Manager): More cowbell.

What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Jan: We have such a literary community in Iowa City. The combination of The 
Writers’ Workshop, The International Writing Program, The Non-Fiction Writing 
Program, and the activity that goes on around our designation as a UNESCO City 
of Literature (currently the only one in the US) means that there are always 
writers in the store. They are, of course, here to read, but they are also here 
casually to shop and talk all the time. This means that we have a very personal 
and stimulating environment and we can include all of our customers in 
wonderful spontaneous discussion of books much of the time. Sometimes it seems 
like we hardly have to work at creating this atmosphere—its just the luck of 
the location—but we are stimulated by it and I think we have learned naturally 
to facilitate a pretty high–or maybe invitingly whacky–level of discourse.

Who is your favorite regular?

There’s one customer whom I inadvertently startled once a few years ago who 
keeps trying to get me back

Jan: It’s hard for me to choose one. James Galvin, a member of the poetry 
faculty of The Iowa Writers’ Workshop, is a voracious reader of fiction as well 
as poetry. I really can’t keep up with him, but I love our discussions. I’m 
also incredibly fond of Burgess Kelly, one of the truly eccentric characters in 
Iowa City. He’s never been able to work, but he reads constantly and has been a 
customer since the store opened. We never know what he’ll say when he comes in.

Terry: There’s one customer whom I inadvertently startled once a few years ago 
who keeps trying to get me back.

Kathleen: Indiebob. He has a pet project of visiting all of the independent 
bookstores in Ron Rice’sMy Bookstore, and he has expanded beyond this and 
visits indie bookstores around the continental US and comes in and tells me 
about it. He is a retired junior high teacher and is also a musician, and he 
has an extremely good memory. He makes a point of talking to the staff at each 
store (and the owner if possible), and he mentions them by name and tells me 
what he bought based on their recommendations. He writes ablog 
<http://theindiebobspot.blogspot.com/>.

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Tim: Craziest is perhaps not the best word to describe this, but certainly the 
most unique situation was President Obama’s visit to the store. The Secret 
Service closed off both ends of the street, no one could go in our out of the 
store (except employees arriving for work), and the sidewalks outside were 
crammed with folks hoping to see the President. He was in Iowa City making a 
speech at the university about the passage of the Health Care Act and had 
pointed out our store as an example of a local business that would benefit from 
the new legislation. We had the speech playing in the store; it was thrilling 
enough to hear Prairie Lights mentioned, but imagine our surprise when Obama 
walked in! He shook hands with every single employee and customer in the store 
at the time. I’ll remember it always.

Kathleen: It was crazy waiting on the President. I was at the cash register 
and had to ring up a book for Barack Obama. There were all kinds of cameras 
clicking away, both behind me at the register and all facing me, filling the 
store. It was otherwise quiet except for the cameras. I had no idea I would be 
doing that when I got up that morning. I would probably have washed my hair. I 
have an really anonymous name and had no internet presence prior to this, but 
then my picture was on the front of lots of newspapers and there I was on the 
White House website. I heard from lots of former classmates after that, through 
other friends. Thanks, Mr. President.

What’s your earliest memory of visiting a bookstore as a child?

Interview with a Bookstore: Melbourne's Readings, the best bookshop in the 
world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/02/interview-with-a-bookstore-melbournes-readings-the-best-bookshop-in-the-world>
Jan: There were no bookstores in my hometown. We went often to the spacious 
Carnegie Library. After I could read myself, I had a wonderful relationship 
with the librarian—Miss Fetteroff. I’m sure she’s the reason I’m both a reader 
and a bookseller today.


Terry: Buying Tolkien’s Silmarillion at a B. Dalton the day it came out.

Tim: As a child, I was a weekly visitor to the Mark Twain Room of the Council 
Bluffs Public Library, but once in high school, I was a frequent customer at 
the B. Dalton’s in the new downtown mall. I just found if fascinating to see 
what was new, and the large format coffee table books they had. My first 
purchase? An oversized book on hygiene and personal grooming for men—just what 
this young man desperately needed. I even tried to apply for work there, but 
employees had to be bonded and I was not yet 18.

If you weren’t working in a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Terry: Night watchman at a cranberry silo.

Tim: I’d probably still be in the restaurant business, either waiting tables 
or tending bar, bemoaning my existence and spending too much money on books.

Kathleen: Writing the books? Would rather sell the books. It’s easier, and the 
quality is better.

What’s been your biggest surprise about working in a bookstore?

Tim: I find the most surprising thing about working here is never knowing who 
will be stopping into the store on any given day. Authors, regular customers, 
former employees, even old friends and classmates from grad school always make 
a point of coming by if they’re in town. I came to work one day and saw Seamus 
Heaney sitting at a table signing copies of his book, as he was here talking at 
the university. Alison Bechdel stopped in after her keynote speech at a 
conference on graphic novels. I’ve met David Sedaris, Colm Toibin, Joseph 
Kanon, Jon Scalzi and Tony Kushner—all through the bookstore. It’s a wonderful 
gift!

The staff shelf

What are Prairie Lights’s booksellers reading?

 * Let Me Explain You by Annie Liontas (2015). Kathleen recommends: “Let Me 
Explain You is such an original and vividly told novel that I could hear the 
character’s voices and see their faces. Every time I opened the book, they 
sprang immediately to life, and author Anna Liontas plots this dysfunctional 
family tale in a way that is fresh and funny.”

 * A Few Seconds of Radiant Filmstrip by Kevin Brockmeier (2014). Paul 
recommends: “A tender, funny memoir of his year in seventh grade, by all odds 
the most horrifying time in a child’s life. Your body changes, your social 
world changes, what is expected of you changes, and notions of who you might 
become begin to suggest themselves to you. Kevin doesn’t understand that he is 
gay, although he suspects something is different in his personality. I am 
thankful to him for sharing humorously, and wisely this horrifying but 
important time in his life. It’s the best kid memoir I know.”

 * The Collected Stories of Deborah Eisenberg (2010). Mary recommends: “If you 
haven’t discovered Deborah Eisenberg’s beautifully crafted short stories, this 
is a good choice, because you will want to read and reread them all. These 
stories are rich and delicate, and linger in the memory to shift and amplify 
their values. Eisenberg’s subtle, intelligent observations put readers in the 
best company.”
 