
Housing Works Bookstore Cafe’s opening is a bit of a mystery, but let’s say it 
opened, in our beloved Crosby Street location, in 1996. But the history of the 
bookstore goes back to the history of Housing Works, Inc, which was founded in 
1993 by Charles King and Keith Cylar and other members of the groundbreaking 
AIDS activist group ACT UP. It was simple: if you had AIDS and you had no place 
to live, it was impossible to receive the lifesaving care that you needed. 
Today we are the largest community-based AIDS service organization in the 
country. We provide housing, primary care, job training, and legal help, to 
more than 20K homeless and low-income New Yorkers living with HIV/AIDS.

As the story goes, in 1993, an angel investor approached Housing Works with a 
proposal: an investment in a second hand store of designer goods, stylishly 
presented and frequently rotated, sold at not rock-bottom but 
irresistible-bargain prices. The thrift shop swiftly opened and exceeding its 
three month financial goals within the first weeks.

The key reason that Housing Works has always been a leader in delivering 
necessary and cutting-edge services, such as needle exchanges and much of our 
work for NYC’s homeless population, is that we do not rely solely on outside 
funding from government and other sources. This work is part of what we call 
Social Enterprise and it is part of our core mission.

Social enterprise is the key to the bookstore in every way: Housing Works 
decided in 1996 that a perfect offshoot would be a used bookstore & cafe – the 
intersection of books and food being a wonderful way to engage with the 
community. Not only is Housing Works supporting its lifesaving services and 
relentless advocacy by selling great second-hand goods – now we’re a place 
where you can come and hang out, read a book, drink a coffee or a beer or eat a 
delicious pastry.

Overtime, due to the hustle of our board members and volunteers, the community 
space of our bookstore café became a significant cultural institution. We now 
present public programming most weeknights, bringing in hundreds of New Yorkers 
into our space to educate them about our mission and share great books and 
culture with them. And to show them a really great time. On the weekends, the 
place gets dressed up by real nice for weddings and private functions, another 
key part of our community efforts and fundraising, which are conducted by our 
award-winning in-house catering company, The Works.

– Molly Rose Quinn, (Director of Public Programming)

---
 housing-works-event Photograph: Courtesy of Housing Works Bookstore 
What’s your favorite section of the store?

Merril Speck (Store Manager): Graphic novels.

Rebecca Shaughnessy (Bookseller & Cafe Staff): I read mostly fiction, so 
that’s my immediate answer; but one of my favorite things to do is browse the 
smaller sections that aren’t as popular, like math, environment/wildlife, or 
health. They’re full of hidden gems! I recently found a book on country 
medicine and cures: did you know the simplest way to get rid of a blister is to 
have a snail crawl over it?

Tom Morris (Bookseller): Art! When I started volunteering I had no vague idea 
that my background in art (especially modern and contemporary art) would be 
particularly useful. But within a few weeks I realized that not everyone knows 
about that stuff – in the same way that I know little or nothing about areas 
where many staff and volunteers have amazing knowledge and absolutely brilliant 
insights. The Bookstore benefits enormously from New York’s art community when 
it comes to donations, not to mention that our customers include artists, 
collectors, educators, and curators.

Brent MacKenzie (Bookseller): My favorite section in the store is the graphic 
novel section. We get some great titles donated and always have a great 
selection. I’m always finding things I never knew about, hard to find and out 
of print books.

Meagan Kavouras (Bookseller): My favorite section of the store, the section I 
always check before I leave the store, is the proofs wall. We have a group of 
customers we refer to as the “proofies” because they come in daily to scour 
that wall. I like it because it’s the best way to find upcoming debut novels 
from young female writers. The proofies usually skip those in favor of the 
Ishiguros and Morrisons. On the flipside, I love our fifty cent cart because 
it’s the best way to read the classics on the cheap.

Rebecca Merrill (Bookseller): I read mainly non-fiction and the memoir section 
is mine to curate, but that’s not the reason I love it. Over the past century, 
memoir has changed so much as a genre and the donation-based nature of our 
store means the section reflects it. Not only do we sell new releases (Between 
the World and Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/08/between-the-world-and-me-sukhdev-sandhu-review>
), recent classics (Just Kids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/feb/13/just-kids-patti-smith-biography>
), classic-classics (The Autobiography of Mark Twain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/the-autobiography-of-mark-twain>) but harder 
to find quirky editions, too. Right now, we have an advanced reader’s copy of 
1976’sA Loving Gentleman 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/2624860-a-loving-gentleman> by Meta 
Carpenter Wilde about her love affair with William Faulkner.
 ‘Over the past century, memoir has changed so much as a genre and the 
donation-based nature of our store means the section reflects it.’ Photograph: 
Courtesy of Housing Works Bookstore 
If you had infinite space what would you add?


Rebecca: If I had infinite space in the bookstore (and no NYC health code), I 
would add cats and couches!! My favorite place to read is on my couch with my 
cats, so I’m just assuming everyone else would love that too. And I’m right, 
aren’t I?

What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Molly: I think we bring new meaning and new life to the idea of a bookstore 
being a community space. When we get to do concerts and comedy shows and such, 
some of those folks never even go to bookstores, but we lure them in with 
nightlife and beer. And on the other side of that, we have many regulars, used 
book and vinyl collectors, longtime neighbors, and also Housing Works clients 
who hang in our space during the daytime, many of them don’t even know we hold 
events in the evening. And my favorite thing is spying on some of my favorite 
authors when they come to write in the cafe during the day. Also, our cafe 
makes something called MENSTRUATION BROWNIES.

Who’s your favorite regular?

Tom: I can’t pick just one. There’s a married couple; the wife is an artist 
and art teacher; the husband, a retired carpenter, is seriously into US 
History. He’s written and produced a play based on the late-in-life 
correspondence between Thomas Jefferson and John Adams that has been performed 
at various New York Public Library branches. Another customer owns an art 
gallery on Bleecker Street and also lives nearby. We’ve had many enjoyable 
conversations about the art world. She also collects LP records, and some of 
her LP purchases have piqued my own interest in some classical and jazz 
recordings that I’ve sought out and acquired.

Brent: Over my past year and a half of volunteering a man named Everett would 
come in almost every Tuesday. He is always extremely kind and is just a great 
guy. He has been selling books in New York for years so we would have 
conversations about different trends in books and reading and I always enjoy 
seeing him.

Meagan: There’s a man named Peter who lives in the neighborhood and comes in 
every Tuesday. In his past lives he was a sailor, a musician, and god knows 
what else, but he’s currently a poet and motorcycle enthusiast who, as far as I 
can tell, just walks around the neighborhood spreading good cheer. Peter comes 
into the store and talks with me about poetry because I have to take the damn 
English GRE soon, and I know nothing about poetry. He’s helping me learn.

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Molly: A few times over the years we’ve done two events in a single night — 
last month we had Kate Beaton appearing for her new book, which was 300+ fans, 
a three hour long signing line, followed by a sold-out, pop up concert by Glen 
Hansard. Kate’s fans were waiting in line to meet her all the way through the 
band’s soundcheck, up until the doors opened, which was shortly before 
midnight. They played until 2am. Kate and Glen are now friends.
 ‘If I had infinite space in the bookstore (and no NYC health code), I would 
add cats and couches!’ Photograph: Courtesy of Housing Works Bookstore 
What’s your earliest memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Tom: I grew up on the far northwest side of Chicago. Our street was the 
bordered on an unincorporated suburb. No public library within a couple of 
miles, and no bookstores at all. Beginning around age 10, whenever our family 
piled in the car and went downtown, I started noticing bookstores, galleries, 
museums, and theaters. Lots of them, some of them huge. At some point it dawned 
on me: “This is what I want to be around all the time.”

If you weren’t running a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Merril: I would want to be the bassist in an indie rock band circa the 1980s 
(Essentially I want to be Peter Hook from Joy Division and New Order).

What’s been the biggest surprise about working in a bookstore?

Rebecca: The biggest surprise about working in this bookstore is (honestly, 
truly, I am not just saying this) how nice our customers are. I’ve heard so 
many horror stories from people working in retail that I just cannot relate to. 
I think when customers come to this store, they feel good about buying books 
knowing that the purchase supports a great cause. In buying books, they join 
our community and that creates a culture of a bunch of people who are about to 
become friends rather than one of a traditional service industry.

Molly: Social enterprise is a keyword at Housing Works, but I also think it is 
a key principle in New York City and has been a large part of my personal 
experience working with publishing, bookstores, authors, comedians, musicians, 
and other artists in NYC. When I try to explain my job to my friends and family 
in other cities, it is a very long run-on sentence. I get to plan, produce, and 
publicize wildly popular and culturally relevant programs at a beloved NYC 
institution in order to spread awareness and raise funds for our efforts to end 
AIDS as an epidemic in New York by 2020. I fill my life and my work with books 
because I believe that literature touches everything and everything touches it. 
And Housing Works Bookstore Cafe is a perfect example of that.

The Staff Shelf

What are Housing Works’s booksellers reading?

 * The Story of My Teeth 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/387131/> by Valeria 
Luiselli(2015). Molly (director of public programming) recommends: “Reading 
Valeria Luiselli is a bit like walking through a beautiful, charming, bursting 
used bookstore. I find myself scratching down on bits of paper the millions of 
books, poems, philosophers, artists, and unknown tidbits of the world that she 
folds into her narratives. This book is almost impossible to describe, so I 
won’t try. Just read it?”

 * Voyage of the Sable Venus 
<http://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/250774/voyage-of-the-sable-venus-by-robin-coste-lewis/9781101875438/>
 byRobin Coste Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/21/robin-coste-lewis-poetry-voyage-of-the-sable-venus>
(2015). Molly (director of public programming) recommends: “What occurs inside 
Robin Coste Lewis’ Voyage of the Sable Venus is destruction, excavation, 
elegance, heart. This volume, which lifts devastating words from historical and 
art archives, argues for living even at its most annihilating moments.”

 * Station Eleven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/25/station-eleven-review-emily-st-john-mandel>
 by Emily St. John Mandel (2014). Merril (store manager) recommends: “A 
beautifully conceived, post-apocalypse story that follows a small group of 
characters in the years following a global pandemic. Mandel’s gift is to see 
the innate goodness in humanity, forgoing a “Mad Max”-style horror show for 
something more delicate and hopeful. Like the great film directors Robert 
Altman and Paul Thomas Anderson, Mandel works with a large canvas, ingeniously 
interweaving character arcs that tease out surprising connections among the 
survivors.” 
 * Wonderful Wonderful Times 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/301834.Wonderful_Wonderful_Times> by 
Elfriede Jelinek (1990). Rebecca (bookseller) recommends: “I just finished 
reading Wonderful Wonderful Times by Austrian author Elfriede Jelinek, and was 
completely obsessed the whole way through. The story focuses on four teenagers 
in Vienna who have no respect for authority and commit violent crimes just 
because they can. Read it for the writing: harsh, direct, and dark, graceful 
and lyrical.”

 * Bowie <http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/21839107-bowie> by Simon Critchley
 (2014). Meagan (bookseller) recommends: I think the best thing I’ve read this 
year is Bowie by Simon Critchley, a brief philosophical inquiry into David 
Bowie’s weird career. I’ve been recommending it to everyone because Critchley 
writes provocatively in bite-sized, easily digestible pieces, and who isn’t 
fascinated with (or maybe confused by) Ziggy Stardust?  