
In 1995, Valerie Koehler moved back to Houston, her hometown, from California. 
A few days after finding the right house, she was driving down Memorial and she 
remembered the bookstore on the corner, Musabelle’s Books. An idea popped into 
her head that she might want to run a bookstore, so she stopped in and offered 
to work Musabelle’s Books for free. Musabelle Naut was not one to turn down 
free. Within a few months, it became obvious that it was time for Musabelle to 
retire and sell the shop. And there Valerie was, ready to buy it. It became 
official in October 1996 andBlue Willow Bookshop 
<http://www.bluewillowbookshop.com/> has since celebrated 20 years. The shop 
has changed in some big ways over the years, but it still retains the quirky 
charm that apparently screams You’ve Got Mail to pretty much every new customer.

What’s your favourite section of the store?

Valerie Koehler (owner): We don’t specialize in one particular category but we 
are half adult/half kids. No one told me that you don’t do that. We became 
known as a family store—fun when we want, serious when we need to be. The staff 
of 14 part time book lovers read everything and read voraciously. We think it’s 
important to love all the books—from toddler board books to serious 
biographies. We had the opportunity to expand a few years ago but decided that 
we like our size.
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
If you had infinite space what would you add?

Valerie: If we could add anything, the staff has a serious stationery 
addiction and we don’t have much space to devote to it. And a kitchen—can we 
get a kitchen? We’d love to have chefs come do demonstrations.


What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Valerie: I don’t know if we do anything better than other bookstores but I 
doubt any of them has ever changed out a customer’s vacuum cleaner bag for 
them. When the Oreck store across the street closed, we had a customer come in 
distraught because she didn’t know how to change the bag. We have an Oreck so a 
staffer went out to her car, brought it in, and we changed it. Now that is 
customer service! We like to think of ourselves as the neighbourhood bookshop 
with a citywide reach. We do tons of events throughout Houston. We are most 
proud of our three festivals: Bookworm Bookfest (for picture book and emerging 
readers), Tweens Read, and TeenBookCon. It’s our mission to connect families to 
reading.

Since we read a variety of different genres, you can always find someone who 
can make a recommendation. We don’t try to shame anyone into reading something 
that they would not enjoy. Some of us are mostly fiction readers and some 
always have a good biography or memoir in their hand. I think that is why 
people come back. We don’t judge and we always have suggestions.
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
If you weren’t running or working at a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Valerie: For me personally at this point, if I wasn’t doing this, I’d be 
sitting on the front porch reading. And maybe a little mentoring at the local 
elementary school. I didn’t grow up with a local bookstore. I grew up at the 
library—checking out as many books as my mother would let me. The biggest 
surprise (and hardest part!) has been how technologically savvy I have had to 
become over the years. As computers have made such a huge impact, we cannot 
afford to be without them for very long. And I know how to change the guts of a 
toilet.

The staff shelf

What are the booksellers at Blue Willow Bookshop reading?

 * Undermajordomo by Patrick DeWitt  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/05/undermajordomo-minor-patrick-dewitt-review>
(2015). Cynthia recommends:“Think of Wes Anderson’s movie The Grand Budapest 
Hotel, and you might get an idea of the whimsical tone of this enjoyable book. 
Lucien ‘Lucy’ Minor isn’t even very well liked by his parents, so he eventually 
leaves home to take a post as the assistant to Mr. Olderglough, majordomo of 
the distant castle of Baron Von Aux. This is a quirky coming-of-age tale with 
death, obscene acts, warmth, and much humour.

 * Everyone Brave is Forgiven by Chris Cleave (2016). Valerie recommends: 
“This is Cleave’s best book yet! Loosely based on his own grandfather’s 
experience on Malta in WWII, young Alastair is given the task of “watching” the 
boisterous, risk taking lieutenant with high connections. Mary North has been 
asked to teach the ‘unteachable’ children that no one thought worth to evacuate 
to the country. Bright, clever, heartbreaking, and ultimately the most 
satisfying novel about the Blitz you will read. High recommended.” 
 * Britt-Marie was Here by Fredrik Backman (2016). Laura recommends: “When, at 
62 years old, Britt-Marie leaves her philandering husband and takes a job as 
the cleaning lady at the recreation center in the dying town of Borg, her 
orderly life is turned upside down. She finds herself in a literal and 
figurative mess, among a community of people who have basically given up on 
life. This is a heartwarming tale.”  