
Itinerant Literate <http://www.itinerantliteratebooks.com/> is a pop-up 
bookstore in Charleston that first opened in April 2015. At the time, owners 
Christen Thompson and Julia Turner saw a vacancy of independent bookstores in 
their community, and, having both come from publishing backgrounds, felt they 
could fill it. The bookstore has turned out to be a quickly growing baby, and 
owners Christen Thompson and Julia Turner plan for it to ultimately become a 
one-of-a-kind bookstore on wheels.
 Booksellers Christen Thompson and Julia Turner. Photograph: Courtesy of 
Itinerant Literate 
What’s your favorite section of the store?

Julia Turner (co-owner): I really love researching and buying for the middle 
grade section. But we change things up a lot, so it’s hard to say!

Christen Thompson (co-owner): That’s a tough one. We try to have rotating 
thematic sections for different events that cross genres, so I’d say those are 
my favorite sections to work on.

If you had infinite space what would you add?

Julia: Well, so much really, but probably a nice poetry section. We currently 
don’t have one at all (with the exception of a few local authors’ chapbooks), 
and I have no idea where we’d put the section if we did. But I’d love to put 
some time (and space) into a poetry shelf and have some readings at the 
bookmobile.

Christen: A full wall of face out recommendations from visiting authors and 
customers.

What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Julia: Make unusual partnerships? Set up the entire store in under an hour? 
Fit the entire store into the back of a pickup truck?


Christen: To borrow a tech term somewhat un-ironically, I’d say disruptive 
bookselling as a business model. We saw a hole in the market but couldn’t dream 
of having the funds to open a physical store anytime soon, but we didn’t want 
that to become the reason we didn’t try. As a result, people are connecting 
with books and each other in places they don’t expect—and responding really 
well to it!

Who’s your favorite regular?

Julia: I don’t think we got their names (hopefully next time they come by), 
but one couple who came to an event we were a part of told us they only came to 
the event to come to our store. They will always be our favourites.

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Christen: This is not the craziest, but it was fun. The only way I can 
describe them is a gaggle. A gaggle of young men came to our set-up at a 
nighttime event, pretty deep in their cups, and they were AMAZED that the 
Jungle Book was in fact a book, and that Newt Scamander wrote a book. 
Absolutely floored. And then they proceeded to decide what books to buy to 
impress some girls. It was awesome.
 ‘What do we do better than other bookstores? Set up the entire store in under 
an hour ... Or fit the entire store into the back of a pickup truck.’ 
Photograph: Courtesy of Itinerant Literate 
What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Julia: For my eighth grade birthday party, I told my mom all I wanted to do 
was go to B&N (the closest bookstore in a fifty-mile radius of my hometown, and 
sadly not independent) and pick out as many books (within reason) as I wanted 
with my two closest friends. And then go eat at Atlanta Bread & Company. It was 
the best birthday.

Christen: Mine was also at Barnes and Noble. It was the only new bookstore in 
town when I was growing up. My earliest memory is going through and picking out 
all the books I wanted and stacking them on the floor to read and decide. It 
was a very involved process, even at like, 9-years-old. Looking back, they 
obviously had a very well trained staff to allow me to do that!

If you weren’t running or working at a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Julia: Well, editing, probably, as it’s already my day job.

Christen: Same.

What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

Julia: Honestly, just that we’re making it happen. A year ago, I was not a 
bookstore co-owner; today, I am. It’s a wonderful surprise.

Christen: How right we were about how fun it would be. We knew it would be 
hard work and that it would be a somewhat uphill battle in some respects and 
just hoped it would be fun. But it is mostly fun, with far less of the negative 
than I thought.

The staff shelf

What are Itinerant Literate’s booksellers reading?

 * Kafka on the Shore by Haruki Murakami (2002). Christen (co-owner) 
recommends: “Kafka on the Shore A delightful cast of characters that range from 
a transient teenager to a sentient cat and everything in between populate a 
masterfully created world and navigate the often magical pitfalls of a 
contemporary Japan still grappling with the ghosts of the past. Don’t let the 
page extent trick you – this is a quick read that you will fight yourself to 
savor.” 
 * City of Thieves by David Benioff (2008). Christen (co-owner) recommends: 
“An exciting, perfectly crafted novel with addictive characters from 
writer/producer of Game of Thrones, David Benioff. Smart, funny, and historical 
but not pedantic or overly aware of the history that follows the actions of the 
book. This “perfect novel” is full of life, energy and high stakes that combine 
for a tragically quick but totally satisfying read.” 
 * The Blue Sword by Robin McKinley (1982). Julia (co-owner) recommends: 
“After Harry Crewe is sent to stay on the Homelander frontier, things get 
interesting when she’s kidnapped by the mysterious Hillfolk’s king, who, for 
reasons neither of them are quite sure of, is certain Harry is key to his 
people’s survival. McKinley’s world building is rich, yet sparse; when you 
finish, you’ll wonder how she crammed an epic into fewer than 300 pages.” 
 * Spillover by David Quanmen (2012). Julia (co-owner) recommends: “Will this 
book make you plan for the looming pandemic apocalypse? Yes, but it’s totally 
worth it. David Quammen explains the world of zoonoses and disease ecologists 
in an utterly fascinating, approachable way. More pertinent than ever after 
last summer’s Ebola outbreaks, Spillover (the event when an infectious disease 
transfers from an animal to a human) goes into the history, investigation, and 
containment theory of these emerging diseases.”

 * Red Moon by Benjamin Percy (2013). Christen (co-owner) recommends: “Part 
apocalyptic saga, political thriller and moral allegory, Red Moon is 
unapologetic, fun and smart. A great middle-ground between literary and science 
fiction, Follow characters from unbelievably disparate walks of life that 
embark on competing, intertwining journeys through a United States struggling 
to accept its newfound werewolf brethren, combat nuclear fall-out, and stave 
off political upheaval nationwide.”  