
There is a painting of a skate in this startling exhibition 
<https://www.royalacademy.org.uk/exhibition/james-ensor-luc-tuymans> that 
amounts to nothing less than a portrait. It shows the voluminous fish sprawled 
flaccidly on a table. The ruffed white body spreads like fancy dress around the 
head, which is propped up so that the eyes are staring straight at the viewer. 
The fish wears a tragicomic expression, slightly humiliated, as if caught 
drinking too much. Or perhaps it had only just dined, before becoming dinner 
itself.

The Skate is very famous in Ensor’s native Belgium and pretty much the 
opposite here – and the same is true of the artist.James Ensor 
<https://www.wikiart.org/en/james-ensor> (1860-1949) was born in Ostend, the 
son of an English engineer; he had a British passport and spent time in London. 
But while we may think of him as the master of the masks – literally: he appears
surrounded by them <https://www.wikiart.org/en/james-ensor> in one 
self-portrait – he is regarded as infinitely more various across the Channel, 
and so he now appears in this Royal Academy show.

Here is a frightening painting of a bathing hut, solitary and remote – number 
164 all alone on the cold grey shore; what happened to the others? Here is 
Ensor’s mother on her deathbed in a most delicate and loving portrait, the nose 
taking prowess in the sinking face. Here are dark figures receding through the 
Ostend fog, and a spectacular painting of Adam and Eve fleeing an avenging 
angel in the form of a gigantic firework reaching out of the sky. Eden is 
low-lying Flanders.
 Bathing Hut, 29-30 July 1876 by James Ensor. Photograph: courtesy of the 
Royal Museum of Fine Arts, Antwerp © DACS 2016 
Christ hangs on the cross surrounded by a crowd of Ostenders, not all of them 
duly solemn. A colossal storm of paint builds above the rooftops and high-tide 
flags of this port.Afternoon in Ostend is more like night, an arsenical green 
glow to this bourgeois interior in which two women take tea – one looking 
helplessly out at the painter, as if in hope of escape from this prison of 
disaffection and boredom.

To be oneself when the onslaught is going the other way: that is his lifelong 
principle

What unites such disparate images is their peculiarly exuberant energy. Ensor 
is festive even when devastating or macabre. His drawing is lithe and precise, 
unfurling prolifically in vibrant space; his painting is celebrated for its 
gorgeous beauty, the brushmarks radiating across the canvas in lavish density. 
With the masks, his palette turns to exhilarating hues of pink, white, ochre, 
mint green and bright, seaside blue.
 Adam and Eve Expelled from Paradise, 1887. Photograph: courtesy of the Royal 
Museum of Fine Arts, Antwerp © DACS 2016 
Ostend is for Ensor what Cookham was for Stanley Spencer: a real place, but 
also a microcosmic land of myth and parable. Ensor spent his entire life as a 
bachelor living above various shops in this seasonal resort. His mother sold 
souvenirs, carnival masks, dolls and chinoiserie; Ensor grew up in her 
curiosity shop, delighted by the “opulent colour, reflections and sparkling 
rays of light… an inextricable jumble of assorted objects constantly being 
knocked over by cats, and deafening parrots”.

Everything his mother sold he painted, jumbled to a purpose. His Ostend is 
crowded with walking dolls, masks and goggling Chinese ceramics, sometimes 
witnessing a great moment –the appearance of Christ 
<https://www.wikiart.org/en/james-ensor/christ-s-entry-into-brussels-in-1889-1888>
 – sometimes a great farce, as skeletons wage war over the corpse of a hanged 
man, or the fish in a grotesque banquet turn upon the diners, biting their 
greasy lips. These surrogate people are both actors and audience in Ensor’s 
show.
 The ‘arsenical green glow’ of Afternoon in Ostend, 1881. Photograph: courtesy 
of the Royal Museum of Fine Arts, Antwerp © DACS 2016 
As a teenager he was taught by a caricaturist and a landscape painter, and his 
art often shows it – there are elegiac seascapes, and coruscating satire in his 
Seven Deadly Sins.Sloth <http://moma.org/collection/works/153511?locale=pt> 
shows the longest lie-in ever, with devils swinging on the clock hands above 
the sluggards and poking at their sleepy eyes while snails slime up the 
bedspread. InGluttony <http://www.moma.org/collection/works/153510?locale=en>, 
the next course is a head on a platter – the artist’s own.

Ensor had some right to his victim complex. His works were banned from 
exhibitions, he was repeatedly excluded from avant-garde groups, and the 
critics tortured him in print. Other than his father, who died of drink at 52, 
his family disliked his work, and some pictures were partly executed in 
household paint because he couldn’t afford oils. In 1893 he even tried to sell 
his room and its contents; there were no buyers.
 Self-Portrait with Flowered Hat, 1883 by James Ensor. Photograph: courtesy of 
Mu.Zee Ostend © DACS 2016 
Success – and there was eventually much of it, culminating in a title – came 
just around the time when his ideas were beginning to circle back on themselves 
in his late 40s.

But it is too easy to make a satirist of him, savagely guying his compatriots. 
The whole Halloween pageant of masks, devils and irate skeletons is not so 
simple. And this is what makes the RA’s show exemplary. Curated by Ensor’s 
fellow Belgian painterLuc Tuymans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/sep/17/oh-what-a-spectacle-glasses-portraits-by-luc-tuymans-in-pictures>
, it clears away the repetitions, allows more space for portraits and 
landscapes, and gives the sharpest sense of Ensor’s evergreen originality and 
his singular vision of the world from above the shop.

The masks are perverse – an unmasking, you might say. Is anything behind them? 
A masked old lady 
<https://www.wikiart.org/en/james-ensor/the-astonishment-of-the-mask-wouse-1889>
 entering a room is astonished by a heap of masks on the floor (disgraceful 
untidiness, or a massacre of her fellow beings?). Two masks, one laughing 
heartily, the other weeping, are affably hugged by a skeleton wearing a parrot 
like a raffish feather hat – how short is the distance from happiness to grief, 
via death…

In The Intrigue, one of Ensor’s largest masterpieces, a throng of masks is 
seen sharing some hugger-mugger news with a mother whose baby is a doll. They 
appear clamorously energetic. The central figure is a man in an opera hat and 
evening dress – if one can call him a man: what he seems, more than anything, 
is a figure in a phantasmagoria staged by the artist, a drama of forceful 
personalities and riveting inventions; a theatre where the masks can live their 
own existence.

Many scholars (and practically all Belgians, according to the catalogue) have 
pondered the mystery of these masks. But Ensor himself was candid. The mask 
meant an opportunity for extravagant gesture, expression and decoration, but 
above all for “exquisite turbulence”.
 Skeletons Fighting for the Body of a Hanged Man, 1891. Photograph: courtesy 
of the Royal Museum of Fine Arts, Antwerp © DACS 2016 
Here is a paradox to carry in mind through this show, where the tone can be so 
hard to catch, falling far from obvious psychology. When the masks give way to 
skulls, for instance, it might seem as if Ensor was preoccupied by death. But 
skulls regularly turned up on the beach at Ostend (130,000 Flemish were 
massacred there in the 17th century), and they stand in for children, art 
critics, carnival-goers and – regularly – the artist himself. They’re almost 
anyone except the dead.

To find oneself burled up in life’s turbulence – single cells metastasising in 
unpredictable throngs – that is Ensor’s modern danse macabre. His predecessors 
may be Bosch and Goya, and perhaps Watteau in the eerie loneliness of certain 
pictures. But the sustained energy of his pen and brush, the graphic freedom of 
his theatrical scenarios is all his own. To be oneself when the onslaught is 
going the other way: that is his lifelong principle. In one of his many 
self-portraits, Ensor appears surrounded by evil spirits. He looks mildly 
perturbed, but not much frightened by this alien crowd. He is nothing like 
these figments. As in life, so in art: James Ensor doesn’t fit in.

 * Intrigue: James Ensor by Luc Tuymans is at the Royal Academy, London until 
29 January <https://www.royalacademy.org.uk/exhibition/james-ensor-luc-tuymans>
 