
Chennai Super Kings reached Sunday’s IPL final by securing a three-wicket win 
over Royal Challengers Bangalore, with one ball to spare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/may/22/chennai-super-kings-royal-challengers-bangalore-ipl-2015-live>
. However, this low-scoring match was rarely as thrilling as the close 
scoreline suggests and the suspicion was always that the RCB score was below 
par.

MS Dhoni took the unusual step of bowling Ashish Nehra and Ravichandran Ashwin 
unchanged through the first six overs. It proved a good tactic as, although 
Chris Gayle hit the second ball of the match for six, scoring was a tricky 
business. Dhoni’s decision was compounded when Nehra removed Virat Kohli and AB 
de Villiers – the latter given lbw to another poor decision – cheaply in the 
fifth over.

Ashwin, bowling through, had Mandeep Singh caught softly at square leg for 
four, reducing the Royal Challengers to 36 for three after 7.1 overs. The 
batsmen’s inability to either score runs at a decent pace or stay in the middle 
put enormous pressure on Gayle. At the halfway stage, though, RCB had managed 
only 46 runs, with only three fours and two sixes.

Gayle’s long-standing back injury was clearly impeding his ability to get 
between the wickets and the combination of his refusal to cut loose and 
inability to take more than one run to almost any part of the ground made him a 
near liability to his team. He finally went after Suresh Raina in the 14th 
over, hitting back-to-back sixes, but then gave the bowler a simple return 
catch going for a third – out for a relatively pedestrian 41 from 43 balls.

The 17-year-old Sarfaraz Khan took on the role of the aggressor but his 
promising partnership with Dinesh Karthik came to an end before it could do any 
real damage, the latter getting out in a fashion typical of the IPL: slapping a 
rubbish full toss high in the air and getting caught on the long on boundary. 
Still, it would be churlish to begrudge the excellent Nehra, who was remarkably 
consistent with his excellent off-stump line, his strong figures of three for 
28.

Sarfaraz’s innings of 31 from 21 deliveries ensured that the Royal 
Challengers’ total would not be a humiliating one but, on a pitch that suited 
spinners, nor did it look like one that would be defended.

Runs may not have been easy to come by but the Royal Challengers needed early 
wickets in the chase. Although Sreenath Aravind had Dwayne Smith caught by 
Mitchell Starc for 17, it hurt that Faf du Plessis was dropped by Gayle off the 
very next ball and Mike Hussey should have been caught in the deep by Harshal 
Patel the delivery after that. By the end of the seventh over, CSK had only 
reached 41 for one but Hussey had been dropped again, this time by Karthik 
behind the stumps.

The match looked to be drifting towards a slow, yet successful, dull chase, 
until Yuzvendra Chahal took the wickets of Du Plessis and Suresh Raina – the 
latter continuing his poor form in what has been his least productiveIPL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ipl> with the bat to date – in three balls 
to make it 62 for three after 10 overs.

It looked as though a window of opportunity had been opened but this brought 
Dhoni to join Hussey in the middle and it is difficult to think of a better 
pair in world cricket for a small run chase. Hussey made an excellent 56 from 
46 balls before getting out to David Wiese and there was a touch of drama when 
Dhoni nicked behind with the scores level and two balls remaining.

It was fitting though that Ashwin, who had got the match off to such a good 
start for Chennai, was the man to knock off the winning run and line up a 
showdownagainst Mumbai Indians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/19/ipl-2015-mumbai-indians-chennai-super-kings>
.
 